A DISTINCT DISCOURSE AND DISCOVERY OF The PERSON and PERIOD OF ANTICHRIST,
WHEREIN A Diligent Enquiry is made concerning the time of his Rise, Reign, and
Ruin, The Answer whereunto is not peremptorily Imposed, but modestly Proposed.

In magnis, Voluisse sat est.
Difficilium, facilis est Venia.
Published for public good by Christopher Ness, Minister of the Gospel in
Fleet Street.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and to be sold by him. 1679.

TO THE Right Honorable ANTHONY Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord President of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy- Council.
Right Honorable,
THe Etymologist, Defines nobilis, quasi prae Aliis Virtute notabilis, and the
Heathen Sage says, Nobilitas sola est, atque Vnica Virtus; The Antiquity of a
Noble Race, is but the matter of true Nobility, it is Virtue that is the Form
which quickens it, and gives life to it: If Nobility (which is but the Moss of
time) do not grow upon the back of Virtue, it wants its true Supporter, and
soon dwindles into nothing: Quoe nos non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra Voco.
'Twas once a tart Sarcasm, Meum Genus a me Incipit, tuum Vero in te Desinit:
Antiquity of Pedigree, is only a Nobility by Parchment. That Nobility is most
truly Divine, where God is the top of the Kindred, and Religion the Root of it:
Tantus quisque est, Quantus est apud Deum. My Lord, this happy Conjunction of
Honor and Virtue in your Lordship, (I speak without Vanity) does plainly
declare you an Honorable Patriot, yea, and in this sad conjuncture of Affairs,
you have shone forth (through the good hand of God upon you) as a Star of the
first Magnitude in our British Horizon, now when Hell and Rome have been
Clubbing their most sublimated Wits to destroy King and Kingdom, Employing
their deceitful Dalilah's to cut off the Locks of our Land, and their crafty.
Vlysses's to steal away our Palladium, to wit, our Religion (which is both our
Ornament and our Muniment) from us. Then did the Lord raise up your Lordship as
the Atlas of England, to support a sinking Nation: it would be prodigious
ingratitude not to acknowledge it: Undoubtedly, my Lord, God has given you (I
speak it not with the stinking breath of a sordid Sycophant) a great Soul in a
little Body for some eminent Generation-Work, and all your former Sufferings
and present Diseases, serve but (as a dark Soil in a well drawn Picture) to set
off your splendor and excellency: God has given you a profound Judgment, and
a most charming (not an effeminate) Eloquence, which is hitherto an effectual
Instrument (in the Lords hand) to conjure down those Incarnate Devils that
Beelzebub and his Eldest Son (the Pope) have raised up amongst us. Your
Lordship has not been like the Nobles of the Tekoites, that would not put
their neck to the Lords work, as if it had been below their Greatness, Neh.
3.5. but rather like the Nobles of Israel, who dug Wells with their Staves
of Honor for the common good, Numb. 21.18. You have done Worthily in Epphrata,
and is famous in Bethlehem, God has wiped off the Scandalum Magnatum, Psalm.
37.6. Go on (noble Sir) as another Joseph, Daniel, or Nehemiah, to save much
People alive from the hands of Popish Cutthroats, Nulla infoelicitas frangit
quem nulla Foelicitas Corrumpit* let your Goodness so Sanctify your Greatness,
that you may improve this upper-Ground whereon you stand, and hold not your
Peace for our enlargement in this day, Esth. 4.14. The work of your day is to
pull down this cursed Antichrist, (here treated on) and to set up our blessed
Christ in his Throne, wherein that you may be daily more signally and more
singularly useful, is the Cordial Prayer of

Your Honors much Devoted Servant Christopher Ness.

Candid and Christian READER.
THe whole sum of our Blessed Bible is, that God made the World, and in it,
Men, that of them he might Constitute a Church, wherein he might be purely
Worshipped according to the Doctrine of the Law and of the Gospel, to the end of
the World. This Church of God is always under some special Promise and
Prophecy: The Coming of Christ in the Flesh, was the grand Promise and
Prophecy to the Old Test. Church; and the Coming of Christ in the Spirit (in
sending the Comforter in extraordinary Gifts) was the grand Promise and
Prophecy to the New. Those were Promises and Prophecies of the former days, all
which have had their full Accomplishment: There be also Promises and Prophecies
of the latter days, to wit, of Christ's Coming in Glory to confound Antichrist
and all his proud helpers: Those are yet to be accomplished, as the Church of
God was ever very inquisitive after the time of the 1st. and 2d. Coming of
Christ, Matthew. 2.4,7. Luke 2.25.26. and Act. 1.4. always waiting for the
Consolation of Israel. Even so should we do now for Christ's 3d. Coming, that
he may not come like a Thief in the Night upon us, Revel. 16.15. and 1 Thessalonians.
5.2. The Promises are the Magna Charta, or Grand Charter of the Church,
purchased by Christ, Propounded, Ratified, and Accomplished in him, 2 Cor.
1.20. The Promises are [(...)] exceeding great and precious, 2 Pet. 1.4. They
are first exceeding Great, as they are above our Fears, Wants, Prayers, Hopes,
Tastes, and Imaginations; 2ly. Exceeding precious, as proceeding from a precious
God, purchased by a precious Christ, and both applied to and sealed on our
hearts by his precious Spirit, they are more precious than the most precious
Stones in the World, though some Pearl be [(...)] of an infinite price and
value; all the comforts in Heaven and on Earth are wrapped up in the Swathing
bands of the Promises: all our present comfort, and future hope, are hid in
them, they are as good Money, as any in our Purse, as good bonds, as any in our
Desk, and as good Jewels, as any in our Cabinet, more especially, the Promises
of the latter day, which are called better Promises, Hebr. 8.6. yea the best
Promises, both in the Word and in the World: our Lord (like the Bridegroom of
the Feast) Joh. 2.10.) keeps his best Wine till the last: Now it is a thousand
pitties we should be so ignorant of them, or unacquainted with them, knowing so
little what they are, and where they lay: we are not such Strangers to our
Money, Bonds, Jewels, etc. If an Herod diligently enquire, Matthew. 2.7. how much
more ought every true lover of Christ; As an help in this Enquiry, God gave the
Spirit of Prophecy, a Daniel to the Old Test. Church, and a John to the New,
Divine Prophecies are blessed Comments upon Divine Promises, that the Promises
are all sealed, breeds Comfort; but that none of them are Dated as well as
Sealed, this breeds uncertainty, especially considering how apt we are to
Antedate Promises, and to Post Date Threatenings; but that Prophecies are
Sealed, breeds sorrow, this made John weep, Revel. 5.4. whereas the opening of
the Sealed Book, was matter of great joy, for then the Elders took their Harps
and blessed God, ver. 5. 6, 8, 9. to find out the due Date of the Promises and
Prophecies of the latter day, is the design of this Manual; wherein you have a
brief Landscape representing the very Quintessence of the most Illuminated
Authors upon this Subject, and which gives you a prospect of such Varieties in
a few hours, as cost its Author many Days, Weeks, Months, and Years hard Study:
Thus a little Map represents a large Country, at one view, which will take up
much time to travel over, Oh Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. as Tradesmen do
their Shop-Books, and let not the Bible lie moulding beside you: If the
rustiness of Gold witness against men at the last day, Jam. 5.3. why not the
mustiness of Books, especially of the Bible: Oh consider what is said here, and
the Lord give you Understanding in all, so prays

Yours in the best bonds, Christopher Ness.
Aug. 25. 79.
Books published by the Author.
1. THe Crown and Glory of a Christian. 2. A Christians Walk and Work on Earth,
till he come to Heaven. 3. A Protestant Antedote against the Poison of Popery.
4. A Crystal Mirror, or Christian Looking-Glass, Discovering the Treason and
Treachery of the Heart.
A DISTINCT DISCOVERY OF The Person and Period OF ANTICHRIST.
CHAP. I.
1. SUch is the tender love of our blessed Redeemer, to his dear Spouse (the
Church) that he has foretold her of all future Calamities (that should befall
her in succeeding Generations) in the Revelation; wherein not only the fata
imperij [the destinies of the Empire] are revealed, but also the fata ecclesiae
[the concernments of the Church] and the former are discovered for the sake of
the latter: many great persons and affairs of the world are indeed Recorded in
Scripture, which had been (as many others are) passed over in silence, save
only that they are [ in ordine ad Ecclesiam] relating to his Church: but
especially Christ has forewarnd his Church of that great Calamity by
Antichristianism that she might be forearmed against it.

2. The Church of God is always under some divine prophecy, under some part of
those unalterable decrees of Heaven, that were unseald and revealed by Christ
to John, and which have their orderly execution in a continued Series of
Providence in the world: thus Christ told his servant, that the Churches first
Calamity ( after his white horse, his Riding forth conquering and to Conquer in
the Gospel) should be those 10 persecutions under Rome Heathen. Revel. 6 3. to
the end, her Second (after the dethroning of the Dragon in those Heathenish
Emperors by Constantine the Great) should be that flood of Arrianism that came
out of the Dragons mouth, when Rome was Christian. Revel. 12.9 13.15. This
Heresy was so pestilential to the Church, that it compelled even Christian
Emperors to rage against Christian Congregations; as if they had been tearing
out their own bowels: then the Churches third Calamity should be the double
beast, Political and Ecclesiastical, which like Samsons Foxes are tied together
by the Tales, and exercise the Cruelty of the Dragon under the 7th head against
the Church making up the great Antichrist; then became Rome Antichristian.
Revel. 13.1. and 11.

3. There be sundry Enigmatical Intimations of this Antichrist in the Old
Testament both in Persons, Names and Titles, all which bear at least a
Resemblance of him as, 1st. in person. Thus Daniel's Antiochus is made a Type
of John's Antichrist by the most judicious Interpreters. This Antiochus does
not only praefigure his Antitype in name (whose name signifies an Adversary or
Opposer) but also in disposition and all manner of practice. 1st. in
disposition, Antiochus was crafty, of an impudent face, and ([ ad omne malum
inverecundus] notoriously shameless: so Antichrist has a whores forehead, out
facing the daylight of the Gospel, yea and the Sun of Righteousness himself,
daring him to the face.

4. As Antiochus resembles this Antichrist in disposition, so 2dly. in
practice; as, he war'd against Judas Macabaeus the Captain general of the
people of God, to wit, the Jews; so this Antichrist wages war against Christ
the Captain General of the Church: as Antiochus exalted and magnified himself
above every God, and spoke morvellous things against the God of gods. Dan.
11.36. So does Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. As, he took away the daily sacrifice,
polluted the Sanctuary, and set up the Abomination of Desolation, so does
Antichrist; as he bewitched many with fair Speeches, so Antichrist deceives the
world with his Intoxicating Cup of fornication. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Lastly as he
prosper'd till the Indignation was past. Dan. 11.36. Even so must Antichrist do.

5. Thus have we a representation of Antichrist in Daniel's proper name and
person of Antiochus; so secondly in Zacharie's appellative name or Periphrasis
[of a foolish Shepheard] by way of eminency, whom he foretells should arise in
the Church, as a punishment for rejecting Christ, who should eat the flesh of
the fat, and become as ravenous as a cruel beast, tearing their limbs asunder.
Zach. 11.13.15.16. This Hieroglyphick does not only signify those Theives and
Robbers which were Shepherds over the Christ-killing Jews. Joh. 10.10. but also
that Grand-idol-shepheard (...) over the outward Court-Christians or Papagan
Gentiles, against whom God denounces this woe, that his arm shall be dried up,
and his right eye shall be utterly darkened. v. 17. Cyprian makes the King of
Babylon. Esa. 14. and Gregory makes Leviathan. Job. 41. to be the types of
Antichrist.

6. The 3d intimation out of the old Testament concerning the Antichrist, is in
the title prefixed to the 9th Psalm. [(...)] Gnal. Muth labben. upon the death
of the Son* now who this Son should be, is controverted. Some makes it Absalon
[ David's own son] this is improbable; others understand it of Goliath more
probably, who was the son of perdition; whom David calls [ O thou enemy.] v. 6.
not only a son of perdition [ actively] as he was a destroying son, having
destroyed Cities: but likewise [ passively.] made to be taken and destroyed,
his destruction of others should end in his own destruction, he should sink
down into the Pit, v. 15. Thus Antichrist is called a Son of perdition, 2 These.
2.3. a Destroyer, Rev. 11. and one that shall sink into the lake of Fire and
Brimstone, Rev. 17.8. and 19.20. when Christ shall overcome him, as David did
Goliath.

7. To omit Daniels 4th. Empire, (which was to be such a destroying beast, as
no name could sufficiently express it; for the 1st. he calls a Lion, the 2d. a
Bear, the 3d. a Leopard but the 4th. he names a Beast in General as if
exceeding, as well as including the Savage nature of all the three former) Dan.
7.4,5,6,7,23. and other places of the Old-Test. that hold forth (at least)
obscure Representations of Antichrist: let us now come to the New-Test. where
the Vail is done away, and where he is without a parable, and plainly
uncharacterized, he is by a Prophetic spirit so punctually, and with so many
circumstances described, as if pointed at by the finger, and as if that
description were an History of things past, and not a Prophecy of things to
come.

8. The New-Test. indeed tells us, there be many Antichrists; as 1 John 2.18.
(that were as petty-enemies to Christ, in comparison to the grand Impostor)
such as Theudas, Act. 5.36. who under pretense of a Prophetic spirit, misled
many Jews; and Judas the Galalean, v. 37. who seduced the People into a
Sedition, in which they perished: and Simon-Magus, Act. 8.9. who was so great a
deceiver, that he was attended on as an Oracle, v. 10. and accounted of as a
God: after those, Barchozba or Benchochebah, (so famous in Jewish Stories) the
Son of a Star, though but a blazing one, that soon consumed it self into ashes.

9. All those grand Heretics that lived in the times of the Evangelist John,
(such as Ebion, Nicolaus, and Cerinthus,) and that black-Roll mentioned by
Eusebius, and other Church-History-writers, (such as Cerdo, Marcion, Novatus,
Arrius, and many others, Ejusdem farinae) were all particular and inferior
Antichrists, who played at small games against the Church, in respect of this
great one, who was to tread down the outward Court of the Temple for so many
Centuryes of years.

10. All those false or pretended Christ's, (that are spoken of in Scripture, as
Matthew. 24.11.24. Act. 20.29.30. 1 Timothy 4.1.) were but harbingers to him that is
called ( the Antichrist) by way of Emphasis, to Usher him into the World. Thus
as if Christ's Ape, he has his (...) or forerunners to attend him, as
John-Bapt. was praecursor to our Lord: briefly, all such as deny Christ's coming
in the flesh, are Antichrists, 1 John 4.3. such as are for Judaisme and Jewish
Ceremonies, following Moses, as if there were no Messiah for the Churches
Lawgiver; such as set up a covenant of works, who in denying the Testament,
deny also the death of the Testator; yea, all such as oppose either the natures
or offices of Christ, are ( quodam -- modo) Antichrists.

11. But as there be many Devils, yet but one Beelzebub, one prince of Devils;
so though there be many Antichrists, yet but one grand-prince-Antichrist, that
bears Gods brand upon him in Scripture-Record: The Holy Ghost has stigmatized
him, (as Ahaz was, this is that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.) so this is the
Scarlet-Whore, Rev. 17.3. this is the Teraefilius, the base-born-Beast that
springs out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11. This is he ( the man of Sin) which is an
Hebreaisme, for one notoriously sinful, the firstborn amongst the Sons of
Belial: This is ( that Son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3.) brother to Judas, who
betrayed his Lord, whom Christ calls by the same name, ( the Son of perdition)
Joh. 17.12. Those are all (...) dicta, pointing at (...) that (like Saul)
overtops all the other Antichrists by the head and shoulders.

12. The name [ Antichrist] properly imports one having contrariety and
opposition to Christ: Thus is he contrary to Christ in that Apostolical
description of him to the Church at Thessalonica, as 1. in his pride, he is
contrary to Christ in his Humility, who was lowly in heart, and came not to be
Ministered unto, but to Minister, Matthew. 20.28. but Antichrist exalts himself
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4. This incarnate Devil (as the Fathers
call him) like his elder Brother Lucifer, Esa. 14.12.13. would advance his
Throne above the Stars of God, whereas Christ is called (...), he will be
called (...), as if he were not only above the Stars of God, but also above the
Sun of Righteousness himself, His Title is Holiness it self: he is contrary to
Christ, 2ly. in His Holiness, (as well as in his Humility) for he is called the
wicked one, 2 These. 2.8. [(...)] a Lawless one, who makes not the Laws of God
his Rule, as the Holy Child Jesus did; but can abrogate, or at least dispense
with such Divine commands, as holds not consistent with his mystery of
iniquity: 3. He is contrary to Christ in his Truth, for Christ is Truth it
self, Joh. 14.6. but Antichrists coming is after the working of Satan with
lying wonders, and all deceivableness, 2 These. 2.9.10. the Father of lies; as
he was the first raiser, so he is the chief supporter of Antichrist in the
World: Thus in those and other respects, Antichrist is a contradiction to
Christ.

CHAP. II.
14. NOw come we to enquire who this Antichrist is, about which there has been
much controversy, since the smoke of the bottomless-Pit has darkened the truth
of God in the World: If there were such doubtful Questions in the days of the
Gospel, about the Person of Christ; yea, even among the Disciples of
John-Baptist? saying, Art thou He that should come? or must we look for
another? Matthew. 11.3. no wonder then if there be so in our days, about the
Person of Antichrist, [ who he should be] whom the word of God so fully
describes, yea, and that among our own Divines also, see Baxters Association.
Page 69.

15. In my inquisition after him, I shall follow this Method; 1. Negatively,
showing [ who he is not,] and 2. Positively, [ who he is,] of the 1st.
Negatively, some would have Theudas to be him, because he was a great Impostor,
Act. 5.36 others Simon-Magus, who was a greater Deceiver, and to find Grotius (
a man of great learning) of this Judgment, I much wonder at, which makes some
fear he played the Cassandrian, in gratifying the Romanists herein, who would
gladly enough receive any Interpretation, to wipe their mouths from the Beast:
I have showed above how both those indeed were inferior Antichrists; but
neither of those could be the great Antichrist, for they wanted both Time,
Place, People, Kingdom, and Succession.

16. As Grotius mistakes in this of Antichrist, so in that of the Witnesses,
whom he makes Two Bishops in Jerusalem, witnessing against that Sorcerer: Thus,
Dato Vno absurdo, mill sequuntur, This Interpretation is full of Absurdity;
for the Revelation about the Beast and the Witnesses, was a Prophecy of things
to come, Revel. 1.1,3. and 4.1. but the Story of Simon-Magus was past and of no
such consequence, though many in Samaria and at Rome, wondered at this Magician,
yet this was nothing to the whole Worlds wondering after the Beast that slew the
Witnesses; and if Simon were [the] Antichrist, then Peter, and Paul, must be
the Witnesses against him, (rather than the Two foresaid Bishops) because they
lived in his time, and encountered with him; and Peter's Ministry (if Eccles.
Story be true) destroyed him.

17. Bellarmin affirms that Antichrist must be a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan, whom
the Jews must receive for their Messiah, Bell de sum pont. lib. 3. and Remandus
de Antichristo, says further of him, that he must Reign in Jerusalem three
years and half, and at length attempting to mount up to Heaven, shall be slain
by Christ on the Mount of Olives: and Pererius in Dan. lib. 15. adds still more
of this trash, that he must not only be Circumcised and observe the Sabbath,
but also must be born in Babylon: Thus those Romanists labors in the very fire
with the figments of their own brains, to put Antichrist far of from Rome, not
any of those notions seem so much as probable, unless the last of being born in
Babylon, mystically taken.

18. The Absurdity of this opinion is easily detected, for Antichrist was to
succeed the Apostle Paul's time and John's; but the 10 Tribes were cast off
long before, and much more the Tribe of Dan, which was the first Tribe that
forsook the worship of God, and fell off to the Gentiles, (which Jacob foresaw,
and looked up to God for Salvation by Christ for them, Genesis 49.18.) their
Idolatry being Recorded, Judge. 18.30. and 1 Kin. 12.28.29. therefore is there
no mention of this Tribe in the First Book of the Chronicles, wherein all the
other Tribes are mentioned, because they were of a long time Revolted from the
true Religion.

19. Besides, if this pretended Antichrist were to be of the Tribe of Dan, how
should he be received of the Jews for their Messiah, (as those Romanists dream)
seeing the Jews expect their Messiah out of the Tribe of Judah, from the
Posterity of David, and not out of this Tribe; neither does that other notion
of his Reigning Three years and a half, hold any better consonancy, either with
Scripture or Reason, that so many Nations should so suddenly subject themselves
to the Government of a Jew, (as is clear must do to Antichrist) after such
inveterate hatred of all Nations against the Jews for so many years, which all
Histories do testify.

20. Indeed several of the Fathers were of this opinion, that this Tribe of Dan
was left out in that 7th. of Revel. (where all the Tribes were sealed) because
Antichrist was to spring of that Tribe; Yet Austin gives another descant, (in
his 11th. Homily on the Apocalipse) expounding the two horns of the Beast, to
be the two Testaments; [ whereas if the Beast (Antichrist) be a Jew, he is only
for the Old Testament, for the New Testament is not for restoring Judaism, and
for rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem] and whereas he resembles a Lamb, yet
speaks as a Dragon; that is to say, he presents himself under the name of
Christinity, to spread abroad secretly the venom of the Devil: Thus he thought
him a Christian rather than a Jew, and Tostatus, Oleaster, etc. calls this
about omitting Dan. in Revel. 7.] a fabulous Interpretation.

21. That which occasioned the mistake of the Ancients is, that this Tribe was
likened to a Serpent and to an Adder, Genesis 49.17. (as well as the omission of
the Tribe of Dan in the sealing work, Revel. 7. as before) but the clearest
Interpreters do understand Jacobs Prophecy, to have relation to Sampson: and
the Fathers (living so long before Antichrist came to his full growth) may well
have their grain of Allowance given them (as all holy men) in those mistakes,
especially in their Allusions and Allegories, concerning this Serpent, which
they lay down as Conjectures only, not as Positive and Divine Truths.

22. It may (with as much probability) be said, that Antichrist shall arise out
of the Tribe of Simeon; because Moses makes no mention of that Tribe in his
Benediction of the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 33. as that he shall come of Dan, because John
makes no mention of him in the Signation of the Tribes, Revel. 7. But they
render better Reasons for both those Omissions, that say, Simeon was omitted by
Moses, for his bloody treachery against the Shecehemites, and Dan by John, for
his notorious Idolatry, and Revolting from God, he saw deep adversity on them,
Judge. 1.24. as well as gross Apostasy in them that prayed so abruptly, I have
waited for thy Salvation, Genesis 49.18. ut Supra, Tremel says, Simeon was
omitted, because included in the Benediction of Judah.

23. Our own Countryman Dr. Done, has a better gloss about Antichrists
arising out of the Tribe of Dan, than this of the Romanists or Ancients; for he
wittily observes that the word [ Dan] in the Hebrew language signifies
judgment, and Antichrist taking upon him the power of judgment over all Faith
and all Actions, as if he were the Judge paramount of Controversies, setting
himself in Christ's stead, who is Judge of the world. Thus Antichrist in a way
of allusion to its signification may be said to come of Dan.

24. But to omit the refutation of all other opinions about their fictitious
Antichrists, let us now come to this rhat has the fairest pretenses of all
other, that they may wipe the mouth of the great man of Rome from the beast,
they have strenuously asserted, that the great Turk is Antichrist, and Mahomet
is the false prophet, for (say they) the Turk is a professed enemy to Christ,
warring against Christendom, ( qua talis) and that his seat is Jerusalem, in
the temple of Solomon, and this agrees (say they) with the character of
Antichrist exactly, who is said to be in the Temple of God, and to sit in that
City, where our Lord was Crucified, to wit, Jerusalem.

25. Here is a clear story, yet if seriously weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, it will be found light and misapplyed: for, Antichrists Seat cannot
be Jerusalem according to John's description, who calls that City, the City of
the beast, which in his time was the great City, that Ruled over the Kings of
the Earth, but so did not Jerusalem when he wrote the Revelation. John wrote
that Book about 94 years after Christ; but it rather was then a ruinous heap
only, it was burnt down to the ground in Titus Vespasians time: and the
Revelation was not writ till Domitian (who succeeded Titus) banished John into
the Isle Pathmos. Revel. 1.9. So must be after its destruction.

26. As Jerusalem cannot be the great City in John's time, neither stands it
upon 7 Hills as Rome does, which all Roman Histories take special notice of;
hence is she called by the Ancients (...), Septi-collis urbs, and that Verse of
Propertius. Septem Urbs alta jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi.


This cannot be truly applied to Jerusalem without notorious violence to the
truth; and John tells us peremptorily that the whore is Seated upon 7 hills, as
Revel. 17.9. which the very Jesuits themselves deny not.

27. Neither can it be made apparent that there is any Temple (of Solomon
especially, which was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar in Zedekiahs time, and a new
Temple builded in Cyrus Reign) for Antichrist to sit in at Jerusalem: for after
the second Temple was destroyed by Titus Vespasian, we do not read any thing of
a third (though Julian himself endeavored it) that was ever built, and
Galatinus the Monk proves by the Ancient Talmudist that there shall never be
any building of a third Temple. Galat. de Arcan. cathol. Ver. lib. 5. Cap. 10.
Yea and a more pregnant Testimony we have from Christ himself, who says, that
one stone shall not be left on another that shall not be overthrown. Math.
24.1.2. and both Temple and City should be trodden under by the Gentiles, until
the time of the Gentles shall be fulfilled Luke. 21.24.

28. Though it be said that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God 2 Thessalonians.
2.4. It must not be meant literally of some material Temple built of Wood and
Stone, but mystically of the Church of God; as the best Expositors (both
Ancient and Modern) does interpret: and as for these words, [ where our Lord
was Crucified] they must be taken mystically also, as Sodom and Egypt are, for
as the Seat of the beast must be a place, like Sodom for impiety, and and like
Egypt for tyranny; so where Christ must be Crucified, either in Cruelty to his
members, Act. 9.4. or in Contemning his Gospel, Heb. 6.6. but more of this
after, in the definition of Antichrist) or in the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
this is Rome.

29. Besides, that Jerusalem is never called the great City in Scripture,
neither is it capable of that description in Revel. 17.10,12,13. For where do
we read any where of that City, [ Jerusalem] that it had 7 Kings, 5 of them to
be fallen, and one there was remaining in John's time (which cannot correspond
with that City that was then destroyed and had no King over it) and another to
come to make up the 7th; and then the beast appears [ Hoc cum Sancta Urbe non
omnino quadrabit] this corresponds better with the Temple of Peter, and Papal
chair ( ut infra) then with the Temple of Solomon or Throne of David.

30. I may add further, that our Lord was not properly Crucified in Jerusalem,
but without the City, as Hebr. 13.12. but suppose it were within Jerusalem, yet
was it done under the Roman Empire, and by Pontius Pilate, (a Roman-Magistrate)
yea, and after the manner of the Roman death, for the Jews used not that manner
of punishment, and should that clause be understood literally, the Argument
would conclude as strongly for Sodom, or Egypt, (to be the Seat of the Beast)
as well as for Jerusalem.

31. As that unquestionable character of Antichrist (that he should sit in the
great City which ( in John's time) Reigned over the Nations) cannot agree with
the Great Turk; which City at that time ( as is made manifest) was not
Jerusalem; So neither can this character any better suit with him, that the
mystery of Iniquity must be an Apostasy from the Christian Faith once embraced;
but the Turk (whatsoever he be) is no Apostate, being descended of a Nation
that never was Christian, but honoring another Prophet above the true Christ.

32 Neither is Antichrist said any where in Scripture, to come like a
Victorious Conqueror with potent and puissant Armies, (yea such as are
innumerable) as the Turk does, but as a grand Impostor, deceiving the Nations
by the deceitful workings of Satan, 2 These. 2.9. nor must Antichrist Sit in
porcorum hara, or in Daemonum Stabulo, [in such a Crowd of Infidels] as the
Turk does, but in the Temple of God, in the midst of the Church: besides, the
Turk is an open Enemy, no mystery of iniquity, no Churchman, no Priest, no
false Successor of Peter, no worshipper of Images, no Usurper of a Deity; so
cannot be [the] Man of Sin.

33. Moreover Antichrist has horns like a Lamb, looks like Christ, so does not
Mahomet, who never was a Christian, (2.) Antichrist heald the Wound (which the
6th. head had gotten) by a new sort of Idolatry, to wit, a Worshipping of
Images, this Mahomet abhors, pretending to worship one God only; (3) Antichrist
comes with signs and lying wonders, which Mahomet pretends not to, but says (to
cover his want of miracles) that Christ was sen^ with Signs, but he with a
Sword: and (4ly) Antichrist pretends to be Christ's Vicar in all his Actings,
but this Mahomet thinks below him as i^ above Christ. See Rosse. (...). page
165.

34. As to the time of both their Originals; it must be confessed that Papism
and Mahumetism were (much what) contemporary, and therefore Dr. Sibs (in his
Evang. Sacrifice) calls them Twins, because they had their beginings (about the
same Century: Mahumetism being the very next Heresy that succeeded Papism; the
first overspeading the East and the South, as this 2d. did the West and the
North. Pareus Medull. Hist. Eccles. page 247. Osiander Epitome 7. Century. page
31. And both those pestilent furies has raged in the world ever since. [ ita
merente mundi perfidia] a wicked world deserving no better; these two being the
Sink of all former Heresies.

35. Mahumetism is the Scum of Judaism and Paganism sodden (as it were)
together, and strawed over with a little spice of Christianity: and their
Alcaron contains a Religion every way accommodated to the carnal affections and
corrupt inclinations of mankind; the plausibleness of which (together with a
Successful Sword, which, (he says) must do greater things then either Moses or
Christ with all their Miracles) has overspread a great part of the world.
Hence the Turk is called the great Leviathan of the land that swallows up all
before him; as he long ago devoured the holy land, and the Golden Candlesticks
of Asia.

36. Why this Mahumetism has spread so far, and continues so long in the
world, Rosse. View of Relig. page 175. Says, the half moon is erected instead
of the Cross. 1. from the looseness of the Clergy and Laity. 2. from the
continual Jarrs and digladiations among Christians about Religion. 3. to punish
the wickedness of the Greek (it may be added, and German) Emperors: Mahumetism
has lasted already above a 1000 years, page 177. and 179. It is too too
manifest to this day, how the Turks improve their Empire on Christendom, which
is not so zealous in defense of the truth, as those [ Musulmanni, believers, or
rather misbelievers] are foolhardy for their false god; and the Turks
Superstitious Credulity of fate (prefixing the hour of every man's death, which
he can neither defer nor hasten) makes them both fearless of Danger and
Careless of their own security, this makes them successful in war.

37. Some learned men are of opinion that God raised up the Turks to punish the
Romans, for being so Cruel to his Saints, and for their Notorious Idolatry. The
Turks (being haters of Idolatry) are made the Rod of Gods anger to punish
Christian or rather Antichristian Idolaters. It is worth our observation, that
as yet they have not done much harm to the Protestant Churches; but most to the
Ignorant Greeks and Idolatrous Papists.

38. The Eastern Roman Empire the Turks have laid waste, and the Western has
not taken warning according to Rev. 9.20. God will do his work with his Rod and
then burn it. This Empire shall be destroyed per intestinas divisiones, as
Luther in his Mensalia affirms; in the mean time, as he is an enemy to the
Godhead and pure Gospel of Christ, so he is an Antichrist, called Orientalis
Antichristus the Eastern Antichrist.

39. Yea, our Dr. Holmes does strongly assert, that the Turk and the Pope make
up one Antichrist, and he gives those reasons for it, 1st. Mahumetism was
hatched by Sergius a Popish Monk. 2ly. according to Dan. 7. ver. 8.24. The Turk
possesses three of those Kingdoms which were under the Pope. 3ly. the Turk sits
over the Material, as the Pope over the Spiritual Temple. 4ly. both their names
amounts to 666. (...) in the Greek as well as (...). 5ly. both are Sons of
perdition, the two Master-limbs of Antichrist, the one Eastern the other
Western.

40. Unto all this concerning the Turk, I shall only subjoyn the choice
observation of that holy and learned Servant of Christ, Mr. John Cotton, who
intimates (in his Treatise upon Revel. 13.) that while the Pope stands, no war
against the Turk can prosper; for it was because of Romes sin that the Turk was
so advanced. God raising up a beastly Engine to punish a beastly Religion. Thus
may the Turk be one Antichrist, but not [The] Antichrist, or at most but one
Limb of him, which shall stand longer than the other Limb; for we Read of the
Turks Rise in Revel. 9. but no where of his Ruin, till Revel. 20.8.

CHAP. III.
41. HItherto Negatively, what is not [The] Antichrist, now I come to show
Positively, what is? If we hunt this beast home ( quasi cum Catulis fidelibus)
this Fox that has most spoiled the Vineyard of Red-Wine, will be found to
Kennel in Rome; The Ld. Chancellor Bacon told K. James (in a dispute about
Antichrist) had he an Heu and Cry for it, he must apprehend the Pope by it.
And as for his birth and Nativity, his Father was an Amorite, and his Mother an
Hittite, what ever he profess to the contrary.

42. Antichrist is taken either Generally for every one that is against Christ
and thus all those opposers of Christ forementioned are Antichrists, in this
Sense; there were many Antichrists in the Apostles time: or it is taken
Specially, and that two ways. 1st. Either for some notable Empire that openly
opposes it self to the Kingdom of Christ; thus the Turkish Empire may be
Antichrist, or that does it privily and closely: so it is the Popish Empire.
2ly. It Is taken (...) for the most principal part of that Empire, and so the
head of the Popish Empire is truly called [The] Antichrist.

43. That we may come more distinctly to the knowledge of this Antichrist,
Learned Chamier lays down a most sure Rule. Quicunque omnes Capit Antichristi
Notas ( quas Scriptura delineavit) est Antichristus: whosoever has all those
Characters (wherewith the Scripture deciphers Antichrist by) is [ the]
Antichrist: but it will appear by the Sequel, that the Pope of Rome has all
those Characters upon him, by which the word of God describes him, therefore it
necessarily follows that the Pope of Rome is [ the] Antichrist.

44. And there is another infallible Axiom used by our Protestant Divines to
the same purpose, Cui Competit Definitio, ei Competit Definitum; but the
Definition (that the holy Scriptures afford us) of Antichrist does best accord
with the Pope of Rome; therefore he is the thing defined, to wit, Antichrist:
that description (the word of God gives of Antichrist) does not only show what,
but who he is (called) Antichristus ille magnus, the Great Antichrist.

45. The holy Scriptures gives us this definition of Antichrist. (1st.) he is
an Apostate ( or Runegado-Christian) (2ly.) professing friendship to Christ,
but practicing enmity against him, (3ly.) Stirred up by the efficacy of Satan.
(4ly.) Usurping a Monarchy in the Church, (5ly.) Excercising his Kingdom in the
great City that Reigns over the Kings of the Earth (6ly.) Behaving himself in
the Church of God, as if he were God. (7ly.) Seducing the Nations with lying
wonders. (8ly.) A man of Sin, a Son of perdition, a wicked one, an Idolater.
(9ly.) Ambitious, Cruel, full of all uncleanness. (10ly.) To be revealed in
those last times, (11ly.) to be Consumed by the breath of Christ's mouth, and
(12ly.) to be destroyed by the brightness of his Coming.

46. That he must be 1st. an Apostate, a faller away from the truth. 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. demonstrates [ Refuga a domino suo] as Austin calls him, one that
departs from the faith and purity of Religion. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2ly. in pretense a
Friend to Christ, but in truth an Enemy. He must be a Christian ( titulo-tenus)
is shown us by his sitting in the Temple of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and by his
having horns like a lamb, Rev. 13.11. This veil of the name of Christ, colors
over all his wickedness and makes him a mystery of iniquity. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.

47. Yet in reality Antichrist must be an enemy to Christ (notwithstanding all
his pretenses for him) 1. Joh. 4.3. though the Greek particle [(...)] signifies
Substitution and Vicegerency; so Antichrist is one for Christ, yet [(...)] as
it implies opposition and Contrariety shows, he is one against Christ, though
he look like a lamb, yet does he speak like the Dragon, Rev. 13.11. yea and
Acts like the Dragon also, for the Dragon gives power to the beast. Rev. 13.4.
and the beast makes war with the Saints. v. 7, yea and with the lamb too. Rev.
17.14. (though he seem to be like him and for him) the beast and all his ten
horns do war against Christ. Rev. 19.19. he is called (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. an
Adversary.

48. It appears 3ly. that Antichrist is one stirred up by the efficacy of
Satan, not only because the Dragon gives power to the beast. Rev. 13.4. but
also his coming is described to be, by the working of Satan. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
[(...)] Antichrist must have the most eminent Activity of Satan's skill, both to
found and finish his Kingdom. Satan delivers the Key of the bottomless pit to
him. Rev. 9.11. and makes him the great Steward of his house, insomuch as
Antichrist has a greater power (according to their belief) in Hell, then
Joseph had given him by Pharoh in Egypt, thus Antichrists Doctrine is called
the Doctrine of devils and his habitation, the habitation of devils. 1. Tim.
4.1. and Revel. 18.2.

49. Antichrist must 4ly. Usurp a Monarchy in the Church; not only a
Spiritual, but also a Temporal Kingdom; for this beast is described with two
horns, (to signify his double power) Rev. 13.11. his Spiritual power Consists
in the Exercise of that Key of the bottomless pit, which Satan gives to the
Star of the Antichristian Church (as above) whereby he binds and looses, not
Ministerially in Christ's name, but rather Magisterially in his own name,
usurping an absolute Authority of Decreeing and Condemning what he pleases,
without the Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

50. He has also a Temporal or Political Kingdom, for the Antichrist, or
second beast excercises all the power of the first beast Rev. 13.12. that is,
takes on him Civil Authority and using a Secular as well as an Ecclesiastical
Sword: he must sit in the same Seat, where the Imperial civil Courts has been
kept, and there set up his own Courts, that as a complete Plenipotentiary he
may hear all causes, Civil as well as Sacred. Rev. 13.2.

52. That he must (5ly.) exercise this his Monarchy and Kingdom, in the great
City that Rules over the Nations appears from, Rev. 13.2. The Dragon gives to
the beast not only his power, but also his Seat where his Throne had been; and
the woman that Rides upon the beast, is called plainly the great City, which
then had the Empire, and Reigned over the Kings of the Earth. Rev. 17.18.
called the great whore Sitting upon many waters, to wit, many Nations of sundry
languages, Rev. 17.1,15. which shows not only the largeness of Antichrists
Territories, but also the Instability of his Kingdom, which has no better a
foundation than as built upon Unconstant-waters.

52. That he must carry himself (6ly.) in the Church of God, as if he were God,
is expressly declared in 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Antichrist must exalt himself above all
that is called God or worshipped, [(...)] either with Civil or Religious
worship. There are, that are called Gods. 1 Cor. 8.5. to wit, Magistrates.
Psalm. 82.6. Those he exalts himself above, in deposing Kings, and disposing
Kingdoms; yea not only above those titular gods, but also above the true God (
In ambitione plus-quam Luciferiana) beyond Lucifer himself; for he said only, I
will be like the most High. Esa. 14.14. But Antichrist will be above the most
High, not only in dispensing with, but also in contradicting his Laws.

53. Antichrist must (7ly.) Seduce with lying wonders, this is proved from 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. (...). To astonish his beholders and to maintain his Reputation, he
should come with signs and wonders, wrought by the power of Satan. Those should
be the means of his advancement, he does great wonders Rev. 13.13. calling fire
down from heaven, as if another Elijah: the spirits of devils issuing out of
the mouth of this Antichrist works wonders. Cap. 16.14.

54. Antichrist must have (8ly.) a threefold brand put upon him, as appears
from 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,8. 1st. a man of Sin, 2ly. a Son of perdition. 3ly. a wicked
one, all those Epithets, to show, what a notoriously Sinful, lost, lawless one
he should be, the 1st. [(...)] denotes him the eldest Son of all the children
of Belial, a Superlative Sinner, the worst of men, as Christ (to whom he is
contrary) was the best; the 2d. [(...)] describes him a man of destruction
actively, ( a destroying Son called (...). Rev. 9.11. So he is to the Church of
God) and for destruction passively, to be cast into Hell, Rev. 19.20. the 3d.
[(...) as above fig. 13.] deciphers him one that neither fears God not
reverences man, as, Luke 18.2. for the Laws of neither can keep him within
compass.

55. That he must be further Stigmatized (9ly.) for being Idolatrous (the first
Adjunct) is manifest, from Rev. 17.2. not only in his own person, but like
another Jeroboam, making others to sin with his Intoxicating cup of
Fornication, thus is Idolatry termed by the Holy. Ghost. Ezekiel. 16.17. the 2d.
adjunct is, Ambitious, [(...)] one advancing himself above every Monarch on
earth, and more than equalling himself with the great God of heaven (as above
fig. 52.) 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. his 3d. Title [ Cruel] is Represented by the woman made
drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6. and by the name of a devouring
beast, so often put upon him, as before in fig. 7. his 4th. Title [ Unclean] is
shadowed out by those names of Sodom and Egypt. Rev. 11.8. and by those names
of great whore, and mother of fornication.

56. (10ly) Antichrist is one to be revealed in those last times, appears
plainly from 2 Thessalonians. 2.7,8. he must be in the world along time, before he be
Revealed; while he remains a mystery of iniquity, or iniquity in a mystery he
is under a vail, The depths of Satan. Rev. 2.24. Unknown, Unrevealed. This
mystery was working out of sight in persons (as Diotrephes) and in Doctrines (
as touch not, taste not, etc. forbidding Meats and Marriages betimes; but his
Revealing is an Antecedent of Christ's coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.

57. The 11th. clause in the Definition of Antichrist, is, he must be consumed
with the Spirit of Christ's mouth. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. The manner 1st. it must be
gradual, not all at once, but a lingering death, (this the word [(...)]
signifies) a wasting a little and little, till he be Annihilated: and 2ly. the
means of his consuming, the spirit or breath of Christ's mouth, [(...)] to wit,
by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the Spirit of Christ works powerfully
(yet gradually) in the hearts of men to bring them off from supporting
Antichrists Kingdom. This is called by the Prophet, the Rod of his mouth, and
the breath of his lips. Esa. 11.4. and the Sword of his mouth. Rev. 2.16. 1
Kin. 19.17.

58. The 12th Clause is, Antichrist is one that must be destroyed with the
brightness of Christ's coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. wherein 1st. the manner [(...)]
shall be brought to naught and utterly abolished, though he Seat himself among
the Stars, yet from thence the Lord will bring him down, Obad. v. 4. even into
utter destruction. 2ly. The means, (...)] which may not be taken strictly for
that precise point of time, wherein Christ shall come personally to judge the
world? See infra 227 Paragraph (as Esti^ observes on the place) but largely for
the Spiritual manifestation of Christ's presence in his Church, before which,
this Antichrist shall melt away, as dew before the Sun; even to an utter
extirpation.

59. Thus in those 12 clauses, I have shown the Scriptural marks and definition
of Antichrist, which are beyond Controversy and Undeniable, these are the
claws of the beast. [ Ex ungue leonem] A Lion is known by his paw; my
Assumption now is, that this difinition does [ quadrare cum Papa] suits with
the Pope, hoc restat ad probandum; I Argue thus, Hypothetically. If the Pope
have those marks, and this definition of Antichrist, then he is the thing
defined; but the Antecedent is true, ergo the Consequent, or Categorically
thus, whoever has those marks and this definition, is the Antichrist; but the
Pope has them, ergo, this is to be proved by an Induction.

CHAP. IV.
60. THe 1st part of the Induction. The first thing to be now demonstrated for
clearing my assumption, is, [that the Pope and his Church has apostatized from
the Faith] which is evidenced thus, the Church of Rome with her Pastors, in the
primitive Apostolical times was a beloved Spouse of Christ (as that famous
Epistle of the Apostle to that Church does sufficiently manifest) but now if we
compare the Doctrines of that Epistle with the Romish Doctrine now (as it came
out of the Trent-Councel) there is nothing more true, then to say (as the
Prophet Esa. 1.21.) how is the faithful City become an harlot, her silver is
now become dross, and her wine is mixed with water, v. 22. She that once was
Bethel, is now Beth-aven; she that was once Christian, is now become
Antichristian.

61. It is not unnecessary to praemise here, that when I speak of the Pope
(either in this, or any of the other following Characters of him) I do not
speak of him personally, as if but one in number, a single person; but
collectively, both as conjunct with the Clergy at one time, and as varying by
Succession for a long time together, under the notion of Peter's Successor, whom
the Romanists call the Church ((...)) by way of Eminency, giving the power of
the Keys to him alone, as i^ Christ had given the Keys to Peter alone, Man
16.19. and as if he alone were the Church that must be told in case of
obstinate offenses* Mat. 18.18.

62. In this sense the Pope and the Church of Rome are Synonimicall terms in
this Discourse; and the Apostasy of the Body and the Head are collectively the
same. Now to prove his Apostasy, 1st shall be from persons, and 2ly from
things. 1st from Persons. Bishop Davenant in his begged Suffrage shows, how the
Church of Rome now is no more a true Church, than an arrant whore is a true
Wife to her Husband, she has forsaken Christ and followed false lovers.

63. Bishop Bramhall uses this Argument: that Church which has changed the
Apostolical Creed, the Apostollical Government, and Apostolical Succession,
cannot remain an Apostolical, Orthodox or Catholic Church: but the Church of
Rome has done all this, Ergo, and so by Consequence is Apostatized. Bishop
Hall also demonstrates, how she has so degenerated from her self, and from the
Truth, insomuch that now their can be no peace with her. Our repugnances with
her are irreconcilable, though Franciscus de Clara ( alias Damport) that
quirking Scot would reconcile us.

64. A great cloud of Witnesses might be brought in to prove this Apostasy. For
many Champions of the Protestant Religion have irrefragably evidenced, that
Rome is not only revolted from Christ, but also from her self under her
primitive Pastor? whose Writings could never be answered to this day: but
seeing they are (but) human Testimonies, Tria (in this place) shall be omnia.
Suffrages that are Human, non sunt Numeranda sed Ponderanda. I shall therefore
add some Divine Testimonies against which there can be no just Exception.

65. The Apostle in his Epistle to that Church, does more then intimate, that
she might prove an Apostatizing Church, Romans 11.20. be not high-minded, but
fear. We must not look upon that passage as an empty ring of a tinkling Cymbal,
but a Prophetical intimation of some possibility. and probability of their
future abjection and Apostasy. But more plainly the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.1,3.
points his finger (as it were) at Rome: so suitable are their Doctrines to those
Doctrines of Devils there mentioned, as our learned Mr. Mede on that subject
clearly shows. Mede's Aposta. of later Times.

66. The Doctrine of Demons. [(...)] Mr. Mede understands to be the Papists
deifying and worshipping of Saints and Angels, their Bowing down to Images,
Breaden-Idols and Crosses, like new Daemon-pillars, their Adoring and Templing
of Relics: all which make as lively an Image of the Gentiles Theology of
Demons, as could be expressed. Thus he, taking the word [(...)] to be
Genitivus Materiae not efficientis as noting the Subject Matter, not the
Efficient cause.

67. But more particularly (omitting Mr. Mede's Notion) let us see how the
Romish Church [ quasi digito demonstratur] is pointed at by this Prediction in
the 1st of those Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.3. to wit, forbidding to marry,
the Scripture commends Marriage as Gods Ordinance, and as an Holy and
Undefiled state, permitting it equally to all Men, so they marry in the Lord:
yet the Romish Church forbids any in Holy Orders to marry, and that by Laws and
Canons which never either Manichee, Marcion or Tatian did (though they had low
thoughts of it) as other ancient Heretics had: they never made any Decrees
against it.

68. The 2d Doctrine is, Prohibition of Meats, which God has appointed to be
received with Thanksgiving. This is also as express and notorious Doctrine of
the Church of Rome, which has forbidden by Law that which God by Law Ordained.
God allows the free use of the Creature, but Rome restrains it by certain Times
and Differences at her pleasure, Rome forbids some at all times, and all at
some times to abstain from some kind of Meats, far beyond the Montanists that
never put such stress on their Fasting Days, as Rome does.

69. Anselm expounds this, 1 Timothy 4. on this wise. The Spirit of God does
manifestly (in me and by me) say, that in the last Times, that is (says he)
during the Reign of Antichrist or before, some shall depart from the Faith as
the same Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.5. there shall be a falling away first. Thus
this ancient Father applied those Doctrines of Devils to the Apostasy of
Antichrist, and Espancaeus upon this 1 Timothy 4. says ( in totidem Verbis) that
the Apostasy from the Faith (there mentioned) is the same with the Apostasy of
the Man of Sin spoken of in 2 Thessalonians. 2.5.

70. Thus it appears from Testimonies, how Antichrist is an Apostate, forsaking
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and not only Embracing, but also Ordaining those
Doctrines of Devils: it may 2ly be made more manifest ex part Rei, and de
Facto, by comparing the Doctrines of Antichrist with the Doctrine of that
famous Epistle of Paul to the Romans. There Is not a word there of the Popes
Supremacy, of Invocation of Saints, of Adoration of Images, or of the Virtue of
Relics, of Monkish Sanctity, of Indulgences, of Transubstantiation, of
Purgatory, of the Mass, or of Auricular Confession, etc. wherein the marrow and
substance of the Romish Religion consists.

71. These were not the Doctrines of that Church in the Apostles days; but now
she has heaped up other Doctrines that do not only contradict the Apostle's
Doctrine, but such as destroys the very foundation of Christianity, at least by
consequence (if not in positive terms) as in their Doctrine of Justification by
Inherent Righteousness which is contrary to Romans 1.17. and 4.6. their Praying
to Saints contrary to Romans 10.13,14. and their Merit, against Romans 8.18.

72. No other foundation can any man lay besides Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Yet
Rome has laid other Foundations ( not holding the Head, Christ Col. 2.18,19.)
they overthrow Christ's Merits, by setting up their own merits, and Christ's
Mediation by making other Mediators, and Christ's Satisfaction in their
Purgatory-sufferings; so likewise the All-sufficiancy of Christ's Sacrifice by
Reiterating their Mass as a Sacrifice: Rome also overthrows the very Humanity
of Christ (which is locally circumscribed in Heaven) by their making it wholly
present in a 1000 places on Earth at once in their Transubstantiation.

73. Besides, Rome denies the Sufficiency of the Scriptures (which are a
Foundation Doctrinal, as Christ is the Foundation personal) and forbidding
their Laity to read them, they do as much as say, the word of God is not
Necessary to Salvation, neither Necessitate medii, nor Necessitate praecepti:
So their Worshipping of Saints, of Angels, of Crucifixes, of Relics, of
Images and of very Wafers, are no better then real Underminings of the sacred
Foundation. Thus it appears they do not only destroy that great Fundamental
truth of Justification by Christ, in ascribing it to Works: but also in
overthrowing both Christ and Scripture.

74. Many more evidences may be added, as their making a New Rule of Faith, to
wit, Tradition, a new guide or head of Faith, to wit, the Pope, prescribing
Prayers in an Unknown Tongue, attributing the effect of the Sacraments and all
Services to the External work, the Popes Canonizing of Saints, his Forgiving of
sins in a Magisterial manner, his creating new Articles of Faith, and making
himself as Infallible as God. By all which it is made as clear as the Sun that
the Pope is this grand Apostate, both from Christ and the Apostolical Church at
Rome.

75. I have insisted the longer upon the first part of the Induction, because
in the Definition of Antichrist, that clause stands as the [ Genus] thereof;
the other following are as the [ Differentiae] which I shall with much more
Brevity run over. Now come we to the 2d part or clause in the Induction, which
is [ pretending friendship but intending opposition] that the Pope is a
Christian none denies it, (though a Degenerate one) his Title shows it;
[Christs Vicar General upon Earth] thus (...) as (...) signifies Substitution
and Vice-gerence, so (...) is a Viceroy) is most fitly also accommodated to the
Pope, as he is Christ's Vicegerent.

76. But like a Pirate at sea, he hangs out false Colors to deceive unwary
Souls. For though he would look like the Lamb, yet speaks he like the Dragon,
and pushes the true Lamb with his horns, Rev. 13.11. and though he be said to
sit in the Temple of God in his external profession of Christianity (which once
did flourish in the Roman Church in Primitive times) yet has he introduced the
Doctrines of Devils into Gods Temple, and has made war with Christ, and with
his Saints that would not embrace them: hence the Pope is truly called (...),
as (...) signifies not for (as above) but against Christ.

77. The word (...) (which the Apostle uses, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. signifying an
Opposer or Adversary) is truly applied to the Pope, though he be not an open
Enemy; for he must speak lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2. he must bring in
privily damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. he must be a false prophet, Rev. 16.13.
he must come in sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7.14. in a word, he must be a mystery
of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and it is wisdom, yea wisdom peculiar to Saints to
discern him, Rev. 13.18 All this makes the Pope a more dangerous enemy, Ps.
55.12,13.

78. That the Pope is an Opposer of Christ and an enemy to him, appears in his
opposition to all the 3 Offices of Christ. 1. his Prophetical office the Pope
overthrows, in his undervaluing Christ's word as Unnecessary (as before) yea,
and as obscure; capable of many interpretatione (as if it were a Nose of Wax)
and in equalling, yea, preferring his own Traditions before it. Lastly, in
assuming a power to make what Scriptures he pleases Canonical or Apocryphal.
2ly his Sacerdotal office, in his urging the merits of Saints, and Expiation of
Venial sins by men's sufferings, etc. as before. 3ly his Regal, in assuming an
unlimited Power to himself of making Canons in the Church, as the Bishop of
Bishops, the Head of the Church; titles of blasphemy in any, save in Christ
Jesus only.

79. The 3d clause of the Induction is [ stirred up by the efficacy of Satan]
the Pope is such an one, not only as under godly pretenses of friendship to
Christ, he has transformed himself (like Satan) into an Angel of light, into
an Apostle of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13,14. and making himself to look like the
Lamb, though more of the Dragon then of the lamb be found in him. Thus his
sworn Swordmen the Jesuits, do ambitiously affect the title of being of the
Society of Jesus, though indeed they be the worst sort of Enemies against Jesus
in the World, warring against his Image where ever they find it, Presbyteri a
socio geritis qui nomen Jesus
Dispeream si vos Jesus amare potest.
but also in more open Satanical practices.

80. That Satan has been the chief Architector of the Pope's kingdom (as well
as of his Doctrines, called therefore the Doctrines of Devils) appears ( ex
abundanti) out of their own Chronologers, as well as out of ours. Benno
Uspergensis (one of their Cardinals) writes what kind of Popes Satan set up
after Silvester the 2d. and Platina (the Popes own Secretary, and keeper of the
Vatican Library) Matthew Parisiensis and others, make them Limbs of the Devil.

81. To dig in this dunghill of Satanical Popes, would be both endless and
unpleasant: to relate the stories out of Platina (their own creature) who wrote
by the commandment of Sixtus the 4th. or out of Benno Uspergensis in his
Paralipom. (their Cardinal) neither of which could write out of prejudice
against them, I omit; and shall only add one passage out of Matthew Paris: (the
last of the fornamed) Hist. Angl. in Guil. Conquest. Y. 1072. pa. 10. he
reports how, Satanas and omne contubernium Inferorum, etc. that is, the devil
and all his hellish Crew, wrote letters gratulatory to the Pope and his Clergy
for sending more souls to hell, then ever went before.

82. To let pass Bernardus, Damianus, Gulielmus de sancto Victore, Nicolaus
Gallicus Narbonensis, Savanarola the Florentine, Arnolphus, Clemanges with many
more mentioned in Illyrici Catologo Testium Veritatis, all which
(notwithstanding the darkness of the time they lived in) espied the efficacy of
Satan raising up the Pope: besides Petrarch, Mantuan of later time; to say
nothing of Wickliff, Husse, Jerome of Prague, etc. or our own later
Chronologers, as Alsted, Pareus, and our Countriman Dr. Prideaux, etc. which
show how many Popes gave themselves to the devil, for obtaining of the Popedom
by his help.

83. Popish Chronologers (as well as Protestant) confess that some of the Popes
were Necromancers, in express league with the devil, and such as sacrificed to
[ him] as if the devil were their God. Some did not only study and practice it
themselves, but also taught it to others, thus promoting Sorcery and
Conjuration; and if those be not evidences of the Popes coming by the working
of Satan, what can be? To say nothing of the Key of the bottomless pit which
Satan has given to him, as before.

84. The 4th part of the Induction is [ usurping a Monarchy in the Church]
which is taken pro Confesso by all Popish writers, that the Pope does, who
challenges to himself the Monarchy of a double power Spititual and Temporal.
Insomuch that his Parasites have courted him with that double title (proper to
our Lord Christ) of King and Priest, yea, and this as Peter's Successor, as if
Peter had not only the Keys committed to him but the Sword too; whereas their
own Image-makers frame Peter with the keys, and Paul with the sword. See
instances Paragr. 90.

85. Boniface was hard put to it for warranting his double Sword, when he had
no better proof then that of Luke 22.38. [ behold Lord, here are two swords.]
Here he understand the Church, and Christ (he says) does not tell them, these
two swords are too many in the Church, but only it is enough: and Peter had one
of those swords by Christ's allowance, for Christ bad him put his sword into his
sheath, and why may not Peter's Successor have a Temporal sword too. Therefore
this same Boniface the 3d. upon a great Jubilee, appeared one day with a goodly
Mitre in his Pontisicalibus, and the next day with a Crown and a naked Sword
born before him: a clear evidence of his usurpation of this double Monarchy.

86. That the Monarchical power is usurped by the Pope, [ in the Church]
appears in his calling himself the Monarch of the Church, acting absolutely as
to Spirituals, and universally as to Temporals, so far (as they say) they are*
in ordine ad Spiritualia. Thus Bellarmine affirms, that the Pope has power to
depose Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms for advancing the Catholic Church. Thus
this grand Thief and Robber (so called, John 10.8.) sitting in the Temple of
God, robs both God of his part, and Caesar of his too; committing high Treason
against both God and Caesar.

87. Indeed the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. does not say that he sits (...) in the
Temple, but (...) in Templum, upon or against the Church as Austin reads it and
others, to show how tyrannical a Monarch he will be: but the Enallage of the
Preposition (...) for (...) is usual in Scripture, as Mat. 2.23. Mark 1.9. So
the reading holds [ in] the Temple or Church of God. That the Pope sits in the
Church, res ipsa loquitur, and himself boasts of his Apostolical Seat, which
was indeed a true Church in Paul and John's time, though now degenerated in the
Pope's time (thus the Temple of Jerusalem was called the Temple of God, even
when it was become a den of thieves) or the Pope may be in the Church, as a
Wenn is said to be in the Body.

88. The 5th clause of the Induction is [ that his Seat must be in the great
City that rules Nations] this is so accommodated to the Pope, that none can
contradict it, for he has erected his Episcopal See upon the 7 hill'd City,
called by the Ancients, (...), as Rev. 17.9. calls it the city on 7 Hills, to
wit, Rome which in John's time was the great City [by way of eminency]
superlatively great; called the Lady of kingdoms, and the Mistress of the
world. For John lived under the 12th Caesar, when Rome was predominant [almost]
over all Lands, and was dignified with this Encomium [ Orbis in Urbe.]

CHAP. V.
89. THe 6th clause [ exalting himself as God, above all that is called God] is
the 6th part of the Induction; which does exactly quadrare cum Papa, the Pope
is the [(...)] 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. that lifts up himself above all Kings and
Emperors, who are as titular Gods on earth. This is as clear in all Histories
as if writ with a Sunbeam, though in profession the Pope be styled Servus
servorum, yet in practice he is found Rex Regum: many instances we read of
those Earthly gods holding his Stirrup, kissing his Toe, as well as waiting (at
his Gate) his leisure and pleasure.

90. To particularize the Popes pride and exaltation in some few instances.
Boniface the 8th wrote thus Imperiously to the French King; we would have thee
to know that thou art Subject to us, as well in temporal as spiritual matters;
So it is Recorded in the Hist. of France. Pope Pius in his 2d. Epistle to Mahomet
the Turkish Emperor page 396. promises to make him Emperor of the East (as
his predecessors had made Charlemain Emperor of the West) if he would turn
Christian and supply the necessities of the Church; Remondus in his Antipap.
Chap. 20. Relates of Pope Innocent, saying the Church has given me a Mitre for
my Prelacy, and a Crown for my Kingdom, as I am Vicar of the King of kings and
Lord of lords.

91. Platina writes, that Pepin one of the Kings of France having kissed the
Toe of Pope Steven the 2d, held his bridle for him on horseback, and served him
as his Lackey or Footboy: in vita Stephani secundi. The Emperor Frederick
holding the stirrup to Pope Adrian the 4th, and mistaking the wrong stirrup,
the Pope rages against him, although the Emperor excused himself, saying he had
not been brought up with holding Stirrops: and Benedict the 9th sent a Crown to
Peter King of Hungary with this Motto, Petra dedit Romam Petr^, tibi Papa
Coronam.
But more proudly did he that set the Crown on Henry the sixt's head, and
kicked it off with his foot again.

92. Yet most proudly of all did Alexander the 3d carry to Frederick Barbarossa
the Emperor, who comes creeping to the Pope for an Absolution, and kissing his
Feet, the Pope, like a proud devil Incarnate, sets his foot on the neck of the
Emperor (then prostrate before him) saying those words of the Psalmist, Ps.
91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the Dragon and Basilisk thou
shall tramph under foot. The Pope calls himself the Sun, and the Emperor but
the Moon in a lower orb to him.

93. Nich. Vignier in his Eccles. History, relating the manner how the Emperors
were consecrated and crowned, says that after Mass the Pope in his Pontifical
Chair, holds the Crown betwixt his feet, which, the Emperor bowing down his
head, lifts up from his feet, and presently the Pope strikes the Crown of with
his foot from the Emperors head down to the ground, to signify that he has
power to depose them again at his pleasure; and then the Cardinals that stand
round about, takes up the Crown and sets it on with great reverence: is not
this like one of the spu^ or kicks of the beast?

94. Thus the Pope, though he pretend himself to be Peter's Successor, yet walks
he not in Peter's steps, for whereas Peter takes up Cornelius when he fell down
at his foot, Act. 10.26. Yet a Pope can let a Caesar ( who is Cornelius Master)
to lay at his feet, and kiss his Toe: and to exercise other practices of
Insolence toward him. See more Parag. 143. o^ succeeding Peter. All those
forcited instances do well accord with that witty Acrostick made of those four
letters. PAPA, to wit, Paparum Ambitio Peperit Antichristum.

95. And as if this were too little for the Pope to exalt himself above those
titular Gods, he exalts himself above the true God too; in contradicting his
Word, disanulling his Institutions, and taking upon him to dispense with his
Laws; as Pope Paul the 3d dispensed with the 5 Commandment, in poisoning his
own father. And that Pope with the 6 Commandment that said, Was God so angry
with man for an Apple, and not he ( Gods Vicar) with his Cook for a Peacock:
and with the 7th, in allowing of Concubines, and common Whoredoms: and with the
4th in denying its morality, and with the 2d in omitting it. Et sic de
caeteris, which might be shown ad Nauseam usque.

96. That he exalts himself ( as God) appears by those fllattering Titles that
are given to the Pope; as Lateran Council Sess. 4. it was cried to him, tu es
alter deus, deus in terra, etc. and thou have all power in Heaven and Earth
given thee; this was said to Leo the 10th, and their own Advocates
blasphemiously write. Idem est dominium Dei and Papae: besides those many
incommunicable properties of God attributed to him, as Infallible, Almighty,
supreme Head and Husband of the Church. Pater patrum, Dominus dominantium, and
Episcopus Episcoporum, all which (and much more) shows the Pope [(...)] a
tanquam God, the Canonists usual phrase is, our lord God, the Pope.

97. The 7th clause in the Induction is [ that he must seduce with lying
Wonders.] This the Papacy owns with not a little boasting of their power of
working Miracles, insomuch that Bellarmine (himself) makes this a note of the
true Church, and proves the Romish Church to be a true Church, because she is
dignified (as he says) with this honorable Mark: and what strange wonders do
we read in Gregory's Dialogues, in the life of St. Francis, in Jacobus de
Voragine, in Bellarm. Lives, and in many other lying Legends, for confirmation
of Popery? All which are the piae frauds of Antichrist.

98. That many Popes have done Miranda, or things to be wondered at, is not
denied: for many of them (being in league with the Devil, as their own
Histories testify at large) might work many things by the Devils help, that
bred admiration in the beholders, as Hildebrand ( that firebrand of hell) in a
great concourse of people, shakes fire out of his gown sleeve in the sight of
them all. These things and such like, as Conjurers, they have done: these are
indeed miranda but not Miracula.

99. True miracles require divine Power, exceeding the ability of second
causes: these neither Satan, nor any of his Instruments can do, for it is the
Royal Prerogative of God, Ps. 72.18. God only does wondrous things. In this
sense, the Devil cannot go beyond the power of Nature, though through the
acuteness of his Angelical understanding, and his long observation and
experience from the beginning of the World, he is able to produce strange and
extraordinary effects. Yet all falls short of a true Miracle, strictly taken.

100. There is difference ex part Rei, betwixt miracles and wonders: Miracles
exceed the power of Created Agents, but wonders do not so. The Sorcerers of
Egypt can imitate Moses, and work wonders with their Enchantments, they can
bring frogs to the increase of their plague, but they cannot take the frogs
away again, their Frogs which they brought were but Phantasms, for their frogs
were not gathered up on heaps (when the Plague was over) as Moses's frogs were,
Exodus 8.7,14. This was a plain figure of the lying Wonders of Antichrist and
Rome, which spiritually is called Egypt, Rev. 11.8.

101. Satan did conjure up, all his Infernal powers in Pharaoh's time, that he
might vie with the wonder-working power of God, and darken his glory, and the
honor of his servant Moses: therefore it is said, the Magicians did so with
their enchantments, Exodus 7.11. and 22. and 8.7. Thus he endeavored to obscure
the gifts of Miracles in the the Apostles, by the Sorceries of Simon Magus: and
what a representation Satan made to Saul, of raising up Samuel from the dead:
thus by the subtilty and agility of his nature, he can amuze the minds of men
with strange actions.

102. Many such things Satan has done for those in Confederacy with him (as
the Popes have been) to raise admiration in the beholders, especially where
blind Ignorance and credulous Superstition, has sat as Judge by the help of
the External Senses only: Such are the miracles that Rome boasts so much of:
some of which being true, in Genere Rerum may well be called lying wonders,
though they be false in Genere miraculorum: Others be merely fabulous which
never were done, and so to be called Wondrous Lies.

103. Their lying Legends are full of this latter sort; as that St. Dunstan
pulled the Devil by the nose with a pair of Pincers; that St. Patrick drove all
the Venomous Beasts with his Staff out of Ireland; that St. Gooderick tamed
Wolves and Serpents with the Sign of the Cross; that St. Nicholas (when he was
but an Infant) abstained from sucking his Mothers Breasts every Wednesday and
Friday: and many more such trash; Imputing the driving away of the Devil to
their Crucifixes and Holy-waters, as Dr. Morton's Grand Impostor shows at
large: they can show of the Milk of the Virgin Mary, and the foreskin of
Christ, and Feathers of the Cock that crew at Peter's Denial of Christ.

104. Suppose those Stories of their Legends true, which they write of an Image
gratulating Aquinas for his Voluminous labors, saying [ been de me Scripsisti
Thoma] as if it had been a Voice from Christ out of Heaven, or as others say,
from the Mother of Christ, for clearing her from Original Sin. This might be
done by the Devil to deceive.

105. Such an other delusion was Bernard complemented withal, when the Image of
the blessed Virgin saluted him with [good morrow Bernard,] at his entrance into
the Church; which the good man (though devoutly Superstitious) tartly replied
to, that her Ladyship had forgotten both her Self and her Sex, for it is not
permitted to Women to speak in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.12. the Psalmist tells us
that Idols or Images have mouths and speak not: These must therefore be
Juggling tricks, unto which that Scripture alludes. Rev. 13.15. in making their
Images to speak.

106. Our own Historians tell us, how Friar Bacon made the Devil speak through
the Brazen nose at Oxford: and what else was it but the same Devil that gave
out all those Ambiguous Oracles at Delphos to the Heathens. Their own Baronius
tells us, how Simon Magus made Images to walk by the power of the Devil, and
their Stories of Images weeping, nodding, and stretching forth the hand, [as
with a blessing] are all dough-Cakes baked in the same Oven: the same Devil
exercises his art of deceit, both under the first Beast, to uphold the
Heathenish Idolatry, and under the 2d Beast, to maintain Antichristian
Superstition.

107. Henry Stephanus in his Apology for Herodotus, tells us of some Answers
that were given to such Superstitious Fools as prayed to Images by some
Juggling Priests that lay hid behind the Images, Polidore Virgil (a Papist)
says, those Answers were made by Priests that crept into the hollow of the
Image: Thus Devils Incarnate, (by their own Confession) makes their Images to
speak, to say nothing of their blessing-Image at Westchester moved by a Wire
and a Priest behind it, and other lying wonders.

108. It is a good Rule, when Miracles are wrought to be Patrons of Sin, they
come from Satan: Such were those wonders that Simon Magus wrought, not only to
raise up an admiration of himself, but also to bring men off from Holiness, and
from embracing the Gospel: Origin tells Celsus that Antichrists Miracles were to
bring men [(...)] to the deceitfulness of Sin; but Christ's Miracles were
[(...)] for the Salvation of Souls: true Miracles oppose Satan's Kingdom, and
are Mercies as well as Miracles.

109. Satan's wonders that he works, (whether mediately or immediately) may
amaze men, but do not benefit them, unless by way of Collusion; as one Devil
(in the exorcist) may cast out another, out of one possessed; which is done by
the Devils consent, and not by the power of any of their Exorcisms: a Devil
will willingly quit a demoniack, for the hardening of men's hearts, and for the
further advancing of his own Kingdom: Thus Austin de unitate Ecclesiae, Cap.
16. calls the Miracles of his time, either ( figmenta mendacium hominum, or
portenta fallacium Spirituum) forgeries of lying men, or prodigies of deceitful
Devils.

110. Chrysostom on the 23. Homily on John the 5th. said thus, [(...)] thou
have no need of Miracles, for those are Signs to the unbelievers, and Stella
(one of their own Religion) speaks well of this point, saying, Miracles as
Scaffolds are necessary in the building of an house, but when the house is
finished, they are but impediments to the Passengers; so now if Miracles were
done, it would argue a weakness in the confirmation of our Faith by the
Miracles of Christ and the Apostles.

111. Miracles now are rather hurtful then profitable, and he that looks for
wonders now is a wonder himself, as Austin de civit, dei lib. 22. Cap. 8. or
says qui credente mundo ipse non credit, magnum est ipse prodigium: he that
seeks for wonders now, when the Faith of the Gospel has been preached to the
World, and confirmed by Miracles, is himself the greatest wonder, our Lord has
told us John 10.41. that Gods Ministers may teach Truth, and yet work no
Miracles: and such may be the Devils Impostors, that come with Signs and
Wonders. Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. Matthew. 24.24.

112. The wonders then, (which the Popish Church brags of) are but fallacious
and counterfeit wonders spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. and so are the very brand of
Antichrist; so that while they boast of them, and make them a note of the
Church, they declare to all the World, that their Church is the Antichristian
Church: were they true wonders wrought by a Divine power, they would then be
Gods Seals, which are never set to confirm an untruth, but their wonders
contradict the Doctrine of Christ, and so are the badge of Antichrist.

113. Suppose the Jesuit Acosta should (for gaining the poor Indians to this
Popish Religion) foretell them, that for a Sign to them, the Sun should be
Eclipsed at such a time: This would be a wonder to them that are ignorant of
the natural Causes thereof: yet no true one in genere Miraculorum, though in
genere Rerum it fall out-so. It Is a lying wonder from the Jesuits, because it
is given out with a purpose to deceive: Miracles are not a touchstone to try
the truth of Doctrine by, but we must try miracles by the word of God.

114. I have been longer upon this Clause, because the Church of Rome lays a
great stress of her excellency above all Churches, in her Miracles, whereby
they (as it were) graphically decipher themselves to be the Antichrist, If any
desire to see more of Antichrist's lying wonders, let him read Osianders
Epitome 7. Cent. fol. 260, 261. and 9 Cent. fol. 84. 120. and 11th Cent. fol.
236. and Fullers Chur. Histor. concerning Abbeys and Monasteries* page 332. and
333.

115. The 8th part of the Induction is, the threefold brand, that God has
stigmatized him withal in his word: [ The man of sin, the son of perdition,
and the wicked one] to show what a complex of many gross Impieties [ the
Antichrist] should be, and how fitly this character corresponds with the Pope;
not only Dr. Prideaux in his Introduction, Pareus Medull. Histor. Ecclesiast.
Osianders Epitome, and all our Church Histories abundantly declare; but also
their own Historians make most shameful descriptions of their Popes Lives.

117. It Is a good Rule, [ Firmum est genus probationis, quod etiam ab adversario
sumitur, ut Veritas, etiam ab inimicis Veritatis, probetur.] It Is a strong
proof, when enemies of the Truth, are constrained to bear witness of the Truth:
and Vives de instrumento probabilitatis, says thus, Amici contra amicum, and
Inimici pro Inimico invincibile Testimonium est, which in plain English is thus
explained: the Testimony of a Papist against a Papist, and of a Papist for a
Protestant is without exception.

117. Let us therefore take a brief account out of some Popish writers (whose
Testimonies are unquestionable) and so make a compendious Landscape of a few
Popes Lives, to show what men of sin, yea, rather monsters then men, they were.
To begin with Sabinianus (who succeeded Gregorius Magnus, he who abominated the
title of Universal Bishop, as smelling too much of Antichrist) this Pope their
own Writers brands thus: Sabinianus culpabili vita, and formidabili morte
notatus est, he lived wickedly, and died miserably. Fasciculus Temporum ad Ann.
614.

118. What a villainous prank did Stephanus the 6th (whom many call Stephen the
7th) play (such as never was played before, as Cardin. Baronius Tom. 10. Annal.
ad Ann. 897. Number. 2. expresses it) with the Carcass of his Predecessor
Formosus, which he took out of the grave, brought into judgment before a
Council of Bishops, spoiled it of his Papal Robes, clad it with a Lay-mans
garment, indicted, arraigned and condemned it, cut off 3 fingers of it, and
cast it into Tyber. Yea, depriving all them of their Orders (whom he had
ordained) reordaining them again. Hoc prae sui immanitate omnibus incredibile
videtur, says Baronius. Erroris tamen convincuntur, qui ista de Formoso negant
and conficta putant: the barbarousness of it makes it unlikely, yet the truth
is, it is no fable.

119. Another of their Popish writers ( Platina by name) tells us of Boniface
the 7th, that he robbed Peter's Church, and fled for a time to Constantinople,
who afterward by Symony, and murdering two Popes, made himself Pope. Of whom
Baronius says, inter famosos latrones and potentissimos grassatores, atque
patriae proditores (Syllas and Catilinas) annumerandus. He outstrip'd the most
notorious robbers and traitors to their Country that ever were; yea Catiline
and Sylla, and at last died like a Beast. This is a truth confirmed by two
witnesses of their own, Platina in the life of Boniface the 7th, and Baron.
Annal. Tom. 10. ad Ann. 985. Number. 1.

120. Their own Platina in the Lives of the Popes, writes how Sylvester the 2d.
[ ambitione and diabolica dominandi Cupiditate impulsus, largitione primo
quidem Archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, inde Ravenatem adeptus, pontificatum
postremo majore conatu, adjuvante diabolo, consecutus est, hac tamen lege, ut
post mortem totus illius esset, cujus fraudibus tantam dignitatem adeptus
erat*] in plain English, he gave himself both body and soul to the devil, that
he might obtain the Popedom. And this is confirmed by many others of their own
Writers, as Cardin. Benno de vita and Gest. Hildebrandi. Stella de vit. Pontif.
Caranza. Sum. Council. and Aeneas Sylvius. Comment. de Council. Basil. lib. 1.
says plainly Sylvester Diabolica fraud Pontificatum ascendisse. The Devil made
him Pope.

121. And William of Malmesbury, lib. 2. de gestis Regum Angl. cap. 10. fol.
36. affirms the same thing of this Sylvester, saying, he is verily persuaded
Sylvester was such a Villain, (...) Historians relate him to be, otherwise why
(says he) did this Butcherly fellow at his death, tear his own flesh (as he
did) had he not been guilty of some notorious Impieties. Neither was Benedict
the 9th much better, whom their own Platina calls teterrimum monstrum, who
lived like a Beast in his life time, and after his death appeared partly like
an Ass, and partly like a Bear. Caput and cauda erant asinina, ut reliquum
corpus sicut Ursus, says Fasciculus Temporum ad Ann. 1304.

122. Such a notorious wretch also was Boniface the 8th, who entered like a Fox,
reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog, as his own Predecessor (Pope
Caelestine) foretold of him. To omit the stories which their own Baronius and
Benno has recorded, how many Popes have been Magicians, and given themselves
to the Devil, sacrificing to Devils in forests and mountains. If those were not
men of sin, sons of perdition and wickedness, where can any such be found?

123. But above all those wicked ones, there be yet three unnamed, which in
their own Chronicles were monsters of men: as 1st Hildebrand (called commonly
Gregory the 7th) that firebrand of Hell, that set both Church and State on
fire; who hired a Varlot to tumble great stones down from the Battlements of
the Church, to destroy the Emperor ( Henry the 4th) as he was in his Prayers.
Who poisoned 6 Popes (to wit, Clement the 2d, Damasus the 2d, Leo the 9th,
Benedict the 10th, Nicholas the 2d, Alexander the 2d) in the space of 13 Years,
by the help of his familiar Brazutus, that he might come to the Popedom. Who
also being angry with his breaden god, for not answering how the good Emperor
might be destroyed (who had escaped his bloody hands in St. Mary's Church in
mount Aventine, by the death of the Villain, whom he employed) this Pope throws
his Sacrament into the fire.

124. This man of sin ordinarily carried about him a conjuring Book, as
Cardinal Benno, in vita Gregor. 7, at large relates those things. This is he
that confessed at his death, that the devil set him on work, to provoke God to
wrath against the world. Florentinus Vigern. in Chronic. page 641. Matthew. Paris
in Guil. Conquest. Anno 1086. The 2d is John the 23. that denied the life to
come, and the resurrection of the body, saying; that men perish like the beast.
This made him die like a beast, insomuch as he for his scandalous life, was
called by those that knew him, the incarnate Devil. Council. Constant. Sess. 11.
Act. 6. and penult.

125. But the 3d is John the 12. who made Deacons in a stable, and a Boy of ten
years old a Bishop, the Lateran (his Palace) a plain Stews, who being at Dice
invocated Jupiter, Venus, and other Gentile Demons; yea, and drank a Carouse
in honor of the Devil, who at last was slain by the Devil (himself) while he
was committing adultery. Luitprandus Hist. Rerum per Europam Gestarum, lib. 6.
cap. 7, 8, and 10. Yea, Bellarmine himself does confess those Popes to be thus
tainted, as Stories describe them; but that we have raked usque ad Naufeam, in
this stinking Dunghill. I might tell you, what our own Dr. Heylin in his
Geography of Italy, relates, the 2d Edition page 181, 182. to which I refer you.

126. The 9th Paragraph of the Induction, is that threefold Epithet, [
Idolatrous, Ambitious and Cruel] all which be as palpable Adjuncts of the Pope,
as any of the former. As first, that he is [ Idolatrous,] therefore he is
called pater omnium fornicatorum and abominationum terrae. How does he adore
Images, not only giving (...) but also (...) to his Idols, worshipping of his
Breaden god, and of his Crucifixes, directing Prayer to it, as to God or Christ
himself. As in their [ All Hail, Oh Cross, our only Hope, increase
Righteousness to the good, and grant Pardon to the guilty] is plainly manifest.
Thus is he as idolatrous as those in Jerem. 2.27. saying to a piece of wood,
thou art my Father, and to a stone, thou have begotten me. so Hab. 2.19.

127. It appears also in his Lady's Psalter, how he makes the Virgin Mary not
only equal, but sometimes superior to the Son of God: as in those Mattens, [
Show thy self a Mother, and by the right of Motherhood, command the Redeemer]
how does he call her the Queen of heaven, the Mistress of Angels, and such like
stuff according to the Council of Trent, attributing to her Omnipotency both in
heaven and earth. Coster. in Hymn. Ave Maris stella, and a Kingdom of mercy,
etc. as Biel in Canon. Missae. lect. 80.

128. As to his second Adjunct [ Ambitious] enough has been said of that
before, from Paragraph 89. to 97. and the 3d to wit, [ Cruel,] is as palpable
as any, not only in his Murdering all that stands in his way to the Popedom,
as Hildebrand did ( ut supra Paragr. 123.) and several others: but also in
Butchering so many innocent Lambs of Christ in all Ages, and in all Nations
(where this Beast raged) which would not bow the knee to his Baal; witness the
Massacres at Piedmont, Germany, Ireland, England, and many others.

129. All these characters of Antichrist being thus aptly accommodated to the
Pope, how can we but say with Dr. Sclater in his Comment upon the 2d Epist. to
the Thessalon. page 115. If a man may be so bold with the Pope, as John Baptist
was with our Savior, to ask, [ Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another.] The like answer should be returned, Go and tell what you have heard
and seen; to wit, Devils worshipped, God contemned Religion profaned,
Superstition hallowed, Beastly lust practiced, Parricide not only committed,
but defended; and much more horrid Hellishness those ( parum probi homines)
has done. Is not this the man of sin ( without a Peer) foretold of in the Word.

130. The 10th branch of the Induction, is [ He must be revealed in those last
times] this also suits to the Pope as the coat to the body, for Antichrist has
several Periods, he was a long time in the Embryo before he was born, as he was
a mystery of Iniquity, so must he have a secret rising of his Dominion; whereof
some Foundations were laid in the Apostles times by Satan and his Instruments.
The itch of preheminency began the groundwork of this Romish Babel betimes, 3
Epist. John ver. 9, 10. Thus the time of his Conception held proportion with
his Continuance in the world: this Mystery was working long in the Pope, before
he was revealed to be Antichrist.

131. If there must be 1260 years betwixt his Revelation, and his Desolation or
Destruction: then there must be a proportionable time for the Conception of
this Monster, before his Birth and Revelation. Pliny writes of the Elephant
(whom Job calls Behemoth [the Hebr. Foemin. plural] as if he were many Beasts
in one) that he is two years in breeding in the womb, before he be brought
forth: so this great Beast or Behemoth was breeding some hundreds of Years
before his Revelation.

132. It is unquestionably true, that Antichrist had many Periods. The Beast
that John saw rise up out of the sea, Rev. 13.1. and come out of the earth, v.
11. ascended up by little and little (and not all at once) till at last his
whole Body appeared above ground, in a full view, and above Water, even to a
full manifestation. His first Period was Nascens, his 2d Crescens, his 3th
Triumphans, his 4th Decrescens, and his 5th Period Expirans: as Rome the city
was not built in one day, no more was the Romish Church or Antichrist. And this
Beast rose up by degrees, being hid in a mystery, before he was Unvailed.

133. Crakanthorpe (in his Vigilius Dormitans) observes, that Antichrist was
Nascent when Rome usurped authority first over all the Churches; 2ly he was
Crescent, when he maintained Adoring of Images, and Praying to Saints: 3ly
Regnant, when he exalted Himself above Kings; and placed his Mitre above their
Crowns: 4ly Triumphant, when he became Lord of the Catholic Faith: 5ly Cadent,
we see him (says he) in our Day, by Luther, Calvin, Perkins, etc. who unmasked
him; and he adds a 6th Period, to wit, Morient, saying, If we do not, yet our
Posterity shall see him die, for God says, that his day is coming, Ps. 37.13.

134. In his first Period, he was conceived in the Apostles time, yea, then
animated; for the spirit of that Antichrist was then in the world, 1 John 4.3.
and strove long to see light. He was well nigh an 100 Y. in lifting up his head
[ of Supremacy] above the Earth. Ambition and Superiority showed it self in
some of those Bishops of that See betimes, though they were reputed generally
good men; yet had they from the following Centuries of the Apostles, a tincture
of Antichrist.

135. Ecclesiastical History tells us, how the purity of Doctrine was
notoriously darkened, and defiled with Humane Traditions, from the time of
Sylvester the 1st (that was Bishop when Constantine the great was Emperor)
then began poison to be sown more rank in the Church, and so on to Sabinianus.
Yea and many endeavors were used by Innocent the first, in Y. 404. And by Leo
the first, and by Pelagius the first and 2d, to bring forth this monstrous brat
of Supremacy, long before Boniface the third, got full strength to do that
work, by the Midwivery of the Parricide Phocas in the Y. 606. So then his first
Period ( Nascent) is from the Apostles time to Boniface the 3d, in the 6th
Century, then was he Antichrist revealed indeed.

136. His 2d Period ( Crescent) is from this Boniface to Hildebrand, in whose
time Hell broke loose, and that woman [ Wickedness] perk'd her self higher and
higher in the Ephah, Zech. 5.7,8. From him to Luther may be accounted the 3d
and 4th Period ( Regnant) and ( Triumphant) wherein the Pope reigned and
triumphed over all Princes and Nations, even with both Swords. The 5th Period (
Cadent) must be from Luthers time, after whom (they confess) Popery never
prospered, but languished daily. And his 6th Age ( Morient) is this our day,
wherein he grows sick of his Consumption ( which is a lingering death) more and
more: the Gospel has won ground of Popery, and many Kingdoms are alienated
from this Antichrist.

137. The Romanists have a saying among them, thar since their Pope was so
publicly preached to be Antichrist, their Religion never throve; and this has
been done long, not only by Wickliffe, Luther, and other great Reformers, (
which are supposed to be those Angels preaching the everlasting Gospel, etc.
Rev. 14.6,8,9. But by the Waldenses, Arnulphus, Parisiensis and many others.
Illyric. Catalog. Testium Veritatis. The fulfilling of this 6th and last Period
(which is Morient) we must patiently wait for. The Vials of Gods wrath are
begun already to be powered out upon him, and shall at last bring his final
Extirpation.

CHAP. VI.
138. BUt before I can touch the two last Paragraphs of the Induction: there be
some objections which the Romanists lay in our way, which here must be removed,
as Amasas body, that hindered the People from going End way 2 Samuel 20.12. They
say first, that Antichrist shall have no such period or proportion of time as
is here specified, for he is some single Person only, because he is called
(...): the Article (...) denotes some Individuum, some singular Person.

139. To this I answer, (1.) That (...) does not always point at a single
Person, for Mark 2.27. (...) there is man at large [but man for the Sabbath]
and not any Individual Person: and the same word is taken in this large sense,
Luke 4.4. [Man lives not by bread alone] and not in their contracted
signification: and likewise in 2 Timothy 2.17. in all which places the Article
(...) is annexed with, (...) but (2ly.) Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. a Prophet there, is a
Succession of Prophets, so here a Succession of Persons of the same Function is
the (...): God raised up more Prophets then Moses, to consummate the Revelation
of his will; Antichrist (3ly.) cannot be a singular Person, because he began in
the Apostles time, and was to continue till the brightness of Christ's coming
did destroy him: (4ly.) It Is therefore a Succession of men, (now above a 1000.
year old) as the Emperor that let him was, yet called (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2.6.
with this Article (...).

140. But 2ly. they object that Antichrist must Reign 3. years and a half only,
and no more, but the Pope has Reigned long beyond this precise time; Answer,
how can this be, that he should subdue so many Kingdoms, and make all the World
wonder after him in so narrow a compass of time, and that he should intoxicate
Nations with his Cup of Fornication, and himself with the blood of Saints in 3.
years and half.

141. Besides, 2ly. Antichrist is called Terraefilius, as he is one base-born,
thus the 2d. Beast is said to come up out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11. because of
his low and Sordid Original: it follows then, to be altogether improbable, (if
not impossible) that one of so base an extract should raise himself into such
high Renown, not only at home, to obtain this Imperial Seat; but also abroad,
to dispose of so many Crowns and Kingdoms in the space of 3. years and half: If
so, this Beast would far exceed in his expeditious exploits, the swiftness of
the Grecian Goat, to wit Alexander, that is said not to touch the Ground for
swiftness, Dan. 8.5. yet had he 6. years to Conquer the East in, though he was
born heir to a Crown.

142. Their 3d. objection is, how can the Successor of the Apostle of Christ be
at any time Revealed to be the Antichrist, the Pope is not only Peter's
Successor, but Christ's Vicar, professing Christianity, so no Enemy to Christ,
as the word [ Antichrist] imports: (1.) Answer, This makes him not only a
mystery of Iniquity, but the firstborn of the Devil, who transforms himself
into an Angel of light, while he is indeed the Prince of darkness: and should
he not profess Christianity, he could not come with all deceivableness, as is
said, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.10. [ he must sit in the Temple] Austin Reads (...), upon or
against the Temple: as if, a Tyrant riding upon the Church, or as if an Enemy
Warring against the Church* we Read it [ in] the Temple.

143 The (2d.) Answer to this 3d. objection is; It is not a little doubted
whether ever Simon Peter was at Rome, (at least Bishop of it,) but it lies out
of doubt, Simon Magus was there. The Distich runs thus, An Petrus Romae fuerit
sub Judice lis est
Simonem Romae nemo fuisse negat.
From this Simon they learned to set Spiritual things (as Pardons, etc.) to
sale for Money, and Romae omnia venalia: but if we grant the Pope to Succeed
Peter, it is in that one thing of denying his Master, or he Succeeds him as
Night Succeeds Day, as the Storm a Calm, and as Sickness Succeeds Health: how
unlike Peter the Pope is, See, Parag. 94. before mentioned.

144. However this man of Sin pretends to be Peter's Successor, yet sure he
never took in Peter's Counsel, of not [ Lording it over Gods heritage 1 Pet.
5.3.] If this had been, this bramble would not have advanced himself to be King
over all the Churches and Vineyards of God: Judge. 9.15,20. And were this Peter's
Successor, stinted to Peter's allowance, [ Silver and Gold have I none Act.
3.6.] he would soon be weary of that Chair that had so scant a Cushon in it,
and so mean a Purse to maintain it: Besides, Damasus writes that the Bishop of
Rome from the first of them to Telesphorus, yea and till the days of Silvester
in Constantines time, (as others say) were poor Martyrs and persecuted
Ministers: Those were like Peter's Successors indeed.

145. Their 4th. Objection is, that if Rome have any relation to Antichrist, it
was when it was Rome Heathen, for then did it persecute Christ indeed in the 10
first Persecutions: Answer, Rome Heathen cannot be this Antichrist; for first,
it was when Rome degenerated into a Whore, that Antichrist Rose: this cannot
correspond with Rome Heathen, which never was a Loyal Spouse; 2ly. It was when
the Provinces fell off from Rome, and set up ten Kings of their own. The ten
Horns receive Power as Kings one hour with the Beast, Revel. 17.12.

146. Yea further, 3ly. Rome Heathen was no mystery of Iniquity, never
pretended friendship to Christ, but was always an open Enemy, did no Miracles,
nor has it a congruity with the rest of the Characters of Antichrist; and 4ly.
Antichrist is when the 7th. Government Succeeded, but those Caesar's was the
6th. Rev. 17.10. in whose time John lived, saying, [ One is.]

147. A fifth objection against the Premises, is, that Antichrist is not yet
Risen, because the preaching of the Gospel in all the World, must be a
precedent Sign of Antichrists coming, Matthew. 24.14. which (as they say) has
not been done, therefore Antichrist is not yet born: Answ. 1st. Christ says
nothing in that Matthew. 24. of the coming of Antichrist, but speaks in General,
only of the Rising of false Prophets: 2ly. Christ says indeed that the Gospel
shall be preached in all the World before the end come, v. 14. not before
Antichrist come: 3ly. that [(...),] then is the end] is meant of the City and
Temple of Jerusalem, if we compare v. 14. with v. 16. and Luke 21.20.

148. And 4ly. as it is but a petitio principii to make the End there spoken
off, to be the end of the World; so it is no better, to make the end of the
World Contiguous to, and Contemporary with Antichrist: for the Apostles tell
us, that in their time Antichrist was already come, 1 John 4.3. and 2 Thessalonians.
2.7. 5ly. but grant that the End there spoken of, should be the end of the
World, as Hierom, etc. interprets it; Yet we cannot infer from hence, that the
Gospel must be preached to all the World, before the coming of Antichrist, (as
they imagine) but only before the End of the World.

149. But 6ly. their own Maldonate in Matthew. 24.14. acknowledges the
accomplishment of this very Prophecy before Jerusalem was destroyed: all the
World is Synecdochically taken, for the most parts of it; Thus one Paul fills
all with the Gospel, from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Romans 15.19. and all the other
Apostles were gifted with all Languages, that they might preach to all Nations,
had they not done so, those Tongues Act. 2. had been given them in vain,
contrary to [ Deus and natura nil faciunt frustra.]

150. Chrysostom has a good observation, if one Paul (says he) could Season
so many Countries, as from Jerusalem to Spain, Romans 15.24,28. (the former
laying far East, and the latter much West) we may easily conceive, what the
other Apostles did, who divided the world amongst them. Yea, their owh
Stapleton relates, how Thomas the Apostle) preached to the Indians, and to the
lowest Antipodes: but above all testimonies, the Scripture speaks expressly,
that the Faith of the Primitive Church of Rome, was spoken of through all the
world, Romans 1.8. and its sound was gone into all lands, Romans 10.18. And it was
preached to every creature, Mark 16.15,20. And every where, Col. 1.6,23.
otherwise it could not have brought forth fruit in all the World.

151. Their 6th Objection they make, is, Antichrist (when he comes) must slay
the two Witnesses, and those two are Enoch and Elias (say they) which they
prove from Mal. 4.5. Rev. 11.3. etc. hence inferring, that seeing Enoch and
Elias are not yet come, so nor Antichrist. Answ. 1st. As the Jews dreamed of a
Christ for themselves, which God never promised; so those Romanists expect such
an Antichrist, as the Scripture no where describes: the like mistake is found
in both. (3ly) Mal. 4. speaks not one word either of the coming of Enoch, or of
Antichrist.

152. And (3ly) that Elias (spoke of, Mal. 4.) is not Elias proper or personal,
but mysterial or symbolical, to wit, John Baptist (who was an Harbinger to
Christ, but not to Antichrist) as both the Evangelist Mark, chapter 1.2,40. and the
Angel, Luke 1.17. yea and Christ himself interprets it, Mat. 11.14. and 17.13.
(4ly) in Rev. 11. There is no mention either of Enoch, or of Elias, but by way
of Allusion.

153. Whereas they urge Math. 17.11. that Elias must first come, and restore
all things. It is answered (5ly) that Christ says not there [(...) in futuro
primo, shall come] as if they might expect his coming in some age after Christ.
But it is [(...) in praesente, cometh] Thus John Baptist was come, and that in
the spirit and power of Elias, to restore all things, that is, to turn the
hearts of Fathers to their Children, etc. Mal. 4.6. For none can restore all
things absolutely but Christ, Col. 1.20. But (6ly) how like is this to a fond
dream, that those two great Favorites of God (which were not to see death, Heb.
11.5.) were only preserved from the cruelty of their own Time, and reserved (I
know not where) to be slain by Antichrist.

154. But the 7th and last Objection, is, Antichrist cannot come into the world
before the Roman Empire (which lets him [(...)] 2 Thessalonians. 2.6,7. be removed:
for (say they) as Christ came into the world when the Roman Empire was at the
height, in her very (...). So Antichrist must come at the Empires lowest ebb,
and when utterly ruined. But still there is an Emperor (say they) though his
Seat be in Germany, hence they infer, that Antichrist is not yet come. Answ.
1st. This is a mere humane conjecture, without any Scripture Light, that the
ruin of the Empire must precede the Rise of Antichrist: for Antichrist was
come into the world in the very Apostles time, long before the desolation of
the Roman Empire.

155. And (2ly.) That of 2 Thessalonians. 2.6,7. has not relation to Antichrists
rising but to his Revealing: he secretly rose in the Church, long before he was
openly revealed to be the man of Sin: (3ly.) [(...).] It Is removed (by their
own confession) out of the midst of Rome, where the German Emperor has neither
Palace nor Dominion. And 10 Kingdoms are risen up out of the ruins of the
Romans Empire, besides the Germ. Empire. (2ly.) It was high water with Rome in
Augustus days, then Christ came: and low ebb with it in Augustulus (that fatal
Name) in whom the Western Caesar breathed out his last.

CHAP. VII.
156. THus prohibentibus remotis, those objections (like Amasa's slain body)
being taken out of the way. I come now to Antichrists last Period (where this
digression began) and to view him as ( Morient) and as one giving up the Ghost,
This is held out in the two last clauses of the Induction (the 11th and 12th)
the 11th is, he must be consumed by the spirit of Christ's mouth, which holds
forth 1st the manner, and 2ly the means. 1st the manner, God does not destroy
this grand Enemy of his Church all at once, but consumes him in his wrath by
little and little, as Psalm. 59.11,13.

157. God will deal with Antichrist, as with a notorious Malefactor, who must
not have that favor, to be dispatched out of all pain at once, either by
strangling or decollation: praestat semel mori quam semper metuere, aut diu
sentire mortem. Antichrist must die by Inches, and his Soul must be driven out
of his body by degrees; that (according to Nero's Speech) he might not only
die, but a long time feel that he is a dying. God writes ( Magor missabib) upon
this proud Pashur, Jer. 20.3. and makes him a terror and burden to himself in a
lingering Consumption, before his utter Extirpation.

158. This agrees with that sound Maxim [ Deus and Natura non faciunt saltum]
and with that parable of the lost Groat, wherein Christ tells of a Candle and a
Besome. The Besome does not sweep away the dirt and defilement of an house at
one brush, but it is often laid on, and applied to all the parts of the Room, till
it at last sweeps all out of doors. So when Christ comes to sweep this lump of
defilement ( sc. Antichrist) out of the great House of the World, with the
Besome of destruction, Isa. 14.23. he 1. drives it out of the Middle Temple,
then out of the outward Court (long defiled with it, Rev. 11.2.) and at last,
out of doors.

159. And when Christ came to purge the Temple ( when that House of prayer was
made a Den of Thieves) we may not imagine that those buyers and sellers went
out at the first lash (he gave them) with his Whip; but it is more then
probable, so many sturdy Fellows (as were there employed in that Merchandise)
would play [ loath to depart] as unwilling to lose so advantageous a Market.
John 2.15. and Mat. 21.12. All this must have a Gradual accomplishment; though
undoubtedly some Beams of Divine Majesty shone forth in Christ herein. And thus
Christ will whip out of the Temple, this grand Thief ( Antichrist) by degrees,
when he comes into it, Mal. 3.1,2.

160. We read of two Jezabels in Scripture (both mothers of Fornication) 2 Kin.
9.33. and Rev. 2.20,21. The old Testament Jezabel was suddenly destroyed in the
midst of her Painting and Delicacy; that cursed Woman (so called, 2 Kin. 9.34.)
was suddenly thrown out of the window, and trodden down under foot. But the New
Testam. Jezabel was cast upon her bed of Languishing, that she might wear away
in a lingering Sickness. This double Doom is inflicted upon this Antichristian
Jezabel, that cursed Queen of Whoredoms.

161. She is first cast into a bed of Languishing, with the latter Jezabel,
that she may pine away in her Iniquity, Lev. 26.39. God will consume her days
in vanity, and her years in trouble, Psalm. 78.33. She must lie long sick of a
lingering Consumption (that her Ruin may bear proportion to her Riso) she had
many steps in her rising, and shall have in her fall. In the end comes the Doom
of the former Jezabel upon her, sudden destruction [ in one day, Rev. 18.8.]
and that, by the hands of her own Paramours, Revel. 17.16. with 13. Her carcass
shall be cast out as dung, 2 King. 9.35.37.

162. As the Walls of old Jericho were not thrown down the first day that it
was besieged, but Israel must walk about it 6 days, and wait for the downfall
of this cursed City till the 7th day, Heb. 11.30. and Josh. 6.13,14 to 20. So
this Mystical Jericho falls not in the first day, nor in the first Vial that is
powered (...) upon it: but seven Vialls are appointed to be powered out for his
utter Extirpation, which are called the seven last plagues, for in them are
filled up the wrath of God, and destruction of Antichrist, Rev. 15.1. In the
mean time, God in much patience, bears with those Vessels of wrath prepared for
destruction, Romans 9.22.

163. As Rome was not built in one day, neither must it be thrown down in one
day; but the Walls of it shall molder down by degrees. God begins with that
spiritual Babylon* first to disquiet her only, as he did with the literal
Babylon, Jer. 50.34. He will disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon, that has so
much, and so long disquieted the Inhabitants of Sion. Thus the compassing about
of Jericho, the former of the 7 days, was at least a disquieting of the
Inhabitants thereof, and an Alarm to them, if not here and there a stone
dropping out daily out of the Wall to weaken it.

164. As sure as God threw down Old Babylon (though her walls were 50 Cubits
thick, and 200 Cubits high, yet lay she open, and exposed to the Vials of the
wrath of God) so sure shall this mystical Babylon tumble down also, though she
be seated among the stars, and be long in falling (even 7 days, or Vials) yet
God will pull her down thence, and every Vial shall bring a degree of ruin
upon her.

165. The fall of Old Babylon was foretold by the Prophet, Esai. 21.7,9. and
executed by Cyrus, Esa. 45.1,2. and chapter 46. and chapter 47. The Church sings an
Hymn upon her assurance of Babylons fall, Esa. 27. Then the Prophet Jeremy
describes her destruction at large, showing how the vengeance of the Lord, and
the vengeance of his Temple came upon her, Jer. 50.15,21. and chap. 51.11,29.
and all this in a gradual accomplishment. The wall of Babylon falls as the wall
of Jericho did, ver. 44, 53.

166. Thus also the fall of mystical Babylon is foretold, Rev. 14.8. and it is
executed, Rev. 18.2. yea, and the word is doubled (like Pharoh's dream, Genesis
41.32.) because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it
to pass. The Duplication of the word, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, imports both
Assurance and Expedition. This Babylon has once fallen culpably, and she must
again fall penally: a weak man throws down the old Babylon, but a mighty Angel
this: that falls like an ordinary stone, but this like a great mil-stone: that
sinks only, but this is thrust down with Violence, into the bottom of the sea,
and no boying it up again: that shall not rise, but this shall be found no
more, Jer. 51.63,64. compared with Rev. 18.21.

167. The God of truth has said, that Babylon is fallen, and twice over, though
it be but falling, it is as sure to fall, as if fallen already. Just as we see a
beast or a bird struck dead wi^ a Gun, before the report be heard: so
Antichrist is dead-struck by that Word, Rev. 14.8. although the report neither
of his Crack, nor of his Fall come yet to us. Fall he must (the foundation of
its Fall God has laid already) though all the World lend their shoulders to
uphold him.

168. The Lord has doubled Babylon's doom [ it is fallen, it is faln] to denote
the certainty of it, and it is expressed in the present (not future Tense) to
show, that God will as surely destroy it, as if we saw it now destroyed. As
sure as Jericho is fallen, so surely shall Babylon fall; and that shortly, as
well as surely, for the Ark of Gods presence has compassed about the walls of
this mystical Jericho several days already: not only because four of the Vials
are supposed to be over, and poured out upon it, but also because we live about
the six thousand Year of the World, and it is an old Tradition, that the 7th will
be a Jubilee and Sabbath.

CHAP. VIII.
169. THus we have seen the first Particular, to wit, the manner, it must be
Gradually, and by a lingering Consumption: now let us 2ly enquire after the
means. We read that Jericho fell by the force of Faith, Heb. 11.30. It was not
by their Silver Trumpets (which they had appointed for calling their solemn
Assemblies, Number. 10.1,2.) nor by the power of their Arms (whereby they overcame
Amalek, Exodus 17.12. but by Rams horns.

170. Rams horns were contemptible instruments, for battering down strong and
impregnable Walls, and yet carries a fair Congruity with the means of battering
down the walls of Babylon. It must be by the Breath of Christ's mouth [the
preaching of the Gospel] God overturns great things by base means, 1 Cor.
1.27,28. by treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.

171. The means that God uses to pull down this Antichrist, are reducible to
two heads. 1st Persons, and 2ly Things. 1st of Persons: 1st in general. Many
battering Rams has God raised in those two last Centuries of years, to break
down the walls of this spiritual Babylon (which is Antichrist complex) insomuch
as not only several stones have dropped out of the walls, but her very
Foundation shakes. And if our Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom
this proud Haman ( Antichrist) has begun to fall, he shall not prevail against
him, but shall surely fall before him, Esther 6.13.

172. The Persons that God employs for the fall of Antichrist, are principally
three: 1. Powerful Preachers, 2. Profound Writers, 3. Potent and pious
Prinoes. 1. Of the powerful Preachers, those are intimated to us in those 3
Angels in Rev. 14.6,8,9. that raised up the first batteries against Babylon,
and made the first separation from Antichrist. The first of those Angels brings
the everlasting Gospel, flying in the midst of Heaven, above all Human
hindrances and oppositions, and Preaching the pure Worship of God, as opposite
to the Idolatrous and impure Worship of Antichrist.

173. This first Angel or powerful Preacher, may well be supposed to be Waldus
and his Followers, from whom sprung the Waldenses, who spread the Gospel in
France, Picardy, and the Lower and Upper Germany; in Bohemia, Savoy, and
Lombardy, about 1100 Ye. after Christ, as the History of the Waldenses show.
And Bishop Usher, de Successione Ecclesia, cap. 6.16.

174. The 2d. Angel (light increasing then in the World) proclaims with open
mouth, that Rome was Babylon, and the Pope that Beast described in the
Revelation, and [ the] Antichrist. This was only muttered at the first
separation from the Romish Church, by Waldus and his Companions, saying in
modest terms only, Romanum praesulem Reliquis Episcopis parem esse, (as Bishop
Usher de Successione Ecclesiae tells us loco predicto) that the Pope of Rome
was but equal to all other Bishops.

175. But in the following Ages, ( boldness growing as well as knowledge)
Ecclesia Romana, was proclaimed to be Meretrix Babylonica, (as Bishop Usher,
Cap. 17. shows) that the Church of Rome was the whore of Babylon: This was done
especially by Wickliffe and his fellows, about the year of Christ 1371. This
2d. Angel ( Wickliffe) seeing the Kingdom of Antichrist shaken by the Ministry
of Waldus, that went before him; now declares boldly, that God had then laid
the foundation of the destruction of it, (his cry was, Rev. 14.8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen) and would as surely destroy it shortly, as if he had seen it
fallen already.

176. Then comes the 3d. Angel, (more vehement than the rest) and that was
Martin Luther and his fellow laborers: This Angel proceeds further, and
preaches Damnation to all that would not come out of this mystical Babylon,
telling the World more boldly, (than the other two Angels did) that God had a
Cup of Indignation (without mixture, that is, not allayed with any mercy) for
all those that continued to drink of the Cup of Fornication: God would give
them Wine for Wine, Wine of Wrath for Wine of Whoredoms, Rev. 14.9.10.11.

177. None of those great Reformers whom God stirred up in those Ages) were so
like this third Angel, as Luther, who denounced horrible and heinous torments,
easless and endless pains to the whole train of Antichrist, and such as abode
in the Worship of the Beast, Urging separation from Rome under the pain of
damnation, and to Rebel against such light, (as then was held forth) could not
consist with Salvation, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. Luthers Epitaph was. Pestis eram
vivus, moriens tua mors ero, Papa.


178. Then 2ly. profound Writers have from the Quiver of common Reason, human
Testimonies, and especially from the Holy Scriptures drawn out, and shot such
arrows at the Beast, that though his first Wound was healed, Rev. 13.3. yet
those Wounds they have given him (those last Centuries) are plainly incurable
by any other Engine, save by private Treachery and public Violence: The Beast
can hardly lick himself whole again, no not with his Order of Jesuits, and all
their endeavors to uphold his tottering Kingdom.

179. Quot ac quantos Scriptores Evangelicos haec postrema aetas in lucem
protulit, etc. how many famous Champions of the Protestant Religion has been
Valiant for the Truth, and strenuously battered the Walls of Babylon: such as
Melancton, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Aretius, Gualther, Musculus,
Lauater, Polanus, Polyander, Zanchy, Beza, Chemnitius, Calvin, Pareus,
Marlorat, and our own Jewel, Reinolds, Whittaker, etc. those and many others, [
non modo, docendo sed etiam Scribendo, damnum Antichristo vel maximum
attulere,] did him very great harm.

180. Besides many other famous Authors in former Ages, which Illyricus in
Catologo Testium Veritatis, does abundantly enumerate: Christ has had his
Witnesses against Antichrist in all the Ages of the Beast, (though most and
clearest in the latter Ages) which has given their Testimony, both by
Preaching and Writing ( though but in Sackcloth) against the Antichristian
Idolatry, all along the lease of 42. Months, that is granted to the Beast to
tread down the holy City.

181. The Pen of those famous Lights in their day, was an Artificial Tongue,
whereby they spoke to Places and People absent, as well as present, to them
afar off, as well as to them that were nigh: and thereby abundance of knowledge
was communicated to the World: Writing has an Image (as it were) of Eternity
in it, it makes a man live when he is dead, though the Prophets cannot live for
ever, Zech. 1.5. yet their laborious Writings may preach, both when and where
they themselves neither may, nor can, nor dare, Hebr. 11.4.

182. But 3ly. and lastly, Potent and Pious Princes, are Instruments in the
hand of God to pull down Antichrist: we read of an Angel that had on his head a
Golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp Siccle, Revel. 14.14. which may well
resemble some glorious Prince, that shall begin to execute Gods Judgments on
Babylon, and v. 15. is some Zealous Preacher out of the Church that calls on
him to do this Execution.

183. When Godly Princes do exercise their Power for Christ and against
Antichrist, then is it said that Christ [ the Son of Man] sits in the Throne to
Rule with them, having a Golden Crown upon his head, as he is described in that
Vision, Rev. 14.14. He is called the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev.
1.5. and then are Christian Kings said to be caught up to God and to his
Throne, Rev. 12.5. when they do Authorize and Execute the Reaping of this
Harvest by their Kingly Power.

184. But more plainly and without a Parable, the Lord tells us, Rev. 17.16,17.
that the ten Horns (which he calls ten Kings, v. 12.) shall hate the Whore, and
make her desolate and naked, they shall eat her Flesh and burn her with Fire:
for God has put it into their hearts, etc. Those very Kings that were the
occasion of his Rise before, shall (by an overruling providence) be the
Instruments of his Ruin; First God in Justice gives them up to be Vassals to
Antichrist, and then in Mercy he moves them to destroy him.

185. Dr. Sibbs in his Evangel. Sacrifice Sermon. First, Relates the occasion of
Antichrists Rise thus; The Roman Emperor having Enemies in the East, was forced
to Reside at Constantinople, and Rome thereby being neglected, the Pope takes
this occasion to set up himself, to depose Childerick, (a weak Prince) and to
set up Pepin (Father to Charles the great) to gratify him. This brief Landscape
he gives.

186. The Dr. relates also, how those 10 Kings betray their own Kingdoms, in
giving up their power to the Beast, therein doing wrong 1st to God, 2ly to
Themselves, and 3ly to their Subjects. And though it be said, that God puts it
into their hearts, to give up their Kingdoms to the Beast, Rev. 17.17. Yet we
may not understand this, as done by either outward Command, or by inward
Infusion: but God finding them in an evil Estate, he uses their sin to his own
End.

187. However this shall be done only, until the words of God be fulfilled,
ver. 17. And as sure as God has put it into their hearts to give up their
Kingdoms to that Beast, so surely God will (in his own appointed time) put it
into their hearts also to destroy the Beast. But whether they shall all agree
in this latter, as it is said they do in the former, is some doubt?

188. It is the judgment of some solid Interpreters, that those very Kings
which held Communion with the Beast, and after hate and burn Antichrist, Rev.
17.16. shall yet lament to see the smoke of that burning, which they themselves
kindled, Rev. 18.9. which may intimate to us, that Cross-Interests engaged them
in that burning of Babylon, more then any true Repentance of their Popish
Religion.

189. Not much unlike the Proceedings of Israel against Benjamin, which when
they had destroyed, they were sorry they had gone so far. Such cross-Interests
fell out lately 'twixt the Pope and the King of France, about some affronts to
the French Ambassador [ Chigi] in Rome, whereupon the French King sends an Army
of twenty thousand Men, over the Alps against the Pope, and reduced the Pope
from his Luciferian Highness to the Order of the Humbled Brethren.

190. This Commotion betwixt them two, made many good Men ( that wait for the
consolation of Israel, in the Accomplishment of that word [ the Kings shall
hate and burn the Whore] to be yet fulfilled) to hope that God was putting it
into the heart of the King of France, to execute his Vengeance upon Babylon.
However it was clearly discovered to be the declining Age of Antichrist, for
the Pope durst not use those bruta fulmina of his Predecessors against the
King, but must satisfy him in all things that he demanded, even to the
erecting of a Trophy, etc.

191. It is most probable, that all those Kings shall not hate the Whore, etc.
But some of the Ten shall take part with Antichrist, after the fall of Rome,
till they be destroyed at Armageddon, [Rev. 19.18. Rev. 16.14. and 18.9. The
flesh of those Kings were there eaten] and others of them shall deal with this
Harlot, as Men do with a Strumpet, when they see what harm they have got by
her, as Ezekiel. 16.36,37,38,39.

192. The great God (who has the hearts of Kings in his own hands* and turns
them as he pleases, Prove. 21.1.) will certainly raise up the Spirits of some of
those Kings, to repent of their Friendship with Antichrist, and to rage against
him as professed Enemies, and to lay waste his dwelling, and to destroy him for
ever. Whereas the King of France (in that late Contest with him) powered out
only some drops of the Vials upon him. Some of those at last (if not he) shall
pour upon him the whole shower, and this, at the end of his Lease, at the
expiration of his Power [(...)] to do 42 Months, Rev. 13.5.

193. It Is a ruled Case [ what has been, may be] now we have seen already in
past Providence, how God has called of several Princes from all amity with
Antichrist; especial in the Northern Parts of Europe, since the Reformation of
Luther. To say nothing of the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hassia, etc.
which came forth (with Luther, and other Reformers) to help the Lord against
the mighty Beast. We find that several of the 1^ Kings (that formerly gave up
their Kingdoms to Antichrist) are now fallen off from him* since the Reformation.

194. God has cut off several Kingdoms in the North from the Jurisdiction of
Antichrist, as England, Scotland, Denmark and Swedeland (which were 4 of the 10
Horns) and some of the Kings of those Kingdoms have personally appeared against
Antichrist, some with their Pen, as King James, and some with their Sword, as
Gustavus Adolphus.

195. To say nothing of Germany, that in a great part broke of from Antichrists
See, under those wonderful Reformations wrought there, both in the Higher and
Lower Germany. Nor of France, from whence came the Angel Waldus, that laid the
first Foundation of Antichrists ruin (as before) and which has in a great
part separated from Rome; for the View of France tells us, the Hugonots had
about 2150 Churches of the Reformed Religion, this was above 60 years ago; in
all likelihood they are much increased now.

196. Thus though their Kings have not themselves declared open Hostility, and
hatred against Antichrist, and so to weaken his Power by their personal
Atchivements: yet their Kingdoms has contributed much to the pulling down of
this man of sin. So that if we reckon France and Germany (though but in part,
battering at Babylon) together with those four before mentioned, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Swedeland (which together with their Supreme Magistrates,
have for a long time opposed Antichrist) we must needs say, that the Viall's
already poured out, have dried up a great part of the Sea, or Jurisdiction of
the Pope.

197. If Kings and Kingdoms have been thus bold with his Holiness, under the
former Vials, and while so much of his Lease was yet to run: how lively and
vigorous may we expect them to be (in the power of God) under the latter Vials,
and when his Term of Continuance is about expiring. The wheel of Providence
will be quicker and sharper in its Motions and Revolutions at the end of his
Time.

198. Thus have we seen in the first place, the three personal Engines (in Gods
hand) against this Beast. 1. Powerful Preachers, 2. Profound Writers, and 3.
Potent and pious Princes. Now 2ly come we to the things that the wise Jehovah
has, and does use as Instruments for Demolishing this mystical Jericho; and
they are principally four, to wit, 1. Spiritual practicing, 2. Unanimous
Praying, 3. Public Printing, and 4. Powerful Preaching, of all which very
briefly, in the following Paragraphs.

199. First an holy practice of Piety, a close walking with God, and a living
in the power of Godliness, does prove an excellent Means for the extirpation of
Popery; the reason is, because Popery is nothing else but a mere Form, denying
the Power. It Is a loose Religion, and its Worship is a carnal compound of
Flesh-pleasing things; it has Music to gratify the Ear, Perfumes to please
the Nostrils, and gaudy Pictures to bewitch the Eye, in these, and many other
particulars, it is every way accommodated to an earthly Mind.

200. Popery is a drawing nigh to God with the body, when the heart is far from
him, it is a being circumstantial in Substantials, and substantial only in
Circumstantials; the Opus operatum of a Ceremony will expel Devils, and work
Wonders; the Cheapness of their Pardons must needs render them notoriously
licentious. How did Lewis of France multiply his execrable Oaths, when he
thought the Kissing of his Crucifix was a sufficient Expiation from them all.

201. Now it is a Physical Rule [ Contraris curantur contrariis] one Contrary is
best cured by another: so is this loose Antichristian Religion by an holy
Evangelical Conversation. Such a Conversation as this, does not only put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men from dispraising, but also opens the
Speech (of knowing Men (for comnending the way of Reformation, not only among
Pagans (1 Pet. 2.1^.15.) but also among Papa-gans; beholding men in the Flesh,
do live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6.

202. This Engine I would commend to all those of the Reformation, that they
may adorn their Profession, and bring it into credit, even among the
Worshippers of the Beast. That whereas the Papists speak evil of the
Protestants, as of evil doers, they may not only be ashamed of falsely accusing
their good Conversation in Christ, as 1 Pet. 3.16. but also be constrained to
say, that God is in them of a truth, as 1 Cor. 14.25. and those are the Seed
the Lord has blessed, as Isai. 61.9. Just as light expells darkness, so does
Evangelical Conversation the mist of Popery.

203. The 2d thing is Unanimous Praying; how does all the Saints of God in all
the Nations of the World ( with one consent) pray against Babylon, and by the
help of Gods Spirit, gets many a kind pull at her (as Sampson did at the
pillars of Dagons Temple, Judge. 16.29,30.) How does praying Souls every where
with one lip, as it were, bow themselves with all their might to pull down this
Antichristian Dagon.

204. As David danced before the Lord with all his might, 2 Samuel 6.14. so the
Servants of the Lord, prays before the Lord with all their might, to make this
Dagon fall before the Ark of God. Solomon says [ whatsoever thy hand finds
to do, do it with all thy might] Eccles 9.10. Now the Saints finding this great
w^ of Demolishing the Kingdom of Antichri^ not more a work for their Hands,
then for the Hearts; therefore they do it with all the might.

205. All the Servants of Christ should b^ Habakkuk's, that is, Wrestlers: they
should come forth as Princes before the Lord in this Work, as Job 31.37. coming
near to God with Princely minds, all the seed of Jacob shall he like their
father Jacob, wrestling till they have power with God, and have prevailed, Hos.
12.4, and 3. not letting God go without this blessing, Genesis 32.26. Prayer
commands God concerning the work of his hands, Esa. 45.11. All such as love
Christ and hate Antichrist, should be as the Sun when he goes forth in his
might, Jud. 5.31. for dispelling the Fog of Popery.

206. How should all the Godly strive together in their Prayers to God, even to
an agony, Romans 15.30. [(...)] to pull this Tower of Babel down, whose top has
well-nigh reached to Heaven. These are the thundrings and lightnings that
filled the Temple and brings the hailstones and earthquake on the Mother of
Harlots, Rev. 11. last.

207. The 3d thing is Typography or public Printing, a rare Engine for
Communicating the knowledge of the Truth, to the pulling down the strong holds
of Antichrist. The Art of Printing was bestowed as a special Gift by a gracious
God, on the last Age of the World, that Knowledge might fill the Earth, as the
Waters cover the Sea, that is, that there might be a full sea of Knowledge,
Isa. 11.9. for the expulsion of all Popish Ignorance, which they say is the
Mother of their Devotion, but indeed of Destruction, Hos. 4.6. I am sure it is
no mother in Israel.

208. There is a witty Interpretation of that passage of Dan. 8.2,4. [ Many
shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased] that the passage of
Commerce 'twixt one Nation and another, by the Art of Navigation being opened,
it brought along with it a great increase of Knowledge. Many run (or pass) by
that Art from one Land to another, and so abundantly improve their
Intellectuals thereby: It may as congruously be applied to this Art of
Printing, as to that of Navigation.

209 For hereby many Books run from one Nation to another, and so exceedingly
increases Knowledge, as many Persons do by Navigation: they may both equally be
alluded to Daniels Text (as well the one as the other, both being instrumental
Conveyances of all kind of Knowledge, divine and humane) though neither of them
be the genuine Sense of the place.

210. Alsted says that this Art of Printing was first published at Moguntiae,
Mentz, and from thence carried to Argentine, Strasburg, and other parts of
Europe, to the great improvement of Learning: Other Authors say, it was first
known to John Gottenburgh at Argentine, where John Mentelius Printed the first
good Authors for the information of a blind ignorant World: and experience
Justifies this assertion, that Typography as well as Navigation, has been
great advancers of knowledge.

211. Incredibilem Usum Generi humano ha^ ars Typographica in Omnes parts
prebuit, says Pareus, Medul. Histor. Eccles. Page 311. It has been of very
great advantage to all parts of the Earth: Printing is like a Wing, on which
knowledge flies through all the Habitable World, and is at this day a famous
Instrument of Gods holy Spirit, to publish his Sacred and Infallible Truth,
though Satan do use it also to spread his damnable Errors; The best things that
are used are found also to be abused, yet lose they not their due worth thereby.

212. Sympson in his Church History speaks home to this point; saying, when
Popedom was come to its height, then God graciously bestowed this Art of
Printing on Mankind, for the Unvailing and Unmasking of this Mystery of
Iniquity to the World: This was a mavelous providence of God in the 14th.
Century; for ever since, Antichrist has begun to decline, and in the 15th.
Century to languish more and more.

213. The 4th. and last thing for the bringing down of Antichrist, is powerful
Preaching, and this is held out in the very expression of this 11th. clause of
the Induction; to wit, his Consumption or wasting away by the breath of Christ's
mouth, [2 Thessalonians. 2.8. (...); Spirit or breath] which is the administration of
Christ's Word by the help of his Spirit. This Ordinance of Preaching has been a
most effectual battering Ram against the lofty Walls of Babylon.

214. We may say of this as David said of Goliahs Sword, [ none like it, 1 Samuel
21.9.] oh that the Lord would give it to all places and People: not only Satan,
but also his Eldest Son ( Antichrist) would fall like lightning thereby, Luke
10 17.18. Though Printing (as we have seen) has its peculiar Excellency, yet
in this respect, Preaching is above it, as it is attended always cum viva voce:
for Milk in a warm Breast is more effectual nourishment, than Milk in a cold
suckling Box; so a Sermon Preached batters Babylon more than one Printed.

215. The Rod of Christ's mouth, and the breath of his lips, (the Prophet tells
us) shall slay this Wicked one, Esa. 11.4. Thus has God raised up his
Boannerges or Sons of Thunder, Marc. 3.17. the Syriack word comes of (...) Sons
and, (...) to Thunder. Thus Nazianzen honors Basil (the great) with this
Epitaph, (...). Sermo tuus tonitru, vitaque fulgur erat; He Thundered with his
Doctrine, and Lightened with his Life, he had Urim and Thummim indeed.

216. Those Three Angels who were the Three first powerful Preachers, for
separation from Antichrist, [ Waldus, Wickliffe, Luther,] were Sons of Thunder,
especially the last of them: what a [ filius fragoris] was Luther, that did not
throw bruta fulmina at the Pope, as the Pope did at him: but rather such a
Thunderbolt, as (according to Ovids Fiction) struck Phaeton out of his Charet;
surely the Thundering Sermons that have been preached by those Sons of Thunder,
have caused this Son of Perdition to shrink downward from his pinnacle of Pride
many degrees.

217. The efficacy of this Ordinance of Preaching against the Walls of Babylon,
is clearly held out in the type of the fall of Jericho, Josh. 6.13. [7 Priests
bearing 7 Trumpets of Rams-horns, went on continually and blew with those
Trumpets: the Priests going on before the Ark and blowing with their Trumpets.]
This they continued to do all the 6. days, and v. 16. it came to pass on the
7th. day when the Priests blew with the Trumpets, the People hearing the
Trumpets v. 20. shouted with a great shout, and the Walls of Jericho falls down
flat to the ground.

218. The Antitype to the Sounding of those Ramshorns is the Ministry of the
Word, which though it be contemptible to man, yet is it (in poor Fishermen) the
power of God, a Weapon that is Mighty, for the pulling down of the strong holds
of Antichrist, 2 Cor. 10.4,5. God hews down (his) Forts by his Prophets, Hos.
6.5. and Cursed is he that rebuilds them again, Josh. 6.26. God writes him
childless that does so, 1 Kings 16.34. all from eldest to youngest dye.

219. We read in 1 Kings 19.17. How it was not only the Sword of Hazael, and
the Sword of Jehu, that cut off that Idolatrous house of Ahab, but such as
escaped their two Swords, should Elisha slay: Yet read we not any where of a
material Sword that this Prophet used, but he slew them by a Prophetical
denouncing of Divine Vengeance against Idolaters: Thus powerful Preaching is an
hewing down of Antichrist by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
Ephesians. 6.17.

220. As the Prophet Jeremy was set over Nations and Kingdoms to root out and
to pull down, to destroy and to throw down, Jer. 1.10. to wit, by his Menances
and Denunciations of Wrath, which should as surely be effected, as if the
Prophet had himself effected them: So are all the Ministers of the New
Testament set up against this Kingdom of Antichrist, to root it out and to pull
it down; yea, and to destroy that man of Sin, that (abusing this same place of
Scripture) assumes a power of setting up and pulling down Kings and disposing
of their Kingdoms at his pleasure: God expounds it better, Jer. 18.7.9.

221. Oh pray then for such Ministers of the Lord as may blow continually the
Ramshorns, as may lift up their Voices like Trumpets, Isa. 58.1. as may (with
the Sword of the Spirit) hew down this cursed Bramble, out of which so much
fire has issued, as has burnt down the Cedars of Lebanon, Judge. 9.15. Oh
pray, that the slain Witnesses may Prophecy again and reveal Antichrist, (that
was born in darkness) for the quintessence of Preaching is a Revealing of the
mystery of Godliness and the mystery of Ungodliness.

222. There be therefore many demonstrative Arguments to prove the fall of
Antichrist by; as 1. He must fall, because he has no foundation in the Word of
God, the Sandy foundation that he stands upon, cannot long uphold him; he is
not built on the Rock of ages, he is no Plant of Gods planting: 2ly. There is
not a promise for his standing, in all the holy Scriptures, but a direful
threatening against his standing, Math. 15.13. [ every Plant which God has not
planted shall be Rooted up.]

223. And 3ly. There is never a true Spiritual Prayer for him, neither in the
Word nor (...) the World: but all Prayer is against him; E^siastical History
tells us, how Prayer broke the neck of Simon Magus, and it will at length also
break the neck of Antichrist. The Popish Queen of Scots seemed something
sensible of this, when she said, she feared Mr. Knoxs Prayer, more then an Army
of Twenty thousand men.

224. He is 4ly. Not only guilty of much Blood, (which cries for Vengeance upon
him) but also he is drunk with it; therefore as he now Staggers, (like one that
is drunk) so he must likewise both stumble and fall, Isai. 8.15. Jerem. 25.27.
then 5ly. Solomon says pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit
before a fall, Prove. 16.18. Antichrists pride was related before, Parag. 52.55.
and from 89. to 97. all which must bring his fall and destruction.

225. But sixthly and lastly, because so many battering Engines are planted
against him, not by weak man, but by the Mighty God, therefore down he must
come, for strong is the Lord that Judges him, Revel. 18.8. When Joshua comes
against Jericho in the name of the Lord, and surrounds it with the Ark of God
and blowing of Trumpets, this plainly portends the downfall of it; So when our
Joshua or Jesus has battered Babylon with those Persons and things
forementioned for some years already, (since Luthers days especially) this
plainly portends it cannot stand, but must tumble down.

CHAP. IX.
226. HAving thus demonstrated Antichrists lingering Consumption, and the means
whereby it is accomplished, which is the 11th clause: I come now next to the
12th and last part of the Induction; to wit, his utter extirpation, ( he must
be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming) the word (...) has an
elegancy in it, as its simple, is (...) to be idle: The Beast has power (...)
(which Mr. Mede Reads faciendi) to do 42. Months, Rev. 13.5. but the brightness
of Christ's coming puts a Period to his lease of doing, cuts the traces of this
wicked plower, and then he cannot plow or do no more, Ps. 129.3,4. he will be
then (...), one out of Employment and out of being also.

227. Some indeed take this brightness of Christ's coming to be at the day of
Judgment, because its said, then He shall come in flaming Fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and then shall the Beast and false Prophet be put to death, and cast into the
Lake, Rev. 19.20. This interpretation makes the final abolishment of Antichrist
to be much later, then indeed it shall be.

228. This coming of Christ is not (says Dr. Sclater) to be taken [(...)] in
that Individual point of time, wherein Christ shall come to Judge the World at
the last day: but it must be taken extensely and with some latitude; so as
under it may be comprised the Anterior part, and the foregoing (both) Signs and
times thereof: and he approves of that Critic Scholiast, that says, this
phrase is not to be understood of his coming in Person to General Judgment,
but of the manifestation of His Presence in the Church by effects of Power,
Justice, Grace, and Mercy.

229. If this Extirpation of Antichrist be the same thing with the downfall of
Babylon, that is described, Revel. 18. then under correction, (says he) the
brightness of Christ's coming cannot be the precise day of Judgment: for after
[it] must follow the Calling of the Jews, the destruction of Gog and Magog, and
some Halcyon-days of the Church here on Earth.

230. There is a coming of Christ spoken of under the Sixth Vial, Revel. 16.15.
[ behold I come] which is added there as a Cordial to Christ's Servants, against
those great preparations for the Battle at Armageddon: Under the Sixth Vial is
the overthrow of the Kings that assist the Pope, through the manifestation of
Christ's powerful Presence, therefore is it called the great day of God
Almighty, Rev. 16.14. and Armageddons Battle is described, Rev. 19.11. to the
end

231. There is a plain Coming of Christ (mentioned in that Rev. 19.12.13.) to
the Battle at Armageddon, wherein he gives the flesh of Popish Kings, and of
Captains, yea and of all kind of Papists, small and great, (which seems to
amount to this utter Extirpation) v. 18. then shall all Papists ( bond and
free) be destroyed; then shall the Beast and the false Prophet in his last War
against Christ and his Church be taken, v. 19.20. so this casting of them into
the Lake, is under the Sixth Vial, and not as before at the day of Judgment.

232. The marriage of the Lamb the 7th Vial brings in, under the notion of the
New-Jerusalem, which begins to be described, Rev. 20. (in the Book-prophecy)
and Rev. 11.15. in the Seal-prophecy: ( when all the Kingdoms of the World
become the Lords, under the 7th Trumpet.) Now because Christ will not be
married, but as a Conqueror; therefore before this Maraiage, he comes and
manifests himself in this great Battle, to destroy Antichrist's Person (with
all his proud Helpers.) Under this 6th Vial, as before he destroys Antichrists
Seat under the 5th Vial.

233. The 17th of Rev. is but an Interpretation who is this Beast and Whore
(spoken of) that the Church might be able to discern this Antichrist. The 18
Chap. is a solemn Funeral-song for Romes Ruin by the fifth Vial, or rather a
Song Triumphant for the Expiration of Antichrist's Kingdom.

234. It may strongly be presumed, that Antichrists lease of his 42 Months will
expire at the end of the fifth Vial, when the great Fox (that has so long
spoild the veins of Christ's Vineyard) shall be unkennel'd. For though he may
raise some forces, and make some Resistance under the 6th Vial (as his
Preparation to this battle at Armageddon) yet shall he reign no more, after his
Seat be ruind.

235. The Holy Ghost will not teach the Saints [ Triumphum canere ante
Victoriam] to triumph before a Victory. Now were not the Kingdom of Christ's
grand Enemy (to wit, Antichrist) as good as at an end, at the Destruction of
Rome by the fifth Vial. This triumphant Song in chap. 18. had been praeposterous
and unreasonable, and should have been reserved till after the next Vial
afterward.

336. There was indeed another triumphant Song to be sung after, but it was
more high and glorious than this, to wit, for the Marriage of the Lamb; and
observe how the bride adorns her self in fine linen, clean and white for this
Marriage, Rev. 19.8. Then begins the 1000 Years of the glorious State of the
Church (described, Rev. 20.) which falls out afer the Beasts casting into the
lake, so that cannot be the day of Judgment.

237. Add to this, that after the Beast and the false Prophet be cast into the
lake of fire, Rev. 19.20. The Devil himself is still reserved, Rev. 20.1,2,3.
wherein a famous Climax or elegant Gradation is observable, 1st the Angel with
the great chain comes down from heaven. 2. He lays hold on the Dragon or Devil.
3. He binds him (as it were) hand and foot. 4. And then casts him into the
bottomless pit ( where he would not have been cast, Luke 8.31.) 5. He shuts him
up there, as if chaining only were not sufficient for restraining such a raging
Devil: yea. 6. the door must be sealed too with Authority from Heaven, that the
Peace of the Church might be secured.

238. Yet after all this, the Devil must be loosed again (though it will be for
a little season, ver. 3, 7. for the day of Judgment presently follows, ver.
18.) to gather together Gog and Magog against the Camp of the Saints, and the
beloved City, v. 8, 9. which (some think) is the Turkish Empire (Satan's last
enemy against the Church) for the Rising of the Turk is mentioned, Rev. 9.3,
etc. but his Fall is no where clearly, till in this Chap. this Adversary shall
be chained up all the 1000 Y. (if he be the Gog and Magog) as his God and
father the Devil is, all that time.

239. All those things being laid together, and seriously pondered, does
clearly evince, that the casting of the Beast, and the false Prophet into the
lake of fire, cannot be meant the precise day of Judgment, for the Devil
cannot be loosed any more after that day, but when his last Agents, Gog and
Magog be destroyed, he is cast in too, where the Beast was cast 1000 Y. before,
Rev. 20.10.

240. Besides, a glorious Estate is promised to the Church in many Scriptures,
glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God, Psalm. 87.3. Now this promise
was never yet performed, not in the times immediately after Christ, for then
the Church was neither visible nor glorious (as Mr. Mede says, Diatribae p.
4.) not under the persecuting Emperors of the Heathen; for then, though indeed
it was visible (having taken foot among the Gentiles) yet was it not glorious
at that time.

241. Go to Constantines time, wherein indeed the Sunshine of the Gospel seemed
to break out from behind a Cloud: yet this lasted not, but presently it was
darkened again with a thick cloud of Arrianism; and no sooner was the Arrian
cloud blown over, but again the very Visibility of the Church was overshadowed
with a thicker cloud of Antichristianism, that grand Apostasy foretold by the
Holy Ghost.

242. This cloud (indeed after a long night of darkness) has begun to be
dispelled, by those 3 Angels formention'd ( Waldus, Wickliffe and Luther) yet
it shall not wholly be done away, till this Sun of Righteousness arise with
healing in his Wings, as Mal. 4.2. both for calling in the Jews and the fullness
of the Gentiles, then shall Sion be exalted above all Hills. And this will be
that brightness of Christ's coming to abolish Antichrist.

243. So then this glorious Estate of the Church never yet had its due
accomplishment, but shall be, when the Lamb comes to marry his Bride, and to
give her a 1000 years of Tranquillity after the destruction of Antichrist. This
cannot be that blessed Estate of the Church Triumphant in heaven, for, 1st.
It Is expressly said, that the Saints shall reign on earth, Rev. 5.10. (not [
does, but shall] to wit) after the Beast and false Prophet be cast into the
lake of fire. 2ly. There will be no need of binding up Satan, when the Saints
reign in Heaven. 3ly. That Reign in Heaven is for more time than a 1000 years,
it is for Eternity.

244. And 4ly. Satan must be let loose again (as before) which cannot be after
the day of Judgment. 5ly. This marriage of the Lamb with the bride, and so (by
consequence) this glorious estate of the Church must be a state on Earth,
because it is said at that time, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and God
will dwell with men, Rev: 21.3. Now were it a state in heaven, then it should
rather be said, that men dwells with God, then God with men.

245. There must therefore be a Coming of Christ (I say not, personal) before
the Day of judgment, to receive his Kingdom of the Father, Dan. 7.13. Not the
natural or essential Kingdom, which he has ( as he is God) for ever: but a
dispensatory Kingdom delegated to him (as he is Mediator) which, when he has
put down all Power, all the 4 Monarchs, and all the 10 Kings (of the last
Monarchy) the Beast and false Prophet, yea, Gog and Magog; after the 1000 Years
of the Churches peace, and after his Judging the World he resigns up his
Kingdom again, 1 Cor. 15.24.25.

246. Thus we see there is a coming of Christ which will be a Restitution of
all things, Acts 3.21. (Whereas the coming of Christ at the Day of judgment,
shall be the Dissolution of all things) and this coming of Christ may be called
[ Epiphany] from the brightness of it, for then the clouds of Antichristianism
shall be dissolved, and so shall it be not only bright to the Church, but
destructive to Antichrist, who shall be Destroyed by the brightness of the
coming of this Sun of Righteousness: at his presence will the mountains of the
Man of Sin melt away, like Snow before the Sun, Psalm. 114.7.

247. This is the Brightness of Christ's coming, that brings in Antichrists
utter extirpation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. For at the sounding of the 7th Trumpet in the
Seal-prophecy, the Angel swears that [ time should be no longer] to wit, for
Antichrist, Rev. 10.6,7. then the mystery of God shall be finished, and then
Christ comes (at the 7th Trumpet) and takes to himself his great Power, and
reigns, Rev. 11.15,17. Then all Kingdoms become the Lords, though the Nations
be angry at it.

248. In the like manner, at the pouring out of the 7th Vial, in the
Book-prophecy, it is said [ It is done] Rev. 16.17. that is, all is finished
concerning Antichrist; not only his Seat and Kingdom is ended, but the Beast
and the false Prophet are taken in Person, and all his Retainders are utterly
destroyed by Christ, Rev. 19.20,21. And then begins the Kingdom of Christ.

249. Thus we have seen at large, how Antichrist's doom is, to be destroyed. O
daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, Psalm. 137.8,9. This Beast must go
into perdition, Rev. 17.8. it is said [ Go, not Run] for it must be gradually
done, every Vial must bring a degree of Ruin on him (as before.) Now those two
last clauses of the Induction are subordinate, but not contrary: for Antichrist
may be both consumed and destroyed, ever since the Separation and Reformation
he has been wasting away.

250. But when Christ shall come with a brighter Manifestation of himself, of
his Grace, and of his Gospel to the World, then men shall be clearly convinced,
that this is the great Whore that bewitches the Nations with her wine of
Fornication, and that she is a common Strumpet with the Kings of the earth,
Rev. 17.2. The Lord will then also mightily discover her to the Kings of the
earth ( that have given up their Power to her) and cause them to hate her, and
to burn her for a Witch, Rev. 17.16. As the Beast has killed with the Sword,
so he shall be killed with the Sword (himself) at last, Rev. 13.10. (after a
long Consumption and Captivity) as if one kind of death were to little for him.

251. This Antichrist therefore is a Son of perdition passively, (as well as
actively) for he must go into perdition, but whether, by the battle of the
Warrior, and by Garments rolled in blood at first, some doubts. Osiand.
Epitome 7. Cent. Pa. 315. However it shall be by burning and fuel of fire,
Esa. 9.5. God will kindle a fire in the hearts of those Kings, and they shall
make Rost-meat of the Whore: at last, she shall have blood to drink, (for she
is worthy) sooner or later, Rev. 16.6. and cap. 18.6. And something hereof is
mentioned in the 3d Vial, Rev. 16.6.

CHAP. X.
252. NOw come we to the great (...)] the grand Enquiry concerning the time of
the fall of Antichrist, which has puzl'd so many grave, holy, and learned
Interpreters. There is a strange Itch, and a strong propension of desire to
know this; Oh that we may go to Christ privately, (as the Disciples did, Mat.
24.3.) and say to him, tell us when shall these things be, and what shall be
the sign of the Coming of Christ? We are ready to say with Balaam, Numb. 24.23.
who shall live when God does this?

253. Various Calculations and Computations of time (about Antichrist's fall)
are extant at this day, even by many good Men, and great Lights in their
Generation. My present Work shall be to draw a compendious Scheme of the
several Conjectures of those most illuminated Servants of Christ (passing by
others, I conceive were less enlightened) and then superadd my own Conceptions (
quales, quales sunt) though I may say with Luther [ Ego nullus sum in
Propheticis] I am neither a Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet.

254. There be two several ways of Computation, especially (according to the
diversity of men's Apprehensions) which they take, to find out the time of
Antichrists fall: some grounds their Conjectures upon that Number given to
Daniel (who was the great Revealer of those Secrets in the Old Testament, as
John was in the New) Dan. 12.11. That from the time of the daily Sacrifices
taking away, and the Abomination of desolation setting up, there shall be a
thousand two hundred and ninety Days or Years.

255. To omit all foreign Writers (which would make the work more tedious) I
shall only speak of our own Countrymen, who (according to their Light) has
made inquiry into this great Mystery: Some of those follow the Computation of
Daniel, as 1st. Dr. Willet in his Comment on this Dan. 12.12. who relating
Bullinger's Opinion [ That those 1290 Days have reference to the last
destruction of Jerusalem, because the Jewish War before the final destruction
of their great City, lasted so many Days.

256. The Doctor answers Bullinger thus. That those 1290 Days must not be
reckoned from the beginning of the Jewish War, but from the setting of the
Abomination in the Temple by Antiochus, which lasted 3 Years and an half: and
seeing the Number 1335. (mentioned in the 12. ver.) differs from 1290. just 45
Days, he conceives, that has relation to Judas Macabaeus his cleansing of the
Temple, 45 days before Antiochus his death. Now all this he makes a Type of
things to come, looking on Antichrist in the New Test. to be the Antitype of
Antichrist in the Old, and corresponding each with other, in Nature and
Circumstance.

257. Hereupon he speaks to the Conjecture of some, that (because there be 45
days difference betwixt 1290. and 1335.) do gather from thence ( that after
Antichrist it destroyed, Christ will come in Glory, at the end of 45 days) but
he answers to this, that then it would be known by Daniels Prophecy, when the
day of Judgment is, which is contrary to the Scripture of the New Testam. Mat.
24.36. Luke 12.40. but rather thus (says he) Christ by the brightness of his
Coming will cleanse his Temple (as Judas Macabaeus did) and 45 days after, he
will slay Antichrist. Here we have (at least) an obscure Intimation of the time
of the fall of this Man of Sin.

258. But more plainly Mr. Symonds (Pastor of Roterdam) reckons by Daniels
Numerical Rule, and observing how Julian (the Apostate) endeavored to set up
the Abomination-Temple of the Jews, and to restore Judaism in despite of
Christ himself (whom he would have proved a Liar thereby) and all those
Christians that lived in his Empire: how also Christ from heaven fought against
his enterprise with Thunder and Lightning, and with an Earthquake from below,
that cast up the very foundation which he had laid.

259. Hereby Christ (whom he would have proved a Liar) fulfilled his own
Prophecy more fully, then it was before. That (not only above ground, but not
so much as under ground) one stone shall not be left upon another, Mat. 24.2.
Thus by a most eminent hand the Lord took away the Jews daily Sacrifice, and
rooted up their Abomination-Temple, yea, and at the same time the Delphich
Temple of the Heathens was utterly destroyed, to tell all the world that
neither Judaism nor Paganism should be set up any more, but the Kingdom of
Christ.

260. These transcendent Providence Mr. Symonds and others, (I say) observing,
are thereby persuaded to begin this 1290 days or years at this Exploit of
Julian (which some say, was in An. Dom. 360.) and so the period of that
Computation ends in 1650 Y. of Christ (which is long ago expired) only there is
a reserve of 45 Years which prolongs this account to 1695.

261. There be other holy Men, that cast their eye (in this work) not upon
Daniels number only, but on John's also: as Mr. Tilling-hast, who begins his
account of 1290 Years at the Rebuilding of the Jewish Temple by Julian, which
(he says) was in the Y. of Christ 366. to wit, 6 Years lower than the former
Calculation, this for Daniels number; but then the 1260, or the 42 Months
(which is John's number) he begins at the Year 396 after Christ.

262. And he gives this reason for the latter, because (says he) at the Ye.
396. was the time of the Beasts rise, for then came in the Worshipping of
Images, Prohibition of Marriages, Traditions, and Antichrists exalting himself
above the Magistrate. Now both those Numbers, to wit, that of Daniels (the
Prophet of the Jewish Church) holding out the time of the Rejection of the
Jews, and of Antichrists domineering over believing Gentiles, jump exactly into
one Period ( sc. 1656 Y.) which also is elapsed, and yet no Vial it powered on
the Seat of the Beast.

263. Dr. Goodwin likewise goes this way, comparing Daniels and John's Prophecy
together, and making that Angel with the little book in Rev. 10. to be the same
that appeared to Daniel, Dan. 12. for (says he) both those Angels (1) use the
same Ceremony, to wit, the lifting up of the right hand toward Heaven (2) both
swearing the same Oath, to wit, by him that lives for ever, Dan. 12.7. and
Rev. 10.5,6. (3) both their Swearing has one end about the same thing, and to
the same purpose.

264. For that Prophecy of Daniel contains (but more darkly) the same things,
that the Revelation of John (more clearly) handles; as namely the Tyranny of
the 4th. Monarchy, and the oppression of the Church thereby: (First by the
Empire, then under the last head of it, the Pope, of whom Daniel had
Prophesied, Chap. 11. from v. 36. to the end) after whose time ended, should
come in a fifth Monarchy of the Saints, as Chapter 7. all which things are more
distinctly presented to us by John; as namely under the 7th. Trumpet, (after
the time of the Pope ended) a glorious Kingdom should come in, Revel. 11.15.17.

265. And (4ly.) as they both agree in one subject matter, so likewise in
setting down the time (determined of God) how long this last head ( the Pope
oppressing the Church) should continue: to wit, for a time, times, and half a
time, ( Daniel mentioning it thus Darkly and Indefinitely) and when this last
head shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy People, then all
those things shall be fulfilled, Dan. 12.7. but it is more clearly and distinctly
mentioned by John, (as became a Revelation) Chap. 11. so as indeed the 11th. of
Revelation, is but an Explication of the 12th. of Dan. for the better comfort
of the Church.

266. Then coming to pitch upon the time of Antichrists fall, Dr. Goodwin
concurs in his Conjectures with those that reckons by Daniels Number of 1290.
Y. and fixing the beginning of this account in Julians time, which was the last
time both of the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice set up by him, and a setting up
Heathenish Idolatry in the World: and he says, we may not reckon from Titus
Vespasians time, (who destroyed the Temple) for then the term is expired long
ago.

267. And he, finding two Periods of time most chiefly pitched upon by writers
of this age, for great changes in the Churches of Christ; the one about 1656.
and the other upon 1666. he (I say) falls in with both those Periods, showing
how both may stand together: for the 5. Vial (says he) has 2 several powrings
forth of 2 several portions; the one is the top, and the other is the dregs or
bottom, The top of the Vial may be powered out in Y. 1656. to prepare for the
other, but in Y, 1666. the dregs of its wrath shall fall on the Seat of the
Beast.

268. The latter of those Periods he reckons by John's Number of 42. Months, or
1260. Y. fixing the head of this account in the Year 406. after Christ, when
Pope Innocent the First challenged and Usurped Jurisdiction over all Churches:
Those two Numbers put together make exactly 1666. but the former of those
Periods he reckons by Daniels Number of 1290. Years, which he begins at Julians
Exploit, Y. 365. or 366. (because accounts of Years since Julians attempt of
building of the Temple, is various) which latter added to 1290. Y. makes
exactly also 1656. according to his 1st. Period.

269. He proceeds further; saying, Daniel being inquisitive after the times
when those things should he finished: The Angel (which is Christ, saying,
Revel. 11.3. I will give power to my two Witnesses, etc. which no created Angel
could say) gives him two Periods, the one 1290. as before, the other 1335.
which is the ending of the dispatch of those great things before the Kingdom of
Christ, (as the other is the beginning thereof) and which from Julians time,
ends about 1700. Y. of Christ: There be 45. Years to accomplish all the
preparatory work in, as Antichrists Ruin, Jews Call, etc. and the first Period
brings blessed times, but blessed is he that comes to the end of the 45. Y.
for then is Christ's Kingdom.

270. There be a 3d. sort of Holy and Learned Interpreters, that neither build
their conjectures on Daniels prophetic Number wholly, nor yet as it stands in
conjunction with the Apocalyptick number of John: but solely upon those numbers
they find in the Revelation, which are of two sorts; 1. That 42. Months or
1260. Days or Years, which is the very term of time the Beast has given him to
tread down the holy City, Revel. 11.2.3. and to [ do] or continue in, Revel.
13.5.

271. The 2d. Apostolic Number is that famous [666.] Revel. 13. last, which
seems to cast up the Number of the Beast; to wit, the date and end of his
Tyrannical Kingdom, whose days shall then be numbered, that is, finished, (as
the phrase is of old Babylon's ending, Dan. 5.26. God has numbered thy Kingdom
and finished it) and the Holy Ghost has computed it (as they have conceived)
to be in the Year, which according to men's computation, shall be called, Six
hundred sixty six Years: Number expressing time, for Aristotle defines Tempus
(to be) Numerus motus secundum prius est posterius, Time is the number of
Motion.

272. And of this Judgment is an unknown English writer, in 1589. of Christ,
Intituling his Book [ To the Church of Rome] and Subscribing himself by the two
Letters [ T. L.] whose Writing speaks him a man of a Savoury Spirit, and of no
mean ability; I have read it with much complacency: who says that in that Year
(666.) The great man of Rome shall fall as the Uncircumcised.

273. In the Number of the Beast, (he says) the millenary Number is omitted,
not only as Known and unchangable, (for Antichrist was to Reign no more
Thousands then One) but also as Respecting the common use of all Nations, (as
well Hebrews as Gentiles) who in their Styles (for brevities sake) do both
speak and write by the Imperfect Number, omitting the Millenary, (as Munster in
his Calendario Hebraico well observes) more then after the Perfect, adding the
Millenary.

274. There be others indeed* that finding the Number of the Beast to be [666.]
have therefore made this Number to design out the very Year of Antichrists
beginning, or Revelation of his Tyranny and Kingdom, to wit, in the Year of
Christ 666. so Mr. Stephens, and the rather because they find in Eccles.
History, that in that very Year, the Latin Service began in the Church, (which
is the Popish Service in all Lands) see Osiander Epitome Cent. 7. Page 189. see
Paragr. 289.

275. But Number, when it is put to signify Time, (as Dr. Goodwin says) does
not so properly signify the beginning of Time, as the ending of it. When the
Number is finished, and (as it were) cast up and made complete: then is his
Time Numbered and the account of it summed up, and not before; and therefore
Daniel uses this Phrase, [ Thy days are Numbred] to denote to us the ending of
the Time of the Babylonish Kingdom, and not the beginning of it, as was said
before.

276. Therefore many godly-learned, declining this latter Notion, has yet gone
over into the Opinion of the former (with T. L.) saying, this Cumputation
(being called the Number of a man, that is, the ordinary vulgar way of
Reckoning years, and measure of time, in the style of the whole Christian
World) holds out the very year of Antichrists Expiration, when his Number shall
be summed up, that is, in that Year which is (according to man's Computation of
years) ordinarily styled 666. as we usual say 88, for 1588.

277. Yet Mr. Durham (in his Comment on the Revelation) puts another sense on
that Number (666) saying, it neither denotes the time of Antichrists Rise, or
of his Ruin; but to show (says he) that this Beast is not any ordinary
Heretic, but a Chief one, that has a great Number of lying Doctrines (his
name of Blasphemy) compact together, and we are called in Rev. 13. last, to
weigh his Heresies judiciously, not to number his Figures Arithmetically.

278. He that has understanding of spiritual Truths, and his Senses exercised
to discern them, will ponder the Doctrines of Antichrist in the balance of the
Sanctuary, ((...) Belshazzar was numbered, and found light) Antichrist's number
is the number of Man (for there is no Article in the Greek) not the Wisdom of
God: his Doctrines are not of God, but of Man, yea, Doctrines of Devils. And
there be sexcenti errores Pontificii (as some Book-titles be) as if Antichrist
were a Compound of 666 grand errors.

279. Mr. Cotton upon Rev. 13.18. declares his opinion of this (666) that it is
neither the Number of his Years when he began, nor the Number of his Years when
he shall end: not the former (says he) for though some think Antichrist arose
to a name in the Y. 606. yet they cannot (though Boniface then took upon him
the title of Chief Bishop) make that 666. seeing there is 60. Y. difference,
and it is probable, the Holy Ghost would not have erred so much in such an
express Number. Besides Antichrist was begun before this 606. and this
Headship, or spiritual Advancement is but a part of Antichrist.

280. Nor can the latter be (says he) for 666. cannot be the number of the end
of Antichrists Years, seeing he continues still to this time (which is almost a
Thousand years since 666.) and to say, that in this round Number something is
omitted (as when we say (88) we mean 1588. yet in Scripture Phrase (says he)
such small Numbers are not regarded; and seeing Wisdom is required to find out
this Number, what wisdom were it for the Holy Ghost to leave out a thousand (as
we leave out when we say 88. for 1588.] the Holy Ghost (he says) does not so
here, and therefore it cannot hold out the number of his Period.

281. He thinks as the number of the Beast is an opposite number to the Number
of the Lamb (which consists all of 12. as of every Tribe 12000, and the City
had 12 foundations, etc. Rev. 21.14,16,17.) the whole fabric of Jerusalem is
12. the foundation is Apostolical; but in the Number of the Beast, there is
nothing Apostolical, six falls short of twelve. Boniface sums up all their
Canons in one Book, which he adding to the 5 Books of Decretals, calls it
Sextus, thus all their Religion is wrapped up in 6 Volumes, and the 6. (they
call) the most perfect of all: hence the Number 6. is pitched on here, the
number of a man for Popery is but man's Wit and Invention.

282. Now come we to the other Apocaliptick Number, to wit, the 42 months, or
1260 days or years (which some interpret in a way of conjunction with this last
Number (666.) and therefore I do speak of it the latter, though in the
Introduction I made it the former.) Many late Writers has concurred with [ T.
L.] in making 1260 Y. to be Antichrists Term, and 666. (the millenary Number
being understood, though not expressed as before) to be the period of that
Term, and to find a fit Correspondency betwixt those two Numbers, they look out
for the rise of Antichrist.

283. And finding the Egg of Antichristianism to be laid in the Days of
Innocent the first, in the Ye. of Christ 406. and that by express Commission,
there was furthermore granted to the Beast, his Heirs and Successors 1260
Years, for the hatching, fostering, and perfecting of this Egg or Child of
Perdition: which being added to 406. makes 1666. to be the very Year wherein
the Judgments of God (denounced) shall fall upon Antichrist. And he shall as
easily weigh the fire, or measure the wind, or call again the day that is past,
as avoid the decree of his Downfall then determined, and as [T. L.] says,
then my Lord of Rome must lay down his proud waves.

284. Other Interpreters labor for no concurrence, or Coincidency betwixt 1260
and 666. but does measure Antichrist only by that Lease or Term that is given
him to do or continue, to wit, 42 Months, or which is all one, 1260 Y. Thus
many learned and holy Men, binding up themselves to this Number only, and
varying in their judgments, where to make the Epoch or Beginning of the
Beasts Rise, has likewise exceedingly varyed in their Opinions, about his
Period and Ruin.

285. Mr. Brightman makes the beginning of the Term of Antichrist to be at
Constantines coming to the Crown (for then began the war with the Dragon, etc.)
when the Man-child was brought forth, that is, advanced to Imperial dignity,
Rev. 12.5. and so he makes the Authority of the Beast to expire about the Year
of Christ 1546. which year or time was so far from ending the Beast, that at
that time he was rather more advanced, for then did the Council of Trent
condemn the Scriptures, in advancing the Vulgar Latin to be most Authentic:
and then did Charles the fifth war against the Protestant Princes in Germany.

286. Mr. Durham comes near to this Computation of holy Brightman, making the
close of the 1260 Y. of Antichrists absolute and uninterrupted Tyranny, and
triumphing over the Witnesses, to fall out in the Year 1559. when Reformation
began by public Authority at Ausperg, till then (he says) the Witnesses
ascended not into heaven. For then, not only in Germany a Diet enacted for
Religion, but also in England it was raised up by Q. Elizabeth, and the Year
before that, it was received in Scotland, and the year after, to wit, 1560. in
France by Charles the ninth: thus he, in his Comment on Revel.

287. But it is objected (says he) against this Opinion, that this Computation
places the rise of Antichrist (over-high) in the 3. Century after Christ, which
was a time, when the Church enjoyed both Purity, and Liberty in the Days of
that good Emperor Constantine. To this, he answers thus: As Antichrist began to
work from the Apostles time, so much more from the time of outward Rest and
Peace which the Church enjoyed by Constantine, who freed her from Heathenish
Persecution.

288. Pride soon (says he) infected her Pastors, ( Hodie venenum in Ecclesiam
fudisti, was imputed to Constantine, when he made the Church as it were,
luxuriant with Temporal Privileges) and the Roman Pastor, having the greatest
advantages of sharing in those Privileges (as Rome was then the Lady of
Kingdoms) began soon to improve them, at least ad Potentiam Pontificiam, though
not suddenly ad Omnipotentiam, as afterward.

289. The Pontificial Omnipotency, or settled Superiority, and the title of
Universal Bishop (he confesses) was not indeed usurped, till Boniface the third
assumed it in the Year 606. After this came in the Latin Service and the Mass,
in the Y. 666. (as I mentioned before, Paragr. 274 by Vitellianus the Pope,
then also was Pantheon (the Temple of the Heathen God) opened and dedicated to
All Saints; and so by degrees comes in all the Romish Trash, till Antichrist
came to his full Growth.

290. But there is yet a stronger Objection against this Opinion (which the
judicious Scot labors to remove) to wit, that the Kingdom of the Beast is
contemporary with the Sackcloth-Prophecy of the Witnesses, and this must be,
for after the Ascension of the Witnesses, and the Earthquake, the 7th Trumpet
sounds, and all Kingdoms become the Lords, Rev. 11.11,12.13,15. The downfall of
the Beasts kingdom must be before this, though he say, the Ascension of the
Witnesses may consist with the decaying Kingdom of the Beast, who must be
destroyed gradually under the 7th Trumpet, yet this sense is cumbred with many
difficulties, as will appear afterward.

291. Mr. Cotton goes yet a little lower then either of the former, in placing
the beginning of this 1260 Y. to wit, to 96 or 97 Y. after Constantine,
rendering this Reason, that though the War began with Constantine, and the Woman
fled into the wilderness (as Mr. Brightman rightly observes) yet it cannot be
said in his time, that there was no place found for the dragon in Heaven, for
this (says he) was the failing of that good Emperor, that he still allowed the
Heathen-Idol-Temples to continue, only shutting their Doors, which his
Successor Julian, opened again, and restored the Dragon to his Heaven of
spiritual Authority.

292. Though the war was begun by Constantine, yet was it not accomplished by
him, so as to cast out the Dragon wholly, and so as no more place to be found
for him in Heaven, this was not (he says) till the time of Theodosius, then did
the Emperors renounce (and not before) the title of Pontifex Maximus. Hereupon
the Beast ( the Pope) the very next year after, takes up this Name, and holds
it to this day. What ever be the Popes name, it is Pontifex Maximus; now this
was about 396. Y. after Christ (as 96. after Constantine) which Number being
added to 1260. makes up 1656. Antichrists Period.

293. This learned and holy man was not alone in his Expectations of eminent
Providence in that Year, or about it (as is manifested before, in Paragr, 262,
and 267.) yet his modesty in this his Conjecture is very eminent, saying, I
will not be too confident, because I am not a Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet
to foretell things to come, yet he expected a great blow would be given to the
Beast, and to the head of the Beast: yea, and the Expiration of his Power and
great Authority, in his Comment. on 13. Rev. page 87, 88, 90, 93, 94.

294. Yea, Mr. Mede himself (whose Labors the Church of God has much cause to
bless God for) pitcheth his Expectation upon this Y. 1656. though tacitly and
implicitly; for in his Synchronismes, he making the first Trumpet, and the
Popes 1260 Days to begin together, and in his Comment page 71. he makes the
beginning of the first Trumpet to be in the Y. 395. after Christ, so as if the
Reign of Antichrist began at that time with the first Trumpet. It Is clear
enough, Mr. Mede inclined mostly to 1655. or 1656. for the Expiration of
Antichrists kingdom.

295. There is another ground that made this Year of 1656. a year of great
Expectation because it was the year of Noah's Flood in the old World, (unto
which Christ compares his Coming, Matthew. 24.37,38. as if there would be so many
years to the first beginning of the new World to come since Christ, as was of
the old World before the Flood, till the days of Noah, to wit, 1656. years. The
Kingdom of Christ is called by the name of the World to come, Heb. 2.5. because
it shall bring with it new Heavens, and a new Earth; wherein dwells
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 3.13.

296. There be other learned Interpreters, that fix the beginning of this 1260.
Y. upon other times; some upon the Y. 383. after Christ, because then the
Council of Constantinople acknowledged the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, wherein
the Beast received much power: others on 401. Y. after Christ, for then Pope
Innocent drew all Appeals to Rome, and about that time, the Mystery of Iniquity
was revealed.

297. the former Hypothesis of these two last, brings down Antichrists fall to
1643. Y. after Christ, and the latter of them to 1661. but because Chronologers
vary in their Computations, to wit, when Innocent the first (who began the
usurpation of Authority and Jurisdiction over all Churches, and first set out
that notorious Falsification of the Canons of Nice, as pretending that those
Canons gave the Roman Bishop this Power) was created Pope, Some say in the Y.
404. this makes Antichrists Period in the Y. 1664.

298. But other Chronologers makes his Creating Pope, in the Y. 406. as Sympson
the Scotch Abbreviator of the History of the Church) pitches the beginning of
the Popes Usurpation in this Y. 406. who yet had no Eye (at all) upon that
great Year of Expectation [1666.] in so pitching it, but because at that time
according to his Calculations, he found that this Nocent Innocent the first was
created Pope, as appears in his English History of the Church, 2d Book, 5.
Century and page, 323.

299. Mr. Buroughs, and many other holy Men has begun their Computation of
Antichrists Term at this Innocent the first, partly for the reason abovesaid,
and partly because this Pope 1st took upon him power over Princes, for he
excommunicated the Eastern Emperor Arcadius (who yet was out of his
Jurisdiction) for banishing Chrysostom, which none of his Predecessors (the
Popes) ever attempted to do (a Copy of his Excommunication is extant in
Baronius) and in his time also the Emperor Honorius exempted his Clergy from
all Secular Powers, so made them a distinct Body for the Pope as their Head, a
lively representation of the Apocalyptick Beast.

CHAP. XI.
300. TThere be yet two Opinions behind, which are indeed Heterogeneal to all
those before mentioned; the first is of that our Godly Martyrologist Mr. Fox,
which (he says) was after long Study and Prayer, cast suddenly into his mind
by Divine Inspiration: to wit, that those 42. Months must be referred to the
Churches Persecution under the Roman Emperors, Reckoning from John Baptist,
(that was slain by Herod the Tetrarch) until Peace was given to the Church by
Constantine.

301. He takes those 42. Months for Weeks of Years, by which Reckoning, they
make 249. Years; to which, if we add the 30. Years of Christ, when he was
Baptized by John, it amounts to 324. Years after Christ, in which Year (he
says) Constantine the great embraced the Christian Religion: To this singular
Opinion of this holy Man, I shall speak to by and by, (and yet without deriding
it as the Popish Writers do) when I come to lay down my own Opinion ( such as
it is) on this Subject.

302. The 2d. Opinion is Dr. Beards, (one who has writ a very Learned Treatise
of Antichrist) whose notions ( in this point) differs from all others (of the
Interpreters aforesaid) about this Apocalyptick Number; saying, that it
concerns not Antichrists Reign, but only the durance of the first Beast, which
was the Roman Empire: and he gives 2. Reasons for this his Opinion; First, it is
said, Rev. 13.5. that power was given to the Beast 42. Months or 1260. Years,
this he says, agrees with the Event; for from the first foundation of Rome, to
its Ruin by Theoderick the Goth, passed just so many Years, 1260.

303. His Second Reason why this Number holds out the length of the Civil
Empire of Rome, (persecuting the primitive Church) and not the Pontifical or
Antichristian; is, because (he says) it is not the manner of Holy Scripture to
premonstrate any certain Periods of those Intestine Troubles which are raised
up in the Church by false Christians; but only by such as arise from Foreign
Enemies, that professedly oppose the Truth: As we see (says he) in the
Persecution of the Ancient Church under the Egyptians, and Babylonians, and
Antiochus.

304. Those Persecutions are defined in a certain Number of Years by the
Prophets: but not that which was executed by their own Idolatrous Kings, as
Jeroboam, Manasseh, and the rest of those Ungodly Kings of Israel; so (says
he) those Numbers in the Apocalypse are not to be referred to Antichrist, (who
was to be a Domestic Foe, this is answered in Par. 347.) but to the Bloody
Cruelty of those Heathen Tyrants, the Roman Emperors who (says he) are the
Gentiles that treads under foot the Holy City 4.2. Months, Revel. 11.2. yea he
further affirms that this 42. Months in Revel. 11.2. and that in Revel. 13.5.
are all one in effect, and cannot be well understood, but of the Heathen
Emperors.

305. To this Opinion also I shall say something, as well as to the other of
Mr. Foxes, ( when I give my own conceptions of the point) and that in the first
place, (though they be last named) because they hold so little consonancy with
my own Opinion, and (as I Judge) with the Truth: and herein my method shall be
first to declare ( Negatively) what is not the mind of the Holy Ghost among
those various Interpretations: and then [ Positively] what (according to the
best Scripture Light God gives me) is the true sense.

306. I come now to cast in my own mite, (such as it is) not without trembling
and astonishment, and that on a 3 fold Consideration; 1. The abstruse
difficulty and mysteriousness of this Subject; which may well be Reckoned among
Peter's, [(...)] 2 Pet. 3.16. things hard to be understood: it is such a profound
mystery, as Angels can but peep into it, [(...)] 1 Pet. 1.12. and such an one,
as cost John many tears to understand, Rev. 5.4. This Consideration makes me
cry out, [(...)] Oh the depth of the Wisdom of God, Romans 11.33. It causes me
to admire the profoundity of the Scripture, to kiss the Book and to lay it
down, and to weep over my own Ignorance, and to cry, Oh when shall I know as I
am known, 1 John 4.2. Gal. 4.9.

307. The 2d. Consideration is, the mistakes that so many famous lights of the
Church have been found in, about it: Some out-living their own Conjectures, and
finding them false, have been constrained to confess that they were on the dark
side of the Cloud when they wrote them: Others (though not living so long) has
yet been confuted by time, which is the surest comment upon dark Prophesies:
the 3d. Consideration is, the Consciousness I have of my own inability for so
great a Work, which would pinch the Shoulders of an Angel: if it be said who is
sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2.16. much less, poor I, that am less then
all the Servants of God.

308. Yet that which encourages me against those Discouragments is, that all
sufficiency comes from God, 2 Cor. 3.5. that he has promised his Spirit to
them that ask him, Luke 11.13. that this Spirit does [ removere prohibentia]
and [ applicare auxiliatoria] that the Lord puts Treasure into Oyster shells,
[(...)] 2 Cor. 4.7. and conveys water of Life through a Leaden Pipe, as well as
through Golden ones: that he has promised blessedness to such as Read and
Search this Book, Rev. 1.3. and his Spirit of Truth to guide into all Truth,
Joh. 16.13. I would therefore come forth in the Strength of the Lord, Psalm.
71.16. and plow with his Heifer to find out his Riddle, Judge. 14.18.

309. I how shall assay this great Work, according to the best Light the Father
of Light gives, by whose help a Lamb may swim, where an Elephant may sink down
into the bottom: and 1st. Negatively, (according to my propounded Method) the
first Opinion I have to speak to, is that of our Godly Martyrologist Mr. Fox,
whose notion I cannot assent to, for those following Reasons; 1. His changing
Months into Weeks seems not to hold a clear consonancy with the ordinary
current of Scripture, (which of puts Days for Years, as Number. 14.^4. and Ezekiel.
4.5,6.) but never (that I know of) are Months put for Weeks.

310. My 2d. Reason is, that the Revelation is a general Prophecy of occurences
to come from John's time, to the end of the World, beginning at the 4th. Chap.
to the end of the Book, (as the 3 first Chap. contain 7. Epistles to 7.
particular Churches which were then in being) Christ comes to show John things
that must shortly come to pass, Rev. 1.1. and the the time was at hand when
those things (Represented to him in a Vision) should begin to be put in
Execution, v. 3. then Chapter 4. v. 1. Christ calls up John, saying, come up hither
and I will show thee things that must be hereafter.

311. Now those two things being seriously pondered: 1. That the Revelation is
not an History of things past, but a Prophecy of things to come, which were to
Commence after John's writing it, in regard of their first beginning: and 2ly.
That John wrote this Book about 94 Years after Christ, thence (I say) it may
strongly be concluded, that the Persecution of John Baptist by Herod can be no
part of this Prophetical Vision, being a dispensation long before executed: and
preceded in time not only all the parts of the Prophecy, but also the 7.
Churches then in being.

312. I shall add other Reasons in the sequel against this Opinion as it has a
coincidency with that of Dr. Beards, (about the Pagan Empire) it shall suffice
now to say, that as Simon Magus could not be the Antichrist, (spoken of in the
Revelation) because that was a story that was expired long before the writing
of this Prophetic Book (as before is spoke of in the 15. and 16. Paragraph)
so, much less can that Persecution of the Church before Christ's death, be any
part of that Persecution (foretold of in the Revelation,) which Christ ( after
he was dead, and lived again, Rev. 1.5.18.) showed to John, should afterward
come to pass.

313. Yet the Sanctity of this Godly Mr. Fox, (being so famously known) and his
saying that he received it in a solemn manner by Divine Revelation, and the
event likewise so aptly corresponding thereunto, being all well weighed, his
Opinion may not be scurrilously derided (as it is by some Romish Authors) which
has more probability and Reason it, than a multitude of their idle dreams and
fantastic imaginations; but rather [ cum grano salis] may be charitably
embraced, as a fair Gloss upon the place, among many other Glosses of Holy and
Learned Men.

314. The 2d. Opinion [of Dr. Beards] I cannot close with neither, for those
following Reasons; First, The two Apocaliptick Beasts must contemporize, (1.)
Because the latter Beast is said to exercise all his Power in the Presence of
the first Beast, [(...)] Revel. 13.12. and ((...)) v. 14. both which
expressions makes the 2. Beasts Contemporary, but the Pagan and Antichristian
Empire succeeded one another in a long distance of time; and so Antichrist
showed no wonders in the Presence of the Pagan Empire.

315. Again (2ly.) it is very probable the 2d. Beast is called the false
Prophet, Revel. 19.20. having the same description there that is found in
Revel. 13.12.14. ( that wrought Miracles before him) to wit, the 1st. Beast; so
that in Rev. 19.20. we see the Beast and his Chaplain; to wit, the 1st. and 2d.
Beast, both taken together and cast into the Lake of Fire burning with
Brimstone: as two Inseparable Companions, they are neither separated in their
Rise nor in their Ruin: but it is commonly known, that Antichrist did not Rise
before the Pagan Empire was Ruined: For that was the ((...)) that let him
from appearing, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6.7. there was no Room for Antichrist at Rome, while
it was the Seat of Pagan Emperors.

316. Thus my first Argument or Reason (being thus strengthened with these two
Illustrations) conludes effectually against the Doctors Opinion, that the first
Beast is not the Roman Empire, (see more of this Subject in Paragr. 145. and
146.) neither in respect of its Continuance nor Persecution. My 2d Reason is,
the Roman Empire and this Beast have two differing descriptions, (as both Mr.
Mede, and Mr. Cotton, etc. observes) for the Roman ( Pagan) Empire is
described, Rev. 12.3. with 7. Heads and Ten Horns, (as this first Beast is) but
with this difference in Rev. 12. the 7. Heads had 7. Crowns on their Heads, but
in Rev. 13.1. the Crowns are not on the Heads but on the Horns, which makes a
great difference both in Place and Number; for in Rev. 12. but 7. Crowns, but
in Rev. 13.1. there be Ten.

317. A 3d Argument that will be concluding against his Opinion is, that it is
laid down as a mark of Reprobation, and so of Damnation to give honor to this
first Beast, Rev. 13.8. They that honor this Beast are such, whose names are
not written in the Lambs book of Life: as if it were thus said, they shall
perish eternally, that yield obedience to this Monster of Iniquity (as Mr.
Cotton, and Mr. Mede explains it) but to yield civil Subjection to the Civil
Power (even of a Nero) is not Damnation, but Duty, Rev. 13.3,5.

318. Again a 4th Argument is, that the 42 Months (this first Beast had to
continue) must in all likelihood be reckoned from the healing of the deadly
Wound. Now whereas the Doctor makes this term of time to reach from the first
Foundation of Rome, to its Ruin by Theoderich. Where can we fix (according to
that Notion) either the receiving, or the healing of this Wound? Rome could not
be wounded before it was Rome: and if we fix it on any time after, then it will
overreach its ruin by Theoderick, which he pitches upon.

319. Those Arguments may be improved against the Notion, about the Civil Romans
Empire whether Christian or Pagan, and are concluding against Mr. Fox's
Opinion, as well as Dr. Beard? I shall have an occasion to speak more of those
two Beasts afterward, which will further eneruate those two foresaid Opinions:
and as the Doctor says [that God uses not to praemonstrate to his Church any
certain Periods of her Intestine troubles] I think, the contrary may be
evidenced even in the very Instances of that learned Man: as first, in his
Instance of Jeroboam.

320. The man of God sets down a plain Period of Jeroboams Idolatry, 1 Kin.
13.2. that Josiah ( by name) should carry out, what Jeroboam brought in: and
though this fell out not till 330 Y. after, yet is it as punctually set down in
particular Circumstances, as if it were a Relation of things past, and not a
Praediction of things to come: compare with it, 2 Kin. 22.1,2. and 23.15,16.
Now because the time was long betwixt the Praediction and the Execution; the
Prophecy comes attended with various Confirming Miracles [ as the rending of
the Altar, the withering of Jeroboams hand, and the Restoring of it again] that
it might be believed: and why may not God foretell the Period when Antichrists
Idolatries shall be cast out also.

321. And in his other Instance of Manasseh, God granted his Church some
Prophets in those bad times, to reveal his Counsel concerning the issue of his
Idolatry, 2 Kin. 21.10. and 2 Chronicles. 33.10. God also told his Church by Elijah,
the issue of those two Troublers of Israel [ Ahab and Jezabel] 1 Kin.
21.19,21,23,25. It was foretold, that though this cursed Woman escape the sword
of Hazael, yet Jehu should slay her, 1 Kin. 19.7. compared with 2 Kin.
9.35,36,37. notwithstanding all her Painting, v. 30.

322. Now was the Lord thus gracious to his Church under the Old Test. to
fortell what should become of this painted Strumpet (that for a long time had
banished Gods Prophets, persecuted his People, and set up the Worship of Baal
(painting her self, and attiring her head, to make Jehu (the King) fall in love
with her, 2 Kin. 9.30. and will not the Lord tell his Church under the New
Test. what shall become of this Scarlet Whore (whereof Jezabel was a Type, as
before) who has enchanted the Kings of the Earth so long with her Painted
attirements? Yes, the Lord has said that ( after her Lease of 42 Months) God
will raise up some Jehu's to hate this Whore, and to burn her with fire, Rev.
16.17.

323. This leads me to a 3d Opinion (which I shall speak to also by way of
Refutation) which is not only the Judgment of this very learned Author
aforesaid, but of many other judicious Divines, to wit, that the 1260 Days, or
42 Months are not to be taken literally but mystically, and that they do not
denote any certain definite Time in respect of Human Understanding, but only
this, that God in his Counsel has determined a set bound and limit to the
Persecution of his Church, which cannot be passed over, and though this be
certain to God, yet it is uncertain to us, for it is not given to us to know
times and seasons, Acts 1.7.

324, I must confess, this Notion seems both plausible, safe, and such as would
put an end to many Controversies about the various computations of this Number.
Yea, and the many mistakes of holy and learned Men (about Calculating it) may
be thought some kind of Confirmation of it. Yet how it can be embraced, with
any Faith in Gods word, I cannot satisfy my self for those following Reasons.
1. The title of the book (called a Revelation) show, that it is a manifestation
of Gods secret Counsel concerning his Church, and concerning the World, in
order to his Church (both the fata Imperii and Ecclesiae) to the end of the
World.

325. And this not only in general terms, but it is a distinct and particular
Discovery of all the eminent passages and pauses of Providence, that appertains
unto the Church in the World; It was a Revelation given by the Father to the
Son (as he was the Churches Mediator) to acquaint his Servant with it, and not
to keep it to himself. Now we may not say, that God revealed those concernments
of the Church in general terms only to his Son, or that this Lion of the tribe
of Judah, did not open this sealed Book wide (or well) enough: this would not
have stayed John's great Weeping, Rev. 5.6,8. and besides, it takes away a great
part of that Comfort (for which this book of the Revelation was given to the
Church in those Ages of her Persecution) to say, it contains only general
Intimations, and is not a distinct Revelation.

326. My 2d Reason or Argument against this Opinion is, It makes the Ante-Nati
to see and know more then the Post-Nati: the old Testam. Church (that was
before Christ) to have greater Privileges then the new Testam. Church that was
after him: as if the former of those two Men ( which bare the cluster of Grapes
between them on a staff, Number. 13.23.) had an equal, yea, a fairer View of that
cluster ( so carried) then he that followed after with his face toward it:
whereas the face of the other was from it.

327. The Old Testam. Church had revealed to her how long her Bondage in Egypt,
her Captivity in Babylon, and her Persecution by Antiochus should continue: and
shall not the Church under the New Testam. have it as distinctly revealed to
her, how long her Bondage in Spiritual Egypt, her Captivity in Mystical
Babylon, and her Persecution under Antichrist (whereof Antiochus was the Type)
shall continue? This is to advance the Privileges by Moses, above those by the
Messiah, as if the Twilight of the Church in her Minority and Nonage (under
Shadows and Ceremonies) exceeded the Noonday of the Gospel Church, which has
her face toward Christ, and to which God has spoken by his Son, Heb. 1.1,2,

328. A third Argument or Reason against this Opinion is, when an indefinite
time is intended by the Holy Ghost by a definite. His manner is, not to use
Phrases wherein broken Numbers are, but whole, as in those words of Jacob to
Laban [ thou have changed my wages ten times, Gea. 31.41.] so in Numb. 14.22.
in both which places, a certain Number is put for an uncertain, this is usual
in Scripture, as Job 19.3. Zech. 8.23. Lev. 26.26. but still by a whole ( not
by a broken) Number: yea, in Christ's words, Mat. 18.22. ( till 77 times) there
is a round Number used, for Peter's 7 is only multiplied into seventy times 7.
to signify often or many times: but here in 42 Months, and in 1260. Days broken
Numbers are expressed as well as the whole, and neither of them are any where
in Scripture Phrase used for Indefinite time.

CHAP. XII.
329. THe 4th Opinion to be refuted in this Negative part is, the whole
Computation (which all those learned and holy Men aforesaid have made) that
has universally (as one man) fallen short of the truth, both those that has
calculated by Daniel, and those by John distinctly, yea and those, by both
jointly. None of them reckoning Antichrists Term beyond 1666. Y. which is now
expired, yet Antichrist lives, and the Seat of the Beast stands. This
Confutation is not by me, but by time (the best Interpreter of this Book) only
some of them has a Reserve of 45 Years.

330. Had not time it self (which brings forth the most infallible Comments
upon abstruse Prophecies: yea, turning dark Prophecies into plain History)
broken the Ice for me, in my praevaricating from their Opinions,; I should not
have adventured to have grappl'd with them, for it is Impar congressus [an
unequal match] as that of Troitus with Achilles, especially with them all at
once. If Hercules (himself) may not contend with two at once, much less poor I
(who am [(...)] the least of Saints, and the greatest of Sinners) may
contradict such great Lights of the Church; famous in their Generation, and Men
of renown: That was but a ridiculous Confutation of Bellarmine by two Words. [
Mentiris Bellarmine] and such an one might mine (of those blessed Souls) seem
to be, had not the issues of Providence made for me an unanswerable Argument
against them.

331. Notwithstanding those eminent Servants of Christ have seemed to miss the
Mark, and their Conjectures do (none of them) hold Consonancy with present
dispensations of Time and Providence: yet may we find out some Salvo's (besides
the Reserve of 45 Y. hereafter to be spoke of in Paragr. 441. whereby they may
be brought of from any disgraceful mistakes; as 1st. The uncertainty of
Chronologies. 2ly. The Variety of Computations from several Periods of
Antichrist. 3ly. The difficulty of computing the Time both of the Churches
bondage in Egypt, and of her Captivity in Babylon, though the Period of both
was plainly recorded.

332. Of all those I shall speak in Order (to say nothing of the Sobriety of
those holy Men in their Conjectures, and their disclaiming all confidence
therein) which shall be as a Prologue to the positive part that is next to be
spoken to, wherein I shall lay down my own Apprehensions, and yet not be too
positive, nor peremptory or dogmatical therein: but so far as I think, I have
the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. and 7.6.

333. First of the uncertainty of Chronologies. A mistake may fall out either
sooner or later in those Computations, from the vulgar Reckoning of the Y.
1666. It may fall over this account (that is common) as well as under, because
Chronologers confess themselves, that the vulgar account of Years from Christ
has not been certainly preserved. This is testified by Arnobius in his Apology
[ Trecenti sunt anni ferme minus vel plus aliquid ex quo coepimus esse
Christiani] about 300 Y. under or over. If the precise point of Time could not
be determined then (so near Christ) without difficulty, much more afterward,
when the Hundreds became a Thousand, etc.

334. The Computation of Time from the Creation of the world to Christ has
been made in much variety: we find above twenty several accounts thereof
(differing one from another) in Alsteds Encuclopaedia, page 2993. now if there
were such uncertainty in that Chronology before Christ (wherein the Records of
the Old Testament go all along, as a thread for guidance in this Labyrinth) how
much more in this Chronology since Christ (which has not that advantage of the
Scripture Chronicle to guide it beyond a 100. Years) if there were many years
Variety in that, how much more in this.

335. Of all kinds of Learning, Chronology was rudest in the Primitive times,
so that in the first Centuries after Christ there is much obscurity; few
Christian Chronologies were then preserved, for the Pagans that were cruel to
kill the Authors, would not be so kind as to preserve their Books. Baronius
(himself) despairs of giving any perfect Story of this time, and Parker
compares it to Archimedes Sepulcher, which was so overgrown with Weeds, that
Cicero could not get a perfect knowledge of it, so (says this good Man)
Antiqua adeo Temporis longinquitate exesa sunt and Antichristi dumetis obsepta,
ut haud ea attingamus. We cannot get an Infallible account thereof.

336. That there is difference in Chronology appears in this, that Helvicus and
others Reckons two Years short of the Vulgar, as 1664. for 1666. there be other
Chronologers that Reckon as much over, as 1666. for 1664. and it comes to pass
in their computing a Princes Reign, a whole Year is allowed to the beginning of
his Reign, and a whole Year to his ending; though another begin in that Year or
the last Year of the Predecessor made but one with the first of the Successor:
This brings a variation in Chronologies, even in latter times, (besides the
obscurity of former times) So that 4. or 5. Years difference breaks not the
Square.

337. I come 2ly. to the 2d. Salvo, taken from the sundry Periods of
Antichrist, and that in a two fold Respect; (1.) In respect of his Rise, and
(2ly.) In respect of his Ruin: in regard of his Rise there be various
Reckonings; (1.) Some Reckon the 42. Months, from Antichrists Conception,
(2ly.) Others from the sharp Throes in the Womb of Rome before his Birth;
(3ly.) Others again do account from his Birth and breaking out into the World:
There be some (4ly.) that Reckon from his ascending the Throne; Others (5ly.)
From his higher advancement; and ( lastly) Some from his very (...), the
Top-gallant of his Luciferian Pride, and then was he both Risen and Revealed
indeed.

338. No wonder then if from those several Epocha's or Periods of his Rise,
many good men have made various Calculations of those 42. Months, especially if
we consider also; (2ly.) The several Periods of his Ruin to be Reckoned to; as
1st. Of his Seat and Kingdom under the 5th. Vial; 2ly. Of his Person under the
6th. and 3ly. The utter Extirpation of all Antichristianism, under the 7th.
Vial: Thus both a differing ( Terminus a quo) and a differing ( Terminus ad
quem,) must yield various Calculations.

339. The 3d. Salvo is the difficulty of Computing the Time, both of the
Egyptian Bondage and Babylonish Captivity, where Chronology is infallible, as
composed by the Holy Ghost; 1. Of the Bondage of Egypt: there be two
Computations of this, one is 400. Years, Genesis 15.13. Act. 7.6. and the other is
430. Years, Exodus 12.41. Gal. 3.13. Now the reason of this difference, is the
different placing of the Foot of the Account; for the first account begins at
the Birth of Isaac, which according to strict Calculation, makes 405. which
broken Number is omitted in the whole, for in a great Number, so small a Number
comes under no particular Account, as we say the 70. Interpreters usually;
whereas they that turned the Hebrew Bible into Greek were 72.

340. But the 2d. Account begins, from Gods promise of Canaan, (made first to
Abraham in the 75. Years of his Age, Genesis 12.7. and upon his first passage into
Egypt, v. 10.) which was 25. years before the birth of Isaac, compare Genesis
12.4. with Genesis 21.5. Now how it came into Moses heart to Visit his brethren,
is hard to say: it is said, he supposed that his brethren would understand, that
God by his hand, would deliver them at that time, which was 40. years before
the true expiration of the promise: whether Moses were at that time acquainted
with this promise thoroughly, and with the true Period of it, (because he wrote
the Book of Genesis (as it is thought) in Midian) or he mistook the time of its
Expiration, is not very easy to determine.

341. To find out the true and undoubted Period of this bondage in Egypt, was
not easy in Moses time without a Divine Revelation, not only because of the
variety of accounts, (as abovesaid) but also from the obscurity of that Word in
Genesis 15.13. and Act. 7.6. ( They shall afflict them ( or evil entreat them)
400. Years) as if they should be in bondage and afflicted for so long a time:
whereas it appears, that the one half of this time was spent before Isreal's
going down into Egypt: only 60. years in tolerable Servitude, and after that
80. years more under intolerable Tyranny, falling out within the 400. years,
yet not lasting so long.

342. Secondly, as to that Captivity in Babylon, God told his People that it
should last 70. Years, Jerem. 25.9,12.29.10. and at the end of that Term, they
should be set free; but where to fix the head of this account and from whose
Reign, or what year to Commence the Computation: there is not a little
Controversy, (even to this day) Some conceiving that those 70. years begin at
Zedekiahs Captivity, (because then Jerusalem was utterly destroyed) and it is
said, that the Land should enjoy her Sabbaths in her desolations thus long, 2
Cron. 36.21.

343. Secondly, Others reckon them from the 4th. of Jehoiakim; because it is the
date of Jeremys Prophecy concerning this Term, Jer. 25.1. about which time
Nebuchadnezzar (giving a great Foil to Pharaoh-Necho) Invades Judea in his way
homeward, takes Jerusalem, and carries Daniel and others Captive, Dan. 1.1,3,4.
and Jer. 46.2. There is yet a 3d. Opinion concerning this 70. years, (which is
most probable) to wit, the commencing of this account between both the
aforesaid, at the Captivity of Jeconiah, Jer. 22.24.26. Eight years after the
latter of those Terms, 2 Kings 24.8.16. for then all but the poorer sort were
carried Captive; and the Prophet Jeremy reckons from that Captivity, in Chap.
29.1,2.

344. Those several Computations must needs trouble the Jews, who were careful
enough (it seems) to number those Years, Zech. 1.12. especially if it be
granted that there were Two 70: years mentioned, to have two several Periods;
the One to end in the first year of Cyrus, and the other (beginning at the
Eleventh year of Zedekiah) to end at the 2d. of Darius, as Zech. 1.1. with v.
12. Intimates. This diversity would (doubtless) not only puzzle the ordinary
Jews, (with their Priests and Levites, who said Hag. 1.2. Sometime, the time is
not yet come) but even Daniel himself (in his consulting with Books, Dan.
9.1,2.) had he not been an Extraordinary Prophet.

345. And we do not find that this Daniel returned with the rest from the
Captivity, (not upon that sordid account that the posterity of Selah did, who
preferred their Service to the King of Babylon, above the Privileges of the
Land of Promise, 1 Chronicles. 4.22,23. nor because he doubted the time was not yet
come, as those forenamed) but to promote the cause of Gods People (in his old
age) which met with many obstructions for a Eleven years, from the first of
Cyrus, to the second of Darius Hystaspes, and which made the People say, ( the
time is not yet come, Hag. 1.2.) they had several Returns; One under Zerubabel,
Ezr. 2.2. Another under Ezra, Ezr. 8.1. (besides that of Nehemiah) all which
made the Account obscurer.

346. It follows then, if there were so much difficulty in computing those
Numbers, (both of Isreal's bondage in Egypt, and of their Captivity in Babylon,
whereof there were infallible Chronologies, and infallible Prophets to
interpret them) If (I say) there were any mistakes then, about the commencement
and determination of those years, (as the time is come, and the time is not
come) it must not be wondered at now, if so many Learned men have mistaken in
the Calculation of those Apocaliptick Numbers, wherein (besides their own
fallibility in placing the head of their Accounts) the Uncertainty of Human
History, makes it more difficult.

347. And here I shall take occasion to show, that Antichrist is not looked on
as a domestic Foe, (according to the Notion in Paragr. 304) for his afflicting
the Church, is compared to the bondage of Egypt, and Captivity of Babylon,
(both which were Extrinsick, not Intrinsic Foes) hence the Plagues on the
Kingdom of the Beast, bears proportion with those on Egypt: Compare Revel.
16.2. with Exodus 9.10.11. Deuteronomy. 28.27.35. and Revel. 16.12. compared with
Jerem. 50.38. and 51.32. besides Rome is called Egypt and Babylon; Yea, and
Romanists are called Gentiles, (which are not domestic Foes) Revel. 11.2.
being Idolaters as they were.

348. Now come I to the positive part, which I call so, as it is contradistinct
to the negative (which was last discussed) not because I intend to be positive
or peremptory herein, but rather, laying aside both Confidence and Curiosity, I
shall declare what I judge most probable, and consonant to Scripture ( about
the fall of Antichrist) with all sobriety; not so much Thetically, as
Hypothetically. Not by Positions so much as by Suppositions; and the cogent
necessity hereof lays in those 3 Salvo's forenamed, to wit, the uncertainty of
Chronology, the variety of Periods, and the difficulty (even) of Scriptural
Computations expressly declared by God, and now already fulfilled by him.

346. If there be controversy about beginning those Accounts (though of
Dispensations that are past, and of Promises that are fulfilled) amongst the
best Chronologers at this day: How much more difficult must it needs be, to
pitch upon a certain period of Time for the fall of Antichrist, which is a
dispensation yet to come, and the promise hereof only expected to be
accomplished. The highest attainment of notions herein, can but amount to a
probable Conjecture, and the many Mistakes of good Men (that are extant at this
day) does much confirm it, [ Aliena errata me cautum faciunt.] Other men's
mistakes make me wary.

350. To find out therefore by Scripture Light what I conceive most probable
about this great Subject, I shall wave those numbers of Daniel (which so many
have insisted on, as before manifested) because they are obvious to sundry
Exceptions, ( As that they have already had their accomplishment in Antiochus,
etc.] and keep to the Apocaliptick number, against which no such exception can
be made.

351. The Apocaliptick Number being taken for granted, to hold out the
undoubted Term or Lease of Antichrists Reign in the world, to wit, 42 Months
which (being dissolved by Reduction into days, allowing 30 days to a month,
according to the old account) make up the just sum of 1260 Days. Those two
Computations (of 42 Months and 1260 Days) being granted to be one and the same,
for though they be mentioned apart in Rev. 12.6. and chapter 13.5. yet are those
two numbers put together in Rev. 11.2,3. that by this linking them together all
doubt might be taken away in accounting the 42 Months to be the same
Computation with 1260 Days.

352. And it being taken [ pro Concesso] likewise, that those 1260 Days are not
Solar days (either Natural of 24 hours, or Artificial, from Sunrise to
Sunset) but Prophetical days, as in Daniels Week or 7 Days, which signify 7
Years. Dan. 9.24,26. So 30 Days for 30 Y. and 1260 Days for 1260 Years (as 70
seven-nights of Days signify in the Prophet 490 Y.) thus also in Ezekiel. 4.5,6.
and Number. 14.34. ut supra. Upon this Hypothesis I build my Conjecture about the
Ruin of Antichrist, granting him ( according to Gods Lease to him) 1260 Y. to
continue in the World.

353. Now for guiding us in this intricate Labyrinth of Reckoning the
continuance of Antichrists Kingdom, the Holy Ghost has given us some certain
Hints and Intimations, which (like Ariadne'e Thread) may help us herein: for
the greatest knot of difficulty in this Work has evermore been acknowledged,
to find out where to foot the account. Now may we but meet with direction from
Scripture, where the Epoch or Root of this Account must begin, it will be
manifest enough where to end it: namely at the Expiration of those 1260 Years.

CHAP. XIII.
354. THe first of those Scriptural Hints or Intimations for footing our
Account, is in Rev. 17.12. from the rising of the 10 Kingdoms. The Holy Ghost
says expressly there, that the ten Kings should receive power ( as Kings) one
hour with the Beast; which phrase implies, that they both had their Rise about
the same time, and in the same Age, [(...)] is, in some Readings, at one hour,
as in Joh. 4.52. [(...)] is translated at the 7th hour; and this Reading
plainly imports, that the 10 Kings rose with the Beast, and the Beast rose with
the 10 Kings at one and the same hour; the 10 Kings be the 10 Horns of the
Beast that bears them.

355. And though (in the course of Nature) horns do grow up after the Beast be
come forth into the World; yet it is not so in this monstrous Beast, for he
brings his horns with him, Rev. 13.1. the Beast that bears the Horns, and the
10 Horns rise together at one hour: and now our work is to make enquiry when
the Ten horn received their power (...) Kings. Chronicles does show us, how the
Goths and Vandals broke off from the Imperial Yoke sundry Nations which were
subject to it, and gave opportunity to set up those ten Kingdoms, which remain
in Europe to this day.

356. Those ten Horns rose not all at once, but gradually (as was observed
before of the Beast that bears them) now the first rising of any of those
Horns, was in the days of the Emperor Honorius about the Y. of Christ 410. when
the Emperor (being driven away from his Imperial Seat by those barbarous
Nations) was constrained for the recovering of Rome again, to allow them by
Covenant to set up a Kingdom in France (that was the 1st Horn) and about the Y.
415. the same Honorius was forced to allow the like in Spain, and by the Y.
456. all the 10 Horns ( who gave their Kingdoms to the Beast) were up.

357. This is not only confirmed to us by Sigonius, Sleidan, Orosius, Alsted,
Pareus, etc. but also by the Jesuit Petavius, in his Rationarii Temporum part
prima, lib. 6. page 275. writing thus, [ Alaricum ut averteret Honorius,
Gallias and Hispanias ei concessit, etc.] Now after that Gensericus the Vandal
had spoiled Rome, about the Year 456. or not much after, not only those two
Horns of France and Spain were extant, but the whole Empire appeared to be
divided into ten Kingdoms, which (...) had all one mind, and gave their power
and strength to the Beast, Rev. 17.13. that he should rule in their Dominions,
and so though they had the title of Kings, yet they obeyed, rather then ruled.

358. Now if we take this hint and character of the Holy Ghost, and reckon from
it, not from the appearance of the first of those Horns about 410. (though then
was laid the foundation of the Beasts Kingdom) but from the time that all the
10 Horns were set up (for he is represented in his Rising as a complete Beast,
having 7 Heads ( to plot with) and 10 Horns ( to push with against the Church
of God) those ten horns or Kingdoms must set up Antichrist, and those ten Horns
were all come forth about the Y. 456. to which, if we add those 1260 Y. it will
make Antichrists period to fall out about 1716.

359. I must acknowledge this Rev. 17.12. will admit of various
Interpretations, as this [(...)] may be taken indefinitely, for a short space,
as in those Phrases [ this is your hour, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53.
and ( the hour of temptation Rev. 3.10.) and tho we take it thus, it is yet
comfortable; for neither the Pope nor his ten Horns shall abide for ever, it is
but for a short space, v. 10. but for an hour, it is but short to God, though
long to us: and [(...)] may be read after the Beast, as signifying, those ten
Kingdoms rose after Antichrist; but we read it not so, and however it is not long
after, it is but an hour after; they both rise in the same Age, this Beast puts
forth his horns betimes.

360. The 2d Hint or Intimation, the Holy Ghost gives to us to guide our
reckoning herein, is in 2 Thessalonians. 2.5,6,7. the removal of the Roman Empire from
the Seat of the Beast, that was [(...), that (...) quasi (...)] hindered his
Revelation, though the Apostle does not specify it, for exasperating the
persecuting Emperors (who promised to themselves [ aeterna Romae] or eternity
of Imperial Rule) against the poor Christians, as Austin, Jerome, etc. very
probably affirm: now as the rising of the 10 Horns is contemporary with
Antichrist, so is the removal of this Impediment of his Revelation, as the
Apostles [(...) time] and [(...) then] here do plainly intimate.

361. This is such an undeniable Argument, that the Romanists (themselves) not
only acknowledge it, but makes it also a ground of their Objection against us
(that Antichrist is not yet come; which has been answered in Paragraph 154,
155. supra and 185. together with the 10th Clause of the Induction: 56. and
130. to 138. The time of this removal therefore must be the very [(...)] or
point of time, wherein this term of 1260 Y. must be footed, because it is the
time, wherein he was revealed, and the Computation must be (not from his 1st
Rising to be) but from that Rising which was his Revelation.

362. Hierome (who lived in the times of the first Incursion of the barbarous
Nations into Italy, etc. and wrote so complainingly of it, (dying in the Y.
420.) he when he saw Rome taken, and those Barbarians rending in pieces the
Western Empire, said then in those times (in his Epistle ad Ageruch.) [ qui
tenebat, de medio sublaturus est, and non intelligimus Antichristum
appropinquare] he seeing the Empire breaking, said, that Antichrist must needs
be at hand: our work then is to find out the time, when Rome was relinquished
by the Emperors in point of Government, and seized on by the Pope, that must
be the head of the Account.

363. Now in this Enquiry we may observe, first that Antichrist rose up to a
manifestation upon the ruins of the Roman Empire, this is proved not only from
this 2 Thessalonians. 2.6,7. [ he that lets, must be taken away] but from Rev.
13.1,11. [the Beast arises not till the Dragon be cast down (Rev. 12.) and the
Dragons seat is resigned to him, Rev. 13.2.] Yea and from Rev. 17.9,10,11. [
five are fallen, and one is] to wit, the Caesar's in John's time, the falling of
one Head, was the rising of another till the last. 2ly. Observe the Roman
Empire began its ruin after the death of Theodosius the first, when it was
rent in twain betwixt his two Sons, the Eastern part to Arcadius, and the
Western to Honorius (who was socordis ingenii, of a slothful disposition)
under whom Rome was taken by the Barbarians.

364. Observe 3ly. that the Western Caesar (which was the 6. Head, as to Rome)
did fall down in that fatal diminutive name of Augustulus (whom Petavius calls
Momyllus) in the Y. of Christ 476. then (says the Jesuit) [ Imperium
Occidentale desitum est] this Western Empire was forsaken, which after molder'd
into an ignoble Exarchate, whose Seat was not Rome, but Ravenna. See for this
Petavius, Rationarii Temporum pars 1. lib. 6. page 304. and lib. 7. page 346.
(that is good Proof which is fetched from an Adversary) and Alsted. Eucuclop.
lib. 20. cap. 22. page 3012. Thus the (...), or let being removed, and the Seat
(as it were) resigned. Antichrist had a fair opportunity to reveal himself to
be the seventh Head.

365. And whereas, it may be said here that the Pope of Rome (for many Years
after that this Roman Hesperus was set in Augustulus) did surrogate the Kings
of France (who were afterward of Germany) into the name and title of Caesar's.
I answer, in usurping his Authority of surrogating and deputing of Caesar's, he
revealed himself to be Antichrist, besides the Mystery of keeping up the name
of the Caesar's, was to gull the world that the 6. Head was still standing, and
that he might not appear to be the last Head. Now if we take this hint and
reckon as high as we can, from Augustulus (as some do) 476. added to 1260. make
1736. a Date longer then before. This account of 1736. ( cum exibunt tempora
Bestiae, si ducantur ab Augustulo) Mr. Mede was much taken with. See his Letter
to the Bishop of Armagh, in Diatribe 4. page 334. he shows that the Chronology
of the Samaritan Pentateuch (set out by Dr. Usher) makes that year 1736. to
make up the 6000. year of the World, and then the Sabbatical 1000. or Millenary
to begin.

366. The 3d Intimation the Holy Ghost gives us for a right Computing the time
of Antichrist is, in Rev. 12.3. [ from the healing of the deadly wound] the
Beast had 7 heads, which are explained to be 7 Hills, or 7 Kings and
Monarchies, Rev. 17.9,10. for his extraordinary Sovereignty: now the wound that
was given him, was by a Sword, Rev. 13.14. which could not be made in any of
the Hills (whereon the Beast was placed) but in one of those Monarchies: and it
cannot be meant, that the wound was made in the 6. Head (either Pagan or
Christian Emperors as before, Parag. 314.) for that wound was never healed
again, as the Jesuit Petavius and others unanimously acknowledge.

267. It follows then, that this wound must be found in the 7th Head, this
Pontifex Maximus, that makes himself the Head of the Church (which the Caesar's,
Constantine and Theodosius utterly disclaimed) yea, and the wound seemed mortal
and incurable [(...), as if wounded to death] which Alaricus (in the 19. Y. of
Caesar Honorius) gave this Head, insomuch that the Beast locked up himself in
his den at Ravenna; the Church was then beheaded, and yet the wound was made
deeper, and more desperate by Ataulphus ( who would have changed the name of
Rome into his own name [ Ataulphas] and by Gensericus, Odoacer, Theoderick and
Totilas. As Rome began in a diminutive name, to wit, Romulus (which would not
be called Romula, from her Founder, for the fatality of that name, but Roma) so
her Empire ended in another diminutive, in Augustulus by Odoacer, and made
wholly desolate by Totilas.

367. This was such a Wound, that this 7th Head which had been long striving
for universal Supremacy, and to be Lord Paramount in the World, was under an
universal Neglect, and himself utterly discouraged: for the Eastern Emperor
(with whom he had fallen out before, about Images) though invited, refused to be
an healer of his Wound; and all Nations began to despise this Head, that was
now become a servant to Barbarians.

369. Thus we see the wounded Head here to be no other then the 7th Government,
to wit, the Pope which makes up the first Argument ( against those Opinions
forecited) that the 1st Beast has relation to Antichrist in this Rev. 13. a 2d
Argum. to prove this, is drawn from the description of the 1st Beast: as (1st)
in his blasphemous mouth ( blaspheming both the Lord of the house and the house
of God, and those that dwell therein (where can this be found more then in this
Antichrist, who blasphemes (1) against the Name of God, not only in assuming to
himself Gods divine incommunicable Properties, but ascribing Divine honor to
Images, as Esa. 65.7. and Ezekiel. 20.27,28. and in his pardons for Sin, Mark 2.7.

370. 2ly. He also blaspheems Gods Tabernacle, which is either the natural Body
of Christ (who is said to tabernacle amongst us, Joh. 1.14. and 2.19. Heb.
9.11.) by his Transubstantiating Priests, adoring Bread for Christ, or this
Tabernacle is the mystical Body of Christ (which is the Church, 1 Cor. 3.19.)
by his reproaching it under the names of Conventicles and Schismatical
companies: yea, and those Saints that are in Heaven do not escape his
blasphemies, in his putting upon them Divine honor, not only Invocating them,
but also dedicating both Days and Temples to them: (2ly.) the Pope is like this
first Beast (as in blasphemy) so in Persecution v. 7. and thus the Waldenses in
the 12. Century (whom the Pope persecuted) understood him to be this very
Beast, saying to his Champions, we know ye must overcome us, for God has said,
the Beast shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them, Rev. 13.7.

371, A third Argument to prove Antichrist this Beast is, from his Identity
with the 2d Beast, which all acknowledge to be Antichrist, for Antichrist does
not always appear in one shape, but sometimes in one shape, and sometimes in
another; sometimes as Dominus in Temporalibus, and so he makes himself the
Moses of Israel, and at other times, as Dominus in Spiritualibus, and so he
becomes their Aaron or High Priest. and though he got his Temporal power after
his Spiritual (so it is the younger of the two) yet it is first represented, as
Moses (the younger Brother) is placed before Aaron the Elder.

372. This Opinion may not seem improbable, that both the 2 Beasts hold out one
Antichrist: for the first reason is, one Elephant ( propter ingentem
magnitudinem, qua instar plurium est) for his vast bigness, is called Behemoth
(Job 40.15.) which is the Hebr. plur. foem. as if many Beasts in one, why may
not this great Monster ( Antichrist) be resembled by two Beasts, who indeed is
a compound of many beasts (all Heresies centring in him) or a Beast of beasts
(as the Song of songs) by way of Eminency: and as the Elephant is said to be
the chiefest of the ways of God, Job 40.19. so Antichrist is chiefest of the
ways of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. ut supra.

373. The (2d) reason (that makes it probable) is, if the first Beast do not
hold out Antichrist, then the Holy Ghost has not (at all) set down the term of
Antichrists continuance in the World; which is contrary to the whole current of
Expositors, who all understand the Term of Antichrists Reign to be included in
the 42 Months, or 1260 days or years of the first Beast. Now we do not find any
such express terms of Time about the 2d Beast, how long he shall continue: as
to that number of the Beast 666. I have showed at large ( ut supra) that it
cannot hold out the Number of his Beginning nor of his Ending, which a little
Arithmetic or Human Wisdom might easily compute, and this is not called Wisdom
with God, the wisdom of this World is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 1.20.

374. But lastly the third Reason which renders it most probable is, that those
two Beasts are one and the same, because there is but one Beast mentioned in
Rev. 17.8. (which is the Holy Ghosts interpretation of the Beast, spoken of in
the 13. chap.) he does not speak of two Beasts, but ( the Beast which thou saw,
etc.) as in Daniel, the interpretation of the Visions follows the Visions
themselves, so does Rev. 17. interpret the Vision of the Beast in chap. 13.
yea, Mr. Medes (notion of the 10 Popish Kings) and Mr. Cottons (of the Cathol.
Church) makes a complex Antichrist.

375. Those things being premised, I come more clearly to speak of the healing
of this deadly wound in this 6th Head, which we find in History, to be done not
per saltum, but gradually, as an old wound (of an 140 Y. standing) required:
the first Plaster that was applied to it, was by Justinian the Emperor, in the
5. Century, not only by the Expulsion of the Barbarians out of Italy by his two
Generals, Bellisarius and Narses, but especially by his Constitutions (called
Novellae and Authenticae) wherein the Decree was, that the Bishop of old Rome
according to the Canons of the holy Councels should have the Primacy of all
Priests.

376. But assuredly it was never perfectly healed, till Phocas (the Parricide)
closed up the wound about the year 606. granting to Boniface the third, that he
should be Ecumenical Bishop (having all the World for his Diocese) and chief
in honor as well as in Order, ( hic Imperator facinorosus Pontifici Romano
omnia indulgebat, ut facinora sua expiaret) Phocas yielded to the Pope (who
insinuated into his favor) this Superiority: Those two Beasts, or beastly Men
licked each other, and the Head was so perfectly cured by him, that presently
all the World wondered after it, when thus recovering of its wound. Now the term
of 42 Months or 1260 Y. being given to the Beast after the healing of this
wounded Head; it is an hint (I say) that we must reckon from Phocas his healing
it in Y. 606. which brings his fall still lower to 1866.

377. There is a fourth Intimation, which (because it is a Criticism) I shall
not insist on, to wit, Rev. 13.5. power was given [ to continue (...), to make
war 42. months] as v. 7. he made war against the Saints, so that all
Antichrists term shall be a Warring against the Church: now from this hint we
are to inquire when Antichrist began his war, wherein Blood was shed, and
Cities destroyed (as the Gr. word (...) signifies, (...) much blood) this was
not till the 12. Century ag. the Waldenses, for 1. he was admired, 2. spoke
great things, and lastly warred, this brings it still lower, but because
[(...)] is not in some Copies, it is not in Montanus, nor in the Syriack, nor
in the Aethiopick, nor in the vulgar Latin. I insist not upon it.

378. Yet allowing our own Reading, as Authentic, (because it is not safe to
allow of Corruptions in Originals, seeing the Arabic Reading has it [ making
War] it plainly holds out, that the Beast had this Lease of 42. Months given
him; not only to be admired in the World, and in the Superstitious minds of his
Worshippers for so long a time; yea, and not only to speak great things with
his blasphemous mouth, in his Pardons and Thundering excommunications for such a
term also: but likewise to make War against the Church, (as War is taken
largely and not strictly) seeing that all those Three are joined together by
the Holy Ghost, and it is so expressly mentioned (in our Greek Copy) Power was
given him to make War 42. Months, Rev. 13.4,5.

379. The whole Reign of the Beast, is [ quodam modo] a certain kind of War and
opposition against the Church: for the Devil is her restless Adversary, and
never departs from her, but as he departed from her Lord, only for a season,
Luke 4.13. once in the Month he will be sure to assault her, and thus he makes
the Beast fulfill those 42. Prophetical Months, though there may be some lucida
intervalla (some Respit.) Thus the Red-Dragon makes three Assaults or
Persecutions, in Revel. 12. The first is against the Man-Child (which that
glorious Primitive Church, (clothed with the Sun, etc.) after many strong
Prayers for a Nursing Father in the Empire, and after ten sharp Throes in the
10. Persecutions) brought forth, Chap. 12. v. 4.

380. The second Assault was against the Woman (or Church it self) that brought
forth this Man-Child, after he was caught up to God, and to his Throne, v. 5.
and the Dragon being cast out, v. 9.13. Thus when Constantine (that Man-Child)
had destroyed the Dragon, then did the Dragon cast out of his mouth a Flood of
Arrianism to drown the Woman. But the third Assault was against the Woman's
Seed, or Remnant, v. 17. (that kept Gods Commandments) by the Antichristian
Beast, Chapter 13. it is said, he went to make War with them, Chap. 12.17. which is
the same word in Chapter 13.5. [(...)] so that the Beasts Reign is called a making
War with the Seed of the Church.

381. This War or Persecution against the Remnant of the Seed, Antichrist began
betimes after he had got his Kingdom, (as our Martyrologies do show) in all
those ten Kingdoms that belonged to his Jurisdiction, for he had the Sword of
those ten Horns at his Command, to War against this Remnant withal: Those
Kings were to fulfill Antichrists will, Revel. 17.17. and was like so many
Vassal-Kings under the Beast, to go and do at his bidding; Such a Check and
Command he had over them, as the Centurion had over his Soldiers, Matthew. 8.9.

382. If Antichrist say to this King [ Go,] he presently Goes, if to Another [
Come,] he Comes: If to a Third [ do this] he must do it, if he bid any of
those Horns, Go, push this Remnant, Go, Strike them with your Sword, They must
fulfill his will, right or wrong: If he bid them, Go make War against Turks or
Heretics, they went, as appears in the Holy-War, (so called) and in the
Churches Persecutions: he had also his Emissaries (those Fryar-Frogs) that
stirred up People (with promises of universal Pardons) to persecute Heretics,
Rev. 16.13.14. yet all this amounts not to a formal War, (Strictly taken) the
formalis Ratio of War, being a fighting of several Battles betwixt two Parties,
by force of Arms: Now though there were many butcheries and Massacres of the
Saints from the Primitive times, yet properly no War till the 12. Century; for
then the Waldenses took up Arms in their own just defense, (both as Men and as
Christians) against the Popish Croisadoes.

383. There is a 5th. Intimation, to wit, The Woman's dwelling in the
Wilderness, which Mr. Mede makes Contemporary with the Reign of the Beast, and
to begin at the same Instant of time; 1. Because of the Equality of both their
Times, (as 42. Months, and 1260. days being an Equal Number) therefore they
must concur in the whole Intermediate space of Time, from beginning to ending:
2ly. Because upon her entrance into the Wilderness, she meets with this double
Beast, the 10 Horned, and the two Horned one, to the former of which, the
Dragon ( stands on the Seashore) gave his Power and Throne, as he says.

384. But because this also is Encumbered with several Ambiguities, I dare not
insist upon this neither; as 1. It does not necessarily follow, that equal
Times, must be the same Times, for bare Equality hinders not, but some of those
Times may be before, and some after, and so have differing Dates; Therefore Mr.
Mede confesses it is not Infallibly Concluding: 2ly. The Woman's flight into the
Wilderness, if it Commence at Constantines coming to the Crown, and the times
of the Beast Synchronize with it, (as Holy Brightmans opinion was Par. 285.)
this makes the Beasts Expiration long before it is found really to be so by
Experience: Exitus acta probat.

385. A 3d. Encumbrance that this Intimation seems to be perplexed with, is,
that there seems to be a double Computation of the Woman's flight into the
Wilderness, one before the Battle was fought, Revel. 12.6. for the Battle is
related after in ver. 7.8.9. the End of which was, there was no place for the
Dragon in Heaven: the other was after, when the two wings of an Eagle was given
to her, ver. 14. (as Mr. Cotton observes) so then this double Computation, must
needs make the time of the Reign of the Beast the more Ambiguous: and 4ly. If
Mr. Medes Notion hold, that the two wings (given to the Woman) were the two
Caesar's of the Empire, divided into East and West, by whose help she got into
the Wilderness: Then the latter Computation of her flight, must not be till
after Theodosius, for the division of the Empire [into East and West] stood
not, till his two Sons came to inherit them.

386. But then 5ly. The Flood of Arrianism must precede the Rising of the
Beast, which took up a great Interspace after the destroying of the Dragon:
This Heresy continued some hundreds of years, and was a long time publicly
received in the Church, spreading it self universally East and West, from
thence Jerome [ Ingemuit totus Orbis, and se Arrianum miratus est] and
persecuting the Orthodox, (under Constantius) beyond all the Pagans, till the
Earth (which helped the Woman, Revel. 12.16.) of the Barbarous Nations
providentially broke this Arrian Faction: Thus this Synchronism wants not
Ambiguities.

387. And ( Ignotum per Ignotius) a dark by a darker, can never be any good
demonstrative Argument, to find out the certainty of any Postulatum or Question
whatsoever: Those Ambiguities both about the Beasts War, and about the Woman's
flight, makes them the less demonstrative: for there seems to be a double
account of both; Of the Beasts War one is, against the Remnant, when the Church
was got from the Dragon into the Wilderness, (as Israel from Pharaoh into the
desert) then began that War with her Seed, that could not get into the
Wilderness with her, so had not Temples nor Prophets to feed and nourish them,
(as the Church in the Wilderness had, Revel. 12.6.14.) but served God privately
without either Meetings or Ministry, (as some say) in Antichrists Dominions.

388. And that Decree which Pope Innocent the first made (to wit, that ( omnes
Hereticos esse Vi cogendos) all Heretics must be compelled by force) was a
fair foundation for, and an Introduction to that force of Arms which Antichrist
used afterward against the Saints, under the name of Heretics in all his
Dominions: the other War is not only described in the Parties against whom it
is raised, but also in the success of it, [(...)] Saints are the Party against
whom, and Victory is the Success of the Beasts War, whereof no mention is made
in the former, if we compare Revel. 12.17. with Revel. 13.5.7. in all which 3
places, this phrase [(...)] is used, Revel. 13.5. holds out the Term of the
War, Revel. 12.17. the War it self, and Revel. 13.7. names not only the Seed, (
Saints) but the Success too.

389. Thus as we have a double account of the Beasts War, so likewise of the
Woman's flight into the Wilderness, (as before) therefore can we not so fully
fix upon either of those two last Intimations, unless we could find out the
[(...),] the Article and point of time, when those double computations began,
wherein I must confess my self to be at a loss, and the more, because I am at
this day deprived of the help of my own Library: may we but fully inform our
selves of the exact Epochas and beginnings of all those Hints aforesaid, it
would bring not a little light to this intricate Question: the full discovery
of which I must refer to men of greater abilities and opportunities for
Chronology.

390. There is also a 6th. Intimation, to wit, the treading under foot of the
outer Court (or holy City) by the Gentiles, for the time of 42. Months, Revel.
11.2. which is the very express Term of the Lease of the Beast, as Revel. 13.5.
Mr. Mede makes this likewise to Contemporize with the Beast, having one and the
same beginning and ending, not only because of the Equality of their times, (as
before) but also because of the Identity of their Expiration; for when the
great Earthquake has destroyed the Imperial City, and with it the Kingdom of
the Beast, Rev. 11.13. and the Kingdoms become the Lords, v. 15. those very
Gentiles that had trodden underfoot the holy City so long, are then cast out,
at which they are enraged, v. 18.

391. The outward Court and the holy City, Mr. Mede makes to be Synonimus and
mutually to expound themselves because the outward Court was the place of
Worship for the People of the holy City: as the Inner Court was for the Priests
and Levites: And those Gentiles that tread it down, are not Pagans, but
Papagans, which are Idolaters like unto the Gentiles, who are also called Sodom
and Egypt, yea, and the Synagogue of Satan ^ those shall possess the Holy City
or Europe, (the allotted Seat of the Church) they shall tread under foot the
outward Face of the visible Church, for 42. Months.

392. Now could we but find out the beginning of this treading down of the Holy
City, this would guide us (as by a Synchronism) to the time of Antichrists
fall; but I shall not insist upon this neither: not only, because a late
Learned Critic makes this casting out of the Outward Court to the Gentiles, a
Dispensation under the 6th. Trumpet, and in the last times of Antichrist, as if
he should recover all those Kingdoms again, (before his fall) that have made a
protestation against him, hence are they called Protestants, and not to
contemporize with him from first to last; but also, because this has such a
fair Coincidency with the time of the Witnesses in Sackcloth, which I purpose
to speak more largely to in the next place.

CHAP. XIV.
393. I Come now to the 7th. and last Intimation, for guiding of us into this
intricate point about the fall of Antichrist; to wit, the Sackcloth Prophecy of
the two Witnesses, which to be Contemporary with the Dominion of the Beast,
none ever denied, but that the Sixth Trumpet ends them both, is granted of all:
so having one and the same term of time, it necessary follows, they must both
begin together: the Witnesses must begin their mourning Prophecy, when Popery
and Antichristianism begins, unto both which the 7th. Trumpet puts a final
Period: So that may we find out the Epoch of their Sackcloth Prophecy, it will
give great light to the time of Antichrists fall.

394. This Prophecy of the two Witnesses may be truly called crux Interpretum,
it has put so many Learned and Holy Men to a kind of torture in the
Interpretation of it: and we may say of this Scripture, (as Maldonate of
another Scripture) Locus facilior, si nemo exposuisset: It has been so ruffled
with variety of Interpretations, that they have made it seem darker by their
Various and Heterogenal Conjectures. God has left many places of Scripture
dark to our understandings: ne illas Scripturas semel lectas fastidiremus, that
we should not disdain the plainness of it, Austin, yet may we not make bawds of
our own wit, to beget our own senses on Scripture, for that is to break the
bones of the Lamb, and to do Violence to the Law of God, Zeph. 3.4. we should
carry no sense to Scripture, but only fetch one from it.

395. That God had his Witnesses all along the Reign of Antichrist is manifest,
by John's measuring out a Church for God, under the Antichristian Persecution;
to wit, the Church in the Wilderness (as before) Ruled by the Reed of Gods
Word, and fed by the two Prophets there, [Revel. 12.6,14. that they, to wit,
those two Prophets should feed her] though not fully feast her, in her
Wilderness-state: and those Witnesses should have the Temple given them in the
Desert, while Antichrist exercises his Idolatrous Worship in the Outward Court
and Holy City, wherein true Christian profession and Worship has been before.

396. Those witnesses (which are (in general terms) called the holy People,
Dan. 12.7. and must be scattered and slain before all these things of
Antichrist be fulfilled) are largely described in the 11th of Rev. with many
particular and distinct Characters. An inspection into which, may contribute
some light in our enquiry after the Epoch or Beginning of this
Sackcloth-prophecy, which does so exactly commensurate the times of the Beasts
dominion, their slaughter being the last bite of the Beast, as Christ's death
slew death, the Distick is, Mors mortis morti mortem nisi morte dedisset,
Aeternae vitae janua clausa foret.
So the death of Christ's Witnesses brings death on the Beast that slew them.

397. In this description observe 1. their Names, 2. their Number, 3. their
Condition, 4. their Actions, 5. their Death or end, and 6. their Resurrection.
1st. Their Names, which are not proper but appellative being two, 1. Witnesses,
2. Prophets: 1st. they are called Witnesses, as being in all Ages to witness
against Antichrist, and to testify to the Truth, but most eminently (it is
probable) in the last Age, when they come to be slain for their Testimony. 2ly.
They are called Prophets, v. 10. because they not only taught People to worship
God according to his Rule (so the Church in the Wilderness all along nourished
with the sincere Milk of the Word Rev. 12.6,14.) but also foretold the fall of
Antichrist out of the Word.

398. 2ly. Their Number, two, which is the lowest number (for one is but the
Root of numbers) to show the paucity of them that witness to the Truth under
Antichrists Reign, and that is intimated in Rev. 11.1,2,3. where the inner
Court is only reserved for the Holy People that keeps the Truth, when the
outward Court (a large spacious place) is given up to Antichrist: for the
Witnesses should be as few as the Priests and Levites that worshipped in the
Inner Court, in comparison of Antichristian Idolaters that worshipped in the
Outward, Luke 12.32. Rev. 1.6. Priests to God.

399. And yet they should not be so few, as to be below a full Confirmation of
the Truth, for two witnesses are sufficient to confirm any truth, Deuteronomy. 17.6.
Mat. 18.16. 2 Cor. 13.1. God orders it so by his overruling Providence, that
his truth shall not be starved; (no, not in the worst of times) by want of
Witnesses, or a sufficient Confirmation: or this number two is an Allusion to
those 3 famous Pairs, the first to Moses and Aaron (the Churches Prophets in
Egypt and the Wilderness) 2ly. to Elijah and Elisha (Prophets to Israel under
the Idolatry of Baal, when the Church was not visible, and only 7000. left that
was hid in Corners) 3ly. to Zerubbabel and Joshua (Prophets in Babylon, and in
Rebuilding the Temple.

400. That there is such an Allusion in this Number to those 3 famous Couples
it is probable, because in the following description [ the turning of waters
into blood, and smiting the earth with Plagues often, v. 5.] has relation to
the first of them, Moses and Aaron: and [ shutting up heaven, and destroying
Men by fire, v. 5, 6. to Elijah and Elisha, and the Olive Trees and
Candlesticks] to Joshua and Zerubbabel. v. 4. Zech. 4.3,11,14. The 3d thing in
the description of their Condition, 'twas sad and mournful, Sackcloth is the
covering that is worn in bad times, Amos 8.9,10. 2 Kin. 6.30. they mourn in
Sackcloth (while Antichrist triumphs in his Silken Copes and costly Garments)
and all, because Idolatry has spread it self so fast and so far, and because
of the troubles of the true Church.

401. 4ly. Their Actions which they performed (with that power which the Lord
gave them) were eminent Exploits, and that of two sorts: one against
Antichrist, and the other for the Church: 1st. against Antichrist, they have
power to do very great things, which carrying such a fair correspondency with
the 4 first Vials in Rev. 16. has made a late learned Critic take those
exploits of the Witnesses to be the pouring forth of the 4 first Vials, as 1.
Plagues on the Earth, v. 6. chapter 11. (as in the first Vial, Rev. 16.2.) 2ly.
Water into blood, v. 6. (as in the 2d Vial, chapter 16.3. and in the 3d Vial, v.
4.) and 3ly. A tormenting of Men with fire, as in the 4th Vial, chap. 11.15.
with chap. 16.8.

402. Which Interpretation, though very ingenious, yet seems it to me a little
doubtful, not only because (1st.) the Order of the Vials is inverted by it,
[as the plagues on the earth, the first of the Vials, is the last in this
description of the exploits of the Witnesses, and tormenting by fire, the first
of those Exploits, is the last of the 4. Vials.] But 2ly. it seems somewhere
too narrow, in leaving out that eminent action of shutting Heaven up from rain,
which none of the 4 first Vials correspond with. And 3ly. somewhere too wide,
in making one of those exploits to comprehend two distinct Vials, to wit, the
2d and 3d. to say nothing of the time of fixing them.

403. The service (2ly) which they do for the Church is, 1st. a power of
Prophesying, whereby they both instructed the Church in the knowledge of the
Truth, and comforted her by predicting the ruin of Rome, which,
notwithstanding all her rage against the Church, could not yet deprive her of
the help of those Witnesses, for God gave them power to Prophecy all
Antichrists Reign: 2ly. to supply the Church with Oil sufficiently, that is,
with Grace enough for this hard time of Persecution, that they might not be
like the foolish Virgins, whose lamps went out for want of Oil.

404. The two Olive Trees [ and] the two Candlesticks, some reads The two
Olive Trees [with] the two Candlesticks [ with for [ and] justifying that
Reading from that in 1 Samuel 14.18. where [ and] is read [ with] the Children of
Israel: because Candlesticks in Rev. 1. 20. is meant Churches, and though the
Churches were 7. then in John's time yet Antichrist reduced them to two, and yet
those two should be supplied with grace to hold out all the wills of God, Acts
13.22. those two Sons of Oil (the Witnesses) are not branches but Trees to
nourish their Graces in that evil day, and to pour in Oil into their Lamps
continually, which was Aarons work, Exodus 27.20.

405. The fifth particular in the description of the Witnesses, is their
slaughter and death, wherein consider 1st. the time when, 2ly. the place where,
and 3ly. the manner how. 1. Of the time when; the Holy Ghost tells us, when
they shall have finished their Testimony, Rev. 11.7. when their
Prophecying-work is done, for if God had given them power to Prophecy longer,
as v. 3. they should have continued in their Prophesying work longer, Maugre
the malice of all their enemies: God permits them to be slain because their
Prophecying-work was done, thus their Lord and Master could not be slain till
his hour was come, John 8.20. and in that hour of darkness he was put to death,
Luke 22.53.

406. Mr. Mede reads [(...)] when they shall be about to finish their
Testimony, because the Greek Verb is not of the Praeter-perfect, but of the
Future Aorist Tense (which is incertae significationis, of an uncertain time)
making the time of this Slaughter to be, when part of the Holy City, or
Christian World repent of their Idolatry, casts off the yoke of Antichrist, and
reforms the Temple within themselves, the Witnesses getting heart by all this,
begins to put off the Sackcloth, and to lay aside their Mourning Prophecy
(which they have done ever since the Reformation) then comes the Beast (as it
were, ascending afresh into the Throne) enraged with the success of their
Mourning Prophecy, he overcomes and kills them.

407. Mr. Brightmans opinion was, that the slaughter of the Witnesses were
past, and fulfilled in the Smalcaldian War, in that great Overthrow of the
Protestant Party by Charles the fifth, Anno 1547. and in condemning the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament (which he makes the Witnesses) about
that time in the Council of Trent, which is now above an hundred and twenty
Years ago: other later Writers apply this Slaughter to those ruined Churches in
Germany, in Bohemia Anno Dom. 1618. and in the Palatinate, 1621. and later in
Piedmont at Lucerne about 1655. as Mr. Tillinghast.

408. Dr. Twiss Judges that this slaughter of the Witnesses has been on foot
many years ago, not by Judicial proceedings only in the Martyrdom of Gods
Saints, but by the Sword of War also; 1. In the Low Countries by Duke d' Alva,
then in France by the Guisses in that bloody Massacre of Admiral Coligni, and
many Thousand Protestants, then in Germany as above: after that in Ireland,
where some Hundred-thousands were butchered by the Irish Rebels, and since that
in England by the Antichristian brood, with so manifest opposition unto Truth
and Holiness, under a Protestant Prince, as (he thinks) the like was never
known since the beginning of the World.

409. Though it be very Consentaneous to our minds to think this Slaughter
over, yet seems it not to be so, to the Truth: who would not (says Mr. Mede)
much rather hope that so lamentable an accident to the Church were past, than
fear it, to be yet to come; but a mistake on that hand is more dangerous then
on this: for the expectation of a future Calamity conduces more to Piety, then
an over-credulous Security thereof, as if it were already past. We are prone by
nature to put the evil Day far from us, Amos 6.3. to keep on our watchtower in
expectation of this Dispensation, does most promote the power of Godliness.

410. There be several Arguments that Captivates my Judgment in this point,
that the Witnesses are not yet slain, the 1st. Reason, 1. Before the Witnesses
be slain, I conceive, their Testimony must be full, before it be finished. But
in those Slaughters forementioned, and in those by Queen Mary in our Land, the
Testimony that was given them, was to the Doctrine of Christ, but never (that I
know of) to the Discipline of the word, which has been the Controversy of our
present Generation.

411. As the first Reason is taken from the want (in those former Slaughters)
of a plenary Testimony; so the 2d. Reason is drawn from a Concomitancy of it*
Various are the Concomitants that attend this Dispensation; as 1st. The pouring
out of the 5th. Vial upon the Seat of the Beast, to darken Antichrists Kingdom,
and to extinguish the glory of it; for this Slaughter is his last scattering of
the holy People, with which he should accomplish his Time, Dan. 12.7. This
shall be the last bite of the Beast, then his power to do (mischief) for 42.
Months shall End, at the same hour is a great Earthquake, Revel. 11.13. says
Mr. Mede, 2ly. It must be about the end of their Sackcloth-Prophecy, which
evidently continues still, for God has not said yet to his Witnesses, as he
said to Joshuah, ( coming out of Babylon) Take away those mournful Garments and
give change of Raiment, Zech. 3.4.

412. And 3ly. upon the accomplishing of 3. Years and half, attends it also a
glorious Resurrection, (which the Spirit of Life from God causes, Setting them
upon their Feet to Preach against Popery again, to the great confusion of their
Enemies, Revel. 11.11.) yea, and a more glorious Ascension, into a more
Excellent Church State than before v. 12. those I call Concomitants, (not
because they are so strictly taken) but because they fall within the Verge of
that Dispensation, so as to evinc^ those foresaid Slaughters in Germany,
France, etc. not to be [ the Slaughter] because no^ thus attended: it being
above an 100. Years since the Eldest, and far above 3. Years and half since the
latest of them: and likewise because I would distinguish them from Remoter
Providence.

413. The 3d. Reason is taken from the Consequences of it; as 1st. The passing
away of the second woe, v. 14. which is the 6th. Trumpet, to wit, the Turkish
Power and Tyranny, that stands in its full strength and height at this day,
notwithstanding all those late Stones of the Jews Embodying themselves against
it: 2ly. The blowing of the 7th. Trumpet, which comes quickly after the former,
v. 14 and brings in the Kingdom of Christ, v. 15. now since the Smalcaldian War
is 120. Y. yet Antichrist Reigns, (not Christ) Rome is in her Ruff, the
Witnesses in their Sackcloth, and no foundation of any of the Praemisses
apparently laid.

414. It is therefore safest for us not to flatter our selves, as if this evil
day were past and gone: for so long as the 5th. Vial is not powered out on the
Seat of the Beast, Rev. 16.10. we may daily expect that the Beast will be
pouring out some of the Vials of his Wrath on us, and it is not determined in
Scripture what time this last War of the Beast shall take (...) before he has
fully Conquered and Slaugh^d them; which may be a Salvo to the ^esaid opinions,
that those Slaughters were ^innings and parts of this last War.

415. And also a Salvo to a latter Opinion ^en any of the aforesaid, to wit,
that the late ^ssion of Parliament which put forth the Godly Ministry out of
place (as well as Ma^racy) at one time, was the time of killing (...)
Witnesses, (which I shall speak more to (...) the place of killing them) This
also may (...) looked on as some skirt (at least of the last ^wer) of
Antichrists Rage: but however, (...) last War must end about 3. years and half
before the downfall of Antichrist, (how long soever it continue) for otherwise
it would ^ake an Inequality in the Synchronism betwixt ^e 42. Months, and 1260.
days, should it be ^ litte before, or a little after.

416. Thus of the time of Slaying them: now 2ly. Of the place where the
Witnesses be Slain, there they lie dead: now much controversy has been about
this Street, what it should be: Mr. Mede makes it the whole Territory of Romes
Dominion, taking (...) in the largest sense as Synonymical with the Hebrew word
(...) Chuts, which it often Answers in the Septuagint-translation, as he says,
Discoursing of it very Critically and Learnedly.

417. Graserus (a Judicious Divine) conceives this place of the Slaughter to
be, (no^ the whole Territory of Romes Dominion) bu^ the Universal States and
Kingdoms of the Protestant Religion: saying, [ quod hacten^ per parts Impleri
nunquam desiit, jam plenari^ and Universaliter perficietur] this Slaughter,
that in some place or other never Ceased, but has been in fulfilling by parts
in every Kingdom where the Witnesses have been; but at last (he says) there
shall be a General total Eclipse of the Churches at once, for 3. years and
half.

418. Mr. Tillinghast goes still narrower: looking upon this street to be
Germany: as it is one of the ten Kingdoms, that belongs to the Beast: as if the
great City consisted of 10. Streets and this to be one, as the 10th. part of
that Dominion, this makes the Opinion probable that it shall be one of the ten
Kingdoms, (as one of the ten Streets of the great City) especially considering
how the great Earthquake strikes off a 10th. part from the great City, Revel.
11.13. which may well be one of those 10. Kingdoms, though not likely Germany,
according to his Opinion, for the Slaughter he fixes on Germany, has not been
so attended as before, etc.

419. Another gives better Evidences, that this Street is Britain; 1. Because
there be more for the purity of Discipline, distinct from the World in it, then
in all other Kingdoms; ^d where there be most Witnesses, there (in (...)
likelihood) must be the Slaying of them: ^y. As Antiochus, so Antichrist shall
plant (...) Tabernacle of his Palace between the Seas, Dan. 11.45. and none of
the 10. Kingdoms ^ays so [ Inter maria] between the Seas, as Britain does.

420. And to make it more probable, this late dispensation of slaying the Godly
Magistracy and Ministry; as to their Office) might be further improved,
praesupposing two things; 1st. that the Magistracy and Ministry be the two
Witnesses, and 2ly. that their slaughter is but a Civil slaughter, but the
first of those is doubtful, not only because the Witnesses are called Prophets
(which is a title rarely given to Magistrates, neither is it their peculiar
work to Prophecy, as of those) but also because we cannot find a Series of
Magistracy, all-along testifying against Antichrist in every Century, as may be
of the Ministry.

421. As to the 2d, concerning the civil Slaughter, I shall speak to in the
next place [ in the manner of it] adding only here, that the time of commencing
that Act (by which the Magistracy and Ministry were excluded) to that great
year of Expectation, 1666. (making up completely and exactly 3 Years and half)
and Nations all that time warring against those Slaughterers, to hinder them
from burying the slain Witnesses, as Dutch, French, Dane, etc. made it more
probable that this was the Place where, and that was the Time when the
Witnesses were to be slain: but that those following Considerations does (at
least) counter-ballance that Probability, and now, Event makes it seem
improbable.

422. As 1st. That great year of Expectation is now fully expired, the Year 66.
is gone, and the Witnesses are not only in their Sackcloth still, but lays
slain in the street after that term without any Resurrection from that state,
or Ascension into a better. Yea, and Rome also, after that Year, says still, I
sit like a Queen, and am no Widow, and does see no sorrow: No pouring out of
the Vial on the Seat of the Beast is heard of, but that Year brings forth the
Burning of London, where the Mystery of Godliness has long flourished, and not
the Burning of Rome, that Mystery of Iniquity.

423. 2ly. Consider whether a limiting of their slaughter to England be not
over narrow and private an Interpretation, it being but a Shovel-full of Earth
(as the K. of Spain once called it in his Haughtiness) a very small Island, in
respect of the whole World: and we find Mr. Brightman blamed for his overmuch
restrictiveness of Interpretation, in calling Lord Cecil, Lord Cromwell, and
Bishop Cranmer those Angels in the Revelation, Fullers Chur. Hist, 17. Cent. b.
10. page 50. which seems (he says) to be unsuitable with the large concernment
of Scripture, as if England (half an Island) were more considerable than all
the World besides.

424. And 3ly. consider, the Witnesses must be slain (expressly) by the Beast
that ascends out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 11.7. Now the Witnesses that have
been accounted slain in England, were not slain by the Beast, but only by the
Image of the Beast (for so is Prelacy esteemed) it was a Prelaticall not a
Popish power that slew them. 4ly. It may also be doubted, whether the Witnesses
shall be slain by a Protestant Power, as well as in a Protestant State; because
it is said Rev. 18.24. In Rome must be found the blood of those Prophets, and of
all private Christians that are slain for Religion: what was said of Jerusalem
[ a Prophet cannot perish out of it,] so nor can those two Prophets perish out
of Rome, they must be slain by a Popish (not a Protestant) Power; and so long
as any State professes the Protestant Religion, they cannot be deemed the Beast
that slaughters the Witnesses.

425. I confess, one has an excellent Notion to qualify this, saying, there
is a Generation of Men set forth as the Beasts last Champions, Rev. 15.2. who
yet shall not (at least at the first) so openly allow the Beasts name and
character, though they receive the number of his Name, and are therefore
reckoned his, as truly as the other; and as the Pharisees ( acknowledging again
the foreign Power of Rome, Joh. 19.15.) slew Christ, that faithful Witness. So
the Prelates advancing the Popish interest by Superstition, and Arminianism and
by Canon Law and Discipline, as Mr. Cotton shows in Rev. 13. p. 260.) shall
also slay Christ mystical in those Witnesles: yet the Event of (66) confirms
not this Notion.

426. Then 5ly. it may be also considered, whether this civil slaying of the
Witnesses in our Land be comprehensive enough to hold out the last Slaughter,
which may be more than a civil Slaughter. And this brings me to the 3d thing,
to wit, the manner how they must be slain: there be two manner of ways, how the
Witnesses may be slain, 1. Civil, 2. Natural. 1. There be grounds of Hope, that
it shall only be a civil Slaying: for 1. they must be slain as Witnesses ( not
as Men) and when those Prophets of Christ are silenced, and so put out of the
way of witnessing, then are they slain as Witnesses.

427. A 2d ground of this Hope is, this accomplisheth Antichrists end, which is
twofold, 1st. a rendering the Witnesses contemptible, this is obtained by
putting them out of their Prophecying-work, for thereby they lay (as dead men
in the street, Rev. 11.8.) like despised broken Idols, in whom there is no
pleasure: and so is his 2d end too obtained by a civil Death, to wit, a freeing
himself from their tormenting him, Rev. 10.11. which they did as Prophets (in
their Prophecying-work) and not as Men. A 3d ground of this Hope is, their
Slaughter shall be like their Resurrection, now as their resurrection is
mystical and metaphorical, and not real (for no Resurrection (properly so
called) can be before the Coming of Christ, under the 7th Trumpet) but this
comes to pass while the 6th Trumpet is in being (as Mr. Mede shows) therefore
their Slaughter then shall be civil.

428. A 4th ground is taken from the Beasts policy, who dare not martyr the
Saints, as formerly, because he found that [ sanguis Martirum was semen
Ecclesiae.] Therefore it may be like that Persecution of Julian, who put none
to death as Christians, but used other means to oppose Christ, not only by
Fines and Ejections, but also by Flatteries and Preferments: and this is the
more probable, because it was the method and manner of promoting Heathenism,
just at its last extirpation in Julian: so may it be of promoting
Antichristianism, just at its last and final extirpation.

129. A 5. Ground is that expression in Dan. 12.7. he shall accomplish to
scatter the power of the holy People. It is called but a Scattering, the Hebr.
word is (...) Naphets, dispergere; The same word is used 1 Samuel 13.11. The
People were scattered from me, they were not slain as men, but scattered as an
Army; so this word denotes, it shall rather be a dissolving of their employment
as Witnesses, then a slaughtering them as men. A 6. Ground is from their laying
unburied, if those 3 days and half be understood of Prophetical days, for so
many years (as all generally take them) then could it not be a Natural death
(for they could not lay unburied 3 Y. and half) but a Civil one, that they
might be a Testimony above ground all that time.

430. But the 7th ground of this Hope seems very pregnant, to wit, from the
four living Wights, and 24 Elders, and a great multitude that are found,
sounding out Romes funeral, and praising God solemnly and publicly at the
burning of that great City under the 5. Vial, Rev. 19.1,2,3,4. The voice was as
the sound of many waters, v. 6. all which could not well be, if the slaughter
were natural and universal (as before) how could those 4 living Wights and 24
Elders, and so great a Multitude survive such a dispensation, and as Dr. Goodw.
observes, those could not be a mere succession of new Converts, but the same
Persons outriding this last Storm, to possess that glorious State of the Church
(after those 3 years and half ended) which is described Rev. 19. from v. 1. to
10.

431. As there be grounds of hope, that it may be a civil death only; so their
wants not grounds of fear, that it may prove a natural or real slaughter: as
1st. It shall be the last bite of the Beast, and therefore the more deadly.
Rome Antichristian may be to the Church, what Carthage was to Rome Heathen: [
plus negotii fuit cum semiruta Carthagine, quam cum integra] says Florus (in
the third Punick War) of dying Carthage; and further, [ quam maxim mortiferi
morientium bestiarum morsus esse solent] the bitings of dying Beasts are most
deadly, for then they are most malignant: and may it not be said of dying Rome,
the last bite of the Beast (I am afraid) will be more then an Analogical or
Metaphorical death, her malignity then expiring.

432. A 2d ground is taken from the conformity of those Witnesses to Christ
(that faithful Witness, Rev. 3.14.) in his sufferings: that there is an
allusion to Christ in this description of the Witnesses, is plain enough, both
in his Preaching, Death and Resurrection: as he preached about 3. Y. and half,
then was put to death, and about 3 days after rose again with an Earthquake,
and ascended into heaven in a Cloud: thus there be many Parallels and
Congruities betwixt them; hence I infer. If those Witnesses must be conformable
to Christ, then they must suffer more then a metaphorical death, they must die
a natural death, as he did, otherwise the Portraiture will not resemble the
Pattern.

433. A 3d ground of fear is taken from those 3. Expressions, in Rev. 11.7. [
make war, overcome, and kill] the Beast 1st. makes war which must differ in
malignity and success from all his foregoing wars, whereof his whole Reign of
42 Months (in a manner) consists. 2ly. He overcomes, getting all power into his
hands, to be Lord-paramount (and Dominus fac-totum.) Then 3ly. he kills, were
their suppression as Prophets only intended, the word ( overcome) would
sufficiently import it: yea, and as Dr. G. excellently notes, there is but 2
Expressions in Rev. 13.7. which yet implies all those bloody Butcheries of the
Beasts reign ( make war and overcome) now here ( kill) is added, to hold out
some further cruelty then a bare suppression (as public Persons) upon those,
that this blood-thirsty Beast has got into his clutches.

434. A 4th is from the nature of affliction, which usually is sorest at last,
as in the bondage of Egypt their bricks were doubled upon them, at last,
according to that saying ( Duplicantur lateres, and venit Moses) the last
Persecution under Dioclesian was of all the ten first, the sharpest. Thus most
Christians have their sorest Conflicts upon their dying bed, yea, and Christ
himself under the deepest Desertions (crying Eli, Eli, lama Sabachthani) at his
giving up the Ghost: this renders it probable enough, that the last brunt of
Affliction, before the Church's Moses come will be the sharpest.

435. The 5. ground of fear is taken from the rage of the Beast, at the success
of their Prophecy, Many Kindreds and Nations shall fall off from Antichrist,
through the influence of their Testimony, so the Beast comes (in this last War)
like a bear robbed of her whelps, besides as D. G. notes, Antichrist will be
further chased with so many Vials poured out upon him, so that when he gets
Power into his hand, he will come forth in that cursed rage, and in that fierce
cruelty (of the brethren in Iniquity, Genesis 49.7.) This brings in the 6. ground,
then gets Rome a fresh draught of blood (after some respite of years) wherewith
she is described to be drunk, just at its destruction, Rev. 17.6.

436. In which description is an elegant Climax of admiration, 1. A Woman
drunk, this is more shameful than for a Man to be so; 2ly. No liquour would
serve her to be drunk withal but blood: And 3ly. no blood but that of Saints.
This made John wonder with great admiration, and the rather 4ly. because he saw
her Dead drunk with her last Cups of blood, and now staggering and falling,
never to arise any more: thus have we grounds of fear as well as of hope, and
whether it shall prove, Event will best discover, however it fall out, whether
the one or the other, or mixed of both; it is best for us, to prepare for the
worst, a mistake in hope is more dangerous than one in fear, that makes us
secure, but this watchful.

CHAP. XV.
437. THis leads me to the last particular, to wit, the resurrection of the
Witnesses, however or whenever they be slain, this is certain, that after 3. Y.
and half, they shall be raised again; and the garments of Captivity (their
Sackcloth-covering) shall be taken from them, and fine linen, clean and white,
shall be given to them instead thereof; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it,
Rev. 19.8. then shall the Ministers of the Lord stand up with Urim and Thummim,
as Ezr. 2.63. then shall the Yoke be destroyed because of the Anointing, Esa.
10.27. then shall those Prophets not only be raised up (as Christ rose) (to die
no more into their former Estate, but into a more excellent dignity: then the
new Heavens, etc. then the Lambs feed after their manner, Isa. 5.17. eating
clean provender, etc. Isa. 30.24.

438. Having thus run over the description of the Witnesses, unto their
Resurrection, which for want of room I can but name, and which brings forth
[the (...)] the ruin of Rome. Now can we but find out where to head the
Prophecy of those Witnesses in Sackcloth, it would more clearly guide our
Conjectures about the fall of Antichrst; for there is an exact equality betwixt
the 42. Months (the Beasts time, being measured by Months) because his work is
Idolatry, a work of darkness, moon or night-work; and the 1260 Days (the term
of the Witnesses) whose work belongs to the day, under the conduct of the Sun
of Righteousness.

439. Without controversy, as soon as Antichrist is reveald, and enthroned in
his Pontificalibus; the Witnesses then begins to put on their Sackcloth
(beholding his silken dust, and his Golden Damnation) and to mourn at the
revelation of this Mystery of Iniquity. So they thus contemporizing in their
beginning, must necessarily do so in their ending too. So that this 3 Y. and
half (forementioned) must be a part (yea, and the last part) of both those
Terms: and as to their beginning of this Sackcloth-prophecy, I shall refer my
opinion to an Appendix annexed to the end of this Treatise.

440. Let no Man marvel that I do but grope in this method, not only because I
am removed by this Dispensation from my Library, but also because it is an
untrodden Path; and though I would not say with Zabarel, ( hoc ego primus vidi)
savouring too much of vain affectation. Yet this I may truly say, that never
any Authors (that I am acquainted with, or heard of) propounded this Method to
find out the true Calculation of Antichrists time, by those several Intimations
fore-spoken of; an improvement whereof may be made by abler hands than by poor
I. John came first to the sepulcher, and saw indeed the linen clothes, but
Peter went in and took a particular View, John 20.4,5,6,7.

441. And what has all those learned and holy Men (forementioned) done but
groped at it, yea, and has missed the mark: those lights has been in the
dark, yea, even those that found the reserve of 45 Years (to retreat to in
their Interpretations) seeing they make the former Period of those Years to
bring with them some eminent Blessedness, Paragr. 269. such as the scattering
of the Holy People to be accomplished, and the Witnesses rising to die no more,
which things (Experience tells us) are not fulfilled according to their
Calculations of the beginning of this Reserve, the end whereof should bring in
the Kingdom of Christ.

442. Above all those eminent Lights, Mr. Buroughs seems most cautelous in his
Conjectures about Antichrists downfall; who observing the variety and
uncertainty of all Chronologies, takes an 100. Y. compass to foot his Account
in, saying, betwixt 4 and 500. Y. after Christ, Antichrist rose (though he lean
most to that Opinion expressed before, Paragr. 299.) so that his Interpretation
holds good at any time, till 1760. Y. after Christ be expired. In his first
Vol. of Lectures on Hosea, and the last Pages.

443. Now whether this Calculation of Mr. Buroughs do hold or no, or ours?
from the rising of the 10 Horns to 1716. Y. in Pa^gr. 358. or from the removal
of the Romans ^pire from the Seat of the Beast (which the ^cient Church looked
much at, using to pray ^t the Continuance of it, because they knew ^hen it was
broken, Antichrist would come) (...) 1736. in Paragr. 365. or from the healing
^f the Wound, to 1866. as in Paragr. 376. or (...) any of the other hit or no?
However, Gods ^ime shall not miss, who keeps his word to a Day, Exodus 12.41.
Though we mistake our reckonings, yet God cannot mistake his, and will make
Antichrists feet slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32.35. This may both comfort and
strengthen us.

444. Beside the uncertainty of Chronologys and our own aptness to Antedate
Promises, and to Postdate Threatenings, it must be considered, that it is much
safer to Postdate Prophecies, then to Antedate them, for Antedating of them
brings a disapointment unavoidable; then if Hope deferred make the heart Sick,
Prove. 13.12. Hope disappointed must strike the heart dead: Oh how tedious is
that time to the big-bellied Woman which is beyond her Reckoning: every hour is
a day, every day is a week, and every week a long tedious Month to her: and
such inconveniences has come by those several misreckonings already past;
besides, the Atheism it occasions in men's hearts against the word of God.

445. However God is a God of Judgment, and knows how to time all his Promises
and Providence, in their best Season. And this peremptoriness of Opinion
(where out knowledge can be but Conjectural, till we see the event of things)
cannot be good: as in that last point of the Witnesses; 1. They may be a long
time (of this 1260. days) in Slaying, before they be fully Slain: so it is hard
to say positively where or when: and 2ly. we must distinguish betwixt
Exemplications and Genuine Interpretations, the killing of the Witnesses may be
Exemplified in many Ages and Countries, which yet may not be the sole proper,
and positive Accomplishment of that Prophecy concerning them.

446. Concerning this day, that is known only to the Lord, Zech. 14.77. we can
but say, we think we have the mind of Christ, while this Vail and face of
Covering is undone away, Esa. 25.7. we speak by permission, and not of
Commandment: Yet this we may certainly say, that Antichrists Kingdom has been
a long time a decaying Kingdom, by sundry Vials already powered upon it, a
Scotch mist is upon it, [(...), Rev. 16.10.11.] as if the 5th. Vial (in some
sprinklings) were upon it, Christ has won much ground from Antichrist already,
whatever may be, as the last lightning before his everlasting fall, the
Assyrian may get Emanuels Land, Esa. 8.8.

447. Ish-bosheths Kingdom was a type of ^tichrists, as David's was a type of
Christ's, ^ Sam. 3.1. David had a Divine promise for (...) foundation, so waxed
Stronger and Stronger, ^t the other (having no support but by an ^rm of Flesh
which withered up like Jero^ms) waxed weaker and weaker: And as ^is man of
shame (for so Ish-bosheth in Hebrew ^gnifies) was destroyed by some of his own
Captains, 2 Samuel 4.2.6. so this Man of Sin must be destroyed by some of his own
Kings, Rev. 17.16. and those (whom the Lord shall (...) her end call out of
Babylon) are Commanded ^o Reward her double, Rev. 18.4.6. when ^er
favourite-Kings stand affar off, and dare (...) help her, v. 9.10.

448. It is true after all this, Sheba the Son of Bichri makes a Rebellion
against David, ^ Sam. 20. Bichri, [ Hebrew] Signifyes, the firstborn (that Son
of Perdition) who begets Sheba, (Hebr. Seven) or 7 Capital Sins, which may
Rebel against our David, and In^ade Emmanuels Land again: but Wisdom ^akes
Council, takes off Shebas head, yields it up to David's General, that so a
Mother in Israel and the Inheritance of the Lord might not be destroyed, v.
15.16.19.22. God will put this Wisdom into the hearts of some of those Kings,
and they shall say with Darius, why should wrath be on us and our Realms.

449. God has given all the Kingdoms of the World to this David, Psalm. 2.6.
long before the Devil proferr'd him a Sophistical Representation of them, in
Matthew. 4.8.9.10. [ All these will I give thee] which the Centurists interpret [
I will make thee Pope] because Rome was then the Mistress of the World, (and is
called [the World] Luke 2.1.) and no where could such glory be seen, as was a
fit temptation for Christ, but the Pomp of the Roman-Empire: thus Satan offers
to Christ that which he knew should be the Seat of Antichrist: he would have
the Singular Seeed of the Woman, to become the Singular Seed of the Serpent,
and makes Rome a Stumbling Block betimes; yea, and after he had offerr'd Christ
all Kingdoms, he accuses him (by his Instruments) for aspiring to one, and that
a little one, [the King of the Jews] but as Christ said to Satan, [ Get thee
behind me] so will he say to this his Eldest Son, to wit, Antichrist.

450. Though Christ refused what Satan offerr'd, yet will he take to himself
the Kingdoms that God has given him, Revel. 11.15.17. and Christ's Rise shall
be Antichrists Ruin: Antichrists Evening shall be Christ's Morning, Zech. 14.7.
though Antichristianism may revive at last, (as Heathenism did in Julian before
its utter Extirpation) for she says, (the day before destruction came) I am no
Widow, as if Married to her 10. Sons again, Revel. 18.7.8. and though he should
plant the Tabernacle of his Palace [ Inter Maria] ^etween the Seas, (as above)
Dae. 11.45. ^et shall he come to his end, and none shall help ^im: when the
Whore sings her own Requiem, *I sit as Queen] in that day is her Ruin.

451. But the great Cry of Gods People is, ^ Lord how long, and why are his
Chariots so ^ng in coming?) as wearied with their Wilderness-State, their Eyes
failing while they look for their God: we measure Christ's slackness in coming;
1. By the shortness of our own lives, 2. By the scantness of our own patience,
and 3ly. By the edge of our own desires to see his Coming: Now a little time in
all these Respects, is a long time; Yet (in deed and in truth) Christ is not
slack as some men count slackness, 2 Pet. 3.9. after some of those 3 ways, our
time is always ready, but His time is not yet, John 7.6. only this he comforts
us withal, in due Season ye shall Reap if ye saint not, be not weary in well
doing, Gal. 6.9.

452. Oh pray, that our Carcases may not sell in this Wilderness,, that we may
pass over this Jordan into that good Land, even to that goodly Mountain and
Lebanon, Deuteronomy. 3.25. Dr. Stoughton tells of a Prophecy, that Antichrist should
never overcome Venice, Paris, and London, what is done to the 2 former is
known, Oh pray, he may never totally overcome this last: alas we are tainted
both with Egypts Idolatry. and Wilderness-sins; only here is our hope, God dealt
with Israel in the Wilderness after the tenure of the Old Covenant, so they
fell there through Unbelief, and entered not into Gods Rest. But God will deal
with us after the tenure of the New Covenant, the free Grace whereof comes
riding Triumphantly over all our Unworthiness: Mercy Triumphs over Justice, Oh
pray, that though we be not worthy, we may be accounted worthy to escape those
things that may come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man in a better
Dispensation, Luke 21.36.

An Appendix concerning the Witnesses. CHAP. XVI.
1. AS the Oracles of God which were committed to Israel were by a special
Miracle of Mercy preserved in the Captivity of literal Babylon: So the Truth in
the Old and New Testament has been no less wonderfully continued, all along
the Tyranny of Mystical Babylon: And as God preserved his Truth, so his Church
in Babylon, during the Rise and Reign, yea, and till the Ruin of Antichrist:
though the Apostasy was General, yet was it not so Universal in all Individual
Persons, [ in those Tongues, Kindreds, and Nations, that wondered after the
Beast] but that there was yet a Remnant according to the Election of Grace,
Romans 11.4.5. As in the Baalish Apostasy, God reserved 7000. that bowed not to
Baal; So in the Antichristian Defection God had his 144000. Virgins that were
not polluted with the Babylonish Whoredoms, Revel. 14.1,4.5.

2. As there were (all that time) the true Seed of the Woman, which kept the
Commandments of God, and had the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.17.
against whom the Dragon raged, yet the Gates of Hell could not prevail: so
during all the Reign of Antichrist God raised up his Ministers, who in their
several successive Ages in several Countries, gave their Testimony ( as Gods
Witnesses) against the Spiritual Whoredoms and Idolatrous Worships of
Antichrist, and nourished the Church in the Wilderness, Revel. 12.6,14. The
smoke of the bottomless Pit was never so thick as to darken wholly the light of
the Gospel, and the Dragons Tail never so long, as to knock out every Star out
of Heaven or the Church, the Lamb has all along a Remnant of poor afflicted
Pastors (as well as of People) reserved in the midst of Babylon, which were
called chosen and faithful, Revel. 17.14. Those are the Witnesses (which the
Holy-Scripture foretells,) should Prophecy in Sackcloth 1260. days, or, which
is all one, all the 42. Months of the Reign of Antichrist.

3. Though it cannot be denied, but the People of God (all this term)
mournfully bewailed the Abominations of those times wherein Antichrist trod
down the Holy City, so may be called ( quodam modo) Witnesses in Sackcloth: Yet
the Godly Pastors of this People (distinct from them in Office and in the Act
of their Prophetical Function) are more properly and peculiarly called the
Witnesses; for 1. The first Reason is, the People are not called (any where in
Scripture) Prophets, as those Witnesses be: The 2d. Reason is, the People are
the Church in the Wilderness, which those Prophets fed, Revel. 12.6,14. so may
not be confounded with them, unless we will make a double pair, (according to
the notion of some) from Rev. 11.4. the 2 Olive trees to be the 2 Prophets, and
the 2 Candlesticks to be 2 Churches, which the People make up in the Wilderness.

4. The 3d. Reason is, from the power the Lord gave those Witnesses, not only
to pray and mourn, (which is the work of private Christians, as well as of
public Ministers) but also to Prophecy, not so much by praedicting future
things, as by Preaching the Everlasting Gospel, (against the Son of Perdition)
as their proper Function, which is not the Function of the People; the 4th.
Reason, Prophets are usually distinguished from the People, where they are
placed both together, as Mat. 10.41. Prophets and Righteous men are distinct,
so in Revel. 17.24. Prophets and Saints: the 5th. Reason, Ministers have in all
ages born the heat and burden of persecuting times, and ever have been the
Sacrifices for Slaughtering Tyrants, and most likely shall be so, when the
Slaughter of the Witnesses comes at the end of Antichrists Reign.

5. And those Witnesses are called two, not so much upon the account of any
Contradistinction of Orders, but to express the paucity of them, which were
very few, (if compared with the Locusts out of the bottomless Pit, which were
Innumerable) and yet not so few, but they were sufficient to confirm the Truth,
and publicly to detect the Abominations of Antichrist, and to denounce the
wrath of God against him; yea, and the exercise of that power (God gave them)
was so effectual, that Fire is said to proceed out of their Mouths, for
devouring their Adversaries, Revel. 11.5. for the Lord did make his Words in
their mouth to be Fire, and the Popish People to be Wood, and it devoured them,
Jer. 5.14. Thus their Ministry is said to torment those that dwell on the
Earth, Revel. 11.10. or on Earthly principles.

6. And if that Scripture in Revel. 3.10. [ the hour of temptation which shall
come upon all the World] be Synonimical to the Slaughter of the Witnesses in
the Street of the Great City; as Dr. Arrowsmiths opinion is, taking the word
(...) (as he Reads it) or (...) not largely for totum terrarum orbem, for the
whole World, but strictly, for the Roman World, that is, for those Nations
subject to the Roman Power, for so is [(...)] taken in Luke 2.1. If (I say)
this in Revel. 3.10. be exegetical to that in Revel. 11.8. thence have we an
hint that the Street may not be any particular Kingdom, (wherein those Prophets
are to be slain) but all the Kingdoms that either have been, or shall be
subject to the Romish Beast, which accords with Graserus, and Mr. Medes opinion
of the Street, but this for digression.

7. It is very manifest, that God has had his Prophets or Ministers to witness
to the truth in all Ages, even from the very Apostles times, and that the Faith
of the Reformed Churches was maintained by the Ancients ever since that time,
our Jewel (against Harding) does abundantly prove, ever for 600. Years. Yet as
there were diverse other Heresies that pestered the Church of Christ; besides,
and before that grand heresy of Antichristianism prevailed. So the testimony
of those ancient Witnesses was principally against those Heresies precedent to
Antichrist, as Athanasius against Arrianism, and Chrysostom against
Pelagianism, etc. does show this.

8. And though we find several of those ancient Witnesses to prophecy in
Sackcloth, especially, those two forenamed, who were for a long time in a
mournful suffering estate for their Testimony against those Heresies, etc. Yet
may not we take them for those Sackcloth-prophecies in Rev. 11.3. because their
Sackcloth was put on upon other accounts, to wit, for the Heresies aforesaid,
etc. and not upon the account of this Romish Beast that was to tread down the
holy City, for Antichrist was not yet come to his throne in their day. That
Cockatrice egg was long in the shell before it was hatched, and appeared a
fiery flying Serpent; it stole into the world ( sensim sine sensu) unsensibly,
and at unawares.

9. In the following Ages, when the man of Sin began to prevail, God raised up
godly and learned Ministers, who in every Century opposed the Romish Doctrines,
defending the sufficiency of the Scripture, Communion in both kinds,
Justification by free Grace; and disowning Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of
Angels, Adoration of Images and Relics; yea, and Praying for the Dead. All
which they opposed with many pregnant Reasons, and openly testified against all
the corruptions and usurpations of Antichrist.

10. Inded Rainerius ( a grand Papist) gives us 'an intimation of the Antiquity
of a Sect which (he says) has now leavened almost all Lands, having a great
pretense of Holiness, because they live righteously among men, and believe all
things truly concerning God, only they hate and blaspheem the Church of Rome,
to which the multitude is very inclinable: this Sect (so pernicious to the
Church of Rome) has been ever since Pope Sylvester (he grants) in the days of
Constantine, if not from the Apostles times. From this hint it may be said,
that there has been Witnesses against Rome (such as the Pauperes de Lugduno
were, he he writes on) ever since the 3d Century in Constantines time, Rainer.
contra Haer. cap. 4. page 54. those were true Protestants.

11. But though this be certain (beyond controversy) that the same Truths (
professed by the Protestant Churches) have been defended by the Ancients, not
only from Constantines time, but also from the very Apostles. Yet to find out
Witnesses, distinct witnesses, and witnesses in Sackcloth, mourning for the
Abominations of Antichrist, before Antichrist was revealed, I think will prove
very difficult; and seeing God gives us a plain intimation, that the flood of
Arrianism must be swallowed up before the rise and revelation of the
Antichristian Beast, Rev. 12.16. and 13.1,11. I conceive the proper Witnesses
against Antichristianism will hardly be found till the Arrian heresy expire,
and the Testimony against it be fulfilled: we cannot make them contemporize.

12. Now if Antichristianism could not be revealed, while Arrianism was regnant
in the World; and if we despair of proper Sackcloth-witnesses (such as we now
treat on) before the Revelation of Antichrist, then it may contribute no little
light to us in this grand Inquest, to search after the time when the Church
left groaning under Arrianism: for God does not burden his Church with two such
great evils (as Arrianism and Antichristianism) both at once: the Epoch of the
latter must be the expiration of the former.

13. That the Arrian Heresy began in the 3d Century, is obvious to all vulgar
understandings, for the suppressing of which Heresy, the general Council at
Nice in Bithynia was called, in the Year 325. after Christ: but the venomous
plants of that Heresy was so deeply rooted, that they could not be plucked up
thereby; and so Arrianism spread like a Gangren ( ut supra) and infested the
Church for some Centuries after, and though those good Emperors, Theodosius
(both elder and younger) Arcadius, Martian and Justinian improved their zeal
and diligence against it, yet could they not bring it to an utter extirpation,
or to a cessation of its Persecution.

14. The Church of God was sadly persecuted by the Arrian Vandals, till the
good Emperor Justinian sent his brave General Belisarius against them, and
thereby freed the Christians from their Persecution, subverting their Empire in
Africa: this was done (according to Helvicus) in the year of Christ, 533. And
yet in Asia the seeds of this Heresy could not be rooted up, but the Eastern
Churches were crumbled into Factions, and wearisome Digladiations (by it) among
themselves: till Mahumetanism arose, and swallowed up all before it. This was
about the 6. Century, and much what contemporary with Antichristianism, ut
supra Par. 34. chapter 2. -- Vix lucem in Occidente aspexerat Antichristus, cum
repent in Orient exortus est Pseudopropheta Mahometes, says Bishop Usher de
Success. page 31.

15. It follows then that the Witnesses testimony against Arrianism lasted till
the 5. Century, then how can we find genuine Witnesses against Antichrist till
the 6. Century. Among those Fathers, which our Historians and Chronologers call
( patres sub Papatu] Alsted. Encuclopoed. page 2840. which they begin to reckon
by ranks about Century the 6. Indeed I find Hierom in the 4th Century to
witness that Antichrist was coming, when he saw the Empire shaken by the
Barbarians, but he is no Witness in Sackcloth against Antichrist revealed.

16. I find (upon diligent search) that Gregory the great, just upon the 6.
Century comes forth much like a Sackcloth-Prophet, and mourns out those words
in his day, Putrescentem. quasi navem Ecclesiam habemus, and tempestate
fortiter obviante; jam jamque putridae tabulae naufragium sonant. Which
doleful complaint of Gregory's Agobardus Bishop of Leiden (living in the 3d
Age after him) took up, subjoyning to Gregory's words a more doleful ditty, Si
tunc jam putrescebat navis Ecclesiae, and si ejus tabulae jam putridae erant,
quid nunc est, Agobard. ad Ludovicum Imperatorem de Regimine Ecclesiastico. If
the Church was a crazy Ship, ready to be broken with a storm in Gregory's day
(as he mourned) 'twas much more so in 3 Ages after Gregory.

17. Yea, the same Gregory lib. 4. epis. 32. breaks out into this mournful
exclamation, O Tempora, O Mores, saeviunt and dominantur quotidie in necem
fidelium cultores Idolorum and tamen Sacerdotes qui in pavimento and cinere
flentes jacere debuerunt, vanitatis sibi nomina expetunt, and novis and
prophanis vocabulis gloriantur. And as if through a prospective Glass he had
seen a storm arising, this same Gregory prophesies of his succeeding Age, Qui
post nos vixerint, tempora deteriora videbunt, ita ut in comparatione
suitemporis felices nos dies habuisse aestimabunt, lib. 8. epist. 36. and
further, Omnia quae praedicta sunt, fiunt, rex superbiae prope est, and (quod
dici nefas est) Sacerdotum ei praeparatus est exercitus, lib. 4. epist. 38. He
foretells sad times were coming, when the king of pride ( Antichrist) comes.

18. Gregor. magn. writing to Mauritius the Emperor, ep. 32. lib. 4. says,
Ipsa Christi man-data superbi atque pompatici cujusdam sermonis inventione
turbantur: Petro quidem cura Ecclesiae committitur, universalis tamen Apostolus
non vocatur: and Consacerdos meus (Johannes Constantinop.) Universalis
Episcopus vocari conatur. From hence I note, that in Gregory's time Antichrist
was more likely to be revealed, at Constantinople, than at Rome. And the same
Gregory says, Juxta est ille, de quo scriptum est, ipse est Rex super
universos superbiae filios, quod non sine gravi dolor dicere compellor. Then
showing John of Constantinople's ambition to the Bishop of Alexandria and
Antioch, he concludes thus, Oh quam gravi considerationis hujus gemitu
torqueor! epist. 32. lib. 4. herein he speaks like a mournful Witness.

19. Now what can be said to this prophetical Testimony against Antichrists
revealing (though not yet revealed) but as our learned Bishop Usher; that this
Gregory the great did not speak these things of himself, but rather he
prophesied (as Caiphas did) being High Priest that Year: for he laid down this
Rule, Quisquis se universalem Sacerdotem desiderat, is in sua elatione
Antichristum praecurrit, which fell out soon after his death, he strenuously
opposed John of Constantinople, in his aspiring after this Title, calling it
Diabolicam superbiam and Antichristi malitiam, lib. 4. epist. 6.

20. He did not only oppose it in others, but also did abominate it in himself,
confidently asserting that In istud scelestum vocabulum ( universalem scilicet
Episcopum) consentire, nil aliud esse, quam fidem per dear, and calling himself
Servus servorum Dei (whether Hypocritically, as some say, I dare not judge)
yea, and acknowledging himself a Subject to the Emperor Mauritius.
Notwithstanding all this, I cannot make this Gregory my first
Sackcloth-Prophet, not only because he was a notorious Patron of Superstition,
though an Opposer of this Supremacy, but also, because the mystery of Iniquity
was but opening her Pack of Abominations in his time, and not yet revealed: now
this Sackcloth-Prophecy must not forego it, but contemporize with it, least an
inequality be made twixt 42. M. and 1260. days.

21. Isidore (who was Pupil to this Gregory the great) is more likely to be a
witness against Antichrist revealed, for then Phocas (that second Zimri) had
slain his Master, and midwiv'd Antichrist into the world. This Isidore beheld
with his eyes that grand usurpation of Universal Supremacy, not only in
Boniface the third, but in three other Popes after that Boniface (living till
about 640. Y. after Christ) and so had more occasion to abominate this
Antichristian arrogance then his Tutor ( Gregory the great) had. Yea, and might
better say (then his Namesake that lived before him) Ecclesia foeminae cuidam
similis est, quae ex antiqua felicitate excidit, ac signa tantum habet (
ornamentorum scilicet Arculas) opibus autem spoliata est. She has the chest,
but lost the cash.

22. This Isidor makes not Petrum but Petram the Rock to be the Foundation of
the Church. Illyricus Catalog. Test. Verit. page 647. and Alsted joins
Sophronius with him, saying of them that they teach so of their Works, Ut ex
iis plurima Romanae Curiae dogmata possint refelli, Chron. Test. ver. pa. 369.
and that Toletan Synod, Anno Christ. 630. wherein Isidore sat President (as
Calvisius pa. 677. says) decreed against the Corruptions of the Romish Clergy.

23. Alsted says, Seculum istud a Gregorio magno adeo sterile admodum fuit, ut
non usque quaque clari sunt viri modo recitati. So dismal was that darkness
when Antichrist began to see the light, not much unlike the Apostles Voyage,
Act. 27.20. wherein neither Sun nor Stars for many days appeared. For after the
Light of the Primitive Church expired, little considerable Knowledge shone
forth in the midst of the Antichristian ignorance and blindness: Yet all along
the 6. Century, and so downward, God had his Witnesses, against Antichrist
(though but few) which are called [ patres sub Papatu] such as Hesychius,
Leontius, Venerable Bede, Damascen, Haimo, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Rabanus,
Bertram, Paulus Diaconus, etc.

24. Illyricus tells us that the Order agreed upon in the 5. Century, was, that
the Romish Bishop should have the first Place in the Councels, the Bishop of
Constantinop. the 2d Place, the Bishop of Alexandria the third, and the Bishop
of Antioch the fourth: and that this was aggreed on for Order sake, but not for
Dominion. Yet he further shows, that this Order of the 5. Century was turned
into Dominion in the 6. Illyr. Cat. Test. page 619. to 632. at large, and in
page 695. he tells of a Book which Clemens wrote against Boniface, who got it
burned, which Book, were it extant (says he) Nos de multis rebus commonefacere
posset. it would tell tales out of the School. Thus Antichrists revelation must
be in the sixth Century.

25. But more particularly Anastasius Bishop of Antioch in the year 607. looks
much like a Sackloth-mourner, who was named Sinaita from his long fasting and
praying in Mount Sinai, as Nicephorus lib. 18. cap. 44. (if he may be credited)
relates, this fasting and mourning was immediately after the revelation of
Antichrist, and so renders it the more probable, being the very year after.
About the same time our own Historians tell of that famous Preacher Wolferus,
that like another Elias (according to the description of the Witnesses)
obtained Rain from Heaven in plenty, which had been much wanting for 3 Years
together, about this time also Daganus (this Daganus refused to eat bread with
the Romish Bishops in the same Inn, utterly rejecting them) and several other
Bishops opposed the Romish Rites, and refused all Communion with their Romish
Bishops, saying the Profession of Christianity was purer amongst them, than
that which they brought from Rome.

26. The same Isidore aforesaid ( Lib. 8. Etym. Cap. 11.) says of Antichrist,
Christum se mentietur and contra eum dimicabit, and adversabitur, Sacramentum
Christi ( ut veritatis eius Evangelium) solvet, omnesque veteris legis
Ceremonias restaurare tentabit: He will faign to be for Christ, yet War against
him: he will restore the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and corrupt the Sacraments of
the Gospel of the Messiah, and Olympiodorus also in the 6th. Cent. (in Eccles.
4. Cap.) says, Vidi ipsos peccatores cum adolescente Secundo, hoc est,
Antichristo, qui exurget pro domino nostro christo: he calls Antichrist [
adolescens] quia Juvenili temeritate est in malo fervidus, robustusque
nequitiae Innovator, He was Rash, Heady, and Hot in his Innovations, when but a
Youth: Mugd. Cent. 6. Cap. 4. Page 121. A. and besides this Olympiodorus, I
find that Illyricus brings in several other Witnesses to succeed in that age,
as Justus, Cassiodorus, etc. Illyr. Test. Ver. Page 576. 577. 578.

27. Olympiodorus, Justus, and Cassiodorus, opposed the Popish points, and
expressly say about this primacy of the Romish Bishop, [ Ca^t Ecclesiae Christus
and unus Pastor est Christus qui unum habet Gregem, Sc. unitatem Ecclesiae
Catholicae,] and Johannes Maxentius, who would have disputed at Rome against
their Errors, but was ill treated there by the Pope; which made him break out
into those words, O mira furiosorum Caecitas, and a veritate alienatarum
mentium Criminosa fallacia: neque enim fas est, tam aperte posse mentiri
Episcopum Romanum, Oh the Impudence of the Pope thus openly to prevaricate;
about this time John of Beverley mourned out his Soul for the troubles of the
Church, leaving his See at York, he died at Beverley with a Gospel Spirit,
Illyr. Test. Page 696.

28. This Maxentius aforesaid had a Bull issued out against him by the Pope,
which he Answers, and Reproves the Pope of several lies in it, and rebukes his
Pride very often, Illyr. Catal. Test. Ver. Page 584. and (our Illyricus adds
many other Witnesses in the 6th. Cent. against Antichrist, as Adelhelmus,
Caesarius, Julian, Pomerius, and some others, page 647. and Alsted adds
Hesychius, who upon his Commentary upon Leviticus, has many Testimonies
concerning the Truth, Catalog. Test. Verit. Page 369.

29. Alsted says of this Caesarius, [ Egregia quaedam Scripsit, quae non favent
papistarum Doctrinae] his Writings favor not Popery, ibidem. and Sabellicus (
Ennead. 8. lib. 6.) tells how Peter of Constantinople opposed Primacy in the
Roman Bishops, as Gregory had done in John of Constantinople, and Paulus
Cretensis appellationem ad sedem Romanam concedere noluit, he allowed not of
Appeals to Rome, as Vitalians Ep. in tom. 2. Council. makes it apparent: The
Magdeburg Centurists makes Isidore, Caesarius, Adelhelmus, Julian, Pomerius,
Witnesses to the Truth, Cent. 7. Cap. 4. Page 28. and say of the Bishops of
Constantinople, [ quod Phocae constitutionem moleste tulerunt, and a Romanae
Ecclesiae forma abhorruerunt,] they loathed the Romish Forms and Dominion, Page
125.

30. Bid tells us of Aidanus, (our own Countreyman) who stood off not only
from Romish Primacy, but from Prelacy, in his owning a Synod wherein Elders,
Deacons, and People, met, Bid lib. 3. Cap. 5. and when the Romish Ceremonies
were intruded on the Church, he said, non gravia legis, non Pharisaeorum onera
populis proponenda, the yoaks of the Law and burdens of the Pharisees, ought
not to be imposed upon the People, Osiand. Epit. 7th. Cent. Pa. 105. and
another of our Countrymen [ Finnanus] has this eminent Encomium left upon
Record, that he was [ Christianae libertatis sirenuus propugnator contra jugum
pontificium] a stout Champion for Christian Liberty against Romish Tyranny,
Magdeburg Hist. Cent. 7. Cap. 70. Page 289. and 2. adversus Ceremonias
pontificias Romans fortis defensor Osiand. Epit. Cent. 7. Page 180. and in the
year of Christ 638.

31. Osiander also tells us of Colmannus, qui mascule sese pontificiis
traditionibus opposuit, who bravely withstood the Romish Traditions, Cent. 7.
Page 196. adding also to the number of those Witnesses the aforesaid Caesarius,
ibid. and the Magdeb. Centurists say, quaedam concilia hujus aetatis veritatem
Testantur, some Councels defended the Truth in that day, Cent. 7. Cap. 4. Page
28. and Page 189. Council. Angl. (at our Hereford) acted, ut nullus Episcoporum
se praeferat alteri per Ambitionem, no Prelate must prefer himself before
another by Ambition, this in Y. 673. or (as Helvicus) 664. and the 11th.
Toletan Council condemns the [(...) Papisticam] Popish Disorder, which Helvicus
makes about 674. see Illyricus, page 689. and Alsted Chron. p. 369.

32. I have been larger in producing Witnesses against Antichrist in the 6th.
Century not only, because I take that to be the Epoch of the Beasts
Revelation, but also because I cannot find (upon my very strict scrutiny) any
Witnesses before that, Cent. against the Beast Revealed, wherein I have the
concurrence of many Reverend and Learned men: Augustine ( in libro de
Antichristo) says, Antichristum non Antea in mundum venturum esse, nisi
venerit primum disoessio, i. e. nisi discesserint omnia Regna a Romano imperio,
quae prius subdita erant, hoc autem Tempus nondum advenit, there must be a
departing of the Kingdoms from the Empire, before Antichrist come, this is not
yet done, says he in the 4th. Century, and Gregory says the like (as before)
in the end of the 5th. Century.

33. The Magdeburg Centurists say, ( Centur. 5. page 1. F.) plus nimio
concessum est, Antichristus hoc seculo quasi intra Viscera Receptus videatur,
qui posteriori seculo ( veluti maturus faetus) est editus, and in Century 6.
Cap. 1. page 1. G. [ Antichristi Regnum, quod quasi in alvum Ecclesiae
superiori seculo receptum est, hoc seculo vitam and Incrementa accepit, and
quasi ad maturitatem suam and ad ipsum partus Tempus sub Phoca imperatore est
deductum] Antichrist lay lurking in the Womb all the 5th. Century, and when he
was fully ripened for the Birth, he was brought into the World by Phocas in the
6th. Century: This is a clear proof from many Learned men.

34. So likewise Osiander in his Epitome, Histor. Eccles. Cent. 5th. Page 1.
says that then might be Antichrists Birth and Craddling, as well as Conception:
Antichristianismus (says he) hac in Centuria conceptus, and Page 179. haec
fuere Antichristi Romani incunabula] not yet made manifest, and Cent. 6. Page
1. he says, In hac Centuria Antichristus pedem in Ecclesia dei posuit and
fixit: and Cent. 7. Epist. 2d. Page tunc Antichristus Romans sedem suam plenarie
in Ecclesiam dei collocavit, quam ipsius Antecessores aliquoties infer
conabantur, Antichrist fixed his foot, he took full possession of the Church of
God in the 7th. Century, which his Predecessors did but endeavor to do.

35. And Cent. 7. Page 1. he says Antichristus adjuvante Phoca Ecclesias dei
sub jugum suum misit, Antichrist by the help of Phocas, brought the Church of
Christ under his Yoke: for till Boniface the 3d. those words [ Volumus and
Jubemus] which he calls, ( vox Superba Antichristi) was not heard of: and the
Bishop of Rome became not Antichrist, donec Malefacius ille Bonifacius a Phoca
Imperatore obtinuit, etc. till he obtained a full power of calling together and
breaking up Synods, of Confirming and Abolishing the Decrees of the Synod: till
then, he did not Seat himself in the Church of God, as Paul foretold, it should
come to pass, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Osiand. Epit. Cent. 7. Page 14. 15.

36. Illyricus also makes this Boniface the 3d. primum in Regno magnae bestiae
Regem, the first King in the Beasts Kingdom, who had the mouth of a roaring
Lion, and spoke like a Dragon, Revel. 13.2.11. 2ly. He makes Pope Joan to begin
the Kingdom of the great Whore, and 3ly. He makes Pope Sylvester the 2d. to
begin the Kingdom of the great Dragon, because then began the Pope-Conjurers,
Necromancers, Robbers, Murderers, etc. then 4ly. He makes Innocent the 4th. to
begin the Kingdom of the Locusts, by whom the Fryar-Mendicants came and spread
themselves all over the World; and lastly, The declining Kingdom of Antichrist,
he reckons from Julian the 2d. who threw Peter's Keys into Tyber, as
Unvaileable, and took Paul's Sword, which (he said) should prevail, Illyr.
Catal. Test. Ver. Page 650.

37. Illyricus likewise Relates a famous Story of Agestinus, in this 6th.
Century) that was expelled the College for his Witnessing against Popish
fooleries to Eustasius; for Redress of this grievance, the Synod at Matiscon
was summoned by King Lotharius, wherein Agestinus makes a particular Invective
against the Superstitions of that day, in Y. of Christ (as Helvicus reckons)
625. and could we have a faithful account of this Synod, (says Illyr.) freed
from the Monkish Writers, some grave Witnesses against Antichrist would be
found, Illyr. Page 676. Alsted also begins the Infancy of Antichrist at
Innocent the 1st. Year 404. his Childhood, at Boniface the 3d. Year 606. his
Youth, at Leo the 3d. Year 800. his grown Age, at Hildebrand, Year 1075. and
his old Age at Leo the 10th. Year 1517. then rose Luther against Leo's
Indulgences, Alsted Chroonl. Page 392. 394.

38. And in the 7th Century Bishop Usher demonstrates, that at least the Church
did live then (though she had not sound health) in giving her Testimony against
Antichrist, as many Bishops exploded Antichrists Images at Constantinople in Y.
754. and further shows how the British, German, and Gallick Churches gave the
like Testimony (sighing out their [ proh dolor] like mournful Witnesses) with
the Oriental Churches, against Image Worship, Usher de Successione Ecclesiae
page 33, 34.

39. But in the 8th Century, Gregory the fourth (unlike to the first of that
name forenamed) appeared such a man of Sin in his proud Tyrannical Usurpations,
that Italy it self had several Sackcloth-witnesses against that Antichrist (as
Baronius confesses, Ann. 863. Sect. 42.) Inter quos fuit Basilius, Zosimus, and
Metrophanes, cumque ipsis multi alii, qui hujusmodi tyrannidem deplorabant, and
ad Ecclesiarum defensionem multis cum lacrymis opem ab aliis implorabant, Many
Witnesses then deplored Antichrists Tyranny, and implored the help of others
against him. Usher de continua Success. page 39. and 40. In this Century also
Albertus, Clemens, and complures alii a Bonifacio dissenserunt, Histor.
Magdeburg. Cent. 8. and vehemently opposed him. Avent. Annal. lib. 3. I name
but few witnesses in those Cent. (because it is not doubted of by any, but by
Enemies) and they be too many to be quoted. See Magde. Cent. 7. page 277.

40. Then in the 9th Century, Agobardus, Rabanus Maurus, Bertram, yea and
Scotus, were all Orthodox about the Lords Supper, and opposed the Popish
Doctrine of the Real Presence with the Authority of Austin, as well as of the
Scripture. Fox Martyrol. 1st Vol. page 187. And he shows how Scotus also
assented to the Grecian Church, more than to the Roman. See also Jus divinum
Ministerii, p. 54. Osian. Epit. 9. Cent. pa. 44. li. 4. c. 1. Clark Martyr.
Engl. pa. 42. Dr. Humphry Regius Professor at Oxford tells this story of Scotus
(out of Crinitus) in his Preface to Praxis Jesuitism. page 22. that Scotus was
supposed to be poisoned by some of his own Popish Scholars, for his Testimony
against Popery in that Point. And about the latter end of this Century,
Arnulphus Bishop of Aurelia speaks boldly in a Synod at Rhemes. Quid hunc in
sublimi solio residentem vest purpured and aurea radiantem? quid hunc (
inquam) censetis? Antichristus est: and sadly mourns there, quod Religione
profligata, nomen Dei impune humilietur; and Cultus divinus etiam a summis
Sacerdotibus condemnatur, who is this that sits on his Throne in Scarlet? it is
Antichrist, who by a loose Religion lays the Truth wast, yet scapes scot-free.
Usher. Ibid. page 44.

41. In the 10th Century (though Bellarmin says, Nullum seculum indoctius and
infoelicius.) Yet God had his Witnesses against Antichrist, as appears by our
own Aelfricks Homily in the Saxon Tongue, appointed to be read at Easter to the
People in Confutation of the Real Presence; neither was this the Opinion of one
Bishop (to wit) Aelfrick only, but Wulfsine Bishop of Sherbourn, and Wulfstane
Bishop of York, and diverse other Learned Men in that time: but especially
Berengarius was a witness in Sackcloth against Transubstantiation, an error
that crept late into the Church, and yet was the first that was most vigorously
opposed.

42. In the 11th Century Bernard writes, woe be to this Generation for the
leaven of the Pharisees, etc. all pretend to be the Ministers of Christ, and
yet serve Antichrist; for he is Antichrist which counterfits himself not only
the Day, but the Midday, extolling himself above all that is called God, this
is (as he calls him) the meridian Devil, etc. And in another place, he in
Prayer mourns out those words [ Oh God, thy near Friends (in pretense) come
near to conspire against thee, etc. Alas, alas, oh Lord God, these are the
chief in Persecution, that are chief in the Church, and about their forbidding
Marriage, he says, it fills all [ Concubinariis incestuosis, seminifluis,
mollibus, masculorum concubitoribus and omni denique Immundorum genere] with
filthy Fornicators, effeminate, incestuous, Seed-shedders, Sodomites, all
manner of uncleanness. This is spoke like a Witness.

43. Then in the 12th Cehtury, more Light began to break forth, and the
Waldenses appeared (those famous Witnesses against Antichrist) that
communicated Light to many Nations. Insomuch that in the 13. Cent. our own
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln ( Romanorum malleus) daringly wrote to the Pope
himself, that he was Antichrist. In the 14. Cent. appeared Bradwardin,
Armachanus, and that famous Sackcloth-Prophet John Wickcliffe. In the 15: Cent.
John Hus, Jerome of Prague, and then Luther, etc. So that in no Cent. did the
Lord want witnesses to his Truth, besides many others that mourned in secret
places of the wilderness, which are not found upon Record.

44. Thus from the beginning of the 6t. Century, Witnesses in Sackcloth may be
found against Antichrist revealed, but not so clearly from the 4th Century
(which yet many has followed) from Innocent the first, which not only Event,
but also this Argument seems to gainsay, to wit, though Innocent the first
attempted Supremacy, yet on a slender Foundation, insomuch as his Successors
Zosimus, Boniface the first, Caelestine the first, and Sixtus the third,
bottomed their claim of Supremacy upon a supposititious Canon of the Council of
Nice. This fraud was detected by the African Bishops, comparing it with the
Authentic Copies, Alsted Encuclop. Histor. page 2849. at large.

45. Methinks to foot the account of Antichristianism from Leo the first, seems
far more probable, than from Innocent the first, because this Leo the first
insisted upon no supposititious Canons for his Supremacy claimed, but (as
Alsted says) [ Cunctis majoribus suis astutius egit] he was more crafty than
all his Predecessors; pleading a Divine Right for his Primacy, that Christ gave
to Peter above all the Apostles, and so consequently to the Roman Bishop (
Peter's Successor) above all other Bishops. This plea his Legates strenuously
urged in the Counsel of Chalcedon, in the Y. of Christ 450. as Helvicus
accounts it, or 440. as Prideaux, being the 4. Ecumenical Council, to which if
we add the term of Antichrist (1260.) it will fall about 1700. or 1710. Y.
after Christ.

46. This seems a more probable Epoch, not only because Event has not yet
confuted this, as it has done the other: but 2ly. because the highest claim
for Supremacy (to wit, Jus divinum) was then pretended: 3ly. the name ( Leo)
suits well with the Beast ( Antichrist) who is said to have the mouth of a
Lion, and a mouth speaking great things, Rev. 13.2,5. as if this Leo (called
Magnus) were graphically pointed at in that description. But 4ly. it is observed
that 3 great Dispensations about Antichrist, fell out under 3 Leo's [ Beasts
all] this Leo the first laid the foundation, Leo the third advanced the Kingdom
of Antichrist by crowning Charles the Great. And Leo the ninth (or as some say
the tenth) weakened it, and perhaps a 4th Leo may arise to destroy it, about
the Y. of Christ 1710.

47. But the most probable of all, is the timing of Antichrist at 606. ut
supra. For 1. Gregory the great said after Leo the great, that Antichrist was
but at Hand in his time. 2ly. Boniface the third then caught the Bird of
Supremacy, which his Predecessors only beat the Bush for. 3ly. Luther then
timed Antichrist, who was so much enlightened against him, and many solid,
holy, and learned Men since, according to which, Antichrists fall may be
protracted till about the 18. Century. Exitus acta probat, Event will be the
best proof.

48. Thus through the help of Christ I am at length arriving out of this
troublesome Sea, wherein I could find so few way-marks to guide me in my search
after so abstruse a point. Those first Ages of Antichrist were very unhappy in
the rarity of famous Writers, or (at least) the Monuments of very few be come
to our hand, because the mystery of Iniquity more and more prevailed: hence
Illyricus says, Pontificiorum astu, scripta omnia, quae Primatum Romanum and
Superstitiones ejus seculi impugnabant, suppressa sunt, and ex bibliothecis
ablata, and flammis consecrata, Illyr. Cat. Test. pa. 676. those Writings are
few upon Record, being either consumed with the teeth of Time, or canceled by
an Index expurgatorius.

49. Yet this is a received Truth, and subscribed by all, That the Faith (which
Christ and his Apostles taught in the first Age) had visible Professors and
Witnesses in all ages, for otherwise the gates of Hell would have prevailed
against it, and Christ would not have been present with the Church to the end
of the World. Therefore that there were Witnesses in every Age can be doubted
by none, but to assign all the Witnesses (in every Age) to that Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints, from the [ primo Antichristi ortu] hic labor, hoc
opus est: and though Witnesses to the Truth be found to be few in comparison of
the Enemies to the Truth, yet by those few we may conjecture, many more (as in
Ahabs time) lay hid unregistred. So that to say our Religion was not before
Luther, is a Popish slander, seeing it is unanswerably proved, that the Faith
of our Religion is the same Faith which Christ and his Apostles taught in the
primitive times.

50. To conclude, the precise point of time for Antichrists fall, can hardly be
demonstrated from Boniface the third neither; because Phocas his grant to
Boniface, Palmerius makes to be in Y. of Christ 607. and Beda 612. Magdeburg.
Centur. 7. page 121. D. E. though most make it in the 606. This uncertain (
substratum) compells me to leave the pointing out of this Punctilio of time to
God only. It shall be one day known to the Lord, Zech. 14.7.

[ Hu Jevadang Jehovah] is an exclusive expression, God only, and not Man knows
it, it is neither night nor day with us. When the Church has no Prophet (there
being [ Chathimath Chazon] a sealing up of Prophecy, Dan. 12.6,9.) to tell her
how long; then she goes to God and cries, Oh God, How long, Ps. 74.9,10. The
Saints upon Eearth cry, How long, Ps. 13.1,2. The Souls under the Altar cry,
How long, Rev. 6.9,10. And Christ (himself) cries, How long, Zech. 1.12. God
answers with good words and comfortable, v. 13. to wit, v. 21. that his hamers
shall 1 fray the Beasts horns, 2. cast them down, 3. cast them out as Gentiles,
4. cast them away, as a stone out of a sling, 1 Samuel 25.29. God will give them
scattering for scattering, 1 Samuel 2.3,13. Luke 1.51,52. 1 Kin. 14.10. In the
mean time our work is Waiting and Watching, which is 1. Angelical, Dan.
4.10,13. and 2. Evangelical Work, Mat. 24.42. and 25.13. and Mark 13. last. No
Watchman can tell us what time of Night it is, Isa. 21.12,13. only that the
Sunset to our Antipodes (or Antichrist) is Sunrise to us, until the Day dawn,
and the shadows flee away (the Church says) I will get me up to the mountains
of Myrrh, and hills of Frankincense, Can. 4.6. This holds out 1. our Repenting
-which is as bitter as myrrh, Lam. 3.19. 2. our Praying-work which comes up as
Incense, Ps. 141.2. Oh, that we may be found so doing, til the sun of right:
arise with healing in his wings, then shall we go forth (from the bondage of
Babylon) and grow up as calves of the stall, Mal. 4.2.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
CHap. 1. The Preamble, Antichrist in his Resemblances and Realities signified
by names and titles, Proper and Appelative, p. 1. to 6. many Antichrists, but
one [The Antichrist] p. 7. he is one contrary to Christ in his Humility, in his
Holiness, and in his Truth, page 8. Chapter 2. Shows (1.) Negatively, who is not
[the Antichrist,] not Simon Magus, as Grotius, nor a Jew of the Tribe of Dan,
as Bellarmin, p. 9. to 14. nor Mahomet, p. 15. to p. 21. Chapter 3. Shows (2.)
Positively, who is [the Antichrist] it is the Pope, p. 22. what is the
Scripture-definition of Antichrist, the 12. branches of that Definition, p. 23.
Chapter 4. Proves first, that he is an Apostate from p. 31. to 37. 2 ly. That he is
Christ's Enemy, p. 28. 3 ly. Stirred up by Satan, p. 39. to 41. 4 ly. That he
has a Monarchy in the Church, p. 42. 5 ly. In the great City, p. 44. Chapter 5.
Proves 6 ly. That he exalts himself as God, to 47. 7 ly. Seducing with lying
wonders to 54. 8 ly. He has a 3 fold brand to 59. 9 ly. His 4 fold Adjuncts to
62. 10 ly. That he is Revealed, in 6 Periods, Nascent, Crescent, Regnant,
Triumphant, Cadent, and Morient, to p. 66. Chapter 6. Answers the Romanists
objections, 1 st. That Antichrist must be a single Person, 2 ly. That he must
Reign but 3. Years and half, 3 ly. That Christ's Vicar cannot be Antichrist, 4
ly. That his Seat must be Rome Heathen, to p. 70. 5 ly. That the Gospel must be
Preached in all the World, before Antichrist Rise, 6 ly. That Antichrist must
slay Enoch, and Elias, the 2 Witnesses; to p. 75. Chapter 7. Holds out Antichrists
Morient Period in the 11 th. and 12 th. Characters, the 11 th. is, he must have
a lingering Consumption; 1 st. The manner of it described to p. 80. Chapter 8. Holds
out, 2 ly. The means of pulling down Antichrist, which are two, 1 st. Persons
who are Three, (1.) Powerful Preachers, (2.) Profound Writers, and (3.) Potent,
Pious Princes, to p. 91. 2 ly. Things, which are 4. Spiritual practicing, (2.)
Unanimous Praying, (3.) Public Printing, and (4.) Powerful Preaching, to 102.
Chapter 9. Shows the 12 th. Character, that Antichrist must be destroyed by Christ's
Coming; that this Coming of Christ cannot be meant the day of Judgment, to p.
110. Antichrist shall be Destroyed as well as Consumed, p. 111. Chapter 10.
Enquires after the time of the fall of Antichrist; Conjectures, 1 st. From
Daniels Number, 2. From John's, distinctly, 3. From both jointly, to p. 119.
from the 42. Months, or from 666. to p. 125. various opinions about the term of
Antichrist, to p. 131. Chapter 11. Contains Mr. Foxes, and Dr. Beards, Opinions,
(differing from all others) about the term of Antichrist, to p. 134. my own
Opinion laid down, 1. Negatively against Mr. Foxes, and Dr. Beards; Reasons
why? to p. 142. a 3 d Opinion (that the number of 42. Months must not be taken
definitly, but indefinitly,) refuted to p. 145. Chapter 12. Refutes the whole
Computation (of the Learned Men aforesaid, both from Daniel, and John's Number)
to 1666. The grand Salvo's for their Vindication, as 1 st. Uncertainty of
Chronologies, 2. Variety of Computations, 3. The difficulty of computing the
bondage of Egypt, and the Captivity of Babylon, to p. 154. 2 ly. My positive
Opinion, paragr. 348. how grounded, to wit, upon sundry Scripture Hints and
Intimations, to p. 157. Chapter 13. Holds out the 1 st. Scripture-Hint, from the
rising of the 10. Kingdoms, to p. 160. the 2 d. is, the removal of the Roman
Empire from the Seat of the Beast, to p. 163. the 3 d. hint is, from the
healing of the deadly wound, to p. 165. a Digression proving the 1 st. Beast to
relate to Antichrist, to p. 168. when the wound was healed, to p. 162. the 4
th. hint is, the Beasts War with the Saints, to p. 172. the 5 th. hint is, the
Woman's dwelling in the Wilderness, to p. 176. the 6 th. hint is, the treading
under the Outer Court, to p. 178. Chapter 14. Contains the 7 th. Scripture-hint, to
wit, the Sackcloth-Prophecy of the 2 Witnesses, to p. 180. the Witnesses
described, by 1. Their Names, 2. Number, 3. Condition, 4. Action, 5. Death, 6.
Resurrection, to p. 184. of the time when, the place where, and the manner how
the Witnesses are to be Slaughtered, to p. 186. Reasons why this Slaughter is
not yet over, to p. 189. what the Street is, to p. 129. the manner how Slain,
whether Civilly or Naturally, the 1 st. hoped, the 2 d. feared, to p. 200. Chapter
15. The Rising of the Witnesses, is the Fall of the Beast, Mr. Buroughs is
Cautelous in his Conjectures, to p. 202. an account of the several
Computations, paragr. 443. the precise time is known to God only, not to Man,
p. 204. a parallel betwixt Ish-bosheth, and Antichrists Kingdom, Antichrists
last outburst is as Sheba's Rebellion, p. 205. Satan tempts Christ to make him
Pope or Antichrist, p. 206. Refer the timing of Antichrist to God, to p. 208.
Chapter 16. Of the Witnesses, not People, but Pastors, p. 210. their first
appearing, p. 225. Antichrists Conception, Birth, and Craddling, p. 226. the
Kingd. of the Beast, Whore, Dragon, Locusts, and its Decay, p. 227. Antichrists
Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Middle, and Old Age, p. 228. the soonest time of his
fall, Y. 1710. the 4 Leo's terminates him, p. 233. the precise day referred to
God, p. 236.

