THE GREAT Excellency, Usefulness, And NECESSITY OF HUMANE LEARNING.

Declared in a Sermon, Preached before the University, at Great St. Mary's
Church in Cambridge, August the 7th. 1681.

By Robert Neville, B.D. Late Fellow of the King's College in Cambridge.

And Moses was Learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians,

Act. 7.22. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Billingsley, at the Printing Press
under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1681.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Nicolas Miller Knight of Hide Hall in the County
of Hertford.
Honored Sir,
THough I am too sensible that the prefixing your name to this Discourse, will
look rather like Presumption than Respect; and that I cannot hope for your
acceptance of it, without a manifest injury to your Judgment; yet I have (in
that short time I have had the Honor to be known to you) made such large
Discoveries of your Goodness, as not to doubt but it will so far Bribe your
Judgment, as to make it accept of that which it cannot approve; especially
when the principal end of its Dedication to you, is to Congratulate that late
Honor, which his Majesty (as a Mark of his particular favor) has so
deservedly conferred upon you; nor am I under any apprehension, that I shall by
this Public Notice of it, draw any Odium or Envy upon you, since your being
Mounted into the Saddle of Honor, was not the Favor of Fortune, but the
Reward of your Exemplary Loyalty; and Honor always sits so well upon Loyal
Shoulders, as that it rather attracts love and admiration, than envy;
especially when attended with that great Modesty and Humility, which have been
so conspicuous in you, since your ascent into the Sphere of Honor, in
imitation of the Stars above, which the higher they are, the lesser they are
wont to appear: Were I not as well assured of your great unwillingness to have
your favors repeated, as I have been sensible of your readiness to bestow
them, I should present you with such a Catalogue of my obligations to you, as
would swell this Epistle into a Volume; but I will not in so high a nature
disoblige you, who have so infinitely obliged me,

Ansty Aug. 30. 1681. Honored Sir Your faithful and humble servant, R. Neville.

Prove. 19th. the former part of the 2d. verse. That the Soul be without
knowledge it is not good.
IT has been deservedly Questioned by some, whether they were not as much
obliged to those, that gave them Education, as to those that gave them Being?
for if, as the Philosopher says, we are born mere Animals, afterward made
men; we are so much the more indebted to those, who thus improve and exalt our
nature, as arriving to the Excellency of our own Species, is a Prerogative
above that of being mere Creatures; and there being not only Infirmities of
Body, but of Soul; It is as great Charity to apparel the Nakedness of the Soul,
as to Cloth the Body: It is an Honorable Object to see the Reasons of other
men wear our Liveries; and their borrowed Understandings do Homage to the
Bounty of Ours: and therefore those young branches of the tree of knowledge,
that thrive and grow in fruitful Nurseries of Learning and Education, cannot
but Present the hand that first planted them with their best fruits. Upon such
Considerations, several of the most eminent Persons in the world have loaded
their Tutors and Governors, with the greatest Favors, and Honors imaginable;
He, who has read that Alexander the Great (the Universal Monarch of that Age)
paid a large portion of honor and Veneration, to his Tutor Aristotle; and made
ampler acknowledgements of his Obligations to him, than to Philip his father.
He, who has heard of that Decree of the Senate, for a Public Statue for
Junius Rusticus, procured by his Royal Pupil, Marcus Antonius; and what Honors
the Emperor Trajan heaped upon Plutarch, for those good Lectures he read to
him, and that the Emperor Gratian made his Tutour Ausonius Consul; will be
easily convinced, that the most Heroic and noble Spirits, have set a value
upon those, who were the Instructors and Guides of their first years; to which
(I conceive) they had no greater inducement, than the consideration of the
great unhappiness of those, who are left in the dark Chaos of their original
Ignorance, which Learned and wise Solomon describes to us, in these words of
the Text, That the Soul be without knowledge it is not good.

In which words there are these two General Parts.

First, An Hypothesis, or Supposition, that the Soul may be without knowledge.

2dly. A Thesis, or Positive Assertion of the great inconvenience and evil
thereof, expressed by a figure called (...) in these words, [It is not good.]
First on the first, namely the Hypothesis, or Supposition, that the Soul may be
without knowledge, and that in these two Cases.

1. When it dwells in an Unfit Body. 2. When it wants fit Instruction, And
First, The Soul may be without knowledge, when it dwells in an unfit Body. The
Organs of the Body, which the Soul imploys, being as necesary in this state to
produce its Operations, as the Soul it self: hence it is that, in Children, the
Organs, either from an excess of moisture, or their smalness, are indisposed
for the vigorous exercise of the mind; some strictures only of Reason
appearing, as Presaging signs of what will be, though mixed with much Obscurity:
but when the Organs are come to their just proportion and Temperament, the Soul
displays its strength and activity. Both the Apprehension, that fair Portal, at
which knowledge makes its Entry; and the Memory, that rich Treasury, where it is
locked up, depend wholly upon the Disposition of the Brain, and the Animal
Spirits, for the performance of their several Offices; and (as that Oxford
Esculapius, the learned Dr. De anima brutorum.
Willis has well observed) men's parts and abilities, are according to the
number, the activity, and orderly motion of the Spirits: it is from their
different Mechanism or frame, that men are dull or quick, heavy or ingenious:
and we find by experience, that when the Organs of our Bodies have been
Untuned, and our spirits wasted and discomposed by sickness, our Souls cannot
Act with their wonted vivacity: but then our before teeming Invention becomes
barren: our Fancy, which before soared aloft, droops and hangs down the Wing;
then our memory looses its Retentive Faculty, and our Notices of things run
through, as Water through a Sieve: Thus Thucydides tells us in his Second Book,
that in the great Plague at Athens, which happened in the second year of the
Peloponnesian War, many persons, after their recovery, were seized with such an
(...) such an Oblivion of all things, as that they neither knew themselves, nor
their Acquaintance; their ransackt memory having lost its whole Treasury of
knowledge:

But then Secondly,

A Second Case, wherein the Soul may be without knowledge, is when it has
wanted fit instruction: The Natural Ornaments of the Understanding, Quickness
of Wit, Excellency of memory, and Solidity of Judgment, are seen only in the
Acquisitions made by Study and Art; for they, who Trade not with that Patrimony
of Nature, loose most of it, and differ little from Beasts: and we see many
Children fairly planted, whose Parts of Nature were never dressed by Art; nor
called from the Furrows of their first Possibilities, by Discipline and
Institution; who dwell for ever in Ignorance, and converse with Beasts; and yet
if they had been dressed and exercised, might have stood at the Chairs of
Princes. And as many great Defects and Indigencies of Nature, in some men, have
been wonderfully corrected and repaired, by Industry, Education, and (above
all) by Conversation; so on the contrary, some early Blossoms in others, which
raised a great expectation of rare perfection, have suddenly decayed, and
insensibly withered away, by not being cherisht and improved by Diligence, or
rather by being blasted by Vice, or Supine Lazyness: A sense whereof caused the
Persians, of what Rank or Quality soever, to send their Children to the Schools
of Learning, to improve them in Knowledge, although they had Estates great
enough to maintain them in Idleness, as (...), lib. 1.
Xenophon tells us. And the Turks themselves, who are generally reputed
barbarously ignorant, yet (as the ingenious Author of the History of the
present State of the Ottoman Empire has informed us) they are well instructed
by their Kalfa's of the Seraglio in the Arabian tongue; wherein all the Secrets
and Treasure of their Religion and Laws are contained; and are made acquainted
also with the Persian Tongue, which sits them with quaint words and Eloquence,
becoming the Court of their Prince; and corrects the Grossness, and enriches
the Barrenness of the Turkish Language, which in it self is void both of
Expression, and Sweetness of accent. Learning is to be courted, and made choice
of by men, either as a Wife, or a Mistress; the meaner and poorer sort must
choose Sciences, as they do their Wives, to get a Fortune by them, to live
constantly with them, and help them to subsist and thrive in the World. Others,
that have more Wealth and Leisure, must choose Sciences as they do their
Mistresses, to recreate and divert them: such Misses as these, may be allowed
to all our Gallants; and these, if frequently conversed with, will take off the
edge of their Appetite for others: if they would spend more of their time with
these, they would find that they were (as they are called) Liberal Sciences to
them, and did reward them largely.

And thus having finished the Hypothesis or Supposition, that the Soul may be
without Knowledge; I should now proceed to the Thesis, and show, how Ill it is.
In order whereunto I shall, by way of Introduction, enquire, what knowledge it
is which is here commended to us; for the better discovery whereof, I shall
rank ail kinds of knowledge under these two Heads,

1. Humane: or, 2. Divine Knowledge.
1. I shall offer at something in commendation of Humane Learning, which is not
altogether foreign to the Text: for though when Solomon speaks of Knowledge,
it is to be primarily understood of Divine and Spiritual, yet is it not wholly
Exclusive of Humane Knowledge: He, that has this, though but Humane, knowledge,
is to be prized as much above the richest, and greatest, of those unprofitable
Animals, who understand no other Language, but that of their Dogs, and know
only how to Act the Town Fop, Swear and Rant, Hector and Debosh, Wast and Riot,
as an Ant, or a Be, above a Caterpillar, Grasshopper, or Butterfly.

The boundless and inquisitive Researches of the Soul after-knowledg, is not
the least Argument of its Spiritual and Incorporeal Nature; and that it is
Acted by a higher Principle, than mere Matter and Motion: Our Minds naturally
grasp at a kind of Omnisciency; and not content with the Speculations, of this
or that particular Science, hunt over the whole Course of Nature; nor are they
satisfied with the present State of things, but pursue the Notices of former
Ages, and are desirous to Comprehend whatever transactions have been, since
time it self had a Being: we endeavor to make up the shortness of our Lives by
the extent of our Knowledge; and because we cannot see forward, and spy what
lies concealed in the Womb of Futurity, we look back, and eagerly trace the
Footsteps of those times, that went before us: indeed to be ignorant of what
happened, before we our selves came into the World, is (as de Oratore
Cicero truly observes) to be always Children, and to deprive our selves of
what would at once entertain our Minds with the highest pleasure, and add the
greatest authority and advantage to us.

It is the Nature of all knowledge, to give a kind of Strength and Presence of
Mind, to the Owner and Possessor; this will secure us, as from the Rocks of
Atheism, by leading us to the Notice of some first Cause, to which all Second
Causes gradually ascend, so also from the Shelves of Superstition, by
acquainting us with Second Causes: For Fancy is apt to suggest many monstrous
and superstitious Notions of those things, of whose causes and Natures we are
unresolved; all which fly (like Shadows) before the approaching Beams of
Knowledge; which leads us, as men do Horses, close up to the things we Start at,
and gives us a thorough View, of what frighted us before: One of the best
remedies against Profaneness, is a knowledge and Skill in Nature, which will be
apt to beget in men a Veneration of the God of Nature: and therefore to those
Nations, who have been destitute of Revelation, the same Persons have been,
both their Philosophers and their Priests; those, who had most skill in one
kind of knowledge, being thought most fit to instruct and direct men in the
other: and if we consult the Stories of other places, and times, we shall
constantly find those Nations, most solemn and devout in their Worship, who
have been most learned, most knowing: And that, on the contrary, those other
Nations in America and Africa, whom Travelers report to be most destitute of
Religion, are withal most brutish and ignorant. Nay, if we will believe St.
lib. 18. de Civ. Dei.
Augustine, De praeparatione Evangel. lib. 10.
Eusebius, In Protreptic. (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus, and some other Writers of good Repute, Gods own People
(the ancient Patriarchs) were famous and eminent for their Learning and
Knowledge; and that Moses appointed (...), Masters among the Tribes, which
initiated and instructed the youth of Israel, in all kind of Secular Learning:
and Abraham (for which De prepar. Evangelica, lib. 9. p. 244.
Eusebius quotes Nicolas Damascenus) was well skilled* in the Mathematics,
which he communicated and dispersed in Chaldea; from whence the Egyptians, and
from them the Grecians did afterward receive it; and Enoch ibidem, page 245.
was probably judged by Polyhistor to be that Atlas, to whom the Heathens did
ascribe the beginning of Astronomy: in short, all Learning was thought by them,
to have been Originally among the Hebrews; and that, from them by stealth and
filching, some seeds of it were sown in Phaenicia, Egypt, and at last in
Greece; for they make it plain by Computation, that Moses (who yet was long
after Enoch, Sem, Heber, and Abraham, all great Scholars) was fifteen hundred
years ancienter than any of the Greek Philosophers; that all Learning, that is
found, or bragged of, among the Grecians, was but a Babe of a day old, in
respect of that of Gods own people; and that all their Philosophy was but some
(...), some fragments, or Scraps, which fell from the Tables of the Jews; and
it were easy to demonstrate that No small part of the Heathenish Mythology,
and Divinity, was fetched from the Hebrew Stories and Practices: As the Greek
Poet says of the Cretians, that they were always (...), Callimach.
liars; so I may say of the Greeks themselves, that they were always Thieves:
though they bragged that all Learning came from them, yet in truth (as Tatianus
tells us) they were but like the Crow, not (...).
adorned with their own Feathers, but with those they had stolen from their
Neighbors; and drew their Dogmata or Assertions, from the Fountain of holy
Writings; and having busy and inquisitive Minds, whatsoever they found in
Moses, or other Divine Philosophers, they endeavored (...), to set another
Stamp upon it, and make it pass for their own: and if we consult the New
Testament, we shall find, that St. Paul was so great a Scholar, as to dispute
with the Stoics, Epicureans, and other Philosophers, according to their own
Notions, which he had learnt at the feet of Gamaliel; being as conversant in
the Learning of the Greeks, as Moses had been before in that of the Egyptians;
and the rest of the Apostles were made great Linguists, and endued from above
with Tongues, and all Knowledge; so that they were reputed at first among the
Gentiles as a new Sect of Philosophers; and in succeeding Ages, the Prime
Fathers of the Church were of the Converted Rhetoricians, and Philosophers, as
Ignatius, Clemens, Ireneus, Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Origin,
Lactantius, and diverse others. And this shall suffice for the first kind of
Knowledge I was to commend to you; namely, Humane Knowledge: I now ascend to a
Knowledge of a higher nature, and that is

2. Divine Knowledge, or the Knowledge of God, and of those things, that conduce
to our eternal Happiness. There are many indeed in the World, that pretend to
knowledge; and the Sons of Adam are now as busy, as ever himself was about the
Tree of Knowledge; shaking the Boughs of it, and scrambling for the fruit;
whilst, I fear, many are too unmindful of the Tree of Life; and though there be
now no Cherubims, with their flaming Swords to keep men from it, yet the way,
that leads to it, seems to be solitary and untrodden; as if there were but few
that had any Mind to taste of the fruit of it. All men's Care and Study is for
Knowledge; never prizing or cheapning so poor a Commodity as Life: All Sin is
(...).
from the Tree of Knowledge, says Clemens of Alexandria; it grows upon that
tree; men for most part having Brains to understand, eyes to see, and tongues
to profess, but neither hearts to apply, nor hands to practice, nor Feet to
walk in the ways of Gods Commandments: there was never any age, that boasted
more of knowledge than this, and the men thereof seem to abound with it; but
yet, if we may judge of the Tree by its fruits; if we observe the actions and
practices of these men, and take notice how faintly the Light of their knowledge
shines before men in a virtuous and holy Conversation, we may safely conclude,
that their Science is falsely so called; and that they are like the Gnostics
of old, who boasted much of their Knowledge, from whence they had their name;
yet because they did not direct their knowledge to a Right End, and it did not
beget in them a due Reverence of God and his Laws, but taught them rather to
make their Brains a Mint, for the Coining new Errors and Heresies, it did not
deserve the name of Knowledge. If a man were Master of all the Knowledge of
Nature and Art, intimately acquainted with all Sciences, if he could attain to
a Command of all Languages, and could give an exact account of the Order and
Motion of all the Stars, discourse of the Intrigues of all States, and the
History of all Ages, and yet should be destitute of the knowledge of God, and of
Christ, all this would be but a more Splendid and Glorious kind of Ignorance.
The Contemplations of those things, that do not contribute to the promoting our
Eternal Happiness are but a more Venial and Reputable Kind of Ignorance, and
will only Qualify us to Commence Infernal Fiends, and take our Degrees in
Satan's University; and make us Members of his Hellish Society.

What does it profit a Man to know all the Motions of the Celestial Bodies, and
the Influences of the Stars, if he does not know Christ, the Bright Rev. 22.16.
Morning Star? is any desirous to know some new thing? the best Novelty is the
New Creature. What great Folly is it in some men, to be curiously inquisitive
how their Souls were conveyed into their Bodies, but wretchedly careless how
they go out? or to Dispute who is Antichrist, when they themselves are no
Christians? or contend that Christ died for all, when they will not reconcile
their Practices to their Opinions, but Reprobate and Damn themselves?
Disputation is no proper Antidote against any one Vice, but an Introduction to
very many; and sometimes makes Passion evaporate into sin; the best Disputant
being often the worst Practitioner. When Eudamidas the Son of Archidamas heard
old Xenocrates disputing about Wisdom, he asked very soberly, if the old man he
yet disputing concerning Wisdom, what time will he have to make use of it?
Christianity is all for Practice, and men enquire so long what it is, that they
have but little time left to be Christians. And this shall suffice for those
two sorts of Knowledge, the Soul of man should be instructed in, namely Humane
and Divine Knowledge; I proceed now to the

Second General part of my Text, namely the Thesis, or positive Assertion, that
it is not good that the Soul should be without Knowledge; the want of Knowledge
is a great Prejudice and Damage to the Soul; of which, that I may the better
convince you, I will show you

1. The great Pleasure and delight that is to be found in Knowledge. 2. Its many
Excellencies and Advantages. And, 3. The great Usefulness and Necessity of it
in all States and Conditions of Life.
1. The great Pleasure and Delight, that is to be found in Knowledge: those who
are possessed with a Noble Passion for knowledge, how do they despise all lower
pleasures in companion of it? how do they forget themselves, neglect the body,
and retire into the mind, the highest part of man, and nearest to God? As the
appearance of light, though not attended with any other visible Beauties,
refreshes the Eye after long darkness; so the clear knowledge and discovery of
Truths, how abstract soever, is grateful to the Intellectual Faculty: thus some
men have been strangely transported with the pleasure of a Mathematical
Demonstration, when the Evidence only, not the Importance, of the thing, was
ravishing and delightful. Solon, when near his End, and some of his Friends
were whispering softly about a Point of Philosophy, on the sudden opened his
eyes, and raised his head to give attention; whereof being asked the reason, he
replied, that Ut cum istud, quicquid est, de quo disputatis percepero moriar.
Valor. Maxim.
when I understand, what you are discoursing of, I may dye; such was his
delight in knowledge, that a little of it made his Agony insensible; and Tully,
whilst he was reading a Treatise of Philosophy, breaks out into this kind of
Ecstasie, O philosophia, unus dies ex praeceptis tuis actus peccanti
immortalitati est anteponendus! and Socrates (so real a pleasure did he find in
Philosophical Knowledge) was said to have given thanks to God among other
things, that (by his Providence) he was a Philosopher.

To be reviewing the Recesses of Nature, and the beautiful inside of the
Universe, is a more manly, yea Angelical Felicity, than the highest
gratification of the Senses, which is such a low degree of Happiness, as is
common to the youthful Epicure with his Hounds and Horses. And as Knowledge is
Pleasant and Delightful, so

2. Has it in it many Excellencies and Advantages; What is it in this World,
on which men put the greatest value? Silver, Gold, Jewels, yet even these must
give the pre-eminence, and strike Sail to Knowledge, which Job 28.15, 16, 18
cannot he gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price
thereof; it cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or
the Sapphire; no mention shall be made of Coral, or of pearls, for the price of
it is above Rubies: Could the excellency and beauty of Knowledge be presented to
the eye of man; the finest Gold would loose its Shine and Luster, the fairest
Pearls would soon grow Pale, and the richest Rubies would blush for shame, to
see themselves so much outvied and excelled by it; Knowledge communicates an
unspeakable excellency to the persons of men; and we may say the same of it,
that the Preacher does of Wisdom, Eccl. 8.1.
it makes a man's face to shine. Knowing and intelligent men on earth are like
the stars in heaven, say the Hebrew Doctors: Knowledge undoubtedly transcends
Ignorance, as far as Light excels Darkness: there is not more difference
betwixt a Man and a Beast, than betwixt a knowing and an Ignorant Person; a
wise, knowing man, though without Wealth, as much excelling a Rich man without
Knowledge, as an Angel does an Ass laden With Gold; Riches are but Appendages
and Accessions to the outward Grandeur, Knowledge is an Imbellishment and
Ennoblement of the mind of man: it being an Error worse than Heresy, to adore
the Complemental and Circumstantial pieces of Felicity, such as are the Gifts
of Fortune; and undervalue those perfections, and essential parts of Happiness,
wherein we resemble our Maker: to which I may also add, that

3. Knowledge is useful and necessary in all States and Conditions of Life;
which we shall the more easily discover, if we consider the great
inconveniences, that attend those Persons, who want Knowledge; and they are two

1. The Want of Knowledge is attended with great Sins, and 2. With great
Miseries.
1. The Want of Knowledge is attended with great Sins; and therefore it was not
without good Reason, that Cebes in his Table, quotes these words of Plato,
(...).
Learning is as it were the Bridle of youth, and keeps it from worse
employments: and again he tells us, that the attainment of Learning cures the
Soul of all Diseases: and Plotinus most truly affirms, that it is from (...).
false Opinions, that men are so fond of their Vices; that it is for want of
right Notions, and Apprehensions, of things: and therefore the Right Honorable
and Learned, the late Earl of Clarendon, in the Epistle Dedicatory to his
Survey of Hobs his Leviathan, truly charges all the Errors of that Book, upon
the Author's consulting, and making use of too few Books. When men are without
knowledge, they will be apt not only to Commit, but also to Consecrate their
wickedness; and because such ignorant Zelots, as these, have not Light
proportionable to their Heat, they become Schismatical: St. Paul indeed tells
us, Gal. 4.8
it is good to be zelously affected, but it must be in a good thing; and not
only so; for he speaks of some who had a godly Zele, and yet in them too there
was something wanting, they Romans 10.2.
had it not according to knowledge; and therefore St. Augustine commends Zele, as
good in David, who was a knowing, and a wise King, when he said, the zele of
thy house has eaten me up; but on the other side condemns it as bad, and
unbeseeming the ignorant Multitude, when it is said of them Zelus occupavit
plebem ineruditam. lib. 20. de Civitate Dei cap. 12.
Zele has possessed an ignorant Multitude: For Zele in Religion without
knowledge will flame so furiously, that it will not so much Kindle, as Burn up
Devotion; and consume the Sacrifice, the Altar, and the Priest himself too. An
ignorant Zelot (being overheated with a Calenture of Zele) like his brother
Fanatic Eunus (in Lucius Florus) who, that he might be thought inspired, put a
Nut-shell into his Mouth filled with Fire and Brimstone, He spits Fire, and
breaths forth Flames, with his words:

This Burning Zeal it is, that makes him often assault Christianity with its
own weapons, fight against our Savior under his own Banner; and whilst he
thinks to Win heaven by Storm, he makes the Kingdom (where he lives) suffer
Mat. 11.12.
Violence, and endeavors to Force it without a Metaphor. The Ignorant Zelot,
who, wanting sufficient Authority to warrant his actions, takes a groundless
Opinion for his Foundation, and makes not Reason his Judge in the Consult, can
receive no assistance from it in the heat of action; he has then lost all
Command of himself; and, as his Ignorance continues, so his vehemence, and
consequently his danger, does increase; He will still follow the same blind
guide, that first misled his devotion; not knowing either how to stop his
Carreer, or direct his Course; like one that puts out to Sea, without the
assistance of either Sails, Compass, or Anchors, he lies at the Mercy of every
Wind and Tide, and is in danger of being foundred upon every Shallow, and split
upon every Rock: and this brings me to the second inconvenience, that
accompanies the Want of knowledge; and that is

2. That it is attended with great miseries; we are told Eccl. 7.11. Wisdom is
good with an inheritance: Wisdom and an inheritance are best indeed when in
Conjunction; they thrive best when they are Meet Helps, and Married together;
but if they must be Divorced, as sometimes they are; Knowledge will prove a
better Support to us without an Inheritance, than the largest treasures of
wealth can without Knowledge: and hence it was that Crates, that noble Theban,
put 200 Talents of Silver into the Common Bank, upon condition that if his Sons
were Fools and Idiots, they should have them again; but that if they were
Philosophers, and men of Learning, they should be given to the people; for he
thought that then his Sons would not need them; He looked upon the Furniture
and Accomplishments of the mind, as better Riches than the largest Doles of
Fortune, and the Wealth and Revenues of an ample Inheritance: And the
Philosopher Aristippus was wont to say, that it is far better to be a Beggar
than unlearned; for he only wants Wealth, whereas the illiterate Person
oftentimes wants Humanity it self: that Sore Evil under the Sun Solomon
declaimes against, namely, Riches laid up for the Owners thereof to their Hurt,
is never so visible and apparent, as when Riches are in the Possession of
ignorant and weak men, who are made a Laughing Stock and Prey to others, and a
Snare to themselves: what golden Asses are they (as Caesar called rich but
unlearned Syllanus) to bear those Burdens of Jeers and Scoffs, which more
ingenious and witty men do load them with? For there is an ignorant Rabble
among the Rich, a Sort of Plebeian heads, whose Fancy moves in the same
Wheel, men in the same Level with Mechanics, though their Fortunes guild over
their Infirmities, and their Purses Compound for their Folly; and it is often
found that they, who have Midas his Wealth, have also his Asses ears entailed
upon them;

Juvenal Satyr. 8. ver. 73.
Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in illa Fortuna, says the Satyrist. He that
is Rich in wealth is usually Poor in Wisdom and Knowledge, and his head is as
empty as his Purse is full: Knowledge is the Fortress and Security of every
State and Condition of Life: Wealth without Knowledge is an unsafe enjoyment,
and certain to be abused or wasted; and the same may be said of a Rich man
without Knowledge, that Solomon does of a fair Woman without discretion Prove. 11
22.
as a jewel of Gold in a Swines snout so is a Rich man without Knowledge. Power
also, unless directed by Knowledge, (like the dreadful thunder) breaks all in
pieces: or it is but as the strength of a beast, dangerous and destructive; or
as a Sword in a mad man's hand, which becomes the instrument of rage and Folly:
It is indeed a very dangerous Station, as being the fittest Stage to expose a
Man's weakness upon, and will at last either be lessened or quite lost; and
that person, who wants knowledge to Steer his Power; will either run himself
upon Rocks, or stick fast in the Shallows of his own Ignorance, till all men
give him a Broadside of Scoffs and Abuses, and thereby at last Sink his
Reputation: for He, that is looked upon to be of no other Quorum, but that of
the Ignorantes, is esteemed by knowing and discerning men, but as a Worshipful
Idol, or Image, in a piece of Arras; or rather as the mere picture of Justice,
which exactly represents his Worship's Blind Ignorance by her being pictured
Blind. And as Magistrates, so also ought Ministers to be endued with Knowledge,
least they render their Calling cheap and contemptible: for, Mal. 2.7.
the Priests lips should keep Knowledge: and God himself declares, that those
are not fit for Holy Orders, that reject Knowledge; Hos. 4.6.
Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me.

A Business of so great importance, as Understanding, and Expounding the
Scriptures (which requires, multiplicity of Authors) is a matter of great
Learning, which cannot in a short time and with small pains be attained; For
if, in the Apostles times, when much of the Scripture was scarcely written, and
God was pleased to teach men by Miracles, St. Paul required diligent Reading;
much more is it necessary in our times wherein God does not supply our natural
defects by Miracles, and yet the Burden of our Profession is infinitely
increased: For if we add to the growth of Christian Learning (as it was in the
Apostles times) but this one Circumstance, which is highly requisite in our
times, but was not so in theirs, namely the Knowledge of the State and
Succession of Doctrine in the Church from time to time, a thing very necessary
for the determining the Controversies of these our days, how great a Stock of
Learning will this require? so that you plainly see, that the most
insignificant and worthless Chip of the whole Block is not fit to make Timber
for the Pulpit: ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius; and so these Mercuries,
these Messengers, of the great God of Heaven and Earth, must not be hewed out
of every Block; least their more acute Auditors serve them, as the Frogs in the
Fable did the Log, insult over, slight, and trample upon them; these are the
fruits of the want of Knowledge as to particular Persons; let us next consider
the great inconveniences, that attend

2. Those Places or Kingdoms, where these Persons that want Knowledge live and
reside; and we shall find their want of Knowledge a great Enemy

1. To their Prosperity. 2. To their Peace. And 3. To their Religion.
1. We shall find the Want of Knowledge an Enemy to the Prosperity of those
Places or Kingdoms, where Persons, that want Knowledge, live and reside. If a
Kingdom would grow great and prosperous, its Prosperity must be built upon one
of these two Pillars, either Trade or War; Now Learning is a great Advancer of
Trade in times of Peace; and a Bulwark to a Nation in time of War. As for
Trade, how can that be propagated, how can we export our Wares and
Merchandises, without Cosmography to bring us acquainted with other Countries?
without Navigation to waft and transport us thither? how can we have a free and
Universal Trade, without foreign Languages, to converse with the Natives of the
several Places, where the Scene of our Traffic lies? Nor is Learning less
advantageous and useful in time of War; As contrary as the Goddess of War,
Bellona, seems to Minerva, the Goddess of all Arts and Wisdom, yet war cannot
be successfully managed without her Assistance: it is not a fierce and brutish
Courage only that proves Victorious; there must be wise Heads, as well as
courageous Hearts, to obtain a complete and Absolute Conquest.

It is by the help of Mathematics that the Soldier draws his Lines of
Circumvallation; Astronomy is necessary for Navigation; History must acquaint
us with Warlike Stratagems and State Intrigues: Some of the greatest Commanders
in the World have been men of great learning; what Julius Caesar was, his
Commentaries sufficiently declare; and by that book of his, called Anti-Cato,
it is easy to be seen, that he did aspire as well after a Victory in Wit and
Learning, as in a War; by engaging with one of the greatest Masters of Wit and
Eloquence that then lived, the Orator of Rome, Marcus Cicero. That famous
Commander Epaminondas was educated under Lysias the Pythagorean; and Xenophon,
that great Soldier as well as Scholar, gained as much credit by his Pen, as his
Sword; his pure strains of Attick Greek have procured him the glorious
Appellation of Athenian Be; so necessary is it for the Prosperity of a Place
or Kingdom, that the Soul should not be without Knowledge; which is also
necessary for the Peace of it; and this brings me to the

2. Thing I was to show you, namely that the Want of Knowledge is an Enemy to
the Peace of a Kingdom. Ignorance makes men Stubborn and Mutinous; the most
Barbarous and unlearned times having been most subject to tumults and
Seditions, when the times of Learning have been times of Peace and Quietness:
and (if we consult the Histories of those times) we shall find that the Romans
never ascended to the height of their Empire, till they arrived to a
Considerable Height in Arts and Sciences; for in the time of the two first
Caesar's, Julius and Augustus, when their Government was at its highest Zenith,
lived Virgil the Prince of Poets, the best Historiographer Titus Livius, the
best Antiquary Marcus Varro; and the best of Orators Marcus Cicero: and in the
Records of time it appears, that the Government of Princes in Minority have
exceeded the Governments of those of mature and full Age, because they were
under the Tuition of some learned man; For so was the State of Rome for the
first five years of Nero's Minority, so much commended, in the hands of Seneca,
Nero's Tutor: So was it again for ten years space or more, during the Minority
of Gordianus the younger, with great applause in the hands of his Tutor
Misitheus. And as the want of Knowledge is an Enemy to a Kingdoms Peace, so is it

3. To the Established Constitution of its Religion; Were not our Church
furnished with learned and able men, the Church of Rome would soon come in upon
us, on our ignorant Blind side, and make her advantage, as she has already
done in the Eastern Churches, which in little more than Age are almost overrun
by her; and though they had a settled and ancient Constitution, and were
generally sufficiently prejudiced against the Romish Usurpation; yet through
their ignorance the Supremacy of the Pope is now their avowed Principle.

I shall conclude all in a Short Address to you by way of Application, and
Exhort you to the Purchase of Knowledge, in the same words that Solomon, does to
that of Prove. 4.7, 8, 9.
Wisdom. Knowledge is the Principal thing, therefore get knowledge, and with all
thy getting get understanding; Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, she shall
bring thee to Honor, when thou do embrace her, she shall give to thine Head
an Ornament of grace, A Crown of glory shall she deliver to thee; this Crown of
Glory will very well become their Heads, who have relation to Royal Such as are
King's Queen's and Trinity College.
Foundations, and that have had Kings for their nursing Fathers, and Queens for
their nursing Mothers; this will place our Academic Youth above the reach of
that reprochful Character, which Menedemus gave of the Youth of Athens; namely,
that the first year they went to Athens they were wise men, the second year
Philosophers, the third Orators, and the fourth but mere Plebeians, and
understood nothing but their own Ignorance; that is (according to our Modern
Language) they were Golden Freshmen, silver Sophisters, leaden Butchelors, and
wooden Masters of Art. O then make earnest pursuits after Knowledge, and (above
all Knowledge) be in Quest of that, which is of most use to you in the practice
of Virtue and Goodness. We read that when the Gods and Goddesses were choosing
those trees they would have Sacred to them, after Apollo had chosen the Laurel,
Venus the Myrtle, Pluto the Cypress, Hercules the Poplar, and Minerva the
Olive; Minerva was commended above all for her wise Choice; for that when the
other Deities elected such Trees as were fruitless, having respect only to
their straightness, shade, of strength; she made choice of such a one, as was
useful and beneficial to men; So that, which denominates men truly knowing, is,
when they know those things that are material, and really useful; for (as (...)
Aeschylus has well told us) Not he, that knows much, but he, that knows what
is most useful, is the Wisest man. Sciences are multiplied and grown to a great
Perfection in these parts of the World; but because it is Impossible to attain
them all, our Apprentiship to them being long, and our life short; those
especially should be followed, which teach men both to live and dye well; this
is the Learning so much recommended by Solomon; Prove. 4.13.
take fast hold of instruction, let her not go; keep her for she is thy life:
this Knowledge; this Learning, God grant us all, for his dear Son Jesus Christ
his sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be Honor, Glory, and
Praise.

FINIS.
TWO Sermons formerly published by the same Author, and sold by Benj.
Billingsley.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen of the City of London at Guild Hall Chapel, August 18, 1678.

2. The necessity of Receiving the Sacrament, declared in a Sermon at a
Conference of the several Ministers of the Deanery of Braughin in the County of
Hertford appointed by the Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of
London, to be held at Ware, Aug. 28, 1678.


