THE NECESSITY OF RECEIVING THE Holy Sacrament;

(That great Test both of the Christian and Protestant Religion)

Declared in a SERMON, at a CONFERENCE of the several Ministers of the Deanery
of Braughin in the County of Hertford, appointed by the Right Reverend Father
in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of London, to be held at Ware, August 28. 1678.

By ROBERT NEVILLE, B. D. Rector of Ansty.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Benj. Billingsly, at the Printing-Press in
Cornhil near the Royal Exchange, 1679.

LICENSED.

May 20. 1679. W. JANE.

To the Worshipful, My much honored Kinsman, James Wilymot, Esquire OF Chelsull
in the County of Hertford.
Honored SIR,
I Am so big with the Resentments of your multiplied and repeated Favors, that
I am in pain till I am delivered of them in Public Acknowledgments; and have
therefore chose rather to expose my own weakness to the World (by making this
Discourse Public) than be ungrateful to you; designing not so much the
Publication of my Sermon, as my Gratitude: when (at the Command of our Right
Reverend and Noble Diocesan) I preached this Sermon, you were pleased to do me
the honor to ride some miles to be an Auditor of it. What was then presented
to your Ear, I now place before your Eye; not that I flatter my self to serve
the ends of my Reputation by it: for I am too well assured that those
Discourses, which (in the hearing) went down with a tolerable relish, are often
found flat and insipid in the reading, especially when they are leisurely and
critically considered by Persons of Judgment and Understanding. I have read of
a young Gentleman of Athens, who being to plead for his Life, hired an Oratur
to make him a Defensive Oration to be pronounced before the Judges, which (at
the first reading) was very grateful and pleasing to the Young Man; but when by
reading it often (that he might fix it in his memory, and speak it with the
better grace) he began to nauseate, and grow weary of it; the Orator bid him
consider that the Judges and the People were to hear it but once, and then it
was probable they might (at the first instant) hear it with as much delight and
satisfaction, as he himself had done. This Story has often represented to my
mind the Fate of my Sermon, which is now stripped of the Advantages it had in the
Delivery; but however I can dispense with my own Credit, and give my self
sufficient satisfaction in that particular; because I have sent it into the
World upon no other Errand, than to put me into a capacity of making a solemn
and public profession that I am,

Honored Sir, Your much obliged Kinsman, faithful and humble Servant, Robert
Neville.
Ansty, May 15. 1679.
A SERMON PREACHED At a CONFERENCE at Ware, August 28. 1678.
LUKE 22. latter part of the 19 verse. -- This Do in Remembrance of Me.

The whole verse runs thus: And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it,
and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body, which is given for you; This do in
Remembrance of Me.


THE Holy Sacrament was in such great esteem and veneration in former Ages,
that in Can. 21 of the Council of Illiberis, the keeping Men from it was
thought an heavy Punishment, as appears by these words of the Canon, Quod si
quis per tres Dies Dominicos ad Ecclesiam non accesserit, etc.
That if any absented himself from the Church for three Sundays, he was to be
kept as long from the Holy Sacrament, that he might thereby seem punished and
corrected for it. And it was decreed by the Council at Aken, in the Year 836,
That the Sacrament should be administered every Lord's day, lest they who stand
off from the Sacrament of their Redemption, should be kept also at as great a
Distance from Redemption it self. And St. Basil (in his 289 Epistle ad
Caesaream Patritiam) commends an every-day Communion as (...).
good and profitable. A sense whereof caused St. Cyril of Jerusalem to invite
Guests to this Feast in these words, (...).
Eat the Bread, that renews your Nature; drink the Wine, that is the Smile and
Delight of Immortality. And St. Cyril of Alexandria tells us, (...).
That to drink of the Sacramental Wine, is to drink of the Blood of Jesus, to
be partaker's of the Lord's Incorruptibility. And Holy Ignatius (in his Epistle
to the Ephesians) calls the Sacramental Bread (...).
The Medicine of Immortality, An Antidote against Death, A Purge that expels
all evil. And the Fathers of the Nicene Council style the two Elements of the
Sacrament, (...).
the Symbols of our Resurrection. And at this rate did several of the Ancient
Fathers speak of it And I could heartily wish that the generality of Men had
the same opinion of the Sacrament in this, as they had in former Ages; and that
they would not exercise the power of the Keys against, and excommunicate
themselves, by their wilful Absence, from this Holy Feast. And since the
Heathens had their (...), their Feasts in memory of their Heroes, Aeacus and
Ajax; and the Israelites their Passover (a Type of this our Feast) in memory of
their Deliverance in Egypt; let us Christians celebrate this Memorial Feast,
which our Savior did institute in these words, This Do in remembrance of Me.

Before I contrive the words into a Proposition, I shall first resolve this
Question; How Christ could, at the eating the last Supper with his Disciples,
with whom he was present, bid them Do this in remembrance of him? how could
they be said to do that in Remembrance of his Death, which was then future, and
to come? For if we do an Action in remembrance of any thing, it must be of a
thing that is past; or, if in remembrance of any Person, it must be either of a
Person absent from us, or of one departed this life.

To which I answer, That it follows only from these words, that Christ
instituted and appointed a Sacrament, or Figurative, mysterious Representation
of a thing; which, in the whole use of it, was variabie, either to this day, to
morrow, or any other day; and therefore never to be naturally verified, but on
the Cross, by a Proper and Natural Presence; because then it was so, and never
else: In Remembrance of which his being and suffering on the Cross, we do this
Holy Action, We do this in Remembrance of Him.

The importance of which words may be comprised in this Proposition: That this
Holy Action of receiving the Sacrament, in Remembrance) of Christ's Death and
Passion, is a Duty incumbent upon every Christian; every Christian is bound to
Do this in remembrance of him; and that for these following Reasons:

I. Because Christ, who did institute and appoint it, requires it of us; whose
Command is of that extent and latitude, as to comprehend all Christians. It Is
true indeed, that the Apostles only were present at Christ's first Celebration,
and so the Command was directed to them: But how? not to the Apostles only as
Apostles, but also as Communicants, as representing the People; or else to the
Apostles, as Dispensers; and to the People, as Receivers: For, if the Officers
and Ministers of the Church are bound to give it, all Christians (no doubt) are
bound to receive it: and that they are obliged so to do, St. Paul has fully
and plainly declared to us; telling us in 1 Cor. 11.24. that when our Lord had
given thanks, he brake the Bread, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body, which
is broken for you; Do this in Remembrance of me. Here this Command [Do this]
immediately refers to these words, [Take, eat] which the verse of my Text has
not; and therefore it must there refer only to taking Bread, giving Thanks,
breaking it, and giving it to them; in which the Apostles and their Successors,
were more immediately concerned; and none can do this, i. e. take Bread, give
Thanks, break it, and give it, but they; but in the other actions of taking,
and eating, all Christians are concerned.

The Receiving the Sacrament is not a thing Arbitrary or Indifferent, to be
done, or not done, at our pleasure, because it is under the Obligation of a
Positive Command, which our Savior has given us in these words, This Do in
remembrance of me; that is, Do this in remembrance that I put a cloud of Flesh
upon my bright and resplendent Glory; In remembrance that I, who am the Light
of the World, suffered my self to be put into the dark Lanthorn of an Human
Body; In remembrance of my bitter Pains and Sufferings on the Cross; In
remembrance of the stretching out of my Arms on the Tree of Shame, to receive
and embrace You; In remembrance of the opening of my Side, to make an avenue
and passage for You to my Heart; In remembrance of my pouring out Water to wash
You, and Blood to redeem You.

Memorials of Dying-Men are of great account with all Men, being placed among
their (...), their most valued and esteemed Treasures: And we usually say, That
the words of a Dying-Man make the strongest and deepest impressions in the
minds of the Living: Be pleased therefore to bribe your Fancy, to suppose One,
who had always been a loving and indulgent Husband, now lying upon his
Deathbed, and the very moment before his Soul is divorced from his Body, and he
from his Wife by Death, making this his last and dying request to her; I
perceive the last Sand of my Glass is now running, and my time of Departure is
near at hand, let me therefore beg this last favor of thee, and desire thee to
keep my Picture by thee when I am dead and gone; let me desire thee to do this
in remembrance of me: Undoubtedly his Wife, if she had but the least spark of
kindness for him, would keep his Picture by her, as a most valuable Treasure;
and when ever she beholds it, pay him, whom it represents, the just Tribute of
a Tear. The Church is Christ's Spouse, and the Sacrament is the Picture of
Christ's Death drawn to the Life; and if Christ, a little before his Death,
desires, nay more, commands his Spouse, the Church, for whom he was about to
die, and shed his most precious Blood, to commemorate his Death after his
Suffering and Crucifixion; and break Bread, and drink Wine, in remembrance that
his Body was broken, and his Blood poured out; call to mind his bloody Passion
by that holy Action; certainly if she has any bowels of Compassion in her, she
cannot deny his so just and reasonable request; she cannot disobey so obliging
a Command.

If this Sacrament could have well been spared, and Men could have kept the Law
of the Inward-Man without it, our Savior, who came to beat down all the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Old Law, would never have raised up this under the
Gospel; but he knew it necessary, and therefore left it upon Record, as binding
as a Law; 1 Cor. 11.25. This do ye, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of
me. As often as ye do it, implies a doing it often; and does not leave it at
large to our will and pleasure, to be taken up at the discretion of every
private person; but supposes that it must be done frequently, as frequently at
least as that Church, whereof we are Members, requires it of us.

Had our Savior imposed upon us a heavy Yoke of Judaical Rites, and laborious
and expensive Ceremonies, and crowded them in so thick and fast upon us, as to
employ and take up all our time, and exhaust our strength, we had had some
tolerable Plea for our disobedience; But when he has freed us from the
burdensome imposition of Judaical Observances, and (except that of Baptism) has
recommended but one innocent, cheap, and easy Rite to our observation; We are
Monsters of Ingratitude if we take not and most cheerful Obedience to this his
peculiar Command; A Command in so peculiar a manner His, as no other is but
that of Baptism. For his other Commands are but inforcements of those Precepts,
that are either contained in the Old Testament, or derived to us from
Principles of Nature; but this is his Peculiar, his own proper Commandment: and
our Receiving the Sacrament in obedience to it, is the proper Characteristical
mark of a Christian, the very Test of our Christianity: for Christ is concernd
in no piece of Worship so much as this; This is more properly Christian Worship
than any other Act of Religion. Shall we not then observe this Mandate, obey
this Command, and enjoy this Privilege properly belonging to his Disciples?
This, this it was that caused the Christians of old, when for their Sins they
were debarred and excluded, to lament their condition in large showers or
Tears, and sadly bewail their banishment from the Lord's Table: This was
esteemed the highest Honor the (...) could receive, when (after long
attendance, and strict examination) they were permitted to commence, and take
the Degree of Fideles, and admitted into the Society of Communicants, into the
Fellowship and Communion of Saints

2. This Holy Action of receiving the Sacrament in Remembrance of Christ's
Death and Passion, is a Duty incumbent upon every Christian, because this was
the practice of the most Apostolical and Primitive Times, which is a good
Comment upon Christ's Intentions, and a clear discovery of the Obligatory Power
of this Command.

They who were the immediate Auditors of Christ and his Apostles, had certainly
the best Notion of the import of this Command; and the Notion they had of it,
made them as constantly do this, as they assembled together either to eat,
drink, or confer together in love and friendship: And the 46th verse of the 2d
of the Acts seems to intimate to us that the Church of Jerusalem receivd the
Sacrament every day, and that they continued daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking Bread at home, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart; that is, after they had daily performed their common
Devotions with the Jews in the Temple, they (because the Jews would not then
permit them to do it in the Temple) went to their own Houses, to tender a more
peculiar Service to Christ, by doing this in remembrance of him. But the
principal time for this Holy Exercise seems to have been on the Lord's Day: for
we read, Acts 20.7. that the Disciples were assembled on the first day of the
week to break Bread. And as in the Apostolical, so in the next succeeding
Times, they often met together to do this; and while the Spirit of Christianity
was yet warm and vigorous, it is more than probable they did communicate every
day, or as often as they came together to the Public Worship; insomuch that
the Canons Canon 9*
Apostolical, and the Canon 2.
Synod of Atioch threatened those persons with Excommunication, who resorted to
the Public Assemblies to hear the Scriptures, and departed from them without
this Spiritual Food. This custom of communicating every day was of no short
continuance in the Church; and some Churches, and particularly the Western did
retain it longer than others. And St. Cyprian assures us that it was practiced
in his time, saying, Eucharistiam quotidie ad cibum salutis accipimus. Cypr. de
Oratione Dominica. p. 268.
We receive the Eucharist every day, as the food our Salvation. The like St.
Ambrose reports of Millain, where he was Bishop. And St. Hierom affirms, that
this custom was in use in his time at Rome. And St. Augustine intimates, that in
the Age in which he lived it was not wholly disused and laid aside. In the
Eastern Churches this custom disappeared sooner than in the Western, though
more or less, according to the ebbing or flowing of their Zeal. And St. Basil
(...). Basil in 289 Epist. ad Caesaream Patritiam
positively affirms, that in his time they did communicate four times a week,
namely, on the Lord's day, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and upon other
days, (...). Basil. ibid.
if the memory of any Martyr were celebrated upon them. Afterward, as Religion
began to be in her Wane and Decrease, this Sacrament was more and more
discontinued, and from a daily was first changed into a weekly, and then into a
monthly Service, and afterward performed but thrice a Year, at Christmas,
Easter, and upon Whitsunday; and even at these three great Festivals it is now
by many lukewarm Christians neglected and disregarded: for (to speak the truth)
we have much degenerated from the Devotion of the Primitive Christians; and are
taught of late to idolize Preaching, and value our selve from our much Hearing;
being like that People called Corimandi, whose Ear (as Historians tell us)
covered their whole Body. The Epidemical Disease of this Age, being the Rickets
of Religion; or the having great Heads, Heads swelled, and big with Knowledge
(falsely so called) but their Legs weak and impotent, not able to walk in the
ways of God's Commandments. Prayer, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
must strike sail to Sermons; and because Men are too feeble in Spirituals to
prepare themselves for it, they are unwilling to come to this holy Feast; and
persuade themselves that Superstition did eat out the heart of true Religion in
the Primitive times, and that then Men did come so frequently to eat with
Christ at his Table, only in a Complement, and Complaisance, and flatter and
wheedle their Savior with a superfluous and needless Devotion, and therefore
they will not do this once a year, nay some of them scarce once in all their
lives. But let me advise such, not to dare to neglect Christ's gracious
Invitation, nor disobey his Command, of doing this in remembrance of him: for
not only Acts, but Omissions are evil. It is a Sin to contemn the Sacrament,
and a Sin not to receive it when we may: the one leads to the other: Neglect
and Indifferency (as we have seen by woeful experience) terminate at last in
open Profaneness. If we had a true esteem of the Cup of Blessings, we should
thirst more after it: but the truth is, our thoughts are seldom or never
employed upon the consideration of those many Benefits and Advantages we
receive by it. And this brings me to the third Reason, why this holy Action of
Receiving the Sacrament in Remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion, is a Duty
incumbent upon every Christian. And that is,

III. Because it is fraught with many Benefits and Advantages; this is not an
empty barren Ceremony, or an unprofitable Rite, it has a large train of
Blessings attending on it. And

1. It makes us participate of Christ, and his Grace and Spirit. The external
Act indeed only declares Christ's Death in Rite and Ceremony; but the worthy
communicating of it, makes us feed upon Christ, and unites him to our Souls,
and makes us to become one Spirit, according to those words of St. Ambrose, In
similitudimem quidem accipis Sacramentum, sed verae naturae gratiam virtutemque
consequeris. Ambros. de Sacramento.
Thou receivest the Sacrament as the similitude of Christ's Body, but thou
shall withal obtain the Grace and Virtue of the true Nature. The Elements of
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament are not (as some tell us) only Symbols of
mutual Charity, Allegorical Admonitions of Christian Mortification, and Rites
instituted, only to stir up Faith, by way of Object and Representation; this
were to embrace a mere Cloud instead of the true Juno, the true Deity: Those
Names, and Appellations, which the Scripture gives them, speak them to be more
than so; such as are the Body and Blood of the Lord, the communication of his
Body, and the communication of his Blood; all which intimate no less to us than
a real change in the Elements, and that Christ is really present there; and
though we must never hope to have our sight so acute, as the Romanists tell us
theirs is, when, through that strange glass of Transubstantiation, they pretend
to see and discern the very Flesh and Blood of Christ; yet we must not
entertain such mean thoughts of them, as to think them only bare signs of what
Christ did for us; but firmly believe that they exhibit Christ himself to all
worthy Communicants.

2. A second Benefit or Advantage of the Sacrament is, That it quickens,
strengthens, and increases our Faith: All Habits are increased by often
repeated Acts: Now this Sacrament requires frequent and great Exercises of our
Faith, by fixing it upon its proper Object, a Crucified Savior; and it being
(as St. Cyril of Jerusalem tell us) (...). Catech. 2.
A Representation of Christ's Sufferings, makes us seal to that Truth, which he
has signed and sealed with his Blood, and make a public profession of our
Faith in the virtue and merits of it: For the Sacraments (as one says well)
are nothing else but Protestationes Fidei, the public Protestations of our
Faith. They who come to the Lord's Table, by their very coming do publicly
profess, that they believe not only every Article of their Faith, but also
every part of this Divine Promise and Institution, by which Christ will renew,
strengthen and establish his Covenant to every worthy Receiver. Nor is our
coming to the Sacrament our Protestation only of our Faith, but also of our
Repentance, which,

3. Is hugely advantaged and promoted by the Sacrament: for we cannot certainly
but repent with all speed of our Sins, when we consider that they were the
Spears that pierced our Savior's side, the Nails that fastened him to the
Cross; and that they laid such loads of Wrath upon the shoulders of Omnipotency
it self, as made him complain and sweat, groan and die: it being impossible for
any Man ever to have such, a sense of, and sorrow for Sin, as when he is
awakened by the signs and images of Christ's Sufferings, and when he sees it
writ and decypher'd in Characters of Blood: so that our receiving the
Sacrament, which commemorates Christ's Death and Sufferings, is a Protestation
of our repenting of those Sins of ours, which most Jewishly crucified the Lord
of Glory.

The Canonist will tell us, Sacramentum and mortis Articulus aequiparantur,
that we are considered at the Sacrament, as on our Deathbed: Now on our
Deathbed we repent of our Sins, then we lay down our Malice, then we nauseat
our Lust, then we go out of and renounce the World, then we quarrel with
Mammon; then we are meek, humble, and tractable; then we are commonly what we
should be in Health: Now if we consider our selves at the Holy Table, as on our
Deathbed, we shall undoubtedly repent of our Sins, and drown them in the
Blood, and nail them to the Cross of our Savior: and if so, then this
Sacrament may very well (notwithstanding what some extravagant Fancies may
suggest to the contrary) deserve the name of a Converting Ordinance; that is,
such an Ordinance as God makes use of to turn Men from Sin to Holiness; toward
which nothing can contribute more, than that solemn Obligation which all Worthy
Communicants lay upon themselves at the Lord's Table, to forsake their Sins,
and lead holy Lives: there being nothing imaginable that can seen a more
probable and proper Instrument, to convert Men from a wicked to an holy Life,
than the sacred Remembrance that Christ's Death was designed to be the Death of
Sin, and the Life of Holiness.

4. A fourth Benefit or Advantage of the Sacrament is, That it enlarges and
enflames our Love, our Charity: whether it be,

First, Divine Love, or the Love of God: Or, Secondly, The Love of our
Neighbor.
First, It enlarges and enflames our Love of God: For, by the commemoration of
Christ's Death in the Sacrament; we imprint in our Memories that Heroic Act,
that never yet did enoble the story of any Person, namely, Christ's laying down
his Life for his Enemies; the Lamb of God his dying for Wolves, for those that
would have devoured him: So that if the Poet's Fancy of Deucalion and Pyrrha
were verified in us, and we, like the Men and Women in their days, were made or
Stone, yet these Marbles could not but weep, these cold stones could not but be
warmed with the Fire of Divine Love, struck out of them by the consideration of
Christ's great Love to us, expressed by that Gift he gave to obtain our Pardon,
namely, his Life: This was such a transcendent Act of Love as no Romance of
Friendship did ever yet fancy or suppose. We may have heard of two Companions
that would die for each other, and that never quarreled in their Lives but for
this, who should suffer first, to save the other, and strove only for Death and
Execution: But for a Person in the Trinity to leave his Heaven, to come down to
us, to dwell with Agonies, that he might free us from Torments: This was an Act
of Love fit for Ecstasies of Apprehension! there were never such wounds of Love
as those that tore his Heart; never such meltings of Affection and Goodness, as
dissolved Christ into sweats of Blood. Let us look on our Savior in the
Garden, and on Mount Calvari, and we shall find him there in as great Agonies
of Affection as of Torment, and hanging down his head upon the Cross, with
Languishments of Kindness, more than Weakness. Now such Meditations of Christ's
Love to us as these, does receiving the Sacrament suggest to us; and if (as
undoubtedly it is) Love is the best Loadstone to attract Love; the doing this
Holy Action cannot but kindle in us that Holy Passion of Divine Love: Nor will
it stop here, but proceed:

Secondly, To nourish and increase the Love of our Neighbor: For it being the
Commemoration of his Passion, who was the perfect Mirror of Love, it cannot but
kindle and inflame our Loves to one another, which is an expression of our Love
to God: For, 1 John 4.12. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his
Love is perfected in us. Christ died for his Enemies, and shall not the
Commemoration thereof teach us to love ours? When the King of Moab was pressed
hard by the Israelites and Edomites, he took his own Son, and offered him as an
Holocaust upon the Wall, whereupon they presently raised the Siege: So God has
offered up his Son, as an Holocaust, as a Sacrifice for us; and can we choose
then, when we commemorate that his Oblation in the Sacrament, but raise the
Siege, and cease from quarrelling and fighting with our Enemies, and do them
all the good Offices of Love and Kindness. Epictetus has ingeniously observed,
That (...).
every thing in the World has two handles; one turned toward us, which we may
easily take; the other turned from us, harder to be laid hold of: the first
makes all things easy, the second does not. The instance he brings fits my
present purpose; Be it (says he) that thy Brother has offended thee; there are
two handles, one of the offense, the other of thy Brother: if thou take hold of
that of the Offense, it will be too hot for thee; but if of that of thy
Brother, it will make all his behavior toward thee so tolerable, as to
continue him still the Object of thy Love. There is no part of out Brother's
carriage toward us, but (if we examine it) we shall find some handle, some
circumstance, that may reconcile our Love to it; if we can find no other, that
of our Savior's dying for his most virulent, bitter, and malicious Enemies,
will accomplish and effect it. For (says St. Chrysostom) did thou know that
thy Brother intended particular Mischief against thee, that he would even
embrue his hand in thy Blood, (...).
kiss that very hand; for the Lord Christ did not refuse to kiss that very
Mouth, that made the Bargain for his Blood: The Effusion whereof we commemorate
by pouring out the Sacramental Wine. Now this Love of his required the best of
our Love by way of Compensation; and he has made our Brethren Letters of
Attorney to receive that Debt of our Love which is due to him.

And thus having mustered up all the Arguments, to enforce the Necessity of
receiving the Sacrament, which the time allotted to this Discourse would allow
of: I shall now remove some of the principal Objections, which are urged by
some, to discourage both themselves and others from this necessary and holy
Duty.

The first Objection is, that of their own Unworthiness, which (they say)
frights them from this holy Feast.

To which let me return this Answer, that though they pretend Fear to be a
Bridle in their Mouths, that hinders them from eating, yet I am apt to believe
this but a bare pretense; because they are not afraid of those things, which (I
am sure) have more evil and danger in them, than the doing this holy Action can
ever be supposed to have; for they are not afraid to break a positive Command
of Christ's, which requires them to do this in remembrance of him.They are not
afraid to live in the known Sins of Schism, Faction, Covetousness,
Uncharitableness, Disobedience to their Governors both in Church and State;
and yet they are afraid to do a necessary Duty, which Christ himself requires
of them. They make their Unworthiness a Plea for their not coming, but who is
culpable and blameable for it? Is it not to be charged upon themselves alone?
Is it not because they are unwilling to take a Survey of their Consciences, and
examine themselves? Is it not because they are so in love with Sin, as to think
it has a better Gusto than this blessed Feast? O let not these sad Wretches
put such Cheats upon themselves, as to pretend, that the thoughts of their
Unworthiness fright them from it, of which if they were truly sensible, they
would not remain so unworthy; but (as the Apostle advises) 1 Cor. 11.28. First
examine themselves, and then eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Let them
not therefore spin such fine Threads of Hypocrisy, as to deceive their own
Eyes; for their Unworthiness is no sufficient reason to keep them from this
Duty, unless they are resolved to continue in that state without Repentance.
The sick Man is not unworthy of Physic, because he is sick, but because he
flings away his Physic, and defies all Remedies and Medicines that may restore
him to Health; and if this be the state of these Men in Spirituals, they are
then indeed unfit to come to the Holy Table: But if they are desirous to purge
away their sins by repentance, and lead a new life for the future, they may,
nay, they are obliged to participate of this Holy Feast; and are as worthy of
it, as the Wounded Man is of Healing Balsam, or the Sick Man of Physic; that
is, they want it; and Christ invites them to come, that they may receive such
supplies as are suitable to their Wants and Necessities.

Secondly; A second Objection against coming to the Sacrament, is this; That it
is often seen, that Men break those Resolutions against Sin after the
Sacrament, which they made in so solemn a manner before they received it; and
than therefore they will not come to it, lest by breaking those Vows and
Promises of a Reformation, which they made to God before receiving, they should
inflame their Reckoning, increase their Sins, and thereby exasperate God the
more against them.

To which I answer; That though Men should by chance break their resolutions of
amendment, after the Sacred Solemnity is over, yet let not that fright them
from a second Celebration of it, but induce them rather to frequent it the
more; that they may obtain that strength by a frequent repetition of this
Action, which could not be had from one single Act; there being a greater
Probability of their standing firm, and not relapsing into Sin, if they receive
often, than if they receive seldom or not at all; especially if they consider,
that their not receiving is it self a Sin, a Sin of Omission, a breach of a
positive Command of Christ's, who requires their Presence at his Holy Table; to
which if they come prepared by Self-examination, and with a sincere Resolution
of their Souls to lead a new Life, they will find their Graces strengthened,
their Faith quickened, their Hope increased, their Charity enflamed, and their
whole Inward-Man repaired by it; and that the oftener they receive the
Sacrament, the more fit they will be to receive; this Sacrament being more
suitable to the weak than the strong, tho needful for both: and it is more than
probable, that Men's weakness is the effect of their feeding so seldom on it,
and permitting those Recruits and Reinforcements they had received by it, decay
and languish, before they were renewed by a fresh repast. To which I may also
superadd, that by the same Argument by which Men discourage themselves from the
Sacrament, they may also fright themselves from the duty of Repentance, without
which there is no Salvation upon Gospel terms; For whenever I repent, I must,
after I have asked God pardon for my former Sins, promise and resolve to serve
him with better Obedience for the future, if I would obtain Pardon of him. And
do we not find by woeful experience, that we break those Promises we make even
in our most solemn Repentance, and consequently incur God's Displeasure by that
breach of Promise? And what then, must we not repent, because we sometimes*
fall back from our Repentance, and either forget, or break our Promises?
Certainly we ought rather to repent again of that our breach of Promise, to
repent and be sorry for the imperfections of our former Repentance: So that by
the same Reason that we must not come to the Sacrament, because we often break
those Vows and Promises of Amendment, that we make before we receive it, we
must not also repent, because we often again return to those Sins whereof we
repented, and which we resolved against at the time of our Repentance; which
dangerous Opinion no Christian, who understands the purport of the second
Covenant, will dare to espouse.

Thirdly; A third Objection against the Sacrament is, That Men fear they want
Knowledge, and understand not aright the nature of the Sacrament; which if they
do not, this their gross and stupid ignorance of a thing so easy, and withal
so necessary to be understood, is, inexcusable. A Subtilety in thorny
Controversy, or an Ability in the intricate Mysteries of Religion are no
necessary Ingredients in a Worthy Communicant; even those Heads that can
neither toil about, not spin out an Argument, may be as richly arrayed in that
Knowledge that is requisite for a good Communicant, as Solomon in all his Glory.
To qualify and fit Men for the Sacrament, it is not required that they should
know the Motions of the Celestial Bodies, or the Influences of the Stars; if
they do but feel any good Motions within themselves, and how CHRIST, the bright
Morning Star Rev. 22.16.
, (and that this Star descended from his bright Orb of Glory, and set in a Sea
of Blood, to raise such black Sinners as they are to Mansions of Eternal Glory:
It is not expected from a Worthy Communicant that he should dive into the depth
of any new Mystery, or study for any new Notion; All that is new he is to be in
quest of, is the New 2 Cor. 5.17.
Creature. Every Child (that has but learnt his Church Catechism) can tell
that the Sacrament was ordained for the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice
of the Death of Christ, and the Benefits we receive thereby; and that the
Reception of this Sacrament is the ratifying and confirming our Covenant with
God; and that it is required of those who come to the Lords Supper, to examine
themselves whether they repent them truly of their former Sins, steadfastly
purposing to lead a new Life; have a lively Faith in Gods Mercy through Jesus
Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all
Men. He that knows but thus much, knows enough of the nature of the Sacrament;
and he that knows not this, (after so many Sermons and Catechisings that have
been made upon the Sacrament) for this his gross and supine Ignorance, may
justly be reputed such a Dunce in Christianity, as scarcely to deserve the Name
of a Christian. And therefore if any Person be ignorant in this matter, why
does he not repair to those, whose Office and Business it is to teach and
inform him better? Why has he not recourse to those, Mat. 2.7.
whose Lips should keep Knowledge? who (I am confident) would be glad of all
opportunities to ^nstruct those who are ignorant in this or any other kind.

Fourthly. A fourth Objection against coming to the Sacrament, is a fear in
Men, that when they have prepared themselves for it as well as they can, they
are not yet so well prepared as they should be.

To which I answer, That if we may not come to God's Ordinances, till we are as
well prepared as we should be, why then are we not afraid to pray to God? and
why are we not afraid to hear h^^ Word? For when we hear and pray, we do the
same thing that is performed at the Sacrament, the not in so solemn a manner:
So that by the same Argument that some Men scare themselves from the Sacrament,
they may also fright themselves from other holy Duties, such as Praying, or
Hearing the Word: For, as the Apostle says, that he the eats and drinks
unworthily; so it is true also, that he that prays or hears unworthily, prays
and hears to himself (...), Judgment, and temporal Punishments, and (if he
repent not by the Admonition of those Punishments) Eternal Damnation; and as he
that is not the better for the Sacrament, is certainly the worse for the
Sacrament; So he that is not the better for a Sermon, is certainly the worse
for a Sermon; every Sermon he hears amiss, shall rise up in Judgment against
him.

Let us then prepare our selves for the Sacrament as well as we can, and God
will accept of it, though it be not so well as we should; he will accept of our
sincere endeavors of Preparation: And if we will not choose to feed rather upon
Doubts and Scruples, than upon the Bread of Life, we may assure our selves of a
welcome to, and advantage by, this Holy Feast. Indeed if we come, like rude and
unmannerly Guests, once is too often; but if we purge and cleanse our Hearts,
if the stomach of our Souls be clean, often we may come, but we cannot come too
often; Christ's Blood is always full of virtue and efficacy, it will put out
the Fire of immoderate Anger, cool the Heart-burnings of Malice and Envy, the
Calentures of our Lust, quench the raging Thirst of Covetousness: If we drink
of this Cup as we ought, it will keep us from drinking too frequently and
immoderately of any other. Christ is always a Fountain of Life to those who
desire to taste the Waters of Life, at which we may draw as often as we please,
if our Pitcher be clean; and the oftener we draw, our Pitcher will be the
cleaner: And that it may be so, God grant us such a sense of our Savior's
Sufferings, as may create in us a just detestation of our Sins, and quicken our
endeavors in the ways of Repentance, and a holy Life, till we obtain those
Blessings, which by the effusion of his Blood he has purchased for us: to whom
with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Honors, Glory and Praise.

FINIS.
Books sold by Benjamin Billingsley at the Printin^ Press in Cornhill.
CHristian Religion's Appeal from the groundless Prejudices of (...) Sceptick
to the Bar of Common Reason. Wherein is prov^^

1. That the Apostles did not delude the World; 2. Nor were themselves deluded.
3. Scripture Matters of Fact have the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of
Scripture is as demonstrable, as the Being (...) Deity. By John Smith, Rector
of St. Mary's in Colchester. Fol. Pr. 1.(...)
A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Ma^^^^^ and Court of
Aldermen of the City of London, at Guild hall Cha^^^^^ Aug. 18. 1678. By Robert
Neville, B. D. late Fellow of King's Col^^^^^ in Cambridg, and now Rector of
Ansty in Hertfordshire. 4. price 6 (...)

Of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Two short Discourses, o^^^^^ing the Nature,
Design, and Ends of those two great Gospel-O^^^^nances, and teaching the holy
use and improvement of them. In (...) Price 6 d.


