OLD POPERY As GOOD as NEW.

OR The Unreasonableness of the CHVRCH of ENGLAND in some of Her Doctrines and
Practices, And the Reasonableness of Liberty of Conscience.

In a Letter from a Private Gentleman in the Country to his Friend a Clergyman
in the City.

Magnam Chartam dedit Henricus, Majorem dabit Chartam Iacobus. Printed in the
Year MDCLXXXVIII.

Worthy SIR,
THough I am a Friend to the Church of England, and Conformable to her
Establishments, as the Law obliges me, yet I have a greater Friendship for
true Religion in the general in what Habit or Dress soever I find it, and
amongst whatsoever different Opinions and Persuasions, I do not think any one
sort of Men do ingross all true Religion to themselves. Apolles and Cephas had
I doubt not as good Christians amongst their Followers as Paul himself had.
Their fault was want of Good Will one toward another, though of different
Sects. The Sincere Conscientious Man, that is Pious to his God, and Honest and
Just to his Neighbor; the Israelite indeed, in whom there is no Guile,
wherever I find him, whether at the Altar with his Beads, or in the Public
Church, or in the Private Conventicle, this is the Man I take to be a good
Christian, and a Member of that Catholic Church in which I believe. And being
thus persuaded, I have often with a melancholy Heart observed and reflected
upon the troubled state of Religion in this Nation for several Years past, and
the dire Consequences that have been amongst us of our severe Penal Laws, in
matters of Religion, made to Gratify one party of Men only, and to Suppress
and Ruin all the rest. I could not without Compa^^^onate and Bleeding Thoughts
see and hear of so many Persons of Sober and Virtuous Lives, and (as I cannot
but believe) very good Christians, to be stripped of their Goods and Estates,
their Persons Imprisoned, or at least forced to Quit and Fly from their
Habitations, and their Wives and Children Undone and brought to Want, and all
because they could not Conform to the Impositions of this one Patty of Men. And
these Thoughts have sometimes led me further to consider how consistent Laws of
this Nature are with Christianity and Policy. If the things Imposed be in their
own nature indifferent to be done or not done, then methinks it can hardly be
good Christianity to Impose them, and seems to be quite contrary to the sense
of St Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 14. If necessary that
Legislation ought to be Infallible that will impose any thing as such. Nay even
then they ought not to be Imposed, for to force me to change my Opinion is out
of the Power of a Law, and even out of my own Power to do; and to act contrary
to my Opinion and Conscience is not fit sure for a Christian Legislation to
Impose. And for the Policy of it, most certainly it cannot be good. All Laws
ought to be levelled at the common good of the People, and as comprehensive as
may be for all Interests, and this renders a Government Safe and Steady: But
when Laws are made with regard only to a particular party of Men, and against
the Interest and Inclination of as great or a greater Number, this
improbability must render a Government Hazardous and Unstable. And this we find
by woeful Experience does continue and highten our Divisions, and makes our
Breaches wider. It puts a Difficulty upon the Prince too, that he must
necessarily Govern with the Disgust and Discontent of a great part of his
People. Nay, and perhaps to his own Discontent and Dissatifaction also. For a
Mild and Merciful Prince cannot de light in Executing Severity, and a Prince of
tender Conscience may perhaps doubt whether Laws of this Nature be not void in
foro Consienciae and therefore not to be put in Execution. But before I can
think these thoughts, though I fancy my self interrupted by a Zealous Church of
England-Man, who comes full Mouth to tell the necessity of these Penal Laws,
for that some of the Dissenters from the established Religion own a Foreign
Power, and the rest are Factious, and Seditious, and of Rebellious Principles;
but the Church of England is Loyal, and a ways was. A great thing this to be
said for the Church of England, that when they have had the Prince and the Laws
on their side they have always been extraordinary Loyal. But turn the Tables
and see what they are then. The late King did but set out a Declaration for
Indulging tender Consciences, and how did they Rant and Rave against it both in
their Pulpit and Private Discourses? How did they animate the Parliament to
oppose the King in it, and were not quiet till that good King did recall his
Declaration? And how do they now, upon occasion of the present Liberty of
Conscience, question even those Powers and Prerogatives in the Prince, that
they themselves (when it served for their purpose did so vigorously Pre^ch up?
And all this Bussle and Stir when their Living and Perfe^men^s are in no
danger, but only their Power of Afflicting their Brethren restrained. What
wo^ld these Men do i^ their Lives, Estates and Liberties were in danger by Laws
made against them, as are now against others? Then they would without doubt be
as great Male contents to the Government, and endeavor as much to evade such
Laws, and avoid their Passive Obedience to them, and consequently deserve as
much the Epithets of Factious and Seditious, and Disaffected to the Government
as ever their Dissenting Brethren did. It Is is against Humane Nature willingly
to be Miserable. And no Man can be easy under those Laws that would undo him.
And is it my fault that I am thus Uneasy? Or is it not rather the mistake of
the Legislators to impose Laws that I cannot obey, and therefore must
unwillingly suffer under? Upon the whole matter, I could not but conclude these
Impositions in matters of Religion to be Unchristian, the Penal Laws that
enforce them to be Impolitick, and the extraordinary Loyalty of the Church of
England (by color whereof she procured them* to be a mere Sham and Pretense. I
proceed then to consider and reflect upon some of the Doctrines and Practices
of this Loyal Church of England, with relation to those that differ from her;
wherein I found her, as I thought, liable to many Objections, which occasioned
this Letter to my Friend. And therein I thought it not Impertinent to take
notice of our extraordinary Happiness in a Prince of that great and noble
Principle of Liberty of Conscience, the reasonableness of that Principle, and
the unreasonableness and mistake of our Penal Laws, which were designed to
Unite, but do in truth more Divide us, and therefore are very fitly Suspended
by the King, till they may be Repealed by Act of Parliament. Sir, Having lately
read some most Ingenious Papers (supposed to be yours) upon this Subject of
Liberty of Conscience, and persuading my self that in many of these things my
thoughts do concur with yours, I present this Paper to you desiring you, if you
think fit, to cause it to be Printed. For my part I date not think it worth
Printing, nor, if I did, do I know how to get it done, being a private
Gentleman in the Country, that never was in Print, nor now otherwise ambitions
of it, then that I may tell the World how much I am, Sir,

Your most humble Servant N. N.
^ctober 19. 1687.
SIR,
AMongst all the Polemick Discourses, that are abroad betwixt the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, I wonder that some things are not objected by
the Papists against the Church of England, which methinks she is very obnoxious
to, and which I would gladly be able to Answer if Objected. And because I know
you to be a Zealous Son of the Church of England, and as able as any Body to
defend her in her Principles and Practices, I apply my self to you for
satisfaction herein. Nor should I have given you this trouble, but that I find
our Vicar (who is no very mean Man neither, his Parts being better in
proportion then his Preferments) is hard put to it to give me a satisfactory
Answer.

We Charge the Papists with Idolatry in Worshipping Images and Pictures of our
Savior and his Cross, etc. But in the mean time we do not consider that we may
as well be blamed our selves for Bowing at the Name of Jesus, Bowing to the
Altar, Kneeling at the Lords Prayer at the end of other Prayers, and putting
off our Hats at Church when no Divine Service there, etc. The first of which,
viz. Bowing at the Name of Jesus is established by a Cannon, and the rest are
so much the constant Practice of the Church of England, that I never knew
either Bishop or dignified Clergyman, or any other thought worthy to be such,
but those that Practiced them. I expect you will tell me, that there can be no
hurt in these things, for that when we hear the Name of Jesus it puts us in
mind of our Blessed Savior, to whom we do the Reverence of Bowing. For Bowing
to the Altar or Communion Table, that is the place whereon the Bread and Wine
are Consecrated, and where the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is Administered,
and thereby our Savior and his Passion particularly Commemorated, and
therefore surely to pay a Reference to that place can have no harm in it. For
Kneeling at the Lords Prayer too in conclusion of other Prayers, it is the form
of Prayer that Christ himself taught us, and Sanctified with his own Lips, and
to do a Reverence to him when we pronounce those Words can have no hurt in it
one would think. And for putting off our Hats in Churches, when no Divine
Service there, sure that can be no harm neither, to pay a Reverence in that
place that is consecrated and set apart for the Worship of the Deity.

These things seem pausible, and have along time pas't for Current. But for my
part, when I consider what difference there is betwixt our Bowing at the Name
of Jesus, and the Papists Bowing to the Image or Picture of Jesus, I can find
none but this, viz. The difference of the outward sense by which the thought of
our Savior is conveyed to our Understanding. For as upon sight of his Effigies
the Papists Worship, so upon hearing of his Name we Worship also. It Is true
this Worship of ours cannot be called Idolatry, the signification of the Word
will not bear it; but I take the Venom of Idolatry to be a misplac't Worship; and
if the Papist in Bowing to that which represents our Savior to his Sense of
Seeing be guilty of it, I doubt, when by the sound of his Name Jesus he is
represented to my Sense of Hearing, and I Worship also, I Am hardly Innocent.

In Bowing to the Altar too, because the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is there
Administered, and the Passion of our Savior is there Commemorated; what do I
less then the Papist Bowing to the Crucifix, whereby the Passion of our Savior
is to him more sensibly represented? And if Bow to the Altar, because that
Sacrament is there Administered, why not to the Font also, where the other
Sacrament of Baptism is also Administered? Some will excuse this Bowing to the
Altar, by calling it Bowing to the East, and pretend to give some insignificant
Reasons why we should do so. Others will tell you of a relative Holiness in
Places and Things, and excuse it that way. But I would ask, If Bowing to the
East be the reason, why no such Bowing in Churches where the Communion Table
stands in the Body of the Church? If because of the relative Holiness, why has
not the Font as good a title to this relative Holiness, and consequently to the
same respect the Altar has? And what is this relative Holiness mere in any
thing then its being Consecrated and set a part for Sacred Uses? And must we
Worship anything for this? Upon the same reason the Parsons may by degrees
challenge some sort of extraordinary respect to themselves, being by their
Ordination set apart for Sacred Services. Methinks 'twere better for the Church
of England to speak plain English, and confess she Bow's to the Altar for the
same reason the Papists do. They do it because they hold that after
Consecration the Wafer and Wine are become the real Body and Blood of Christ,
so that the real Christ is present there. And this without all doubt was the
beginning of it in the Church of England. We had it from Rome, and in truth we
keep it still upon the same reason they do, though we conceal, and will not own
it. The real Presence that we hold in the Sacrament, what to make of it I cannot
imagine but Transubstantiation, or somewhat yet more strange. For what
difference is there betwixt the real Christ being present by the
Transubstantiating Power of the Popish-Priests Consecration, and Christ's being
really present by the as unintelligible Power of out Church of England Priests
Consecration? Is it not as great a Miracle, for a Church of England Priest, by
his Words of Consecration, to fetch down Christ from Heaven, and to
circumscribe his Omni-present Deity to the. Communion Table, as for the
Popish-Priest, by his Consecration, to translate the Bread and Wine into
Christ's real Body and Blood? And when we have his real Presence there, how
comes it that in the Sacrament we really receive his Body and his Blood? It
must be by Transubstantiation sure, or somewhat less intelligible even then
that. Now that there is a real Presence in the Sacrament, and that we receive
the Body and Blood of Christ verily and indeed, in the Opinion of the Church of
England, I will only cite you the last Church of England Author that I read,
and that is the late Published Exposition of the Church-Catechism, Composed for
the Diocese of Bath and Wells, Page 75, and 76. He indeed there confesses it
Unintelligible, and makes some Pious Ejaculations thereupon. And what need
there is to make or think this Sacrament so Unintelligible I protest I know
not. Most certainly our Savior in his Institution of it nere meant it so: When
he said, Eat, this is my Body, and Drink, this it my Blood: He little thought
that the Pronoun (my) should occasion these Doctrines of Transubstantiation and
the Real Presence; if he had, he surely would not have given those other
Directions, viz, That as often as we do it we should do it in Remembrance of Him:
Remembrance being only of Persons and Things absent and not present. He surely
did intend it a plain and easy thing both to be done and understood. As if he
had said, I for your sakes have left those heavenly Mansions where my Father
dwells, and where I sat at his Right Hand, enjoying equally Eternal Bliss in
Unity with him; and am from thence come down to put on Human Nature here, and
to become Obnoxious to all the Frailties and Infirmities thereof, even to Death
it self. This Body of mine must be Bruised for your Iniquities, and my Blood
spilt for your Sins. Nay I must Dye the Death too, even the accursed Death of
the Cross, (a Death more due to you) that I may rescue you from Death Eternal.
And therefore when I am Dead and Gone I would have you Meet, and Eat and Drink
sometimes together, and remember me. When you break Bread, remember this Body
of mine that was Wounded for your sakes; and when you Drink, remember also my
Blood that was for your sakes Shed. Remember that bitter Cup that I drank of;
those horrid Agonies that I endured to satisfy the Divine Vengeance due to
you. And when you do this, repent of; and for sake your Sins that brought me to
it, and believe in me, and rely upon this Satisfaction and Atonement thus made
for you. So shall you Eat and Drink Worthily: So shall you Grow and Increase in
Grace: So shall your Souls be Nourished and Preserved to Everlasting Life; and
so shall my Flesh be to you Meat indeed, and my Blood Drink indeed. This seems
to me to be the sole and whole intent and meaning of our Savior, when he
instituted this holy Festival of the Lords Supper, viz. Thankfully to
commemorate his Death and Passion, and to believe in him. How the Immortal God
could become Man and Dye for us is the great Mystery to be Admired and
Believed. That God was made Man and did Dye for us is the great Mercy to be
Remembered and Adored. Now by these Notions of Transubstantiation and the Real
Presence we make our Commemoration as Mysterious as the thing Commemorated, and
consequently the practical part of our Res^ion, which should be plain and
easy, does become difficult and unintelligible. It Is good Craft in the
Priesthood to make it so, who thereby make themselves so much the more
Necessary, by how much the more Mysterious they make our Religion. And if they
would set to it, and make the best use of all those Figurative, and
Metaphorical, and other Rhetorical Expressions that are in the Scriptures, and
take them Literally, they may furnish us with Mysteries good store. But enough
of this matter.

Now for the Kneeling at the Lords Prayer at the end of other Prayers which are
said Standing. What may this mean I trow? Do we vary the object of our Devotion
when we use the Lords Prayer? Do we not in our other Prayers before it pray to
the same God? Why not then the same Reverent Posture at one Prayer as at
another? Nay, methinks if any difference ought to be, the most Reverent Posture
should be used when we do our Devotions in our own imperfect Words and Forms,
and when we use that absolute Form our Savior taught us, one would think we
rather might approach the Throne of Grace more boldly.

And when we put off our Hats in the Church, when there is no Divine Service
there, to what purpose is it, and to whom do we do that Respect? If to the
Deity, why do we walk and talk, and transact other matters there at the same
time, as Parish Business, etc. If not to the Deity, to whom or what else? I
doubt there can no good account be given of it. Yet I am told of a tantivy
Country Parson in Northamtonshire, who being lately very angry with an honest
Neighbor of his, for keeping on his Hat, at a Parish Meeting, in the Church,
and being restrained from his usual and proper course of Revenge, by the Kings
late gracious Declaration of Indulgence, he prevailed with a young Baronet (his
Patron and his Neighbors Landlord) to turn his Neighbor out of his Farm
(where he had Lived long, and paid his Rent well) to his no small Damage. A
wise Landlord, and a precious Parson in the mean time, I Will warrant You.

Another Objection I have against our Church of England, Is the Singing their
Prayers in their Cathedral Service. We blame the Papists for Praying in an
unknown Tongue, and what is this less? It is Intelligible to none but those
whose Business it so much is, that I doubt it is but little their Devotion. And
yet we tell the Papists, that all public Devotion ought to be Intelligible to
all, and therefore not in Latin; and therefore say I too, not in this noisie
confused manner that cannot be understood.

Then there is the business of the Cross in Baptism, very liable to Exception. I
Sign thee with the Sign of the Cross (says the Church of England) in token that
thou shall become Christ's Soldier and Servant, and manfully Fight under his
Banner, etc. I Sign my self with the Sign of the Cross (says the Papists) when
in Danger, and upon such like Occasions, in token that my Faith and Trust is in
my Blessed Savior, that he that has set me free from the Bondage and Slavery
of Sin and Satan, can and will preserve me from all outward Dangers. Pray
where is the difference?

Another thing I object against the Church of England, which I find in the
Exposition of the Church Catechism, that I mentioned before, page 28. where he
tells us of the Saints Praying for us in Heaven, whilst we are Celebrating
their Memorials here. If they can pray for us and do us kindness, sure we may
pray to them to do it. And so in that point I think we are very good Catholics.

One thing more I must not omit to mention, which methinks is very scandalous
in our Church of England, and that is the slight regard we have to the
Sabath-Day or Sunday. With what industry we have endeavored to suppress the
Observation of that Day, the Book of Sports heretofore published and publicly
read in Churches, and the several Books written against the Sunday-Sabath, by
Eminent Churchmen, may sufficiently show. And at this Day it is enough to
brand any Man for a Fanatic or Whig if the be for the strict Observation of
that Day, or for twice Preaching on that Day. How many Ministers have been
upbraided with it even at Visitations? It is the Opinion or many Learned Men,
that the Observation of this Day is of Divine Institution, which makes it at
least probable; and therefore how unseemly is it in us, who are a Reformed
Church, so much to discountenance the Observation of this Day (as if we were
afraid of being too Religious) when at the same time we exact the strict
Observation of some other Days acknowledged on all hands to be purely of Humane
Institution.

These and many other things in practice with us are so like the Church of Rome
that it seems mere Obstinacy in us that we are not the same with them. And
certainly all Standers by, that have observed for these twenty six Years past
what we have Preached and Practiced, have thought us that way bent. But they
were quite mistaken I perceive. We are for a Popery of our own, a Yoke of our
own making that we would have the slavish Laity to vvear. And 'tvvas for this
that we have procured to be made and excecuted those Penal Laws, which now
the World (too early for our purpose) does see through. And to this end we have
Preached up and taught that wholesome Doctrine of Prayers and Tears by others,
to be Practiced not our selves. It Is strange to me, I must confess, why we
should retain such semblances of Popery, and those so unaccountable, and yet so
eagerly oppose Popery it self. The Apes the Uglier Creature much because most
like the Noblest Creature Man. And for my part I think our Apish Ceremonies and
Superstitions are so like those of Rome that they are the worse again. And truly
if we must have so many Ceremonies in our Religion, give me Old Popery rather
then New: Those Ceremonies of the Roman Church, Approved and Practiced by so
much the greater part of the Christian World for many Ages past, rather then
those trivial upstart Mimmickries of them practiced only within the narrow
Limits of the Church of England.

But, thanks to Heaven and our great Prince, our Choice is not so straightned.
A Nobler Principle far is by his Great Example taught us. Be we but Virtuous
and Religious, and we may be so in our own way. Modes in Religion ought not,
shall not be Compelled. Those severe Penal Laws, that at the first were parhaps
well intended, being made upon mistaken Grounds prove Ineffectual, and serve
now only to assist the Haughty Clergyman in his Insolence, the Angry Layman
in his Revenge, and the Ravenous Informer in persuit of his Prey. And when a
Law out lives the reason of it, and becomes inconvenient in the general Opinion
of People, (as these have been already Voted by a Parliament) why should it
not be in the Princes Power (nay is it not his Duty) to interpose and preserve
his People from Destroying one another by bidding such fatal Laws to cease, at
least till a Parliament may actually Repeal them? Sure else he bears the Sword
in Vain. When he in his great Wisdom sees and observes that Humane Laws cannot
reach the Minds of Men; but that that must and will be Free: And to compel the
Body without the Soul is but to force Hypocrisy; from which no Glory can
redound to the Prince, nor Safety to his Government. When his Wisdom approves
as Necessary what his Piety inclines him to as Just, and for the good of his
People: Shall he not then declare, My People shall be Free, their Consciences
no longer shall be forced in matters of Religion? O Great and Gracious KING!
This is to make us Free indeed. A Glorious and Divine Principle. A Principle of
Universal Right and Justice, and doubtless most agreeable to the Mind and Will
of God, who seems on purpose to have placed the Soul out of the reach of Humane
Power and Compulsion, and not otherwise to be moved then by the Dictates of
right Reason, and the gracious Influences of his Holy Spirit. A Principle that
carries in it the sum of all Religion, Impartial Charity: that carries in it
the sum of all Wisdom and Policy, it being the only Principle that can Unite
divided Mankind heartily together. A Principle for which our Glorious Prince
will ever be Renowned in after Ages, when it shall be said, King JAMES the Frst
United the Kingdoms, but 'twas Great JAMES the Second that did Unite the
People. And now I am upon this mighty Theme, so great a Prince; and of so noble
a Principle as Liberty of Conscience, I should not know when to have done did
not my Sheet of Paper grow too near the end. I will therefore only add this one
thing: That Prince that Governs by this generous and noble Principle, his
Government does most resemble that of the Deity in Governing the World. God
Almighty, the great Author of all our various intellectual as well as outward
Complections, accepts the variegated Services of his different Creatures, and
is pleased with the Harmony that arises from that Discord, since all agree in
the Praise and Glory of their great Creator. But no more. I would be glad to
have your thoughts of these things, in which, though I conceit my self somewhat
in the right, I am sure you will conclude me much in the wrong. I am

Your humble Servant, N. N.
September 12. 1687.
Primus Jacobus Regna Conjunxit, Secundus Corda.
FINIS.

