AN ASTROLOGICAL AND THEOLOGIGAL DISCOURSE Upon this present Great Conjunction.

(The like whereof has not (likely) been in some Ages.)

Usherd in by a Great COMET.

And so far, upon the Heavens, the Planets, and fixed Stars as is a Necessary
Introduction into a Distinct and full knowledge of the Principal Subject Herein
Handled.

When I Consider thy Heavens O Lord Ps. 8. 3. Look now toward Heaven and tell
the Stars. Genesis 15. 5. Lift up your Eyes on High, and behold these things Isa.
40. 26. Though we may not be Star gazers, yet we must be Star-beholders Caril
on Job.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis at the sign of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey near
Fleet-bridge, 1682.

depiction of a comet with Archimedes and people observing from below The
Figure of the Planets Application Toward their Conjunction which was Usherd in
by this COMET

ARCHIMEDES beholding both in his Jacobs Staff.



An Astrological and Theological Discourse upon this Great Conjunction, and
upon the Heavens, the Planets and fixed Stars; So far as is necessary to Unfold
its Mystery.
AS this great, if not greatest and Climactericael Conjunction is Vsherd into
the World by a great Blazing Comet, so is this Discourse upon the Former by my
Half sheet upon the Latter; which falling into the Hands of a very Learned and
Honorable Gentleman, not only found most pleasing Acceptance (notwithstanding
the Notorious Omissions in it by its negligent Printer, who left out two lines
in two places of the First page, and another most material One in the Second,
to wit? the Third under Moses, the Fourth under Solomon, the Fifth under
Christ; so he curtaild my Copy, if not made it Nonsense.) But also it brought
forth a Request from Him to me for an Enlargement upon this great Conjunction:
Touching the Comet (which was the Usher to this Conjunction) I observed, It
quite left its Northern Latitude (where it first Appeared) and is passed to the
Southern, posting away from Ursa Major, by Arcturus to a little beyond the
Aequinoctial line, where it has overtaken the Beams of the Sun, and wherein it
has hid it self from our Sight, for the present. But may (If its matter be not
all spent before) be seen again in the Morning (when it has out run the Sun)
so come nearer to its Signal Lord and Master (the Superior Planets conjoined)
to which as an Harbingger and Herald it has sent out General Summons to look
up and admire: Leaving therefore the Servant (the Comet) who has now Left us,
(having done its Errand) and we have Lost it by its Disappearance, let us
attend upon its Master (the Conjunction) which it attended upon, and has
sounded its Trumpet (both North and South) to Rouse up Spectators of this so
wonderful position of the Planets, the like whereof has not been for Twenty or
Two Hundred or Eight Hundred Years past, as the Sequel does demonstrate in
following Remarks the (1st. Remark is, Heaven (according to Scripture notion,
omitting the distinct orbs found out by Philosophy) is 3 fold Coelum expansum
stellatum and gloriosum. (1) the Firmament wherein the Fowls do fly, which is
the Aerial Heaven, and hence, it is said [the Fowls of Heaven] Math. 6. 26. (2)
the Aetherial or Syderial Heaven, wherein the Sun, Moon and Stars are seated
and do shine forth, hence are they called the Stars of Heaven. Genesis 22. 17.
Deuteronomy. 1. 10 etc. 3) the Empireal or glorious Heaven the uppermost of all, the
Seat of the Blessed into which the Apostle had his Rapture. 2. Cor. 12. 2.
where glorified Saints, and glorious Angels dwell with the great God, hence
it is said, the Angels of Heaven. Math. 24. 36. it is hard to open so much as a
Window or Casement for letting men see the Incomprehensible light of that
glorious Lodging, which is the Palace Royal of the Almighty Jehovah, the Chief
City and Court of the great King of Kings: Omitting this and the first. The
Second is the Subject of our present Discourse.

The starry Heaven is but the Floor and Pavement of the glorious Palace, though
it be a Roof and Canopy over us; it is (as it were) the spangled Cartain of the
Bride-grooms Chamber, the glorious and glittering Rough-cast, the Under
cetling, or (at least) the Utmost Court of the Celestial Palace. The Great
Creator has showed much Skill, and laid out great Workman-ship upon Heaven, a
most curious, accurate and elaborate Work, therefore is it called the Work of
Gods Fingers, Psalm. 8. 3. (a Metaphor from Embroiderers and workers of
Tapestry, choice Needle work, or Watch work, they must have nimble Fingers that
work such fine Works with Expedition and Exactness) and therefore is the Maker
of Heaven called [(...)] an exact Artist (as the word signifies) Hebr. 11. 10.
and not only [(...)] a Work man or Labourer, whose courser Work requires more
the Strength of his whole Hand, than the Skill and Activity of his Fingers: The
Great God Erected this most Immense Celestial Vault without any Ladders,
Scaffolds, Tools or Engines, and when He had so done, He Garnished it with
Stars (as a Palace is adorned with stately Pictures.) Job. 26. 13. If the
Outside and Underceiling of Heaven be fo glorious, how much more is the Inside
unconceivably so. Isa. 64. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 9. Psalm. 31. 19. John the Divine (in
an ecstasy of the Spirit) makes search through all the Bowels of the Earth and
Sea to find out all the precious Treasures hid in Both, as Gold, Pearls and
precious Stones of all Sorts, and all this is done only to be a Dim shadow of
Heavens excellency, Revel. 21. 11. to 21. Yea to resemble the Glory of the new
Jerusalem in the last times as to her Walls, Windows, Gates, and the Pavement
of her Streets upon which no dirty Dog shall ever trample. Isa. 54. 11. 12.
Revel 21. 27. and 22. 15. When Moses and the Elders got but a glimps of Gods
Glory, they saw under the Feet of the God of Israel as it were the paved Work
of a Saphir-Stone. Exodus 24. 10. God dwells in inaccessible Light. 1. Tim. 6.
16. Moses could only see the Back-parts of that Glory. Exodus 33. 23. Yea such
is that surpassing Splendour, that the very Angels cover their Faces with both
their Wings as with a double-Scarff (just as men clap their Hands upon their
Eyes, when the Lightning flashes in their Faces) Isa. 6. 2.

The (2d.) Remark is, the Stars in the starry Heaven are Numberless and many of
them Nameless: Psalm. 147. 4. God can both Name and Number them, which is an
Exclusive Expression, intimating God only, but no Man can do it. Augustine tells
of Aratus and Eudoxus who vainly vaunted, that they could both Name and Number
them. De civit. Dei lib. 16. But a better Man than either of them, Abraham, one
who was (as the Rabbis say) a great Astronomer could never count the Number of
them, as God says to him [If thou be able etc.] Genesis 15. 5. Implying it an
Impossibility to do it. Yea Adam himself (in his State of Innocence) could give
Names to all the Beasts of the Field and to all the Fowls of the Air, Genesis 2.
16. But not a word do we read of his giving Names to the Stars of Heaven: God
says expressly the Host of Heaven cannot be Numbered. Jer. 33. 32. Hereupon Man
is forced to call a whole House of Stars all by one Name, such a Constellation,
containing each a Bundle of Stars.

The (3d.) Remark is, as the Stars are to be admired for their being above Name
and Number, so likewise no less admirable is both their Station and Motion: The
Great God has set a Tabernacle in the Heavens for all those Nameless and
Numberless Stars as well as for the Sun. Psalm. 19. 4. 5. Each individual Star
has its distinct and particular Station, (as every great Cart-nail has its
proper place round about the Ring or Rimm of the Cart-wheel) where it remains
unmovable, every Star has kept its Station ever since the Creation to this
Day, not one particular Star has left its peculiar Place for almost 6000
Years: Though some Angels left their first Habitation. Jude v. 6. Yet never did
any one Star forsake its own Tabernacle wherein its Creator at first placed it.
Indeed Metaphorical Lucifer did fall from Heaven. Isa. 14. 12. But the Literal
and Real one (to wit, that called Venus, the Morning and Evening star) never
yet did so: The Stars are called the Host of Heaven. Jer. 33. 22. They are Gods
Army, that have their Stands and Stations, they all Stand in Battalia by the
Appointment of their Maker, and Master, Jehovah is their Chief Lord General,
who has set them in Rank and File by an Ordinance of Heaven. Jer. 31. 35. etc.
No Star ever yet brake its Rank from the Foundation of the World: Yet this
Celestial Host or Army has not only its Stand and Station, but also its March
and Motion, yea (which is the more mavelous) they both Keep their Station,
and hold their Motion at one and the same point of Time: Their Station is
certain and peculiar though their Motion be constant, and perpetual: This may
be exemplyfied by a familiar Instance, every Cart-nail in the Tire of the
Wheel, keeps its place where it is fixed, while the Wheel runs its Round,
and makes a progress; It Is not the Nail, but the Wheel that makes the Circular
Motion, no more is it the Star that moves, but the Orb or Sphere (wherein it is
fixed) which carrys about the Star (as the Wheel the Nail) in its continual
Circulation: Thus likewise it is further demonstrated by a well-disciplin'd
Army, every Soldier not only keeps to his own Colors, but also marches orderly
in his place (whether a left Hand or a right Hand Man) to his Rendezvous, he
duly observing his Generals Order both for his Station where, and his Motion
whether at one and the same Time: And no doubt but Gods Host of Heaven is a
well disciplined Army, every Star in Heaven is under a Law and Ordinance made
by the God of Heaven, God asks Job [knowest thou the Ordinances of Heaven:]
Job. 38 33. Can thou tell how to order the whole Host of Heaven? (as Master
and Governor over them) or can thou guide or direct) the Motion of (that
single Constellation) Arcturus and his Sons, ver. 32. which ever whirleth Round
about the Northern pole, but never goes down the Horizon, it is the work of God
alone to order every Star in its Course. Yea, to make the matter still more
admired, this motion of the Stars is made either without wandering or weariness.
1st. without wandering All the fixed Stars do constantly keep their way, and
their time as well as Place and Station) in both their Nocturnal and Diurnal
Motion: (1) they do hold their way (wherein their Maker has confined them)
with so much exactness, that they have no Epicycles (as the Planets have) nor
any Eccentrick Motions, but fulfill their Circles and Revolutions without the
least Deviation: Hence it is observed, that those Inhabitants (directly under
the aequinoctial) have a prospect of all and every Star equally for 12. Hours
above the Horizon) for there the Sphere is Direct, but where it is oblique,
some Stars rise together, yet do not set together, yet none vary an
Hairs-breadth from their appointed Lines of Circumference: Neither (2) do they
vary the time (appointed them) but do precisely observe it even to a Minute,
hereupon the Psalmist celebrates Gods Praise: For the outgoings of the Morning
and Evening. Psalm. 65. 8. for the exact Vicissitude of Day and Night, and the
admirable Equipage the Host of Heaven marches in according to the Ordinances
of Heaven from the Lord of Hosts. Jer. 31. 35. The Sun, Moon and Stars know and
observe precisely their time both of going down and of rising up. Psalm. 104.
19. 20. which all the Powers of Hell and Potentates on Earth can neither Hinder
nor Hasten. Job. 38. 12. Psalm. 74. 16. 17. Yea so exact and regular is their
Motion, that Men (who knows not where themselves shall be, or what shall befall
them to Morrow. Prove. 27. 1.) can write Ephemerides what Eclipses will be for
many Years to come, in what point of Heaven and what Hour of Day or Night, such
and such Positions, Conjunctions, Oppositions etc. will happen, yea not only
when the Sun will rise and set all the Round Year, but also, that the Tail Star
of the Great Bear will early and late point directly to Arcturus, that Arcturus
shall rise exactly when the Sun sets upon the 10th. of March: and that the
great Star of the Lion and of the Great-Dog, though they rise together, yet the
Dog Star will set some Hours before Cor Leonis, because their Sphere is oblique
(as to us) this latter being nearer to the Tropic of Cancer, as the former is
to that of Capricorn: these and many more Instances (not mentioned) may
demonstrate how they all exactly observe their time and way without wandering.
Yea and (2dly.) All this the Stars do Without weariness also. In an Host of men
on Earth, some Soldiers will be found both wandering and weary: But in this Host
of Heaven (so called) As none are found wandering (in sano sensu) So nor can we
find one Star, that may be reputed weary: The Prophet compares God to a Chief
Commander calling forth his Companies (the Host of Heaven, all in his
Muster-Roll, and laying his Commands upon them. though some Soldiers may fail
in their March either through Fear or Feebleness (as that Egyptian did. 1.
Sam. 30. 11. 12. 13.) but not so much as one Star ever failed. Isa. 40. 26.
though their March be many Millions of Miles round the Circumference, and that
without Rest and Respit Night or Day, Yea and now for almost 6000 Years. But
one Instance (for brevity) to wit, that before mentioned. It Is a Matter of of
great Admiration, that Canis Major and Cor Leonis (among the fixed Stars)
should Run a Race Round about the Globe of the Earth (which, the Hebrews say,
is distant from Heaven a 500. Years Journey) rise together at their first
Creation in one point of time, yet though they have been Running their restless
Course, for near 6000 Years now, neither of them has fainted or failed in the
way, so as at any time to outrun each other, but still both of those Great
Stars observe a precise point of time for their Rising together now, as they
did at their first setting forth, yea and of setting together to those under
the Aequinoctial, though not so to us through the obliquity of their Circle and
Circumference in our Horrizon: The same may be said of the other Stars.

The (4th.) Remark is, that the Great God has created not only Innumerable and
Unnameable Stars, that are fixed in the 8th. Sphere (called the Starry Heaven)
but also seven Planets, or wandering Stars (as the word Planet signifies) so
called, not (...) Simply, but (...) Secundum quid, or Comparatively: If those
Planets be Simply and by themselves considered, they have made their several
Revolutions (in their own distinct Orbs) at the most fixed and most
unchangeable certain Periods from the Beginning of the World to this present
day; but to speak comparatively (in Respect of the fixed Stars) all these
Planets are placed under them, have a differing Motion from them, and hold an
unequal distance to them, yea and one to another in Respect of their (seeming)
Vagabond and Eccentrick Motion, they have various Longitudes, Latitudes,
Conjunctions, Oppositions, extile, Square and Trine Aspects. Sometimes they
move more swiftly, sometimes more slowly, as they are higher or lower in their
Epicycles, sometimes Retrograde, and Direct, or Stationary, never keeping the
same distance among themselves; or to any of the fixed Stars, nor holding one
and the same Situation in the Firmament as the fixed do: Notwithstanding all
this, no Stars wander less than they do, but have a most certain, constant,
stated, and regular Motion; Duly performing the precise points and periods of
their compass in their appointed Times: As the Sun knows his going down. Psalm.
104. 19. So do all the other six Planets comprehended in one Verse, Post [Sum
Sum] Sequitur, proxima [Luna] subest: Wherein [S] is Saturn [J] Jupiter [M]
Mars. The next [S] is Sol the Sun, [V] Venus and [M] Mercury with Luna the
Moon. All these 7 are called wandering Stars for the Reasons above named, and
this Denomination has a Divine warrant from the Apostle Jude v. 13. where
wandering Stars are mentioned: [(...)] in the sense only of the common Judgment
of Sense which beholds them carried about in a differing Course to the whole
Circuit of Heaven beside: Two of those 7. Planets are these 2. Great Luminaries
or Lights of the World, the Sun and Moon both which be a whole Bundle of
Wonders. The Sun is the Prince of Planets, yet (as his Hebrew Name [Shemesh]
Signifies) is a Servant to Gods Servants: He comes out of his Chamber as a
Bridegroom (with mavelous Splendour, Pomp and Bravery, when he first shows
himself above our Horizon) and Rejoices as a Champion to Run his Race. Psalm.
19. 4. 5. This he Runs with such a wonderful Swiftness, as exceeds the Eagles
Flight, more than the Eagle exceeds the slow Motion of the Snail (Bellarmine
says, the Sun runs seven Thousand Miles in the Eight part of an Hour. Bell.
de Ascens. Mentis in Deum grad. 7.) and with such Incomparable Sweetness Eccles
11. 7. that Eudoxus the Philosopher professed his Willingness to be burnt up
presently by the Sun, so he might be but admitted to come so near it, as to
learn the admirable Nature of it, and Chrysostom cannot but wonder at the Suns
darting down its Rays toward the Earth, whereas all Fire shoots and hastes
up toward Heaven. I might mention many more Marvels in the Sun, were it not
besides my present Design. As likewise in the other Great Light, the Moon,
called Hebr. Jareach of Rauach to Refresh or Refrigerate, because she cools the
Earth with her Influences: and Moses mentions, that as the Sun by warmth, so
the Moon by Moisture, make the Earth fruitful Deuteronomy. 33. 14. as some will needs
place Hell in the Hollow of the Sun, so others conceit a World in the Moon, the
Thinner part to be the Sea, and the Thicker, (which is easy to discern, not all
alike lightsom) to be the Earth: However no Planet has such Changeable
Aspects, yet Astronomers Affirm, she has as much light in her Wane as in her
Full, only her bright side is turned toward Heaven: Hence Dr Hackwel has an
Excellent Note, that therefore God seemed to set Her lowest in the Heavens and
nearest to the Earth (of all the 7. Planets) to put us daily in mind of the
Constancy in Heavenly, and Inconstancy of Earthly things, Herself (in some
sort) partaking of both, though in a Different manner, of the one in her
Substance, and of the other in her Visage: to say nothing of the Ecclipses
which are the wonders of the World, and which Metamorphose (even) the very
Haters of Astrology to become stark-staring Star Gazers: to say but little of
the two Planets next above the Moon, yet under the Sun to wit, Venus and
Mercury, both which do attend always upon the Sun, as Courtiers do upon the
King, never going far from Him, Venus never more than 48 degrees and Mercury
but 30, which is the Reason, why it is so seldom seen, and why both have no
other Aspect to the Sun but Conjunction, whereas the other Planets have
oppositions etc. The Morning Star (commonly called Venus for its Beauty and
Bravery) is the constant Companion of the Sun, and next in bigness (as to
Appearance) to the two Great Lights casting a shadow as the Moon, it is seen
long upon the Day, and is not darkened by the Moon in the Night, Sed ipsius
Contactu fit luc dior Aureo color in Candorem diffuso. The near Approach of
the Moon Changes only its golden Complexion into a more splendid brightness.
These two (in a word) (Venus and Mercury) are called Homodromi, that is,
Fellow-Runners because They Run almost in the same course together, and
fulfills their periods not far asunder, never much Remote from the Palace
Royal or Presence Chamber of the Sun their King, which is also the Reason, why
these two never have Ortum and Occasum Cosmicum, they do not Rise, and set with
the Sun in that part or point of Heaven etc. which is opposite. Both keep nigh
the Sun sometimes going before it, and sometimes following After.

But (omitting the Inferior) my main concern at present is the Superior
Planets, under which the Sun is eated as the Center of all the Stars and the
Eye of the World. God has placed it, in the midst of the Orbs, that it might
the more commodiously give light (It self being the fountain thereof) to both
the Superior and Inferior Stars, and that neither by its propinquity (If in
the Moons Orb) it should scorch the Earth, nor by its too much Distance (in the
7th or Saturns Sphere) Sublunary things should be starved through want of
warmth from it. The Sun is seated in the midst of Heaven (3 Planets above. 3
below him) as a King in the midst of his Kingdom, that He may Diffuse his
Influence on every hand, and Keep all sides down in an equal poize and posture
(as Plutarch says) by his middle presence: The Planet (commonly called for
Distinction-sake) Saturn, is the Highest above the Sun, and next below the
Starry Heaven or Sphere of the fixed Stars, appearing of a dusky color, as a
Star of the Second magnitude, cold, dry and Melancholiek, and (having the
Highest and Widest Circumference) cannot complete his Circuit under the space
of Thirty years. Therefore it is said to be of a slow Motion in his peculiar
Cycle, to say nothing of his Epicycle or Eccentrick Motion: That, called
Jupiter is the next to Saturn exceeding splendid (so that it is often mistaken by
the Unskilful, for the Morning Star, or for the great Dog Star, appearing as a
Star of the first Magnitude, that may Eclipse Saturn, when their latitude
(which seldom Happens) be Equal at their Conjunction. This Planet Accomplisheth
his Zodaical period in the space of twelve years. Having a narrower Sphere than
Saturn, yet a five times bigger body, so that no Planet but the Sun is greater
than it, being 95. times (Cardanus says a 100 times) bigger than the whole
Earth.

The third Planet is called Mars, less than Jupiter, Higher Colored than
Saturn, of a Red, Fiery, Choleric Complexion, who (still in a narrower Circle)
Finisheth his Revolution in two years Time: The Wisdom of our and Their Creator
may be much wondered at here in two Respects (to mention no more now of the
many Besides) that (i) Saturn, which cools much, and Mars, which Heateth much
should have Jupiter placed betwixt them that it might temper and qualify those
two Extremes with its more moderate, Temperate, and Benign Beams: (2) that
there should be such a Concreated Harmony betwixt the Sun and those 3. Superior
Planets (as is aforesaid) That Supreme law which their maker laid, and left
upon those 3. was, that they should observe a constant Congruity in all their
Eccentrick Motions with the Sun, whom they seem (says Alsted) to Reverence as
their King, This Divine Command They have kept (to the shame of us who
frequently transgress that Law laid on us in Disowning, Dishonoring and
Disobeying Christ our King) for almost 6000 years, for as often as they are in
Conjunction, so often do they betake themselves to the top of their Epicycles as
to their Chapel or closet, in Reverence (as it were) of so Royal a Guests
presence, they Depart into the utmost borders of their own Dominions, they give
place to their Approaching King, stands off at a due Distance and there
Receives (as it were) commands and Influences from him: And then, when (After
the Conjunction) the Sun (whose Motion is swifter) withdraws from thence, these
Planets do Descend from the Top or Tower of their Epicycle and (like officious
Courtiers) Attend upon their Prince going his Progress, and so they follow the
Sun (their Lord) so far, as till he is gone off through the third part of the
Zodiac, till (by his quicker speed) He has outrun them the space of four (of
the Twelve) signs. Then, at length, as if they had fully Discharged their Duty
and Homage, they make a stand (called at that time Stationary) for some Days,
casting (as it were) their long looks after him, and at that distance they
throw him a Farewell: when this is done, They begin their Retrograde Motion,
Running back into the bottom of their Epicycle, and letting themselves down
into the lowest part thereof (as often as the Sun is gone from them into the
opposite part of the Heavens to them) and therefore (as Alsted excellently
observes) they seem to bewail the absence of their King, and (as it were)
Humbly Request his Return: After this, when they Discern the Sun drawing off
from his opposition to them, and Returning toward them again, then they,
Ascending from the bottom, the place of their bewailing (still contrary to the
order of the Signs) Hasten out to meet their King, and (as with some
Salutations) they Entertain the Sun, while He is yet distant from them the
space of a Trigon (3 or 4 Signs) by becoming Stationary, or making another
stand again, this done, and the Sun Approaching still nearer and nearer, They
then Run before him (as his joyful Heralds and Harbingers) in a right and
Direct course according to the order of the Signs, and as with great Gladness
glide up to the Top of their Tower again, that they might (as it were) resign
up the nearest and most Commodious and Honorable place to the Sun their King:
This in short is the constant Harmonious Motion of these 3 Superior Planets and
the Sun. The Epiphonema cannot be less, than an Heart Refreshing Admiration,
and a Soul-Ravishing Adoration of the most mighty and only Wise Jehovah who
Created and has ordered these Astonishing Stars etc. The works of the Lord are
great, sought out by all those that have pleasure therein Ps. III. 2. If all
the works of God be great, those on the Earth and in the Sea, then much more
those in the Heavens, no less than great works can fall from the hand of so
Great a God, they are all Magnalia, so should all be magnifyed, not neglected
or slighted: It should be a pleasure to us (as it has been no little to me) to
search and find out such wonderful works, Though they be Great, yet are they
to be seriously sought into, and found out by those that Delight therein, and
the deeper they dive into them (not for vain Curiosity, but from solid
Sanctity) the sweeter they find them: God has shown singular Skill in all
(Esp. in these) his works, and He will have Men to admire him their Maker. They
all (a centro ad Coelum) are Tip'd and Guilt with a Glory upon them, this the
Brutish Man understands not Ps. 92. 5. 6. Neither his ordinary nor
extraordinary Handiwork, whereas a woe is Denounced upon those that Regard
them not Isa. 5. 12. 15 Ps. 28 4. 5. They shall have like for like etc. God
will Reward them according to the work of their hands, because they Regard not
the work of Gods Hands.

The (5th.) Remark to omit the Conjunctions of the Inferior Planets, (because
the frequency thereof darkens the Significancy) beside their Inferiority) the
Superior only are here to be handled and the other but Obiter (as occasion
offers) and Mars also, though it carrys a correspondency with Saturn and
Jupiter in the Quality of their Motions (both as to Longitude and as to
Laittude) these three differ only in the Quantity thereof: Mars fulfills his
Cycle far sooner than the other, so its Motion has not so many Remarks upon
it, Saturn and Jupiter have many Aspects, both toward the other Planets and
one toward another, as Sextil, Trine, Square, Opposite: on and Conjunction,
waving all the other four, I shall insist upon the Last named: Their
Conjunction must needs of all their other Aspects, be most Remarkable seeing
then and therein only, those two mightyest Planets (as it were) twist together
their most powerful Beams, this they do, when they come near each, as do the
Sun and the great Dog Star from the 20th, of July to the 27th. of August, all
which are called Dog days from the Hot season produced by the twisted Rays both
of Sol and Sirius: Indeed in true Propriety of Speech, a Close Conjunction
cannot be called an Aspect, for when they have no distance wherein to look one
upon another, but are in the same- Degree and Minute of a Sign together; Thus
may it sometime come to pass, that Jupiter may totally Ecclips Saturn, as being
both in a lower Orb, (and coming 'twixt us and it) and of a larger Body, seeing
Saturn is but as a Star of the 2d. Magnitude, whereas Jupiter as one of the
first: Mr. Wing (in his Astron Britannica page 1280. writes, that in the Year
1661. May the 3d. at 11. in the Night, he saw Saturn totally Eclipsed by the
Moon, which is a far lesser Body than it, though it seem greater through its
nearness to us, and the others great Distance from us: That these two Superior
Planets (as also Mars) should be sometimes Direct (going strait forward)
sometimes Retrograd (stepping backward) in their Motions, and sometimes
Stationary (standing, as we say-stock-still) while all the other Stars (called
fixed) never do so, must needs be very mavelous; yet their strange
Conjunctions one with another is far more a greater marvel, their Conjunction
is Threefold, 1. Minima. 2. Media. 3. Maxima. or (as Artists phrase them) 1.
Specialis, 2. Trigonalis, 3. Climacterica. These 3. several sorts of
Conjunctions in the two Superior Planets are caused thus, (1.) Saturn is of
slowest Motion (as he is the highest Planet, and has the largest Circle to
run, seldom above 3. or 4. Minutes in a day, his mean Motion is (as some say)
2. Minutes and 11. Seconds, his swiftest Motion is but 6. Minutes: And if his
Diurnal Motion be so slow, his Annual must be accordingly, which (according to
Keplers Tables improved by Maginus) is computed not above 12. Degrees in 12.
Months. The slowness of Saturns Motion is further illustrated by his several
Postures, Retrograde, Direct and Stationary. He stands still (neither moving
backward nor forward) for 3 or 4. (some say) five Days before he move backward,
or contrary to the Order and Succession of the 12. Signs, and as many days,
before he go direct forward, that is, from one Degree of the sign to two, and
so on to the rest, in which direct Posture the Sun and Moon, are always found,
marching Endways, and never are Stationary (as the other Five Planets be) or
Retrograde, but by a Miracle as they both stood still in Joshuahs time, and the
Sun went back 10 Degrees in that of Ahaz: Beside, Saturns Retrogradation
con^^^^eth customarily (as some compute it) an 140. Days, all which
considered, must constitute his Motion Annually to be very slow: (2.) Jupiter
has a smarter Motion, finishing his Revolution in about 12. Years, whereas
Saturn does require about 30. Years wherein to finish his Cycle. Yet Jupiters
Motion (compared with that of all the other Planets) is very slow also, whose
swiftest Diurnal Motion is but about 14. Minutes (as Saturns, at the most, is
but 7. and Mars but 31.) beside his being (as well as Saturn) Stationary five
Days before he be Retrograde, four Days before he go Direct, and his
Retrogradation lasts 120. Days. So that he likewise is of a slow Motion:
Hence it comes to pass, that these 2. Planets do seldom make Application each
to other in their distinct Spherical Motions, they seldom meet together in
Conjunction, and they may meet together sometimes with their Beams when they do
not exactly with their Bodies. The first sort of those three Conjunctions the
2. Superior Planets make, is called the Least, Meanest or Special, which falls
out only once in about 20. Years, reckoning in the round Number all along, and
not troubling either my self or the Reader with the Fractions or broken
Numbers: This may be thus explained: Suppose Saturn and Jupiter do start and
begin their Course in the Sign Aries (the first chief, and cardinal Sign of all
the 12, in the Zodiac) Jupiter must run through all the 12. Signs, before
Saturn can run through 4. of them, therefore (through this Inequality and
Disproportion of these 2. Planets distinct Motion) before Jupiter can overtake
Saturn, the Space of about 20. Years is required, that is the Time, whereat
these 2. Planets do concur always in some one of the 12 Signs, and in some one
Degree, and Minute thereof. This is called Conjunctio Minima: Their (2d.) sort
of Conjunctions is the Mean or Middle, for understanding this, we must suppose,
the 12. Signs are divided into 4. Trigons, Triplicities, or Triangularitiys,
the Fiery, Earthy, Aerie, and watery Trigon; Aries, Leo, and Sagittary make the
first, Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn, the second, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius, the
third, Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces make the fourth; now Saturn and Jupiter,
having made 10 Conjunctions (as Modern Astronomers reckon them, though the
Ancient say 12. but of that after) in some one of those four Trigons, they then
go off from that Triplicity, to make so many Meetings or Conjunctions (be it
10. or 12.) in the next Trigon, as out of the fiery Triangularity into the
Earthy etc. These many Meetings in each Trigon (before they can go through all
the 3. Signs thereof) require the Space of 198. Years and 265. or (according to
Alsted) 236. days etc. by the Modern computation of making only 10. Meetings,
but if 12. (after the Ancients) (...) taken, then the measure of time will be,
not only almost 200. (a^^ the former) but altogether 240. Years before the
planetary Conjunctions have accomplished all their Revolutions in any one
single Trigon, for which it is called the Trigonal or Mean Conjunction. Lastly
the (3d.) Sort is the Great, Greatest most signal and climacterical Conjunction
which happens very rarely in the World, for as the first falls out once and
but once in every Twenty Years successively, (as above) and as the second
succeeds only in every two Hundred Years (which is the round Number, within
little more than one Year above the Fractions) according to the Modern
computation: So this third cannot fall out, till Saturn and Jupiter have run
out all their 10 (or 12.) Conjunctions in the First (the fiery) Trigon, all the
same Number in the second the Earthy, all likewise in the Aerie the third, and
lastly all in the last which is the watery by an orderly Progress. When these
two superior Planets have run through all these four Trigons in successive
Order, and at last comes to have another Conjunction after their last leaving
the watery, and at the very beginning of their first meeting in the fiery
Trigon, this is the full period of their whole Cycle, which is a Revolution (as
Kepler computes it in the round Number) of 800. Years, by the Modern
compuputation: But according to the Computation of the Ancients, (who reckon
not by 10. but by 12. the 20s. the Compass of Time then amounts to 960. Years
betwixt one Total, chiefest and climacterical Conjunction (as this last is
called, and another. Because this latter and ancient account may serve us as
some Salvo in the Sequel, let it be observed, that Men of great Name and Note,
were of this Opinion: such as Haly Rodoan, Albumazar, Guido, Bonatus, Abraham
Avenaris, Alcabitius and many others, none contemptible in Astronomical Art,
perhaps it was (as it is said) their mistake for want of those exact Tables in
those ancient Times, which our later Times (standing as Pigmees upon those
Giants shoulders so might see further than they) have found out by greater Art
and Industry. And perhaps even these Later Tables are not found faultless, for
Engl. prophetic Merlin finds fault with Origan, Kepler and Alsted in their
computing those Great Conjunctions short both of Truth and Experience page 53.
54. concluding, that there is not any certain Rule can be made, whereby without
(a right) Calculation the true Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter may be found,
for there will be Variation in Degrees, If no worse Error happen.

However this Third is the Great Conjunction, which all Astronomers (both
Ancient and Modern) have unanimously put the most Stress upon in their Learned
observations, not only because these 2. Superior Planets are (above all the
other) most significant and efficacious, but also because this their
climacterical Conjunction falls out but once in almost every Thousand Year of
the World: This new Consideration has so transported (that Phaenix of his Age)
Kepler and after him (that Univerfalist for all solid Learning) Alsted as
jointly to say, that the Great Conjunction of these 2. Planets in the Fiery
Trigon did portend the Revolution of some new Empire. Alsted Thesaur.
Chronolog. fol. 482, further saying, that the Force and Fire thereof would burn
up and destroy all the Dregs and dirty Doings of Rome, but above all others is
the Divine Rapture of the Noble Dane Tycho Brahe (...), who says, It is worthy
of our weightyest Observation, that as all the former uneven Revolutions of the
Fiery Trigon (namely the First, Third and Fifth) have ever been auspicious to
the World, as having Vsherd in some signal and singular Favors of the Almighty
to Mankind; so the Seventh Revolution is the Forerunner of a more happy and
glorious State, than all the former past Ages have ever yet enjoyed etc. Tycho
Brahe Astronom. Progymnasm: Tome the First, not far from the End, where that
Atlas of the Mathematick Heaven divinely argues and inlarges upon it: This same
famous Tycho Brahe does further say, that the first (Exclusive) Revolution of
the fiery Trigon (and by consequence the first climacterical Conjunction after
the wordls Creation) happened under Enoch and under the (then) flourishing
Estate of the Church as he calls it. The third he fixes under Moses, and under
the Deliverance of Israel from the Egyptian slavery: The fifth (he places)
under Christ, and under the Restoration of fallen Man into Gods favor by the
Redeemers passion etc. And his own words follow thus [Septima haec Trigonorum
in integrum (ab orbecond to) Restitutio quandam Sabbatismi occultam Rationem
obtinet, and praecaeteris peculiare, magnique momenti aliquid denunciat.] That
is, the seventh Conjunction Climacterical, in the Complete Return of the fiery
Trigon from the Foundation of the World, brings along with it in its bosom a
certain secret Sabbatism or State of Rest, and something it demonstrates which
is peculiar above all the Rest of the six Revolutions, and what is a matter of
mighty moment. Thus Tycho Brahe, d. l. and much more to the same effect.
Neither is this Atlas of found Astronomy (as Learned Authors call him) singular
in this Opinion, but profound Kepler went before him in the same Sentiments,
and Acute Alsted followed after; this appears in his Encucloped. Page 1105.
Where he concurs with Keplers Tables (Reputed the best in the World) which, he
relates, to run thus: (Though the period of each Climacterical Conjunction be
computed to be completed in the Compass of Seven Hundred Ninety four Years,
two Hundred and fourteen Days, yet (says he) for these Fractions or broken
Numbers, Kepler reckons by a round Number, so that the Grand Revolution must
be reckoned by the Round Number of Eight Hundred Years:] And he sets down
Keplers Tables thus. The first great Conjunction (Exclusive) from the beginning
of time was in the 800 Year of the World, which was three Thousand, two Hundred
Years before Christ: The second was in the Year of the World 1600, which must
be two Thousand four Hundred before Christ. The third did fall out in Anno
Mundi 2400. which was one Thousand six Hundred before Christ: The fourth falls
in the 3200. year of the World, which must be before Christ Eight Hundred
Years. The fifth was when Christ came in the Flesh to work the Worlds
Redemption, which was in the four Thousand Year of the World. The sixth falls
out in 800. years after Christ, which was the four Thousand Eight Hundred year
of the World: And the seventh (still multiplying by 8. from the first to this
last) must fall out in the sixteenth Century, 1600 Years after Christ at what
time the World is five Thousand six Hundred Years old: Al^^^d adds further (in
Page 1215) that the Ancients did measure Time by these Revolutions as by
infallible Rules, as thus from the Creation (1) to Arts, Cities and Robberies
is 800. Years. (2) to the Universal Deluge and the first Monarchy 1600. Years
(3) to Abraham and his Seed going out of Egypt, 2400. (4) to the Destruction
of the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, 3200. (5) to Christ and the Rise of the New
Testament Church 4000. Years. (6) to the pressures of Christ's Church 4800. (7)
to the Church's Deliverance from those pressures by Antichrist etc. 5600. So
that all these three most Eminent Authors did Unanimously expect this seventh
great Conjunction, or complete Revolution of the Planets (which happens in
this our sixteenth Century) that great and universal Changes would be the
products thereof, seeing the Planets in this 7th. Revolution shall have run
through their Circles, and then return to their first Beginnings again, which
cannot but portend mighty things: This being supposed to be the last, sundry
Astronomers questions, whether there ever will be any other after this seventh.

The (6th.) Remark is the pious Meditation of the Ancients, that the Septenary
or Seventh Number is a plenary, perfect and mystical Number, which (in
Scripture) has a peculiar signification, it is compounded of 3. and 4. the
Ternary or Three is the Number of God our Creator, who is one in Three and
Three in one; the Quaternary or Four is the Number of Man (the Creature) who is
made up of the four Elements as are also all Sublunary things called Elementary
compound Bodies; hence it is that all things have a wonderful Harmony of
Cohaerency and Rest in the Septenary Number; hereupon Philosophy calls io
[Numerus primus, Virgineus, Sacer and Quietarius] (1) The first Number because
it made up the first Week (2) The Virgin Number, because great is its force and
efficacy (as a Virgin is in the Flower and Strength of Age, so every Seventh
Year is computed Climacterical and Seven Nines (or 63.) is accounted the great
one, as 7. Years (in Law) is the Term of a Man's life, and 3 Sevens are
aequivalent to 3 Lives: (3) It Is called a Sacred Number because it flows from
the Ternary, which is the Number of God, and the Quaternary, the Number of the
World, as is abovesaid, this Note savors not so much of Superstition as it
Respects the Nature of Harmony hence the Poets Phrase Perfection of Prosperity
by torque quaterque Beati] a 3 sold and a 4 fold Happiness: (4) It Is the
Resting number because the Seventh Day and the Seventh Year in sacred Writ were
Sabbatical: Every week is called Septimana, consisting of 7. Days, and every
Seventh Year produces some material Alteration: Beside, the Seventh Number is
called the Limit and Measure of all inferior numbers, and any great number
proposed (whose Measure is Seven and may be divided by 7. exactly) can by no
other Means be more certainly sound out than by Division with 7. But above all,
the Holy Scriptures number all by Sevens, accounting, the 7th. Hour, Day, Month
and Year to be all Sabbatical and the Seven Seventh Year to be a Jubilee, a
Restitution of all etc. And this Harmony between Hours, Days, Months and Years
seems to be intimated Revel. 9. 15. Thus also the Law required 7. washings or
sprinklings of blood or water, and the 7. Lamps in the Inner Court or Holy
Place, representing the 7. Planets in the Visible Heavens, as the greatest Lamp
stood in the middle of the other six, having 3. on either side, so the Sun is
seated in the midst (as Prince of the Planets) having 3. above Him and 3. below
Him, all attending him, as above: All the walks of this glorious Sun, are
shadows of something within the Vail. The Eve or Evening was (as Eve was to
Adam) the Wife of the Morning, the Jews and other Nations reckon the Beginning
of Time (as of the Sabbath) at Evening, and to them that are about the
Equator, and to all, ar either Aequinox, the first 6 Hours brings the Sun to
the Midnight Nadir, or Mid-heaven of the Antipodes, and six more to the
Morning Horizon, six more to the Zenith or noon of the upper Hemisphere, and
six more to its setting again, when the Sun has taken all these Turns of Sixes
6. times over, theh comes the 7th. or Sabbath Day, whereon the Cakes of the
Shewbread were changed. 1. Sam. 21. 6. Every 7th. Hour (as well as every 7th.
Day) made a Pauze or Rest the Sabbath of the Evening Ps. 104. 23. of the
Midnight or the Morning, and of the Noon or Midday. All Vsherd in by six
Hours, as the Sabbath is by six days, and that 7th. is the first Number wherein
Heaven and Earth met together (God and Man) in the first Sabbath worship:
Numero Deus Impare Gaudet. 7. is an odd Number, and the 7th. Day was not only a
Resting, but a Refreshing day to God. Exodus 31. 17. (would to God it were so to
us) above all the other 6. Days. And I know not why this 7th. Grand Revolution
of those Planets may not bring in a blessed Sabbatism, or some Extraordinary
Rest and Refreshment seeing [(...)] a Time of Refreshing (or as the Gr.
signifies) or Cooling the Heat, is promised Act. 3. 19. and [(...)] a Time of
the Restitution of all things v. 21. wherein all Ruins by Sin shall be
Repaired by our Savior, and Blessed Jesus shall take off the Curse and
Corruption under which the Creature groaneth, Romans 8 19 20. 21. 22. This great
Scripture Truth, Divine Plato Hammerd at in his Great Revolution, when, after
many Thousands of Years (He says) all things shall be again (in statu quo
prius) as they were at the Worlds beginning in a state of perfection: The World
waxes worse and worse and the last (being but Dregs) are the worst of Times,
yea not only the Earth but Heaven also grows faint and feeble through old Age.
Insomuch that the Sun (as Ptolomy says) Runs much nearer the Earth many
Thousand Miles now, than at the Creation: If so, then by the same Rule, the
Planets must do the same, and then neither of them have kept their first
perfection, from whence some Salvo's to arising Doubts may be deducted, if this
Hypothesis should be taken for Granted: But whatever may be said to Ptolomys
Assertion, I shall endeavor to illustrate that of Noble Tycho Brahe, saying,
that all the 6. Great Conjunctions which only have happened since the
Foundation of the World (Exclusive) to this 16. Century, have been Auspicious
to the World, and Vsherd in some signal Mercies to Mankind: So this 7th. in
our Century will certainly exceed them all etc. as the 6. Days Creation had
(each of them) their Tob, Good, but the 7th. Days Rest was attended with Tob
Meod, very good: So the 6. former Revolutions all brought Tob, good to the
Church, but this 7th (supposed to be the last) will undoubtedly bring Tob Meod
very good things with it. The Bridegroom at the Marriage feast reserves his
Best Wine for the Last Time. John 2. 9. 10.

Take a short Land-skip of all the former 6. The (first) under Enoch 800. Years
of the World, his Name signifies [Catechised] as Genesis 14. 14. [Chanikau]
Catechized or Trained up in Religion as well as Warfare. He was taught of God
to walk with God. Genesis 5. 24. Hebr. 11. 5. Ecclesiasticus 44. 16. and 49. 14 A
great Type of Christ in his Ascension living 365 Years before his Translation
after a God pleasing Life, and just so long did Christ live in the Purity of
the Primitive Church to Julian the Apostate in the Year 365 after Christ. He
was (as all the Patriarks were) the Chief Bishop of his Time, by whose Labors
the Church of God was preserved in that profane Age, He prophesied of the
Destruction of Sinners (before Noah did of the Deluge) foretelling the Day of
Judgment and the Coming of our Lord. Sir. Maran-Atha (hence the Jews make him
the Author of the great Excommunication) Jude v. 14. 15. As Enoch is called the
7th from Adam, the Church had some Sabbath or 7th Time of Refreshing by him, a
Rest and Respit from that Universal Destruction which came upon the World
afterward: Thus Elijah (Enochs Brother candidate of Immortality) is Styled the
7th. from Adam also, not in Respect of Degrees or Gradual Descent (as was Enoch
the 7th. Patriarch, not the 7th. Person) but by way of Computation, and in
Respect of so many Generations (as some Reckon) between them: Elijah is
computed the 7th. Prophet from Adam and the first sent to the Gentiles, a great
Reviver of the Church (as his Brother Enoch was, and a Restorer of the Law. Now
here be two [7ths. from Adam] both Translated into Heaven, which may intimate
that after the 6000. Year of the World, comes the 7th. from Adam or 7th.
Millennium with its strange Translation likewise. However, this Translation of
Enach is called Annus Sabbaticus, Calvisius, Opus Chronolog. Page 3. Enoch
predicts (as a late Reverend writer says) Judicium matutinum the Morning part
of the Judgment Day (explained Dan. 7. 7. 8. 9.) as if then to be seen [behold
he cometh] which was not to be till the 7000. Year begin, and the Vespertinum
or Evening part is after it, explained in Revel. 20. 7.

The (Second) Climacterical Conjunction (by doubling the Number [8] here and
all along) was in the 1600. Year of the World under Noah, in which Century the
Universal Deluge destroyed the wicked World, which was then drowned in
wickedness before it was drowned in water. Yet the Church had then her Annum
Sabbaticum a complete Year of Rest in Noah's Ark, for from November (when Noah
had laid up all his Stores of the Earthly Fruits, and entered the Ark with his
Beasts, Fowls and Family) he remained there till the Beginning of November
following: As Enoch had been a Cooler to the Church, when the wicked world was
Hot in wickedness, by his contrary Profession, prophesying, and Practice, for
which God took him up into Heaven (as thinking no place good enough for him
upon Earth) and whose Translation gave to the Church the first Specimen or
Proof, that God had prepared another Life (after this) for his Saints, wherein
they should live with him in Glory for ever. So Noah (as his Name signifies)
was a Comforter to the Church, saving her from the Deluge, which Reduced the
World to its first Chaos or Confusion Genesis 1. 2. when the Waters above the
Firmament and the Waters under met again together, and brings the Earth once
more into her first posture to be covered with Water. 'Twas a peculiar
privilege, that Noah brought the Church nigh God in this great Flood of
Waters. Psalm. 32. 6, Enoch was a Prophet foretelling Christ's coming, and Noah
was a Preacher of Christ's Righteousness, had greater Blessings than Adam,
having the Promise [I will no more destroy] etc. Genesis 8. 21. 22. the Bow in the
Cloud, and a new String to his Bow, the Everlasting Covenant, the pattern of
all Covenants with Israel (often mentioned by the Prophets) and the Flood (made
such a Baptism to the Earth) also, as helped to wash away its Curse, which
Cursed Earth shall become so Renewed, and so Blessed of the Lord, yea so much
Christ's Darling, that He Resolves to make it the Center of his Glory (as some
suppose) at the 7th. Millennium, or last Revolution of the Superior Planets.
Revel. 5. 9. 10. where the Saints or Angels Rejoice, that they shall come (out
of Heaven) to Reign upon Earth, thus God tells Moses in the Mount, that the
Land shall enjoy her Sabbath of Rest, not only a Temporal Levit. 26. 34. 46.
and 2. Chron. 36. 21. and Levit. 25. 2. 6. But an Eternal one. Hebr. 4. 9.
which the Lord of the Sabbath (Math. 12. 8. Mark 2. 27. 28. Romans 9. 29. Jam. 5.
4.) has made for man; The whole Earth shall be filled with his Glory Numb. 14.
21. He will Cover, or Atone it Deuteronomy. 32. 43. God (not Adam) named the Earth
[Erets] which signifies [of Ratsah] to Delight, as If He meant to take his
pleasure upon it, when the Heavens, that Canopy and Curtain (now hiding his
Glory) shall pass away as a Scroll of parchment before the Fire: God will come
to keep his Sabbath of Rest on Earth, and here accept his People, then the Land
of Canaan (more accursed than all Lands, while possessed by the accursed
Nations) shall be most blessed, the Glory of all Lands: The place of Gods
Residence and Delightful Rest. Ezekiel. 26. 6. 40. and 34. 26. 30. Hos. 2, 20, 23.
etc.

The (Third) great Revolution (still adding another 800) falls out in the 2400.
y. of the World under Moses, when the Church had again another Sabbath of Rest
from her long and groaning slavery in the brick bondage of Egypt, this is so
plain in Scripture History, I need not enlarge upon it as upon the 2 former, a
word only, the blessed Messiah which the 7th Revolution may bring in, is
greater than Moses as much as a Son than a Servant etc. Hebr. 3, 3, 4, 5, 6. He
will plague the Pharaoh of mystical Egypt with sorer and severer plagues (his
Vials of wrath Revel. 16) till He make him yield, and let go his People as
Exodus 12. 31. He will not only bring his Church into the Wilderness (which was
all Moses could do, leaving the conquest of Canaan to Joshua) but bring her
also into the Heavenly Country.

The (fourth) falls in the 3200. y. of the world (adding another [8] to the
24.) under Solomon and the Kings of Israel according to incomparable Tycho
Brahe, this is likewise evident enough in Scripture, that the Church had her
Sabbath of Rest under Solomon, that peaceable King, as his Name signifies; yea
and the Ark of God, that had (from Moses time hitherto) no better harbor than
in a Moving and Tottering Tabernacle, found a Sabbath of Rest, in a standing
and stately Temple (the wonder of the World) not only for his time, but for his
Godly Successors also. Still our Savior whom the first Revolution ushers into
the World in y. 4000.) is greater than great Solomon. Math. 12, 42. He is the
Prince of Peace, the maker and matter of our peace, our Sanctuary, and
Salvation in whom alone our Souls find a Sabbath of Rest. Math 11, 29. This
needs still less Illustration: Go forward, then 800. y. more to the (Sixth)
Epoch or Revolution in 4800 y. of the world which brings in Charles the great,
under whom, as the Roman Empire was in its Zenith, or most flourishing estate
at Christ's Birth, so now it was translated from Rome into Germany. This must be
insisted upon a little, because it is beyond Scripture History, it is true the
Church could have but a slender Sabbath of Rest in his Time, for then
Antichrist was Regnant, and Leo was Rampant, (Leo the 3d was then Pope, who
prostituted his Keys to the Emperors feet, for which the Popish People whipped
him like a Rogue, If not, plucked out his Eyes and cut out his Tongue etc.
Prideaux Introduction page (96) yea in this 8th Century, Pope Joane made a good
proof that the Church of Rome was a Base Whore; so that the ^^st of the Church
in this Age, was like the Rest that the Ark of the Covenant had in the midst of
Jordan, and that of the Priests of the Lord who attended it Josh. 4, 9, 10, 16.
with 3, 13. The Feet of the Priests (that bare the Ark) did Rest in the midst
of Jordan, there they stood and must not stir out of their station until 600000
people were passed over the 4000. Cubits of dry Land within the banks, there
they stand, they Rest in the midst of Jordan, with hideous Mountains of water
hanging over their Heads, a most Ghastly and frightful sight without all
peradventure, yet there they stood (till God called them off) betwixt the People
and Danger, so do all good Ministers in all Ages, the first shock falls on
them: The Church has such short Restles Rests or Sabbaths sometimes, as Act,
9, 31. then had the Churches Rest, and such a Sabbath she enjoyed in this
Emperors time, whom Eginardus (writing his life) calls a most pious and
glorious Emperor, He waged his Wars principally to Extirpate Heathenism, and to
propagate Christianity, more than for Enlarging his Dominions Pareus. Med.
Hist. Eccles. page 257 He trod in the path of his Father Pipin, and of his
Grandfather Charles Martel of France, in that great Service of Christendom
against the Saracens, had an Averseness (though he Reconciled the Pope and
People) from allowing the Popish upholding of Images, which appeared in a
Council held at Franckford, and his writing against the 2d Council of Nice. He
gave for his Motto, Christus, Regnat, Vincit, and Triumphat; Christ, Reigns,
Conquers and Triumphs. (This was much, even then when Antichrist began to be
both Regnant and Triumphant in this 8th Century) Prideaux Introd. page 229, 230
as this Motto expressed his Christian Humility in the midst of his Grandeur and
Greatness, to the great shame of the Popes Pride and Ambition in that time; so
it Demonstrated his prophetic Faith, that Christ (in due time) would Trample
Antichrist underfoot and Triumph over Him: He is said to give unto the Empire
not only a new Body, but a new Soul too by promoting Religion in all his
Conquered Countries. Alsted, Encuclopaed. page 3019. He made Amicable leagues
with sundry Infidel Kings and Princes, that they might be more Favorable to
their Christian Subjects Pareus Med. Hist. Eccles^ page 258. Alcuinus (our
Oxford man, and one of Venerand Bedes Pupils) was this Emperors Tutor, by whom
he gave a large Testimony against Popish Errors, Illyr. Test. Verse. page 704
and 724. and by whom the Holy Scriptures were translated into the Mothers
tongue, the Pope at that time not contradicting it Alsted 3020. and Prideaux
230. page to conclude, though this Great Emperor had some Tincture of
Superstition with his piety, (says Osiandor) yet was he a Zealous promoter of
Christianity, insomuch that Christ had his Churches, (in this 8th. Century)
even in all Lands. Where they had a little Sabbath, or Rest, and kept their
Sabbaths (as the Centurist says) in Palaestine, Egypt, Greece, France,
Germany, yea and in our Britain, as at London, York, Beverley, Crowland,
Canterbury etc. All named. Osiand: Epst. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 8. lib. 1. Cap.
12. page 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. would to God our King may become another Charles the
Great to protect the Protestant Religion in all Lands: Helvicus says Aaron
King of the Saracens gave this Charles Mount Calvary in Jerusalem, and the
Sepulcher of Christ God give to our Charles a share in Christ's Kingdom. Now come
we to the (7th.) or Sabbatical Revolution (which makes the former 8th. to be
now the 16th. Century. The beginning of which makes the World five Thousand six
Hundred years old: As the sixth climacterical Conjunction turned the Empire from
Rome to Germany in the 8th. Century. So this 7th. may both turn it and burn it
(with the House of Austria and the Pope of Rome) out of the World. As the 8th,
Cent. gave a little Rest or Sabbath to the reformed Religion, which has been
miraculously Rested, though Arrested by the malice of Rome both before and
since Charles the 5th, but this 16th. or last may be a Sabbath of Sabbaths, and
proclaim a Jubilee of Triumph. To apply this General Discourse particularly to
our present purpose, as also to obviate Objections, some Observations (both
Astrological and Theological) may be here usefully added.

(1st.) Astrological, (1) observe in the General there is no Arrival at
perfection in Astronomy, the best Artists have erred, even in their best works,
Humanum est errare, the best Astronomer may say with the Man in Terence, Homo
sum, Humanum a me nil alienum puto. Men, as Men, yea the best of Men may
mistake: The very Masters and chief Luminaries in the Astronomical orb (such as
Mercator, Maginus, Morinus of France, Lord of Knudstrobe, Andrew Argol of
Padua, learned Hecker and Kepler himself) are all found faulty, and in some
things committing Errors, especially in the places of the slowest paced
Planets as are Saturn and Jupiter: None agree in all points, nor is it one man,
or one Age, that can set these Differences to the Rights: as Mr. Gadbury
ingenuously acknowledges in his Epistle to the Reader both before his 10 y.
and his 20. y. Ephemerides (2) observe in particular, neither do astronomers
Agree among themselves in Assigning the Time of this 7th. Clymacterical
Conjunction in our 16th Century, but have differing sentiments about it. Alsted
(that aliquis in omnibus, Universally learned in all University Learning) says,
that it happened in the Year 1603. December 24. ('it is 14. in another place) at
Noon in Sagittary, Encuclopoed. page 1105. 1106. and 1215. 1216. and 1285.
1286. in the first of which places, he calls it the 8th. Conjunction since the
Creation (Reckoning the first Inclusive at the Beginning of the World) as if it
shadowed out not only the Christian Sabbath which is on the 8th. Day or first
Day after the 7th. (on the 8th. Day was Circumcision celebrated, and the Psalms
on Sheminiths or Eights) but also that Sab. of Sabbaths, the Millennium Sab. to
be Vsher'd in thereby: Yet in his second place quoted, He calls it, but the
7th. Conjunction page 1216. where the first at the Creation is exclusive, and
not Reckoned in the Number, to Represent it more purely Sabbatical in the 7th
Number. In his Third place He adds, that this 7th Revolution portends not only
great and Universal Commotions (in Church and State) but also some glorious
Reformations, which (be says) cannot be accomplished without great Concussions
in Kingdoms and Countries. But Engl. prophetic Merlin contradicts this, not
only in its Computation, as to time, (affirming it to be on December. 7th and at
the 7th. hour 45. minutes page 22.) but also in its Denomination, as to name,
for (says He page 57.) that Conjunction may properly be called Magna, and was
no other, but it had been Absurd to have called it Maxima, it was Great, but
not the greatest, or Climacterical, because it was not in Aries (which is the
first of the Zodiac a Cardinal sign, etc.) but in Sagittary.

This is most certain, it must be one of those 3 sorts, Greatest, Middle or
Meanest, either that sort of Conjunctions which returns not above once in 800.
Years, or that of 200. Years, or that of every 20. Year, and this last is the
more probable seeing we find that after the Conjunction in 1603. there was
another after that 20. y. in 1623. another after that 20. y. in 1642/3. Another
after that 20. y. in 1663. and now another after that 20. in this present year
1682. However The Author aforementioned does well to call that in 1603. a great
Conjunction, because it was attended with very great and most memorable matter,
that James King of Scotland should become the Mighty Monarch of England, and of
Ireland too, and that without either Blood or Blows; what was this but a
setting up in effect (even by a Miracle) a New Monarchy, especially considering
that old Antipathy betwixt Scots and English: That prudent Prince, brought
peace not only to England, but also to Europe: yet in some sense, those other
Succeeding Conjunctions (in the Interval of 20. y.) before named, may be called
great, as well as that in 1603. in Respect of either some great Good, or some
great Evil attending them: For as that in 1603. was attended with the Death of
good Queen Elizabeth: So was that in 1623. with the Death of King James, and
that in 1642/3. with civil uncivil Wars, and that in 1663, had both the
dreadful Plague and Fire following it: And God knows what great Matters may
also attend this present Conjunction in 1682. whereof more afterward: As to
that common Notion, that climacterical Conjunctions (which be but 7 in all as
above) must be in Aries, because it is the first of the Signs of the Zodiac,
Chief and Cardinal, and under it the World (some say) was created, and
therefore must be the chief Epoche of the mightiest Matters and Mutations in
the World: Against this I must enter these Exceptions (1) who told them that
the World was created under Aries, surely Moses (with all his Learning of the
Egyptians) did not tell them so, nor Abraham, nor Job who both are reckoned up
as skilful in Astronomy, it is therefore gratis Dictum, and a being wise above
what is written: (2) I find in the best Tables of Calculation (I can consult
with) that the (first) Conjunction (Recorded therein) was in the 3d year of the
World, and that in Sagittary. The (2d) was 23d y. from the Creation in Leo. The
very Sign of our present Conjunction) and the (3d) in the 43. y. to be in Aries
Then the (4th) in 63. y. in Sagittary, and the (5th) in 82. in Leo, just as it
is now in our (82 reckoning by 20s (or thereabouts) betwixt that and this all
along from the Beginning of the World to this year. (3) In the Tables of Kepler
(the best in the World, improved by Maginus) the Sign Leo bids fairer for the
place of climacterical Conjunctions, than Aries, seeing the first in the Tables
(exclusive) was in Leo, A. M. 23. and the first Revolution of 800 y. (which is
the periodical Motion of Saturn and Jupiter) after that falls in 817 y. of the
World in Leo again, as the Tables tell us: If we reckon this (as well we may)
for the first climacterical Revolution, then we find there again, the second to
fall in 1611. in Leo too. As the first down from the Beginning to Enochs Time,
so the second reaches to Noah's Days, and to that universal Deluge. The third to
Moses in the y. 2406. and Isreal's Deliverance from Egypt, which was again in
Leo. The fourth to the y. 3200. (as some say) to the Medes Monarchy, or (as
others) to Solomon, and the Kings of Israel Then also was the Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in Leo also. The fifth to y. 4034. the Time of Christ's
Resurrection, and in the 34. of Christ these 2. Planets met again in Leo, as
Representing, that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah had then conquered Death, the
Grave and Hell, who soon after Ascended into Heaven. The sixth to 829. y. after
Christ, the Time of Charles the Great, whose Offspring possessed the Imperial
Throne for an 112. years, Pareus Medul. Hist. Eccles. page 260. and that Time
also had a Conjunction in Leo of the 2 superior Planets: The seventh (and
possibly the last) brings us down to the 16th Century, wherein we find no
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo till we come to 1682. therefore may we
more probably conjecture that this 7th Conjunction present in Leo has some
secret Mystery of Sabbatism in it, and promises something (in its signature)
of more singular Moment to this World, than any of its Antecedents. (4)
Astronomers do grant, that when the 2 superior Planets do pass out of the
watery Trigon, and have their Meeting in the Fiery (be it in Leo, Sagittary, or
Aries in which soever their Conjunction is) it is a great Conjunction, and
portends great Mutations, not only because these 2 Interchanged Triplicitys are
contrary as Fire and Water, but also their Abode in one Trigon is about 200, y.
And if usually 7. y. (the Term of Man's Life in Law) bring Changes, what may 20.
y. (their least Conjunction, and about 3 Men's Lives) do; much more may 200. Y.
(the Time of their Mean) but most of all the 800. Y. which is their
Climacterical Meeting: New Empires etc. may well arise in that Time. (5)
Spineus Physician to the Duke of Padua, who wrote Catastrophe Mundi. 1625. y.
and Englished by Squire Ashmol says page 24. that of all the 3 Signs in the
fiery Trigon, Aries is the weakest, then must it follow that Leo is stronger:
And at this Time especially considering, (6) This present Conjunction in Leo
comes Notably corroborated in 3. Respects. (1) it is attended with 2 frightful
Comets (the first esp. the like whereof has not been this 800. y.) as sealed
up in its significancy with a double Signet, or Seal Royal. Alsted etc. affirm,
that such Con junctions, so sealed, are most-significant. (2) their Conjunction
is near Cor. Leonis, (a Royal and Couragions creature, whose Heart is the Seat
of his Courage) which must add to its significancy, seeing those 2 greatest
Planets go into this Regal sign and so near the Heart of it, entering there (as
it were) into a deep Consult and there consronting the Sun: (3) That Mars
should meet first Jupiter upon the 7th of this last September, and Saturn up on
the 12th to strengthen them both with his conjoined Rays, as both passed along
in Tendency toward this their Great Conjunction all these Meetings are in the
same Sign of Leo, though now Mars be going off from cauda Leonis, as dropping
down from off the Lions Tail into the Sign Virgo, wishing them (as it were) an
Happy Meeting, which (no doubt) will be so according to Rules of Art, for
Jupiter, having the higher Elevation, and being above Saturn as yet, must
correct Saturns Malignity Halys comment on Ptolomy 63. Aphorism; beside, both
Jupiter and Saturn are oriental and so is Mars, which is a Situation judged the
least obnoxious, Saturn (say Artists) makes Plots, but Jupiter (above him)
spoils them: both the Two and Mars are occidental to the Sun, and therefore
(says) Almansor propos. 30.) They must give good at the latter End, though the
way to that End may be rough and rugged enough, esp. to the Northern Regions,
they being all so nigh to the Tropic of Cancer, (their Diurnal Ark, (or March)
in our Horizon pouring down their Influences for about 15 Hours) and both
Saturn and Mars being (what Star soever they are joined with) so mischievous to
Mankind: What their 2d Conjunction on January 30 in the Y. (83 and their 3d
Conjunction again upon May the 2d in the same next Year 83. (all Three in Leo
though in 2 distinct Years immediately succeeding each other, and all 3 in
theCompass of 8 Months, which is far short of the distance of 20. years, (for
this great Conjunction consists of all these 3 Meetings, that a 3 fold Cord may
not easily be broken; Whereas, as is abovesaid, their least Conjunction has
the Interspace of 20 years) may conduce hereunto, time will best declare, for
Truth is the Daughter of Time: Considering also, that the Sun will lose its
light so soon after this first Conjunction October the 9 (82 and so little
before their second in January 30. in (83; for in the same Year and Month upon
the 17th Day of January in the Y. 83. that great Luminary will be Ecclipsed,
and 9 Digits darkened in Aquarius, about 3 a clock in the Afternoon, much more
might be added here, but sat verbum sapienti etc. I have duly and daily
observed the Motion of these 2 great Planets (every clear Morning) since they
came nigh each other, and do wonder that they should be so swift in their
Motion (Saturn running 2 Millions 376 Thousand 261 Miles in an Hour, and 3964
Miles in one Minute, and Jupiter running 898 Thousand 700 Miles in one Hour,
and 14 Thousand 9 Hundred 78 Miles in one Minute) yet are so slow in their
Meeting: For I find Saturn requires 12 Days in his Diurnal motion to go this
one single Degree in Leo, and Jupiter requires 7 days for the same, before they
can come through the 18th Degree of Leo to conjoin in the 19th, distant only 2
Minutes (whereof there be 60 in every Degree) on the 9th of 8ber (82, then on
the 10th Day Saturn marches off 6 Minutes and Jupiter 8 from their so near
Application: It must be considered also, that the proper Motion of these 2
Planets (as of all the other 5.) is from West to East upon the Pole of the
Zodiac (though the primum mobile or upper Heaven hurry them upon the Northern
and Southern Poles from East to West) as plainly appears in the Motion of the
Moon (one of the Planets) which at her Change is setting West, every Night
falls backward, and backward toward the East, till at her Full she Rises in
the East, in about 15. Days.

2ly, Theological, that it may (1) appear This Discourse is not Chaldaization
or the folly of the Chaldees, so much condemned in Scripture; for Astronomy and
Astrology must not be confounded as too generally they are: That the Stars have
a 3 fold Excellency (light, Motion and Influence) is granted by all that are
Judiciously Learned: All the Controversy is about the last: Concerning their
Influence, there be 3 Opinions (1) in excess (2) in Defect, and the (3) in the
middle between both: The 2 former extremes are offensive, but the 3d is
inoffensive, (1) Those in the Excess were the Chaldeans, Arabians, Egyptians,
Stoics, and many Jews, yea and Gentiles too both Heathen and Christian, who
Account the Heavens to be a Book, wherein the Fates of All are written, and who
make their Schemes and Horoscopes from thence as Creditable as the Gospel (2)
Those in the Defect are such as Censure all sorts of Astronomical prognostics
for Tables and Fooleries. To say, Heavenly bodies do produce no effects by
their powerful Influence, is to Deny both Scripture and Experience: They both
offend in Contrary Extremes in saying, that the Stars either do all things, or
that they do nothing: therefore (3) The middle way betwixt these two Extremes
must be most Approved.

In Medio tutissimus Ibis. Ecclipses may certainly and changes of Times may
probably be prognosticated: Job was Undoubtedly a great Astronomer, yet a good
man and Holy in his Astronomy, knowing Arcturus, Orion, the Pleiades and the
Chambers of the South. Job 9. 9. Yea and the Dragon (whose nodes have all the
Ecclipses, and Seated betwixt the 2 Bears, not far from the North Pole,) Job.
26, 13. and God (himself) Discourses with Job as with one Conversant in that
study, Job 38, 31, 32, 33. Where the Lord Asserts an Influence in the Stars,
and that Irresistible as to Man, Job cannot bind it up or loose it out and let
it go, the power of Binding and loosing pertains to the all powerful God, who
is the sole Guide and Governor of them, and who has placed a Dominion in them
over all Elementary bodies: which is expressly mentioned in these words [canst
thou set the Dominion of them on the Earth] Job 38, 33. God has put a Power
into the Stars to Rule the 4 Seasons of the year etc. This is called [The
Powers of Heaven] 3 Times Recorded by Christ himself Matthew. 24, 29. Mark 13,
25. and Luke 21, 26. and surely those powers cannot be Insignificant, Deus and
Natura, nil faciunt frustra. God and Nature make nothing in Vain. They have
then a Power, Dominion, or Influence, which no mortal men (though never so
many, or mighty) can either binder or hasten: Thus Amos also that Heardsman and
Summer-fruit-gatherer (neither a Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet) Amos 7. 14)
yet) was a most notable Astronomer discoursing notably upon the Stars) Chimah
and Chesil] 2 years before the Noted Earthquake. Amos 1, 1. and 5, 8. as
likewise upon the Spheres, those 3 Stories of Heaven one above another, before
the Famine of the Word. Amos 9, 6. and 8. 11. yea and Hosea brings in God
Reckoning the Heavens to be next in power (the next Vessel of Mercy) to
Himself. Hos. 2, 21. where the Prophet sets down a Concatenation of Causes
concerning Divine providence, which the Wizzards of this World, either deny or
deride; Lastly Moses (when He blesses Israel as their Civil Father, as Jacob,
their natural Father had done before Him, Genesis 49.) Declares therein How the
precious things of the Heavens do bring forth the precious Things of the Earth,
Deuteronomy. 33, 13, 14, 15. So that Stars are not set and seated in the Heavens
[ornatus gratia] merely for Ornaments sake (as Baldwin in Cases of Conscience
p. 780. excellently Demonstrates) They are not only for Garnishing the
Under-Ceiling and stately Vault above our Heads (as Job says, Job 26, 13. but
Moses Intimates, that they are the Treasurys of God) having Treasure, laid up
in them, the Stars are Gods Storehouses out of which He scatters his precious
things from his Heaven upon the Earth, saying [The Lord shall open to thee his
good Treasure] Deuteronomy. 28, 12. Every Star (says one) is as a purse of Gold, out
of which God casts down Riches, that Good Men gather up by Honest means, but
the Evil scramble for by fraud, or by Force: that the Stars be Signs all do
grant, and in some sense, Causes: That they be Signs, is grounded upon Genesis 1,
14. [Let them be for Signs] yet some do narrow that word, saying, they are only
Signs of Night and Day, if so, then the Sun and Moon had been enough to signify
both these, so all the Rest (of the Thousands and of the Millions) be
altogether superfluous, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora,
what need many, where two will do, it is against Common sense as well as express
Scripture to deny that those Celestial Bodies are not Signs of Times and
Seasons also, as of Summer and Winter, Genesis 8, 22. of Weather etc. yea Learned
and solid Pareus on Gen 1, 14. Excellently Argues, that the Stars could not be
called Signs unless They did signify something, and that something (He says)
is, to warn mortals of may Matters such as be (1) Natural (2) Civil (3)
Spiritual, and He Approves of that (...) Verse of Aratus.

(...) The Stars signify to men what matters are forged or framed for them: As
(1) Natural Signs they be, of Heat, Cold, Dryness and Moisture etc. (2) Civil.
the Sailor must Hoise up his Sails (as the Word pleiades signifies) when those
7 Sisters bring in the Spring with their sweet Influences. So for setting,
sowing etc. (3) Spiritual, their Aspects, and Passions (says he) are Signs of
spiritual Events as both Scripture and Experience teach, such as Ecclipses,
Comets etc. For though these things have their Causes in Nature, yet do often
portend horrible Changes of public Affairs, Seditions, Wars, Droughts,
Inundations etc. for so much as (He says) they either do naturally excite
those sore Judgments, Through divine Pleasure, or do certainly assist the
Causes thereof, therefore they do foreshew, and are Signs of Gods Displeasure,
whereby Men are alarmed to Repentance: Though the Rainbow have a Natural
cause, (as the Reflection of the Sunbeams in an opposite watery Cloud) yet is
it nevertheless a Sign of Divine Clemency (Genesis 9. 8.) for preserving the
World: How much more must those preternatural Passions of the Planets be Signs
of either Gods Anger or Favor. Pareus on Genesis page 54. Col. 12. All this He
says, though in page 55. He shows himself no Friend to Judiciary Astrology;
which Dr. Willet likewise declares to be repugnant to Reason as well as
Scripture, and its practice (in telling Fortunes and finding things lost etc.)
to be Vain and Impious in his 20th. Question Genesis 1. 14. My opinion is,
Astrology in the General is lawful, provided it keep within its due Bounds, and
pry not too far into Gods Secrets Deuteronomy. 29. 29. It Is only the allknowing God
who can foretell future Events Isa. 41. 21. 22. 27. 1. Eccles. 8. 7. and 10. 14.
etc. Man knows not what shall be, no nor the Devil (not withstanding the
Subtlety and Sagacity of his Angelical nature, together with his long
Experience) to help Man, therefore all his Oracles He delivered in ambiguous
Terms, that he might save his Credit when deceived. All Apollo's Oracles were
made by Astrology says Eusebius. Depraeparat Evang. l b. 6. cap. 1. with lib.
5. cap 10. And they were not only directed by the Aspect of Stars, but also
ministered by Familiar spirits. Yet the starry Heaven is a sacred Alphabet,
wherein the Wisdom, Power, Justice and Mercy of God are Lined out to us, these
all be written legibly, yea Palpably (as the word Act 17. 27. signifies) in the
Brows of the Firmament; hence Clemens Alex: Calls it the first Bible God made
for Man's instruction; it is one of the 3 leaves of the Book of Nature which
every mortal should read and consider. Thus David did, He read it. because it
declared the Glory of God. Ps. 19. 1. yea every line of that leaf, he knew how
far reached the length of those lines, what David calls a line, Faul calls a
Voice, Romans 10. 18. quoted from Ps. 19. 4, Reading Divinity-Lectures to all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, that they may make a serious contemplation of them,
and David considered as well as Read it. Ps. 8, 3. All men as well as He,
should be much in this Consideration, this Appears, because (1) herein lays the
Difference betwixt Men and Beasts which cannot consider any thing (2) The bolt
upright figure of man's Body does admonish him hereof.,

The Heathen Poet Ovid could say thus,

Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
God with a lofty look did man Indue
Commanding him the Heavens and Stars to View.
(3) We are taught this duty by the fifth Muscle, which God has given to man's
Eye (whereas other Creatures have but four,) for drawing it upward, ut ejus
Auxilio Coelum Intueremur, says the Anatomist, that by the help thereof we
might Contemplate and Consider the Heavens: some Heathens (to the Shame of some
Christians) have said, they were therefore Born, that they might Contemplate
the Heavens: Alas, many make more Delightful Contemplations upon Lumps of
Farth, than upon the Lamps of Heaven, as Duke de Alva, have so much business on
Earth, that they have no Time to Look up to Heaven: let us consider them, and
cry with David. Lord what is man etc, Ps. 8, 3, 4. in looking up, we behold
every Star Twinkling at us and (as it were) Beckoning to us to Remember our
Creator Eccles 12, 1. It Is not presumption but Duty to Read the Face of the
Firmament, Matthew. 16, 2. Luke 12, 56. 1 Kings 18, 43, 44. Read this Leaf while
it is Expansum, an open Leaf, for it must be Rolled up and Folded together as a
Scroll, Isa. 34. 4. and Rev. 6, 14. yet rest not in Reading this Book of
nature, that only Declares Creation-Love, It Is the Book of Scripture in which
Redemption love is Discovered, we are no where bid to search in the former (as
in the latter. John 5, 39.) for Eternal life: It Is said, Ubi definit
Phtlosophus, ibi incipit Theologus: So where Nature Ends, and can go no
further, there the Scripture begins, and gives more grace Jam 4, 6. Isalm 19,
1, 2, 7, 8.

(2) But the grand Question is, though Stars be Signs, whether they be also
Causes, seeing Mases calls them Signs Genesis 1, 14, but never causes. A. Baldwin
says, Stars do incline and irritate, but do not necessitate, p. 780 Cas.
Consc. and Amesius calls them common causes, Cas. Consc p. 191 Alsted styles
them Causae adiuvantes ibid, as if they were Auxiliaries, the soundest Divinity
says, they are general Causes only, but not special, so nothing can be
infallibly foretold from their positions. Moses did call them Signs, not Causes
to prevent Idolatry, much less did He call them Prophets, as if they could
predict future Events with any certainty: Hence Spineus heartily confesses that
Astrologers can but conjecture, none but those inspired by God can foretell, (as
Amos 3 7.) Catastrophe Mundi, page 11. 12. The same say, Kepler, Tycho, Alsted,
etc. Kepler makes a more modest Observation than Cardan; saying, the wise Men
who were led by a signal Star out of the East, might by the Rules of their own
Astrological Art make some Conjectures of an Eminent Event, and of the Birth of
a mighty Monarch, because (says he) that Comet (as he calls it) appeared at
the very Time, when their was the fifth Climacterical Conjunction of the 2
superior Planets, (Saturn and Jupiter) in the fiery Trigon: Yea the Head
Masters of that Mystery do grant, that though the various Positions of the
Stars have great Effects upon sublunary Bodies, yet peremptorily to assign them
is Presumption, for the Efficacy of the Stars above our Heads, and their
Specific virtues cannot be so well known to us as may be that of Herbs, which
we can take in our Hands and do tread upon with our Feet, and therefore, long
Experience of such and such Effects following Comets and Conjunctions, do teach
more and better than all Astrological Rules, Maxims or Aphorisms: Indeed Sir
Christopher Heydon steps a little farther, saying, that their Effects be by
long Experience certainly known, though the Causes be unknown, and cannot be
demonstrated, I must confess, this Assertion holds true in some other Cases
more familiar to Man, and such whose Causes and Effects are (each of them
equally) more nearly conversant with us, than are Celestial Causes and
Terrestrial Effects; as for Instance, it has been my own many Times
Experiment, how Harmony in Mufick (upon musical, well tuned and stringed
Instruments) will strangely and strongly Affect even at some considerable
Distance: As thus, hang a little cooked Straw upon the Base or Remotest string
upon your Base-Vial, Lute, or Harp, make the trebble String either Unisons,
Diapasons, or Dis-Diapasons (that is, either Ones, Eights, or Sixteens, in
which Notes do consist the highest Harmony in Music) and your stroke upon the
Trebble (either stopped or open to make those Harmonious Sounds aforesaid) will
cause the Straw to cut Capers, and to Dance a Gallyard, leaping Levalto's all
along till at last it falls down, which will not so much as move, no not, if
it be placed upon the neareststring to the Straw (as I have often tried) at any
other Note: No Reason can be rendered for this, save only, it is from Harmony in
Music, which is like the poor Shift of the Philosopher when Non-plus'd with
the Sympathys and Antipathys in Nature (both of Plants and Beasts) his Retreat
for a Solvo or Salvo is, it is an occult Quality, which is Tantamont, the great
God has posed me, I know not the Reason. The like is well known (as to the
Matter of Fact) How Geometrical Symmetry in musical Sounds and Voices, will
marvellously Affect the Heart of all that are not Melancholic, yet the manner
of its Operation is hard to be Demonstrated: As it is not doubted, so neither
must it be Denied, that those Celestial and Aetherial Stars do much Affect all
Terrestrial and Elementary Bodies, (both Plants, Beasts and Men that are upon
the Earth, and Subterranneal Metals that are within the Earth) by those
powerful Influences which the great Creator did Concreate them with, and placed
in them otherwise, we had never heard of the sweet Influences of the Pleiades
or 7. Stars, Job 38, 31. (those 7 Sisters or Lovers have an Irresistible
Influence to produce the Spring-flowers etc.) nor ever have been called upon to
pay our Tribute of praise (upon our beholding the Garnished Heavens) to the
great Creator of them for man's good, as we are Psalm 136, 7, 8, 9. with ver. 1.
(seeing they Thrust forth out of the Earth so many precious Creaturecomforts
for us. Deuteronomy. 33. 14.) nor ever have heard how the Stars fought in their
Courses against Sisera Judge. 5, 20. The Stars are called the Host of Heaven,
Psalm. 33, 6. (and in many more Scriptures) where the Psalmist makes the first
mention of this Host, as the most glorious part of Creation work; and how did
this Host fight against Sisera: Much like so many Soldiers that observed both
Rank and File, or rather like so many Regiments, God (their generalissimo)
called forth now one Regiment and then Another, drawing up their extraordinary
Influences to Confound his and his Peoples Enemies therewithal: Some take these
Stars Metaphorically for Angels as 2. Maccab 10, 29 and 11, 8. but the literal
sense is more proper, for God made those [Hachochabim mimmisilotham] Stars from
their stations to stir up storms (according to their Natural Influence) and to
Dash Hailestones, Lightning, and Thunderbolts in the faces of the Cursed
Canaanites, as Josephus says Antiquit. lib. 5. chap. 6. Those Stars could more
easily, more strongly, and more Hittingly cast their malignant Darts or Rays
from their High Stations (as Misiloth signifies) Downward upon those foes below
(than can possibly be cast from below upward for Killing work) Esp. God
Directing these Darts to Hitt their appointed marks, Notwithstanding all this,
we may not place the Stars in Gods stead, as to Ascribe to them a Supreme
Dominion.

Indeed these Superior bodies have (expressly) Job 38, 33. a power or Dominion
over our Inferior, unto which we are Subject and must Submit, yet is it only a
Ministerial power, a Dominion subordinate to the Appointment of God: He may use
their Ministry Respecting the mighty matters of this lower World (as He did
against Sisera) yet may we not say, that the lives and Fortunes of Men, the
Fates and Changes of States Depend wholly upon the Stars, and may be foretold
by the Temper, figure, color and Posture, of the Planets, This is a Divination
Condemned by the Word of God. Deuteronomy. 18, 10. Isa. 47, 13. etc. and it is a
putting the Stars in Gods stead; whereas All created beings (yea the very
Planets themselves) are in the hand of God. Indeed Plato in Timeao, calls the
Stars Gods, such as the blind Gentiles, and some Blockish Jews made so, not
only in observing them (which all ought to do) but also in Adoring them 2.
Chron. 33, 3. Jerem. 44, 17. etc. contrary to Deuteronomy. 4, 19. etc. I could wish
that the names of those Planets were Reformed from those of Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Mercury, etc. Seeing all these were Names of the Heathen Gods, which
should be spetted out of Christians Mouths with utmost Detestation, Exodus 23,
13. Psalm. 16, 4 and Hos. 2, 17. Hereupon the Primitive Christians did dislike
those names that Mercurius Trismegistus had given to the Days of the week, such
as Dies Saturni, Jovis, Martis and Veneris etc. Desiring to shun all Semblances
of Idolatry, and fearing to countenance those Heathenish Dunghill Deities:
Reverend Beza says, he had rather still Retain the Hebrew Names, [Has, Chesil,
and Chimah, than call them Arcturus, Orion and the Pleiades, which have beenn
so much Abused with the obsceen Fables of profane Poets: I am Constrained to
call those Planets by their common Heathenish Names for Distinction sake and by
way of Recital, as Baal Romans 11, 4. and Castor and Pollux, Acts 28, 11. are
mentioned by the Apostle, non Honoris gratia, sed tantum Recitative, not to pay
them any Honor, but in the way of an History only, it being there an Historical
Relation. Gualtherus has an Excellent Note upon Zeph. 1, 5. etc. [them that
Worship the Host of Heaven upon the House-top] saying, let those that profess
Judiciary Astrology observe this, they worship the Stars no less than did the
Heathens of old, and do openly bring in Heathenism again, while (first) they
call the Stars by the Names of those Heathenish Deityes, which ought to be
Abolished; as above: (2dly) they put the Event of all things in subjection to
those Stars, yea even of Man himself, as touching all his Manners and Fortunes
which (as the Scriptures Affirm) do Depend upon the Eternal Providence of God
Alone. I add a (3d) to Gualter, their putting the Government of the World under
7 Planetary Angels, giving names and Times of Government to them
Unscripturally. This is Intolerable Impiety, and they that fall into it, shall
not escape the Just Judgment of God, Great Augustine calls this no better than
the Doctrine of Devils, saying this kind of Divination was of the Devils
Teaching: De Civit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 1. page 70. par. 2dae. Yet in propriety
of Speech, that is not Divination which speaks from Signs and Causes, but from
Impulses and Inspiration Beza Ep. 29. now to propose the Planets as both Signs
and Causes not only of Natural, but also of Voluntary things (without any
Respect either to the Free Will of Man or to the Free Grace of God) Reducing
All under a Fatal Necessity and Determinations of Planets, This must needs be
both great Folly, and gross Idolatry. No Doubt, but the Planets have a mighty
power over the Bodies of Men, yet it is wicked to say that the Soul also is
subject to Stars, and though they may have some Influence upon the passions and
Affections of the Soul, which do naturally Arise from the Temper of the Body,
yet can they not Incline, much less Enforce the Will of Man, but least of all
the Will of God, and therefore cannot afford any Certain Divination: Besides,
the Planets are but Universal and Remote Causes (at the most) and there be
other more near, and more particular causes Intervening which may (having a
power of their own) either Resist or Remit that force descending down from the
Stars.

This probably may be the True Reason, why the very Conjecturers themselves do
so much disagree among themselves in their own Conjectures.

Suppose Pythagoras and Plato's Notion hold True, that the Motion of the
Celestial Spheres (called Motus Trepidationis, a Trembling Motion) makes a most
Melodious Music, and suppose that Music (being Celestial) should make a
greater Impression upon the minds of Men (though they hear it not by a Virtual
Contact, than any Terrestrial Music (as is aforesaid) can do) yet this occult
Quality (as to the matter of its effects, as well as to the manner of its
Operation) cannot Afford any better than an occult or obscure Divination from
the obscurity both of the Causa and of the Causatum: which have the same
Quality: Now if the Devil himself can foretell nothing but such as are [in
causis cognitis operantibus] in their Causes both known, and in their very
working too, much less can any Mortal Man (far short of his Subtlety, sagacity
and experience) Declare moral matters long before there is any working in their
natural Causes by Astrological Rules, such predictions must needs be Uncertain,
Vain, if not false, yea sometime Blasphemous. There be some such predictions,
we would have gladly prove true [quod Volumus, facile credimus] as this, That
Mars never leaves Leo and goes into Virgo, but then the Enemies of the
Protestants go down etc. on the contrary that of Cambden, that Saturn never
passes through Leo but he leaves a plague upon this City of London: God forbid
it.

To conclude then with (not peremptory Conclusions, but) some probable
Conjectures partly Astrolog. and partly Theolog: (1) give me leave to say with
Nuntius propheticus. Page 35 my Nature has hitherto abhorred predicting Events
by the Stars, yet seeing the Congress (or Conjunction) of the 2 Superior
Planets have an I had of Evils mostly attending them (to fall some where) so
must portend great Matters, yet it is beyond the Knowledge of Man to make any
positive Prediction from them upon whom it will fall, or precisely when that
Great Sabbath, or Time of Rest shall come upon the Earth: He reckons many
Reverend men (some that lived while the Blood of Christ was yet warm) who
taught freely and fully (of this Golden Age, or great Sabbath to come) with the
Applause of all, and contradiction of none etc. Which future Felicity of Gods
Servants upon Earth may well be portended by this 7th, Sabbatical and
Climacterical Conjunction: (2) concerning the precise point of Time when this
Day of Refreshing. Acts 3, 19. and of the Restitution of all things v. 21 shall
be, no mortal Man can determine; indeed, so many Men, so many Minds, One Author
assigns this Year, Another that, a third differs in his Account from both: And
(in truth) such is the Uncertainty of Chronology, that it is impracticable if
not impossible to fix any Certainty herein: The Computation of Time from the
Creation to Christ is made in that Variety, that Alsted reckons up about 24
several Accounts and Conjectures thereof in his Encuclopaedia. Page 2993. Now
if there were so much Uncertainty in that Chronology before Christ (wherein the
Records of the Old Testament run all along as a Thread for Guidance in that
Labyrinth) how much more since Christ, which has not a Scripture-Chronicle to
direct us beyond the first Hundred years: And in the very first Century, there
must be much Obscurity; for the Pagans, who were so Cruel, as to Kill the
Authors, would not be so Kind, as to Keep their Books: See my Discovery of
Antichrists Rise, Reign and Ruin. page 147, 148, 149. etc. (3) Notwistanding
the Variety of Minds in stating this great Matter as to Time, yet all do agree
unanimously, and there is a Concurrence of Sentiments on all Hands, that this
thrice happy and golden Age is now at hand, and the Nearer we may well suppose
it, because the 7th Conjunction must be attended (as all the former 6 have
been) with Great Revolutions: The great Champion of this Sabbatical Doctrine
Alsted does (confidently enough) determine the year of Christ 1694 (which is
now about 12 y. hence) for the first Year of that Triumphant State or Happy
Jubilee: And I cannot but wonder to find Trithemius Spineus, Cardan and Tycho
Brahe all speaking of a new erected Kingdom about the Year 1700. (which is
about 5 or 6 years beyond Alsteds Account) In quo omnia Nutu Unius Regentur
etc. And betwixt this great Conjunction (renewed again Jan. 30 and May 2d of
the next year) and in that 17 Century I find not any other of these 2 Superior
Planets (nor will be, till their 20 y. Return from this Meeting) only as great
an Eclipse of the Sun I find March 29 in the y. 1693 (about Alsteds year
aforementioned) as was that in the y. 1652. which than gave the Denomination of
Black Monday accompanied with most Black Effects: (4) As to those that have put
so much stress upon the y. 1666 (a year fatal to London, not to Rome that
mystical Babylon) Time it self (the best Interpreter of dark Mysteries) has
confuted: That was before this Great Conjunction (though not before a Great
Comet in the y. (64) unless we reckon from Christ's (not Birth; but) Ascension
(for then was made Christ's Visible Conquest) which will be a fit Salvo for the
aforesaid, as adding 34 y. more to 1666, betwixt Christ's Ascension and
Descension to Restore all things, which is not yet elapsed, but falls upon the
17. Century. (5) there be others, who judge the Time uncertain, and certainly
their Judgment (in my Judgment) is most certain: However this is a sovereign
Cordial against all our interveing Cordoliums, that our Redemption draws nigh
Luke 21, 28. therefore are we bid to look up, and to lift up our Eyes on high
upon those Heavenly Wonders (the Conjunctions and the Comets) Isa. 40, 26. And
lift up your Heads etc. (as before) or [exhilarate corda] cheer up your Hearts,
as that Luke 21, 28. is interpreted: or stretch forth your Necks (as (...) Romans
8. 19. signifies) which is either a Metaphor from Birds that thrust forth a
long Neck out of a Cage, or else from Men that earnestly look and long for some
special Friend a coming, as Siseras Mother did, looking out at a Window and
crying [why is his Charet so long in coming] Judge. 5, 28. when ye see those
things come to pass, says Christ, that is, when ye behold these Signs,
Prodigies, Ecclipses etc. Then know your full and final Deliverance is not far
off, see Romans 8, 19, to 22. (6) Whereas this Intimation cutts the Worlds
continuance (in statu quo] short of 6000 years, it is true, it seems to do so;
The Hebrew Cabbalists do indeed observe, that in the first Verse of the Holy
Bible there are six Alephs, who from thence conclude, that the World shall last
six Thousand Years reckoning each Aleph (as it stands in Genesis 1. 1.) for a
Thousand: Suitable to this (in point of Time) is that other Rabbinical Notion,
that as Solomon's Temple was finished in the 3000 y. of the World, so the
spiritual Temple shall be consummated in three Thousand more: According to this
Tenure likewise, does the known Prophecy of Elias (not the Tisbite, but a later
Learned Rabbi) run in his Reckoning, that as there weree 2000 y. (plus minus)
before the Law, and 2000 y. (more or less) under the Law: So there are to be
2000 y. also under the Gospel: Agreeable also to these 3 former Computations, is
the Notion of comparing the six Thousand years of the Worlds Redemption
(whereof the first four Thousand belonged to the prophetical Office of Christ,
and the last two Thousand to his Sacerdotal or Priestly) unto the six first
Days of the Worlds Creation. Because both the Old and New Testament do testify,
that a Thousand Years with God are as one Day Psalm. 90, 4. and 2. Pet. 3, 8. As
likewise because God promises to show Mercy to a 1000 Generations; that is,
(as some interpret it) for 7000. y. For as after the 6 Days came the Sabbath,
so after the six Thousand comes the 7th or Sabbatical Millennium: And after the
prophetical and priestly Offices be accomplished in the four and two Thousand
(as aforesaid) then begins his Regal Office, wherein he takes to himself his
great power and Reigns. Revel. 11, 15, 17. for which He has been in long
Expectation, Hebr. 10 13. with 1, 13. and Ps. 110, 1. and 1. Cor. 15, 24. 25.
this is his Kingly Office. (7) These aforesaid Divisions of Times are Indeed
Fair and plausible, but as they are not Divine and Scriptural, (wanting a
Warrant from the Spirits Inspiration) so there is (1) a plus and a minus, a
more and a less Attending them; and if the two former periods, why not the
latter: (2) Christ has said that this latter period shall be shortened for the
Elects sake, Matthew. 24, 22. which words may have a special Relation to the
world in general, as well as to Jerusalem in particular. (3) There is a German
Doctor, who tells us, we have lost more in the Chronology of Time than Two
Hundred years (4) Consider that Tycho Brahe calls the Former Epoches of great
Revolutions Uneven ones, and why may not this last be so: (5) Remember how the
Ancients make 960. y. betwixt one Climacterical Conjunction and another, this
will Advance etc. (6) so will a Reckoning from Christ's Ascension, and not from
his Birth: (7) This Planetary Revolution being the 7th we may expect the sooner
a Restitution of all things All Sabbatick Circulations are Reputed as Rings of
Gold, and the 7th is the Diamond and Sparkling Jewel of Daily, Monthly and
Annual Revolutions. I shall therefore Conclude with this precious double 7th
(both in the paragraph and in the Subdivision) and with that old Hebrew prayer
[Bimerah Bejamenu] let this 7th Millennium or Blessed Jubilee come quickly, and
in our Day Before we be lodged in the silent Grave; even so, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly. So prays C. N.

Christopher Nesse.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
It Is true when this Sabbatick Jubilee shall begin, no mortal man can determine
the Hour, Day, Mouth, or Year, Tacente Scriptura, Taceamus and nos; where the
Scripture has not a Mouth to speak, we should not have a Tongue to ask: no man
nor Angel knows when the Son of man will come to Restore all things, Matthew, 24,
36. Acts 3, 21. The Truth is Certain, that it shall be, but the Time is
Uncertain, when it will be: for the Scripture is silent upon a 2 fold account
(1) to suppress our Curiosity; eorum quae scire, nec datur, nec fas est, Docta
est Ignorantia says Austin: An Itch of knowing secrets, is a sort of madness
says Calvin, Arcana Dei sunt Arca Dei, a prying into Gods Secrets (which
belong not to us Deuteronomy. 29, 29. may have the same measure with presumptuous
prying into Gods Ark. 1. Sam. 6, 19. and Peter gives the same charge against
Curiosity, as against Theft or Murder, 1. Pet. 4, 15. Tu fuge ceu pestem (...).
To be too pragmatical and Inquisitive after matters unrevealed, falls under a
severe Reproof Acts 1, 6, 7, 11. Judge. 13, 18. God has set us our Bounds (as
Exodus 19, 12.) His Revealed will, we must be wise to Sobriety, not above what is
written. The 2d Account is, to oblige our Vigilance, Ideo latet vnus Dies, ut
observentur omnes says Austin. Christ would not tell his Disciples the day or
time of his Return (though he told them all that was expedient John 14, 2, and
16, 7. yet pronounces them 3 times Happy, that are always upon their watch,
Luke 12, 37, 38, 43. so Mark 13. 37.

Nevertheless, we may safely say, this Day of Redemption Draws nigh, and must
now be at the very Door as may further be Demonstrated, as it is with the
Microcosm or little World (Man) so it is with the Microcosm or great World: As
Man's first Age is Infancy reckoned from his Birth till he be 7y. old: His 2d
Age is Childhood from 7 to 14. His third is Adolescency or his stripling Age
from 14 to 21. His fourth is his Youth from 21 to 35. His fifth is his middle
Age or Fullness of Strength which lasts from 35 to about 50. (these 2 last are
uneven Numbers, lasting longer in the Course of Nature, than the former 3
wherein Natural Vigor is shooting up in growth; as a plant till it come to its
(...) or full Strength; then comes the sixth his old Age, wherein he declines
daily and droops toward the Earth from whence he came, therefore is it called
the evil Age Eccles. 12, 1. (senium and malum are convertible Terms) because it
is attended with manifold Maladys and Miserys, then he faith with Isaac [Behold
now I am old and I know not the Day of my Death] Genesis 27, 2. and with Jacob
[behold I dye, and the Time draws nigh that I must dye] Genesis 47, 29. and 48,
21. and with Paul [I protest that I dye daily] 1, Cor. 15, 31. Even so it is
with the great World whose Infancy was to Enoch the first Climacterical
Conjunction, it is Childhood to Noah at the second, it is Adolescency to Moses at
the third; it is Youth to Solomon etc. at the fourth; it is middle Age to Christ
at the fifth, it is old Age brings in Charles the Great at the sixth: This is
further illustrated thus, Paul the Apostle adjusteth this Metaphor, not only
comparing God to a great Householder who disposes of Times to his Family the
World (as the word [(...)] signifies) in which Dispensation, there is a Time of
Tutorage, Pupillage and Pedagogy (which comprehends all those Times before
Christ, whose coming in the Flesh He calls the Fullness of Time twice over. Gal.
4. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Ephesians. 1, 10. that is, the full grown Age of the World and of
the Church in the World to be freed from Wardship etc. And the same Apostle
calls the Times afterward the Ends of the World. 1. Cor. 10, 11. which can
signify no other than its old Age, the very Lees and Dregs of Time: So the same
Apostle calls them the last (and therefore the worst) Days. 2. Tim. 3, 3. and
the Lord is at Hand. Phil. 4, 5. the Author to the Hebrews calls them also the
last Days Hebr. 1, 2. and the End of the World. Hebr. 9, 26. and the Apostle
James says the Coming of the Lord draws nigh, and the Judge is standing at the
Door I am 5, 7, 8, 9. and the Apostle Peter says, the End of all things is at
Hand. 1. Pet. 4. 7. and 2. Pet. 3. 3. and John the Apostle, says expressly, it
is the last Time, and we know it is the last Time. 1 John 2. 18. and He further
adds, yet a little while, and Christ will come quickly. Revel. 1. 7 and 3,
11. and 22, 7, 12, 20. So that all the Apostles seem to expect then the End of
the World, and Paul points to his own Body, when he said [this Corruptible
shall put on Incorruption etc.] 1 Cor. 15, 53. and expected by the coming of
Christ, to be Changed rather than to Dye, 1 Thessalonians 4 17 yet after, other things
were Revealed to him, 2 Thessalonians 2, 2, 3. etc. And so to John likewise in his Seal
and Book prophesy, Wherein he discovers, 1. The Fata Imperii, 2. the Fata
Ecclesiae (as a Seal represents the State, and a Book the Church) All to be
Accomplished before the End, or they might have Respect to the 3 Ages of the
World (according to Elias's Distribution) 1. before 2. under the law, 3 under
to Gospel, no New Rule or Revelation was to be expected after the last Which
they therefore called the end of the World: However they had desired to know
some Signs of Christ's coming and of the End of the World Matthew. 24, 3. Thinking
verily that the World could not stand longer than the Temple, nor possibly out
last it, as if it had been the Atlas and principal Pillar to support it: for
Solomon had said (at its erecting and Dedication,) I have surely built God an
house to dwell in for ever. 1 Kin 8, 13. and 2 Chronicles. 6, 2 that is, so long as
the World stands it shall stand, which was but conditional, Hence the Disciples
jamble these 3 questions together 1. what be the Signs of the Temples Ruin, 2
of Christ's second coming, and 3. of the End of the World. The Lord Answers all
the Three, in declaring distinct Signs of Jerusalems Destruction, and
promiscuously mixing them with the other, but in v. 30. He singles out a Sign
of his own last and most glorious coming, which some suppose may be some
Extraordinary Comet or Blazing Star, as his first Coming was by a Bright Star,
that led the Wisemen to Bethlehem: and if so many prodigys attended Christ's
passion, surely many more may attend his Return in Glory and the end of the
World, many strange Commotions in Heaven, Earth and Sea, Luke 21, 25. and
Matthew. 24, 6, 7, 29. Houses usually give a great Crack when they are Ready to
fall, and so will the Great House of the World, yet may there be some space
betwixt the Sign and the thing signisyed, The end may be near, but not yet,
Matthew. 24, 68, 33. Luke 21, 9. Therefore it is said [That day and hour knows
no man Matthew. 24 36. nor Angels, neither the Son, but the Father only, Mark 13.
32. Ordine videlicet sciendia a se, non ab alio. The Son knows it not (in his
humble State) but from the Father, as he subsisteth and works from him, John
5, 19. etc. 20. Christ as man knew not all things at once but did grow in
knowledge gradually, Luke 2, 52. till after his Ascension, it is said, God gave
the Revelation of all things to Him Revel. 1, 1.

Yet some Men, vea good Men have made bold to pry into this forbidden Ark of
this unknown Arcanum both among Ancient and Modern Writers as appears in
Bacholcers Chronology, and in Alsteds also page 494 gathering the Coming of
Christ from the Numerical Letters of [Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judeorum] the first
Letters of which 4 Words (to wit, J N R I.) the Romanists still write upon the
Top of their Cracifixes, and from the Numerals of [Videbunt in quom
transfixerant] They shall look on him whom they have pierced Zech. 12. 10. The
former pointing to y. of Grace 1532. and the latter to they, 1533. I may add,
Joachimus Abbas pitched the End of the World upon they 1258 Arnoldus d
Villanova upon they. 1345. Michael Stiphelius upon St. Lukes Day in the y 1533.
C^prianus Leonitius upon the y. 1583. Jobannes Regiomantanus upon the y. 1588.
(which was the year wherein the proud Spaniards would have brought a Doomsday
on England in Q Elizabeth's Reign by whom God wrought a great Deliverance from
it:) Adelbertus Thermopedius upon the y. 1599. April the 3. etc. All which
Childish Conjectures even of Learned men Time it self (the best Comment upon
Hidden, uncertain Mysteries) has already given a severe Censure and Certain
Consutation no plausible Salvo's can be Administered to solve them from Lies:
Come we next to those that have given their Guesses upon this 16th Century
(wherein this Climacterical Conjunction must fall by the Rules aforesaid) and
so forward to future Time. I find sundry good and Learned men, who fix the end
of the World upon 1656 or 1657 y. and for proof they make use of that
Chronogram MV nDi ConfLagrat 10 (whose Numeral Letters [MDCVII.] amounts to
that year) further Alleging, that the Universal Destruction of the old World
by the General Deluge happened about 1657 from the old Creation (when also
there was a Climacterical Conjunction) so may it be like wise about 1697 y.
from Christ's Resurrection (which was a New Creation) as the Flood was so long
from the old: And this opinion is farther confirmed with the words of Christ
[as the Days of Noah were, so shall the Coming of the Son of Man be.] Math. 24.
37. which seem to intimate, that as there were so many years betwixt the
Creation of the old World, and its 1st. Destruction by Water, so there should
be as many years betwixt the Reparation of Mankind, (by Christ's Resurrection
and the last Destruction of this New World by Fire, which will be the
Dissolution of all old Things, and a Restitution of New Heavens and a New Earth
etc. 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13. Acts. 3. 21. See Selneccer Paedag Christ part. 2.
page 374, 375 and sundry Neotericks all concurring with this Conjecture
reckoning from (not Christ's Birth, as our common Computation is, but from) His
Resurrection, as before, Which advances the Account to the 17th Century: Thus
Nich. Casanus pitched upon the y. 1700. yet Cardan upon 1800. and Picus
Marandula upon 1905. etc. others say, the World shall continue till all the
Stars return to the same point from whence they took their Progress at the
first, and where that was, who knows.

The Dutch Divine Sheltco (whose Book is called a comfortable Discourse of
Christ's 2d coming, translated by Mr. Thomas Rogers the Publisher of our 39
Articles) concurs with Elias's Notion of the Worlds lasting but 6000 y. and
says, Orpheus Verse imports it.

(...) That is, in the sixth Age or Thousand God will destroy the World, which
not only Plato but Caspar Pencerus applauds: He makes Enoch a Figure of the
last Time, the 7th Millennium, for as Death had Dominion over the six first
Patriarks, Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahal^l^el and Jared (who all dyed) but
upon the 7th from Adam, Enoch, Death had no power: So Death shall have Dominion
over Mankind for 600 y. but at the 7th, Death shall loose its Sting: This great
Truth Jude hints at in v 14, 15. saying Enoch the 7th from Adam foretold
Christ's last coming: Thus also Elias (called the 7th from Adam by Computation,
as Enoch is by Generation) seems a Type hereof, for six Prophets (to wit, Adam
M^thusalah, S^m Jacob, Amram and Ahia^) went before him, then was Elias the
7th, who was translated likewise, to show that the 7th Millennium will bring
the like Glory: Yet He thinks (Chap: 2 and 3) that Christ will come before the
6000 y. be expired. For (1st) the Sabbath began at the Evening of the sixth Day
before it was quite expired. (2ly) Elias (in Tilmud) says, some years shall be
wanting, for Christ will hasten his coming because of wickedness (3ly) to omit
his 4. Esdras 5, 45 etc. which admits of Exception, this agrees with Christ's
words, Math. 24, 22. (4thly) never so many Ecclipses, Comets, Conjunctions etc
for many Hundred y. past, which are Signs of Christ hasting to come, to which I
add (5thly Christ has 6 Comings all expreessd in Scripture) betwixt his first
and last, as (1) after his Resurrection (2) at Pentecost (3) at Jerusalems
Ruins (4) to the 7 Churches of Asia (5) in the 6 Seals (6) to destroy
Antichrist: And (6ly) this Trebble great Conjunction may usher in hislast,
being hard to parallel it, Saturn began his Direct motion March 23 (82 meets
Jupiter October 9th after begins Retrograde 9iber 20 (as Jupiter does on 26) so
they meet again on Jan. 30 (83 and Jupiter begins his Direct Motion on March
26. (83. so they meet again on May the 2d 83.) Luther on Genesis 1 says, O portet
ingenius lusus suos concedere, modo absit superstitio, Mr. Greenhil takes this
Liberty in his Fast Sermon (43 April; as a great Conjunction vsher'd in Ruining
of the old Jerusalem, so may this at Rearing of the New. All the Comets and
Conjunctions cannot be Dumb Signs, but warn us of Good or Evil according as we
are. I saw Mars in Conjunction with the Moon on this 16 of 8ber. while the
Superior Planets were in theirs hard by, and Saturn on the 18th got above
Jupiters Perpendicular, yet not much varying their Distance. Upon this 19 of
8ber I observed, that Jupiter which was above Saturn in a Perpendicular line
before, is now got under him a little oblique to the Right Hand; so has made
more than a Semi-circular Motion about him, though at a little farther
Distance. There may be a Mystery in this Motion, especially if Benign Jupiter
gain the Upper-hand of Sullen Saturn again: Suppose the worst, that the last
Bite of the Beast be not yet over; but he shall once more Tread under foet the
outer Court (as Bp. Usher says) so more easily come at the Witnesses in the
Temple to slay them, yet shall they have a speedy Resurrection and Ascension
etc. Let therefore this 7th and last great Conjunction be reckou'd (if not a
Spectator) at least a (...) of the 7th Trumpet and 7th Vial, which will as
certainly destroy Antichristianism (yea and Mahometanism too) as sure as the
7th Seal has destroyed the Heathenism of the Roman Empire, and so Usher in the
New Jerusalem. The course of these Planets are called the Clocks of Gods
Eternal Counsels. Telling the Times of greatest Remark, as (1) of Enoch's
Translation (2) Noah's Flood, (1) Moses Deliverance, (4) Solomous Glory (5)
Christ's Redemption (6) Charles the Greats Greatness, and (7) the Lambs Marriage
with the Bride, oh that our Redeemer may be as a Roe skipping over Mountains to
ruin the Reprobate, and reward the Righteous; Let not Men Jeer, where they
should Fear. 2. Pet. 3. 3. etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 21. line 12. Read 20 for 26. l. 34. R. fist for first p. 28. l. 16 for
Tables, R. Fables p. 29. l. 40. R. many for may l. last (...) p. 32. l. 11.
Rithere for their, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author of this Discourse is not the Author of the 2d packet, as the Author
of the first will assure such as Enquire.


