portrait of the author Christopher. Nesse aetatis Succ 56: 1678 Minnister of
the Gospel in fleet Street London.


A Christians Walk AND WORK on EARTH, Until he attain to HEAVEN. Which May
serve as a Practical guide, and a plain Direction in his Pilgrimage thither,
through his personal and Relative Duties. Marvelously useful to all persons,
and Families of all Ranks and Qualities, both in City and Country.

By Christopher Nesse, Minister of the Gospel in Fleet-Street-London.

(...) Torah, Or, Lex Lux Prove. 6. 23. Gods word is David's Lantern and Candle,
Psalm. 119. 105. Blessed is he that Reads, Revel. 1. 3. Printed for Dorman
Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey, 1678.

To the Right Worshipful and Worthily Honored, Sir. William Waller Knight,
Living in Westminster, etc. And to the Right Worshipful and very Virtuous and
Religious Lady his comfortable Consort, etc. And to their two hopeful
Olive-Plants, Mr. Richard, and Mris Katherine Waller. Grace, mercy, and peace,
be Multiplied.
Noble Sir.
YOu are a blessed branch of an Honorable stock, whom [I hope] Divine
Providence has thence extracted for some more than Ordinary Generation-work,
and will [after all your Interchanges of Occurrencies, that now attend you) in
due season fix you as an Orient Star in your proper orb and station to diffuse
some delightful light, and benign influence to your Generation: The ground of
my Hope hereof (for I profess against speaking either at Random, or in
Flattery, as fearing my Maker) is this; Besides your Natural Candor, Sublime
Temperature, and sweetness of Disposition, I have observed in you something
that is supernatural both of parts and of Piety. 1. Of paris in the Excellency
of your Pen (both in public Print, and in private Manuscripts) your true
Relation of the sad estate of the Reformed Churches in foreign Countries, is the
former, and your graciously composed Letter you sent me from France, when you
laid under great weakness there, is the latter Testimony. 2. Of Piety in your
owning, avouching and acknowledging the great Jehovah to be your God. Deuteronomy. 26.
17. Pro. 3. 6. I do personally know that you have made Prayer (to God) your
Refuge while under misery; and praise (of God) your Recompense, when under
mercy. From hence I do both hope and conclude that your God [whom you serve]
will assuredly own and Honor you. There is an eternal truth in that blessed
word of God, [they that honor me, I will honor.] 1 Samuel 2. 30. it is a bargain
of Gods own making, we may bind upon it, such as acknowledge and avouch the
Lord for their God, God will undoubtedly acknowledge and avouch them for his
Servants: God never gives such Excellent endowments in vain, but he honors
them with Suitable Exercises and opportunities in the World. Fame follows
Virtue closer then the shadow does the Body, and true Piety is as a thousand
Eschutcheons in it self. Godliness [of it self] is great honor as well as
gain, though no more be gained but Godliness, it self.

Honored Madam.
THe very bosom-Disciple of Christ dedicates his second Epistle, unto the Elect
Lady [one undoubtedly Eminent both in favor with God and in Estimation among
the Churches for her shining Faith and Holiness, which are rarely found in
great Persons] and to her Children, rejoiceing in their Gracious carriage and
Conversation. 2 Ep. Joh. v. 1. 2. both the Honorable Mother and Her Honorable
Children had this Elders [the Apostles] unfeigned, and wellfounded Love. In
Saluting therefore your Lady-ships hands, and the hands of your dear and
delightful Children with this Dedication is no untrodden path, wherein not only
this beloved Disciple, but also the Fathers of the Church, [Jerome especially]
has walked before me. I doubt not to say [without Vanity] that you are an
Elect Lady having known your manner of Conversation for some few Years, both in
your devotion to God [publickly and privately] and in your Communion with
Saints, together with your Religious Education of your sweet Children, I know
you have taught them the good ways of the Lord. Genesis 18. 19. that neither of
them might become degenerat plants, but both of them, the Heirs of the same
promise, Heb. 11. 9. By all which you have confuted, that fond conceit of the
World, to wit, that goodness and greatness are Inconsistent things, whereas
they have an happy and a comely Conjunction in you: without Controversy,
greatness has nothing greater in it, then both an Heart to be willing, and a
power to be able to do good; how much you are capacitated and Qualified by your
first Birth [which was honorable, as to Earth] but especially by your
New Birth [which is more highly HoHonourable, as to Heaven; even your greatest
Credit and Comfort in both Worlds] has been Manifest in many Fair and Legible
Characters of long candor and kindness to me and to my Family.

But to bring those two streams into one Channel, as God has [by his Covenant
of Marriage] made your two persons to be one Flesh: Though I might say much
more in a just commendation of you both, yet I forbear: not only lest I should
so much as seem to give Flattering Titles, which indeed I know not to do. I
have as little Art in it, as heart to it, in so doing, my maker might snatch me
away in that dangerous Sin of Flattery. Job 32. 21, 22. But chiefly because
your modest Ears, and humble Hearts do not love Salutations in the Markets,
Math. 23. 7. Ye would not have it published upon the House-tops, either what
God has done for you, or what ye have done for God. Therefore I shall only
crave your pardon for affixing your Honorable Names to this little Book, which
is not done, either altogether to seek your Patronage [as the manner is] for it
has License to go abroad into the World, or to beg your hand to help me higher
in the World, for I am less then the least of those mercies of my God, that I
do already enjoy, and I would lay at Gods foct [as the righteous Man did. Isa.
41. 2.] in these things: but it is to express my gratitude to you who have both
watered this work and furthered it with your sweet Influences.

I do here present you with the Walk and Work of a Christian upon earth until
he come [at the end] to Heaven, both these are weighty and worthy of all
Acceptance. First, The Walk here does infinitely transeend the best walk in
your garden, or in the best spring-garden in the whole World. It Is a walk,
wherein you may not only walk hand in hand with the Angels of God, [both those
that are Terrestrial, to wit, Christians, and those that are Celestial, to
wit, Cherubims] but also with the God of Angels [himself] even as a Man walks
hand in hand with his friend, thus Enoch walked with his God, Genesis 5. 24.
Secondly, The work here is (verily) Angelical as well as Evangelical work, a
work that is Honorable to the most Honorable upon Earth, giving more of
Honor to them then it can receive of Honor from them. Deo servire est
regnare, says Augustine. And David accounted it a greater honor to be Gods
Servant, then to be Isreal's King. Psalm. 18. Title. The great God is the most
honorable Master, who Employs his Servants in this most honorable work, and
will undoubtedly pay them with the most honorable wages, even with an hundred
fould in this life, and in the World to come with life everlasting. Mark. 10.
30. I have no cause to doubt but that you are [both of you] already true
Spiritual Pilgrims in this Divine walk and work. And I cannot but be confident
that you [both] do Ardently affect what soever may promote your Progress
herein. O that my poor Labors might contribute any thing to further your
passage, If but some few steps; I could [then] wish every word were Ten, every
line a Leaf, and every Leaf a Volum, and that both my Tongue and my Pen might
have ten-fold more of the Divine tincture upon them, to be serviceable to you
thereunto: Your God and the God of your Fathers, has already done singular
things for you, and therefore he does expect singular things from you, Math. 5.
47. Where the Husbandman bestows his greatest cost, there he expects his
largest crop. Your Trading and your Talents should be proportionable; to whom
much is given, of them much is Required, Luke 12. 48. I beseech you therefore,
as ye have received how ye ought to walk and to work in this paradise of
christianity (into which the second Adam has graciously restored you, as the
first Adam cast you out [in himself] from thence) so ye would abound more and
more. 1 These. 4. 1. According to the Divine directions herein presented you:
That ye may follow the foot steps of your Father Abraham who followed God
blindfold, when called [as you have been] out of one Land into another. Heb.
11. 8. That ye may be called at last from Earth to Heaven, in Soul and Body [as
ye are already in Spirit] after ye have walked out your generation-work in
Abraham's steps, to be safely lodged in Abraham's bosom; that the blessing of
Abraham may come upon the hearts of your Son, and Daughter, and of their seed
for ever; and that your Walls and theirs may be continually before the Lord of
the whole Earth. Isa. 49. 16. All this, is the unfeigned desire and hearty
Prayer (which shall never be wanting) of

Your Worships sincerely and thankfully Devoted Christopher Nesse.

To the READER.
Candid and Christian Reader.
HEre I present you with the Walk and Work of a Christian upon Earth till he
get to Heaven. Wherein, 1. Observe the matter. And, 2. The method hereof. 1.
The matter is twofold: 1. Your Walk, and, 2. Your Work. 1. As to your Walk,
there be three remarkable phrases in the holy Scriptures, that (all) concern
your Christian Walk. 1. A walking [with] God. 2. A walking [before] God. And,
3. A walking [after] God. The first was that Walk of Enoch, who is said to walk
[with] God, Genesis 5. 22, 24. as a man walks with his friend (with whom he is
well agreed, Amos 3. 3.) hand in hand, and heart in heart [aequis passibus] in
equal pace and equipage. And this he did, not only for an hour, or a day, or a
week, or a month, or a year, but for 300 years. Alas, we can neither watch with
Christ, nor walk [with] God for the space of one single hour, Mat. 26. 40. The
second was the Walk of Abraham, who is bid to walk [before] God, Genesis 17. 1;
that is, to set himself [evermore] solemnly in Gods Presence, as having the
great God always in his Rear (his Lieutenant General) and for his rereward,
Isa. 52. 12. Thus the people of the God of Abraham had the cloudy pillar
[behind] them in their passage through the red Sea, Exodus 14. 19, 20. where
Jehovah (himself) brought up the Rear of 600000. Now to know that you are ever
under Gods eye, and ever before him, this must needs make you walk [(...)]
accurately, Ephesians. 5. 15. and not to take up one foot, until you know where to
set down the other, walking exactly, by line and by rule, and (as it were) in a
frame footing it rightly and uprightly, (as the word [(...)] signifies) Gal. 2.
14. striving to get to the very top of Godliness. The third was the Walk of
Israel, who were commanded to Walk [after] the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13. 4. as after the
Captain General of their salvation, Heb. 2. 10. Thus the pillar of glory went
before them through the wilderness, and they followed after it in all their
removes, Exodus 13. 21, 22. Thus Caleb (with a better Spirit than that of the
World) walked [after] God fully, Numb. 14. 24. as the needle does, after the
Lodestone that draws it, Cant. 1. 4. and Joh. 6. 44. you walk after a good
guide, while you walk after your good God, and in so doing you cannot easily
wander in this wilderness of the World. This will be a blessed Antidote to you
against cursed Apostasy. 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. and thus God must be your [All] and
[in All] Col. 3. 11. he must be [with] you, [before] you, and [behind] you
also, that you may be as a Ship under Sail, carried end-ways, strongly by a
favorable Wind, and fearing neither Rocks nor Sands in the River of Gods
Paradise. Psalm. 46. 4. and Genesis 2. 10. to 15. This same [(...)] as Revel. 10.
9, 10.) Or little Book is a rude draught or Platform or Land-Skip of the
Gospel-garden of Eden, the true Spiritual Paradise of pleasure, the sublimest
Spring-garden of Scriptural-Holiness, wherein you have not only pleasant Rivers
(as above) but also delightful walks far surpassing the best gardens and
galleries that can be found in this (Chabul, 1 King. 9. 12, 13.) or dirty
world. Herein you are directed, not to be Idle, nor to stand still, but to go
forward (as walkers do) and to walk Arm in Arm (as it were) not only with God,
but with his holy Angels, Zech. 3. 4, 5, 7. Mat. 22. 30. Isa. 57. 2. And that
not in one walk only, but in many Delectable walks whereof this blessed
Paradise of Piety consists; insomuch that as the laborious Be in a fruitful
field of fragrant Flowers (when Tired with one Flower) flies to another; even
so you, when wearied with one walk or duty (for you may be weary in it, when
you are not weary of it) then may you pass to another without nauseating upon
any one only; you may walk Orderly out of one Ordinance to another. Secondly,
as to your work, which is (as the walk) the best work in the World, though it
be least minded by the World; it is a work wherein you serve the most honorable
Master, that employs his Servants in the most honorable work, and will reward
them with the most honorable wages, to wit, with an hundred fold in this life,
and in the world to come (again) with life everlasting, Mark. 10. 30. yea it is
a work that is wages to it self (as you will find within) Psalm. 19. 11. In (as
well as for) keeping Gods commands, there is great reward; It Is verily as the
work of glorified Saints and of glorious Angels (it being of the same nature
with theirs) whose work is their wages; O then, you may rationally conclude
with your self from hence, What a shame it is that I who am created to an
Eternal being, and that do possess an Immortal Soul, should spend 20. 30. 40.
or 50. Years in Vanity (if not in Villainy) all the time wearing the livery of a
cursed Master (being a Slave to Sin and Satan) and never look up to God, the
best Master and the Supreme good. Alas, you may hop from Mountain to Hill, Jer.
50. 6. And go Satan's round, Jab 1. 7. yet find no rest (with Noah's Dove) for
the Soles of the Feet of your Soul, until you come to the Ark of this blessed
work: your Soul is Created with such vast Capacities, as nothing bears
proportion [either to 'its being, or to 'its wants] below God no Created being
has Room enough in it, to entertain so ample and so endless a guest: it is of
such unlimited desires, that nothing but the Immortal God can satisfy an
Immortal Soul.

Secondly, Observe the method, which is first general, in the whole duty of Man
to God, this is held out in those three general Names. [1.] Of godliness. [2.]
Of Religion. [3.] Of Christianity. Together with the necessity of each: then
Secondly, you have more particularly the many good duties of Man to God (both
personal and relative) Treated upon, and that with as much perspicuity and
plainness as so little a Book would admit of: If you meet with any passage that
seems obscure, ascribe it to the Curtnes of my style [who endeavors to say
much in a little] and after some acquaintance herewithal [with a little
pondering] you will be able [through grace] to understand the darkest Sentence.
If you desire direction, in natural and civil Actions, etc. [As well as in
Religious.] I refer you to my little piece [called the Crown and glory of a
Christian.] If either in that or in this, any thing may be blessed to your Soul
and bring you further of from Sin, and nearer God [which is the best thing in
the World, Psalm. 73. 28, both for Living and Dying] let God have all the glory
for the gift [how mean soever] bestowed on me [how unworthy soever] 2 Cor. I.
II. And let me have the Relief of your Prayers for further abilities, and your
faithful Improvement of those poor performances, which I commend to your
Candor, and your Soul to God and to the Word of his grace: Subscribing my Self
to be

Yours in the best Bonds, Christopher Nesse.
London, this 10th. of April, 1678.
Short Rules for your general Direction.
Let your Thoughts be Divine, Awful and Godly. Talk be Little, Honest and True.
Works be Profitable, Holy, and Charitable. Manners be Grave, Courteous, and
Cheerful. Diet be Temperate, Convenient, and Frugal. Apparel be Sober, Neat,
and Comely. Will be Ready, Obedient, and Constant. Sleep be Moderate, Quiet,
Seasonable. Prayers be Short, Devout, and Frequent. Recreations be Lawful,
Brief, and Seldom. Mind be Suitable to your Means. Memory be Of Death,
Judgment, and Glory. Conscience be Void of offense to God, and Man. Task be
Always doing, or receiving good. Conversation be In Heaven while your
commoration be on Earth. Latter-End be That of the Righteous, Hopeful, in the
Lord; not Hopeless, in Sin.


A well-wish to your weal in both Worlds.
Utinam
Saptres Praeterita Malum Commissum Bonum Omissum Tempus Amissum


Intelligeres Praesentia Vitae Brevitatem. Salvandi Difficultatem. Salvandorum
Paucitatem


Praevideres Futura Mortem qua nihil inevitabilius. Judicium quo nihil
terribilius. Infernum quo nihil intolerabilius.


I wish you would, First, make a wise use of things past; to wit, evil
committed, good omitted, and time lost and gone. Secondly, consider things
present, to wit, the shortness of life, the difficulty of Salvation, and the
fewness of those that are to be saved: Thirdly Foresee things to come, to wit,
death, than which nothing is more unavoidable; the day of Judgment, than which
nothing is more terrible; the pains of Hell, than which nothing is more
Intolerable.

A Christians Walk and Work on Earth, etc. CHAP. 1.
1. YOU must know that Man is the masterpiece of the Worlds' Maker. God calls
(as it were) a Counsel in Heaven, saying, Let us make man, Genesis 1. 26, Us, all
us, the whole Wisdom of the Trinity was exercised in the making of Man: The
consultation and deliberation therein plainly demonstrates, that there was then
the bringing forth of a piece of work of greatest moment and importance; and
therefore what is said of Behemoth, He is the chief of the ways of God, Job 40.
19. may more eminently be said of Man; he is the chiefest of the ways and of
the works of God. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are but the work of Gods fingers,
Psalm. 8. 3. But man is the work of his hands, Psalm. 139. 14, 15. Job 10. 3. 8.
Hence David speaking of Man, first wonders, and then speaks, and when he has
done to speak, he has not done to wonder, Psalm. 8. 1. 9.

2. Every Creature of God is (indeed) a wonder, yea little Creatures (those
Decimosexto's of the Creation) are great wonders, (as well as the great
Behemoth, and other large Folio's thereof) for the infinite Wisdom and Power of
the Creator is manifest in couching up both life and motion in such a little
compass, as in Insects, Flies, Ants, etc. But Man is the greatest wonder, as
having the excellency of all other Creatures in him: he is the abridgment of
all wonders. You believe that God is a Spirit, and you see that the World is a
Body: Man is an Epitome of both, 1. Of God, in respect of his Spirit. And 2. of
the World in the composition of his Body; as if the great Jehovah (on purpose
to set forth a plain mirrous of himself and his work) designed to bring into
this one narrow compass of Man, both the infiniteness of his own nature, and
the vastness of the whole world all together.

3. The soul of Man resembles the circumference of Heaven, as being everywhere
over the little world: his brain the Sun that gives light to this little world,
and the senses stand round about it as so many Stars: His heart represents the
Earth in its Center: his liver is as the Sea from whence flows the blood in all
its circulations: the like correspondency (you may easily imagine) in all other
parts too long to particularize. Hence is it that Tertullian calls the World a
great Man, and Man a little world. Man (the Microcosm) is Gods Text (as it
were) and all other Creatures (in the Macrocosm, or great world) are as so many
plain Commentaries upon that dark Text.

4. You may learn a little further herein, (if you would have yet more
particulars hereof) from this gloss upon Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to
every creature, is meant man only, as being the compendium of all Creatures.
Stones have a being, but not life: Plants have a being and life, but not sense:
Beasts have a being, life, and sense, but they want understanding. Now Man (as
being a compendious Index of Gods great Book in Folio) does participate of a
being with stones, of life with plants, of sense with beasts, and of
understanding with Angels; and therefore is he most aptly called every
creature, as having all their perfections in him.

5. Now the chief end why the Lord God put forth so much skill upon Man, in
making him such a curious piece, was, that Man should serve his Maker. God
raised up the stately Fabric of the great World for Man (he did not bring Man
into an empty house, but furnished it with all Creatures before he made him),
and his masterpiece Man he made for himself, and for his service. This a
Philosopher had the right notion of, stileing Man the end of all in a
Semicircle, as all things were made for Man, and Man for God, and that Man
might serve his Maker the better: he made him in his own likeness, that he
might not only partake of the Excellencies of all things below, but of the
Image of his Maker above also. Thus as one said to his friend that desired to
see Athens, Viso solone, vidisti omnia, in seeing Solon, you see all; Athens
was the Abridgment of all Greece, and Solon was the excellency of all Athens;
so in seeing and knowing Man your self, you see the quintessence of all things.

6. Solomon tells us, That God made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4, for
serving his Glory, and well he may; For, first, he has none above him, he is
higher than the highest. And, secondly, he is not capable of being puffed up
with vainglory, as we should be in such a case. Now he that made all things
for himself, must needs make Man for himself, seeing Man is the best of all
things. Indeed it is the only end of Man's Creation, seeing no other Creature is
capable of a Religious serving of God as Man is. All other Creatures do hold
out the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; but Man only can hold forth the
Holiness of God, and he only (of all other Creatures) is commanded to be holy,
as God is holy: he must be holy in quality, though he cannot be so holy in
equality.

7. Seeing then it is the law of the Creature, that we should be holy, and that
we should serve God instantly night and day, Act. 26. 7. Bethink your self, how
every Creature observes the Law of their Creation: The birds make their nests,
and breed up their young: the beasts make a scuffle for their pasture and
sodder: the fishes float up and down the waters for their livelihood: the
trees, herbs, and flowers, all answering their Makers Law in their kind: the
fire ascending up to its Center with all its might, and the water descending
hastily down into the deep: the air, to fill up all vacuity under Heaven: the
Sun, Moon, and Stars fulfilling (each) their courses assigned them.

8. How then can you imagine, that the great Creator (who has assigned to
every thing in the world some particular end, and an instinct also that have a
tendency to that end, and that continually) should make Man (the most noble
Creature, for whom all other things were made) in vain, as having no peculiar
end proportionably appointed him to the true nobleness of his created quality?
Undoubtedly, he is not made to play on the Earth, as Leviathan was made to play
in the Sea, Psalm. 104. 26, nor to serve diverse lusts, Tit. 3. 3, as debauched
persons do. The Heathen Seneca could say, Major sum, and ad majora natus sum,
quam ut corporis mei sim mancipium; I am greater, and am born to greater
things, then that I should be a mere slave and vassalage to the lusts of my
flesh.

9. Therefore you must conclude, that there is some high and eminent service
allotted unto Man by his Maker, as the main object whereat he is to level all
his aims and intentions wholly and continually, even all the days of his life:
he must serve his Maker in holiness (which is his duty to the first Table of
the Decalogue) and in righteousness (which is his duty to the second Table
thereof) before him all the days of his life, Luke 1. 74, 75. This is your
Homage and Fealty you owe to your great Lord; the Lords Rent you must pay to
the Landlord of all your Mercies, both as to your being, and as to your
well-being in the world. There must be a Reciprocation betwixt Relatives, as
the Son owes a duty to his Father, from whom he had his being, and from whom he
has all things for his well-being: How much more does the Creature owe a duty
to his Creator, who is his heavenly Father, and to whom we should not be
undutiful, as the worst of parents would not have their Children undutiful to
them?

10. It necessarily follows then, that you must avouch the Lord to be your God,
and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and
his judgments, and to hearken to his voice: If ever you do expect that the Lord
should avouch you for one of his Children, and of his peculiar people, Deuteronomy.
26. 17, 18. Hebr. [Hee Marta eth Jehovah], signifies, that you must promise on
your part (as your Maker has promised on his part), there is a mutual
stipulation on both sides: you want not Gods part: And will a man rob God of
his part? Mal. 3. 8. You do truly avouch the Lord for your God, when you with
highest estimation, most vigorous affections, and utmost endeavors, bestow
your self upon him, and give up your name and heart to his blessed service in
faith and obedience, Isa. 4. 4. 5. When God cries, Who is on my side? who? (as 2
King. 9. 32.) you must answer, I am the Lords, and subscribe with your heart
(as well as with your hand) unto the Lord, then may you hope for protection of
him, and provision from him for both worlds, which be his part in the Covenant.

11. It Is a plain command, Prove. 3 6. In all your ways you must acknowledge God,
that is, be evermore in the sense of his presence, and in the light of his
countenance, and in serving your God (in your generation-work) ask counsel at
his mouth, and aim at his glory in all your undertakings. This is the
conclusion of the whole matter (both to answer the end of your Creation, and to
attain a true happiness at your end), Fear God, and keep his Commandments,
Eccles. 12. 13. This is the totum hominis, the whole duty of Man, the
abridgment of all the Bible; Fear God in Christ, fear his goodness, Hos. 3. 5,
as well as his power, and keep his Commandments in an Evangelical obedience
(you cannot now keep them in the legal way). This is the one thing needful,
Luke 10. 41, and it is the bonum hominis, the good of Man (as well as the whole
of Man) to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with his God, Mic. 6.
8. It Is not only the good, but also the chiefest good of Man attainable in this
life; to wit, Conformity to God, and Communion with God in the Duties of the
first and second Tables of the Law.

12. This whole and good duty of Man to God, has commonly three Names. 1.
Religion. 2. Godliness. 3. Christianity. 1. It Is called Religion, [a Religando]
from binding, as it is a sacred bond that binds Man in his Duty to God. There
is (indeed) the cursed bond of iniquity, Act. 8. 23, which binds the heart of
Man to Sin and Satan. But that may seem needless, seeing Man's heart does so
naturally love the service of sin; and you do not find your heart so apt to
slip from the service of Satan (so less need of this bond of iniquity), as you
are apt to slip from the service of God. As therefore you cannot love the
service of God, unless it be supernaturally given you; so a Religious principle
must both bring you near to (who in the fallen nature are afar of, from God,
Ephesians. 2. 13.) Psalm 73. ult. But also must bind your shppery heart fast to God,
that you may be Gods bundle, tied up on Earth, to be carried up to Heaven.
Religion is the girding up of the loins of your mind, Luke 12. 35. 1 Pet. 1.
13: and he that is thus ungirt, is certainly (according to the Proverb) unblest
also.

13. There is, 1. A Natural Religion whereby Man fashions his thoughts, words,
and deeds according to the light and law of Nature; hereby also he has a good
or a bad opinion of himself, according to the Conformity or Inconformity to
Natures light and law. And the more that the understanding of Man is
enlightened, the stronger is the obligation (or bond) to all duties of this
Natural Religion. But alas, such darkness has befallen the Gentile Natural
Religion, that they have made Gods of men; and when they have so done, brings
down those Gods to play the men in murders, thests, and rapes, as their own
Poets are not ashamed to tell us. 2. There is the Jewish-Religion, which binds
them to conform to all those Laws (Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial) and to
observe them according to the intention of the lawgiver, and to judge of
themselves by their having or wanting Conformity to those Laws. 3. The
Turkish-Religion (in a word) makes sensuality the best happiness, and therefore
to be abhorred by all that love Holiness.

14. (4.) The Popish-Religion (which is almost as bad as the Mahometanism, or
the Turkish, as Opander in his Epitom 12. Centur. page 275. large quarto
shows) by its Doctrine of Merit and Supererogation, etc sets up Man, and not
God, yea makes God a debtor to Man; to say nothing how it is pompous and flesh
pleasing, allowing of equivocations, of buying and selling of pardons; how it
relies on the Infallibility of wicked Popes, it hoodwinks the Laity, it
worships stocks and stones, it overthrows Christ's Humanity by giving to it
ubiquity; it destroys Christ's Satisfaction by purgatory and perfection, it
befools Temporal Princes, it denies assurance, it tolerates open stews, it
damns all Infants that dye unbaptized, and much more of the same bran,
therefore it is not obligatory, or binding to you (as the word Religion
signifies) being a mere cento of Judaism and Heathenism, and a composition of
lying Doctrines: It Is Divine Truth, and not Humane Error that binds the
conscience.

15. (1) There is the Protestant-Religion, which truly abases Man, and exalts
God. Those be the two Properties of the true Religion, and such as do not so,
are always to be suspected for false Religions. This last teaches us, that a
man, being united by faith to Christ, believes in him both for Satisfaction and
Salvation, though he come short of Gods Glory and his own Duty, hoping to be
saved by the Righteousness of Christ, and not by any Righteousness of his own:
It holds out reconcilement to God, and communion with God as the end, and the
Covenant of Grace as the means to that end. Thus does it bind God and Man
together after the great breach by the fall; yea, it binds Man to God, after
his breaking from God, and teaches him rightly to worship God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, according to the holy Scriptures.

16. There is but one true Religion that is binding to your soul: Diversity of
Religion is against the Essence of God, which is but one; there is but one
Truth, one true Religion that has life and power in it, all other are but
carcasses, yea spectrum's and phantasms. You must know, every difference in
opinion makes not up a false and a differing Religion: Those that agree
together in fundamentals, cannot be said to be of different Religions: there
may be a ruffling the Fringe in circumstantials, where there is no rending the
garment in substantials. Abraham and Lot may take several ways, yet be brethren
still, yea, and be ready too to rescue each other from the common Enemy.

17. Plato blessed God for three things 1. That he was made a man, and not a
beast. 2. That he was a Gracian, and not a Barbarian, 3. That he was a
Philosopher, and not a Rustic. You may add to this God-blessing work, not only
that you are born in a Region of Religion (the land of Goshen, and valley of
Vision), but that you are acquainted also with the power of it in your own
heart: For, 1. Religion is the beauty and bulwark of your Nation; it is to it,
what the Palladium was to Trey, which could never be destroyed, so long as they
possessed it: It Is as Sampsons lock, which while he retains, he retains his
strength also, and is unconquerable: therefore as the Gracians first stole away
that Image of Pallas from Troy, and then destroyed it: and as the Philistines
cut Sampsons lock, and then conquered him; So the Enemy of Truth would rob our
Nation of Religion (which is its muniment, as well as its ornament, Zeph. 2.
5.) and then destroy it. Religion is our (turris a tuendo) a Tower of defense,
Isa. 5. 2, which is a Fort Royal against all Invaders. So long as the
Tabernacle stood in Shiloh, the Kingdom flourished, and there were no Ichabods
in it, but the Canaanites were subdued before them, Josh. 18. 1, etc. as if the
stability of the Tabernacle, had given stability to the Kingdom: The fall of
the Tabernacle, was the fall of the Kingdom, Psalm. 78. 60, 61, 62; and that
tribe perished first, that lost the tabernacle first, ver. 67. Sion was
double-top'd, on the one hill stood the Temple, and on the other the Palace of
the King, as if the latter had its luster and safety from the former; that
Nation that has God nigh them (in Religion) is a great Nation, Deuteronomy. 4. 7; and
desolate Nations may say, as Mary said in another case, Oh Religion, if thou
had been here, our Nation had not dyed nor been destroyed. Though every shower
(on our land) were a shower of gold, every stone in it a pearl, every beggar
therein an honorable Senator, every fool as wife as Solomon, every weakling as
strong as Sampson; yet wealth, honor, strength, and wisdom, yea all is gone,
when this Ark (Religion) is gone: you may then sing a doleful lamentation (with
Phineha's wife, 1 Samuel 4. 21.) the Glory is gone from England; Oh you would not
live to see Religion dye, better you dead and gone (a hundred times) than
Religion be dead and gone.

18. Religion, to wit, in the power of it, gives both a Relative and a real
worth to your self in particular, as it gives beauty and safety to your Nation
in General. 1. Real worth, it makes you of Gods treasure, Exodus 19. 5. of Gods
jewels, Mal. 3. 17, whereof the world is not worthy, Heb. 11. 31. This makes
you of the Blood Royal of Heaven, not only in Alliance, but in Union, though
never so poor in the world. 2. Relative-worth; this makes you more excellent
than your neighbor, (though never so great and honorable, if irreligious),
Prove. 12. 26. Hereby Abraham was a Prince among the Hittites, Gen 23. 6. When
others are in Scripture called vile, you are precious; others chaff, you wheat;
others reprobate silver, you refined gold; others briars and thorns, you a
noble vine, though your condition be never so mean in the world: A living dog
(in this sense) is better than a dead lion, Eccles. 9. 4. The Jews say, Those
seventy souls that went down to Egypt with Jacob, were of more worth to God,
than all the seventy Nations that were in the world besides: They are the
excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. better Gentlemen (as the word (...)
signifies), Act. 17. 11. truly honorable, Isa. 43. 2, 3. the very Chariots and
horsemen of Israel. One religious man saves a land, Zech. 12. 5. Job 22. ult.
Jer. 5. 1. And if God could have but found ten righteous and religious persons
in five wicked Cities, he would not have destroyed them: It Is remarkable,
Abraham lest begging, before God left baiting, he might possibly have brought
God to a lower number, yea, if but one in Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1. he would have
saved it.

19. You must therefore put an high estimation on Religion: it is the field
wherein the pearl of great price lies, and you are a wise merchant if you
purchase that field, Matthew. 13. 44, 45. Whatever it cost you, you cannot pay
too dear for this gold, nay, for this that is better than gold, yea, than the
finest gold, Job 28. 15. five several sorts of gold are there mentioned,
intimating, if there be one sort of gold finer than another (as indeed there
is), yet the finest thereof is not comparable to this heavenly wisdom, yea,
it is more precious than Rubies, Prove. 3. 13. and 8. 10, 11. Solomon (by his
advantage of sublime wealth and wisdom) had even ransacked the whole Creation,
to find out the most exquisite excellency of all created beings, yet he
proclaims the vanity and insufficiency of them all, and prefers this above them
all; and Paul (that great trader by sea and land, 2 Cor. 11. 23, 25, 26.)
counts all but dung and dross, yea dogs-meat (as the word (...) quasi (...)
signifies), Phil. 3. 8. in comparison of the unsearchable riches of Christ,
Ephesians. 3. 8. If the mountains of the earth were all pearl, and the might rocks
thereof were Rubies, yea, if the whole Globe of the Earth were one sparkling
Diamond; yet all this could not be weighed against the worth of Godliness; one
grain of grace is better than all the vast Entrado's of Spain, then the gold of
Ophir, yea, than all the riches of both Indies: it is better to be rich in
faith, than in gold, and a man with a gold-ring is not comparable to a man with
a gracious heart, faith is more precious than gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7, and 3, 3, 4.
Gold is indeed the King of metals, and outshines them all on Earth, (as the
Sun outshines all the Stars in Heaven), yet is it but the shadow of this
spiritual thing, Zech. 4. 12. Exodus 25. 17. Cant. 5. 11. Revel. 21. 18. Now
there must be more worth in the substance, than in the shadow; therefore do not
think you make a bad bargain, though you part with all your treasure, to
purchase this field of treasure.

20. In a word. (1) It Is your best inheritance, that has most satisfaction,
and most duration in it; and therefore must you say with Naboth, God forbid I
should part with my inheritance, 1 Kings 21. 3. It Is just so much the best of
blessings, as much as God is the best of beings, hold it then as your life. (2)
It Is your best friend, that will not only abide with you in this world, (for
there are no bankrupts herein that ever truly received its power), but 'twill
also accompany you into a better world, Rev. 14. 13. Your first friend (Riches)
cannot do so, though desired, that can only give something toward the journey,
to wit, a windingsheet, and a Cosfin; your second friend (Relations) can only
bring you a little on the way, to wit, accompany you to the grave. But this
third and best friend (Religion) will go along with you to your journeys-end,
and stand before the Lord, as being recorded in Gods Book of Remembrance. (3)
It Is your best teacher, teaching you, (1) to own the Lord, as your right owner
and true proprietary; you had not your being from your self, but from the first
of beings, and so your being must be for God, as it was from God: you are not
your own, 1 Cor. 6. 20; but you are his, not only by Creation, but also by
choice, purchase, and conquest. 2. To acknowledge him your just governor, it is
meet the Artificer should govern his own workmanship, however he deal with you;
and he is too kind to do you harm, and too just to do you wrong. 3. To avouch
him your best benefactor, more than a friend, a master, a father, or a husband,
yea, a God that gives you a being and wellbeing too; Oh, cry with David, The
God of my mercy, Psalm. 59. 10. Therefore Religion must be your business, all
other things but your by-busines. Aristotle studied Philosophy as his (...) in
the morning; Eloquence (as his (...) in the evening only. No concern like
Salvation of the Soul.

21. The second Name is Godliness, this has life and power in it. There may be
many carcases and forms of Religion, but there is but one life, one power; there
is a form of knowledge, Romans 2. 20. and a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. yet
both may want the power: you may live by a form, but you cannot die by a
form. It Is the power of godliness that is godliness indeed. Godliness quasi
Godlikeness, it makes you like God (as ungodliness makes you unlike God) holy
as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.

22. As Godliness is the recovery of the Image and likeness of God, which man
lost by ungodliness (in eating the forbidden fruit:) So it is the whole frame of
grace spreading (like blessed leven) over all the three measures of meal (not
only the understanding, will and memory, but also the Body, Soul and Spirit)
Matthew. 13. 33. 1 These. 5. 23. through the gracious overshadowings of the holy
Ghost. Godliness is (as it were) God manifest in the Flesh: 1 Timothy 3. 16. as
God was manifest in the flesh of his Son ((...)) bodily, Col. 2. 9. Joh. 1. 14.
So God is manifest in the Flesh of his Saints ((...)) Spiritually, as the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are (all) said to take up their abode, and to live,
to dwell, to tabernacle and to temple in them: Joh. 14. 23. and 17. 23. Gal. 2.
20. Ephesians. 3. 17. Revel. 21. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Romans 8. 11, etc.

23. Godliness is a compound of all the graces of the Spirit, as so many
Ingredients to the making up of this blessed Composition: it is the life and
exercise of every grace, of faith and love, of joy, peace and praise, of
Selfdenial and devotion, of patience and obedience, of hope and perseverance.
It contains in it your trusting in God, your worshipping of God, and your
obedience to God; yea lastly, your very Victory and Triumph over all your
Enemies, the flesh, the World and the Devil: Godliness therefore must be the
main thing that you must look for and labor after, as it is the main thing that
God looks after, Psalm. 14. 2. God looked down from Heaven, what for? Not to see
how fair, how strong, how Rich, how great, how Honorable Men were, but how
good, how godly, how Righteous, how Religious they were.

24. Hence Solomon tells you, that wisdom is the principal thing, and with all
your getting you must get it principally, Prove. 4. 7. and one greater than
Solomon (even your blessed Savior) bids you, Seek first the Kingdom of God,
and all other things shall be added unto you, (as paper and pack-threed are
cast into the bargain) Matthew. 6. 33. Godliness is the Sublimest wisdom, it is
wisdom that is from above, Jam. 3. 17. and the fear of God is the beginning of
this wisdom, Psalm. 111. last. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Yea it is not only the beginning of
it, but it is also the middle and the ending thereof too. Say the world what it
will, Godliness is the greatest gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. and brings a great deal of
gain with it besides it self, though it self be great gain. Godliness is great
gain of it self, though no more be gained but it self, having the promises of
both lives annexed to it. 1 Timothy 4. 8. It Is a fat land, and fruitful of all
sorts of blessings, at its gates are all manner of pleasant fruits laid up for
those that do inhabit it, Cant. 7. last. It Is a tree of life on which do grow
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal blessings, and you may count all the Stars
sooner than all the mercies that come flying upon the wings of Godliness.

25. Yea Godliness is not only great gain, but it is better than gain, for you
cannot carry your gain, 1 Timothy 6. 7. out of the World, but you may your
Godliness, and your works (of Piety) shall follow you into a better world,
Revel. 14. 13. besides Godliness is such a blessed thing in it self, that it is
a reward to it self: in, (as well as for) keeping Gods commandments there is
great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11. therefore look upon it as not only your duty but
also your privilege, not only your work but your reward too. Wickedness is a
punishment to it self in the many Cordoliums and heartquakes that do attend it;
but Oh the peace and pleasantness that is found in the paths of Divine wisdom,
Prove. 3. 17. a sweet tranquillity of mind does always attend upon a Godly life.

26. You may ask all those blessed spies which the Lord has sent to spy out
this Land of Godliness, as they did the Land of Canaan, Numb. 13. 17, 18, 19,
20, 27. they can tell you that the Land is a good Land, a fat (not a lean)
Land, a land that flows with Milk and Honey, and they can show you some of
those blessed clusters of Canaans grapes, saying this is the fruit of the land.
The plagues of the Lord fall upon those that bring an evil report upon this
good land, Numb. 13. 32. with 14. 37. The Apostle tells you that Godliness is
profitable unto all things. The Babylonians (faith Plutarch) make 360
commodities of the Palm Tree, but there is a ((...)) a thousand benefits to be
got by godliness: Riches, Honors, Delights, Pleasures, life and length of
days; Seed and posterity are all entailed upon godliness, Prove. 3. 15, 16. Oh
who would not then turn Spiritual purchaser, and with all his gettings get
Godliness (with any pains, and for any price) the least dram whereof is saving,
and so better worth then the Riches of both Indies.

27. They bring up an evil Report upon this good land that slanderously say,
Godliness does beggar Men: whereas it is more truly said that ungodliness does
beggar Men. That this contrary is the truth; the Vales of Godliness are above
the wages of wickedness, the gleanings of the former is above the whole Vintage
of the latter; do but look into the world and you may behold many fair Estates
have been melted away by Whoredom, Idleness, Pride and Drunkenness. Such
ungodly wretches are doubly undone by their own ungodliness, they are undone in
this life, and undone in the life to come; while the little that a godly Man
has (by a special blessing of God upon his godliness) does increase to a
thousand, Psalm. 37. 16. Abraham, Job, David, and others were richer than any;
and so might Men be now, If they could (or would) be as godly as they were.
They sought godliness and Gods Kingdom first, and therefore other things sought
them: and so they would do us, would we or could we but run the same method.
They did not read Gods truth backward, making Earth their Throne and Heaven
their footstool, as the Heathens, Virtue after Money: Philosophy teaches to
seek first (bona Animi) the good of the Soul; and Divinity, (Regnum Dei) the
Kingdom of God; then the overplus shall be added as the wise God Judges meet:
the Proverb of blind Popery shall shame those slaunderers, Meat and Mattens
never hinders thrift.

28. Another evil report upon godliness is, that it destroys all mirth, delight
and pleasure: alas Swine think that sheep have no pasture, because they feed
not upon draff as they do. So the wicked World accounts godliness a Melancholy
fancy; Whereas the way of it is a way of pleasantness, Prove. 3. 17. And its
paths are paved with peace: righteousness has not only peace, but also Joy in
the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. God does not grudge nor envy our delights and
pleasures, only he would not have them sensual; he allows to have pleasure, but
he would not have us live in pleasure, Jam. 5. 5. You may take delights, but
delights may not take you: you may be merry, but you must not be mad, Mirth is
not forbidden any further then is Inconsistent with your Eternal good;
Godliness does not abolish it, but rectify it: Religio est loeta, non
dissoluta, it is a pleasant not a loose thing. God would not have our Isaac (or
laughter, or Joy, or delight) to be sacrificed; it is only the Ram that must be
slain and offered up to God, those rank and rammish delights in worldly vanity
and villainy (quorum gaudia Crimen habent) wherein the Devil is our play fellow.

29. The third evil Report Men bring up against godliness, is, that it shortens
a Man's life by the practice of mortification, self-denial, and abstinence from
worldly comforts. Cujus contrarium Verum est. The quite contrary (you may be
sure) is the very truth, for it is not Piety but Impiety that shortens the life
of Man. Temperance is the grand preservative of health, and Intemperance is
notoriously destructive to life, as the Book of nature teaches you: moreover,
the Book of Scripture further assures you, that length of days is promised to
godliness. Deuteronomy. 6. 2. and 30, 19, 20. Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14. Prove. 2. 21, 22.
and 3. 16, 22. 4. But the ungodly shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.
last. Nether can you think it probable that so good a Landlord as God is,
should thrust those Tenants out of their dwellings, that pays their Rent so
duly and daily: No, God will power out his Indignation upon such Persons and
Families as Call not upon his Name, Jerem. 10. 25. the non payment of this
Lords Rent of prayer does (as it were) uncover the Roof for Gods Curse to be
rained down upon Men's Tables, Beds, Enterprises, All.

30. A fourth slander put upon Godliness, is that it makes Parents negligent
and careless in providing for their Children: Whereas in truth, such provision
for Children as is not according to godliness, is (as Jacob said to his Mother)
a laying up a Curse for them, and not a blessing, how many ungodly Parents
leaves Jobs Legacy to their Children, in laying up Iniquity for them (as well
as Inheritances) Job. 21. 19, when God punishes the Sins of Fathers upon the
Children, as 2 Samuel 3. 29. Joab must have the honor of a General, with a
Vengeance to him and his: And Gehazi must have seven hundred and fifty Pound to
buy land withal, and with a Vengeance too to him and his, 2 Kin. 5, 23, 27. And
surely they are mad Parents that will damn their own Souls, in providing only
for their Childrens bodies: on the other hand Godly Parents lay up a stock of
prayers for their Children, of wrestling with God, that no one Chip of the old
blocks should become sewel to everlasting burnings; and they are the Travel of
some Mothers Souls, as they had been (at their births) the Travel of their
bodies: besides, the rule of Godliness teaches Parents to lay up for their
Children, 2 Cor. 12. 14. Jacob could say, [and when shall I provide for my own
House also] Genesis 30. 30, and they are worse than Infidels that do not, 1 Timothy
5. 8, yet dare not turn stones into Bread, at the Devils bidding, for them, but
what God gives, leaves it them with a blessing.

31. A fifth slander put upon it, is, that it loses friends: whereas indeed
it gains Friends, making Enemies to become Friends, when your ways please the
Lord. Prove. 16. 7, as Jacobs did, when Laban pursued him with one Troop, and
Esau affronted him with another; yet God so wrought for his godly Servant, that
he had peace with both, and a kiss from both; you need not to fear Men, if you
be in league with God.

In a word, Godliness is (6ly.) slaundered, as the way to be despised, whereas
riches and honor are in its left hand, Pro. 3. 16, as length of days (in
eternal happiness) is in her Right. Godliness may better say to us then Balak
to Balaam, come and I will promote thee to great Honor this should be a Cogent
Argument. It did no less to Joseph, David, etc. Such as honor God (in ways of
Godliness) God will (undoubtedly) honor them either here or hereafter or both,
1 Samuel 2. 30.

32. The third name that is usually given to that service which Man does owe to
God, (as his Servant,) is Christianity, which has not only a respect to God
the Creator, but also to Christ the Redeemer; it being a sincere Imitation of
the Holiness of Christ according to your power. This is that which must devote
you and dedicate you to Christ, and make you Imitate the Holy life which your
Lord did lead upon Earth: all that look for Salvation by Christ must purify
themselves as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. you cannot be a Christian, unless you
comport and conform to that Purity and Holiness that was in Christ: you must
learn of the Holy Child Jesus, to be Holy in all manner of Conversation, and
though you cannot take such long strides in ways of Holiness as he did, though
you cannot do what you ought, yet you ought to do what you can, (as 1 Samuel 28.
2.) Say you to God (as David to the King) thou shall surely know what thy
Servant can do: your Holiness must be like to Christ's in quality or kind,
though it cannot be in (Equality) or Measure.

33. This is that which gave the Honorable Name of Christians first at
Antioch, Act. 11. 26, which Name was given by Divine direction (as the word
(...)) signifies, warned of God. So the same word is Rendered, Heb. 11. 7. for
the Divine Oracle had promised to give a new Name to the Saints, Isa. 62. 2.
and 65. 15. here it was accomplished, to wit, at Antioch, so much Honor had
this City, that from thence Christ spreads his Banner, that it might appear to
the World, that he had a people that would own him, and that would glory to be
called by his Sacred Name, who were called Nazarens before, Act. 24. 5, which
were certain Heretics that jumbled Christ and Moses together, Baptism and
Circumcision (as now some do the seventh day and the Lords day) to bring the
greater disgrace upon the Christian Religion, Godwin Hebr. Antiqu. Page 39, 40.
Hence it is thought that the Church at Antioch, (being Divinely directed) in
detestation of this New-bred Heresy, (fastened upon them by the Name of
Nazarens) forsook that Name, and called themselves Christians. Junius in
parallel. Lib. 1, 8.

34. Then was the partition wall thrown down, and the dividing Names of Jew and
Gentile ended in this New and Honorable Name, which before was promised to
Sion, as above. There was a Coalition of Jew and Gentile into one Church, and
(by Consequence) an abrogation of the differing Names. Hence this common Name
was given to both (believing in Christ) by God himself according to his
promise; but Oh what a shameful thing it is, that this New and Honorable Name
should be at this day a Name of Reproach, amongst the Papists in Rome and
Italy, by whom it is usually abused to signify a fool or a dolt; as Dr. Eulke
on Act. 11. in his Annotations upon the Rhem. Testam.) plainly proves out of
their own Authors: Thus those same, who have changed Gods glory into their own
shame (as to things) in their Superstition and Idolatry, have done no less (as
to Names) in their ignorance and debauchery, by a righteous Judgment of God
upon them, 2 These. 2. 11.

35. But you must know that a Worthy Title is put upon you, an Honorable Name
is given to you in your becoming and being a Christian, (which signifies the
Anointed of the Lord) even the sacred Name of Christ (of whom the whole family
in Heaven and Earth is named, Ephesians. 3. 15,) is called upon you: A name that will
honor you, if you honor it, and that will highly exalt you, if you exalt it.
Austin tells of one who had a Crown set upon his head, consisting indeed of
many Crowns, (as he was an Emperor) yet he made not all this the Crown of his
rejoicing; but preferred this as a greater Crown, that the name of Christ was
called upon him; this he accounted his greater honor: and the Title to Psalm.
118. shows you, that David accounted it a greater honor to be the servant of
the Lord, than to be the King of Israel. The highest Title or name upon the
Earth is nothing to this, no though it should endure so long as the Earth
endures, here is Eternity of Honor, and such an Honor, as reaches from Earth
to Heaven.

36. The great difficulty you will find is to Answer this Name, to honor and
exalt this Name, that it may honor and exalt you: it is an easy matter to be a
Christian in name, but to be a Christian indeed there is the difficulty; to have
our natures to Answer our name (as to have self to crucify self) is no easy
work, if you be but almost a Christian, as Agrippa, you shall be but almost
happy too. You will not find it easy to offer an holy violence upon your self,
even to the plucking out of your right Eye, and the cutting off of your right
Hand. Yet this you must do, if you will Answer your name, and be a Christian
(indeed) and enter in at the strait gate by an holy violence, your heart is
Weak, Ezekiel. 16. 30, as well as your hand; and no less than the mighty hand of
God can enable you for this mighty Work.

37. Therefore I must tell you, the Holy Scripture owns none to be Christians
but such as be according to Christ, and as the Anointed of the Lord: there is a
powerful influence in true Christianity, that must spread it self over three
things. 1. Over your Conscience, Heb. 13. 18, and therefore there must be the
answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3. 21. 2. Over your Communication, Prove.
10. 20. your Tongue must be as choice Silver having a good Sound, by a tincture
of the Spirit of Christ upon it. And 3. over your Conversation, Ephesians. 4. 1. you
must be of a Christ-like Conversation walking worthy of that high calling,
Phil. 4. 13.

Of a Religious, Godly and Christian Conversation in the General. CHAP. II.
1. AS all those three names aforesaid, (to Wit, Religion, Godliness and
Christianity) do jointly agree in this one great truth, that man must serve his
Maker both in heart and life according to his revealed Will; not only in the
harsher dispensation of Moses (whose first Miracle was the turning water into
blood) but also, and that especially, in the sweeter dispensation of the
Messiah whose first Miracle was, the turning of water into Wine, that cheers
the heart of Man) and therefore Christianity (the last of the three) does
contain in it the whole duty of Man to God; yea in the nearest and dearest
Relation, to wit, in Christ: even so, the last of those three (to which
Christianity communicates an effectual influence) to wit, conversation, may (in
its Latitude) comprehend the concerns of Conscience and communication also, as
appears by the Sequel.

2. The Apostle Peter tells you of (all manner of Conversation) 1 Pet. 1. 15,
and of (all holy Conversation) 2 Pet. 3. 11. Those two Expressions are
extensive, comprehending the whole duty of Man (Relating to God, to himself,
and to others) in thought, word and deed; all conversation, and all manner of
conversation. There is one conversation of your thoughts, another conversation
of your words, and a third conversation of your deeds, and all respecting
either your God, or your self or others in wharsoever capacity or Relation you
stand either in Church or World.

3. Touching your conversation in the general (before I descend into
particulars) you must know it must be a worthy conversation, worthy of that
sacred name that is called upon you, the more unworthy that a Christians
conversation is, the greater pollution is cast upon that Sacred name which is
put upon him: the more Sacred his name is, the greater is his guilt, and the
more accursed. Such an one is the basest of Men, and like a withered Vine good
for no use, Ezekiel. 15. 4. Or like Unsavory Salt not so much as good for the
dunghill, Matthew. 5. 13. but to be trodden under foot.

4. It Is a good conversation that commends a Christian, and that only:
heart-service does (indeed) please God best, but never without life-service
too, which honors God most. Matthew. 5. 16, where the heart is made Suitable to
Gods nature, there the life will be Subject to his Law. If Christ have his
throne upon your Conscience, his Scepter will appear upon your communication
and upon your conversation also. Thus an holy conversation does not only
commend a Christian before God, Angels and Men; but it also commends the God of
the Christians to the World; they glorify their Father, Matthew. 5. 16. Esa. 61.
9. Peil. 2. 15.

5. Besides, your Christian conversation must not only commend you for a
Christian, but it must prove you to be a Christian. It would not be Miracles,
if you could work them; nor Revelations; If you could be dignified with them;
nor signs and wonders, if such a power were given from above to you, that
could (any or all, severally or jointly) prove you a Christian: All those have
been given to workers of Iniquity, and such as have cast out Devils; have been
cast out to Devils (themselves at last) as Judas who was a Devil (himself)
Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Joh. 6. 2, 70. So then it is the conversation, which is all in
all, and justifies before Men, yea and glorifies God too.

6. Our Lord says thus of himself, if I do not the works of my Father, believe
me not. Joh. 10. 37, his works should testify of him, what he was, Luke 7. 20,
21, 22. His works must be the standard by which they must measure him, whether
he were the Christ or no, and so a fit Foundation for their Faith: Christ's
Vicar, the Pope (who causelessly calls himself so) will not say thus as Christ
said; but will have all his precepts dispatched not disputed, obeyed, not
examined (though we be bid to try the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1,) and although by
his evil Example he drew thousands to Hell, yet none must say so much as what
do thou?

7. Whereas works must be the standing standard, whereby all Men (as well as
Christ) yea the Pope himself, must be measured, whether they be in Christ, and
Christ in them. If you do not the works of Christ (to wit, such as he has
proposed for your Example; Imitable works) it is a vain belief, yea a mere
conceit only to think your self a Christian, and you do but put an everlasting
cheat, upon your own Immortal Soul: your works tell the World, what you are,
for those the World sees and hears, and by them you either glorify your Father
in Heaven, or give clear evidence, that you have denied the Lord, that bought
you, 2 Pet. 2. 1, and would Redeem you from a Vain Conversation. 1 Pet. 1. 18,
and 2, 12.

8. It Is true, you may be a Christian in truth though something of Sin remain in
your heart, yet then it must not be liked there, Romans 7. 15. and although
something of Sin remain in your life; yet then it must not Reign there, Romans 6.
14. And for the main course of your life, you must be chaste, modest, temperate,
meek, gentle, kind, and pitiful. You must bridle your passions, mortify your
inordinate affections; and in a word, exercise all the graces of his Spirit in
you and Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 7.

9. Your practice must be answerable to your profession. You who carry Christ's
name (that Sacred worthy name) how exactly should you carry your self, and what
manner of person ought you to be, 2. Pet. 3. 11, even a person to admiration
(as the word (...) signifies) how accurate and how elevated above the Ordinary
strain! You must have your feet where other Men's heads are, Prove. 15. 24, the
way of life is (above) to the wise; you must be a choice person as you have a
choice name, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you,
and you in him, 2. These. 1. 12. This glory of Christ shall rebound unto your
glory, and Christ accounts himself glorified therein.

10. You must therefore be Holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
your very civility must favor of Sanctity, and your common commerce relish of
Religion: Holiness to the Lord should be Writ upon your Bridle when you Ride,
and upon your Cups when you Drink, Zech. 14. 20, 21, you should (as it is said
of a Reverend Divine) Eat and Drink and Sleep Eternal life; Those very common
Actions are as so many Steps, in your Christian walk and way, and therefore you
should not despise them, but (with all seriousness) refer them to the glory of
God. 1 Cor. 10. 31, do all to God and his glory.

11. Such as name the name of Christ should depart from Iniquity, 2 Tom. 2. 19,
and this, loose professors not doing, does exceedingly promote Atheism. There
is nothing enlarges the Gulf of Atheism more then that [(...)] wide passage
between the profession and the practice of pretenders to Christianity: how can
the profession of that be looked upon by others to be Honorable, the practice
whereof is not looked on by themselves to be so? If the Sum of Christianity be
good, why do they not practice it, and if it be not good, why do they so much
as profess it.

12. See then that your Conversation may be in Heaven, while your commoration
is on Earth, Phil. 3. 20, it is so; Ish. Exemplarily, while you are Writing by
Heavens Copy: and 2dly. Analogically, according to Heavens Rule; living by
Heavens Laws: yea 3dly. Theologically, going about your Earthly matters with an
Heavenly mind; which a carnal heart (that makes Earth his Throne and Heaven his
footstool) can never do: a Fly cannot make that of a flower that a Be does.
The Carnal man is like to the Duke de Alva; that said, he had so much business
upon Earth, that he had no leisure to look up to Heaven: but you must have so
much business in Heaven, as to have no time to look down (so as to love the
vain and vexing things hereupon Earth.)

13. You must set Christ before you as the most perfect pattern, of an Holy and
Heavenly Conversation, who (as Athanasius said of him) while he went about
doing good upon Earth, carried about him everywhere an Heaven; you must
resemble Christ, (If you be a Christian) and walk as he walked: you must live
as one that comes down from Heaven to Earth, and expects to go up from Earth to
Heaven: Christ did his Fathers will upon Earth (and it was meat drink to him to
do so, Joh. 4. 34,) as the Angels does it in Heaven: you must Imitate Christ,
and though you cannot do so in his Miracles, yet you may and must in his
Morals; you must walk in Christ's steps, here or never expect to rest in Christ's
bosom hereafter.

14. You must be the true Picture of Christ, (as every true Christian ought to
be.) Every dawber cannot draw the Kings Picture; some such make strangers think
strangly of the Kings Person, because of his dawbed ill-favored pourtraiture.
And shall those dawbers be punished for Exposing a Misshapen Picture of the
Kings person to open View, then what shall become of those titular, (yet loose
and licentious) Christians; (whose lives should be a lively Representation of
Christ) If by their Carnal, careless, and scandalous Conversations, they do
cause the Name of Christ to be blasphemed among Unbelievers, that do Judge of
him by this counterseit misshapen Representation. Surely Christ will not own
those workers of Iniquity: Though they have prophesied in his Name, and eat and
drunk in his presence. Matthew. 7. 23. Men use to hang out their well-drawn
Pictures (of some special friend) in the most conspicuous place, that it may
appear to all beholders, they rejoice in it as a grace and ornament to them: So
must you show forth the praises of him that has called you, 1 Pet. 2. 9. If
the Image of Christ be stamped upon your heart, you must show it in your life,
in a good Conversation. Jam. 3. 13.

15. Thus you ought to ask your own heart, whose Image and Super-scription is
this? Is it Christ's, or is it Satan's? God forbid, that Satan should Imprint his
limbs and lineaments upon your Soul, unrased out by Christ; you have born the
Image of the Earthly Adam (in your natural Estate) If you belong to Christ and
Salvation, you must bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam. Christianity (being
both the Imitation and the participation of the Divine nature) is the reducing
of the Image of the first and fallen Adam, into the second; it is the bringing
back of the Earthly Image, of fallen Man into the Heavenly Image of the holy
God; wherein Man was first Created in Righteousness and true Holiness, 1 Cor.
15. 48, 49. Ephesians. 4. 24. This being done for you and in you, you have the Right
Picture of Christ, your practice answering both your principles and profession.

16. The true Christian is like a pair of compasses, that keeps within compass;
the one foot, to wit, his principles, standing fast in the Center, and the
other foot, to wit, his practice, walking round the circumference, yet both
feet do correspond sweetly together in parallel lines, each with other. Thus
ought there to be a sweet Harmony, betwixt your principles and your practice,
and your Conversation must not give the lie to your profession: you must make
straight your paths, Heb. 12. 13. 1 Samuel 6. 12. The Kine held strait on their
way to Bethshemesh. So must you to the house of the Sun of Righteousness, (as
the Word Bethshemesh signifies) your Eyes must look Right on, and your Eyelids
look straight before you, Prove. 4. 25. It Is the crooked Serpent, Esa. 27. 1,
that brought Man to crooked ways, Psalm. 125. 5. Corrupt Nature runs in a
Crooked channel, but it is Christ's work to make things crooked straight, Esa.
40. 4.

17. Some creatures are commended for being comely in their goings, Prove. 30,
29, sure I am, every true Christian should be so, he should lead a convincing
life, and be of a comely and commendable conversation, such an one as becomes
the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27, and as becomes Holiness, Tit. 2. 3. both young and
old, Male and Female should be of a comely deportment; you must walk worthy of
God, who has called you to his Kingdom and glory, 1 These. 2. 12, his livery
you must wear, his Image you must bear, and his Kingdom you are called unto,
and therefore you must carry as Children of a King, Judge. 18. 18, and as
Children of the Kingdom. Remember (says Menedemus to Antigonus, when he was to
go to a Feast, where a Famous Harlot was to be a guest) that you are a Kings
Son, do nothing unworthy of such an Honorable Title. Scipio African (when
solicited to filthiness by an Harlot) Answered, (Vellem si non essem Imperator)
It is below an Emperor: and Nehemiah said better, shall such an one as I flee?
Neh. 6. 12.

18. A Godly conversation is very graceful to the Gospel, and the Gospel gains
much glory by you, if you walk in the beauty of Holiness; you are called not
only to his Kingdom, but also to his glory; 1 These. 2. 12. and therefore the
Spirit of glory should rest upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14. This is the smooth bark
that evidences the good Tree (as well as the Root, bole, branches, leaves and
fruit) to be a Tree of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, Isa. 61. 3, to
be of Gods (not of the Devils) planting and watering; a clearskinn'd Tree (not
full of Bur-knots) is the most hopeful for fruit. So is the Man that has a
shining conversation: as the shining of Moses face, so the shining of your
life, does evidence you have been with God in the Mount. They took notice of
the Apostles that they had been with Jesus, Act. 4. 13. This makes even a
Nebuchadnezzar confess, these are the servants of the most high God. Dan. 3.
26. Those Virgin-Souls that followed the lamb, had their Fathers name Writ in
their foreheads, Revel. 14. 1, 4. though you shall be Judged, according to Men
in the flesh, yet should you live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4. 6.
and not do folly in Israel, Genesis 34. 7.

19. The Levitical Law does likewise tell you, what beasts are clean, and what
unclean, all which are a shadow of things to come, Col. 2. 16, 17. Whereby
Israel was taught to study purity, and to know that the very Creatures are
(all) defilled, with Man's Sin. Those beasts were accounted clean, that both
chewed the Cud, and divided the hoof. Therefore the Camel was numbered amongst
the unclean, though he chewed the Cud; becausehe divided not the hoof, by all
which you must understand (in Levit. 11. 3. etc.) That it is not enough for you
to ruminate upon the word of God; in your most serious Meditations (which is
your Spiritual chewing of the Cud) but you must part the hoof too, in putting a
difference betwixt good and bad Actions. You must not only think on the
Commandments of God, but so think on them, as to do them, Psalm. 103. 18.
Cleansing your self from all filthiness hoth of flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
you must not only profess the word, but you must practice it also; you must add
to your Faith, Virtue, Temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5. and then are you accounted
a clean Sacrifice to the Lord. To practice Sermons you hear is the best kind of
Repeating Sermons; live Sermons as well as hear them.

20. As the Law concerning clean beasts, Levit. 11. 6, does teach you that good
Meditation should end in a good Conversation, (for a Copy is not only to be
Read over,) (by him that learns to Writ) but it must be Written after also, and
Lessons of Music must be practiced by those that would learn it.) So the Law
concerning clean Fishes teachs you the same; they must have Fins and Scales.
First Fins to steer their motion, so must you have the Fins of knowledge, Faith,
and Divine dispositions to direct you, and to set you forward in the things of
God. And secondly Scales for smoothing their passage, for their Ornaments and
safety: So your Scales of good works must be set so close and so near one
another, that no Air (of Temptation) may come between them; as Job. 41. 15, 16,
17. Levit. 11. 9. You must have the Scales of Piety, Patience, and the Fins
(which are as Wings) of Divine affections, to carry you cheerfully end ways
into Divine Actions, that you may be holy as God is, Ver. 44. (which is the end
of this Law) and clean meat to Gods sight and palate.

Now of a Religious Godly, and Christian Conversation in particular: And first
of Meditation. CHAP. III.
1. HItherto of Conversation in General (which is the Practick part of
Religion, Godliness, and Christianity) now of a Religious, Godly, and Christian
Conversation in particular (which is a large Field of discourse.) You have here
a breviary thereof contracted into a narrow compass; wherein you may View the
whole Duty of Man to God, and Man in Respect of the Conversation; the Agenda,
or things to be done, besides the Credenda, or things to be believed. I told
you before, there is the Conversation of your thoughts; as to that, I refer you
to that Religious Duty of Meditation; which follows here, there is another
Conversation of your Tongue, as to that, I refer you to that Religious Duty of
Conference; which follows also in 'its place here. As to your Conversation in
natural and civil Actions, (which is not my present Work) I refer you to my
Crown and glory of a Christian from, Page the 78. to Page 121. Wherein you have
directions to guide you therein.

2. Religious Duty in (the Walk of a Christian) is therefore a comprehensive
Word, and contains in it the All of man's duty both to God and to Man: as the
first Table in the Decalogue is before the second Table. First in Order,
because first in nature and Excellency. I shall begin therefore with your duty
to God in Religious Actions. And first with Meditation: which is a Scripture
duty, Phil. 4. 8, that all the Sons and Daughters of Abraham, should live in
the practice of: as Isaac did, Genesis 24. 63, the heir of Abraham; you must walk
in Abraham's (and in this Son of Abraham's) steps, in this World, If you would
lodge in Abraham's bosom (that Synonymon of Heaven) in the World to come: alas,
those licentious times have (almost) Antiquated, the power and practice of this
Religious Duty, in which you should be conversant all your days. This holy
Patriarch was not of so loose a mind, as those in our loose times, that would
spend the evening of the Sabbath in Sports and pastimes, for he spent the
Evening in holy Meditation.

3. The Word [Shuach] in the Hebrew. Signifies to speak with a low voice, as in
the heart, and the Word in the Septuagins, [(...)] Signifies a satiating
Soliloquy; as if Isaac had his fill of Divine talking, both with his God, and
with his own heart. It was his holy Exercise and Recreation (thinking the
latter part of the day as fit for Acts of Holiness as the former part was.) It
was a pleasant and delightful pastime (as the Greek Version is) to the
Patriarch, and he found more heart-Ravishing complacency in it, then can be
found in all the delights of the Sons of Men; and no less it was to the
Prophet, who professes he found more transcendent sweetness in Meditating on
the Word, then in the honey or in the honeycomb. Psalm. 19. 10. and 94, 19. and
139. 17. and 119. 103. he found marrow and Gold, yea better in it.

4. Oh then, do you account it your duty and your privilege, to take a few
turns daily upon this Mount Tabor of Divine Contemplation, which is an Heaven
upon Earth, a beginning of the beatifical vision, an Employment (as it is in a
manner without the body) plainly Angelical: it is an handsel of Happiness and a
Foretast of Heavenly Joy. Oh, who would not but be an Anchorite, to be pent up
in the Voluntary Prison-walls of this Religious Action, and to say with Peter,
it is good being here. No doubt but Moses was ravished in Spirit all the 40.
days he conversed with God; yet longs he still for more, crying, I beseech thee
show me thy glory, Exodus 33. 18.

5. Objection, but you will say, how can such a duty be so delightful, that is
so difficult? to this I Answer, by Similies, difficulty and delight may be
found in one and the same Action; there may be difficulty in the beginning, and
delight in the progress and ending: the root may be Bitter, and the fruit
Sweet. 1 Simile, It Is in this duty, as it is in the heating of an Oven, the
first kindling of the fire in it may be not only difficult, but painful, the
fuel must be set on fire; and then it must be blown up (with labor) into a
Flame: after that the Oven begins well to warm, the fuel will then catch and
kindle of it self; no sooner is a stick thrown into the Oven, but presently
it is all on a blaze: So where there is but a little spark of grace, in the
heart at first, it requires some pains to blow it up into a Flame, but when
the heart is once heated with the true Flames of Love, then does it inflame all
the thoughts, and sets the affections on fire; insomuch that then this duty
will not only be without difficulty, but with much delight.

6. 2 Simile, It Is with your heart, as it is with that wax, which has been
laid in cold places, it thereby becomes hard and unpliable to your hand,
insomuch that it will break rather then bend: but if laid a while in the Sun or
by the fire, or if wrought a while in your warm hand, then does it soften and
become pliable, and so capable of any Impression. Thus will it be with you in
this Divine duty, the greatest difficulty lies in your entrance into it; for
corrupt nature and carnal principles will put forth a repugnancy against it,
and therefore flesh must be put to silence in this blessed duty, which is
(mainly) the exercise of the Spirit in you; the experience of all ages tells
you (as well as your own.) 3 Simile, that the entrance into Learning is
attended with difficulties and discouragements; but when once the Nut-shell is
cracked, and the sweetness of the Kernel tasted, then do youth pass through all
difficulties with delight, till at last they become Famous Instruments in
Church or State.

7. 4 Simile, This duty is (indeed) as the climbing upon some high Tree,
Monument or Mountain, all hard Work; but then there is a blessed compensation
for all your pains at the top of all these. First, at the top of this Tree of
life, there be the choicest fruits to nourish up your Soul, to eternal life.
Secondly, at the top of this Monument of mercy, you have the most lovely and
Soul-refreshing and heart ravishing prospect, even transforming and
transfiguring you into the glory of it. Thirdly at the top of this Mountain of
God, and of Holiness you may behold not only the Kingdoms of this lower World
and the Vanity of them (quite contrary to the Devils land-skip showed to your
Lord) but also the glories of a better World (as Moses from the Top of Pisgah)
the upper land of Canaan, that transendently flows with Milk and Honey. Digging
in Mines of the Earth; a pressing of grapes in the Wine press, etc. Are both
hard works; yet finding fine Gold in the Mines of the Scriptures by this
Spiritual digging, and a rich Wine flowing from this blessed Winepress of
Divine Meditation, will make a satisfactory Amends for all your pains at last.

8 Having removed this Objection out of your way (as Amasa's body was out of
the Armies way, that their March might not be hindered, 2 Samuel 20. 12, 13.) Let
us now proceed to show as (Is It.) how pleasant this duty is; so (2ly.) how
profitable both to your self and to others. 1. Io your self upon a twofold
account. 1. For preventing evil. Beelzebub (that Prince of Flies) cannot Fly
blow your heart so long as it is boiling a good matter, Psalm. 45. 1. (Hobr.) in
Divine Meditation. Flies will not touch honey while it is Teething hot. 2 For
promoting good, hereby you may obtain more familiar Acquaintance, with your
God, and a more distinct understanding of your self, both which are worth a
Kingdom. 2ly. It Is profitable to others, for Meditation makes a Man a full Man;
it makes him accomplished to serve out his Generation, and to be a blessing to
every Relation round about him: It fully furnishes him for every good Work, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and 2 Timothy 3. 17.

9. As this duty is pleasant and profitable, So it is (3ly.) a necessary duty,
as necessary as chewing the Cud is to beasts of that kind: and as a due
retaining of food is to man as well as beast, it is a general Observation that
such persons, as do cast up their meat by vomit, or cast it out by stool, as
soon as they have eaten it, be always ill-thriven persons; for though the
stomach may catch hold of some small parcel of the food; and thereby maintain a
life (such as it is) for a time, yet is it no better then a life-less life,
it is a life so filled with distempers, that it becomes a burden to it self;
whereas when the food is retained, and a due fermentation is wrought in the
Stomach, to a complete concoction; then is nourishment Ministered, (as Col. 2.
19.) to all the parts, which makes a strong, healthy and well-liking
constitution. As it is thus in the life natural: So it is in the Spiritual,
Psalm. 119. 11. Luk 9. 44. and Job. 8. 37. Gods word hid and sunk, in the heart
that has a Room for it, makes a thriving fat Christian.

10. Meditation (as it is a pleasant, profitable, yea a most necessary, though
much neglected duty) is twofold, 1. Occasional. 2. Appointed. First
occasional, wherein all occurrences of Temporal objects (occasionally met with)
affords you some Spiritual Considerations: Note first, this requires a
Spiritual heart, to make a Spiritual improvement of every Temporal object; that
Divine providence presents to your Eyes, ears, and outward Senses: David made a
profitable prospect of the Heavens, crying, Lord what is man! Psalm. 8. and
Christ at the Well of Shilo, (he who was Jacobs Shilo) speaks there of the
water of life, Genesis 49. 10. Joh. 4. 10. etc. A good heart makes every external
object a Divine blessing: the Husbandmans plowing, sowing and reaping, etc. The
Trades-mans buying and selling, his weighing and measuring, etc. may afford you
sundry Spiritual instructions: And note secondly, If you gain no more by them,
then a bare beholding of them with the Eye, the very brutes gain as much as
you. If you content your self with a bare natural use of the Creature without a
Spiritual Improvement thereof, you get not the one half of that advantage by
the Creature, for which the Creator gave it you; the Beasts of the field, and
the Birds of the Air, have so much themselves: you do not use the Creature, as
Lord of the Creatures, so God made Adam. (Genesis 1. 26.) unless you find your
Lord in the Creatures.

11. Every Creature preaches to that Man, in whom the Spirit of God first
inwardly preaches: Note thirdly, you never need to want matter, if you want
not an heart: you may be cast into such a Condition, as whereby you may be
hindered from good Actions (as by sickness, Imprisonment etc.) But there is
nothing in all the World, (save a naughty heart) can hinder you from good
Meditations: go to the Ant, O sluggard, says Solomon, do you see how busy she
is in the Summer, to make provision for an hard Winter? how much more ought you
to concern your self, in your Summer of health and strength, before the Winter
of death, and Eternity come upon you: do you behold the Spider in your window
Spinning clammy threeds (out of her own bowels) and weaving cunning Webbs to
catch and entangle the silly Fly, laying snares for her life? then consider
(with a sigh) O how does Satan all this (and much more) against my precious
Soul, and all out of himself too, (though you had not a desperately wicked
heart, Jer. 17. 9. to assist him when he speaks a lie, he speaks it of his
own. Joh. 8. 44. It Is the Devils cursed disposition, it is as impossible for
Satan to do good, as it is for a Toad to spit Cordials.

12. Note fourthly, It Is richly worth your Observation also, that this
Spiritual limbeck (Divine Meditation) does not spoil the earthly Subjects,
that it extracts Heavenly Instructions out of, as material limbecks do plants,
etc. (Put in them) leaving them Sapless and useless save only for burning. As
the laborious Be flies over a field of Flowers, sucks Honey out of each of
them, yet leaves them all as fresh and as fragrant as before it found them: So
you in extracting Celestial Meditations, out of your Terrestrial Employments
and Enjoyments, (which is the Sublimest Mellification) in stead of hurting or
hindering them, you do verily, both advance them, and advantage, yea enrich your
self. Note the fifth, In a word, you may not be like the foolish Child, when
you look on the Book of the Creature, only to behold the gaudy Pictures and
Babies therein, or to gaze upon the gilded leaves, and cover there of; but you
must mind your lesson that every Creature does especially learn you: the Stork,
Crane, and Swallow, know their Seasons, Jer. 8. 7. the Ox knows his owner and
the Ass his Masters Crib, Esa. 1. 3. and will not you learn from hence to know
yours?

13. As to your further improvement of the Book of nature (with 'its 3. leaves
of Heaven, Earth, and Sea) I refer you to my Crown and glory of a Christian.
From Page 125. to 145. I now pass from occasional to Appointed Meditation,
which is, the Souls setting of it is self apart, silently and seriously to work
out some profitable Meditations, upon some chosen Subject (out of its own
heart) thoroughly, at a fit time and in a fit place; thus Isaac went out into
the field to Meditate (as above) Genesis 24. 63. That which concerns matter of
knowledge, for finding out truth, does chiefly belong to Students, Scholars,
Ministers of the Gospel; but matters of affection for inflaming our loves to
God in Christ, and for abasing our selves to a self-abhorrency, this is of
Universal concernment, the work of every Christian.

14. This blessed duty has 'its beginning in the head, but 'its ending in the
heart. (1.) It Is a pondering some Divine truth in your mind, until you be well
acquainted with it, until you be seasoned with the Savor of it, until it
settle and take rooting in your Spirit, until it beget in you good affections,
and fire your Soul in love to that truth. (2.) It Is like the rubbing of a Man
in a Swoon, it (as it were) chases in the Oil of grace with a warm hand or
rather, with a warm heart. (3.) It Is like the selvedge that keeps all the loose
threeds from ravelling out. (4.) It Is as the hammer that drives the nail of
Divine truth to the very head. (5.) It Is as the Art of the Be sucking Honey
out of Flowers; then in your Soul a Spiritual Deborah, (which in Hebrew
signifies a Be) when it gathers the sweetness of many Spiritual Flowers, and
then works it up in the Hive of the hidden Man of the heart. (Lastly)
Meditation does (after a sort) transform you into the Image of truth (as 2 Cor.
3. 18.) making truth one with you, and you one with it, and turning all you
hear and Read into Juice and blood by a kindly digestion.

15 That you may manage this Meditation the better, and make work of your work;
you must consider there be three main steps herein, to wit, 1. Ingress. 2
Progress. 3. Egress: the first step is the hardest, (as is shown above,
Paragraph. 5. 6. 7.) therefore take those two grand Rules of Direction about
your Ingress. (1. Your heart must be prepared. (2.) your subject must be
profitable: as to the first you must pray your heart into a Meditating frame, a
praying heart is the best Meditating heart; and a Meditating heart is the best
praying heart, those two twin duties (like the City buildings shore up and
succor each the other. It is said of Gersom, that he has sometimes spent four
hours in banishing bad thoughts, and in working up his heart into Tune for
this Angelical duty. You may not begin this duty with a Raw and a cold (but
always with a warm) heart: It Is a Rule in Physic; [Medicandum est cum coctis,
non cum crudis,] Your thoughts will be Raw, till they be boiled in a warm
heart, Psalm. 45. 1. And raw Meditations have no healing Virtue in them to a
Sin-Sick-Soul.

16. When you have (through Divine assistance) prepared (in some measure) your
heart; then secondly, make choice of some profiting Subject, such as may edify
your Soul: you must not come to the bush (which the Lord is in the midst of)
with your shoes of Worldly-mindedness upon you. Exodus 3. 5. When you go up to
Mount-Moriah with your offering you must (with Holy Abraham) leave the Servants
and the Ass at the foot of the Hill, Genesis 22. 5. When you are (with Moses) to
ascend this Mount of Meditation] the Law is peremptory, [the beast that touches
the Mount shall surely die.] Exodus 19. 12, 13. you must be better then a beast,
and more then a Man, yea you had need be an Angel for this Angelical work.

17 At your Ingress (or entrance) into this duty, you will find earthly
thoughts to proffer themselves, and press upon you with Importunity, but
Heavenly thoughts must with Importunity be sued for and sought after. When you
would think of Heaven and Heavenly things then will you thoughts of Earthly
things lay Ambushments in your way, and Intercept you: those Birds, that have
their Wings daubed with Bird-lime, cannot Fly, much less mount up toward
Heaven: you may not be like Martha, who was cumbred about many things, but
(with Mary) you must choose the better part for the Subject of your Meditation:
you may not be as the (Scarabeus or) Horse fly, that passes over a whole field
of Flowers, and at last lights upon some filthy dung: you must rather be [a
Deborah] a Divine Be (as above) that flies over the dung with abhorrency, and
fixes upon the most fragrant Flowers, or as the Noble Hawk in her flight, that
passes over Crows and Jack-daws (as unworthy of her pursuit) and falls upon
Birds of better prey.

18. If yet worldly thoughts hinder your entrance upon your work, you must pray
them away as Abraham did the fowls that trouble him in his Sacrifice, Genesis 15.
11. And though they be thoughts, that are needful enough (as how to care for
your Family) at another time, yet must you then say to them as Hushai said of
the Counsel of Achitophel, it is not good at this time, 2 Samuel 17. 7.
Family-cares have their proper Season, but at this time they are unseasonable:
Suppose yet further that several good thoughts do come together into your mind
at once, know that this may hinder your entrance (through the wiles of Satan)
also, as when a great many people crowd in at a door all at once, they all
Stick fast and none can enter; In this case you must single out from the rest,
your selected Subject that it may pass alone, without crowding, and reserve the
rest to come singly on in their proper place and Season.

19. Your selected Subject must be either something concerning God, or
something concerning your self: First concerning God, either his works or his
word. 1. Meditate on the works of God, not only on such as are common to the
World (such as Creation and providence be) but also on such as are proper and
peculiar to his Church and Children. We have thought on thy loving kindness,
(says the Church) Psalm. 48. 9. (we have silently mused. Hebr.) it being better
admired then expressed. So must you muse on Gods love to your Soul, (1.) on his
electing love, O think with your Self, should not you give God a room in your
heart at this time, who gave you a room in his heart before times, even from
all Eternity, Ephesians. 3. 11. (2ly.) on his redeeming love, think then how God
bestows Christ (the best of all things) even on you the worst of all things)
for you know more evil to your self, then to all the World beside: think also,
O this surpassing love of God in bestowing a Christ on you, and not on others,
that (for ought you know) better deserved him, and (possibly) might have made a
better Improvement of him. Joh. 14. 22.

20. And thirdly Meditate upon Sanctifying love, O wonderful condescension that
ever the Spirit of Holiness, should vouchsafe to dwell in such a dirty dog-hole
as your defiled Soul, and that an House of unclean Spirits, (it may be, a whole
Legion of them, for as Luther says, tot doemonia, quot crimina, So many Sins,
so many Devils.) Should ever become the Temple of the Holy Ghost; And thus may
you Meditate also upon Justifying love. Fourthly, which is such an Act of
Divine grace, as is equally vouchsafed to the weakest (if true) as to the
strongest Saint, to poor you (if a Christian in truth) as well as to great Paul
or to the blessed Virgin: and eternity shall not add to the matter of it,
though perhaps it may to the manner of it. Fifthly, upon Adopting-love, which
makes Sons and Daughters of Children of the Devil, as well as of wrath, and
gives a lease of the best Inheritance, not only for three lives, yea not only
for a thousand years, but for eternity, even for ever and ever.

21. Lastly upon glorifying-love, whereof indeed you are not Capable, in this
life. Peter got but a glimpse of it at Christ's transfiguration, and he was
plainly intoxicated with it, so that he wist not what he said, Matthew. 17. 5.
etc. O admire, that you (a worthless worm and wretch) should hereby become not
only, [(...)] like Angels, Matthew. 22. 30. but even advanced above Angels, for
glorified Saints are Sons of the Kingdom, when glorious Angels stand by, as
servants. In a word, all these love tokens are such transcendent privileges,
that they can never be enough thought on and admired; no, though you should
think upon nothing else, and that so long as your life shall last, yea though
you should live as long as the World shall last; and therefore God has
appointed an Eternity, in a better World, where you shall have no other
Employment, but to ponder them and to praise God for them; Singing Hallelujahs
to him that sits upon the Throne for evermore.

22. As you must thus Meditate on Gods works, so secondly upon his word;
whether precepts, or presidents, or promises, or Ordinances thereof: all which
have sweet Honey in them, to the Divine Be: Your second Subject is concerning
your self, as David did when he Eat in his Palace. 2 Samuel 7. 14. Saying with
an humble heart (Lord what am I?) Not, what am I not? As Nebuchadnozzar did,
with an haughty Spirit, as he sat in his palace, Dan. 4. 29, 30. Humble David
who had neither an haughty heart, nor a lofty Eye, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. has
exceeding high thoughts of God, and exceeding low thoughts of himself, he
cannot name any thing bad enough to compare himself unto; in his (Lord what am
I? he says not, Lord, what a great Monarch am I? Or what a great Man am I? But
he says I am a worm and no Man, Psalm. 22. 6. I am a dead-dog, or a Flea, 1 Samuel 24. 14. Lord what am I? O Imitate this Holy David, as you sit in your
House! I am the least of Saints and greatest of Sinners. Ephesians. 3. 8. 1 Timothy 1.
15. But take heed of Nebuchadnezzers self admiration, who Trumpets out his own
glory when none asked him the Question; as if he had done all (whereas Babylon
was built above a thousand years before he was born) and God that builds all
Cities. Psalm. 127. 1. had done nothing, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm.
10. 4. he exalts self and excludes God.

23. Your second step herein is progress, which is more easy then the first. As
a Bird has the greatest lift, when she rises up from off the Earth, but when
once got upon the Wing, then she mounts up aloft, not only without much
straining difficulty, but with much sporting complacency; then does she sing
out her Melodious note thoroughly, so long as she lists and likes, as
(likewise) a Ship has always the most difficulty to hale out of Harbor (where
many times she sticks fast in the Mud) but if once got under Sail and a fresh
gale of wind sitting right for her, O how she sports in the waters (as the Bird
does in the Air) and goes on gallantly toward her desired Haven; yea even in a
stormy and tempestuous Sea, let her have but Sea-room enough, and then she
fears not to be driven by the storm, either upon Rocks or Quicksands: as it is
thus with Birds, Ships so with Bells, it is hard to get them up; when once
raised then rung with ease and delight, just so it is with your Soul in this
Divine work, all your difficulty is to get up from the low Earth upon the wing
(with the Bird of the Air) and to get out of the muddy harbor (with the Ship
of the Sea) under Sail, if once set a float and forward bound under a fresh
gale of the Spirit of grace; O how merrily do you mount upwards (with the Bird)
and how gallantly do you go endways toward the Cape of good hope (with the
Ship) so that an entrance is administered unto you abundantly into the Heavenly
Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1. 11. as it were, with Colors flying, Drums beating, Trumpets
Sounding, yea with top and top Gallant entering into your Masters joy, Matthew.
25. 21, 32.

24. For furthering your Progress, take these short directions. 1. Direct. when
you have turned (what you should not think on) out of doors (as Sarah did
Hagar) and taken in what is necessary, expedient and profitable for you to
Meditate upon, then in Gods strength, Psalm. 71. 16. you must view your Subject
round about and observe all it is circumstances as well as it is substance; thus
the Psalmist counsels you (that you may think the better upon the
loving kindness of God in the midst of the Temple) to walk round about Sion;
and tell the Towers of it, and mark well her bulwarks, yea consider her
Palaces, etc. Psalm. 48. 9, 12, 13. Until you fully and distinctly know all. 2.
Direct. Then you must dwell upon it with your doubled and redoubled thoughts,
and fix your Meditation, pondering it in your mind; until it have a kindly
influence upon your affections, until it become a Rooted and Engrafted
consideration: Mountains are barren, because the Rain of Heaven run's off from
them; but valleys are fruitful, because it rests there, the Wolf greedily
swallows his meat (hair and all) so all goes from him into excrements, he
presently voids all, so makes all void and never fatteneth. 3. Direct. Retain
therefore your Subject and duty till you find something of God in it, dropping
down upon your heart, till you find Elijahs God in Elijahs mantle working
wonders for you. 2 King. 2. 14. Let neither go without advantage. 4. Direct.
When you have found God (in your Subject and duty) retain him some while, as
Abraham did the Lord Christ. Genesis 18. 3, 4, 5. saying, pass not away I pray
thee from thy Servant, but rest with me for a while, etc. O then are you an
happy Son or Daughter of Abraham, when you can thus engage the Lords stay with
you in this Divine duty. 5. Direct. Forget not to retain your own slippery
heart, 'twil linger as Lot in Sodom. If the Lord of Angels help you not. Genesis
19 16. be often crying; O quicken this loitering heart, Psalm. 119. 37. and O
unite this treacherous heart. Psalm. 86. 11.

25. Your third step is Egress; when you have (through grace) brought your
Divine duty to some profitable Issue, then (1.) take down your Soul by degrees,
and not all on the sudden: it is a dead Bird that falls down like a stone
without hovering upon the wing, as the living ones do: as nature cannot endure
any sudden alteration, so nor grace (Deus and Natura non faciunt saltum) God
and Nature make no leaps. (2.) Direct. When down, review your whole
perambulation; wherein you have been enlarged, be thankful and wherein you have
been straightened, be humbled, (3.) Direct. Take heed of the cold Air of
Tentation, when warmed by this work. The sweating labourer (sometimes) sits
down over hastily, catches cold, and dies of a Consumption; be walking gently
in musing still, that this befall not you.

Of Prayer. CHAP. IV.
1. PRayer follows Meditation, as twins follow each other in their birth, they
both lay in the same womb, the Hebrew word [Shuach] mentioned in Genesis 24. 63.
which our Translation Reads to Meditate) the Septuagint, the Geneva
Translation, and Tremellius (in his Marginal notes upon it) reads it (to pray)
the word signifies both, which shows they are near akin lying in the same
word as twins in the same womb; they consort well together, for Meditation is a
blessed Improvement of Meditation: you may suppose, Isaac had his Oratory in
the field, this private place for secret Prayer now upon this Important
occasion (of Marriage quasi marrage he uses deep Meditation to make servent
Prayer, thus ought you to do now, as the Patriarch Isaac did then and as the
Prophet Daniel did afterward, first open the windows of your Soul, by Divine
Meditation and then kneel down to praying work. Dan. 6. 10. There practice is
your Pattern: when you have filled your water-Pot to the full (by Meditation)
then draw out (by prayer) as Joh. 2. 7, 8.

2. As Faith is called the best of graces, so Prayer is called the best of
duties, if other duties be pennies, this is a pound in many respects. First, as
it gives God the glory of his three great Attributes. 1. It gives him the glory
of his Omnisciency, that he knows all your wants, that he, whose Throne is in
Heaven, yet hears all your Petitions presented to him upon Earth. 1 King. 8.
30. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. yea when you pray only heart prayer (which man hears not,
knows not) as Moses, Exodus 14. 15. The Lord said, wherefore cryest thou unto
me, when he spoke not a word, so Hannah. 1 Samuel 1. 13. and Psalm. 38. 9. all my
desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. 2ly. it gives him
the glory of his Omnipotency, it presupposes that God is able to supply all
your wants you spread before him, Ephesians. 3. 20. The very act of Prayer, says to
God as Job, (I know thou can do every thing. Job. 42. 2. 3ly. It gives him
the glory of his merciful goodness, or bountiful benevolency, that he is
willing as well as able to supply your wants. Divine might and Divine mercy are
the two Pillars that the House of Prayer stands upon, as the Temple of Solomon
stood upon Jachin and Boaz. 1 King. 7. 21. which signifies stability and
strength. 2 Chro. 3. 17. Exodus 22. 27.

3. The second respect that makes Prayer the best of duties, is, that a kind of
Omnipotency is ascribed to it (as Luther said) when it is the Prayer of Faith,
and so acted by that best of graces; you may stand and wonder what the
Scripture attributes to Faith and Prayer, or Prayer of Faith. It can do more
then all the Witches in the World can do, for it can set God at work, whereas
they can but set the Devil at work; none knows what Prayer can do, but those
that know what God can do; in this sense, Prayer is said to be Omnipotent as it
sets Omnipotency at work: it has had command over all the four Elements, as
1st. Over the Air in Elijah. Jam. 5. 17. to whom God gave this Key to open and
shut up Heaven at his pleasure. 2ly. Over the fire which the same Elijah fetchs
down at pleasure by his Prayer one time in a way of wrath, 2 Kin. 1. 16. and
another time in way of mercy and merciful acceptance. 1 Kin. 18. 37, 38. 3ly.
Over the water in Moses. Exodus 14. 15, 16. And 4ly. Over the Earth in the same
Man of God, who by his powerful Prayer; first cleaves the Sea asunder to save
Israel, and then the Earth asunder to destroy the accomplices of Korah, Numb. 16.
29, etc. Psalm. 106. 17. As those two great consorts of Christ on Mount Tabour
(Moses and Elias, Math. 17. 3.) had command over the four Elements: So Joshuah
over the Sun it self. Josh. 10. 12. as by Moses Prayer, he had command over
Amalek before. Exodus 17. 11, 12. Yet higher, Elishah by Prayer has command
over the Angels, fetching them out of Heaven, for his Protection and comfort. 2
Kin. 6. 17. but yet higher than that over god-man, the Angel of the Covenant,
the Lord of Angels in Jacob. Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26. Who (as Sckindler Interprets.
Hos. 12. 4. Bacah) wept and Supplicated Jacob, saying let me go for the day
dawneth, Genesis 32. 25.

4. The Lord Christ (there) asks him his Name, as if he had said, thou art
such a fellow as I never met withal, and therefore he confers the honor of
Knighthood (as it were) upon him in saying to him, kneel down Jacob, rise up
Israel; having power with God and prevailing. Thus also the Lord Christ was
overcome, by the power of the Canaanitish woman's Prayer of Faith. Matthew. 15.
26, 28. Insomuch that he gives her the Key of his Treasury, and bids her go in
and take what mercy she pleased, he turns her loose (as it were) into his
fullness and all sufficiency; and not only his own Omnipotency is at her beck,
but also Devils and all must stoop to her, if she pleased; O woman great is thy
Faith (in Prayer) be it unto thee even as thou will. You must know, How Jacob
(as this Syrophaenician woman) outwrestled Christ, for 'twas his wonderful
condescension to put forth more of hiw own strength in Jacob against himself,
then he did in himself against Jacob. This redeeming Angel (as Jacob calls him
Genesis 48. 16.) held him up with one hand, as he strove against him with the
other, and voluntarily yielded himself as conquered by the Patriarch's Prayer;
otherwise the same Divine power that disjointed Jacobs thigh, could as easily
have unclasped his hands. O how can you but admire this glorious vouchsafement!

5. Lastly, God himself speaks as if his hands had been tied up by Prayer.
Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone, etc. As if Moses had held him from his purpose, and
had laid fetters and restraints upon Omnipotency, and (as Austin glosseth upon
the place) brings the Almighty to bespeak his own freedom, yea indenting with
Moses, and offering him a Composition for [his] silence and his own liberty,
saying, (if so) I will make of thee a great people, as if Moses's Devotion had
been stronger then Gods Indignation: which shows, that great is the power of
Prayer, it is able after a sort (Fifthly another gloss) to transsuse a dead
Palsy into the hands of Omnipotency; this cannot be through the prevalency of
Human power against Divine, but through the condescension of Divine grace to
poor Mortals, bidding us, concerning the work of his hands to command him. Isa.
45. 11. Which is a wonderful expression, rather to be admired with an holy
Reverence, then strained into a rude blasphemy: undoubtedly it would be no less
then black blasphemy in us to say so, had not God himself said it for us, and
Genesis 19. 22.

6. All this shows you both the excellency, and the efficacy of right Prayer;
the Apostle James tells you, it avails much. Jam. 5. 16. Yet does not tell you
how much, you must find out that both by your own experience and by the
Experiences of others. It certainly avails [much,] though happily it avail
not [always] God has indeed said that the Children of Moab shall go into his
Sanctuary to pray: but shall not prevail. Isa. 16. 12. But he has avowed
before all the world that the Children of Sion shall not do so. Isa. 45. 19.
They shall not seek the Lord in vain: their Prayer shall be like Jonathans bow,
it shall never return empty. God ever hears their Prayers, always ad Salutem
(as Anstin says) though not ever ad Voluntatem: he always hears their Prayers
according to their well, when he does not hear them according to their Will.

7. First the manner of Prayer; Now that your Prayer may be [(...)] a
throughly-wrought, effectual and available Prayer, to work wonders in Heaven
and Earth. Jam. 5. 16. yea after a sort Omnipotent as Luther said; take these
following Directions for managing this duty aright, first before duty, as to
the manner of it before, in, and after it. First of those that are Antecedent
or before Prayer. Direct. 1. You must be New born, a New Creature; until the
Child be come out of the womb, it cannot Cry, no more can you Cry Abba Father,
so long as you are in the womb of a natural state, Romans 8. 15. God first
accepts the person, and then the Action or offering. Genesis 4. 4. Heb. 11. 4.
your person must be accepted as Abel was, and then your Prayer will be
acceptable, you must be Righteous (in Christ) it is the Prayer of the Righteous
that prevails, Jam. 5. 16. as it is the Character of the unrighteous, that
they call not upon God, Psalm. 14. 4. Paul was never said to pray till Converted
from his Pharisaical State. Act. 9. 11. So if at any time they do pray, their
Prayer is an Abomination. Prove. 21. 27. and therefore it is not accounted
Prayer. The long Prayers that Paul had while a Pharisee were not reckoned
Prayer at all: you must first be a Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and
then you will be an House of Prayer: for so the Temple is called. Naturalists
tell us of a Jewel, that, when put into a dead man's Mouth, loses all its
Virtue: So prayer (a precious Jewel in it self) in the mouth of one that is
dead in Sin, has no force, nor efficacy: God will not hear Sinners, Joh. 9.
31. he will not take them by the hand, Job. 8. 20. Margin Hebr. and Geneva
Biblt, it is but a Multiplying lies daily, Hos. 11. 12. a compassing God with
lies to call God Father when we are not his Children, and while we are without
Christ. You must pass through the merits of the Son, into the mercies of the
Father.

8. The second Direction before duty is, prepare to meet your God in duty. Amos
4. 12. The Jews had their preparation for the Passover. Joh. 19. 31. So should
you have for prayer, setting some time apart as well to prepare for Prayer, as
for prayer it self; it is coming to duty with a common Spirit, and with an
Ordinary frame of heart, that makes us lose many a duty. 2 Chronicles. 12. 14. Ezra
did better then Rehoboam herein, Ezr. 7. 10. the latter lost all, the former
saved all hereby. Labor therefore your heart into a praying frame before
prayer; this is done by getting. First, the Majesty of the great God (before
whom you are going) wrought truly and thoroughly upon your heart. Consider
seriously he is a great King. Mal. 1. 6, 14. and a God that will be Sanctified
of all that draw nigh to him, Levit. 10. 3. this may help you to a God
sanctisying, frame of Spirit: David prepared with all his might, why? the
reason is rendered. The Temple was not to entertain man but God, therefore must
it be more Magnificent and he more exact in all preparations for it. 1 Chro.
29. 1, 2. Christ tells you, he is gone to prepare a place (even a Temple, a
Mansion of glory) for you, Joh. 14. 2, 3. and will not you prepare a place for
him in that poor heart of yours? Consider also, Secondly, his purity, that the
God (with whom you have to do in prayer) is a God of purer eyes then to behold
Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. he cannot look upon it, but he must loath it; he cannot
behold it, but he must punish it; this calls for a reverential heart, Psalm. 2.
11. Before him who is in Heaven and you on Earth, Eccles. 5. 2. cover your
face, if Angels do so that are holy and blessed, Esa. 6. 2. Much more you that
live in an House of clay, and drinks up iniquity like water, Job 4. 19. and 15.
16. Tremble to bring along with you any Sin unrepented of, unpardoned, lay
aside all filthiness; Jam. 1. 21. as the Serpent her poison when she goes to
drink, yet with this difference, she after drinking reassumes it again, you may
not do so with the Poison of Sin, when you have been drinking of the Rivers of
Gods favor, this is to return with the Dog to his Vomit. 2 Pet. 2. 22. you
must know it again no more. Genesis 38. 26. nor have so much as a leering look
toward it, Psalm. 66. 18. much less allow of it or wallow in it.

9. Would you have leave with God in prayer, then leave Sin and that for ever;
you may not say concerning your Sins as Abraham did concerning his Servants,
and the Ass (which he left at the foot of the Hill, Genesis 22. 5.) saying, I will
come again to you; but you must take an everlasting farewell, of your Sin when
you come to your God, and with David keep your self (for ever) from your
Iniquity. Psalm. 18. 23. and as he washed his hands in Innocence, when he did
compass Gods Altar. Psalm. 26. 6. So must you wash your heart in that fountain
that is opened, Zech. 13. 1. Thus Ruth did wash and anoint her self before she
went up to Boaz. Ruth. 3. 3. and Esther purified and persumed her self for
acceptance with Ahasuerus. Esth. 2. 9, 12. and the Captive Damosel was to pair
her nails, etc. Before she became a fit bride for an Israelitish Bed, Deuteronomy. 21.
12, 13, 14. and the Rabbis say, that a Man might not come into the Mountain of
the House of God with his staff, nor with his Shoos, nor with his purse, nor
with dust upon his Feet; hence Lavers were set at the door of the Tabarnacle,
for washing off defilements at their entrance thither; Exodus 30. 18, 19. and
Bernard used to say at his entrance to his public Devotion, O wordly thoughts,
[ad templi Januam manete vos] stay ye here at the Church door, alluding to
Abraham's words, Genesis 22. 5. and to Moses deed. Exodus 3. 5. as above in
Meditation: Thus also Solomon says, [keep your foot, when you enter into the
House of God] Eccles. 5. 1. that is, look well to your affections (those feet
and out goings of the Soul) that you offer not the Sacrifice of Fools. Thus
also under the Law the inwards and feet were to be washed. Levit. 1. 9. all
which do teach you what due and true preparation, you must make for your
approaches unto God; that you may lift up holy hands (and an holy heart) unto
him in Prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. those in, Isa. 1. 15. That came to God with their
hands full of blood, did (as it were) dare him to his face, and they do no
less, that come with their hands or hearts full of any Sin.

10. Secondly, of those that are Concomitant or in Duty, after preparing for
it, comes proceeding in it. When your heart is fixed, or prepared for God, like
the Instruments of Music, when the Treble is in Tune, it is easy to bring all
the other strings into Tune also: you can make no progress in Prayer, unless
this heart string be wound up to a due Note; and all your graces and affections
dancing attendance to the duty: so then the First, Direct. or rule, is clean
Prayer, be sure you stretch forth you hands in Prayer, with an heart prepared
for Prayer, as Job. 11. 13. If thou preparest thine heart, and stretch forth
thine hands. and Ver. 14. If Iniquity be in thy hands, put it far away, and let
not Iniquity be in thy Tabernacle, and Ver. 15. then shall thou lift up thy
face without Spot, and shall be steadfast, etc. which teaches you, that (1.)
your heart must be prepared to meet your God, Amos. 4. 12. Humbly submitting to
his Justice, and heartily imploring his mercy. (2.) that you must stretch forth
your hands in prayer (as the Beggar does for Alms) in forma pauperis, to
receive mercy, or as men Beg quarter for their lives with hands held up over
their heads; or lastly, as one that is fallen into a ditch or deep dungeon, and
cannot get out, holds up his hands and cries out for help, you are fallen into
the dark dungeon of Sin, and Christ is your blessed Ebedmelech, that lets down
a Rope of mercy (his promises) to draw you out, as Jerem. 38. 12. with all
tenderness, if you cry unto him, Psalm. 130. 1.

11. And thirdly those hands you lift up in Prayer must be pure hands, 1 Timothy
2. 8. the Fountain of Divine goodness will not be laden at with foul hands,
Esa. 1. 15, 16. The Apostle James gives you good Counsel, (cleanse your hands)
Jam. 4. 8. and the Prophet Jeremy, (cleanse your heart) Jerem. 4. 14. and so
does blessed Paul (cleanse your self from all filthiness both of flesh and of
Spirit) 2 Cor. 7. 1. then shall you lift up your face without Spot. That is,
you may come to God with comfort and confidence, not casting down your
countenance, as guilty Cain did, Genesis 4. 6. but looking up boldly and
cheerfully as Steven did, Act. 6. 15. (they saw his face, as if it had been the
face of an Angel) and then shall you stand steadfast in duty as a Pillar in the
Temple, Revel. 3. 12. your heart being established with grace, and your mind
with peace to serve God without fear, Luke 1. 74. Psalm. 112. 7. when the heart
is thus fixed (as David's was) Psalm. 57. 7. and 108. 1. (twice over in both
places) this makes duty more easy; the expert Soldier having his Arms rightly
fixed, goes more cheerfully into the Battle; then Prayer will be your business,
and you will make work of your work; yea God himself will not strictly stand
upon the (exact) purification of the Sanctuary, but will certainly pass by all
your other weaknesses, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. when he sees you prepare your heart to
seek God, Ver. 19. and when he beholds you (to your ability) sweep out the
dirt, wash the floor, spread your best Carpets, uncover your best Stools, and
bring forth your best Plate, and Ornaments; setting open the Everlasting door of
your Soul to entertain the King of glory, Psalm. 24. 7, 9.

12. The second Rule or Direction in duty is Cordial Prayer, be sure you engage
your heart in it. Jerem. 30. 21. and in every part of it, that your Prayer may
be Cordial, or a hearty prayer, your Tongue and heart must be (all a long)
Relatives, and keep both time and Tune together; the principal Element of
prayer is the heart, take prayer out thence, and it is but a dead thing, that
prayer which comes out of the head only, and not out of the heart also, is not
prayer in Gods account. Ephraim was a silly Dove without heart, Hos. 7. 11. The
Jews (no doubt) had prayed much and often during their seventy years Captivity,
yet Daniel denies that they had prayed at all, Dan. 9. 13. (yet made we not our
prayer unto the Lord our God, etc.) Seeing, no Affection, nor heart was in
their prayers, all was but lip-labor, they gave God not the Calves of their
lips, as Hos. 14. 2. but only the lips of their Calves, which God esteemed no
better then Jeroboams Calves; when the Tongue prays without the heart it is but
an empty Ring, the tinkling of a Cymbal. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Expressions of the
Tongue without Impressions on the heart, makes no Melody in Gods ear, non vox,
sed votum, non Musica Chordula, sed Cor. When the inward Sacrifice is not
joined with the outward, God faith (in contempt of it) they offer me flesh,
Hos. 8. 13. Flesh stinks in our Nostrils while it is burning: when both were
joined together, God calls it his Honeycomb with his Honey, Cant. 5. 1.
Eleazar the priest carried the Incense in his bosom (to show that prayer
should come from the heart) as he carried the Oil for the Lamps in his right
hand, the anointing Oil in his left hand, and the meat offering upon his
Shoulder, as Rabbi, Elias, and Chaskuny upon, Numb. 4. 16. tells us. David
found in his heart to pray his prayer to God. 2 Samuel 7. 27. he did not only say
his prayer (with his lips) but he also prayed his prayer (with his heart.)
Prayer without the heart is like the Body without the Soul; O how loathsome to
man is this latter, and as loathsome to God is the former, then draw you near
with a true heart. Heb. 10. 22.

13. As your Prayer must be hearty or Cordial (for quod cor non facit, non fit,
that which the heart does not, is not done at all; if your heart be Right, God
will give you his hand, and you may come into the Chariot of Prayer: as 2 King.
10. 15. which is as the Chariot of Amminadab, Cant. 6. 12. but if your heart be
not right in the sight of God, as Act. 8. 21. You have neither part nor portion
in this matter; and you do but take the Name of the Lord in vain, and God will
not hold you guiltless, Exodus 20. 7.) So it must be constant which is the Third
Direction, constant prayer: and this constancy is two fold. First, in duty, and
secondly to duty. The first relates to this or that duty of Prayer in
particular. The second relates to the duty of Prayer in the general; touching
the first, your heart must be constant in prayer, O the backwardness of the
heart of Man, to praying work ('twill take a dispensation for a discharge from
duty, any small Interruption for a while, to stop the mouth of Conscience, is
an excuse from prayer) and O the lubricity and slipperiness of the heart of Man
in praying work; as the heart naturally hangs off from it, so it usually, when
it comes into it, slips out of it again; it is like Reuben as unstable as water,
Genesis 49. 4. though it be not so liquid as water to be poured out (as water)
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 6. Psalm. 62. 8. (which is the proper Notion of
prayer, to wit, the pouring out of the heart unto God) there is too much of the
stone in the heart, that is yet undissolved into tears and tenderness. Ezekiel.
36. 26. you will find by woeful experience, that your heart will not be steadfast
with God, but it will start aside like a deceitful bow, Psalm. 78. 37, and 57.
you cannot watch with Christ (in praying work) one hour, Matthew. 26. 40. you
cannot serve the Lord without distraction; Nor attend upon him in prayer, 1
Cor. 7. 35.

14. Therefore as your heart stands need of whipping to Prayer, it stands as
much need of binding in prayer; never did the Sacrifice stand more need of
binding with cords to the Horns of the Altar, Psalm. 118. 27. then does your
loose and slippery heart, of binding with all Spiritual bonds to this Religious
duty. Hence it is, that David begs of God: Lord unite my heart to fear thy
Name, Psalm. 86. 11. he found it as hard to fix, as the Chemist does
Quicksilver, which has a principle of motion in it, but not of Rest; and
therefore you are commanded to watch unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Satan will be
Interrupting you, as the Pythonisse did Paul, Act. 16. 16, and as the Enemies
did Nehemiah. Neh. 4. 17. he built and watched, and watched and built. So
should you pray and watch, and watch and pray. Satan is always busiest at the
best work, if you stand up (in prayer) before the Lord, he will be sure to
stand up against you, Zech. 3. 1, 2. If you be at Gods right hand, Satan will
be at your right hand; he will thrust himself in among the Sons of God, Job. 1.
6. but suppose he tempt you not, your own heart (so far as it is unrenewed) will
be a tempter to it self, and will wander from duty, the Man in the
Ecclesiastical History, that was to have an horse given him, if he could say
his Lords Prayer, without a wandering thought; cried in the midst of the prayer
(dabis and ephippium) you must give me the saddle too, so lost both horse and
saddle, this divided heart, Hos. 10. 2. makes us lose many a duty.

15. The second branch is constancy to prayer, you must give your self to
prayer; as David did, Psalm. 109. 4. Hebr. (Vaani Tephillah) but I am prayer, as
if he had been made up of nothing else, but been a mere compound of prayer; or
as if he had done nothing else (in all the world) but poured out his heart to
God in prayer. Chrysostom moves this Question, why David is called (a man
after Gods own heart) more then Moses or Abraham, etc. And for his Answer to it
he gives this Reason, because he was more Conversant with God in (both) praying
and praising work; he (above all others) turns every providence into a prayer,
and his whole Book of Psalms consists either of Hosannas (in praying to) or of
Hallelujahs (in praising of) his God. He is the greatest favorite to an
Earthly King, that is oftnest conversant with him. Thus David was Gods darling,
his special minion and favorite, that was much in Gods bosom in his Divine
Colloquies. So that he would be up, and at this praying work three times in a
day; Morning, Noon, and Night, Psalm. 55. 17. and, as if this had been too
little for him he will be at it seven times a day, Psalm. 119. 164. that is,
very often, as often as God reard him up an Altar, so often he had ready his
Sacrifice, not as Formalists do (that make means their Mediators) in a cold
careless and customary manner, walking the round of duty as the Horse in the
Mill, but David roused himself, and cried aloud not only (precem fundere) but
also (Coelum tundere) to batter Heaven by his prayers, Psalm. 3. 4. and 107. 6,
13. and 120. 1. and 130. 1, etc.

16. You are commanded in Scripture to pray always, evermore, every where,
without ceasing, continually, Ephesians. 6. 18. 1 These. 5. 17. Romans 12. 1. Col. 4. 2.
1 Timothy 2. 8. Phil. 4. 6. There is no duty so often commanded as Prayer, it must
be your constant Trade; and that Divine breath, which you must constantly draw:
Paul speaks, 1 These. 3. 10. (night and day praying exceedingly) as if his
practice had been nothing but prayer. It may have Intermission, but never any
cessation in sound sense: not as the Euchites of old and Monks of late has
imagined, as if God would have men to cast off all care and callings, and do
nothing else but pray. For the Thessalonians (whom the Apostle bids to pray
without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17.) are commanded also to work with their hands, 1
These. 4. 11. And the Apostle tells them, if any will not work, neither shall he
eat, 2 These. 3. 10. Men cannot be as Angels in this World, that need no Food no
nor yet as Lillies. (which Christ speaks of) that neither Card nor Spin, Sow
nor Reap, toil nor take pains, yet are nourished and arrayed. Every good Man
must have a particular calling to honor God in his Generation-work, Acts 13.
36. which may not be justled out by any duty of his general calling.

17. But the true sense is, (1st.) that you should observe stated times of
prayer (morning and evening) in this sense, the word (continually) is used, 2 Samuel 9. 7. (thou shall eat bread at my Table continually) you cannot imagine,
that Mephibosheth did nothing else night and day, but eat at David's Table (for
so he had been an unparaleld Cormorant) but only that he should observe his set
and appointed meals. (2ly.) it is an Hyperbolical speech exhorting to frequency
of prayer. Thus, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Paul remembered Timothy in prayer night and day;
Thus he did remember the Romans, Romans 1. 9. as before the Thessalonians. 1
These. 3. 10. you should be as frequent (in Supplication) with your Spiritual
Father, as your Spiritual Enemies are frequent (in Temptation) with you: as the
flesh world and Devil (some, or all) do assault you continually; So you had
need pray against their assaults continually, to fetch in strength and relief
against them from God.

18. The third sense is, that your prayer should spread it self over all your
concernments. As the Temple (that House of prayer) Sanctified the Gold and all
other Materials and Utensils in it, Matthew. 23. 17. So this holy duty of prayer
does Sanctify all things, 1 Timothy 4. 5. All Ordinances, all Providence, all
Enjoyments, all Employments, prayer does not only Gild them over, but also
turns them into the finest Gold. So that to pray continually, is to carry this
Temple (as Austin called it) about with you at all times in all places, upon
all occasions and in all conditions, yea all your life, even to your very
death: this Spiritual breath must conterminate with your Natural. For the last
work of a dying Christian is to breath out this prayer, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit.

19. The fourth true sense of praying always and continually, is the keeping of
your heart in a praying frame continually: so that upon all occasions (that
occur) you may be lifting up your heart, your thoughts and affections unto God
(whom you have set always before you, Psalm. 16. 8.) and darting out frequent
Ejaculations to the Throne of grace. Thus your Harp (or heart) should be ever
kept in Tune for prayer, as the Soldier has his Arms ready by him, and right
fixed upon any Assault of the Enemy: and as the fire in your guest Chamber, it
is always prepared (though it do not ever burn or blaze out) upon your friends
coming to be blown up into a Flame: thus you may pray, when you do not set your
self apart to pray, even in the works of your callings; and besides your set
Meals for your Soul (in your Morning and Evening prayer, called the continual
Sacrifice, Numb. 28. 3, 4. as well as for your body; you have many other
refreshing morsels (to wit, occasional Apostrophes and Ejaculations) to nourish
the inner, man and to make it increase with the increasings of God, through the
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. and Col. 2. 19.

20. Thus to pray continually (quoties aliquid occurrit, as Dr. Willet senses,
Romans 12. 12. as often as any thing falls out, that calls for Divine assistance)
it is not only your duty but your privilege; it is like the herb (All-heal) an
universal remedy against all diseases, a choice yet a cheap Catholicon and
Antidote both against the evil of sinning and off suffering: This is the best
and most blessed Expedient to avoid dangers, to overcome difficulties and to
procure both safety and success, in all your honest designs. Thu, Nehemiah
before he opens his mouth to the King, even in the Kings presence, first opens
his heart to God, Neh. 2. 4. his sudden and secret Ejaculation he darted up to
God (for ordering his speech and speeding his Petition) is called, his praying
to the God of Heaven: and this was his frequent practice upon several other
providence, Neh. 5. 19. and 6. 14. and 13. 29. Thus Abraham's servant darted
out desires to God, that he might prosper in his Enterprise, Genesis 24. 12. 26.
Thus Moses cried to God, yet said nothing, Exodus 14. 15. Thus Hannah was not
heard, yet prayed, and thus wherever God sets you up an Alter, you must be
ready to offer Sacrifice, crying, either mentally or vocally, Lord prosper me
in this work, Lord protect me in this Journey, Lord direct me in this duty,
etc. Thus Christ often did for you.

21. The fourth Direction is, your prayer must be earnest and intent, or
instant, you must not only pray but cry, Psalm. 130. 1. out of the depth have I
cried unto thee. David cries there (and in many other places) unto God with his
utmost strength, out of the depth of his heart. You must be servent in it, as
well as constant to it; neither the frequency nor the fervency of prayer ought
to be abated, prayer is called wrestling, which requires your utmost strength as
well as skill; it requires the very strength of your affections, you must be
fervent in Spirit, while you are serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. and be instant
as well as constant in it, Ver. 12. your heart must be seething-hot as the word
there [(...)] signifies; your heart must be boiling a good matter as David's,
Psalm. 45. 1. in the Hebr. Reading, this will be the best cure of wandering
thoughts, Flies sieze not on Honey while it boiles, nor Beelzebub (the Prince
of flies) upon your heart while it is boiling any good matter in prayer. God
loves not cold prayers (as some men love not cold dishes) yea even lukewarm,
hearts are Nauseous to him. Revel. 3. 16. every offering, that is of a sweet
Savor, is made by fire unto the Lord, Levit. 1. 9, 13, 17. It Is three times
over, every Sacrifice must have fire in it as well as Salt, Mark. 9. 49. the fire
of Zealous Devotion as well as the Salt of truth and sincerity: yea the
Sacrificer (as well as the Sacrifice) must have both those Ingredients (Salt
and Fire) in him. You must have the grace of truth (Psalm. 51. 6.) which (as
Salt) must dry up those evil humors in you, that would breed the never dying
Worm; and you must have the grace of Zeal, which (as fire) must burn up those
corruptions in you, that (otherwise) would carry you to that unquenchable Fire,
Mark. 9. 43, 44. 45, 46, 47, 48.

22. This blessed Spirit of burning (so called, Isa. 4. 4. that makes a true and
through combustion among your fleshly corruptions) must prevent you of
everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14. as the Sun of the Firmament (with 'its hot
Beams will eat out the Kitchin-Fire, that is upon the Hearth. So this
Celestial Fire (of Zeal and fervency for God in prayer, which is indeed a warm
beam of the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2.) will eat out the stinking fire of
Sin that is in your heart. This fire of Heaven will devour that fire of Hell
(Jam. 3. 6.) in you, a live-Coal must touch your heart as well as your lips,
Esa. 6. 6. and you must be baptized, with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Matthew.
4. 11. and Act. 2. 3, 4. Elijahs Sacrifice had not only much water (out of
Kishon) but also fire from Heaven, to Render it an acceptable Sacrifice. 1
King. 18. 33, to 30. So you must not only have the water of godly sorrow and
Gospel repentance, but also the fire of Zeal and servent Devotion to make an
acceptable prayer unto God. The fire of Aetna and the water of Nilus, are said
to be the Hieroglyphics, of those choice Ingredients of a rightly compounded
prayer; God requires hot bread to be set before him daily. 1 Samuel 21. 6.

23. The breath that a pair of bellows breaths out, is cold breath, and so is
it not properly breath but wind; accordingly cold prayers, that are carelessly
breathed out, are not truly prayer, but wind and vanity: the breath of a living
Man, is not cold as bellows breath, but warm; the lack of servency is the loss
of prayer. God will be cold and careless in accepting and answering, if you
dare be cold and careless in asking his face and favor. Paul tells you of your
great need, both of the shield of Faith (that is defensive Armor) and of the
darts of prayer (which is offensive Armor) Ephe. 6. 16, 18. Now this dart will
not wound your Spiritual Enemies, unless it be well-pointed, steeled and
sharpened with Zeal: when the Soldier strikes with his full strength, then
does he give his Enemy the Mortal wound. Solomon says, what you do, you must
do with all your might, Eccles. 9. 10. you must much more pray (the best of
duties) with all your might. David danced before the Lord with all his might, 2 Samuel 6. 14. surely he (much more) prayed with all his might, he prayed and
cried with his whole heart. Psalm. 119. 58, 145. Sampson also bowed himself with
all his might at the pillars of Dagons Temple, Judge. 16, 30. and surely had he
not prayed with all his might likewise, Ver. 28. he should never have been
enrolled in that little Book of Martyrs, amongst those great Favorites of
Heaven. Hebr. 11. 32.

24. You must therefore go forth (in praying Work) as the Sun in its strength,
Judge. 5. 31. and come as a Prince to God. Job. 31. 37. you should ask as a Son,
Isa. 45. 11. as a Kings Son, Judge. 8. 18. Jacob (as a Prince) had power with
God and prevailed, Hos. 12. 4. and so should all the seed of Jacob do, putting
forth all the strength both of Soul and Body, (as he did) in wrestling work.
Christ prayed so earnestly, that he prayed himself into an horrid Agony, so as
to sweat clods of blood. Luke 22. 44. Daniel prayed himself sick, Dan. 8 27.
and Nehemiah prayed himself pale, Neh. 2. 6. Hannah also was so transported in
prayer, that old Eli thought she had been drunken, 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14. lastly
Elijah put himself into such a posture of prayer as could not but strain all
the strings of the heart, he puts his head between his knees (to pray) 1 King.
18. 42, 45. and by this renting of his heart, Joel. 2. 13. (so prayer is
called) and earnest prayer, Jam. 5. 17, 18. he procures the Key of Heaven, to
open and shut it at pleasure, he prayed in his prayer (as (...) imports) there
was the prayer of his heart, in the prayer of his Tongue, or he prayed and the
Spirit prayed too in his prayers, according to, Romans 8. 26. while we make
Intercession in our prayers, the Spirit makes Intercession in and for us:
lastly he did not say his prayers, but he prayed his prayer. Thus must you set
all your faculties and graces at work, which all should be exerted and
exercised in prayer: do not pour out your Speech only but your Spirit, also
into your Fathers bosom, Romans 1. 9. then only is it an hearttransforming duty,
Luke 9 29. and then also thundrings comes out of the Temple, Revel. 11. 19.
then breaks he Mighty Arrows, Psalm. 76. 3.

25. Thus must you be Instant in prayer, (as well as constant) (...). It
signifies extension, First, of the duty, Secondly, of the affections in the
duty. Act. 26. 7. serving God Instantly, with a vehement extension of Soul, and
you must continue instant, Romans 12. 12. [(...)] constant as well as instant, a
Metaphor from hunting Dogs that give not over the game till they have got it,
all along pursuing it with their utmost strength and skill. The word [(...)] of
the same Root, Ephesians. 6. 18, signifies invincible constancy or continuing in
utmost strength, So Col. 4. 2. you must not only be constant in respect of the
time of your prayer, but also be instant in respect of the strength of your
affections; you must keep up your heart upon the Wing of elevated affections,
desiring with David that your raised frame may be kept for ever upon your
heart. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18, when Divine wings are given you, as Revel. 12. 14. and
you have a Divine wind (the breathings of the Spirit) in your Divine wings, as
Zech. 5. 9. then keep in the wind, and upon the wing, you may not flag and
flatten in the duty; If the world whisper in your Ear, or if the tempter jog
you on the elbow; Answer them both as Nehemiah did the Adversary, I am about a
great work, and I cannot attend you, Neh. 6. 3. why should the work cease while
I come down to you: a Bell may be long in Raising, but when once at the height,
it Rings most Tuneably, but all the difficulty and skill is to keep it there,
that it cease not before the time.

26. In a word, as prayer is your Ambassador to Heaven, so it must be
accomplished as an Ambassador; (1.) It must be the Action of your Soul, bodily
exercise profits little, 1 Timothy 4. 8. much Action and little affection availes
not; Soul-prayer when it is alone, is accepted, but woe to Body-prayer when it is
alone; Soul-prayer is necessary, and Bodyprayer is comely, for you are to
glorify God with both, 1 Cor. 6. 20. you must lift up your heart, Psalm. 25. 1.
as well as your hands to your God, (2.) Not only your Soul must be in it, but
an intent Soul, your heart strings screwed up to the highest note. Thus prayer
is called a striving to an Agony, as the Greek word imports, Romans 15. 30. and a
wrestling; so Rachel wrestled with God in prayer (as well as her Husband Jacob,
Genesis 32. 24.) Genesis 30. 8. with great wrestlings she obtained a Son and called
him, Napthali. i. e. my wrestling, every mercy you win by wrestling in prayer,
you may name it Napthali my wrestling. (3.) You must pray with your
understanding (as well as with your affections,) 1 Cor 14. 15. otherwise it is
but Barbarism you bring to God, and Psalm. 47. 8. you must understand your
wants and your weaknesses, and have the sense of them upon your heart. This
will make you cry and cry loud, and your Soul will follow hard after God and
his mercies, Psalm. 63. 1, 8. (4.) Be clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. walk
humbly through the work of prayer, Micah. 6. 8. Come in forma pauperis. Thus
did Abraham, Genesis 18. 27. the Centurion. Matthew 8 8. and the woman of Canaan,
Matthew. 15. 27. Content with Crumbs, if she may not have bread, and content to be
a Dog, so she may be but Christ's Dog. (5.) In faith, Jam. 1. 7. you ask and
miss, because you ask amiss, not beleiving that as Gods love moved him to make
the promise, so his truth binds him to perform it. (6.) By the help of the
Spirit, Romans 8. 26. Mary would not serve alone, she would have Martha's help,
Luke 10. 40. So you must have the help of the Spirit, (being all infirmity in
your self) you must go forth in his strength, Psalm. 71. 16. get his hands on
your hands and heart, as 2 King. 13. 16. to draw the bow of prayer, and lean
on him, Cant. 8. 5. not on self, Prove. 3. 5.

27. The last Accomplishment of this Ambassador to God is, it must come in the
name of Christ? As prayer without the help of the Spirit is but the cry of the
Creature, the heart will fall down like the heavy hands of Moses, Exodus 17. 12.
If this stone of help (your true Eben ezer) be not underneath, 1 Samuel 7. 12. So
it is no better then presumption if presented in your own name, or in the name
of any Saint or Angel. Christ is the only master of Requests. Joh. 16. 23, 24,
26. and Ephesians. 3. 12. The old Testament Saints cried in prayer (for the Lords
sake) Dan. 9. 17. and the New Testament Saints cry also (for Christ's sake, Joh.
15. 16.) Upon a twofold account. (1.) As he is the only purchaser of access to
God; we are afar off in the first Adam, but brought nigh by the second, Ephesians. 2.
13, 14. putting on us his own Robe for acceptance. (2.) He is the only Mediator
of the Church, the keeper of the great Seal in Heaven, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Joh. 6. 27,
37. and Joh. 17. 12. this is shadowed to you, as (1.) No man was to offer up
his own Sacrifice, but he must put it into the hands of the Priest to offer it
for him, Levit. 1. 15, 17. burn it and bring it, etc. (2.) Every loaf of
shewbread had a dish of Frankincense upon it to perfume it for acceptance,
Levit. 24. 7. (3.) While the people were praying without, Zechary (the Priest)
was offering Incense within, Luke 1. 10. (4.) The brazen Altar for Sacrifice
was placed before the Golden Altar for Incense, to show, there is no admission
for prayer as Incense, till first Christ our Sacrifice give us our Entrance,
Exodus 38. 30, and 39, 40. as Jacob got the blessing in the garments of the
Elder brother, Genesis 27. 15. to 29.

28. The second general is the matter of your prayer (as before the manner of
it) to wit, according to Gods will, 1 John 5. 14. now his will is known either
by his precepts (what he has commanded) or by his promises (what he has
(ovenanted) or by his Prophecies, (what he has foretold) those must be the
bounds of prayer, or more briefly, those three may be reduced into one, for
Divine precepts and Prophecies are propounded to us in the nature of promises,
and so the Divine promise is the ground of every right humane prayer: wherever
faith finds a promise, it turns that promise into a Prayer, and then God turns
his promise into a performance: Now the Divine promise (which is the Christians
Charter,) (I will be to you a God, etc. Hebr. 8. 10. and all are yours, 1 Cor.
3. 22.) is wide enough in the general, and there is no Cause, why we should
desire it is further Enlargement. Besides, there is no condition you can fall
into, but there is a particular promise to that Condition, if the word of
Christ dwell richly in you, Col. 3. 16. So as to find out all those Herbs of
grace that grow in the Garden of the Holy Scriptures.

29. You are bid to be Sober in Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. This is, to observe Gods
limits, your Prayers must not [be (...)] childish and feverish or distempred
Prayers, to ask neither [Illicita] unlawful things, nor [Inutilia]
unprofitable or hurtful things: you may not ask Serpents instead of fish, nor
stones instead of bread; the Disciples asked fire from Heaven upon the
Samaritans, Luke 9. 55. and the two Sons of Zebedee asked the privilege of
sitting on the Right and left hand of Christ. Matthew. 20. 21. they all went
beyond the bounds of a Divine promise, asking they knew not what, Ver. 22. as
Prayer is, (1.) An Act of Adoration, so the hallowing of Gods name is first to
be prayed see; and nothing else without Subordination to his honor. (2.) As
it is an Act of Impetration, so your own good and the good of others. 1
Spiritual, and 2 Temporal; the good things of the throne first, and then of the
footstool, Judge. 15 16. understanding what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.
17. and referring all to his wisdom, Act. 21. 14. Matthew. 26. 29.

30. Lastly, the consequent duties after prayer be four. 1 walk humbly. 2 wait
patiently. 3 work diligently. 4 wear thankfully what you win by Prayer. First,
of the first walk humbly, if you have been truly and thoroughly servent in your
praying work, you will be very apt to catch cold after it, and therefore you
must still keep walking after duty, and cool not over hastily, lest you catch a
cold, and so a Consumption, as before in the Chapter of Meditation; you should
take down your Soul by degrees, and not grow remiss all on the sudden, by
letting your Spirit run freely into the World, immediately after your warm
conversing with your God. For there is the danger of deepest withdrawments to
humble you, after you have had the privilege of highest Enlargements to help
you, Cant. 5. 1, 2. after the spouse had been most largely feasting with her
bridgeroom, the very next news we hear of her, is, that she was fallen into a
Spiritual slumber; you may suppose it was through the want of this care, she
over-suddenly cooled, and so catched a Spiritual cold, and had she not had a
blessed Physician (that was as willing as able to help and heal her, she might
have fallen into a Spiritual Consumption; can you be thus wise for your body
(in preventing such a danger the worser part of you which you have in common
with beasts, how much more ought you to be thus wise for your Soul, that better
part which you have in common with Angels: beasts have bodies as well as men,
and Angels are Spirits as men have Spirits: O be not more careful of the beast
then of the Angel in you.

31. And you must walk humbly (too after Prayer: Pride often follow Prayer, and
the worst Pride after the best Prayer you cannot be ignorant of Satan's devices
working in your own heart, 2 Cor. 2. 11. it is the Devils Chemistry to bring
evil out of good, as it is Gods Chemistry to bring good out of evil: Beelzebub
that Prince of Flies) will Flie-blow your best performances, and make you proud
of your most Seraphical Prayers, as if God were then in your debt for them,
whereas you have done no more then your duty (in so doing) and it is no matter
of merit to pay your due debt and duty, Luke 17. 20. and when you have done all
you can, you are but an unprofitable Servant, coming far short both of Gods
glory and your own duty: Hence ought you to reflect upon your own imperfections
in prayer) after Prayer how your heart has wandered in your work. Moses could
not keep his hands steady in prayer ('it is only proper to God to have his hand
stretched out still) nor you your heart; the best of Men cannot undergo any
long intention, you may be weary (in) prayer, when you are not weary (of)
Prayer. As this review of your frailty in Prayer may humble you, so it may help
you against both resting in, and trusting to your Prayer: alas in so doing, you
have been drawing nigh to Prayer, not drawing nigh to God, which is the true
notion of Prayer, and you do verily rest in it and trust upon it, when your
admiring thoughts do (after duty) run out more upon your prayer, then upon your
God hearing prayer, Psalm. 65. 3. you must forget your Prayer and remember your
God, can you but Consider, the iniquity of your holy things, then Prayer will
be your nothing and Christ your all, and in all, Col. 3. 11. If it stand for
any thing, It must be only for an Evidence, not a Savior.

32. The second rule or direction is, wait patiently for an Answer to your
Prayer. When David had Marshald (as the Hebr. Gnarach signifies) his Petitions
and set them in good Order, in Battel-aray, then did he [Saphah] look up
(Speculando Spectavit, as a Spy on the Watchtower) to see whether he carried
the day and prevailed, Psalm. 5. 3. you must mind your Arrow you shoot up to
Heaven, whether it fall short or over, as Jonathan did his, 1 Samuel 20. 21. what
becomes of your Rich-Ship you adventure to the Cape of good hope, as the
Merchant does his: how it fares with your precious seed (so Prayer is called,
Psalm. 126. 6.) that you sow upon the Throne of grace (a far more fruitful Soil
then that of Isaac which brought forth an 100. sold. Genesis 26. 12.) as the
Husbandman does with his. Noah minded what tidings his Dove brought him, and
every Man minds what message his messenger brings him: you may not cast the
Angling rod of Prayer, into the vast Ocean of Divine love, and never observe
what it brings to your hand, if rightly hooked and bated: you may not be as
Pilate who scoffingly asked what is truth, but waited not for an Answer, Joh.
18. 38.

33. You must therefore look up after Prayer, and observe what becomes of your
Prayer, what access it has to God; what acceptance it has with God, and what
returns it brings from God. If you believe that God hearkens what you speak to
him, Mal. 3. 16. there is much Reason, that you should also hearken what God
will speak to you, Psalm. 85. 8. you must look out of yourself and up to God,
that looks out of himself and down to you, Psalm. 113. 6. and though this
posture of looking up, be a wearisom posture, yet must you not be weary of it;
wait patiently, Psalm. 40. 1. as those that wait for the morning, Psalm. 130. 6.
in due season you shall Reap, if you faint not, Gal. 6. 9. for God waits on
you that he may be gracious in the best season, Isa. 30. 18. your waiting on
God is there called blessed work, and if the great God wait on such a worthless
worm as you, (tantus tantillum. Job 25. 6.) how much more must you wait on him;
and not offer up Bethulian Prayers (as in the Apocryphal Judeth. Chap. 7. 30.
limiting God to 5. days or give up all which ought not to be done, Psalm 78. 41.
to limit God is but to Tempt him: his delaying is not denying, it is but a
commending his mercy (you beg) to you, Cito data Vilescunt. Mercies lightly
Obtained; are but lightly esteemed, and it may be, God stays to bring a great
many mercies together, and you will surely look up and not lose that mercy,
which long waiting hands in to you.

34. The third Direction is, work diligently, in the use of the means that
leads to the end; ora, labora, is the Christians Rule, and the very Heathens
could say, admota manu Invocanda est Minerva: you must do your part, if you
expect God to do his. David will set a Watch over his lips, Psalm. 39. 1, 2.
though he beg of God to do it for him, Psalm. 14 1. 3, the duty is yours but the
ability is the Lords; the care of the means belong to you, but the care of the
end to God; and it is not only careless oscitancy, but a plain tempting of God
to neglect any means that God gives you to accomplish the end, you may not
expect to stumble upon mercy, you do not so for the body, (sometimes overusing
means) why should you for your Soul? You are bid to Ask, seek and knock,
Matthew. 7. 7. you must Ask with confidence, seek with diligence, and knock with
perseverance. In the sweat of your brows you must eat your Spiritual bread as
well as Corporal; as you lift up your hands in Praying for the end, so you must
lift up your hands in practicing the means that have a tendency to the end, be
sure you do not first pray against your Sins; and then go away and Sin against
your Prayers, this is but a mocking of God, and he will not be so, Gal. 6. 7.

35. The fourth Direction is, wear thankfully, all that you win by Prayer; what
you win by Prayer, you must wear with thanksgiving, as you have made Prayer
your refuge, so must you make praise your Recompense. David's Psalms were not
all Hosannah's, or Prayers to God, but he had his Hallelujahs also, his Psalms
that were praises of God as before: Prayer is the seed of praise, and 'its pity
that when the joy of harvest (which is parallel to the joy of Marriage and to
the joy of Victory) does come, that the God of all joy and comfort should not
have his thankoffering. God took it unkindly from Hezekiah that he Rendered not
to the Lord according to his loving kindness to him, 2 Chronicles. 32. 28. and he
took it kindly from David, that he made it his Spiritual Study and project, how
to render to the Lord [what shall I Render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me,] Psalm. 116. 12. the blessed Man was in an holy Ecstasy, and in a
deep demur with himself, what he might do best for so good a God. He had
nothing to give, so faith, what shall I Render, and he had nothing good enough
to Render to him who is the chiefest good. Ten Lepers cried for healing, Luke
17. 12, 17. But when all were healed, but one returned to praise Christ, and he
is praised of Christ. God has but the tenth of praises, and it is ten to one
whether you practice his praise, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

Of Hearing the Word. CHAP. V.
1. THe third Religious duty wherein you must serve God, is the Hearing and
Reading of his Word; that you have the word of God to Read and Hear, you must
prize as a precious privilege, and praise the Lord for it, with your heart,
lips, and life: God has deposited a Rich Treasure with you in lending you his
Word and Gospel. You might have been begging drops of mercy in Hell at this
time, when behold God offers you Oceans of grace on Earth in his Word and
Gospel. O what would the damned give (even ten thousand Worlds if they had
them) to enjoy such means of grace (yea but one day thereof) and such days of
Salvation as are bestowed upon you; God has not dealt so with many Nations,
nor with many persons, as he has dealt with you and the Land of your Nativity,
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. 'twas a Special favor and vouchsafement to Israel, that God
committed to them the lively (and life-giving) Oracles, Romans 3. 2. there is a
(chiefly) set upon it; being a matter of great trust, to know your Masters Will
is a choice Talent. There is (much) in that of Luke 12. 48. (as there was
(chiefly in the other) the word [(...)] Signifies to deposit or lay up, as a
matter of great worth: The poor Pagan World lay under a long night of darkness
(having only the twinkling Star light of the fallen nature) wherein they wander
woefully, yet not so wide as to miss of Hell. Their Starlight indeed leaves
them [(...)] inexcusable, Romans 1. 20. but cannot lead them to the Star of
Jacob, the bright and Morning Star, nor to life and Salvation, Act. 4. 12.

2. God has Magnified above all things his name by his Word, Psalm. 138. 2. To
the words (there) may be Read: or as our Reading is, thou have Magnified thy
word above all thy Name. If God Magnify his word above all, how should you
Magnify it accordingly while you have the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. The
word must be admired and highly esteemed before it have a through work upon
your heart, Act. 13. 48. and 2 These. 3. 1, 2. You must esteem it (as Job did)
not only above your dainties and superfluities, but even above your necessary
food (without which you cannot Subsist,) Job. 23. 12. It Is better to want your
daily bread (that perishes with using then this bread of life, Joh. 6. 27. I
had rather want meat, drink, sleep, sight, light, any thing, every thing, said
Selneccer, then want the word of God; and Luthers Rapture was, I had rather
live in Hell with it, then in Heaven without it. O then what a blessing do you
enjoy in hearing the Word, it is [Epistola Creatoris ad Creaturam] Gods letter
from Heaven to Man, the very Reading whereof has a blessedness annexed to it,
Revel. 1. 3. So it be but Read both with affection and application.

3. More particularly, there is a three fould duty to be observed in this
Religious exercise, as in the former; 1 Something before. 2 Something in, and 3
Something after. In all these the heart of Man is apt to miscarry, as Christ
intimates in two Cautions he gives you, Mark 4. 24. take heed [what] you hear,
and Luke 8. 18. take heed [how] you hear. In the former he Cautions you about
the matter of your hearing, and in the latter, about the manner of it. As to
the first of those, you must be like the careful Husbandman who is very choice
in his seed, very Curious and Critical, he will not commit corrupt seed to his
fruitful Soil; so neither must you lend your ear to the Devil or to any of his
Chaplains: Sin came into the World, first by the door of the ear, your great
Grandmother Eve listened more to Satan's lies then to Gods truth; and though the
Devil be not ever (Mendax) a liar, yet is he (Semper-fallax) always decitful,
speaking truth only with a purpose to deceive. 2 Cor. 11. 3. a cozener.

4. The Devil did only Equivocate to our first Parents, yet is he called a
downright liar, Joh. 8. 44, etc. He began his Kingdom by a lie, and he upholds
it by lies to this present day. O how shameful then or rather shameless are
those Popish Doctors that Preach up Equivocation, as a comfortable Doctrine to
afflicted Catholics; calling back (as it were) that pest from Hell, and from
that old Equivocator: that subtle Serpent when he was but young, outwitted
your first Parents, now that he is old, and ye young Children, Ephesians. 4. 14. take
heed he does not cozen you either by himself, or by any of his Chaplains, with
their finely spun Threads of Popery. Christ says, my sheep hear them not, for
they know not the voice of strangers Joh. 10. 5, 8. for they have their Senses
exercised to discern good and evil, Hebr. 5. 14. yea they have a Spirit of
discerning, 1 Cor. 12. 10. to discern the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16. Bread
from Stones, and fish from Serpents, and what the Chaff is to the Wheat, Jer.
23-28. they hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 104. and it is Impossible for them
to be fully and finally deceived, Matthew. 24. 24. you may know those Imposters
by their lightness, as well as by their lies, Jer. 23. 32. they shall not
profit this people at all says the Lord, and yet they may much hurt them, Lam.
2. 14. loose and lewd courses as well as loud and lying discourses are the
brand, God puts upon Satan's Spelman: by their fruits you shall know them,
Matthew. 7. 15, 16. the evil communication of such (as are Trumpe and Triumphant
in this day) do corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33.

5. As hitherto of the matter, so now of the manner of hearing. Herein Observe
those Directions, 1 Before hearing, 2 In it, and 3 after it. First before, you
must prepare to meet your God in this duty also, as well as in the two former,
to which I refer you: Moreover, your heart must be prepared for this duty more
especially. First Direct. by laying aside all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. when you come to the sincere Milk of
the Word, your fallow ground must be plowed up that you sow not among Thorns.
Jer. 4. 3, 4. If your stomach be soul and clogged with bad humors, you first
purge it, before you feed and fill it, otherwise whatever you Eat, will but
nourish those corrupt and morbifick Humors: so will it be with your Soul when
it is clogged with Sin. Christ's Market is then fore-stalled, and your heart so
fraught with false Lovers, and like the Inn at Bethlehem, so full of other
Guests, that there will be no Room for Christ, Luke 2. 7. There is much
unsuitableness betwixt a filthy Spirit and the pure word of God, and therefore
must you put away all filthiness (both of flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.) never
to have any more to do with your idols, Esa. 30. 22. pull up every weed and
cast it away to prepare for the seed; the House must be swept clean for
Entertaining the King of glory.

6. The second Direct. about preparation is, you must lay aside not only all
filthy Sins, but also all worldly thoughts and cares of this life, which will
choke the seed of the Word, Mat. 13. 22. Especially when those Thorns overtop
the Corn, which naturally they will do: it is good ground (indeed) it is a good
heart, wherein grace over-tops corruption and not corruption grace. Wherefore
lay Gods charge upon Worldly cares, that they stay at Churchdoor (with Bernard)
and at the foot of the hill of God (with Abraham) as above; but they must not
go up, or in with you, if they presume to press in with you, drive them away,
as Abraham did the Fowls that disturbed, if not defiled his Sacrifice, Genesis 15.
11. The Rabbis say, that in the Temple though there was much flesh for
Sacrifice used in it, yet not so much as one Fly was seen stirring there. So
not a wandering thought should appear stirring in your worship, especially
considering you are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, so should not think your own
thoughts, Isa. 58. 13. in Gods Temple have more of Sabbath thoughts on
weekday, then weekday thoughts, will less trouble you on Sabbathday.

7. The third Direction for preparing your heart to this Religious duty is,
beware of a prejudiced Spirit, either against the person Teaching or against
the Doctrine Taught. 1. You may not have a prejudicate opinion against the
Teacher, if once you distaste his person, you can never relish his Doctrine: the
best of Ministers are exposed to prejudice, even Christ himself (that Palmoni
Hamadabber Dan. 8. 13. or Prince of Preachers) was personally cavilled at, viz.
Is not this the Carpenter? And can any good thing come out of Nazareth? etc. If
this did befall that green Tree, what can the dry expect, Mark. 6. 3. Joh. 1.
46. Luke 23. 31. Hence Paul admonished Timothy, so to behave himself in the
Church of God that none might despise his youth, 1 Timothy 4. 12. this is a great
Impediment to a prospering and profitting Gospel: the Heathen could say (Inter
senum deliria and Juvenum praejudicia cadit Respublica) 'twixt the dotage of
old men and the prejudice of young men the Commonwealth falls. O that we had
not cause to say, that betwixt those two (cadit Religio) the common Salvation
falls: the plainest Preachers are exploded by such, as if they stood not in
need to be put in Remembrance of those things they know, 2 Pet. 1. 12. The end
of Preaching is not only to inform the Judgment, but also to reform the
affections, not only to teach Men what they know not, but also to stir them up
to Practice what they know. It Is ordained for this as well as that.

8. Neither 2ly. must you have prejudice against the truth taught; as those of
Itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3. not abiding sound Doctrine, as fore eyes not enduring
the Sunshine, the fault is not in the Sun, but in the eyes: so it is not in the
Doctrine, but in them which savours no Doctrine, save that which suites with
their Itching tempers, being not willing to frame the heart to the Word, but
rather desirous to have the Word framed to the heart. Thus Carnal men despise
Prophesying, 1 These. 4. 12, 20. and plain Preaching is foolishness to them. 1
Cor. 1. 21. though it be under the blessing of a Divine Institution in that
phrase (It pleased God) which is not so Solemnly set upon bare Reading the
Word: you may (indeed) and must try the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1. and prove all
things in Order to the holding fast of that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. as
those well bred Bereans did, Act. 17. 11. and if you find the grain good, never
quarrel with the seeds-man: Elias's food was acceptable to him, though unclean
Ravens were his Servitours, and Current Coin is not to be refused though from a
Leprous hand, yet it is ever best from a Barnabas, Act. 11. 24. of all others.

9. The fourth Direct. herein is, beware of presumption as well as prejudice,
that you come not to the word with an heart resolved (before hand) what to do,
let God and his Ministers say what they please, Jer. 2. 25. so as to take your
own way and to follow your own course, Jer. 44. 16, 17. as if you scorned to
bend to truth; this is proud obstinacy or stubborn pride which you must
abandon. Say not, you know enough already, for you know nothing yet as you
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. you must become a fool for Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 18.
and sit down at the very foot of God, Esa. 41. 2. to receive his Law. Deuteronomy. 3.
33. Thus Mary sat at Jesus feet and heard his Word, Luke 10. 39. great Naaman
will learn good from a little Maid. 2 King. 5. 2, 3, 4. etc. Bring along with
you a bored ear, Psalm. 40 6. and a bowing heart, as Samuel, speak Lord for thy
Servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10. as Saul said Lord what will thou have me to do,
Act. 9. 6. In a Word pray to God, that all this may be done that he would bless
the Word, both for the killing of Sin, and the quickening of grace, etc. Do you
beg a blessing on the food of your body and not of your Soul, Prove. 2. 3, 5.
cry after it, this is your life, Matthew. 4. 4. Esa. 38. 16. Joh. 6. 63.

10. The second thing you are to mind is, concomitant, as the first things
preparation, the second is performance, to wit, w^^^ is required of you in this
Religious duty, and it is threefold. 1 Attention. 2 Intention, and 3 Retention.
1 Attention of the ear. 2 Intention of the heart. and 3 Retention of the
Memory. 1 of the first of these, to wit, Attention of the ear. The ear is the
sense of Faith, as the eye is the sense of love; Faith comes by hearing, Romans
10. 17. God makes the ear to be the Organ of our Salvation (in working Faith by
hearing the word) as it was the Instrument of our destruction, when our first
parents lent their ear in listening unto Satan's lies: the Milk of the word is
not to go in at the mouth, but at the ear, the ear is the Instrument to take in
God by, and not the eye, Exodus 33. 19. Moses desires to see Gods glory, Ver.
18. no (says God) I will proclaim it, and accordingly he does so, Exodus 34. 6,
7. and thus likewise God does testify to Elias in a still small voice, (not in
visible things as fire and Earthquake, but in a voice which is Audible) 1 Kin.
19. 11, 12. both those Instances teaches you, that teaching by a voice should
be the principal means, to bring your soul to the saving knowledge of God,
Moses thought that his seeing of God would much confirm him, (as Papists thinks
of their seeing of Pictures and Crucifixes) but God Rectifies Moses error and
proclaims himself, the Lord; Rectify the Popish mistake also.

11. Hearing prevail not, neither will Seeing, no not your seeing a man from
the dead, Luke 16. 27, 31. the Jews were so far from believing when they saw
Lazarus raised from the dead, that they would have killed him, for no other
fault, but because he who had been dead, was alive again, Joh. 12. 10. their
seeing of such an one was so far from working Faith in them, that it
Transported them into fury; and into such sublime malice and madness, as to
make them take up Arms against Heaven it self, as seeking to kill a man, only
because God had made him alive. They listened as little to him whom they saw,
as to Christ whom they heard, but sought to kill [him] also, as well as Christ:
Indeed who can believe the Testimony of a mere Creature, that will not believe
the Testimony of the Creator himself. So that Hell is to be escaped by hearing,
Luke 16. 29. Esaias. 55. 3. Hear and live.

12. The deafness of man's ear to hear the word of God, causes Christ to sigh,
Mark. 7. 34. [(...)] he sighed, as if himself felt and fainted under the burden
of man's deafness. Until Christ say [Ephphatha] be opened, and boar the ear,
Psalm. 40. 6. God may speak once and twice, and man not perceive it. Job. 33.
14, 16. There be three vices in hearing which Christ must cure you of, before
you can be attentive to the Word of God. (1.) There is a Carnosity on the
Tympanum Auris; A fleshie excrescence upon the drum of the ear, this must be
removed to recover natural hearing; so Carnal affections to the World will make
you Spiritually deaf to the Word, until you be Circumcised in ear, as well as
heart by Christ. Act. 7. 51. Jer. 6. 10. Thus Herod's carnality (with Herodias)
made him deaf to Divine Doctrine, Mark. 6. 17, 18. (2.) There is abundance of
bad humors in the brain, that make a noise within, so that a voice cannot be
heard without. Intus existens prohibet Alienum. The head must be purged of
those Vapors before hearing can be quick, thus the heart must be purged of
Pride, passion, or prejudice, etc. Those bad humors that deafs man to God: the
Jews ears were waxen fat herewith, that they could not hear Christ's voice,
Matthew. 13. 15. (3.) The Organ is sometimes hurt by a fall: this is certainly
done to the Inner-man, by the fall of the first man, our hearing is wounded
till Christ cast out the deaf Spirit.

13. Your heart thus purged by Christ (for Vnguentum pretiosum Vasi faetido non
committitur, precious Ointment may not be put into an unclean Vessel) when
Christ has wakened, Esa. 50. 4. and opened your Ear, Psalm. 40. 6. then attend
the word with your ear, not as the Word of Man, but as the word of God, 1 These.
2. 13. with all due reverence and true affection looking beyond the instrument
(which yet God uses) at the Authority and institution; how the treasure is
precious though in an earthen Vessel, 2 Cor. 4. 7. [(...)] in Oyster-shells, a
bright Pearl may be found therein (though contemptible in themselves) by a
Divine appointment; that it should be so, (pleases God) as before. Therefore
set your self Solemnly in Gods presence, as Cornelius and his friends did, Act.
10. 33. we are all here present before God, to hear all things commanded thee
of God: and as the Corinthian Convert saw God in the Ordinance, 1 Cor. 14. 24,
25. when he found that it told him (as once to the Samaritan Woman, Joh. 4.
29.) all that ever he did, it is a curious Critic, Hebr. 4. 12. It finds and
ferrets out secret Sins.

14. Hereupon must you, (1.) Give your best attention to it; your plus and your
prius, First and most, as to a Divine Institution, whereof God (himself) is the
Author. Christ (himself) the matter and Salvation (it self) of your precious
and immortal Soul, 'its end; look well then to your foot, Eccles. 5. 1. as one
that expects some blessed News from Heaven, and concerning matters of greatest
Importance; Expecting that God will Magnisy his Word above all his name, Psalm.
138. 2. and longing for a word in Season, which will be to you, as Apples of
Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11, 20. yea looking upon the word as a
part of Christ's purchase, and every Syllable thereof (as it were) written with
his precious blood, and therefore desiring not only to hear it, but also to
feel it and to taste of it; that your heart (as well as your hand) may handle
of the Word of life, 1 John 1. 1.

15. And (2.) you must attend it often, as often as you can redeem time from
your other Employments, to embrace such a blessed and golden opportunity: the
Reason is, you will never find your heart in the same frame (at the next
opportunity) that the Word left it in at your last audience of it. This is the
disadvantage of the Ministry above all other callings in the World: a Minister
of Christ never finds his work as he leaves it, the Carpenter, the Goldsmith,
the Potter, (and men of all callings) find their work next morning as they
leave it overnight; but a Minister of the Gospel, does not find the hearts of
his hearers the following Sabbath, in the same frame as he left them in the
foregoing: he sent them away with warm hearts, but they return to him again
with cold hearts; So that he has a new fire to Kindle, his Iron to heat again
before it will be Malleable to the hammer of the word, Jer. 23. 29. his wax
(that is now grown hard by lying in the cold) to mollify again, before it will
take the Impression of the Divine Seal, Romans 6. 17. therefore does he pray for
this before he Preach: you will assuredly and by wosul experience find your
heart not as the materials in other callings, abiding in the same frame and
tenure as they are left, but rather as the flesh of the Peacock, which
(Naturalists say) though Roasted over night, will be Raw in the next morning;
pray then with David, keep this frame for ever on me, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. when you
are warmed with the word, and lay your Soul often under the droppings of the
Sanctuary, for reforming your affection, as well as for Informing your
Judgment, Isa. 28. 10.

16. Thirdly, you must attend the word without drowsiness: if you sleep at the
word, the envious one will be sure to sow his tares while you do so; Matthew. 13.
25. Remember Eutichus, Act. 20 9. you may get a worse fall then he did; you may
fall from the high pinnacle of profession to the low Pit of profaneness, from
the third Heaven, to the lowest Hell, where you shall have no Paul to take you
up and recover you: did you ever see a Man sleep at his Markets, and so go
home empty, neglecting to buy the Provisions (for himself and his Family) that
he came thither for? Your errand to Gods Market for your Soul is (or ought to
be) to buy the truth, Prove. 23. 23. O go not home empty-handed, emptyhearted;
did you ever see a man fall asleep in taking and telling of Money's, such an
one cannot tell whether he take right Money, or wrong, and is easily Cheated.
Yet alas, how many by so doing put an everlasting Cheat upon their own Souls,
falling not only into a natural, but also into a Spiritual slumber while they
are talking and telling of Divine truth, which is the only Current Coin in the
Court of Heaven.

17. Alas poor Soul, if you do so, I cannot say of you; as Christ once said of
Lazarus, (Joh. 11. 12. If he sleep, he shall do well) but the contrary, if you
sleep in an Ordinance, you both do, and will do, very ill; you can neither take
nor tell [even] saving truth when it is told out to your hand and to your
heart. As the Apostle faith, what! have you not Houses to eat and to drink in,
1 Cor. 11. 22. So I say, what! Have you not Houses to sleep in? But you will
shame your self, and despise the Church of God. Shall I praise you in this? I
praise you not, O little do you know what drops of the Divine unction (that
flows from the two blessed Olive Trees (Christ and his Spirit) Zech. 4. 2, 3,
12, 14) Runs by your Vessel, while you shut the mouth of it, by your falling
asleep. Spare-diet on that day is a good Antidote against that evil, and sure I
am, a truly thirsting Soul, that follows hand after Christ, Psalm. 63. 1, 2,
8. has the right Spiritual Antidote (as spare-diet is the natural) against it.
Such as wake much in Taverns and Alehouses, will be sure to sleep much in the
Ordinances, and they that dare do so, and can be pleased with themselves in so
doing, may justly suspect their own state and standing Godward. Such as sleep
to God, God will sleep to them; and it is just (says Mr. Robert Bolton) that
such be plagued with some sudden vengeance from Heaven, for neglecting so great
Salvation, Hebr. 2. 3. to become Examples to others: It Is Gods great mercy,
Gods plagues are suspended. God will (sooner or later) send out his Summons for
sleepers.

18. Fourthly, you must attend the word without weariness, as well as without
drowsiness, those two very often go together. If Nero were so angry with
Vespasian for being weary of, and falling asleep at his Music; O what will the
great God be, if you both be weary of, and fall asleep at his sacred Ordinance:
you must shake your self from sluggishness as Sampson did, Judge. 16. 20. and
not cry out, O what a weariness is it! Mal. 1. 13. and when will the Sabbath be
over, Amos 8. 5. as if in the stocks all the while you sit there; but consider
how Christ stands and knocks at the door of your heart (and this he has
done many days and weeks and mongths and years) yet is not weary, Revel. 3. 20.
although the posture of standing be a wearisom posture, and the action of
knocking a wearisom action: yet his legs ache not with standing, nor his hands
wearied with knocking, Esa. 59. 1. shall the Master wait and wait (long) upon
the servant without weariness, and dare the servant be weary with waiting [a
while] upon his Lord and Master? Such as have maintenance from the Kings
palace, or are salted with the Kings Salt [in their Salaries,] as, Ezr. 4. 14.
Must not be weary with waiting in his Service: it is the brand of the Child of
Perdition, to have eaten of his Masters bread, and yet lift up his heel against
him. Psalm. 41. 9. Matthew. 26. 23.

19. How many lift up their heels, to go away from Christ in the Ordinance, if
they do not lift up their heels to war against him; know you not (says the
Apostle) that the Saints shall Judge the world? 1 Cor. 6. 2. but alas the very
Ox and Ass does Judge such persons by their knowing and waiting on their Masters
Crib, better then they, Esa. 1. 4. Some cannot sit above an hour, as if all
spoke after were unsanctified matter, and born out of due time. Surely it is
easier to hear with the ear then to cry with the voice, there is straining and
stretching of both lungs and sides in this, but none in that; yet the
Worshippers of the Idol [Diana] could cry out (with an extended voice) for the
space of two hours, (great is Diana of the Ephesians) Act. 19. 34. yet some
cannot hear with the ear above one hour. O Consider, your Lords Heaven and
Happiness (for which you are hearing and which is prepared for all that hear
aright) is more then of an hour long; and shall man make the Ephah of his
makers Worship so small, Amos 8. 5. when his Maker has made the Omer of his
Wages so great. Our work is not the tenth part of our Wages, Exodus 16. 36.
Shall the Cedar of Lebanon, woo and suit the Thistle in Lebanon for a Marriage,
as 2 King. 14. 9. And can the poor Thistle be weary of such beseechings?

20. Fifthly, you must attend the word without wanderings as well as without
weariness: you must serve the Lord without distraction, 1 Cor. 7. 35. as
before. David loved the word of God so much, that he hated all vain thoughts,
that would have distracted him in it. Psalm. 119. 113. he (as it were) shrinks
out of himself into his God, when the wicked one touched his heart with
wandering thoughts: alas the Plaque of Flies is upon the fallen nature of Man,
(as it was upon the land of Egypt) from Beelzebub the God of Flies, pray the
Lord so to expel them, as not one may be remaining. Exodus 8. 31. and 10 19.
Those flocks may not feed before the Mount of God. Exodus 3. 4, 3. and those
Fowls may not rest on your heart, as 2 Samuel 21. 10. that (as Haman) would ravish
the Queen (the Soul) even in the Kings presence, Esth. 7. 8. hang them, Ver.
10. Genesis 15. 11.

21. The second duty in the Act of hearing is, Intention, (as before Attention)
there must be Intention of the heart, as well as Attention of the ear first,
Luke 19. 48. [(...)] (pendebat ab ore ejus) the people (there) were so intent
and earnest in hearing the word of Christ, that they did (as it were) hang
their ears at Christ's mouth, and tied them to his very Tongue. Thus you should
hear as for your life, and as for your last; just as Prisoners hear their
Prince that Judges them at the Bar, when every word he speaks to them is
either life, or death: Or as Benhadads servants did hear the King of Israel
(whom they expected to find a merciful King) 1 King. 20. 31, 32, 33. How did
they watch every Word, and how did they catch at the word, [brother] you must
hang on God in his Ministers) as the Babe does upon the breast, and as the Be
does upon the flower. (2.) Open your hearts, Acts 16. 14. God bids you open
your mouth wide, and he will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. This [(...)] your narrow
Soul, and your narrow Faith will spoil you in this Ordinance; you should bring
large Sacks and such as will open wide, when you come for the Corn of Heaven to
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, as the Patriarks did when they went (in a Famine)
for Corn to the Lord of the land of Egypt. Genesis 42. 2, 3, 6, 25. Your Joseph
your Jesus (I dare assure you) will be kinder to you (if you so come unto him)
then ever that Joseph was to his Brethren, whose rough words were (indeed)
somewhat discouraging, but his smooth deeds were wonderfully encouraging; he
sent them laden home not only with Corn but with their Money too. Genesis 42. 7,
27. and 44. 1. Food as much as they could carry.

22. Thirdly, bring Enlarged hearts; The greater your Vessel is, and the wider
mouth it has, it is not only the sooner filled, but you carry so much the more
water home from the Conduit also. Joh. 4. 7, 28. Christ's Ministers (that
beseech you in Christ's stead. 2 Cor. 5. 20. are compared to Clouds, Jude. 12.
Upon a threefold account. 1. As they are driven to and fro. 2. As sustained
(like Clouds full of water) by the mighty power of God. 3. As dropping down
refreshing rain upon the droughty Earth; now as the dry ground gapes for Rain,
so should you for the word. Hebr. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Ezekiel. 21. 2 They waited
for Job as for the Rain, Job 29. 23. Which in those hot Countries was heartily
longed for and highly prized: and they opened their mouth wide (to him) as for
the latter Rain. That is, they listened as for life, and gaped as if they would
have eaten his words. Such a Divine thirst David's Soul abounded with, in his
dry and thirsty land, Psalm. 63. 1. and 42, 1. 2. and 119. 20, 81, And the
Spouse, Cant. 2. 4. Crying stay me with flagons, it is not a drop, or a
spoonful, or a little Cup full that will quench her thirst, but she must have
whole Flagons. You should come to an Ordinance, just as Behemoth came to Jordan
in his thirst, Job 40. 23. The Elephant is such a thirsty Creature, that he
swalloweth abundance of water at one of his Mighty draughts; he fancies (when
he comes to drink) he can drink up a River, and draw up great Jordan at one
draught into his mouth; and so great is his thirst, that he is said to take the
whole River with his Eye. Ver. 24. his belly is better filled (it seems) then
his Eye. O that you could come with such an intent Soul to the Ordinance, as if
you could swallow up the whole blessing of the Ordinance your Self, and drink
it all up at one draught. Suppose you could thus Monopolize and appropriate the
blessing, yet this would be no damnifying of others; there is no envy in
Spiritual things, which may be divided (in Solidum) in the whole, each Soul may
have a whole blessing, without wronging one another; it is otherwise in
Temporals, the World admits not of Rivals, as being conscious of 'its own
scantness, and not having enough for all.

23. Fourthly, Be Reverent as to God. The overgrown Heathen (though a King)
Eglon shames and condemns many hearers in our day; no sooner does he hear Ehud
say, I have a Message from God unto thee O King, but presently he arose from
off his seat to receive it with Reverence though it proved a sad Message, Judge.
3. 20. Yet the worshippers of the true God do not now raise up themselves, nor
raise up their hearts to receive a Message from God to them, though it be not a
Message of death and destruction (as that to Eglon was) but a Message of Life
and Salvation. Fisthly, be earnest, you must hear the word of God earnestly, as
blessed Baruch is said to repair the Wall of Jerusalem earnestly, Neh. 3. 20.
That is, with all his heart, Soul and strength, being vexed with himself that
he had begun no sooner. The Hebrew word (Hicherah, hence the Latin Ira for
Anger) signifies there (he burst out into an heat) as being angry at himself,
that he had done no more and at others also that they had done so little:
Hereupon in an holy sum and fervency he finishes two parts (and that quickly)
while others were busy but about one piece: a ready heart makes riddance of
Gods work, and will kindle 'its own heat from other Men's coldness, and quicken
it self from others slothfulness: what you do, you must (says Solomon) do with
all your might, Eccles. 9. 10. If every Civil work, much more this Spiritual
(which is of greatest Importance) the strength of your affections must be here
as well as in Prayer.

24. In a word, Sixthly, to hear with Intention, is to have your heart affected
with that you hear, so as it may not only burn in your heart as theirs did,
Luke 24. 32. but also melt kindly under it, as Josiahs tender heart did at the
hearing of the Law. 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. yea and rejoice greatly when you are made
to understand it, as the people did, Neh. 8. 12. your heart leaping within you
at it, as the Babe sprang in Elizabeth's womb when (not the Lord himself, but,
The Mother of our Lord spoke to her, Luke 1. 41. not only hear, but feel Gods
voice, 1 John 1. 1. (1.) You must desire earnestly to hear Gods voice as well
as hear Man's; God says in this Ordinance to his Angels of the Churches, as he
said at the Creation (as some sense it) to the Angels (that left not their
first state and habitation, Jude Ver. 6.) let us make Man, Genesis 1. 26. So here,
let us both join together to make Sinners Saints, Ministers of God are [(...)]
fellow laborers with God. 1 Cor. 3. 9. and who would not but labor heartily
with so sweet a companion; he joins his Spirit to their word, and makes them
Preach all sorts of Sinners into another (even the Divine) Nature, you may not
then be satisfied, till you feel God speak as well as hear man speak, till God
speak to your heart, with a strong hand as he did to the Prophet, Isa. 8. 11.
till he Single you out from others, and speak to you with efficacy. Many hear a
Noise of Christ that do not hear (the) voice of Christ, Act. 9. 7. with 22. 9.
Eighthly mix Faith with the word, be sure you mingle the Word with Faith, those
two meeting together makes a precious Confection, a blessed mixture, Heb. 4. 2.

25. The third particular is, retention of memory, the Word. 1. It must be laid
up in the head; you hear must not be like breath upon steel, that is soon on,
and as soon off again: nor as day flies (called Ephemerae) that are bred at
noon and dead at night. Nor as the morning-dew that soon goes away, Hos. 6. 4.
The Sun arising soon licks it up from off the Earth: In the hearing of the Word
a blessed dew falls from the drops of it, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. but it should not go
away as the dew. If you cannot stay it, but it will go away; then pray, that
however some Manna may still remain, as Exodus 16. 14, 15. the Manna did come
down with the dew. Ver. 13. Christ (that bread of life, Job. 6. 32.) comes down
in the Ministry of the word, Psalm. 110. 3. the dew covered the Manna, hence is
that promise of hidden Manna, Revel. 2 17. when the dew was gone the Manna
remained for the people to gather, O get an Omer full of this Angels food, put
it into the Golden Pot of a Sanctified memory, and lay it up before the Lord.
Ver. 33. 34. Heb. 9. 4.

26. You must (with Mary, Luke 25. 51.) lay up all Christ's sayings in your
heart, though there be but a little distance betwixt the head and the heart yet
it is a long time ere the Word get down from the former to the latter: yet this
must be done, Luke 9. 44. let my sayings (says Christ) not only Sink down into
your ears and heads, but also into your hearts, the Word should be hid there,
Psalm. 119. 11. If you desire a preservative from Sin. You must treasure it up
there, till it be kindly wrought upon your heart and become an Engrafted Word,
Jam. 1. 21. till you have an Inclination to it, and a delight in it, when it
Incorporates and becomes one with you and you with it. Thus the Word must Sink
as well as Swim, it is not enough that it Swim in the head but it must also Sink
down into the heart: God promises to give an heart to know him, Jer. 24. 7. in
that New Covenant, it is not head to know him, though the head be the seat of
notional knowledge, yet the heart is the seat of that which is practical and
experimental. The seed of the word abides, 1 Job. 3. 9. only in honest and
good hearts, Luke 8. 15. there be three bad sorts of hearers to one good; how
often does Satan (that Prince foul of the Air) pick up that seed, which is sown
on the highway of the head, and not in the heart.

27. None ever (that was wise) went to the Well, for a Pitcher of Water to
spill it by the way; Jewels are to be locked up carefully, and not cast at our
heels, for fear of Thieves; no wonder if the grand Thief (Satan) steal away
that word you are careless of your self, he is to blame for robbing you of your
best Riches, but who is blameworthy that leaves open the door? The Samaritan
Woman went to the Well for water to carry it home, Joh. 4. 7. and Ruth gleaned
in Boazs field to carry home to her aged Mother at Home, Ruth 2. 19. Is the
Lord kinder to you then Boaz was to Ruth, who let her glean among the sheaves,
and bid his servants let fall handfulls on purpose that she might gather them.
Ver. 15. 16. be sure you beat out what you gather of the Corn of Heaven, and
carry it home with you, and Scatter it not by the way, our Memory must not be
as the Sieve or broken Vessel, that lets all the liquor of life run out: if it
be so naturally and in Worldly things as well as Heavenly; yet know for your
Comfort, the oftener that the Vessel has water in it (though all the water run
out) yet it leaves the Vessel cleaner then it found it. A retentive faculty is
necessary to an healthful body, until there be a due segregation, and no less
is it necessary to an healthful Soul: yet must not your memory be as the Sponge
to suck up puddle-water as well as purest Wine; but rather like the Fan that
blows away the chaff, while the solid Wheat abides; and like those in Mat. 13.
48. you must gather the good fish into this Vessel (of a Sanctified memory) and
cast the bad away, as Moses, slay the Egyptian (when you meet him) but save the
Israelite alive: wise Virgins distinguish 'twixt meat of Gods sending, and that
of the Devils cooking.

28. The consequent duties after hearing, be, (1.) What concerns your self keep
in everlasting remembrance. Prove. 4. 20, 21, 22. as you must not be like the
hourglass that runs out one way as it comes in the other way; or as the
Hogshead that lets go the Wine but retains the dregs: So you must be like those
Vessels that let go the bran, but retain the pure Wheat; it is your Spiritual
health and life. Ver. 21. 22. (2.) Meditate upon what you thus remember. 1 Timothy
4. 15, which is as the bellows of the Soul that kindles holy affections, if you
chew the Cud, you are a clean Sacrifice. (3.) Repeat it, the whole Book of
Deuteronomy is but a Repetition of Moses former Sermons in his foregoing Books:
as a man that comes into a Garden of Flowers and Spices, is not content with
the present fragrancy thereof, but carries home some of them in a Nose-gay for
his future Refreshment; when you have been in the Garden of Spices, and felt
the Savor of Christ's ointments carry some home, and pound them for use;
Repeating (yea and Conferring) is as the pounding of those Spices, this makes
them smell sweeter indeed. (4.) Turn all into Prayer, that you may not only
repeat it in your lips, but especially in your life. Luke 11. 28. Ezekiel. 33. 32.
Jam. 1. 23. The best Repetition of Sermons is in the life; Sermons should be
felt and lived as well as heard; then is the root of the matter (or word Hebr.)
indeed in you, Job. 19. 28. when it brings forth fruit. Col. 1. 6. and the
stalk of wickedness. Ezekiel. 7. 11. Will be out, grown.

The fourth Religious duty (another walk of a Christian) is the Singing
Ordinance. CHAP. VI.
1. SEeing the Saints are called Singing Birds, Cant. 2. 10, 12. (the time of
the Singing of Birds is come.) It Is a thousand pitties that any of those
Singing Birds, should lose this Singing Ordinance, as if it were still Winter
with them, and as if the Springtime of grace were not come upon them; or as if
it were the mowting Month with them, as it is with some Singing Birds (which
having some did emper in their Voices, Tongues, or Breasts) Sing not at all in
that Month. The Saints of the most high God, should rather be as the
Canary-Birds that warble out their pleasant Notes, all the Months of the Year;
seeing the time of the Singing of Birds is come upon them. And they are made
able to say (in the witnessings of the Holy Ghost. Romans 9. 1.) that their Sins
are pardoned, their persons are accepted off, and their names are writ in the
Lambs Book of life. This is the true Singing time and they should rejoice in
this, Luke 10. 20. and rejoice evermore. 1 These. 5. 16. yea in every thing give
thanks. Phil. 4 4, 6. always warbling out the high praises of the most high God
which is ever comely for the upright. Psalm. 33. 1.

8. The Method of my discourse upon this Subject shall (in Gods strength) be
thus managed. 1. In showing you the grounds, reasons and Arguments (at least
some of them) that may be alleged for it. 2. The Answers to those Objections
that are usually urged against it, and of both briefly. First of the first of
those. The first Argument to enforce this Religious duty is taken from the
Divine precept, all Divine Worship must have a Divine Warrant this is
(principium eternoe Veritatis) a maxim of everlasting truth, and will prevail
against all contrary assertions: And assuredly there is no duty (next to
Prayer) that is more pressed (both in the old and New Testament) by the most
(holy) God, although it be so little practiced by (Sinful) Man. But waving the
old Testament precepts (which are liable to more exceptions) the New Testament
precepts are most cogent, and they are principally three. (Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3.
16. and Jam. 5. 13.) that in the mouth of three Witnesses this great truth
might be established.

3. The second Argument, is taken from Divine presidents, (waving the
Old Testament in this also) as before in Divine precepts; and they are three
likewise. as Mat. 26. 30. Act. 16. 25. and 1 Cor. 14. 15. The Example of Christ
(himself) is the (Regula Regulans) rule ruling, and the example of the Apostles
is the (regula Regulata) rule ruled. You cannot Write after a better Copy, then
after Christ, and after his Apostles so far as they followed Christ. His
Pattern is for your Practice, and he will not be a Savior to you for
happiness, unless he be also a Samplar to you for Holiness; you must either
tread in his steps here in this world, or you shall never lodge in his bosom
in the World to come; and you should follow them, who through faith and
patience do now Inherit the promises. Heb. 6. 12. Follow the white-side (though
not the dark-side) of this cloud of Witnesses. Heb. 12. 1.

4. The third ground is Antiquity, pure Antiquity. This may give light, when
all other lights are out; the laudable and comely customs of the primitive
Church ought to be observed, 1 Cor. 11. 16. as Water the nearer that it is to
the Spring, the purer does it run in the stream, so is Antiquity in customs,
the nearer to the Apostles times, before the man of Sin arose to foul them
with his foul foot, Ezekiel. 34. 18. Rev. 13. 1. the purer they are and so are
justly deserving a due esteem and diligent perusal in matters of fact, which
(they) must needs know better then others after them. It Is true, the universal
practice of Churches is no Rule; for the word of God is the only rule, and
custom, without truth is but a moldy Error, and as a Cipher without a figure:
yet when the customs of the Church are backed with both Divine precepts and
Divine presidents, It should ever strike a Reverence upon the heart; Gods word
is truth. Joh. 17. 17. and it is that which must institute all Ordinances; such
customs, as hold not a consonancy to the word, are vain. Jer. 10. 3. and ought
to be abolished: but in the duty of Singing custom and truth meets together,
'twas the practice of him that was truth it self; and (primum Cujusque Generis
est mensura Reliquorum) the first of the kind is a Rule to all the rest. Christ
was first in this Gospel-Ordinance, and the Primitive Churches followed him
herein, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and others testify, having their (Cantus
antelucanos) Singing praises to God and Christ before day.

5. The fourth Reason for reviving this Gospel Ordinance, is the universal
Obligation that lies upon all to perform it. It Is a natural duty (as well as
instituted and moral duty hence all lys under the Obligation of it. Even all
Creatures that receive mercy from God, should return duty to God; let every
thing that has breath praise the Lord, Psalm. 150. last. to wit, in their kind
and after their manner; yea the whole Creation, all the works of God (whether
Reptilia, Aquatilia terrestria ceu Coelestia, creeping things, Fish, Foul,
Beasts below, and Stars above) shall praise God. Psalm. 145. 10. all joins in
consort with the Saints in praising work. It Is indeed chiefly Man's work as he
is Gods Masterpiece, and endowed with both Speech and Reason above other
Creatures. Yet it is not Man's duty only, though it be (his) chiefly; all
Creatures do owe an Homage of praise to their Creator, and all men may know
either by the light of nature, that this duty is natural or by the Law of God,
that it is moral (besides what has been said of 'its Institution in the
Gospel) it is pity that Man should rob God. Or as the Hebr. is, Mal. 3. 8. will
Adam pillage Elohim? to wit, of his praise: and it is the greatest pity that
this should be done not only by Adam in general, but also by any of the best of
the Sons and Daughters of Adam.

6. The fifth Argument is the Excellency of the duty above bare Reading:
Singing the word of God in meeter, is fuller of Vigor and Spirit then Reading
it in prose, which of it self, and in 'its own nature is a far more saint and
seeble strain, and has not that sweet delectation in it to the Godly mind, as
frequent experience does easily demonstrate: how often is a gracious Soul even
elevated herein above it self? thus David had his unspeakable ravishments in
this Ordinance, and therefore as being much vexed with his own natural
dullness, he stirs up himself as Deborah had done before him. Judge. 5. 12.
Awake Deborah, Awake, utter a Song. So he awakes his tongue (which he calls his
glory) his harp and his heart too, for this duty wherein he found so much
sweetness. Psalm. 57. 7, 8. and 108. 1, 2. and 104. 33, 34. and 119. 103.

7 David did not only raise himself up from his indisposing drowsiness (going
out with Samson to shake it off from him, Judge. 16. 20.) but he reckons Gods
statutes (which he made his Songs in the House of his Pilgrimage) to be better
to him then thousands of Gold and Silver. Psalm. 119. 52, 54, and they were the
rejoysing of his heart, as his best inheritance. Ver. 111. Thus should the word
of Christ dwell in you Richly. Col. 3. 16. [(...)] Indwell in you: It must be
in you and in you again, well digested and turned into juice and blood, and
this cannot be so well effected by a bare and cursory Reading the Word, as it
may be by Singing it; wherein there is a distinct and fixed Meditation upon it,
and upon every Syllable of it while it is leisurely founded out by the voice:
the longer that you ponder it in your mind, the more likely may it have a
strong influence on your affections; this pausing and pondering does chafe,
supple and work the word into your Spirit, and so makes it both a refreshing
and a ravishing Ordinance to you, having a more spriteful violence upon your
heart then bare Reading; for hereby Gods word takes a deeper Impression upon
you, and those things that you did know before, come to be better known and
more graciously understood, the Spirit of God Sealing them upon your Soul; then
does the word of Christ dwell in you Richly, and you give rich and liberal
entertainment to it, and you will account all other but trivial trash to this
true treasure.

8. The sixth Reason to enforce this Gospelduty, is, as it is an Ordinance that
is comfortable to Man (often sweetning his Spirit for God and Godliness) so it is
an Ordinance very acceptable to God; not only Solomon's Prayer to God, but also
his praising of God had a most gracious acceptance with God. The fire that came
down from Heaven upon his Sacrifice, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. (as a visible evidence of
acceptance) was after both his praying and praising work, 1 King. 8. 55, 56.
and 62. He blesses the Lord in a standing posture (as well as the People) when
he had done praying to the Lord in a kneeling posture. Ver. 54. 56, 57. and
this Ordinance of Singing praises to God is the more acceptable to him, as it
has a more copious and ample profession of Piety in it, (then in other
Ordinances) when the word of Christ dwells in us Richly, to make us Sing
indeed, Col. 3. 16. for it is an Ordinance that contains in it an universal
personal performance and Action, every one must be an Actor in sounding out the
praises of the God of Israel. Psalm. 148. 11, 12, 13. both Princes and Peasants,
both young Men and Maidens, both old Men and Children. None are two high to do
God Homage in their persons (not by a proxy) but as they are bound to do it (as
men) so they are doubly-bound to it (as great men) and none are two low to pay
this tribute of personal praise to God. Hereupon the Psalmist Summons in all
things to pay their Rent to God. Factouring (as it were) among all Animate and
Inanimate things to bring forth their proper praises to God.

9. This duty has such acceptance with God that he has put a double honor
upon it, 1. In this World, 2. In the world to come. 1. Here God has honored
it with gracious effects far above the reach of either Nature or Art in two
things. (1.) In allaying the evil Spirit. 1 Samuel 16. 24. The sound of David's
Harp (which could not be available alone) was quickened with the spiritual Song
(wherein the breathings of the Spirit were) these altogether made Saul well
altogether. (2.) In Ministering to the good Spirit, 2 King. 3. 15. Elishah
(finding himself indisposed) calls for a Minstril (supposed to be some Godly
Levite, skilful in singing David's Psalms upon his Instrument of Music) this
prepared him for Prophesying, which (without Divine influence) he could not
have effected. 2. Hereafter God honors it with making it the only and whole
work of the other World, where sighing is turned into singing; sighing Hosannas
into singing Hallelujahs. David awakes up his glory to sing on Earth, Psalm. 57.
8. but singing in Heaven shall be glory it self, it is a grace here as it is
glory hereafter, it will be work and wages both.

10. The seventh Argument for the singing-Ordinance, is, it is prositable to the
Church (as well as comfortable to Man and acceptable to God) in as much as it
has a greater Communion unto mutual edification in it, then in other
Ordinances. Ephesians. 5. 19. speaking to your selves herein, etc. And Col. 3. 16.
Teaching and admonishing one another hereby; this is done, not only as there is
a personal performance of every ones part in this duty (above others) but also
as there is a shoring up of one another Spirits and Affections in it; like
City-buildings that bear up one another; not like those in the Country that
stand alone and bear up themselves upon their own single bottom: besides when
this singing work is carried on [(...)] with joint consent, this heaves upward
every Petition more forcibly, and takes Heaven (as it were) by storm and
violence, especially when Melody is made in the heart, which is the best Tune
to every Psalm. Can the roaring Boys of the World, stir up and provoke one
another to Mad Merriments, among their Cups by their loose and lewd Catches:
and may not the Saints provoke one another, (Heb. 10. 24.) unto a Spiritual
jollity (in a sober sense) to be expressed in Psalms? When Spiritualized unto
Spiritual Songs, this is good fellowship of the best sort.

11. It Is pity then, that this honoring God with our glory (as David that
sweet singer of Israel calls it, Psalm. 57. 7, 8.) should have so much dishonor
and disgrace cast upon it, either as to manner, or as to matter, either by
those that are good, or by those that are evil. The Papists and Popish persons
do indeed deride us for singing Geneva Jiggs, (as they style the singing
Psalms.) And others cry the duty down as a Novelty; whereas the Ancients tell
us, that Christians (in their times) were wont to sing Psalms in their very
journeyings. And that Maids and Servants made it their practice in their daily
work; assuredly the Devil would do to the Church now, as Balak (with (the
Devils spel-man) Balaam) would have done to the Church in the Wilderness, who,
when he could not cut off the whole Camp of Israel, would be content to have
part thereof cursed. Number. 23. 13. and 27. Thus Satan, when he cannot Plunder
the Church of all the Ordinances at once, he will play at smaller-games (rather
then be Idle) and endeavor only to cut her off from this Ordinance and the
blessing of it.

12. Now to Answer the Objections which is the second thing propounded; The
first Objection is, that singing is comely for the upright only. Psalm. 33. 1.
So none else ought to Sing praises but they. Answer the first, the word (only)
is not in the Text, and it may be duty in sinners, as well as comely in Saints;
it is true, high Speech so praise is, being the proper work only of glorified
Saints, and of glorious Angels) becomes not a fool. Prove. 17. 7. Or a Nabal.
Hebr. that is a sapless or worthless fellow, in whom all true worth is
withered; God likes not fair words that come out of a foul Mouth; why do such
take Gods word in their Mouth, when they hate to be Reformed? Psalm. 50. 16, 17.
The lepers lips should be covered according to the Law. Levit. 13. 45. and
[laudari ab illaudato] to be praised by a praisless person is no praise at all.
Christ silenced those Devils that confessed him the Son of the most high God.
Mark. 5. 7. Luke 4. 41. O then rather cover your lips (with the leper) or
resolve to reform and let not your life give your lips the lie, be not as the
Blacks that are white in the Mouth only.

13. The second Answer to this first Objection is, all persons (both Saints and
Sinners) do lay under an Obligation to this duty (as it is both a natural and a
moral or instituted duty, as before) it is a duty enjoined upon all, though all
cannot perform this duty a like, and after a comely manner or with an
Evangelical Spirit. It Is true, the old heart cannot sing the new Song. Psalm. 3
3 3. the new Song before the Throne, Rev. 14. 3. or the Song of the Lamb, Rev.
15. 3. For should a man Sing a good Song with his Voice, and play a bad one
upon his Instrument, it would make but an ungrateful grating Noise: So it is
with them whose lips and lives are not Relatives, and whose Actions contradict
their sayings and singings: yet every thing that has breath, should praise the
Lord. Psalm. 150. last. and such as cannot do, what they ought, they (resolving
to reform) ought to do, what they can; Seeing the positive command for this
duty is general and universal: Sing to the Lord, all the Earth. Psalm. 96. 1.
and make a joyful noise, all ye Lands. Psalm. 100. 12. and Sing to the Lord, all
ye Kingdoms of the World. Psalm. 68. 32. The duty is grounded upon the
Sovereignty of God, as he is a great God and a great King above all Gods. Psalm.
95. 3. and as his works of Creation and Providence, extends to all the Sons
and Daughters of Men, Psalm. 145. 6. to 10. Therefore the Psalmist Infers (and
we with him) O that (All) men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the Children of Men. Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31. it is often
over again and again.

14. The second Objection is, we may not Sing with a mixed multitude, that do
but take the name of the Lord in vain; hereby we do but partake of their Sin,
and so make it our own. Answer the first, when Moses and the Children of Israel
Sang that Famous Song, Exodus 15. 1. there was not only a mixed multitude among
them at that time (as is expressly mentioned, Numb. 11. 4.) but also such of the
Children of Israel, that soon forgot the works of God, and tempted Christ in
the Wilderness even of those that Sang his praise, Psalm. 106. 12, 13, 14. and 1
Cor. 10. 9. And the Song of Moses (recorded in Deuteronomy. 34.) was appointed to be
Sung by the Children of Israel, not only in their upright state, but also in
their state of Apostasy, that it might testify against them as a standing
Witness. Deuteronomy. 31. 19, 21, 22, 29. even by such it was to be Sung as Moses knew
would (after his death (corrupt themselves utterly and the New Testament also,)
Act. 13. 44.) tells you, that almost the whole City of Antioch (the greatest
part whereof were poor Pagans) came together to hear the Word of God, and
though the Apostle managed the work both in praying to God, and in praising of
God, yet may it not be called confusion, if the whole Assembly said [Amen] to
all. This saying [Amen] by the people gave their assent to both Prayers, and
Praises. 1 Cor. 14. 16. And was an universal acting personally in Gods worship,
as well as personal singing is.

15. The second Answer is, though Sinners (which drive the trade of Sin) do Sin
in the manner of singing (because they do it not after a Spiritual manner) yet
they do not Sin in the matter of the duty, which is plainly Obligatory to all,
though it be comely only in Saints: he does bonum though he does it not been,
and yet the Saints (themselves may Sin in the manner of it too as well as
sinners, alas none of us know either how to pray, or how to Sing, but as the
Spirit helps our Infirmities, Romans 8. 26.) so as to sing after a gracious
manner and to make Melody in our hearts to the Lord; and no sufficient Reason
can be rendered, why Saints should discontinue their duties, because sinners do
own God, and their own duty (both by the light of Nature, and the Law of God)
enjoined them. Paul both prayed and gave thanks to God in the presence of them
all. Act. 27. 35. even among poor Pagans, rude Mariners and Soldiers, that
trusted to their own wisdom more then to Gods word. Ver. 11. and that would
have killed Paul not withstanding all his kindness to them. Ver. 42. he does not
discontinuc his Devotion and duty upon the account of a mixed multitude; besides
God delights that his will should be obeyed, and abhors that his Law
should be disobeyed even by sinful men, as in Saul's case. 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23.
and in Ahabs, 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29. God knows how to allow yea and to reward
that which is his own, when yet he takes no pleasure in the sinful manner of
the performance of a Divine duty.

16. The third Answer is, there is a parity of Reason put upon both praying and
singing, Jam. 5. 13. is any afflicted, let him pray, is any merry, let him Sing
Psalms. The stress of both those duties lays not so much upon the qualification
of man, as upon the commandment of God: and though sinners cannot sing with
grace in their hearts, yet this excuses them no more from singing then from
praying, both which are alike general duties to all mankind and not peculiar to
Saints: the very light of nature pressed Jonahs Mariners to pray in distress.
Jon. 1. 6. And the Moral precept that forbids Atheism, commands Prayer which
is an owning of God. He is David's Atheistical fool, that says in his heart
there is no God, and that calls not upon God. Psalm. 14. 1. 4. Hence it is
inferred, that though carnal, Ignorant or profane people cannot Sing as they
ought, no more can they pray as they ought; yet as this excuses them not from
praying work, neither can it from singing work; whatever is not done with Faith
is Sin, Romans 14. 23. and without Faith there can be no pleasing of God. Heb.
11. 6. as to pray (so to Sing) without Faith is Sin, yet not to pray at all is
a greater Sin; for the former is formality, but the latter is Atheism, which
is the worse of the two.

17. The third Objection is. Singing is but Temple-worship, and should be
assisted with Instruments of Music, etc. Answer the first, Moses and Deborahs
Song was long before the Temple. 2. The Song of the Lamb, Rev. 15. Is taken out
of several Psalms. 3. Praying was Temple-worship and was attended with Incense
there, as well as singing was with Musical Instruments there; and so the
Argument lays as strong and as Cogent, for abolishing the duty of praying now,
as well as of singing. 4. Singing to Instruments (then used) were only typical,
and so but temporary belonging to the Ceremonial worship and so is ceased,
'twas accommodated to the Church during her Minority, Gal. 4. 1, 2. but singing
with heart and voice is Moral-worship and so to abide among the mature heirs:
the Ceremonial and Pompous part of Temple-worship is done away, but the moral
part (in simplicity and gravity) remains; and now no voice should be heard in
the Church but such as is significant, and is edifying by signification (which
the noise of Instruments cannot be) 1 Cor. 14. 10, 11, 26. and in that Prophecy
of the Gentiles Conversion, Psalm. 95. We are commanded to make a noise with
Psalms but not with Instruments. Ver. 1. 2.

18. Briefly the fourth Objection is, but we are bidden to sing the word of
Christ, Col. 3. 16. not the words of David now. Answer first David writ his
Psalms in the Spirit of Christ, 2 Samuel 23. 2. the Lord (Christ) had spoken by
the Mouth of his servant David. Act. 4. 23. 'Twas the Rock (Christ) that spoke
to and by David, and made him the sweet singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 1, 3. All
the holy Scriptures (by which you must be guided here and Judged hereafter) is
wholly the words that Christ has spoken, Joh. 12. 48. So that while you sing
the Psalms of David, etc. You do verily sing the words of Christ. 2. Answer,
the Hebrew Titles of David Psalms, be [Misimorim, Tehillim, and Shurim] which
does expressly correspond with the express phrase of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 10.
Col. 3. 19. Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; wherein he plainly points out
the use of David's Psalms, as being also the word of Christ and richly suiting
to all Conditions: and such Psalms which cannot be Sung as your Experience, yet
may you Sing them for your Instruction. Divine truth is the same in Meter, that
it is in Prose, and may as well be Sung as Read. 3. Answer, Such Hymns as are
composed by any now (suppose they be free from the rash and raw Eructations of
a private Spirit, which cannot edify as it ought, 1 Cor. 14. 26.) yet as
coming from an Ordinary gift only (for God no where promised another gift) it
must needs (infinitely) fall short of those Scripture Psalms; eomposed by the
holy Penmen of the Word, to whom the Lord vouchsafed such an High Public and
Infallible Conduct, in Composing what was Consigned to the use of the Church
for ever; these must excel private Hymns, as much as the holy Scripture exceeds
all other Books whatsoever.

The fifth Religious duty: Or walk of a Christian is Godly Conference. CHAP. VII.
1. NOw to manage your self in this fist walk of Christianity, Consider you
must first have a New heart, and then you cannot want a New tongue,. for where
Christ comes he makes all New. Rev. 21. 5. and 2 Cor. 5. 17. a New
Constitution, a New Communication and a New Conversation: not only a New heart
and a New life, but also a New speech; he turns [to his Redeemed] a pure
Language. Zeph. 3. 9. Or a lip of Excellency, Prove. 17. 7. as choice Silver
(that has a good sound,) Prove. 10. 20. So as to feed many, by administering
grace to all hearers, Ephesians. 2. 29. So that this New tongue shall scatter
Pearls, Math. 7. 6. and cast abroad Rich Treasure, Math. 12. 35. yea even
Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11. yet none of this can be,
till Christ cast in a cruse full of the Salt of grace into the Fountain as
Elisha did, 2 King. 2. 20, 21, 22. and healed the waters: for as is the
Fountain, so are the streams sweet or bitter, the streams cannot rise higher,
nor run better then is the spring; qualia principia talia principiaetam, as is
cause so are the effects good or evil; as is the Tree, so are the Fruits, and
as is the Treasure, so are the Expenses: an evil Man out of the evil Treasure
of his heart, brings forth nothing but rotten and corrupt Communication, Matthew.
12. 35. the Bell is known by the Clapper whether it consist of good metal or
bad: what kind of water is in the Well, the same will be in the Bucket. And
what is in the Warehouse, the same will be in the Shop: So whatever is in the
heart, the same will be in the Mouth for out of the abundance of the heart the
Mouth speaks; the heart of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10. 20. till
Christ renew it, for and in you.

2. Consider your speech (also) must be seasoned with Salt, Col. 4. 6. even
your common Communication and Conference, must be seasoned with grace, that you
may leave the Savor of grace in all places and companies wherein you come, as
those meats that are most apt to putrify are most poudered; So that unruly
member the Tongue, Jam. 3. 6. Is apt to have rotten and putrifyed Discourse,
[(...)] Ephesians. 4. 29. unless it be well seasoned with the salt of mortification
and of that Christian wisdom which is from above: upon this uncomely part, you
must put on the greatest comeliness, 1 Cor. 12. 23. that your Mouth be not as
the unclean vessel (under the Law) that wanted a covering, Numb. 19. 15. you
must have the covering of the Spirit, Esa. 30. 1. that will let no corrupt
Communication, no rotten discourse, no obscene borborology nor filthy speeches
come from you, while God (by his Spirit) keeps the door of your lips. Psalm.
141. 3. stinking breath proceeds from ulcerated lungs, and such as have their
Excrements come out of their Mouths, have that mortal and desperate disease
(called Miserere mei) upon them: it is very unlikely that ever the holy God
entered into such an House, and such an heart that has so unclean a door, that
has not God, (1) In their heads, Psalm. 10. 4. nor (2) In their hearts, Psalm.
14. 1. nor (3) In their words. Psalm. 12. 4. no nor (4) In their works or ways,
Tit. 1. 16. he is [(...)] an Atheist, Ephesians. 2. 12. that is thus without God (any
way, every way) in the World. They were not Sons, but two Bastards, that would
dare to shoot their Arrows against the dead body of their Father (according to
the determination of the Judge, Judging which of the three was the right heir of
his Fathers goods) but he that was angry with them both for so doing: and
surely those cannot be the right heirs of Heaven, that dare frequently shoot
their venomous Arrows of blasphemous Oaths at the heart of God.

3. Consider that God has a Book of Rememberance, wherein to write down all
that men say (as well as do,) Mal. 3. 16. in order hereunto he hearkens what
Sinners say, Jer. 8. 6. as well as Saints. That he may make memorable mention
of them (at least at the last day; when all shall be either justified or
condemned by their words, Mat. 12. 36, 37. Idle as well as evil words, and
waste as well as wicked words, must then be accounted for in that great
Ampitheatre; Plato thought it meet that men's speeches at Meals and meetings
should be written; should this Platonic proposal be put into practice, O what
strange Records would they be and yet though men do not Register them, God
does, you have need therefore to take heed to your ways, that you offend not
with your tongue, Psalm. 39. 1. which was a lesson that old Pambus was 30. Years
in diligently Learning it, yet prosessed he could not yet take out that one
Lesson: God (in that infinite wisdom wherein he made all things) has set a
double hedge before this, unruly member (the tongue) to wit, of teeth and lips,
to keep it up and in; and he has also placed it 'twixt the brain and the
heart, that it might take counsel of both, neither will he suffer Children to
speak, till they have wit and understanding to guide them in their speaking;
and those that are deaf, are also dumb, because they cannot hear Instruction,
nor learn wisdom that they might speak advisedly and to Edification.

4. Consider that especially God regards, rewards and Records what the Saints
speak, one to another of him in the duty of holy conference, as well as what
they spoke one with another to him in holy Prayers, Mal. 3. 16. This duty
should be often done it is well pleasing to God: for (1.) Elijah was taken up
into Heaven out of this Ordinance, 2 King. 2. 11. (not either out of Prayer or
Meditation) but (as they were going on and talking) he knew best, what was
fittest to be done, and happy is that man whom his master when he comes shall
find so doing, Mat. 24. 46. and (2) The two Disciples going to Emmaus, and
talking together of Christ's death (as Elijah and Elisha of (his) Translation)
Christ comes to them and made the third Man, and they had fire (as the other
had a Chariot of fire) came to them and made their hearts burn with in them,
Luke 24. 14, 17, 32. Christ was known to them and stayed with them, and he will
be still in the midst of two or three that meets for holy Conference, Mat. 18.
20. Yea (3) Christ himself (who is a whole cloud of witnesses in himself) has
Sanctified this Ordinance, by his conferring with Moses and Elias about his
[(...)] departure (as of Israel out of Ehypt) Luke 9. 31. at this Sacred Synod
(wherein Moses and Christ, the Law and the Gospel did well agree) was Christ's
glorious Transfiguration: let this Ordinance be one of your Gospel-walks, and
Divine fire, a Chariot of fire, yea Transfiguring grace and glory in Gods
presence may come upon you: be a Companion of those that fear God, Psalm. 119.
63. Nosciture Socio, etc. A man is known hereby, and by conference as the Bell
(whether cracked or found) by it is Ringing; Gods Jewels conser, Mal. 3. 16, 17.

The sixth walk of a Christian is in the two Sacraments. CHAP. VIII.
1. THough the word [Sacrament] being a Latin word (as Ornament, Element) not a
Greek or Hebr. word, (in which Language the Scriptures were written) be not
found in the Scripture, yet may it not be quarelled with on that account, for
neither the words [Trinity, Omniscient, and Omnipotent, etc.] are found in it,
and it is enough the things (though not the Names) be found therein, for God
does not bind us up to the latter (though we should hold fast the for me of
sound and wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13.) but to the former which are variously
expressed according to the various Idiome, or propriety of speech in every
Nation and Language that Translates the Original. Hebr. Oath. in the Old
Testament, and [(...)] Greek words in the New Test. signifies (all of them)
Sacrament. Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11. So likewise (...) 1 Pet. 3. 21. And (...)
Heb. 8. 5. and 9. 23. have the sense with the Latin word [Sacrament] but to
find Latin words in the Hebr. or Greek Bible, none can Rationally expect. There
is no thing more clear in Scripture then this, that God has instituted visible
Signs and Seals of the promises of his grace to man, that are as visible
Sermons to him, for the more effectual exciting of our dull minds; Hence
Augustine calls a Sacrament [quasi Visibile and Spectabile Verbum] God has
Added Sacraments to his word to be as a visible word, (1) Assuring us that he
dallieth not with us in his promises, (2) Propounded Spiritual things, to us
after a corporal manner (as Chrysostom faith) and (3) To make his promises
more Authentic and of greater validity to us as the deed (drawn by the Notary)
is forcible, when the Hand and Seal are fixed and annexed to it. Yea (lastly)
to be Symbols of the true Religion (distinct from that of Infidels and Indians)
thus Adam had his Sacraments even in his state of Innocence, for being made up
an earthly body, he had earthly Elements to instruct him, as the Tree of Life
was a Sacrament of Immortality and Incorruption, and the Tree of knowledge of
his probation and Trial of his Obedience, Genesis 2. 17. and 3. 22.

2. If the first man stood need (as the wisdom of God then Judged) of visible
Signs in his state of perfection, how much more do we stand need of them in our
state of Imperfection: we shall certainly need them till we come to Heaven; so
long as we are not (as yet) come to our Rest and to our Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 12.
9. Heb. 4. 3, 8. our Sacramental Manna must not cease, till we eat of the Corn
of the land of promise, Josh. 5. 11, 12. In Heaven (indeed) when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is Imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13.
14. when we are become all Spiritual, then we shall have no need of Sacraments;
but Christ will be our all in all: no Temple shall be seen in the state of
glory, for the Lord and the Lamb shall be the Temple of it. Rev. 21. 22. but
while we are here in the Church Militant (and not come to the Church Triumphant
made perfect in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23.) we have need of all the helps that God
has provided, and Christ has purchased for us; we have need both of the word
and of the Sacraments. 1. Of the word to convert us, and 2. Of the Sacraments
to confirm us, the word is the Spirits Instrument to beget and begin life, and
therefore is it propounded unto every Creature, Mark. 16. 15. but the
Sacraments are the Spirits Instrument only to nourish life begun and begotten,
and therefore administered to those only that (in the Judgment of Charity) are
supposed to be New Creatures; to wit, such as be members of the Church, Heb.
13. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 2, 3. with Chap. 10. and 11.

3. The Sacraments (which present to the Eye, as the word propounds to the Ear)
are a part of Divine worship, some duties whereof are natural, as Prayer, etc.
But this is properly Instituted worship proceeding from the Nomothetical, or
Legis lative Authority of God, Esa. 33. 22. who only has power to appoint
Sacraments. Those of the old Testament had a Divine appointment and institution
to wit, Circumcision, in Genesis 17. 9. and the passover, in Exodus 12. 12. So
likewise the two Sacraments of the New, to wit, Baptism, in Math. 28. 19. and
the Lords Supper, in Math. 26. 26. and the things signified in both those forts
of Sacraments (old and New Testament) were one and the same, to wit, Christ and
his benefets, although the Rites and outward materials were differing: yet the
Divine Image and Super-Scription, was equally stamped upon both to make them
current Coin.

4. The Romanists would (indeed) have more then two Sacraments, of the New
Testament, foisting in other five as equal Corrivals, of the two, to make them
seven; and the Sublime Speculation of Tyrabosco (Patriark of Venice) may not be
omitted; This Seraphick Doctor undertakes to assure the world that there must
be seven Sacraments, and neither more nor less; and his proof is this, because
their were five Loaves and two Fishes, (where with Christ fed the people, Luke
9. 13.) and neither more nor less; [(...)] O the depth of this Doctr. his
Notion! it is a Mystery of Mysteries, and (if it would not spoil his Number)
might stand for another Sacrament. But herein he has done well, to make a
distinction 'twixt the two and the five; for as the two Fishes were things of
Gods making, and the five Loaves were things of the Bakers making: So the two
Sacraments (to wit, Baptism and the Lords Supper) are true, proper, and genuine
Sacraments (Gods Creatures, and of Gods making as the two Fishes; but the other
five (to wit, Confirmation, Penance, Extrem Unction, Orders and Marriage) have
the knavery of the Baker in them; made up more of course bran then of fine
Meal. They are of the Popes making and not of God: they are bread of deceit,
and not sanctified food, as are the two Sacraments of the Gospel, Instituted by
Christ, and not invented by Antichrist.

5. The main and principal constitutive parts of a true Sacrament be three, to
wit, [Verbum, Signum and Signatum] the word, the Sign and the thing signified,
(1.) There must be the word of Divine Institution under the Covenant of grace;
which yet is not the form of a Sacrament, but the efficient cause
(instrumentally taken) by which God (out of his tender compassion to us) makes
for us a Sacrament [accedit verbum ad Elementum and fit Sacramentum.] The word
of Institution comes to the Element, and makes it a Sacrament faith Augustine.
(2.) There must be the outward Sign ordained of God, and not to be altered or
adulterated by Man; and when the instituting word is applied hereunto, then
does it begin to signify truly to us something that is Divine and Heavenly, and
that not of 'its own nature, so much as through the Ordination and Appointment
of God. Those are called Sacramental Elements, which do Sign and Seal the
Covenant 'twixt God and Man. (3.) There must be the thing signified, to wit,
the inward grace of Christ promised in the word to be annexed, to those Sacred
Symbols and signisyed by them.

6. Thus the five pseudonomous or Mock-Sacraments of the Romanists are Justly
exploded by Protestants, seeing they. (1.) Have not any Divine institution to
make them Gospel Sacraments. nor (2.) Have they any outward Sign ordained of
God for them. nor (3.) Any promise of grace annexed to them for the benefit of
those that use them as Sacraments. But the two standing Gospel Sacraments, has
all those ingredients and constituting qualifications; as (1.) Baptism has,
(1.) An outward Element ordained of God, to wit, [Water] and (2.) A Divine
institution by our Lord Christ, Math. 28. 19. and (3.) It has also the promise
of Remission of Sin annexed to it, Mark. 1. 10. and Act. 2. 38. and so (2.) The
Lords Supper has, (1.) 'Its Elements appointed by Christ, to wit, (Bread and
Wine,) Math. 26: 26. and (2.) The word of institution (do this in Remembrance
of me) Luke 22. 19. yea and (3.) A promise annexed (of partaking of the
benefits of Christ's body and blood, for our nourishment to life eternal) Joh.
6. 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56. Therefore those two only are the true Gospel
Sacraments.

Of Baptism. CHAP. IX.
1. THose are the only Sacraments, which (we may safely say) did flow out of
the sides of our dear Savior, Joh. 19. 3, 4. When his Pericardium was pierced
by the Soldiers spear, (which nature has filled with water to cool the heat of
the heart,) there came out blood and water; and this the same John alludes to
in his Epistle. 1 John 5. 6. when he says that Christ came by water and blood;
not by water only, but by blood also. Not only to teach us, that he justifies
none by his merit, but whom he sanctifies by his Spirit; (the grace of
justification, held out in the blood, is always accompanied with the grace of
Sanctification, hold out in the water) but also to show, which be the two only
Gospel-Sacraments that he has Ordained for, and bestowed (as pledges of his
love) on his Church his spouse, that was taken out of his side also (as well as
those Sacraments) just as Eve was taken out of the sides of Adam. Genesis 2. 21,
22, 23. The five Popish Sacraments came not out of the side of Christ (as
Sacraments for his bride) but out of the side of Antichrist, being his mere
Inventions, and none of Christ's holy Institutions.

2. Those two Gospel-Sacraments Christ has appointed the one for a Sacrament
of Initiation; and the other for a Sacrament of nutrition. The former once only
to be administered to one and the same Subject, and the latter to be often
according to the Institution: and that of Augustine may pass as a plausible
Reason, [Semel Nascimur, soepe Pascimur,] We are but once born, but we are
often fed: feeding is a daily work, [as often] as ye eat this bread and drink
this blood, ye do show the Lords death till he come. 1 Cor. 11. 20. First of
the first, to wit, Baptism, in the general it is a fleeing from wrath to come,
Math. 3. 7. And a running to Christ (as to a Sanctuary) for Salvation from that
wrath: the terminus a quo or what is fled from, does suppose that there is a
(terminus ad quem) or a City of refuge to run to for safety, Pro. 18. 10. In
case Malady be not without a Remedy. Hence the Pharisees are said to Reject the
Counsel of God against themselves, and were [Ingrati gratioe Dei] as Ambrose
speaks, ungrateful to the grace of God. Luke 7. 30.

3. Baptism does also [now] save us says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 21. as the Ark
did Noah and his Family, from that deluge of Divine wrath that destroyed the
old World. First, it is said to save us, as it is called the Laver of
Regeneration, and the Baptism of Repentance, and the washing of the New Birth;
and a being Baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, (as well as with
water) Tit. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 26. etc. This saves, yet not as the efficient cause
of Salvation, for that is Christ alone; nor yet as a necessary Instrument, for
that is Faith alone: but only as a pledge of Salvation, and as a badg of the
saved; you must look upon it as a special favor from God to you, that he has
given you this Gospel Ordinance: and Secondly it is said to save us (now) to
show the permanency of 'its use and efficacy, to that Soul which makes a
believing use of it; it is effectual to Seal up Salvation whenever a man
repents and believes. Hence Baptism is done once for all.

4. Baptism was first administered at that very place, where the people of
Israel passed over Jordan; to wit, at Beth-abara, Joh. 1. 28. or Beth. bara,
Judge. 7. 24. Josh. 3. 8. It signifies Trajectum or place of passage for Israel,
which was their entrance into Canaan, so Baptism is into the Church: Baptism
was there first administered, where it had been of old foreshadowed, the Famous
Acts both of Joshuah and Jesus (which are plain Synonyma's) took their happy
beginning at one and the same place, and like as Israel, after they had passed
over Jordan, were circumcised. Josh. 5. 3. before they Received the Land of
promise by lot of Inheritance, Josh. 14. 1. etc. So after you have been
Baptized, and thereby enrolled among the Citizens of the New-Jerusalem, the
remnants of Sin, and superfluity of naughtiness you must daily pare off by the
practice of mortification. Jam. 1. 21. before you can come to Inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven. You must have confession of Sin and confusion of Sin too:
for (1.) It Is that man only that is wakened out of his dream, that can tell his
dream; So it is only he that is wakened out of his Sins, that can clearly
confess his Sins in token of his true Repentance, and (2.) This confession of
Sin must have confusion of Sin joined with it, otherwise all your words of
confession are but empty wind, and all your very tears of contrition are but
insignificant water; not only the filthiness of the flesh must be put away, but
there must be the Answer of a good conscience too. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

5. The place of your Baptism is your Beersheba, (which signifies the Well of
an Oath, for there you swear (as David did, Psalm. 1 19. 106.) to keep all Gods
Commandments. Now God will not own those that are a generation of Vipers
(though Baptized) who bring not forth fruits meet for Repentance, that weigh
just as much as Repentance does in the balance of the Sanctuary, that may
parallel it and prove it, to be a right Repentance never to be repented of, 2
Cor. 7. 10. the whole course of your life must be such as becomes Repentance,
and may evince, evidence and justify it. Yea amounts to as much as Repentance
comes to, otherwise your Baptism is no mark of your being Gods Child, but
rather the brand of a fool; that first makes a Vow, and then breaks it,
Eccles. 5. 3. If God has dealt so severely with such as have been guilty of
perjury, and playing fast and loose with men (as with Zedekiah and Shimei) how
will God revenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Levit. 26. 25.

6. Such as add not holiness of life (which is the Answer of a good Conscience)
unto their external profession, are no better then so many Renegado's, who
(though they have given their names to Christ in Baptism and profession) do
plainly renounce their Baptism, forsake their colors, and leaving Christ (the
Captain of Salvation, Heb. 2. 10.) in the open field, they run away from him to
the Enemy. As unregenerate Israel is (as black) as Aethiopia to God. Amos 9. 7.
and their doom is already denounced by the Judge of the World; If any draw back
(or withdraw) his Soul shall have no pleasure in them. Heb. 10. 38, 39. they
do it to their own perdition with that Son of perdition, who was circumcised as
well as Peter. Whereas your Baptism should not only confirm you in the Faith of
the forgiveness of Sin, and in the Hope of Eternal life, but it also
Consecrates you to the sincere service, of the Sacred Trinity all the days of
your life; and here with (as Luthers Virgin did) you should repel the Tempter
saying, I am Consecrated to God by my Baptismal stipulation, so may not, cannot
own thee, Satan or thy Temptations.

7. There be three sorts of Baptism, [fluminis, flaminis and Sanguinis] of
water, of the Spirit, and of blood, which third is the Baptism of Martyrs that
loved not their lives to the death, but gave their best blood to Christ who
gave His blessed blood to them, and so were Baptized (as it were) in their own
blood. The first, to wit, the Baptism of water, is but the outward Baptism,
which therefore can never be effectual to Salvation, without the second which
is the Baptism of the Spirit, and is the inward Baptism; both those should go
together, Joh. 3. 5. Except you be born of the water: and of the Spirit, you
cannot enter into Gods Kingdom: Alas thousands of Souls are undone to all
eternity by resting in the outward Baptism, and not minding at all the inward.
Indeed Christ says to us (as the Prophet to Naaman) in this Sacrament (wash
and be clean) as in the other Sacrament he says to us eat and live.) God
says, when will it be (that you wash and be clean) you may Answer again, Alas
Lord it will never be unless thou give what thou commands, and join the inward
Baptism to my outward.

8. That the feed of believers (as well as believers themselves) are the
Subject of Baptism, I shall give you only a brief Landscape of those Reasons
which satisfy me in it, omitting the common and voluminous Arguments that are
usually alleged for it.

As first, Favores sunt Ampliandi. It Is certainly more dangerous to narrow and
straiten the Favors of God to Mankind, then to overamplify them in cases (that
we may suppose to be) dark and doubtful; it is most certain that the Law was a
grievous, and the Gospel is a gracious dispensation, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. Act. 15. 10. If the Moon light of the Law did lead into its Sacrament
of initiation, both Parents and their Children, I cannot see Reason enough why
the Sun light of the Gospel should exclude whom the Law received; seeing it is
undoubtedly a more gracious (as well as a more glorious) dispensation, and that
which has a more liberal Provision of comfort in it, for all the Saints of
God. Otherwise a believing Jew might justly object against the Gospel,
especially having one Son before conversion Circumcised; and another Son after
conversion unbaptized, saying, if my seed be excluded by the Gospel from the
initiating Seal which was admitted to it (as well as my self) under the Law,
then Moses was a better Mediator than the blessed Messiah, inasmuch as the
Church Priviledges of the Law were larger, and more comprehensive then those of
the Gospel.

9. The second Argument or Reason is, the blessing of Abraham comes on the
Gentiles by the Gospel. Gal. 3. 8. 14. with Genesis 12. 3. The Gospel is the
Promulgation of the same promise to Abraham, to whom the Gospel is expressly
said to be preached, even in the old Test. now the blessing of Abraham being to
his seed as well as to himself, Genesis 17. 7. Believing Gentiles must have the
same privilege, otherwise the blessing of Abraham does not come upon them,
neither can they rationally be said to have the privilege of sitting down with
Abraham in the Kingdom of God, to wit, in the Church, as Christ said they
should. Mat. 8. 11.

The third ground is, Salvation and the way to it, is common to both Jew and
Gentile, Act. 15. 11. [(...)] by the grace of Christ we shall be saved even as
they; Hence it is called the common Salvation. Jude Ver. 3. It follows then that
the Jews were bound to understand, the Mystery of their Legal Ordinances, and
to exercise Faith in them as well as we Gentiles. Yet (though Children then
could not understand the Mystery of their Circumcision) were they not debarred
from it on this account: so nor ours ought now from Baptism, of whom it may be
said as Christ to Peter. Job. 13. 7. what I do thou know not now, but thou
shall know hereafter why thou have been washed.

10. The fourth Reason is, Foederati sunt Signandi, if Children have an
interest in the Covenant, (which is the greater) then much more in the Seal of
the Covenant (which is the lesser) If the seed of believers be holy. 1 Cor. 7.
14. And the Kingdom pertains to them, Mark. 10. 14. Why not the Seal of the
Kingdom

The fifth Argument, can any man forbid Water that these should be Baptized;
which receive the holy Ghost as well as we, Act. 10. 47. a zeal in forbidding
to Seal adoption to such may be displeasing to Christ, Mar. 10. 14. that they
may receive the Holy Ghost as well as we. First, there is no impediment on
Christ's part, for he bids them come. Secondly, nor on their part, for he faith,
of such is the Kingdom of God. nor Thirdly, on the part of Baptism, for it is a
passive Ordinance as Circumcision was. That some Children did receive the holy
Ghost, appears from Jer. 1. 5. Jeremy was Sanctified in the Womb, and Luke 1.
15. John Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost even from his Mothers womb.

11. The sixth Argument, Baptize all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. Includes Children,
as go mark my Sheep, does include that the Shephard must mark his Masters
Lambs, as well as Sheep. As that in Genesis 12. 3. Gal. 3. 8. Includes young as
well as old.

The seventh Argument, Children may have the seed of Faith, as well as of
Reason, before they can act or exercise it, and as in the womb they can neither
take, nor chew meat but are nourished by the Navel there, so Baptism may be a
round goblet that wants not liquor. Cant. 7. 2. to nourish Children and
newborn Babes, in the womb of the Church it may have in it Christ's blood to
justify, and his Spirit to Sanctify and cleanse them from Sin.

The eighth Argument, we may not damn all the seed of believers, and that in
Mark. 16. 16. makes as much against their Salvation as against their Baptism;
how can they be of the Kingdom of God (as above) and be saved but by the grace
of the Covenant, as the want of understanding did not hinder Children, from the
first Adams Sin, so neither did it hinder them from the second Adams grace; and
if they have both grace and glory, why may they not have that which Scals both.

Briefly the ninth Argument, David had Faith for his Child. 2 Samuel 12. 23, 24.
that it dyed happily, for what comfort could it be to David, that he should go
to the grave unto it, he did believe it did belong to the Election of grace,
otherwise he could not have been so comforted at its death.

The tenth Argument, Christ loved his Church washing it with Water, Ephesians. 5. 26.
Hence it must be said, that either Children are not of the Church (whereof they
were ever Members in the old Testament, and never repealed in the New) or that
they may be washed with Baptismal Water.

12. Consider also (with these Arguments) those material things. As first it
was the Red Dragon (Pharaoh) that would have hindered Isreal's little ones, from
the Sacrifice of the Church in the Wilderness, Exodus 10. 8, 9, 10. (2ly.) God
speaks in great displeasure against those Men. (from their Children have ye
taken away my glory for ever) Micah. 2. 9. (3ly.) God was angry with Moses for
neglecting to Circumcise his Child, Exodus 4. 24, 25. (4ly.) Parents do Covenant
for themselves and their Heirs, in Leases, and Deeds, and their Children have
livery and seisin of Copy-holds, according to the Custom of the manor though
they know it not. (5ly.) If unbelief broke off Children, as well as Parents,
from the old stock. Romans 11. 20. Then Faith may engraft in both again. (6ly.)
As we find no express precept for it, so nor any express prohibition against
it, nor that any Baptized person kept their Children from it: the silence of
the Scripture in it (which we are to admire and adore) makes it more probable:
Christ gave no Rules, who to be Baptized, seeing the common use among them had
been to Baptize Men Women and Children, as 1 Cor. 10. 2. Hence the Jews do not
Question the action of Baptizing, or the Subjects of it in John Baptist, but
only his Authority. Joh. 1. 25. It being so commonly known to them under the
Law.

13. Such believing Parents whose opinion is, that God does say to them as
Jacob said to Joseph, Genesis 48. 9. bring your Children hither near to me, that I
may bless them in this Ordinance) bring them into my House and Family.
Dedicating their Children Solemnly to the Lord, as Elkanah did Samuel, 1 Samuel
1. 14. as being born to God (he has a propriety in them) Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. and
looking upon their Children as Heirs of the same promise with themselves (when
born to them) as Isaac and Jacob were Heirs with Abraham of the same promise,
Heb. 11. 9. O how should you endeavor the Conversion of your Children, often
dropping Divine dew upon them. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. That the Lord may bring upon you,
that which he has spoken of you in his Covenant, Genesis 18. 19. O how should you
press upon them to take hold of the Covenant, Esa. 56. 4, 6. Even in their own
persons; for the just must (live) by their own personal Faith here, and they
must be (saved) also by it hereafter, Hab. 2. 4. O how should you pray for your
Children (as duly and truly affected with the extent of the Covenant, both to
you and to yours.) Saying, Lord, thou have graciously given me a Child, Genesis
33. 5. I have given him Sin, but I cannot give him grace and Christ; O that my
Ishmael may live before thee, Genesis 17. 18. and let my Reuben live and not die,
Deuteronomy. 33. 6. he is born to me by generation, let him be born to thee by
Regeneration; let him live no more in Sin, though Sin continue to live in him:
let him be the work of thy hands, in the midst of my House, and then my face
shall not Wax pale, but I shall Sanctify the Holy one of Israel. Esa. 29. 22,
23. Alas we sail our Children herein, and undoes them and our Selves too.

14. All you that are Baptized (whether while young or when old or both) you
must all know, that therein you have avouched the Lord to be your God (to walk
in his ways and to keep his Commandments) and the Lord has avouched you in
that day, to be his peculiar People. Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 19. The most excellent and
honorable name of Christ is then put upon you; O walk worthy of that worthy
name, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you and you in
him, 2 These. 1. 12. This is your engagement and that by the Solemnest vow, that
ever was made or taken: the Covenant of your God is upon you, the bond of the
Covenant should bind you fast (as the word (Religion) signifies a binding) unto
God and Godliness. O break not those bands, nor cast away those cords from you,
for then you are sure to be broken as a Potters Vessel that cannot be patched
up again, Psalm. 2. 3, 9. O be not amongst that black bed-roll. Romans 1. 31.
Covenant-breakers, he that breaks this Convenant with poor man, shall not be
delivered. Ezekiel. 17. 15, 16. Much less he that breaks his Covenant with the
great God, who will assuredly avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Levit. 26.
25. O keep your selves in the love of God. Jude 20. and continue ye in Christ's
love, Joh. 15. 9. which constrains you to Obedience and Holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
You are Soldiers of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2. 3. O do valiantly, and (as good
Soldiers) fight the good fight of Faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Against those
Adversaries that War against your Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 11. The Romans of old (as
Lipsius says) had their (Sacramentum Militare) an Oath of service in War (as
now we have Press-Money) to bind them Sufficiently to their Military Service.
And (desertores Militie) such as run away from their General, etc. Were (ipso
facto) to be hanged; Thus you have taken Gods Press-Money, and the (Sacramentum
Evangelicum) the Gospel Oath is upon you, and you are enrolled in Christ's
Muster-Book; of how much sorer punishment shall you be thought worthy, (to wit,
to be hanged up in Hell) Heb. 10. 29. If you forsake the Camp without leave of
your General, yea revolt and run to the Enemy, as Apostates do; or if you stay
still in the Camp, yet hold private Correspondency with the Adversary, and
betray the trust committed to you; or if you do neither of these, yet out of
Cowardice or contempt never strike blow, or perform duty. It Is worst of all to
be in Gods Camp, and yet fight the Devils battles, and not Gods. This contracts
more guilt then if you had never contracted with God to serve him at all.

15. Lastly seeing it is more then probable that this great Ordinance (which
came even out of the very sides of our Lord Christ) turns to the least account
and advantage among professors of the Gospel; the most part being not able to
know the use and efficacy of it, when it is administered to them, and very few
have any serious thoughts upon it (I fear) after the Administration of it.
Therefore I beseech all persons to look back upon their Baptism, (whenever
they were Baptized) and not only to make some penitent Reflections upon all
your Sins past against your Covenant with God therein, but also some believing
Improvement of it, as a blessed Antidote against Sin for time to come. Thus
Luthers brave Virgin (forementioned) answered the Tempter (who tempted her to
Sin) O Satan I call to mind that I am a Christian and have been Baptized, and
therein I Covenanted with my God, never to do such things as thou Tempts me
unto, and therefore I cannot, I dare not, I will not hearken to thy
Temptations, which are so contrary to my promise and vow in Baptism; and
hereupon the Tempter departed from her, having quenched his fiery darts with
her Baptismal water. So (through grace) may you do by the same means, making
such serious Reflections as David did, Psalm. 86. 16. Lord (save the Son of thy
handmaid) he remembered that he was born in Gods House, that he came of Godly
Parents, etc. And so hoped God would help him (at least) for their sakes as
Ishmael was for Abraham's; he cries also, I have sworn, and I will perform it,
that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119. 106. Binding himself thus
(in the strength of God, whom he desired to be his surety herein, V. 122. that
he might do as he had sworn, and thus though the Act of Baptism be transient
(soon over and done) yet the effects of it are permanent, and may be of blessed
use to us all our days.

Of the Lord-Supper. CHAP. X.
1. IN the general, First the Lords Supper is the Lords last Legacy, he left
his Disciples (reserving his best Wine till the last) before his shameful and
painful death.

Secondly, It Is an inestimable evidence of his favor to all his Redeemed.
David could not express his favor to Mephibosheth in a better way, then to
make him Eat and Drink with him at his Table. 2 Samuel 9. 5, 7. and 'twas an high
favor to Chimham also; to be admitted to David's Table, 2 Samuel 19. 33, 35, 38.
yet an higher favor and honor has all the Saints. Luke 22. 30. The King is at
their Table, Cant. 1. 12. And they at his in both Kingdoms of grace and glory.
Rev. 3. 20.

Thirdly, it is the feast of fat things promised. Isa. 25. 6. full of marrow,
and of Wine on the lees well refined; this is a great (Royal and magnificent
feast, Mat. 22. 4.) (...) (of (...), Saginare, to cram) his crammed fowls, his
fatted Oxen are killed (or [(...)] are Sacrificed) as if a blessing had been
craved by Sacrifice upon the feast, on Gods part all things are ready, all the
defect is on our part, the Father has prepared the fatted Calf for his
penitent Prodigals, Luke 15. 20, 23. Christ (himself) is the feast or fatted
Calf to feed and feast upon: a feast above that of Belshazzars, Dan. 5. 1. To a
thousand of his Lords. This is to all people (both to Jews and Gentiles)
without respect of persons, Act. 10. 34, 35. and Rags are as welcome here as
Robes, yea above that of Ahasuerus. Est. 1. 3, 5. and 2. 18. and that of
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 8. both which lasted only some few days, but this feast
lasts till time shall be no more.

Fourthly, It Is a full feast, as it not only has [Humidum and Siccum] both
that which is moist and that which is dry, which is all that is required to a
full Meal. It has both the (...) Bread and Wine that comprehends all: a double
Element in this Sacrament, though but single in the other.

Fifthly, It Is such a feast as is both Dinner and Supper, yea the best of the
kind, a wedding-Dinner, as Matthew calls it, Mat. 22. 4. and it is a wedding
Supper, as Luke calls it, Luke 14. 16. to show that the Saints do Dine and Sup
with Christ, they Eat and are satisfied continually with the fatness of his
Table. Psalm. 65. 4. It Is a thousand pities God should say I have prepared my
Dinner or my Supper ('it is both (his) and of (his) preparing) and that when it
is prepared of God, it should be slighted of man. Some by keeping from it that
should come, and others by coming to it that should not, for want of the
wedding, garment, the word wooes and beseechs us; this Sacrament makes up the
match, and marries the Redeemed with the Redeemer: neglect it not, Number. 9. 13.

2. More particularly, three things are required of you herein. 1. Preparation
before. 2. True participation in. And, (3.) Right improvement after. First of
the first, to wit, due preparation. First, in the General, Man before the Fall
had no need of preparation, 'twas only his changing of employments, and a bare
going out of secular work, into spiritual and religious: but fallen man cannot
do so, he must prepare his heart first, and then change his employment; fallen
man is as Joseph in his prison state, Genesis 41. 14. who puts off his
prison-garments, and changed them for better, and then came in to Pharaoh;
accordingly and much more, you must put on your best graces, when you are to
come in unto the Lord in this solemn and sacred Ordinance, in which are the
highest mysteries of the Christian Religion. 1. As it is a standing evidence of
transcendent affection, both of the Father in giving the Son to us, and of the
Son in giving himself to us. 2. As it is a lively representation of your
blessed and bleeding Redeemers suffering upon the Cross, far beyond all Popish
Crucifixes, it being of Christ's own institution. 3. As it is the nearest
Communion we have with God upon Earth, a sitting down at the Kings own table
(which earthly Monarchs practice not) as his Favorites and familiar Friends.
And, 4. as it is a [Prelibamen] or foretaste of that eternal banquet you shall
hereafter eat off in your Fathers house, and therefore you may not rush into
this Ordinance (above all others), but prepare for it, as you would do for
death itself: Casuists say, Sacramentum and Articulus mortis aquiparantur, you
should be as serious in your coming to the Lords table, as in your going (at
the point of death into another world), in both you appear before the great God.

3. Your preparation for this solemn Ordinance is held out in that
Scripture-expression, (the purification of the sanctuary), 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.
which consisted of three parts: 1. Washing with water. 2. Changing their
Garments. and 3. Purging out all leaven out of their Houses to prepare for the
passover. If the Jews were thus zealous in the shadow and Ceremony, how much
more ought Christians to be in the truth and substance. First of the first,
washing with water, every Jew had his water Pots beside him for his daily
washing, Joh. 2. 6, for his Purification. God will be Sanctified of all those
that draw nigh to him. Levit. 10. 2, 3. and therefore God requires this
Purification of all the People, Exodus 19. 10. this outward washing was a time
of inward cleansing. Isoe. 1. 16. which is principally required. Heb. 10. 22.
grace purifies the heart, Act. 15. 9. and they must be pure in heart that would
see God. Mat. 5. 8. without holiness no man can see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. much
less come nigh him, for iniquity is a wall of Separation, Isa 59. 2. As in
those Levitical purifications they were to wash off. 1. All defilements. 2. The
deepest stains. 3. From off all the parts from head to foot. 4. And this often
as in the Leper, yea, 5. Their very Garments spotted with the flesh, Jude 23.
the resemblance is, (1.) That you be washed from the blood of your Nativity,
Ezekiel. 16. 4. the Spirit of Sanctification must be applied to every soul
faculty of the Soul, and Member of the body; Especially to the Conscience, Heb.
9. 14. (2.) The pains you must take in mortifying your Earthly members, Col. 3.
5. which are as the spots of a Leopard, Jer. 13. 23. which will not wash out
without much rubbing and scouring, and many nights frosting out of doors. You
must be contented to endure much hardship, 2 Timothy 2. 3. and many tribulations,
Act. 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12. many bats and blows, so the stain of Sin may be
fetched out which will not be done easily, but sticks as close as flesh to the
bone. (3.) Your whole frame (being all out of frame) must be washed, and
throughout Sanctified. 2 These. 5. 23. You must cry with Peter, wash (Lord) not
my feet only, but also my hands and my head, Joh. 13. 9. (4.) And this you must
do often: it is not the work of a day, week, month, or year, but it is the daily
work of your whole life, renew your Repentance daily, that you run not your
life out in Hypocrisy, and die like a fool at last, Zach. 13. 1. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

4. The second part of the Jewish purification was change of Raiment, Genesis 35.
2. Though the Ceremonial Law was not then Written, yet it was practiced by the
Patriarks all along before Moses, as Sacrificing, etc. Alas filthy clouts and
rags of Sin are upon you, even the appearel of death, till Christ give you
change of Raiment, Zech. 3. 3, 4. 'Till Christ cover you with embroidered work,
Ezekiel. 16. 10. and make you comely with his Robe of Righteousness. V. 14. hereby
you are acquitted from the curse of the Law, and also accepted into Gods
favor. This is the Goodly raiment wherein Jacob got the blessing. Genesis 27. 15.
the Garment of your Elder Brother Jesus Christ, you must put on the Lord Jesus,
Romans 13. 14. Unless you bring this Benjamin with you, there is no seeing the
face of the Lord of the land, neither will there be any Corn for you, as Genesis
44. 23. you cannot expect to Eat the flesh, unless you be clothed with the
Fleece of the Lamb of God; the skin of a cruicifyed Christ, must be your Coat
to cover your nakedness, as God clothed the first Parents with the skins of the
Sacrifices, Genesis 3. 21. You must have the Livery of this blessed Lord and
Honorable Master, which the followers of the Lamb are distinguished by from
the World, both the imputed and imparted Righteousness, Rev. 19. 8. which you
can (of your self) neither purchase nor put on: You may not come to the Lords
feast or supper without this Wedding Garment, Christ will come in to see his
Guests. If you appear there in the tatterd rags of the wretched old -Adam, you
will have nothing to say for your self, but be as the muzzled beast [So (...)
signifies] mute before him, Mat. 22. 11, 13. If you have not this garment on
your back at your coming in to the Supper. You may have fetters upon your feet
at your going out from thence; from the Table you may pass to the tormentors as
he did: If your conversation be unlike your high calling and Company.

5. The third part of the Jewish purification was the purging out of Leaven.
Exodus 12. 18, 19. as the Jew was not to eat the passover, until he had purged
all Leaven out of his House, so nor we the Lords Supper till we have put away
every known Sin, 1 Cor. 5. 7. you can never expect the comfort of that
Ordinance, while you hide any of that old Leaven in any corner of your heart.
There is (indeed) the Leaven of a corrupt Faith, of corrupt manners, and of
corrupt nature: This last (which is as the fretting-leprosy, Levit. 14. 44,
45.) you cannot chide out of doors as Sarah did Hagar, but 'twill be a ruful
inmate within you (making you cry O wretched Man or Woman, that I am. Romans 7.
24.) So long as the walls of your House of clay stands, and until the Stones
and Timber be thrown down, it cannot be purged out; but the Leaven of corrupt
Doctrine (which soures the whole Lump, or truth of the Gospel) and that of a
corrupt Communication, and Conversation (which soures both our selves and
others with us) both these should you (both) find out and cast out, (Psalm. 34.
13, 14.) If not with as much Ceremony, yet with as much seriousness as the Jews
did their Leaven: The first Jewish Ceremony that carries resemblance, was, the
Jew began to purge within, and to banish all Leaven found within his own House;
It teachs you to mind within-doors-work, it is not enough to purge your mouth
and your hands, but especially your inside, your heart and not so much other
men's as your own, Jer. 4. 14. your own House and heart; the second was, not so
much as the least morsel or crum of Leaven must be spared, which shows you,
that you must account the least Sin, both hateful to God and hurtful to man, so
it may not be indulged. The third Ceremony was, the Jew Searching the House
with a Candle and finding but a mite or crum thereof, in any corner by sweeping
(even) that little he carries out with great Solemnity: learn you hence, that a
little poison is poison, sweep every cranny of your Soul, your Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. your affections. 1 Timothy 1. 5. your senses. Psalm. 1. 19. 37. your
speeches. Psalm. 39. 1. that your whole House may be possessed in holiness and
honor. 1 These. 4. 4. a little Leaven mars all. 1 Cor. 5. 6.

6. The second general is the true participation after a due preparation: yet
this you may know for your comfort, that your God will not stand exactly or
Rigorously upon every circumstance required in this purification of the
Sanctuary, provided you prepare your heart with all your might, as David. 1 Chronicles. 29. Ver. 1, 2. this is plainly taught you for your Encouragement, in 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. that where the heart is prepared to seek, and meet God
according to our best endeavors, he will not insist upon the exact
purification of the Sanctuary, (which consisted on those three parts aforesaid)
but will pass by and pardon all our other weaknesses and imperfections at the
Prayer of his Vine-dressers, Luke 13. 7, 8. 2 Timothy 1. 16. God will yield
something to their Prayers, even when he might come forth in severity against a
person or people; happy are they then that have Praying vine-dressors set over
them, saying with Samuel, God forbid I should Sin against the Lord so, as not
to pray for you. 1 Samuel 12. 23. and the good Lord pardon every one that is not
so exactly prepared: in such a case God accepts of the will for the deed. 2
Cor. 8. 12. and looks more at the willingness of the offerer, then at the
worthiness of the offering; and you must put a difference betwixt, being
unworthy and eating unworthily: all believers are (in themselves) unworthy of
Christ and Salvation, yet being in Christ they are accounted worthy. Luke 21.
36. and Rev. 3. 4.

7. Thus you, (1.) Being in Christ (for you must be bred before you be fed, and
be begotten, born and live before you be nourished, Mark. 5. 43. no stranger
(to Christ) no uncircumcised (in heart) must eat thereof. Exodus 12. 43, 48.
Romans 2. 29.) and (2.) Having prepared a large upper Room (a raised and an
enlarged heart, Mark. 14. 15. Luke 22. 12. then (3.) Open the gates and the
everlasting doors of your Soul, that the King of glory may come in, Psalm. 23.
7, 9. yet withal say, (4.) with the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof, Mat. 8. 8. nor am I worthy that I should come to thy
Table: and with Mephibosheth (who was loved for Jonathan sake as you for
Jesussake) will thou look (Lord) on such a dead Dog as I am, so, as to let me
eat bread at thy Table? 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8. O that you may trim your self as he did
to welcome hom ehis Lord the King. 2 Samuel 19. 24, 25, 28. In this trembling
frame must you draw near to the Lords Table, not approaching with a common
Spirit, but well knowing that no other Ordinance is urged with that strength
and Severity as this is, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. and no duty does strike such a
terror upon the Consciences of Men as this does, insomuch that even evil
persons do think they must be good at that time, and have then good words, good
works and good Prayers, etc.

8. There be three things especially required of you in your participation of
this Ordinance. First self-examination, there ought to be a search as well as a
Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11. 28. (1.) Examine your state as Lapidists do their Stones,
that you put not an everlasting cheat upon your own Soul; thinking your self
one of Gods Jewels when indeed you are but a Bastard Diamond. (2.) Examine your
wants, as coming to your Soul market, what Sin you have to Subdue, and what
grace to strengthen; none goes to market, but they do enquire what their
Family-wants be. (3.) Examine your sins, search for them as the woman did for
the lost groat; she sought and swept, swept and sought (with a Candle in her
hand) till she found it, Luke 15. 8. you must take David's Lantorn and Candle.
Psalm. 119. 105. and search till you find all your Sins, saying to your own Soul
(as Samuel to Jesse, are these all the Sons that thou have. 1 Samuel 16. 12.) are
these all thy Sins, if any one do not yet appear, sit not down till that be
fetched, especially if it be a Mordecai Sin, that will not bow to Christ, or a
Dalilah Sin, that hinders your Soul most from a Resignation to Christ, (4.)
Examine your graces as knowledge, Faith Repentance, Love, Zeal, Obedience, all
those should be ready to wait on their Lord, their founder and their finisher,
bring forth your bravery to entertain Christ.

9. The second thing required in the Ordinance, is self-excitation, you must
stir up your self, as Deborah did; calling up her own Soul saying, awake awake,
Deborah, awake awake, Judge. 5. 12. open there all the Springs of your Soul for
Christ, as Christ opened all the veins of his heart for you. (1.) Open all
your desires and affections for him; come to this Ordinance, as Behemoth to
Jordan, with a mighty and an all exhausting thirst upon you. Job 40. 23. bring
strong affections and a lusty appetite to this Supper, where it is a virtue
Sublime to to be an holy glutton, and to drink hearty draughts of the blood of
Christ, that you may go away from the Supper as Christ did from his Baptism;
filled with the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3. 16. you must consider what is before you as
Prove. 23. 1. but in that duty it is not your work to restrain, but to provoke
appetite, and the rather, because Christ so exceedingly thirsted after your
Salvation, Luke 12. 50. though he knew it would prove so costly to him; Christ
says, with desire I have desired to Eat this Supper with you, Luke. 22. 15.
that had no need (for himself) of either you or it, how much more should you
say, with desire I have desired to Eat this Supper with Christ, who is at all
the charges, pain, and pains himself and all for your Eternal profit.

10. Secondly, excite and quicken up all your faculties, as the affections
(those hand maids of the Soul) give attendance to meet Christ (the mistical
David) just as the Virgins of Israel met literal David in their Singings and
dancing. 1 Samuel 18. 6, 7, 8. every one Singing their part appointed them
accordingly [hope] is sent out to wait for this King of glory, and if he come
not [desire is sent out to fetch him, [Love, Delight, and Joy] receives and
entertains him, all these Virgins go out to meet this blessed bridegroom, Mat.
25. 1. having first swept the House clear, and cast all the filth away into the
brook Kidron. 2 Chronicles. 30. 14. Math. 13. 14. Jam. 1. 21. and brought forth
their best bravery, (Arras hangings, Persian Carpets, rich stools, all their
Plate and Jewels) to wit, all the graces of the Spirit (far surpassing Aarons
rich garments that were for glory and beauty) all to prepare a large upper-Room
for entertaining the King of glory: even so all the faculties of the Soul must
be stirred up, to Improve their Interest in such a blessed guest, as (1.) your
understanding must look round about him, and behold him altogether lovely from
this Sycamore-Tree, as Zacheus. Luke 19. 3, 4. Cant. 5. 16. (2.) Your will must
offer up both Sword and Keys, etc. As the Major does to his Prince at his
entertainment. (3.) Your memory must be ready to Register every act of love to
your Soul, remembering his loves more then Wine, Cant. 1. 4. In a word Christ
must be led into every Room of your heart: and Lastly all your graces must be
excited, and made ready to receive [each] their Alms from Christ's fullness, as
saving knowledge, justifying Faith, sincere Repentance, servent love, etc. All
come to touch him for healing virtue, well knowing that Christ comes with a
Royal heart into the Soul to give abundantly and like himself, no mean gift can
come from so noble an hand and heart, and that all this may be done you must
use the third thing required, to wit, strong Invocation; coming as a Prince to
him Job. 21. 37. and begging his grace (in all) with your whole heart. Psalm.
119. 58.

11. The third general is your Improvement after all. When Faith and all your
other graces (together with your affections and the faculties, of your Soul)
have played their part in the Mount, and brought you even to a Transfiguration,
as was done both to Moses and to the Messiah, Exodus 34. 29. and Luke 9. 29.
then. (1.) You must tremble to lose that luster and glory that God has put
upon you by your conversing with him: If he has made you one of his Jewels by
communicating his presence to you, Mal. 3. 17. then shine as a Jewel in all
your Relations, that all which see you may acknowledge you to be a seed, the
Lord has been blessing, Isa. 61. 9. (2.) Be thankful to your Lord for this
inestimable benefit, Psalm. 116. 12. be of a rendering disposition, and that in
your life as well as with your lip. If David's condescension to such a dead Dog
(as Mephibosheth accounted himself) was so admired by him. 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8. how
much more by you that in rigor of Justice might be fed with Wormwood, and have
the waters of gall to drink, Jer. 9. 15. yet the Lord gives you the flesh of
his own Son to be meat indeed to you, and his blood to be your drink indeed.
Joh. 6. 55. that might say I will not feed you at all, Zech. 11. 9. (3.) Let it
be an everlasting obligement on you, to keep far from every evil matter, Exodus
23. 7. The Oath of God (no less is a Sacrament) is upon you, lay Gods charge
upon all your corruptions, Cant. 2. 7. you are Vas Signatum, shall you Sin,
Neh. 6. 12. your all is for the Prince, Ezekiel. 44. 3. do singular things for
Christ, that does singular things for you, Mat. 5. 47.

The seventh Walk of a Christian wherein all the other Walks do meet, is the
Lordy-Day. CHAP. XI.
1. COnsiderations, and 2. Directions, before, in and after it. 1.
Consideration, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, Exodus 20. 8. you must
first Consider the Number of it. Before the fall (when Man's nature was pure)
that the Lord God gave Man but one Commandment, to wit, that of not eating the
forbidden Fruit: but after the fall (when Man's nature was defiled) God gave him
ten Commandments, and those mostly prohibitive to stop his proneness and strong
Inclinations unto evil: The first of the tenth does teach you the Object of
Worship; The second, the matter of Worship the third, the manner of worship
(both of outward and inward worship in all these) as the fourth teaches you the
time of worship, inwardly and outwardly also. The time of worshipping God, is
not left to man's own liberty, for then the loose heart of man would keep no
time at all, though time of worship (as well as, that God is to be worshipped)
is [Juris naturalis] written on the Tables of man's heart, yet one of seven is
[Juris positivi] and written on the Tables of stone; both which are the
Writings and the workmanship of God, as Exodus 32. 16. The fourth Commandment
closes up the first Table. (1) As the most powerful means to keep all the three
former, and (2) As it draws into one the whole worship of God: and [lastly] as
it makes Gods worship known to the World, which otherwise would not be so well
known, as it is by keeping a day for it.

2. Consider secondly the Situation of it, as the fourth Commandment is placed
by God [himself] in the close of the first Table, so likewise before the front
of the second Table; it stands in the midst of both, to show you, that the
Observation of both Tables in the Decalogue, depends much upon the
Sanctification of the Sabbath, which has influence on both Tables; for as the
immediate honor and worship of God (which is brought forth and swaddled in the
three first Commandments) is suckled and nursed up in the bosom of the Sabbath;
so the keeping of the Sabbath is the best expedient, and the most blessed help
for the keeping of all the six following Commandments; thus it appears, that
the Sabbath is [caput and Compendium Religionis, and omnem Dei cultum in se
Continet] it is the head and Epitome of all Religion, containing in it the whole
worship of God, and the whole duty of man, respecting both his holliness to God
and his righteousness to men.

3. The third Consideration is, the Influence of it; that Religion and the
power of Godliness is, just as the Sabbath is, as the Observation of the
Sabbath finds reception, accordingly does true Christianity decay or flourish
in Persons, Families, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Countries. It decreases or
increases just as the Sabbath is esteemed, or disesteemed. This might be
demonstrated (without difficulty) both by Scripture and Reason, or Argument, as
well as by Experience: moreover it is richly worth your Observation, that when
the Children of Israel broke the fourth Commandment only in the matter of
gathering Manna, the Lord taxes them for the breaking of all the Commandments,
Exodus 16. 28. because he that makes no Conscience of breaking the Sabbath, will
not stick (when it may serve his turn) at the breaking of any other
Commandment, he stands alike affected unto all; the whole Law is but one
Copulative. Ezekiel. 18. 10, 11, 12, 13. It Is like a Chain that is dissolved by
the loosening of one link; that an offense in one, makes guilty of all, Jam. 2.
10. All Sins flow from the same corruption as Temptation draws it out; he that
breaks one (especially this fourth) habitually breaks all, not so Actually.

4. The fourth Consideration is, the stamps on it, that as the Sabbath is the
Mother of Religion. So God has put four Immortal stamps upon this precept that
concerns it, above all the other nine precepts: as (1) It has such a Preface
before it, as none of the other has, to wit, [Remember.] (2) Whereas the other
nine are delivered either negatively (as most of them are) or positively only.
The fourth is delivered both ways. (3) Whereas the other Commandments are
delivered to a man's person only [Thou and Thou.] This is not to our persons
only, but to our Families and Relations also. [Thou and Thine, Thou and all
Thine.] (4) It has more grounds and Reasons alleged in it (to enforce the
Observation of it) then any other precept, as 1. 'Its own Equity. 2. Gods
bounty. 3. His own Example. and 4. The days benediction. Those four Immortal
stamps and Characters of Authority, you must neither forget nor neglect, much
less the Sabbath, but remember to sanctify it; the Gentiles as well as the Jews
are obliged to observe it, seeing the ground of it is general (to Gentiles as
well as to Jews) and the Equity of it perpetual, for the Commemoration of Gods
Creation of the World, and of Christ's Redemption of it, have (both) an
Universal and an everlasting Equity in Them.

5. Consider fifthly, the sense of its preface [Remember] imports three things:
1. The Antiquity of the command, (as it is said in another Case, 1 Chronicles. 4.
22.) These are ancient things, almost as ancient as the World it self, Genesis 2.
2, 3. and the ceasing of Manna on the seventh day. Exodus 16. 24, 30. plainly
shows, that [ab ipsius Mundi primordio invaluisset Sabbati Observantia] the
Sabbath was kept from the beginning of the Creation before the promulgation of
the Law at Sinai, Exodus 20. which was added, because ancient things are apt to
wear out of the mind of Man; and the Devil had endeavored to blot out the
Remembrance of the Sabbath, and of the Creation in the long-lives of the
Patriarks, that so he might Usher in that foolish conceit of the Worlds
Eternity, so cried up by some Heathen Sages, though decryed and exploded by the
wisest of them. 2. It implies the weightiness of the Command; it is not left
either to your pleasure, or to your leisure, or liking, (as a frivolous or
indifferent thing) that may admit either of a dispensation or a discharge; but
among all your other necessary duties, you must Remember this duty of weight
and of great importance: and 3. It Imports man's proneness to forget it; ever
since his memory was wounded by the fall, therefore is he often called on to
remember: Alas you will forget it (thinking yourown thoughts, etc.) before you
be aware.

6. Consider the morality of it: the fourth Command does indeed consist of some
things Temporary and Ceremonial (and so by consequence changeable) peculiar to
the Jews: as (1) Not stirring out of their places, Exodus 16. 29. (2) Not
kindling of Fires, Exodus 35. 3. (3) Nor carrying burdens, Jer. 17 21. Neh. 13.
15, 16, 17. So likewise their Sabbath was (4) A sign 'twixt God and them, Exodus
31. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. and (5) In remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt.
Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Yea (lastly) there Seventh day was to be Observed with several
Rites. Number. 9. 10. all which are Typical, and so Temporary and Changeable;
besides all these appendices, there is another part of it which is moral and
perpetual; as (1) That there should be a day of Sabbatizing or Resting [as the
Word [Sabat] signifies,] (2) That this day should be kept holy to the Lord; and
(3) That a Seventh day should be observed as an holy rest, not this or that
particular Seventh day, but one of the Seven: For, 1. The precise time of the
Seventh-day, from the Creation, is lost by the Suns standing still in Joshuahs
days, and by 'its retrograde Motion ten degrees in Hezekiahs days, Josh. 10.
13. Esa. 38. 8. Hence some think that our Lord's Day is the very same
numerically with the Seventh-day, if so, then we keep Godsday commanded here.

7. Again secondly, as the Suns standing still and running backward made an
alteration, in the course of the universe, and so did lose [as to us] that
precise computation of the Seventh day. So likewise, should that precise part
of 24. hours (from the Creation) of the Seventh-day belong to the morality of
the fourth Commandment, then such as Travel by Sea, either East or West to such
and such degrees, are obliged to Impossibilities; for by the distance of
Climates, they may gain or lose, half a day or a whole day, (as Sir Francis
Drake did, who putting a girdle about the World in his Sea-Voyage, though a
critical measurer of time, yet through the Variation of Climats, lost one day.
(Fullers Holy State. Chap. 22. Book. 2. Page 128. In his life.) So that it is
Impossible for them precisely and punctually to observe that part of time.
(3ly.) Neither is it said in the fourth Command: [Remember to keep holy the
Seventh day,] but it is said, twice over, [keep holy the Sabbath-day] which does
not only respect the Jewish-Sabbath under the Law, but may also have reference
to the Christian Sabbath under the Gospel. The Hebrew Text may as well be read
thus, Remember the resting-day to keep it holy, [a seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God.] So that he who Remembers to keep a Religious rest weekly,
is not breaker, but a true observer of the fourth Commandment.

8. Fourthly and lastly, it is worth your observation that the Seventh-day after
the Creation is not butted and bounded with the Evening and the Morning, as all
the other six days are, Genesis 2. 2, 3. because (as may be supposed) the time
would come under the Gospel, wherein the Sabbath should have a new beginning
and a new ending, when all things were to be made new by Christ, Revel. 21. 5.
and if all things, then (by consequence) the Sabbath is made new by the Lord of
the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 8. Mark. 2. 28. And hence is that new Sabbath called the
Lord's Day, Revel. 1. 10. which very Phrase Imports the Lords Institution of it,
as parallel Phrases do (the Lords Supper, the Lords-Prayer, the Lords-Table)
intimate that he Instituted all these. It being the manner in the Apostles-days
to call all things [the Lords] rather then [Christs.] [(...)] the Article
[(...)] (set before it) makes it found in sense [that Lordsday] it is predicated
of him denominatively as it is, of, or belonging properly to the Lord, it is
expressed by an Adjective possessive, as showing the day to be a part of
Christ's possession, not only as all other days are his by Creation, but this is
his (more Emphatically called so) by way of Consecration and Institution.

9. This leads to the seventh Consideration, the Actions of it, that it is more
then probable, Christ (himself) in his own Person was the Author and Institutor
of the First Day. Sabbath, supposing those few things, which ought to be
supposed: as (1) That Christ's life was the light of Men, Joh. 1. 4. as he is
the Object of your hope, so he must be the pattern of your holiness; he will
not be your Savior for happiness, unless he be your Samplar for holiness too,
1 John 3. 3. (as above) therefore he bids you learn of him, Math. 11. 29.
[Imitari quem colimus est summa Christianitatis.] Conformity to Christ (whom we
Worship) is the very Sum of Christianity, it is an Imitation of his Morals,
though his Miracles and Mediatory Actions are unimitable. Christ came primarily
as the price of our Redemption, but secondarily as the pattern of our
Sanctification, and so gave us an Example that we should follow his steps. 1
Pet. 2. 21. and he instructs us by his doing as well as by his teaching, Act.
1. 1. [to do and to teach.]

10. The premises being granted, that Christ's [doing] instructs us as well as
his teaching, you will find this one of Christ's [doings] to keep the first day
holy (himself) after his Resurrection; as he rose again (after he had rested
all the Jewish Sabbatb in the grave) upon the first day morning; So he came the
very next first day into the midst of his disciples (then Assembled,) Joh. 20.
19. and the very next first day (immediately after that) he came to them again
also. Ver. 26. The like he did ('it is very probable) every first day during the
40. days he continued upon Earth between his Resurrection and Ascension,
because the Sabbath Day (being also the first day of the week) the Apostles
still kept their holy Assemblies, Act. 2. 1. and then was the holy Ghost given
to them. The (2) thing to be supposed (briefly) is, that Christ taught his
Disciples the observation of the first day-Sabbath, not only by his appearing
once and again to them on this day in a Solemn manner, and thereby approving of
their meetings on that day, but also by his speaking to them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, (all the 40. days of his abode on Earth with
them, no. constantly but by intervals on each first day,) Act. 1. 3. and surely
this great concern of the time of worship must needs belong to the Kingdom of
God. The (3) thing to be supposed is that Christ is as faithful as Moses, who
ordained all things generally necessary and profittable for the Church, Heb. 3.
2. and no less can be the observation of the Sabbath, so needful as above.

11. The eighth Consideration is, the Arguments for it. The many Arguments for
the First-day-Sabbath, which for brevities fake I shall here but name. as (1)
Christ's own pattern, as above. So (2) the Apostles practice, whom undoubtedly
Christ instructed, (during the 40. days) in the change of legal Sacrifices,
Sacraments, and Ministry into Evangelical (as all grant) and why not of the
Jewish-Sabbath into the Christian, since there is the same Reason; otherwise
the Apostles would not have kept their Solemn meetings on the first day, as
they did, Act. 2. 1. and 2. 7. (the Apostle being at Troas several days might
have kept any of the seven-days, yet pitches on the first day for Prayer,
Preaching, and Celebrating the Lords Supper,) 1 Cor. 16. 2. As Christ is the
Rule Ruling, so the Apostles are the Rule Ruled, and we should follow them as
they followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. The (3) Argument is the precept of the
Apostles (as well as their practice.) They did not only observe it themselves,
but they also prescribed it to others, Phil. 4. 9. 1 Cor. 16. 2. [Every first
day, etc.] Which implys, (1) That their Solemn meetings were on the first day.
(2) That this day was well known among Christians for their meeting day, this
Epistle being writ to the Corinthians about 23. Years after Christ's death, (3)
This day was injoined for such holy exercises, as Collections usually followed
in primitive times, Act. 2. 42. (4) The word (every) shows 'twas no occasional
prescription, but a perpetual Ordinance, and (5) Ordained to be observed in all
the Churches, 1 Cor. 4. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 23. Besides [(...)] the Lord's Day is
added in the old Greek-Copy, as Beza witnesses, on 1 Cor. 16. 1. [(...)]

12. The fourth Argument is, from the proportion or equality of honor due to
Christ with the Father, Joh. 5. 23. The Son must be honored equally with him,
and it is no Robbery, Phil. 2. 7. As the Father has been honored with the
Seventh-day Observation (his resting day) from the Creation to the Redemption
of the World. So the Son must be honored from thence to the consummation of
the World with the first-days observation, which was his resting day. Heb. 4.
10. and that from a greater work, as Jer. 23. 7, 8. otherwise there would be no
equality: The (5) Argument is, the prophecies of the old Test. that the Sabbath
of the new Test. should be on the first day of the week; as the Institution of
Circumcision on the eighth-day, the Psalms [on Shemineth] or eights, and Psalm.
110. 3. with 118. 24. Math. 21. 42. Act. 4. 11. speaks all of this day as the
latter Scripture expounds the former, etc. The (6) Argument is, the prerogative
of this day above other days, as on this day, (1) The light was Created and the
Angels of Light also, (2) Israel went through the Red Sea. Ancients say (3) God
fed them with Manna, (4) Also on this day the star appeared to the wise men,
and (5) That Christ fed 500. with 5 Loaves, and (6) Was Baptized on it, however
rose upon it, And (7) is Gods Judgments upon profaners of it, and the (8) The
constant and continued custom of the Church to keep it, in all ages since
Christ.

13. The second thing (after the pregnant considerations) is the practical and
profitable Directions, how the Christian Sabbath may be Sanctified so, as to
bring a Spiritual blessing into the Soul. The first Direction: prepare to meet
your God, O Christian, Amos 4. 12. there is no work (either Natural or
Artificial) but it requires preparation, how much more this Religious work! the
Husbandman prepares for his Husbandry, and the Musician for his Music, and
shall not you [that are part of Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. 9.] have your Soil
prepared for the Celestial seed. O pray to the only preparer of hearts. Prove.
16. 1. to the skilful Musician, that he may tune your harp (your heart) to
Sions Songs, and Sabbathservices, that you may make melody therewith and
therein to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. The second Direction is, set some time apart
(at least) the evening before the Sabbath to trim your Lamps for meeting your
Bridegroom, Math. 25. 7. The Traveller makes all ready over night for his
Journey intended next morning; and that Oven which is heated the night before,
will be the sooner fitted for baking in the following day: the Jews had their
preparation for the Sabbath the evening before it, Mark. 15. 42. Joh. 19. 31.
their preparation to the Sabbath began at three a Clock in the afternoon,
having [Sabbatulum ante Sabbathum] before Sabbath, before the Sabbath. Those of
Tiberias began the Sabbath sooner then others, as those of Trephore continued
longer, laying down this as their Rule (as Buxtorf relates) Tutius est tollere
de profano and addere ad Sacrum, quam tollere de Sacro and addere ad profanum;
It Is safer to pinch a part of the weekday, than the least part of the
Sabbath Day.

Our own Chronicles tell us, that the Saxons (in those dark times) were so
devout, as not to allow their secular affairs to entrench upon their
Sabbath Days Devotion, and therefore began their preparation at three in the
afternoon on the last day of the week; insomuch that our forefathers at the
Ringing of the Bell to Prayer at that hour, the Husbandman would give over his
labor in the Field, and the Tradesman his work in the Shop, and set
themselves to prepare for the Sabbath: Clarks, Engl. Martyr. Page 30. Tells of
Edgars Law to this purpose. And Tacitus says [Nox diem ducere videtur] the
night seems to lead the day, as the evening, in Genesis 1. is (all along) set
before the Morning, and therefore the evening before must belong to it. O how
the Devotion of those dark days condemns the Indevotion of our (more knowing)
times, wherein Men are so far degenerated from their Ancestors Zeal, that they
dare entrench upon the holy time, either in worldly works or in foolish games,
as if the waters of the Sanctuary (that full-Sea of knowledge promised, Esa. 11.
9.) had extinguished the fire of the Sanctuary, to wit, that former Zeal and
fervent devotion in Solemnizing Gods Sacred Sabbath in the entire extent of it.
I the longer insist upon this second Direction, because usually, as men measure
to God in preparation, God remeasureth to men in performance of his blessing: I
have found my best Prognostics about what communion with God I should enjoy on
the Sabbath Day, from the Divine influences I have had upon my heart the
evening before.

15. The third Direction is, Remember, not only to prepare for it, but also to
long after it, as a day of desires to your Soul, the preface (Remember) spreads
it self over all the duties of the Sabbath, before, in and after also: Drusius
tells of an holy Jew that would usually go out early in the Morning of the
Sabbath, and having put on his best Apparel would, cry out (Veni sponsamea)
come my blessed Bride, thou art welcome; as being exceeding glad of 'its
coming. If you, (with the Mariner) have lanched out your heart (the Ship) out
of the Haven of Worldly mud over night, you will long for the Morning, (as
Psalm. 130. 6.) to hoise up Sail for your Voyage to the Cape of good Hope, and
you cannot then but rise early as Israel did in their Siege of Jericho upon the
Sabbath day. Josh. 6. 15. have not you the strong holds of Sin (as they had the
walls of Jericho) to batter down. O long for this Queen of days (as the
Ancients called it) for your Souls market day, having cast up all your Spiritual
wants overnight. Say with David, my Soul longs, yea even faints for the
Courts of the Lord, O when shall I come and appear before him, etc. Psalm. 8.
42. and 63. 1. and 42. 1, 2.

16. The fourth Direction is, Improve every part and parcel of the Lords
Sabbath for your Souls edification and advantage (either publicly, or
privately) in holy and Religious exercises; the Hebrew word (Shamer) to (keep)
the Sabbath, signifies such a careful and diligent keeping, as is that of Gold
or precious things, which a man would not lose any part or parcel of: how
careful is the Goldsmiths of keeping the very filings of his Gold, and the
Apothecary (in his beating of Pearl to Powder) is extraordinary watchful, that
the least dust of it fly not out of his Mortar; and why? Because a little of
such things is very precious and of great value: Thus the smallest part of this
Holy Day is of great price, take heed of loseing the least moment of the
precious Sabbath (one Inch whereof the Damned in Hell would give worlds for, if
they had them) but improve the whole day for Gods glory and your Souls good. O
then, that practice (of too many persons in too many places) in making Gods
Sacred Sabbath the very voider and dunghill for all refuse-businesses (putting
them off to that day) must needs be a great provocation to the most high and
holy God, it is a Scripture wonder, [will a man rob God? [or, Hebr. will Adam
plunder Elohim?] Mal. 3. 8. Seeing the whole day is consecrated both by God,
and also (as Ananias goods) to God, it is dangerous to keep back any part of it
for your own use, Act. 5. 1, 2, 5, 10. and not keep it wholly and (in every
part of it) holy to the Lord.

17. The fifth Direction is, make this day a day of your delights, as before a
day of desires; delight in the day, and in every duty of the day; account the
Sabbath not only your duty, but also your privilege, not only your work, but
your wages too, Isa. 58. 13. Call the Sabbath your delight, and if it be not
so, you may not call it so; surely it was not so to those Worldly wretches that
cried, when will the Sabbath be over, etc. Amos 8. 5. as if they had been in
the stocks, all the while they were keeping a Sabbath; The Greek word for
delight is [(...)] Septuag. Psalm. 37. 4. etc. Which comes from the word [(...)]
that signifies Paradise, or place of pleasure; to intimate, the Lord and his
Sabbaths may not be as stocks to you, but as a Paradise, and a place of
pleasure; you should take as much delight therein, as in walking the Round in
the choicest Spring-garden. O how should you bless God for the Sabbath, as Neh.
9. 14. and rejoice in it as in the day the Lord has made (for Spiritual
delight,) Psalm. 118. 24. counting it so, and making it so; not only a delight,
but also holy and honorable and because holy therefore honorable. O may you
but be in the Spirit on this Lords day, (as Rev. 1. 10.) and taste how good the
Lord is, (Psalm. 34. 8.) in the dainties of holy duties, and in his heart
refreshing and Soul-ravishing Ordinances; you will find most incomparable
pleasure therein, and far-far exceeding all the dirty delights of sensualists
and Sabbath breakers, Prove. 14. 10. Job 27. 10.

18. The sixth Direction, be not weary of it before it be over. The whole
Sabbath should be spent without weariness, in works of Piety, mercy and
necessity, and in none else; here is variety to prevent nauseating in works of
Piety you may pass from one Ordinance to another, (as the Be flys from one
flower to another) and not be weary; and from works of Piety you may go to
works of Charity, and from thence to works of necessity for your own natural
nourishment: O then, here is no need of crying out [what a weariness is it] as
Mal. 1. 13. or [when will it be over] as Amos 8. 5. as if in little ease all
the while; Carnal hearts know not (indeed) how to wear out the Sabbath ('it is
such a weariness to them) and therefore they wish it over, full loath would they
beg David's office out of his hand (of being a doorkeeper in the house of God,
who must be first in and last out,) Psalm. 84. 10. and what would they do to
spend an everlasting Sabbath in Heaven, that are so troubled and tired with a
short one on Earth, not without a world of wilful distractions, but the
Spiritual heart that is rapt up and ravished in Spirit, Rev. 1. 10. and is in
the fear of the Lord (and in the comforts of the holy Ghost) all the day long,
Prove. 23. 17. can wish with Joshuah that the Sun stood still on that day for
more killing of Sin, and quickening of grace.

19. The seventh Direction is, be sure you make it a right day of restraint to
you, as it is called, Deuteronomy. 16. 8. (Jomegnatsereth) diem Interdicti; a day of
prohibition from all Improper work; the same word is used, Numb. 16. 48. and
the Plague was stayed, or restrained by either. (1) Entreaty, as 2 Samuel 24. 21.
or (2) By Authority and Commands or (3) By strength and force; all these ways
you should Remember to [keep] the Sabbath, if you keep not your heart with all
keepings, Prove. 4. 23. You can never (keep) the Sabbath holy. The Plague of
your heart (mentioned, 1 King. 8. 38.) will not be stayed or restrained, unless
you, (1) Offer upon Christ (your Altar, Heb. 13. 10.) Your Entreaties to God
with David 2 Samuel 24. 21. and (2) Unless you lay Gods charge and command upon
your extravagant heart to keep within compass, Cant. 2. 7. Yea and (3) You must
use holy force and Violence (going but in Gods strength, Psalm. 71. 16.) to
restrain your loose, slippery and treacherous heart, both from wicked, and from
worldly work on that day, for in the former work you keep the day to Satan, and
in the latter to your self, but not to your Savior in either; besides every
wicked work is cursed Sin any day, but it is doubly so on the Lord's Day, the
season being a great aggravation of the Sin, like that in, Est. 7. 8. it is a
ravishing the Queen of days before the very face of the King of Kings: and
every Worldly work done on Gods-day can never expect Gods blessing, but will be
a Canker, and may say with Jacob, I shall bring a curse and not a blessing,
Genesis 27. 12. he that did but gather a few sticks (a small business some may
say) was paid home with stones because he did presumptuously on that day, Numb.
15. 30, 32, 35, 36. If you must do no manner of work, (save only the three
works of Piety, Charity, and Necessity,) no manner of Worldly work, much less
wicked work. O do not eat forbidden fruit, when you may eat of all the Trees in
the garden, on your six days, do not your own works, (but cease from them, Heb.
4. 10.) nor speak your own words on this high and holy day. Isa. 58. 13. Exodus
31. 14.

20. The eighth Direction is, never satisfy your Soul with spending one
Sabbath, without enjoying something therein of the Lord God of Sabbath; never
content your self with Elijahs Mantle, without the Lord God of that Mantle, 2
King. 2. 14. O let it not be enough to you (as it was not enough to Absalom to
live in Jerusalem. 2 Samuel 14. 32.) without seeing the Kings face; cry with
David (in every duty of the day) O when will God come unto me, Psalm. 101. 2. To
miss of a good friend is sad, to meet him is joyful, Psalm. 73. 25. If you miss
of this your best friend, this will justly fadden you (as it did even Saul
himself, 1 Samuel 28. 15. If you meet him and miss him not, If your friend (the
King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3.) Sit at your Table, then your Spiknard will send
forth the smell thereof, Cant. 1. 12. Such a sign of sweet friendship and
fellowship must needs fill your heart with joy unspeakable, and full of glory
(as it reminds and represents your Communion in Heaven) and make the Sabbath a
delight (indeed) to you; then shall you delight your self in the Lord and he
will (not only) cause you to ride upon the high places of the Earth, but also,
upon the heights of the Heavens, where you shall keep an everlasting Sabbath
(in which all Sabbaths meet) and whereof there is no evening. Is. 58. 13, 14.
Psalm. 37. 4.

21. The ninth and last Direction is, be careful to close up the Sabbath with a
gracious frame of heart when (with Zacheus) you have got a view of your sweet
Jesus from top to toe, upon the Sycomore Tree of some Gospeladvantage (though
low of stature in your self) this is your after duty, be sure you take Christ
home with you, and joyfully receive him there, as he did, Luke 19. 3, 4, 5, 9.
he is (you will find) the most blessed guest that brings Salvation, with him as
well as a Supper, Rev. 3. 20. Reflect then upon the whole carriage of your
heart all the day; and falling down upon your knees. (1) Beg pardon for your
drowsiness or distraction, for your want of fervency of Spirit in serving the
Lord, Romans 12. 11. And a Sabbath frame of Soul. (2) Return praise for the
Angels moving the waters in order to any healing, either the weakness of your
grace or the strength of your Corruption: lose not the warmth of the day in the
cool of the evening, for want of watchfulness; and let Sabbath day thoughts
abide with you all the weekdays, then weekday thoughts will less trouble you
on the Sabbath day.

Of Family Duties, the first Pregnant Considerations, second Practical and
profitable Directions. CHAP. XII.
1. HItherto of the walk of a Christian in personal Holiness; a short discourse
of his Relative Holiness in the close of all, Consider the first, it is true, a
man is, what he is in private and in personal Actions habitually, either good
or evil; and it is as true, that a man who is good privately and personally,
cannot but be good Relatively also, he will labor to be good in all Relations:
be will desire and endeavor to be holy as a Father, as a Husband and as a
Master; this holds true in all other Relations, Superior, Inferior or Equal,
as a Wife, as a Child, and as a Servant Yea as a Magistrate, and as a Minister,
etc. All persons are Really, what they are Relatively; unsound hearts (like the
Pillar of smoke in the Wilderness) will have a dark side, as well as a bright,
because they be not, what they seem to be, they be not to God, what they seem
to be to men, you may not be like the Candle in a dark Lantern, that gives but
light one way; but rather as the Candle set upon the Candlestick that disperses
its light every way, into every corner of the House, you must not be diligent
in one Relation, and negligent in another, but be holy in all Relations wherein
God has set you.

2. The second Consideration is, Religion (in Truth) disperses it self into
every Relation, and makes the New Creature, [(...)] a publick-Creature, for the
good of others, a blessing, (Genesis 12. 2.) to Family Relations, and so by
consequence to both Church and State, whereof a Family is the Epitome, being
(as the Philosopher says) the first Society in Nature: as before the flood,
[both] were bound up in private Families, as in a little volume: so now, the
way to have both good, is to have Families good, whereof Churches and Kingdoms
do consist to make them as great Folios; Religious Families are blessed
nurseries out of which are transplanted a good Son into one place, a good
Daughter into another, and these bring a blessing along with them to those
several places, as Jacob did to Laban, Genesis 30. 27, 30. and Joseph to Potiphar,
Genesis 39. 23. those two blessed branches of the Patriarks Families, (though
transplanted into a Foreign Soil) carries a blessing to Foreign Countries.

3. The third Consideration is, seeing it is the Lord that sets the Solitary in
Families, Psalm. 68. 6. and appoints the bounds of your habitation, Act. 17. 26.
the placing of persons in this or that place and habitation is from the
appointment of the Lord thereof; as your being, so your dwelling is from the
Lord, and this is not for wordly convenience only, but for the worship of God,
Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. and 11. 18. 19. which is your homage and quit-Rent, you must pay
to the Lord of all, Act. 10. 36. Prove. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Genesis 18. 19.
Hereupon every new house was to be dedicated to God, Deu. 20. 5. with Prayers
and Praises, as David did his, Psalm. 30. title, and as all should be
Sanctified, 1 Timothy 4. 5. the walls of your house are ever before the Lord, Isa.
49. 16. and therefore Holiness to the Lord should ever be writ upon them, Zech.
14. 20. that your house may be as the house of David, Zech. 12. 8. Psalm. 101.
2. and as Melanctons Prince, a Church Court and Academy.

4. The fourth Consideration is, in two branches. 1. Keep out Sin, that grand
trouble house, Job 5. 24. and 11. 14. and 22. 23. do you visit your habitation,
it is a great mercy, denied to many; put Iniquity far from your Tabernacle (by
Repentance and Reformation) and while God fills your house with good things, do
not you fill it with evil Sins. O let not this be your kindness to your friend,
2 Samuel 16. 17. O do not thus requite the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. your house should
be all built of Irish-Oak (as it were) which cannot endure any venomous Spider
to come near it; 2. You must keep in the Ark, as well as keep out Sin, thus did
David, Psalm. 101. 2, 3. he would set no wicked thing before him, yet he did the
holy Ark, before which he danced with all his might 2 Samuel 6 14, 16, 17.

5. That you may be rightly guided in this last walk of a Christian, to walk in
your house with a perfect heart, as David did, Psalm. 101. 2. and both keep out
Sin, and keep in the Ark, to wit, Religion, as Obed-edom did and was blessed
for so doing, 2 Samuel 6. 11. take these following directions (the second thing
propounded) which relates, First, to the Governors of a Family, and Secondly,
to the governed in it. First to Governors, the (1) Direction is, wheresoever
God has set out the bounds of your habitation, Act. 17. 26. though God say to
you, as Genesis 49. 13. (Zebulun shall dwell by the Seashore) an unruly
Neighbor, and that yields no good Air, and it may be not an house to your
liking in all things, yet say, this is the place appointed me of God, and
having God for your Portion there cry with David, your lines are fallen to you
in a pleasant place, and that you have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 9, 6. Gods
company (to give all good things to you, Math. 7. 11. and to take all evil
things from you) makes a Cottage, yea a Cave to become a Stately Court, and a
Princely Palace, for where the King is there is the Court: though you have not
all to your mind, yet this will make you say, you have all (as Jacob, Genesis 33.
11. and as Paul, Phil. 4. 18.) in having him, that has all: yea though you
have nothing (in comparison) yet possessing all things in him. 2 Cor. 6. 10.
when you have got the Divine Art of contentment, Phil. 4. 12. O Remember how
the great Architect of the World had not a house to put his head in (though he
was the Carpenter, Mark. 6. 3. and the builder of all, Heb. 11. 10.) Math. 8.
20. Phil. 2. 7. 2 Cor. 8. 9. and how those great Favorites of Heaven wandered
about in Sheepskins, etc. Heb. 11. 37. 38. Having no certain dwelling place. 1
Cor. 4. 11. Suppose you have none (or but a mean one) on Earth; yet have you
one (and that a Magnificent one) in Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

6. The second Direction is, having an habitation appointed you of God, be sure
you make the Lord your Counceller about a yokefellow (whether you be Male or
Female) if you have a call thereunto; Marriage [quasi] Marre-age or Merry-age,
it is the making or marring of you for your whole life; of all your civil
affairs, there is none of the like Importance as this, having an Influence upon
all your days you live in the World: it is like a stratagem in War, that cannot
be recal'd when you will: according to your choice of a good or evil Spirit
(you bring into your bed and bosom) you make your house a lasting Heaven or
Hell; You are mine, and I am yours, [brevis quidem est Cantiuncula, longum vero
Epiphonema] is a short Song, but it has a long undersong, therefore (an Error
herein being Irrecoverable) you have need of Argus his hundred Eyes, as well as
Briareus his hundred hands, and of Gods Counsel (above all) that you lay not
the foundation of a lasting sorrow thereby; and that your Conjugium prove not a
Conjurgium a continual crossing (instead of comforting) one another, when two
are in one yoke and each draws contrary ways to the other. Hereupon (some say)
that Adam in his deep sleep was praying for a meet help, Genesis 2. 21. and the
Scripture says expressly, that Isaac went out to confer with God (in Prayer and
Meditation) about this weighty matter, Genesis 24. 63. a good Wife is from the
Lord, Prove. 19. 14. And so is a good Husband.

7. The third Direction is, let not that Doctrine of Devils (that forbids to
Marry, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3.) hinder you, as if it were better to live upon the
Common, or as if the unmarried estate were more honorable (without regard to
the proper and peculiar gift, 1 Cor. 7. 7, 9.) for Marriage is honorable unto
all, etc. Heb. 13. 4. and God himself (not Cecrops, Lycurgus, or Numa) was the
first Author and Institutor of it and that in Paradise, yea and before the
fall, Genesis 2. 22. hence it is called the Covenant of God, Prove. 2. 17. and though
Paul the unmarried (qua talis, as it is said) went up to God (which was a great
honor) yet Moses that was married had God to come down to him, which was
greater honor; despise not this Divine medicine, which if rightly applied, is
your Arrival at the fair Haven, marriage, quasi merry-age, the sweetest passage
of your life, a rest and center of your affections, Ruth 3. 1. that it may be
well with you, this is desirable (as well as honorable) in both Sexes, for
the man misses his rib and would recover it, and the woman (the rib) would be
in her place under the Arm again.

8. The fourth Direction is, be careful to enter in by Gods way, into Gods
Covenant, not as some that enter into Gods Ordinance, (to wit, Marriage) by the
Devils portal; (to wit, fornication) so lays the Foundation of a curse, and not
of a blessing: the Apostle faith, let them marry only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.
39. you must not marry in Pluto (the God of Riches) nor in Venus (the Goddess
of pleasure) as the Heathens feigned, but in the fear of the Lord; the Rabbis
observe, that in the names of [Ish and Ishah] the Hebrew names of Man and
Woman, is included (Jah) the name of God, and that if you take out Jod and He,
whereof the name (Jah) consists, there remains nothing but (Esch, Esch,)
which signifies fire, fire; the moral of it is good signifying, that if you
marry in any manner but in the Lord, whose name is Jah, Psalm. 68. 4. there will
be nothing but fire, fire, nothing but brawling and doleful dissension, a fire
that burns to the fire of Hell; but if you marry in the Lord, you marry also
with the Lord, and he cannot be absent from his own Marriage; it was Christ's
presence at a marriage that turned water into Wine, Joh. 2. 2, 9. Jesus must be
Invited to your Marriage (as the principal guest) but by no means invite the
Devil (quasi do-evil) who is (Abaddon and Appollyon. Rev. 9. 11.) the destroyer
of all good; Except the Lord be with you to build your house (even in your
foundation work, which is always serious and weighty work) all your endeavors
will be but (Arena sine Calce) sand without lime that cannot hang together, but
like untempered Mortar, will fall asunder, and you build in vain, Psalm. 127. 1.
2. Except and except, etc. It Is vain and it is vain, etc. Should found in your
Ears.

9. The fifth Direction is, if God have made you the husband of a Wife
(especially of such a one as has the seven qualifications of a good one, to
wit, grace, race, face, arts, parts, portion, proportion,) then (1) Be thankful
to your God for so great a blessing, Psalm. 116. 12. this was one of the first
real and and royal gifts that God bestowed on Adam, and that upon deliberation
of Divine wisdom, Genesis 2. 18. the Trinity in the unity had consulted before
about man's first being, (let us make man, etc. Genesis 1. 26.) Now the Unity in
the Trinity consults about man's well-being, and determins it is not good for man
to be alone (I will make him an help-meet for him) a piece so exactly cut out
for him, as answers him rightly in every Joint; no such glorious Creature could
Adam find among all the Creatures that passed before him, hence the woman is
the glory of a Man, 1 Cor. 11. 7. O bless God for such a glorious Creature, and
rejoice at the recovery of your lost Rib, Cant. 3. 11. Rejoice in the Lord the
giver of that mercy, 1 Cor. 1. 31. for marriages are made in Heaven, before
they be Solemnized on Earth; it is the work of God the Creator to provide an
helpmeet for Man his Creature, Genesis 2. 18. Prove. 18. 22. Prove. 19. 14. And (2)
Live with your Wife (that God has graciously given you) as a Man of knowledge,
1 Pet. 3. 7. where should knowledge and wisdom be, but in the head, if you have
found (by seeking God in Prayer as Isaac did) a Wife, that is, a good Wife (as
name is used, Eccles. 7. 1. for a good name and Wool, Esa. 1. 18. for white
Wool) you have found a good thing, a fit and faithful yoke fellow is a singular
blessing, and you have obtained favor of the Lord, Prove. 18. 22. as this calls
for abundance of praise to your God, so for abundance of prudence to your
Consort, which is the weaker Vessel, and so ought to be handled as a Venice
glass with all tenderness even as Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 29.

10. The sixth Direction is, if God make you the head and Governor of an house
and Family, then learn in the first place to rule your little house well, to
wit, your self, he that has no rule over his own Spirit, is very unfit to take
the rule over others, Prove. 14. 29. and 16. 32. and Eccles. 7. 9. Anger may
rush into a wise-mans bosom, but it shall not rest there, he dare not let the
Sun go down upon so evil a guest and Counselor; sury dwells and domineers in
no house or heart (not only till the Sun go down a whole day) but while it go
round (a whole year,) Ephesians. 4. 26. but where a fool is the Master of the Family,
a troubler of his own house that brings all to nothing, Prove. 11. 29. his
livelihood (by a secret curse) Vanishes into Smoke, and if not his life (by
fretting) yet his liberty goes away, for he shall be servant to the wise in
heart; none Triumphed in Rome but such as had five Victories; nor you in Heaven
without Victory over your five senses.

11. The seventh Direction is, be careful to lead an Exemplary and a convincing
Life, that you may be a pattern of Piety to your whole Family; patterns are so
prevalent (both to good and evil) that Pelagius did think (though amiss) Sin
came into and is continued in the World by imitation and not by propagation; be
sure you show Piety at home (as well as abroad,) 1 Timothy 5. 4. and be not like
the Stage Players, that act the part of both great and good men upon the stage,
but follow them into the Tiring-House (where they dis-robe themselves) and then
it will appear they are but very Rogues and vile-Varlots; every man is, what he
is at home and in private. If Godliness be writ in a fair Character, and in
large and lovely Letters, in the leaves of your life, 'twill invite your
Children and Servants to Read, like, and love it, who otherwise (possibly)
would never have heeded it; the Master of a Family is the Ordinary
Looking-glass, whereby the whole Family do dress themselves, [Regis ad exemplum
totus Componitur Orbis,] as is the politick-head, so are the People, the body;
and as is the domestick-head, so (usually) is the household good or evil: as it
is with a fish, if the head be sweet, all is sweet; if it stink, all is
putrefying: The Office of an head is great, in guiding and going before the
whole body; in Joseph's dream, Genesis 37. 9. [behold the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, etc.] the Father of the Family should be as the Sun, full of Heavenly
light in himself, and communicating of his light to enlighten the Moon (his
wise) and the Stars of several Magnitudes) (his Children) yea and the Air and
the Earth too, to wit, all his Servants.

12. The eighth Direction is, if you be the Wise or Mother of the Family, you
must be of a wise Conversation, which wonderfully wins (as well as wooes) all
you are related to, toward Conversion as well as Conviction. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. you must be as the Moon [in Joseph's dream] shining out (in your
Orb) in your husbands absence, and yet vailing to him, (as the Moon to the Sun)
when he is present, and in his power being Subject to him in all his lawful
commands or restraints. O that you may be fair as the Moon, Cant. 6. 10.
Shining bright in all Virtues and Graces, while you are ordering your
Family-affaires, as Sarah and Abigail, etc. And though you may have sometimes,
a dark side toward the Earth, yet (as the Moon in her very Eclipse) you may
have a bright side toward Heaven which may never be Ecclipsed; you should be
to your Husband what David's harp was to Saul in his fury and Phrensy; 1 Samuel
16. 23. when your Husband is at any time (as who is not at some time)
transported into passion; see that you cast Milk and not Oil upon the flames
of his Anger, that you may quench that fire and not more inflame it by adding
another fire (your own anger,) to it, 'twas once a blessed Expedient in a godly
Couple (though both Choleric) to live lovingly together for forty years,
without ever any fallings out betwixt them, by yiedling evermore to each others
passions, and never being angry both together.

13. The ninth Direction is, to both the Sun and the Moon [the Husband and the
Wife] jointly, that you live together as heirs of the grace of life, that your
Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Alas you are Men and Women (Subject to
many passions and infirmities, Act. 14. 15. Jam. 5. 17.) and not Angels, freed
from all frailties of the Flesh; and therefore you have need to be enriched
with all grace, whereby you may perform the duties, enjoy the comforts, undergo
the cares, and resist the Temptations that do attend your persons and
conditions, as becomes the Gospel you profess, Phil. 1. 27. and your praying
much with and for each other (without hindrance, 1 Pet. 3. 7.) will (with Gods
blessing) wonderfully increase and Spiritualize your mutual affections one to
another, either jarring will make you leave praying, or praying will make you
leave jarring; Isaac and Rebeccah were the most loving Couple we Read of, Genesis
24. 67. For they were a praying Couple, Genesis 25. 21, 22. he prayed for his Wife
constantly, as the Hebrew signifies, and she prayed down her passions
prudently, he got the mercy (desired), and she the Oracle, Abraham obeys God in
things grievous to him, Genesis 21. 11 and 22. 2, 3. and Sarah hindered him not by
saying why do you so, for she was a straight Rib and Satan cannot use it to
break the head. As the Husband must be a Son of Abraham, so the Wife must be a
Daughter of Sarah, 1 Pet. 3. 6. O happy house with such Couples, and where
there is but one will, the Wives swallowed up in the Husbands, and the Husband
in the Lords will.

14. The tenth Direction to both is, neglect not to let up the Worship of God
in your Family, this is not only to entertain the Ark of God, but even God
himself: the Ark was the sign of Gods presence, no sooner is David settled on
his Throne, but he will settle Religion, and therefore sends for the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 1, 2, 3. It Is come to Obed edoms. Ver. 10. And brought a blessing with
it thither. V. 11. David then cries, O when wilt [thou] come unto me, Psalm. 101.
2. he would have the blessing Ark come to his house as well as to Obededoms,
and not only the Ark of God, but also God himself, Arise [thou] and the Ark of
thy strength,) Psalm. 132. 8. where Religion is set up, that house is [a
Beth-el] an house of God and there is the gate of Heaven, Gen 28. 16. 17. not
only for your Prayers ascending up to God, but also for his blessings
descending down upon you, for he is Rich unto all persons and Families that
call upon him, Romans 10. 12. Job. 8. 6. whether you be small or great, God is
not an Austere Master but a liberal pay Master, but that house wherein the
Worship of God is not, nor any calling upon his Name it is not a Bethel, but a
Beth-Aven, Hos. 10. 5. an house of Sin, and God will pour out his curse upon
it and not his blessing, Jer. 10. 25. Neglect of Family-duty does (as it were)
uncover the roof for Gods curse to be rained down upon a Man's Tables, Beds, all
things he has or does, Prove. 3. 33. yea Brimstone is is scattered upon his
habitation, Job. 28. 15. which the wrath of God may soon give fire to. Psalm.
11. 6. and hale in Hell at 'its Heels.

15. Secondly a short word of Direction to the Governed, as they stand related
to the Governors, (1.) In General; to all such, whether Children or Servants,
etc. The first Rule is, account it your mercy and privilege and not your
burden, that you live in Religious Families where Prayer, Reading, Catechizing,
yea order and discipline are observed, Genesis 16. 8. and 18. 19. Children of many
Prayers and Servants of many Prayers and Spiritual helps may not say, what a
weariness is this, Mal. 1. 13. 'twas cursed Jeroboam that said, it is too much
to do so, 1 King. 12. 28. Yea 'twas the mad and raging Heathens that cried, let
us break these bands asunder and cast away those cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3.
Those are Children of [Belial] that like not to be yoked (as the word
signifies) no not with Christ's easy yoke, and those are the Redeemed of the
Lord that look on Family duties (not as Cords and Bands, but as garters and
girdles to confine them where they ought to be, Romans 7. 22. Christ left this
pattern for all Families by the ordering of his own, as (1) To worship God,
Joh. 4. 22. (2) To keep the Sabbath Luke 4. 16. (3) To pray with the Family,
Luke 9. 18. (alone there is meant apart from the Multitude, for his Disciples
(which were his Family) were with him, (4) To pray privately or secretly by
himself, Luke 5. 16. (5) And that morning and evening, Mark 1. 35. and Math.
14. 23. And (6) This was his practice and custom, Luke 22. 39. yea (7)
Sometimes all night long, Luke 6. 12. And (lastly) with Submission and Devotion
as a Servant of God, Math. 26. 39. Governors and governed [learn of him Math.
11. 29.] he is your best Master, all this Practice of Piety, it is no matter how
dull the Scholar be (if but desirous to learn) so Christ himself be but your
Teacher.

16. Secondly in particular. First to Children, the second Rule is, Obey your
Parents, Ephesians 6. 1. as Isaao did Abraham in submitting to be Sacrificed (though
he was then grown up and might have resisted) and as Christ became obedient
even to the death of the Cross. Good Children help to lengthen their Parents
days, as Joseph did Jacobs; God therefore in the first Commandment promises (by
way of requital) to lengthen theirs; Remember you are [stars] in Joseph's dream
(who was [himself] a whole constellation of graces,) O be a bright and morning
Star in Christ who is so called, Revel. 22. 16. be a morning-seeker in the
morning of your life, Prove. 8. 17. and grow in wisdom as well as in stature,
and in favor with God and man as the Child (Jesus) did. Luke 2. 52. but be not
a blazing meteor, not a falling, but a fixed Star, not (Sancti Juvenes and
Satanici Senes) not degenerate plants, Jer. 2. 21. Degenerating, not only from
your Godly Parents (though a Child of many Prayers cannot easily miscarry, as
Ambrose told Monica concerning Austin (her Son) while a Manichee.) But from
your seeming godly self in your younger years; a falling Star, falls not to the
Earth only, but (as the Star (wormwood,) Rev. 8. 11. bitter to Parents and
self) into the bottomless Pit also, and is it not pity that any one chip of
the good old blocks should become fuel for everlasting burnings.

17. The third Rule is, be a Serving Son, Mal. 3. 17. it is an old and yet a
true saying, that God, Parents and School Masters can never be requited both
for your being and for your well being; Parents have power to require the
service of their Children, and as it is the Parents privilege to command
service, so it is Childrens duty to do service; even churlish Laban had serving
Sons, Genesis 30. 35. and so had the old seducing Prophet, 1 King. 13. 13. yea and
the Prince or Priest of Midian had serving Daughters, Exodus 2. 16. This is the
honor that God commands Children to pay to their Parents, Exodus 20. 12.
Children can never do enough for their Parents, that have done so much (and
also suffered so much) for them; it is very remarkable, that good Jonathan (who
was otherwise a truly serving Son) was taken by Lot, 1 Samuel 14. 42. the whole
disposing whereof is of the Lord, Prove. 16. 33. and this may well be supposed
to be some Reason, that God hereby did show how tender he is in allowing the
least show of disobedience to Superiors, and to make Children fear and avoid
(even) the Rash and causeless curses of Parents, which (by a secret Judgment of
God) are sometimes inflicted, a wise (serving) Son, makes a glad Father, etc.
Prove. 10. 1. every Son should be an (Abner) which signifies his Fathers light,
and every Daughter an (Abigail) which signifies her Fathers joy. O then whether
you be Son or Daughter, do not bring down the gray hairs of your Parents with
sorrow to the grave, Genesis 42. 38. and 44. 31.

18. The fourth Rule is, you must nourish your Parents in their old Age, that
nourished you in your youth, and as you expect that your Children should
nourish you when you are old; good Joseph is a blessed pattern, Genesis 45. 9, 10,
11. Saying to his old Father, come down to me, and be near to me, and there
will I nourish thee, and he did so, Genesis 47. 12. and Obed was a restorer of
life to old Naomai whose life had been long a lifeless life as it had been
joyless) and a nourisher of her old Age, Ruth. 4. 15. See David's love herein, 1 Samuel 22. 3. And Christ's also (the mystical David,) Joh. 19. 27. This the
Apostle commends, as a thing not only good before men, but also acceptable unto
God, 1 Timothy 5. 4. and Christ reproves the neglect of it, Math. 15 4. and Paul
calls such [(...)] without natural affection, Romans 1. 30. 2 Timothy 3. 3. The
stork has a singular affection to the Aged sire, as Pliny Relates. Lib. 10.
Cap. 23. The contrary carriage brings Gods curse, Exad. 21. 17. Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
Prove. 30. 17. The infernal Ravens shall pick out the Eye of him that mocketh
his Parents, as cursed Cham did blessed Noah; yea God often repays them again in
the same Coin, as one ungracious Son (I Read of) that kicked his Father down
the Stares, and dragged him by the hair of the head to turn him out of doors,
and for this end opening the door, the old Father then spoke saying; Now Son it
is enough, do no more, for thus far I went with my Father, however God will
take them to task as he did Abimelech, and render to them the wickedness done
to their Parents, Judge. 9. 5. 56. And he was a Son of more wit then grace, who,
when his Father complained that never Father had such an undutiful Child, as he
had; replied, yes my Grandfather, meaning his Father (when a Child) whom he
spoke to.

19. The fifth Rule is, if you be a Son or Daughter that fears, your Parents
have left you Job's Legacy, laying up iniquity for you as well as Inheritance.
Job 21. 19. as 2 Samuel 3. 29. and 2 King. 5. 27. and Exodus 20. 5. Yet know none
shall be damned eternally for their Parents Sin, Ezekiel. 18. 17. Gal. 5. 6.
unless they make it their own, either by commission or approbation; yet may
they be punished Temporally; yea though they prove good Children, as 1 King.
14. 12, 13. and that you may escape this, you must bewail your Parents Sins.
Ez. 9. 6, 7. and Dan. 9. 4, 6, 8. and Deuteronomy. 21. 13. and as to the goods you
derive from them, you should do with them as you do with fruit out of the hands
of some dirty Huckster, you must wash them over again and then you may use
them; to the pure, all things are pure. Tit. 1. 15. besides grace cuts of the
entail (though the oldest and strongest) of wickedness, as a good Child may
come from a bad Father (as Ahaz had an Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 1. and Amon a
Josiah, 2 King. 21. 21, 26.) So a good Child may have a sanctified use of the
goods of bad Parents, as those two good Sons had of the Treasures of bad
Fathers.

20. The sixth and last Rule is, Secondly to Servants, please your Masters in
all things, not answering again (either by chatting or thwarting,) Tit. 2. 9.
The old saying is, be it better be it worse, please him that bears the Purse;
not with Eye-service, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6. It Is not enough for you to fear man (your
Master) who has power over the flesh only, but you must fear God, Col. 4. 22.
who has power to cast Body and Soul into Hell, Math. 10. 28. not one servant
went into the Ark with Noah, nor out of Sodom with Lot, which shows that few
Servants be good, O be you of the Number of the few, that takes some time for
your Soul; If Servants under the Law did so (that were Slavish bondmen and
bond-women) much more you under the Gospel; Abraham had a faithful and a
praying Servant, Genesis 24. 10, 16, 27, 45. and Jacob was no less to Laban, and
Joseph to Potiphar, and the Centurion was happy in his Servants, Math. 8. 6. O
see, you make your Master happy, etc. by your faithfulness, diligence and
Conscience of duty.

The Conclusion.
1. UPon the Review of the whole, If you be the governor of a Family, your
great concern is to see that both your self and your Family do serve the Lord
(in walking all those pleasant and profitable walks of a Christian,) Josh. 24.
15. the Reasons be three. 1. It Is your duty. 2. It Is your beauty. 3. It Is your
safety so to do. 1. Your duty as you are Gods Tenant at Will, only [quamdiu te
been gesseris] so long as you behave your self well; your Gold is his, and your
Silver in his, Hag. 2. 8. your Land is his, Lev. 25. 23. and your house is his,
he appoints it you. Act. 17. 26. Genesis 49. 13. God is the true proprietary of
all Ezekiel. 21. 27. and your serving of God is your Pepper-corn, you pay to your
great Landlord. 2. Reason it is your beauty, holiness has a beauty in it and
therefore are they often put together, 1 Chro. 16. 29. 2 Chro. 20. 21. Psalm. 29.
2. and 96. 9. and 110. 3. That Family which worships the Lord in the beauty of
holiness, has a Church in their house, as Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19. and to
turn an house into a Church is a beautiful thing. 3. Reason it is your safety.
(1) From Gods wrath, his destroying Angel shall not break in upon you, Exodus
12. 12, 13. but he does break in upon the Families that call not upon his name,
Jer. 10. 25. (2) From the Devils malice, such houses as are haunted with
evil-Spirits, whatever other Reason there may be thereof, yet sure I am this
is one, that the worship of God has not been duly and truly observed in that
house; where the fear of God is not, there all evil, and any Devil may prevail
to play their pranks, Genesis 20. 11, 17. and Isa. 13. 21. Babylon may be a place
for Satyrs, or Devils in borrowed shapes and hideous apparitions, but Sion is a
place of Songs. No Lion shall be there, not that roaring Lion, (the Devil,)
Esa. 33. 13. and 35 9, 10. 2 These. 3. 3. 1 John 5. 18. Psalm. 118. 15.

2. If you be the Father of the Family, then are you as the Sun, if the Mother
thereof, then are you as the Moon, and if Children, then are you of the Stars,
as in Joseph's dream, Genesis 37. 9. [the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars] as before.
Shows the duty of each, besides the Governors of Families, should be King,
Priest, and Prophet, in their own-families; (1) You must be a King (or a Queen,
if a Female) to make Laws for your Family, and to see to the Execution of them,
as you have power to make Laws, so you have the Sword to Execute them, Genesis 16.
6. (she is in thy hand) to correct her for her fault; though this Lady or Queen
(as the word (Sarah) signifies) showed too much wrath to her maid and too
little Reverence to her Husband, in dealing so roughly with her; correction
given in Anger has usually more of rigor then of right; Socrates said to his
offending Servant, but that I am angry, I would strike thee. (2) You must be a
Priest (the word is used in Latin for he and she) to Sanctify your Family and
familiarity, by the Sacrifice of Prayer daily. Thus did Job. Chap. 1. 5. well
knowing he was bound to the preservation of Gods precepts as well as to the
Observation of them, and to see that all his (under his shadow, Hos. 14. 7.)
should keep them as well as himself; he sues for pardon even of suspected Sins
in his Sons, and turns his suspicion into a supplication; and this Job did
[Kolhajomim] continually or every day. This also was our Lord Christ's custom as
before, not being weary of well doing, yea further you must by your Priestly
Office admonish offenders; and excommunicate those that are Incorrigible, (cast
out the bondwoman and her Son) Genesis 21. 9. 10. The Son was a mocker and
derider of the Covenant, a fault it was no doubt and a great one too, otherwise
the Apostle would not have called it persecution, Gal. 4. 20. nor God have
punished it with Excommunication, and the Mother was (likely) the Author, or
(at least) the abettor of her Sons Sin, in ambitiously seeking the Inheritance
and therefore out they must go together. Thus likewise David would not suffer;
a wicked Servant to tarry in his sight, Psalm. 101. 4. 8.

3. And thirdly you must be a Prophet (or Prophetess) to instruct your Family
in the knowledge of God and (with Abraham) command your Children and your
household to keep the ways of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. The lips of the Righteous
feed many, Prove. 10. 21. Ruth carries her gleanings home, Ruth 2. 17, 18. and
the Be carries all her gatherings to the Hive; so a good Householder, what he
gathers abroad he carries home, knowing that all the Souls in the house are
given to him (to care for) as all the Souls in the Ship were given to Paul,
Act. 27. 24. 'Twas a notable saying of Mr. Stocks, that many Householders in
London while they are taking care, of preserving the health of their own bodies
(in their Country houses) they are all that time starving their Servants
Souls. O consider, how may Servants Dog, cry after, and curse their Masters in
Hell for Murdering their Souls, (which is worse then body-murther) and for
doing no more for them, then they did for their Beasts, to wit, in feeding
their bodies only; but (as Gallio) not caring for better things, Act. 18. 14,
17. O how did the Queen of Sheba admire the order of Solomon's house, and the
Apostle commend the order he saw in several houses, and would they not as much
wonder and discommend, the disorder an perturbation in many houses (that pray
not apart, Zech. 12. 10, 12.) but Moon and Stars above the Sun, water above the
Earth, all Ataxies or disorder, and brawling about triffles. Thundrings,
rending the middle Region (while alls quiet in a well ordered house, as in the
upper Region) Mox, long, tarde, Cede, Recede, Redi. Such an house has the
Plague of Leprosy in it, Levit. 14 35, to 42. If it be matter of choice to you,
depart quickly (...) of it, remove a great way from it, and let it be thoroughly
cleansed before, you return to it again.

FINIS.

