A DESCRIPTION OF YE ISLE OF PINES
How they were cast away
gathering there Ship wrack
Pine Numbering his People
ye Dutch ship taking ye writing


The ISLE of PINES, OR, A late Discovery of a fourth ISLAND near Terra
Australis, Incognita BY Henry Cornelius Van Sloetten. Wherein is contained. A
True Relation of certain English persons, who in Queen Elizabeth's time, making
a Voyage to the East Indies were cast away, and wracked near to the Coast of
Terra Australis, Incognita, and all drowned, except one Man and four Women. And
now lately Anno Dom. 1667. a Dutch Ship making a Voyage to the East Indies,
driven by foul weather there, by chance have found their Posterity, (speaking
good English) to amount (as they suppose) to ten or twelve thousand persons.
The whole Relation (written, and left by the Man himself a little before his
death, and delivered to the Dutch by his Grandchild) Is here annexed with the
Longitude and Latitude of the Island, the situation and felicity thereof, with
other matter observable.

Licensed July 27. 1668.

LONDON, Printed for Allen Banks and Charles Harper next door to the three
Squerrills in Fleet Street, over against St. Dunstans Church, 1668.

Two Letters concerning the Island of Pines to a Credible person in Covent
Garden.
Amsterdam, June the 29th 1668.
IT is written by the last Post from Rochel, to a Merchant in this City, that
there was a French ship arrived, the Master and Company of which reports, that
about 2 or 300 Leagues Northwest from Cape Finis Terre, they fell in with an
Island, where they went on shore, and found about 2000 English people without
clothes, only some small coverings about their middle, and that they related
to them, that at their first coming to this Island (which was in Queen
Elizabeth's time) they were but five in number men and women, being cast on
shore by distress or otherwise, and had there remained ever since, without
having any correspondence with any other people, or any ship coming to them.
This story seems very fabulous, yet the Letter is come to a known Merchant, and
from a good hand in France, so that I thought fit to mention it, it may be that
there may be some mistake in the number of the Leagues, as also of the exact
point of the Compass, from Cape Finis Terre; I shall enquire more particularly
about it. Some English here suppose it may be the Island of Brasile which have
been so often sought for, Southwest from Ireland, if true, we shall hear further
about it; Your friend and Brother,

Abraham Keek.

Amsterdam, July the 6th, 1668.
IT is said that the ship that discovered the Island, of which I hinted to you
in my last, is departed from Rochel, on her way to Zealand, several persons
here have writ thither to enquire for the said Vessel, to know the truth of
this business. I was promised a Copy of the Letter that came from France,
advising the discovery of the Island abovesaid, but it is not yet come to my
hand; when it comes, or any further news about this Island, I shall acquaint
you with it,

Your Friend and Brother, A. Keek.

The Isle of PINES, DISCOVERED Near to the Coast of Terra Australis Incognita,
by Henry Cornelius Van Sloetten, in a Letter to a friend in London, declaring
the truth of his Voyage to the East Indies.
SIR,
I Received your Letter of this second instant, wherein you desire me to give
you a further account concerning the Land of Pines, on which we were driven by
distress of Weather the last Summer, I also perused the Printed Book thereof
you sent me, the Copy of which was surreptiously taken out of my hands, else
should I have given you a more fuller account upon what accasion we came
thither, how we were entertained, with some other circumstances of note wherein
that relation is defective. To satisfy therefore your desires, I shall briefly
yet fully give you a particular account thereof, with a true Copy of the
Relation itself; desiring you to bear with my blunt Phrases, as being more a
Seaman then a Scholar.

April the 26 th 1667. We set sail from Amsterdam, intending for the
East Indies; our ship had to name the place from whence we came, the Amsterdam
burden 350. Tun, and having a fair gale of Wind, on the 27 of May following we
had a sight of the high Peak of Tenriffe belonging to the Canaries, we have
touched at the Island Palma, but having endeavored it twice, and finding the
winds contrary, we steered on our couse by the Isles of Cape Verd, or Insulae
Capitis Viridis, where at St. James's we took in fresh water, with some few
Goats, and Hens, where with that Island does plentifully abound.

June the 14. we had a sight of Madagascar, or the Island of St. Laurence, an
Island of 4000 miles in compass, and situate under the Southern Tropic;
thither we steered our course, and trafficked with the inhabitants for Knives,
Beads, Glasses and the like, having in exchange thereof Cloves and Silver.
Departing from thence, we were incountred with a violent storm, and the winds
holding contrary, for the space of a fortnight, brought us back almost as far
as the Isle Del Principe; during which time many of our men fell sick, and some
dyed, but at the end of that time it pleased God the wind favored us again,
and we steered on our course merrily, for the space of ten days: when on a
sudden we were encountered with such a violent storm, as if all the four winds
together had conspired for our destruction, so that the stoutest spirit of us
all quailed, expecting every hour to be devoured by that merciless element of
water, sixteen days together did this storm continue, though not with such
violence as at the first, the Weather being so dark all the while, and the Sea
so rough, that we knew not in what place we were, at length all on a sudden the
Wind ceased, and the Air cleared, the Clouds were all dispersed, and a very
serene Sky followed, for which we gave hearty thanks to the Almighty, it being
beyond our expectation that we should have escaped the violence of that storm.

At length one of our men mounting the Mainmast espied fire, an evident sign
of some Country near adjoining, which presently after we apparently
discovered, and steering our course (...) nigher, we saw several persons
promiscuously running about the shore, as it were wondering and admiring at
what they saw: Being now near to the Land, we manned out our long Boat with ten
persons, who approaching the shore, asked them in our Dutch Tongue Wat Eylant
is dit? to which they returned this Answer in English, That they knew not what
we said. One of our Company named Jeremiah Hanzen who understood English very
well, hearing their words discourst to them in their own Language; so that in
fine we were very kindly invited on shore, great numbers of them flocking about
us, admiring at our Clothes which we did wear, as we on the other side did to
find in such a strange place, so many that could speak English, and yet to go
naked.

Four of our men returning back in the long Boat to our Ships company, could
hardly make them believe the truth of what they had seen and heard, but when we
had brought our ship into harbor, you would have blessed your self to see how
the naked Islanders flocked unto us, so wondering at our ship, as if it had
been the greatest miracle of Nature in whole World.

We were very courteously entertained by them, presenting us with such food as
that Country afforded, which indeed was not to be despised; we eat of the
Flesh both of Beasts, and Fowls, which they had cleanly dressed, though with no
great curiosity, as wanting materials, wherewithal to do it; and for bread we
had the inside or Kernel of a great Nut as big as an Apple, which was very
wholesome, and sound for the body, and tasted to the Pallat very delicious.

Having refreshed our selves, they invited us to the Palace of their Prince or
chief Ruler, some two miles distant off from the place where we landed; which
we found to be about the bigness of one of our ordinary village houses, it was
supported with rough unhewn pieces of Timber, and covered very artificially
with boughs, so that it would keep out the greatest showers of Rain, the sides
thereof were adorned with several sorts of Flowers, which the fragrant fields
there do yield in great variety. The Prince himself (whose name was William
Pine the Grandchild of George Pine that was first on shore in this Island) came
to his Palace door and saluted us very courteously, for though he had nothing
of Majesty in him, yet had he a courteous noble and deboneyre spirit, where
with your English Nation (especially those of the Gentry) are very much endued.

Scarce had he done saluting us when his Lady or Wife, came likewise forth of
their House or Palace, attended on by two Maidservants, she was a woman of an
exquisite beauty, and had on her head as it were a Chaplet of Flowers, which
being intermixed with several variety of colors became her admirably. Her
privities were hid with some pieces of old Garments, the Relicts of those
Clothes (I suppose) of them which first came hither, and yet being adorned with
Flowers those very rags seems beautiful; and indeed modesty so far prevails
over all the Female Sex of that Island, that with grass and flowers interwoven
and made strong by the peelings of young Elms (which grow the^^ in great
plenty) they do plant together so many of them as serve to cover those parts
which nature would have hidden.

We carried him as a present some few Knives, of which we thought they had
great need, an Ax or Hatchet to ^ll Wood, which was very acceptable unto him,
the Old one which was cast on shore at the first, and the only one that they
ever had, being now so quite blunt and dulled, that it would not cut at all,
some few other things we also gave him, which he very thankfully accepted,
inviting us into his House or Palace, and causing us to sit down with him,
where we refreshed our selves again, with some more Country viands which were
no other then such we tasted of before; Prince and peasant here faring alike,
nor is there any difference betwixt their drink, being only fresh sweet water,
which the rivers yield them in great abundance.

After some little pause, our Companion (who could speak English) by our
request desired to know of him something concerning their Original and how that
people speaking the Language of such a remote Country should come to inhabit
there, having not, as we could see, any ships or Boats amongst them the means
to bring them thither, and which was more, altogether ignorant and mere
strangers to ships, or shipping, the main thing conducible to that means, to
which request of ours, the courteous Prince thus replied.

Friends (for so your actions declare you to be, and shall by ours find no
less) know that we are inhabitants of this Island of no great standing, my
Grandfather being the first that ever set foot on this shore, whose native
Country was a place called England, far distant from this our Land, as he let
us to understand; He came from that place upon the Waters, in a thing called a
Ship, of which no question but you may have heard; several other persons were
in his company, not intending to have come hither (as he said) but to a place
called India, when tempestuous weather brought him and his company upon this
Coast, where falling among the Rocks his ship split all in pieces; the whole
company perishing in the Waters, saving only him and four women, which by means
of a broken piece of that Ship, by Divine assistance got on Land.

What after passed (said he) during my Grandfathers life, I shall show you in a
Relation thereof written by his own hand, which he delivered to my Father being
his eldest Son, charging him to have a special care thereof, and assuring him
that time would bring some people or other thither to whom he would have him to
impart it, that the truth of our first planting here might not be quite lost,
which his commands my Father dutifully obeyed; but no one coming he at his
death delivered the same with the like charge to me, and you being the first
people, which (besides our selves) ever set footing in this Island, I shall
therefore in obedience to my Grandfathers and Fathers commands, willingly
impart the same unto you.

Then stepping into a kind of inner room, which as we conceived was his lodging
Chamber, he brought forth two sheets of paper fairly written in English, (being
the same Relation which you had Printed with you at London) and very distinctly
read the same over unto us, which we hearkened unto with great delight and
admiration, freely proffering us a Copy of the same, which we afterward took
and brought away along with us; which Copy hereafter follows.

A Way to the East India's being lately discovered by Sea, to the South of
Aff^ick by certain Portugals, far more safe and profitable then had been
heretofore; certain English Merchants encouraged by the great advantages
arising from the Eastern Commodities, to settle a Factory there for the
advantage of Trade. And having to that purpose obtained the Queens Royal
License Anno Dom. 1569. 11. or 12. Eliz. furnished out for those parts four
ships, my Master being sent as Factor to deal and Negotiate for them, and to
settle there, took with him his whole Family, (that is to say) his Wife, and
one Son of about twelve years of age, and one Daughter of about fourteen years,
two Maidservants, one Negro female slave, and my Self, who went under him as
his Book-keeper, with this company on Monday the third of April next following,
(having all necessaries for Housekeeping when we should come there, we
Embarked our selves in thegood ship called the India Merchant, of about four
hundred and fifty Tuns burden, and having a good wind, we on the fourteenth
day of May had sight of the Canaries, and not long after of the Isles of Cape
Vert, or Verd, where taking in such things as were necessary for our Voyage,
and some fresh Provisions, we stearing our course South, and a point East,
about the first of August came within sight of the Island of St. Hellen, where
we took in some fresh water, we then set our faces for the Cape of Good hope,
where by Gods blessing after some sickness, whereof some of our company died,
though none of our family; and hitherto we had met with none but calm weather,
yet so it pleased God, when we were almost in sight of St. Laurence, an Island
so called, one of the greatest in the world, as Mariners say, we were
overtaken and dispersed by a great storm of Wind, which continued with such
violence many days, that losing all hope of safety, being out of our own
knowledge, and whether we should fall on Flats or Rocks, uncertain in the
nights, not having the least benefit of the light, we feared most, always
wishing for day, and then for Land, but it came too soon for our good; for
about the first of October, our fears having made us forget how the time passed
to a certainty; we about the break of day discerned Land (but what we knew not)
the Land seemed high and Rockey, and the Sea continued still very stormy and
tempestuous, insomuch as there seemed no hope of safety, but looked suddenly to
perish. As we grew near Land, perceiving no safety in the ship, which we looked
would suddenly be beat in pieces: The Captain, my Master, and some others got
into the long Boat, thinking by that means to save their lives, and presently
after all the Seamen cast themselves overboard, thinking to save their lives by
swimming, only my self, my Masters Daughters, the two Maids, and the Negro
were left on board, for we could not swim, but those that left us, might as
well have tarried with us, for we saw them, or most of them perish, ourselves
now ready after to follow their fortune, but God was pleased to spare our
lives, as it were by miracle, though to further sorrow; for when we came
against the Rocks, our ship having endured two or three blows against the
Rocks, (being now broken and quite foundred in the Waters, we having with much
ado gotten our selves on the Bowspright, which being broken off, was driven by
the Waves into a small Creek, wherein fell a little River, which being
encompassed by the Rocks, was sheltered from the Wind, so that we had
opportunity to land ourselves, (though almost drowed) in all four persons,
besides the Negro: when we were got upon the Rock, we could perceive the
miserable Wrack to our great terror, I had in my pocket a little Tinder-hox
and Steel, and Flint to strike fire at any time upon occasion, which served now
to good Purpose, for its being so close, preserved the Tinder dry, with this,
and the help of some old rotten Wood which we got together, we kindled a fire
and dried ourselves, which done, I left my female company, and went to see, if
I could find any of our Ships company, that were escaped, but could hear of
none, though I hooted and made all the noise I could; neither could I perceive
the footsteps of any living Creature (save a few Birds, and other Fowls. At
length it drawing toward the Evening, I went back to my company, who were very
much troubled for want of me. I being now all their stay in this lost
condition, we were at first afraid that the wild people of the Country might
find us out, although we saw no footsteps of any not so much as a Path; the
Woods round about being full of Briers and Brambles, we also stood in fear of
wild Beasts, of such also we saw none, nor sign of any: But above all, and that
we had greatest reason to fear, was to be starved to death for want of Food,
but God had otherwise provided for us as you shall know hereafter; this done,
we spent our time in getting some broken pieces of Boards, and Planks, and some
of the Sails and Rigging on shore for shelter; I set up two or three Poles, and
drew two or three of the Cords and Lines from Tree to Tree, over which throwing
some Sailcloathes and having gotten Wood by us, and three or four Sea-gowns,
which we had dried, we took up our Lodging for that night altogether (the
Blackmoor being less sensible then the rest we made our Centry) we slept
soundly that night, as having not slept in three or four nights before (our
fears of what happened preventing us) neither could our hard lodging, fear, and
danger hinder us we were so over watched.

On the morrow, being well refresht with sleep, the wind ceased, and the
weather was very warm; we went down the Rocks on the sands at low water, where
we found great part of our lading, either on shore or floating near it. I by
the help of my company, dragged most of it on shore; what was too heavy for us
broke, and we unbound the Casks and Chests, and, taking out the goods, secured
all; so that we wanted no clothes, nor any other provision necessary for
Housekeeping, to furnish a better house than any we were like to have; but no
victuals (the last water having spoiled all) only one Cask of biscuit, being
lighter than the rest was dry; this served for bread a while, and we found on
Land a sort of fowl about the bigness of a Swan, very heavy and fat, that by
reason of their weight could not fly, of these we found little difficulty to
kill, so that was our present food; we carried out of England certain Hens and
Cocks to eat by the way, some of these when the ship was broken, by some means
got to land, and bred exceedingly, so that in the future they were a great help
unto us; we found also, by a little River, in the flags, store of eggs, of a
sort of foul much like our Ducks, which were very good meat, so that we wanted
nothing to keep us alive.

On the morrow, which was the third day, as soon as it was morning, seeing
nothing to disturb us, I looked out a convenient place to dwell in, that we
might build us a Hut to shelter us from the weather, and from any other danger
of annoyance, from wild beasts (if any should find us out: So closse by a
large spring which rose out of a high hill over-looking the Sea, on the side of
a wood, having a prospect toward the Sea) by the help of an Ax and some other
implements (for we had all necessaries, the working of the Sea, having cast up
most of our goods) I cut down all the straightest poles I could find, and which
were enough for my purpose, by the help of my company (necessity being our
Master) I dug holes in the earth setting my poles at an equl distance, and
nailing the broken boards of the Caskes, Chests, and Cabins, and such like to
them, making my door to the Seaward, and having covered the top, with
sailclothes strained, and nailed, I in the space of a week had made a large
Cabin big enough to hold all our goods and our selves in it, I also placed our
Hamocks for lodging, purposing (if it pleased God to send any Ship that way) we
might be transported home, but it never came to pass, the place^ wherein we
were (as I conceived) being much out of the way.

We having now lived in this manner full four months, and not so much as seeing
or hearing of any wild people, or of any of our own company, more then
ourselves (they being found now by experience to be all drowned) and the place
as we after found; being a large Island, and disjoined, and out of sight of any
other Land, was wholly uninhabited by any people, neither was there any hurtful
beast to annoy us: But on the contrary the country so very pleasant, being
always clothed with green, and full of pleasant fruits, and variety of birds,
ever warm, and never colder then in England in September: So that this place
(had it the culture, that skilful people might bestow on it) would prove a
Paradise.

The Woods afforded us a sort of Nuts, as big as a large Apple, whose kernel
being pleasant and dry, we made use of instead of bread, that fowl before
mentioned, and a sort of waterfowl like Ducks, and their eggs, and a beast
about the size of a Goat, and almost such a like creature, which brought two
young ones at a time, and that twice a year, of which the Low Lands and Woods,
were very full, being a very harmless creature and tame, so that we could
easily take and kill them: Fish, also, especially Shellfish (which we could
best come by) we had great store of, so that in effect as to Food we wanted
nothing; and thus, and by such like helps, we continued six months, without
any disturbance or want.

Idleness and Fullness of every thing begot in me a desire of enjoying the
women, beginning now to grow more familiar, I had persuaded the two Maids to
let me lie with them, which I did at first in private, but after, custom
taking away shame (there being none but us) we did it more openly, as our Lusts
gave us liberty; afterward my Masters Daughter was content also to do as we
did; the truth is, they were all handsome Women when they had Clothes, and
well shaped, feeding well. For we wanted no Food, and living idly, and seeing
us at Liberty to do our wills, without hope of ever returning home made us thus
bold: One of the first of my Consorts with whom I first accompanied (the
tallest and handsomest) proved presently with child, the second was my Masters
Daughter, and the other also not long after fell into the same condition: none
now remaining but my Negro, who seeing what we did, longed also for her share;
one Night, I being asleep, my Negro, (with the consent of the others) got
closse to me, thinking it being dark, to beguile me, but I awaking and feeling
her, and perceiving who it was, yet willing to try the difference, satisfied my
self with her, as well as with one of the rest: that night, although the first
time, she proved also with child, so that in the year of our being here, all my
women were with child by me, and they all coming at different seasons, were a
great help to one another.

The first brought me a brave Boy, my Masters Daughter was the youngest, she
brought me a Girl, so did the other Maid, who being something fat sped worse at
her labor: the Negro had no pain at all, brought me a fine white Girl, so I
had one Boy and three Girls, the Women were soon well again, and the two first
with child again before the two last were brought to bed, my custom being not
to lie with any of them after they were with child, till others were so
likewise, and not with the black at all after she was with child, which
commonly was at the first time I lay with her, which was in the night and not
else, my stomach would not serve me, although she was one of the handsomest
Blacks I had seen, and her children as comely as any of the rest; we had no
clothes for them, and therefore when they had sucked, we laid them in Moss to
sleep, and took no further care of them, for we knew, when they were gone more
would come, the Women never failng once a year at least, and none of the
Children (for all the hardship we put them to) were ever sick; so that wanting
now nothing but Clothes, nor them much neither, other then for decency, the
warmth of the Country and Custom supplying that Defect, we were now well
satisfied with our condition, our Family beginning to grow large, there being
nothing to hurt us, we many times lay abroad on Mossey Banks, under the shelter
of some Trees, or such like (for having nothing else to do) I had made me
several Arbors to sleep in with my Women in the heat of the day, in these I and
my women passed the time away, they being never willing to be out of my company.

And having now no thought of ever returning home, as having resolved and sworn
each to other, never to part or leave one another, or the place; having by my
several wives, forty seven Children, Boys and Girls, but most Girls, and
growing up apace, we were all of us very fleshly, the Country so well agreeing
with us, that we never ailed any thing; my Negro having had twelve, was the
first that left bearing, so I never meddled with her more: My Masters Daughter
(by whom I had most children, being the youngest and handsomest) was most fond
of me, and I of her. Thus we lived for sixteen years, till perceiving my eldest
Boy to mind the ordinary work of Nature by seeing what we did, I gave him a
Mate, and so I did to all the rest, as fast as they grew up, and were capable:
My Wives having left bearing, my children began to breed apace, so we were like
to be a multitude; My first Wife brought me thirteen children, my second seven,
my Masters Daughter fifteen, and the Negro twelve, in all forty seven.

After we had lived there twenty two years, my Negro died suddenly, but I could
not perceive any thing that ailed her; most of my children being grown, as fast
as we married them, I sent them and placed them over the River by themselves
severally, because we would not pester one another; and now they being all
grown up, and gone, and married after our manner (except some two or three of
the youngest) for (growing my self into years) I liked not the wanton annoyance
of young company.

Thus having lived to the sixtieth year of my age, and the fortieth of my
coming thither, at which time I sent for all of them to bring their children,
and there were in number descended from me by these four Women, of my
Chrildren, Grandchildren, and great Grandchildren, five hundred sixty five of
both sorts, I took off the Males of one Family, and married them to the Females
of another, not letting any to marry their sisters, as we did formerly out of
necessity, so blessing God for his Providence and goodness, I dismissed them, I
having taught some of my children to read formerly, for I had left still the
Bible, I charged it should be read once a month at a general meeting: At last
one of my Wives died being sixty eight years of age, which I buried in a place,
set out on purpose, and within a year after another, so I had none now left but
my Masters Daughter, and we lived together twelve years longer, at length she
died also, so I buried her also next the place where I purposed to be buried my
self, and the tall Maid my first Wife next me on the other side, the Negro next
without her, and the other Maid next my Masters Daughter. I had now nothing to
mind, but the place whether I was to go, being very old, almost eighty years, I
gave my Cabin and Furniture that was left to my eldest son after my decease,
who had married my eldest Daughter by my beloved Wife, whom I made King and
Governor of all the rest: I informed them of the Manners of Europe, and
charged them to remember the Christian Religion, after the manner of them that
spoke the same Language, and to admit no other, if hereafter any should come
and find them out.

And now once for all, I summoned them to come to me, that I might number them,
which I did, and found the estimate to contain in or about the eightieth year
of my age, and the fifty ninth of my coming there; in all, of all sorts, one
thousand seven hundred eighty and nine. Thus praying God to multiply them, and
send them the true light of the Gospel, I last of all dismissed them: For, being
now very old, and my sight decayed, I could not expect to live long. I gave
this Narration (written with my own hand) to my eldest Son, who now lived with
me, commanding him to keep it, and if any strangers should come hither by
chance; to let them see it, and take a Copy of it if they would, that our name
be not lost from off the earth. I gave this people (descended from me the name
of the ENGLISH PINES, George Pine being my name, and my Masters Daughters name
Sarah English, my two other Wives were Mary Sparks, and Elizabeth Trevor, so
their several Descendants are called the ENGLISH, the SPARKS, and the TREVORS,
and the PHILLS, from the Christian Name of the Negro, which was Philippa, she
having no surname: And the general name of the whole the ENGLISH PINES; whom
God bless with the dew of Heaven, and the fat of the Earth, AMEN.

Ater the reading and delivering unto us a Copy of this Relation, then
proceeded he on in his discourse.

My Grandfather when he wrote this, was as you hear eighty years of age, there
proceeding from his Loins one thousand seven hundred eighty nine children,
which he had by them four women aforesaid: My Father was his eldest son, and
was named Henry, begotten of his wife Mary Sparks, whom he appointed chief
Governor and Ruler over the rest; and having given him a charge not to
exercise tyranny over them, seeing they were his fellow brethren by Fathers
side (of which there could be no doubt made of double dealing therein)
exhorting him to use justice and sincerity amongst them and not to let Religion
die with him, but to observe and keep those Precepts which he had taught them
he quietly surrendered up his soul, and was buried with great lamentation of all
his children.

My father coming to rule, and the people growing more populous, made them to
range further in the discovery of the Country, which they found answerable to
their desires, full both of Fowls and Beasts, and those too not hurtful to
mankind, as if this Country (on which we were by providence cast without arms
or other weapons to defend ourselves, or offend others,) should by the same
providence be so inhabited as not to have any need of such like weapons of
destruction wherewith to preserve our lives.

But as it is impossible, but that in multitudes disorders will grow, the
stronger seeking to oppress the weaker; no tie of Religion being strong enough
to chain up the depraved nature of mankind, even so amongst them mischiefs
began to rise, and they soon fell from those good orders prescribed them by my
Grandfather. The source from whence those mischiefs spring, was at first, I
conceive, the neglect of hearing the Bible read, which according to my
Grandfathers proscription) was once a month at a general meeting, but now many
of them wandering far up into the Country, they quite neglected the coming to
it, with all other means of Christian instruction, whereby the sense of sin
being quite lost in them, they fell to whoredoms, incests, and adulteries; so
that what my Grandfather was forced to do for necessity, they did for
wantonness; nay not confining themselves within the bound of any modesty, but
brother and sister lay openly together; those who would not yield to their lewd
embraces, were by force ravished, yea many times endangered of their lives. To
redress those enormities, my father assembled all the Company near unto him, to
whom he declared the wickedness of those their brethren; who all with one
consent agreed that they should be severely punished; and so arming themselves
with boughs, stones, and such like weapons, they marched against them, who
having notice of their coming, and fearing their deserved punishment, some of
them fled into woods, others passed over a great River, which runs through
the heart of our Country, hazarding drowning to escape punishment; But the
grandest offender of them all was taken, whose name was John Phill, the second
son of the Negro-woman that came with my Grandfather into this Island. He being
proved guilty of diverse ravishings and tyrannies committed by him, was adjudged
guilty of death, and accordingly was thrown down from a high Rock into the Sea,
where he perished in the waters. Execution being done upon him, the rest were
pardoned for what was past, which being notified abroad, they returned from
those Desert and Obscure places, wherein they were hidden.

Now as Seed being cast into stinking Dung produces good and wholesome Corn
for the sustentation of man's life, so bad manners podueeth good and wholesome
Laws for the preservation of Humane Society. Soon after my Father with the
advice of some few others of his Counsel, ordained and set forth these Laws to
be observed by them.

1. That whosoever should blaspheme or talk irreverently of the name of God
should be put to death. 2. That who should be absent from the monthly assembly
to hear the Bible read, without sufficient cause shown to the contrary, should
for the first default be kept without any victuals or drink, for the space of
four days, and if he offend therein again, then to suffer death. 3. That who
should force or ravish any Maid or Woman should be burnt to death, the party so
ravished putting fire to the wood that should burn him. 4. Whosoever shall
commit adultery, for the first crime the Male shall lose his Privities, and the
Woman have her right eye bored out, if after that she was again taken in the
act, she should die without mercy. 5. That who so injured his Neighbor, by
laming of his Limbs, or taking any thing away which he possesses, shall suffer
in the same kind himself by loss of Limb; and for defrauding his Neighbor, to
become servant to him, whilst he had made him double satisfaction. 6. That who
should defame or speak evil of the Governor, or refuse to come before him upon
Summons, should receive a punishment by whipping with Rods, and afterward be
exploded from the society of all the rest of the inhabitants.
Having set forth these Laws, he chose four several persons under him to see
them put in Execution, whereof one was of the Englishes, the Osf-spring of
Sarah English; another of his own Tribe, the Sparks; a third of the Trevors,
and the fourth of the Phills; appointing them every year at a certain time to
appear before him, and give an account of what they had done in the prosecution
of those Laws.

The Country being thus settled, my Father lived quiet and peaceable till he
attained to the age of ninety and four years, when dying, I succeeded in his
place, in which I have continued peaceably and quietly till this very present
time.

He having ended his Speech, we gave him very heartily thanks for our
information, assuring him we should not be wanting to him in any thing which
lay in our powers, wherewith we could pleasure him in what he should desire;
and thereupon proferred to depart, but before our going away, he would needs
engage us to see him, the next day, when was to be their great assembly or
monthly meeting for the celebration of their Religious Exercises.

Accordingly the next day we came thither again, and were courteously
entertained as before, In a short space there was gathered such a multitude of
people together as made us to admire; and first there was several Weddings
celebrated, the manner whereof was thus. The Bridegroom and Brideappeared
before him who was their Priest or Reader of the Bible, together with the
Parents of each party, or if any of their Parents were dead, then the next
relation unto them, without whose consent as well as the parties to be married,
the Priest will not join them together: but being satisfied in those
particulars, after some short Oraizons, and joining of hands together, he
pronounces them to be man and wife: and with exhortations to them to live
lovingly toward each other, and quietly toward their neighbors, he concludes
with some prayers, and so dismisses them.

The Weddings being finished, all the people took their places to hear the Word
read, the new married persons having the honor to be next unto the Priest that
day, after he had read three or four Chapters he fell to expounding the most
difficult places therein, the people being very attentive all that while, this
exercise continued for two or three hours, which being done, with some few
prayers he concluded, but all the rest of that day was by the people kept very
strictly, abstaining from all manner of playing or pastimes, with which on
other days they use to pass their time away, as having need of nothing but
victuals, and that they have in such plenty as almost provided to their hands.

Their exercises of Religion being over, we returned again to our Ship, and the
next day, taking with us two or three Fowling-pieces, leaving half our Company
to guard the Ship, the rest of us resolved to go up higher into the Country for
a further discovery: All the way as we passed the first morning, we saw
abundance of little Cabbins or Huts of these inhabitants, made under Trees, and
fashioned up with boughs, grass, and such like stuff to defend them from the
Sun and Rain; and as we went along, they came out of them much wondering at our
Attire, and standing aloof off from us as if they were afraid, but our
companion that spoke English, calling to them in their own Tongue, and giving
them good words, they drew nigher, some of them freely proffering to go along
with us, which we willingly accepted; but having passed some few miles, one of
our company espying a Beast like unto a Goat come gazing on him, he discharged
his Piece, sending a brace of Bullets into his belly, which brought him dead
upon the ground; these poor naked unarmed people hearing the noise of the
Piece, and seeing the Beast lie tumbling in his gore, without speaking any
words betook them to their heels, running back again as fast as they could
drive, nor could the persuasions of our Company, assuring them they should have
no hurt, prevail any thing at all with them, so that we were forced to pass
along without their company: all the way that we went we heard the delightful
harmony of singing Birds, the ground very fertile in Trees, Grass, and such
flowers, as grow by the production of Nature, without the help of Art; many and
several sorts of Beasts we saw, who were not so much wild as in other
Countries; whether it were as having enough to satiate themselves without
ravening upon others, or that they never before saw the sight of man, nor heard
the report of murdering Guns, I leave it to others to determine. Some Trees
bearing wild Fruits we also saw, and of those some whereof we tasted, which
were neither unwholesome nor distastful to the Palate, and no question had but
Nature here the benefit of Art added unto it, it would equal, if not exceed
many of our Europian Countries; the Vallyes were every where intermixed with
running streams, and no question but the earth has in it rich veins of
Minerals, enough to satisfy the desires of the most covetous.

It was very strange to us, to see that in such a fertile Country which was as
yet never inhabited, there should be notwithstanding such a free and clear
passage to us, without the hinderance of Bushes, Thorns, and such like stuff,
wherewith most Islands of the like nature are pestered: the length of the Grass
(which yet was very much intermixed with flowers) being the only impediment that
we found.

Six days together did we thus travel, setting several marks in our way as we
went for our better return, not knowing whether we should have the benefit of
the Stars for our guidance in our going back, which we made use of in our
passage: at last we came to the vast Ocean on the other side of the Island, and
by our coasting it, conceive it to be of an oval form, only here and there
shooting forth with some Promontories. I conceive it has but few good Harbors
belonging to it, the Rocks in most places making it inaccessible. The length of
it may be about two hundred, and breadth one hundred miles, the whole in
circumference about five hundred miles.

It lies about seventy six degrees of Longitude, and twenty of Latitude, being
situate under the third Climate, the longest day being about thirteen hours
and forty five minutes. The weather as in all Southern Countries, is far more
hot than with us in Europe; but what is by the Sun parched in the day, the
night again refreshes with cool pearly dews. The Air is found to be very
healthful by the long lives of the present inhabitants, few dying there till
such time as they come to good years of maturity, many of them arriving to the
extremity of old age.

And now speaking concerning the length of their Lives, I think it will not be
amiss in this place to speak something of their Burials, which they used to do
thus.

When the party was dead, they stuck his Carcass all over with flowers, and
after carried him to the place appointed for Burial, where setting him down,
(the Priest having given some godly Exhortations concerning the frailty of
life) then do they take stones (a heap being provided there for that purpose)
and the nearest of the kin begins to lay the first stone upon him, afterward
the rest follows, they never leaving till they have covered the body deep in
stones, so that no Beast can possibly come to him, and this shift were they
forced to make, having no Spades or Shovels wherewith to dig them Graves; which
want of theirs we espying, bestowed a Pick-ax and two Shovels upon them.

Here might I add their way of Christening Children, but that being little
different from yours in ENGLAND, and taught them by GEOGE PINES at first which
they have since continued, I shall therefore forbear to speak thereof.

After our return back from the discovery of the Country, the Wind not being
fit for our purpose, and our men also willing thereto, we got all our cutting
Instruments on Land, and fell to hewing down of Trees, with which, in a little
time, (many hands making light work) we built up a Palace for this William
Pines the Lord of that Country; which, though much inferior to the houses of
your Gentry in England. Yet to them which never had seen better, it appeared a
very Lordly Place. This deed of ours was beyond expression acceptable unto him,
loading us with thanks for so great a benefit, of which he said he should never
be able to make a requital.

And now acquainting him, that upon the first opportunity we were resolved to
leave the Island, as also how that we were near Neighbors to the Country of
England, from whence his Ancestors came; he seemed upon the news to be much
discontented that we would leave him, desiring, if it might stand with our
commodity to continue still with him, but seeing he could not prevail, he
invited us to dine with him the next day, which we promised to do, against
which time he provided, very sumptuously (according to his estate) for us, and
now was he attended after a more Royal manner then ever we saw him before, both
for number of Servants, and multiplicity of Meat, on which we fed very
heartily; but he having no other Beverage for us to drink, then water, we
fetched from our Ship a Case of Brandy, presenting some of it to him to drink,
but when he had tasted of it, he would by no means be persuaded to touch
thereof again, preferring (as he said) his own Country Water before all such
Liquors whatsoever.

After we had Dined, we were invited out into the Fields to behold their
Country Dancing, which they did with great agility of body; and though they
had no other then only Vocal Music (several of them singing all that while)
yet did they trip it very neatly, giving sufficient satisfaction to all that
beheld them.

The next day we invited the Prince William Pines aboard our Ship, where was
nothing wanting in what we could to entertain him, he had about a dozen of
Servants to attend on him he much admired at the Tacklings of our Ship, but
when we came to discharge a piece or two of Ordnance, it struck him into a
wonder and amazement to behold the strange effects of Powder; he was very
sparing in his Diet, neither could he, or any of his followers be induced to
drink any thing but Water: We there presented him with several things, as much
as we could spare, which we thought would any ways conduce to their benefit,
all which he very gratefully received, assuring us of his real love and good
will, whenever we should come thither again.

And now we intended the next day to take our leaves, the Wind standing fair,
blowing with a gentle Gale South and by East, but as we were hoising of our
Sails, and weighing Anchor, we were suddenly Alarmed with a noise from the
shore, the Prince, W. Pines imploring our assistance in an Insurrection which
had happened amongst them, of which this was the cause.

Henry Phil, the chief Ruler of the Tribe or Family of the Phils, being the
Offspring of George Pines which he had by the Negro-woman; this man had
ravished the Wife of one of the principal of the Family of the Trevors, which
act being made known, the Trevors assembled themselvesa lltogether to bring the
offender unto Justice: But he knowing his crime to be so great, as extended to
the loss of life: sought to defend that by force, which he had as unlawfully
committed, whereupon the whole Island was in a great hurly burly, they being
too great Potent Factions, the bandying of which against each other, threatened
a general ruin to the whole State.

The Governor William Pines had interposed in the matter, but found his
Authority too weak to repress such Disorders; for where the Hedge of Government
is once broken down, the most vile bear the greatest rule, whereupon he desired
our assistance, to which we readily condescended, and arming out twelve of us
went on Shore, rather as to a surprise then fight, for what could nakednss do
to encounter with Arms. Being conducted by him to the force of our Enemy, we
first entered into parley, seeking to gain them rather by fair means then
fo^ce, but that not prevailing, we were necessitated to use violence, for this
Henry Phill being of an undaunted resolution, and having armed his fellows with
Clubs and Stones, they sent such a Peal amongst us, as made us at the first to
give back, which encouraged them to follow us on with great violence, but we
discharging off three or four Guns, when they saw some of themselves wounded,
and heard the terrible reports which they gave, they ran away with greater
speed then they came. The Band of the Trevors who were joined with us, hotly
pursued them, and having taken their Captain, returned with great triumph to
their Governor, who sitting in Judgment upon him, he was adjudged to death,
and thrown off a steep Rock into the Sea, the only way they have of punishing
any by death, except burning.

And now at last we took our solemn leaves of the Governor, and departed from
thence, having been there in all, the space of three weeks and two days, we
took with us good store of the flesh of a Beast which they call there Reval,
being in taste different either from Beef or Swines-flesh, yet very delightful
to the Palate, and exceeding nutrimental. We took also with us alive, diverse
Fowls which they call Marde, about the bigness of a Pullet, and not different
in taste, they are very swift of flight, and yet so fearless of danger, that
they will stand still till such time as you catch them: We had also sent us in
by the Governor about two bushels of eggs, which as I conjecture were the
Mards eggs, very lussious in taste, and strenthening to the body.

June 8. We had a sight of Cambaia, a part of the East Indies, but under the
Government of the great Cham of Tartary; here our Vessel sprin^ing a leak, we
were forced to put to shore, receiving (...) in some of our Commodities; we
were forced to ^^y the Pump for eighteen hours together, which, had that
miscarried, we had inevitably have perished; here we stai'.d five days
mending our Ship, and drying some of our Goods, and then hoising Sail, in four
days time more we came to Calecute.

This Calecute is the chief Mart Town and Staple of all the Indian Traffic,
it is very populous, and frequerted by Merchants of all Nations. Here we
unladed a great part of our Goods, and taking in others, which caused us to
stay there a full Month, during which space, at leisure times I went abroad
to take a survey of the City, which I found to be large and populous, lying
for three miles together upon the Seashore. Here is a great many of those
persons whom thy call Brachmans, being their Priests or Teachers whom they
much reverence. It is a custom here for the King to give to some of those
Brachmain, the hanselling of his Nuptial Bed; for which cause, not the Kings,
but the Kings sisters sons succeed in the Kingdom, as being more certainly
known to be of the true Royal blood: And these sisters of his choose what
Gentleman they please, on whom to bestow their Virginities; and if they prove
not in a certain time to be with child, they betake themselves to these
Brachman Stalions, who never fail of doing their work.

The people are indifferently civil and ingenious, both men and women imitate a
Majesty in their Train and Apparel, which they sweeten with Oils and Perfumes:
adorning themselves with Jewels and other Ornaments befitting each Rank and
Quality of them.

They have many odd Customs amongst them which they observe very strictly; as
first, not knowing their Wives after they have born them two children:
Secondly, not accompanying them, if after five years cohabition they can raise
no issue by them, but taking others in their (...): Thirdly, never being
rewarded for any Military (...) unless they bring with them an enemies Head in
their Hand, but that which is strangest, and indeed most barbarous, is that
when any of their friends falls sick, they will rather choose to kill him, then
that he should be withered by sickness.

Thus you see there is little employment there for Doctors, when to be sick, is
the next wa n for to be slain, or perhaps the people may be of the mind rather
to kill themselves, then to let the Doctors do it.

Having dispatched our business, and fraighted again our Ship, we left
Calecute, and put forth to Sea, and coasted along several of the Islands
belonging to India, at Camboia I met with our old friend Mr. David Prire, who
was overjoyed to see me, to whom I related our Discovery of the Island of
Pines, in the same manner as I have related it to you; he was then but newly
recovered of a Fever, the Air of that place not being agreeable to him; here
we took in good store of Aloes, and some other Commodities, and victualled our
Ship for our return home.

After four days sailing, we met with two Portugal Ships which came from
Lisbon, one whereof had in a storm lost its Topmast, and was forced in part to
be towed by the other. We had no bad weather in eleven days space, but then a
sudden storm of Wind did us much harm in our Tacklings, and swept away one of
our Sailors off from the Fore Castle. November the sixth had like to have been
a fatal day unto us, our Ship striking twice upon a Rock, and at night was in
danger of being fired by the negligence of a Boy, leaving a Candle carelessly in
the Gun-room; the next day we were chased by a Pyrate of Argiere, but by the
swiftness of our Sails we out ran him. December the first we came again to
Madagascar, where we put in for a fresh recruit of Victuals and Water.

During our abode here, there happened a very great Earthquake, which tumbled
down many Houses; The people of themselves are very Unhospitable and
Treacherous, hardly to to be drawn to Traffic with any people; and now, this
calamity happening upon them, so enraged them against the Christians, imputing
all such calamities to the cause of them, that they fell upon some Portugals
and wounded them, and we seeing their mischievous Actions, with all the speed
we could put forth to Sea again, and sailed to the Island of St. Hellens.

Here we stayed all the Christmas Holy Days, which was vere much celebrated by
the Governor there under the King of Spain: Here we furnished our selves with
all necessaries which we wanted; but upon our departure, our old acquaintance
Mr. Petrus Ramazina, coming in a Skiff out of the Isle del Principe, or the
Princes Island, retarded our going for the space of two days, for both my self
and our Purser had Emergent business with him, he being concerned in those
Affairs of which I wrote to you in April last: Indeed we cannot but acknowledge
his Courtesies unto us, of which you know he is never sparing. January the
first, we again hoised Sail, having a fair and prosperous gail of Wind, we
touched at the Canaries, but made no tarriance, desirous now to see our Native
Country; but the Winds was very cross unto us for the space of a week, at last
we were favored with a gentle Gale, which brought us on merrily; though we
were on a sudden stricken again into a dump; a Sailor from the main Mast
discovering five Ships, which put us all in a great fear, we being Richly
Laden, and not very well provided for Defense; but they bearing up to us, we
found them to be Zealanders and our Friends; after many other passages
concerning us! not so much worthy of Note, we at last safele arrived at home,
May 26. 1668.

Thus Sir, have I given you a brief, but true Relation of our Voyage, Which I
was the more willing to do, to prevent false Copies which might be spread of
this nature: As for the Island of Pines it self, which caused me to Write this
Relation, I suppose it is a thing so strange as will hardly be credited by
some, although perhaps knowing persons, especially considering our last age
being so full of Discoveries, that this Place should lie Dormant for so long a
space of time; Others I know, such Nullifidians as will believe nothing but
what they see, applying that Proverb unto us, That Travelors may lie by
authority. But Sir, in writing to you, I question not but to give Credence, you
knowing my disposition so hateful to divulge Falsities; I shall request you to
impart this my Relation to Mr. W.W. and Mr. P.L. remembering me very kindly unto
them, not forgetting my old acquaintance Mr. I. P. and Mr. I. B. no more at
present, but only my best respects to you and your second self, I rest

Yours in the best of friendship, Henry Cornelius Van Sloetten.
July 22. 1668. POSTSCRIPT.
ONe thing concerning the Isle of Pines, I had almost quite forgot, we had with
us an Irish man named Dermot Conelly who had formerly been in England, and had
learned there to play on the Bag-pipes, which he carried to Sea with him; yet
so un-Englished he was, that he had quite forgotten your Language, but still
retained his Art of Bagpipe-playing, in which he took extraordinary delight;
being one day on Land in the Isle of Pines, he played on them, but to see the
admiration of those naked people concerning them, would have stricken you into
admiration; long time it was before we could persuade them that it was not a
living creature, although they were permitted to touch and feel it, and yet are
the people very intelligible, retaining a great part of the Ingenuity and
Gallantry of the English Nation, though they have not that happy means to
express themselves; in this respect we may account them fortunate, in that
possessing little, they enjoy all things, as being contented with what they
have, wanting those alurements to mischief, which our European Countries are
enriched with. I shall not dilate any further, no question but time will make
this Island known better to the world; all that I shall ever say of it is, that
it is a place enriched with Natures abundance, deficient in nothing conducible
to the sustentation of man's life, which were it Manured by Agri-culture and
Gardening, as other of our European Countries are, no question but it would
equal, if not exceed many which now pass for praise worthy.



FINIS.

