DISCOURSES CONCERNING Government: In Way of DIALOGUE. WHEREIN, By Observations
drawn from other KINGDOMS and STATES, the Excellency of the ENGLISH GOVERNMENT
is demonstrated, the CAUSES of the DECAY thereof are considered, and proper
REMEDIES for CURE proposed.

By Henry Nevill, Esquire

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, School.

TO THE READER.
THese Discourses were privately Printed, and Handed about, in K. Charles the
Second's Reign; but now in this Reign, when Truth is better Entertained, I have
thought good to make them more Public, for the Benefit of my Country.

A. B.

The Argument.
A Noble Venetian, not one of the young Fry, but a grave sober person, who had
born Office and Magistracy in his own Commonwealth, having been some years
since in France with a near Relation of his who was Ambassador at that Court,
and finding himself out of Employment, resolved to divert himself by visiting
some part of the World which he had never seen; and so passing through Germany,
Flanders, and Holland, arrived in England about the beginning of May last,
bringing Letters of recommendation to several English Gentlemen, who had been
Travelers, and made Friendship in his Country. A Custom usually practiced
amongst such who travel into any part where they have no habitude or
acquaintance. Amongst the rest, he was addressed to one of the Gentlemen who
acts a part in this Dialogue: Who after he had waited upon him, and served him
for near two Months, had certain necessary occasions, which called him for
some time into the Country. Where he had not been above three Weeks, before he
heard, by mere accident, that the Gentleman of Venice was fallen dangerous sick
of a malignant Fever. Which made him post away immediately to London, to
assist and serve him in what he might. But he found him almost perfectly
restored to his health by an eminent Physician of our Nation, as renowned for
his Skill and Cures at home; as for his Writings both here and abroad: And who
besides his profound knowledge in all Learning, as well in other Professions as
his own, had particularly arrived to so exact and perfect a discovery of the
formerly hidden parts of human Bodies, that every one who can but understand
Latin, may by his means know more of Anatomy than either Hypocrates, or any of
the Ancients or Moderns did, or do perceive. And if he had lived in the days of
Solomon, that great Philosopher would never have said, Cor hominis
inserutabile. This excellent Doctor being in the sick man's Chamber, when the
other English Gentleman, newly alighted, came to visit him. After some
Compliments and Conversation of course, they begun to talk of Political
Matters, as you will better understand by the Introduction, and by the
Discourse it self.

The FIRST DAY.
The Introduction.
English Gentleman. THE sudden news I had of your sad distemper, and the donger
you were in, has been the cause of a great deal of affliction to me, as well as
of my present and speedy repair to London, some Weeks sooner th^n I intended: I
must confess I received some comfort to hear at my arrival of your amendment
and do take much more now to find you up, and as I hope recovered; which I knew
would be a necessary consequence of your sending for this excellent Physician,
the Esculapius of our Age, it being the first request I had to make to you, if
by seeing him here in your Chamber I had not found it needless. For the Destiny
of us Englishmen depends upon him, and we either live or dye Infallibly,
according to the Judgment or good Fortune we have, when we are sick, either to
call or not call him to our assistance.


Noble Venetian. I am Infinitely obliged to you, for your care of me, but am
sorry it has been so inconvenient to you, as to make you leave your Affairs in
the Country sooner than you proposed to your self to do: I wish I might be so
fortunate in the course of my Life, as to find an opportunity of making some
part of an acknowledgment, for this and all the rest of your favors, but shall
pray God it may not be in the same kind; but that your health may ever be so
entire, that you never need so transcendent a Charity, as I now receive from
your Goodness: And as to this incomparable Doctor; although, I must confess,
that all the good which has happened to me in this Country, as well as the
knowledge I have received of Persons and Things, does derive from you; yet I
must make an exception, as to this one point; for if I can either read, or
hear, this Gentleman's excellent Writings, and the Fame he worthily injoys in
my Country, would have made it inexcusable in me, to implore the help of any
other; and I do assure you, that, before I left England, it was in my Ambition
to beg your Mediation toward the bringing me into the acquaintance and favor
of this Learned Person, even before I had any thoughts of becoming the Object
of his Care and Skill, as now I am the Trophy of both.


Doctor. Well, Gentlemen, you are both too great to be Flatterers, and I too
little to be flattered, and therefore I will impute this fine discourse you
both make about me, to the overflowing of your Wit, and the having no Object
near you to vent it upon but me. And for you, Sir, if my Art fail me not, the
voiding this Mirth, is a very good sign that you are in a fair way to a perfect
recovery. And for my Countryman here: I hope whilst he has this vent, that his
Hypocondriack distemper will be at quiet, and that neither his own thoughts,
nor the ill posture of our Public Affairs will make him hang himself, for at
least this twelve Months: Only, Gentlemen, pray take notice, that this does not
pass upon me, nor do I drink it like Milk (as the French phrase it) being
mindful of what a grave Gentleman at Florence replied to a young Esquire, who
answered his Compliments with, Oh, Sir, you flatter me, i prencipt s'adulano i
pari vostri si coglionono; That last word I cannot render well into Latin.


English Gentleman. Well, Doctor, we will not offend your Modesty: The next
time we do you Justice, it shall be behind your back, since you are so severe
upon us. But you may assure your self that my intention of recommending you to
this Gentleman, was for his own sake, and not for yours: For you have too many
Patients already, and it were much better, both for you and us, that you had
but half so many: For then we should have more of your Writings, and sometimes
enjoy your good Conversation; which is worth our being sick on purpose for. And
I am resolved to put my self sometimes into my Bed, and send for you, since you
have done coming to our Coffee-House.

But to leave this Subject now, I hear you say, that this Gentleman is in a
perfect way of recovery; pray is he well enough to hear, without any prejudice
to his convalescence, a reprehension I have to make him?


Doct. Yes, yes; you may say what you will to him, for your Repremands will
rather divert than trouble him, and prove more a Cordial than a Corrosive.


Eng. Gent. Then, Sir, pray consider what satisfaction you can ever make me,
for the hard measure you have used toward me, in letting me learn from common
Fame and Fortune, the news of your Sickness, and that not till your recovery;
and for depriving me of the opportunity of paying the debt I owe to your own
merit, and to the recommendation of those worthy Persons in Italy, who did me
the honor to address you to me. And this injury is much aggravated by the
splendor of your Condition, and greatness of your Fortune, which makes it
impossible for me ever to hope for any other occasion to express my faithful
service to you, or satisfy any part of the duty I have to be at your devotion.
To be sick in a strange Country, and to distrust the sincerity and obedience of
--


Noble Ven. Pray, Sir, give me leave to interrupt you, and to assure you, that
it was not any distrust of your goodness to me, of which I have had sufficient
experience; nor any insensibleness how much your care might advantage me; much
less any scruple I had of being more in your debt; which if it had been
possible for me to entertain, it must have been thought of long since, before I
had received those great Obligations, which I never made any difficulty to
accept of. It was not, I say, any of these Considerations, which hindered me
from advertising you of my Distemper; but the Condition and Nature of it, which
in a moment deprived me of the exercise of those Faculties which might give me
a Capacity of helping my self in any thing. But otherwise I assure you that no
day of my life shall pass, wherein I will not express a sense of your Favors,
and --


Doct. Pray now, Sir, permit me to interrupt you; for this Gentleman, I dare
say, looks for no Compliments; but that which I have to say, is; That the
desire you signified to me, to give you some account of our Affairs here, and
the turbulency of our present State, will be much better placed, if you please
to address it to this Gentleman whose Parts and Studies have fitted him for
such an Employment; besides his having had a great share in the managing
Affairs of State here, in other times: And really no man understands the
Government of England better than he.


Eng. Gent. Now, Doctor, I should tell you, i pari miei si coglionono, for so
you your self have baptized this kind of Civility; But however, this is a
Province that I cannot be reasonably pressed to take upon me, whilst you are
present, who are very well known to be as skillful in the Nature and Distemper
of the Body Politic, as the whole Nation confesses you to be in the concerns
of the Natural. And you would have good store of Practice in your former
Capacity, if the wise Custom amongst the Ancient Greeks were not totally out of
use. For they, when they found any Craziness or indisposition in their several
Governments, before it broke out into a Disease, did repair to the Physicians
of State (who, from their Profession, were called the Seven Wise Men of Greece)
and obtained from them some good Recipes to prevent those seeds of distemper
from taking root, and destroying the public Peace. But in our days, these
Signs or Forerunners of Diseases in State are not foreseen, till the whole
Mass is corrupted, and that the Patient is incurable, but by violent Remedies.
And if we could have perceived the first Symptoms of our Distemper, and used
good Alteratives, the curiosity of this worthy Gentleman had been spared, as
also his command to you, to give him some light into our matters; and we
unfortunate Englishmen had reposed in that quiet, ease, and security, which we
enjoyed three hundred years since. But let us leave the contest who shall
inform this Gentleman, lest we spend the time we should do it in unprofitably,
and let each of us take his part; for if we speak all, it will look like a
studied discourse fitted for the Press, and not a familiar Dialogue. For it
ought to be in private Conversation, as it was originally in the planting the
Gospel, when there were two sorts of preaching; the one Concionary, which was
used by the Apostles and other Missionaries, when they spoke to those who had
never heard of the Mysteries of Christian Religion, possibly not so much as of
the Jewish Law, or the History of Christ: The duty of those was to hear, and
not reply, or any way interrupt the harrangue: But when the Believers (called
the Church) assembled together, it was the Custom of such of the Auditors, to
whom any thing occurred, or (as S. Paul calls it) was revealed, to interpose
and desire to be heard, which was called an Interlocutory Preaching, or
Religious Conversation; and served very much to the instructing and edifying
those who had long believed in Christ, and possibly knew as much of him as
their Pastor himself; and this is used still amongst many of our Independent
Congregations.


Doct. I have (besides the reason I a^ledged before, and which I still insist
upon) some other cause to beg that you will please to give your self the
trouble of answering this Gentleman's Queries; which is, that I am very
defective in my Expressions in the Italian Language; which though I understand
perfectly, and so comprehend all that either of you deliver, yet I find not
words at hand to signify my own meaning, and am therefore necessitated to
deliver my self in Latin, as you see. And I fear that our pronunciation being
so different from that which is used in Italy, this worthy person may not so
easily comprehend what I intend, and so be disappointed in the desire he has
to be perfectly instructed in our Affairs.


Noble Ven. Really, Sir, that is not all; for besides that, I confess your
pronunciation of the Latin Tongue to be very new to me, and for that reason I
have been forced to be troublesome to you, in making you repeat things twice, or
thrice. I say besides that your Latinity, ^s your Writings show, and all the
world knows is very pure and elegant, which it is notorious to all, that we in
Italy scarce understand: Gentlemen there never Learning more Latin, than what
is necessary to call for Meat and Drink, in Germany or Holland, where most of
the Hosts speak a certain Franck, compounded of Dutch, Latin, and Italian. And
though some of us have Latin enough to understand a good Author, (as you have
of our Language) yet we seldom arrive to speak any better than this Franck, or
can without study comprehend good Latin, when we meet with it in discourse. And
therefore it is your perfection in that Tongue, and my ignorance in it, that
makes me concur with you, in desiring this Gentleman, to take the pains of
instructing my Curiosity in Italian.


Eng. Gent. I shall obey you in this, and all things else, upon this condition,
that both you and the Doctor will vouchsafe to interrogate me, and by that
means give me the Method of serving you in this: And then that you will both
please to interrupt and contradict me when you think I say any think amiss, o^
that either of you are of a different Opinion, and to give me a good occasion
of explaining my self, and possibly of being convinced by you, which I shall
easily confess; for I hate nothing more than to hear disputes amongst
Gentlemen, and men offense, wherein the Speakers seem (like Sophisters in a
College) to dispute rather for Victory, than to discover and find out the
Truth.


Doct. Well, all this I believe will be granted you; so that we have nothing to
do now, but to adjourn, and name a time when to meet again. Which I, being this
Gentleman's Physician, will take upon me to appoint, and it shall be to morrow
morning about nine of the Clock, after he has slept well, as I hope he will, by
means of a Cordial I intend to send him immediately. In the mean time, not to
weary him too much, we will take our leaves of him for this Night.


Noble Ven. I shall expect your return with great impatience, and if your
Cordial be not very potent, I believe the desire of seeing you will make me
wake much sooner than the hour you appoint. And I am very confident, that my
mind as well as my body, will be sufficiently improved by such Visits. It begins
to be darkish, Boy light your Torch, and wait on these Gentlemen down.


Both. Sir, we wish you all good rest and health.


Noble Ven. And I, with a thousand thanks, the like to you.


The SECOND DAY.
Doct. WEll, Sir, how is it? Have you rested well to Night? I fear we come too
early


Noble Ven. Dear Doctor, I find my self very well, thanks to your Care and
Skill, and have been up above these two hours, in expectation of the favor you
and this Gentleman promised me.


Doct. Well, then pray let us leave off Compliments and Repartees, of which we
had a great deal too much yesterday, and fall to our business, and be pleased
to interrogate this Gentleman what you think fit.


Noble Ven. Then, Sir, my first request to you, is, That you will vouchsafe to
acquaint me for what Reasons this Nation, which has over been esteemed (and
very justly) one of the most considerable People of the World, and made the
best Figure both in Peace, Treaties, War, and Trade, is now of so small regard,
and signifies so little abroad? Pardon the freedom I take, for I assure you it
is not out of disrespect, much less of contempt that I speak it: For since I
arrived in England, I find it one of the most flourishing Kingdoms in Europe,
full of splendid Nobility and Gentry; the comliest persons alive, Valiant,
Courteous, Knowing and Bountiful; and as well stored with Commoners, Honest,
Industrious, fitted for Business, Merchandise, Arts, or Arms; as their several
Educations lead them. Those who apply themselves to study, prodigious for
Learning, and succeeding to admiration in the perfection of all Sciences: All
this makes the Riddle impossible to be solved; but by some skillful Sphynx,
such as you are; whose pains I will yet so far spare, as to acknowledge, that I
do in that little time I have spent here, perceive that the immediate cause of
all this, is the Disunion of the People and the Governors; the Coffeehouse
of the Gentry, and Turbulency of the Commonalty; although without all Violence
or Tumult, which is Miraculous. So that what I now request of you, is, That you
will please to deduce particularly to me, the Causes of this Division, that
when they are laid open, I may proceed (if you think fit to permit it) from the
Disease, when known, to enquire out the Remedies.


Eng. Gent. Before I come to make you any Answer, I must thank you for the
Worthy and Honorable Character you give of our Nation, and shall add to it,
That I do verily believe, that there are not a more Loyal and Faithful People
to their Prince in the whole world, than ours are; nor that fear more to fall
into that State of Confusion, in which we were twenty years since; and that,
not only this Parliament, which consists of the most Eminent Men of the
Kingdom, both for Estates and Parts; but all the Inhabitants of this Isle in
general; even those (so many of them as have their understandings yet entire)
which were of the Anti-royal Party, in our late Troubles, have all of them the
greatest horror imaginable, to think of doing any thing, that may bring this
poor Country into those Dangers and Uncertainties, which then did threaten our
Ruin; and the rather for this Consideration; that neither the Wisdom of some,
who were engaged in those Affairs, which I must aver to have been very great,
nor the success of their Contest, which ended in an absolute Victory, could
prevail, so as to give this Kingdom any advantage; nay, not so much as any
settlement, in Satisfaction and Requital of all the Blood it had lost, Money it
had spent, and Hazard it had run. A clear Argument why we must totally exclude
a Civil War from being any of the Remedies, when we come to that point. I must
add further, That as we have as loyal subjects as are any where to be found, so
we have as gracious and good a Prince: I never having yet heard that he did, or
attempted to do, any the least Act of Arbitrary Power, in any public Concern;
nor did ever take, or endeavor to take from any particular person the benefit
of the Law. And for his only Brother (although accidentally he cannot be denied
to be a great motive of the Peoples unquietness) all men must acknowledge him
to be a most Glorious and Honorable Prince; one who has exposed his life
several times for the Safety and Glory of this Nation; one who pays justly and
punctually his Debts, and manages his own Fortune discreetly; and yet keeps the
best Court and Equipage of any Subject in Christendom; is Courteous and Affable
to all; and in fine, has nothing in his whole Conduct to be excepted against,
much less dreaded; excepting, that he is believed to be of a Religion contrary
to the Honor of God, and the Safety and interest of this People, which gives
them just Apprehensions of their Future Condition: But of this matter, we shall
have occasion to Speculate hereafter; in the mean time, since we have such a
Prince, and such Subjects, we must needs want the ordinary cause of Distrust
and Division, and therefore must seek higher to find out the Original of this
turbulent posture we are in.


Doct. Truly you had need seek higher or lower to satisfy us, for hitherto you
have but enforced the Gentleman's Question, and made us more admire what the
Solution will be.


Eng. Gent. Gentlemen, then I shall delay you no longer: The Evil Counselors,
the Pensioner-Parliament, the Thorowpac'd Judges, the Flattering Divines, the
Buisie and Designing Papists, the French Counsels, are not the Causes of our
Misfortunes, they are but the Effects (as our present Distractions are) of one
Primary Cause; which is the Breach and Ruin of our Government; which having
been decaying for near two hundred years, is in our Age brought so near to
Expiration, that it lies agonizing, and can no longer perform the Functions of
a Political Life, nor carry on the work of Ordering and Preserving Mankind: So
that the Shifts that our Courtiers have within some years used, are but so many
Tricks, or Conclusions which they are trying to hold Life and Soul together a
while longer; and have played Handy-Dandy with Parliaments, and especially with
the House of Commons, (the only part which is now left entire of the old
Constitution) by Adjourning, and Proroguing, and Dissolving them (contrary to
the true meaning of the Law) as well in the Reign of our late King, as during
his Majesty's that now is. Whereas indeed our Counselors (perceiving the decay
of the Foundation, as they must, if they can see but one Inch into the
Politics) ought to have Addressed themselves to the King to call a Parliament,
the true Physician, and to lay open the Distemper there, and so have
endeavored a Cure, before it had been too late, as I fear it now is: I mean
the piecing and patching up the Old Government. It is true, as the Divine
Machiavil says, That Diseases in Government are like a Marasmus in the Body
Natural, which is very hard to be discovered whilst it is Curable; and after it
comes to be easy to discern, difficult if not impossible to be Remedied; yet
it is to be supposed that the Counselors are, or ought to be skilful
Physicians, and to foresee the Seeds of State-Distempers, time enough to
prevent the Death of the Patient; else they ought in Conscience to excuse
themselves from that sublime Employment, and betake themselves to Callings more
suitable to their Capacities. So that although for this Reason the Ministers of
State here are inexcusable, and deserve all the Fury which must one time or
other be let loose against them, (except they shall suddenly fly from the wrath
to come, by finding out in time, and advising the true means of setting
themselves to rights) yet neither Prince nor People are in the mean time to be
blamed for not being able to Conduct things better. No more than the Waggoner
is to answer for his ill guiding, or the Oxon for their ill drawing the Wagon,
when it is with Age and ill usage broken, and the Wheels unserviceable: Or the
Pilot and Mariners, for not weathring out a Storm, when the Ship has sprung a
planck. And as in the body of Man, sometimes the Head and all the Members are
in good Order, nay, the Vital Parts are sound and entire; yet if there be a
Considerable Putrefaction in the humors, much more, if the Blood (which the
Scripture calls the life) be Impure and Corrupted; the Patient ceases not to be
in great Danger, and oftentimes dies without some skillful Physician: And in
the mean time the Head and all the parts suffer, and are unquiet, full as much,
as if they were all immediately affected. So it is in every respect with the
Body Politic, or Commonwealth, when their Foundations are moulder'd: And
although in both these Cases, the Patients cannot (though the Distemper be in
their own Bodies) know what they ail, but are forced to send for some Artist to
tell them; yet they cease not to be extremely uneasy and impatient, and lay
hold oftentimes upon unsuitable Remedies, and impute their Malady to wrong and
ridiculous Causes. As some people do here, who think that the growth of Popery
is our only Evil, and that if we were secure against that, our Peace and
Settlement were obtained, and that our Disease needed no other Cure. But of
this more when we come to the Cure.


Noble Ven. Against this Discourse, certainly we have nothing to reply: but
must grant, that when any Government is decayed, it must be mended, or all will
Ruin. But now we must Request you to declare to us, how the Government of
England is decayed, and how it comes to be so. For I am one of those Unskilful
Persons, that cannot discern a State Marasmus, when the danger is so far off.


Eng. Gent. Then no man living can: for your Government is this day the only
School in the World, that breeds such Physicians, and you are esteemed one of
the ablest amongst them: And it would be manifest to all the World for Truth;
although there were no argument for it, but the admirable Stability and
Durableness of your Government, which has lasted above twelve hundred years
entire and perfect; whilst all the rest of the Countries in Europe, have not
only changed Masters very frequently in a quarter of that time, but have varied
and altered their Polities very often. Which manifests that you must needs have
ever enjoyed a Succession of wise Citizens, that have had skill and Ability to
forwarn you betimes of those Rocks against which your excellently-built Vessel
might in time split.


Noble Ven. Sir, you overvalue, not only me, but the Wisdom of my Fellow
Citizens; for we have none of these high Speculations, nor has scarce any of
our Body read Aristotle, Plato, or Cicero, or any of those great Artists,
Ancient or Modern, who teach that great Science of the Governing and Increasing
great States and Cities; without studying which Science no man can be fit to
discourse pertinently of these matters; much less to found or mend a
Government, or so much as find the defects of it. We only study our own
Government, and that too Chiefly to be fit for advantageous Employments, rather
than to foresee our dangers. Which yet I must needs confess some amongst us are
pretty good at, and will in a Harangue made upon passing a Law, venture to tell
us what will be the Consequence of it two hundred years hence. But of these
things I shall be very prodigal in my discourse, when you have Leisure and
Patience to command me to say any thing of our Polity; in the mean time pray be
pleased to go on with your Edifying Instruction.


Eng. Gent. Before I can tell you how the Government of England came to be
decayed, I must tell you what that Government was, and what it now is: And I
should say something too of Government in General, but that I am afraid of
talking of that Subject, before you who are so exact a Judge of it.


Noble Ven. I thought you had been pleased to have done with this Discourse, I
assure you, Sir, if I had more skill in that matter than ever I can pretend to,
it would but serve to make me the fitter Auditor of what you shall say on that
Subject.


Eng. Gent. Sir, in the Course of my Reasoning upon this Point, I shall have
occasion to insist and expatiate upon many things, which both my self and
others have Published in former times. For which I will only make this excuse,
that the Repetition of such matters is the more pardonable, because they will
be at least new to you, who are a stranger to our Affairs and Writings. And the
rather because those discourses shall be applied to our present condition, and
suited to our present occasions. But I will say no more, but obey you, and
proceed. I will not take upon me to say, or so much as Conjecture, how and when
Government began in the World, or what Government is most Ancient: History must
needs be silent in that point, for that Government is more Ancient than
History. And there was never any Writer, but was bred under some Government,
which is necessarily supposed to be the Parent of all Arts and Sciences, and to
have produced them. And therefore it would be as hard for a man to Write an
account of the beginning of the Laws and Polity of any Country, except there
were memory of it, (which cannot be before the first Historiographer) as it
would be to any person without Records to tell the particular History of his
own Birth.


Doct. Sir, I cannot comprehend you, may not Historians Write a History of
Matters done before they were born? If it were so; no man could Write but of
his own times.


Eng. Gent. My meaning is, Where there are not Stories, or Records, extant; for
as for Oral Tradition, it lasts but for one Age, and then degenerates into
Fable: I call any thing in Writing, whereby the account of the Passages or
Occurrences of former times is derived to our knowledge, a History, although it
be not pend Methodically, so as to make the Author pass for a Wit: And had
rather read the Authentic Records of any Country, that is a Collection of
their Laws and Letters concerning Transactions of State, and the like, than the
most Eloquent and Judicious Narrative that can be made.


Noble Ven. Methinks, Sir, your discourse seems to imply, that we have no
account extant of the beginning of Governments; pray what do you think of the
Books of Moses, which seem to be pend on purpose to inform us how he, by Gods
Command, led that People out of Egypt into another Land, and in the way made
them a Government? Besides, does not Plutarch tell us, how Theseus gathered
together the dispersed Inhabitants of Attica, brought them into one City, and
under one Government of his own making? The like did Romulus in Italy, and many
others in diverse Countries.


Eng. Gent. I never said that we had not sufficient knowledge of the Original
of particular Governments; but it is evident, that these great Legislators had
seen, and lived under other Administrations, and had the help of Learned
Lawgivers and Philosophers, excepting the first who had the Aid of God
himself. So that it remains undiscovered yet, how the first REgulation of
mankind began: And therefore I will take for granted that which all the
Politicians conclude: Which is, That Necessity made the first Government. For
every man by the first Law of Nature (which is common to us and brutes) had,
like Beasts in a Pasture, right to every thing, and there being no Property,
each Individual, if he were the stronger, might seize whatever any other had
possessed himself of before, which made a State of perpetual War. To Remedy
which, and the fear that nothing should be long enjoyed by any particular
person (neither was any man's Life in safety) every man consented to be debarred
of that Universal Right to all things, and confine himself to a quiet and
secure enjoyment of such a part as should be allotted him: Thence came in
Ownership, or Property; to maintain which it was necessary to consent to Laws,
and a Government to put them in Execution. Which of the Governments now extant,
or that have been formerly, was first, is not possible now to be known; but I
think this must be taken for granted, that whatsoever the Frame or Constitution
was first, it was made by the Persuasion and Meditation of some Wise and
virtuous Person, and consented to by the whole Number. And then, that it was
instituted for the good and Preservation of the Governed, and not for the
Exaltation and greatness of the Person or Persons appointed to Govern: The
Reason why I beg this Concession is, That it seems very improbable, not to say
impossible, that a vast number of people should ever be brought to consent to
put themselves under the Power of others, but for the ends abovesaid, and so
lose their Liberty without advantaging themselves in any thing. And it is full
as impossible that any person (or persons so inconsiderable in number as
Magistrates and Rulers are) should by force get an Empire to themselves. Though
I am not ignorant that a whole people have in imminent Dangers, either from the
Invasion of a powerful Enemy, or from Civil Distractions, put themselves wholly
into the hands of one Illustrious Person for a time, and that with good
Success, under the best Forms of Government: But this is nothing to the
Original of States.


Noble Ven. Sir, I wonder how you come to pass over the Consideration of
Paternal Government, which is held to have been the beginning of Monarchies?


Eng. Gent. Really I did not think it worth the taking notice of, for though it
be not easy to prove a Negative, yet I believe if we could trace all
Foundations of Polities that now are, or ever came to our knowledge since the
World began; we shall find none of them to have descended from Paternal Power;
we know nothing of Adam's leaving the Empire to Cain, or Seth: It was
impossible for Noah to retain any Jurisdiction over his own three Sons; who
were dispersed into three parts of the World, if our Antiquaries Calculate
right; and as for Abraham, whilst he lived, as also his Son Isaac, they were
but ordinary Fathers of Families, and no question governed their own Household
as all others do; but when Jacob upon his Deathbed did relate to his Children,
the Promise Almighty God had made his Grandfather, to make him a great Nation,
and give his Posterity a fruitful Territory, he speaks not one word of the
Empire of Reuben his firstborn, but supposes them all equal: And so they were
taken to be by Moses, when he divided the Land to them by Lot; and by Gods
command made them a Commonwealth. So that I believe this fancy to have been
first started, not by the solid Judgment of any man, but to flatter some
Prince, and to assert, for want of better Arguments, the jus Divinum of
Monarchy.


Noble Ven. I have been impertinent in interrupting you, but yet now I cannot
repent of it, since your Answer has given me so much satisfaction; but if it
be so as you say, that Government was at first Instituted for the Interest and
Preservation of Mankind, how comes it to pass, That there are and have been so
many absolute Monarchies in the World, in which it seems that nothing is
provided for, but the Greatness and Power of the Prince.


Eng. Gent. I have presumed to give you already my Reason, why I take for
granted, that such a Power could never be given by the Consent of any People,
for a perpetuity; for though the People of Israel did against the will of
Samuel, and indeed of God himself demand, and afterward choose themselves a
King; yet he was never such a King as we speak of; for that all the Orders of
their Commonwealth the Sanhedrim, the Congregation of the People, the Princes
of the Tribes, etc. did still remain in being, as has been excellently proved
by a learned Gentleman of our Nation, to whom I refer you; it may then be
enquired into, how these Monarchies at first did arise. History being in this
point silent, as to the Ancient Principalities, we will Conjecture, that some
of them might very well proceed from the Corruption of better Governments,
which must necessarily cause a Depravation in manners (as nothing is more
certain than that Politic defects breed Moral ones, as our Nation is a
pregnant Example) this Debauchery of manners might blind the understandings of
a great many, destroy the Fortunes of others, and make them indigent, infuse
into very many a neglect and carelessness of the public good (which in all
settled States is very much regarded) so that it might easily come into the
Ambition of some bold aspiring Person to affect Empire, and as easily into his
Power, by fair pretenses with some, and promises of advantages with others, to
procure Followers, and gain a numerous Party, either to Usurp Tyranny over his
own Country, or to lead men forth to Conquer and Subdue another. Thus it is
supposed that Nimrod got his Kingdom; who in Scripture is called a Great Hunter
before God, which Expositers interpret, A great Tyrant. The Modern Despotical
Powers have been acquired by one of these two ways, either by pretending by the
first Founder thereof, that he had a Divine Mission and so gaining not only
Followers, but even easy Access in some places without Force to Empire, and
aftewards dilateing their Power by great Conquests. Thus Mahomet and Cingis Can
began, and established the Sarazen and Tartarian Kingdoms; or by a long Series
of Wisdom in a Prince, or chief Magistrate of a mixed Monarchy, and his Council,
who by reason of the Sleepiness and Inadvertency of the People, have been able
to extinguish the great Nobility, or render them Inconsiderable; and so by
degrees taking away from the People their Protectors, render them Slaves. So
the Monarchies of France, and some other Countries, have grown to what they are
at this day; there being left but a Shadow of the three States in any of these
Mocarchies, and so no bounds remaining to the Regal Power; but since Property
remains still to the Subjects, these Governments may be said to be changed, but
not founded or established; for there is no Maxim more Infallible and Holding
in any Science, than this is in the Politics, That Empire is founded in
Property. Force or Fraud may alter a Government; but it is Property that must
Found and Eternise it: Upon this undeniable Aphorism we are to build most of
our subsequent Reasoning, in the mean time we may suppose, that hereafter the
great power of the King of France may diminish much, when his enraged and
oppressed Subjects come to be commanded by a Prince of less Courage, Wisdom,
and Military Virtue, when it will be very hard for any such King to Govern
Tyrannically a Country which is not entirely his own.


Doct. Pray, Sir, give me leave to ask you by the way, what is the Reason that
here in our Country, where the Peerage is lessened sufficiently, the King has
not gotten as great an Addition of Power as accrews to the Crown in France?


Eng. Gent. You will understand that, Doctor, before I have finished this
discourse; but to stay your Stomach till then, you may please to know that in
France the greatness of the Nobility which has been lately taken from them, did
not consist in vast Riches and Revenues, but in great Privileges, and
Jurisdictions, which obliged the People to obey them; whereas our great Peers
in former times had not only the same great Dependences, but very Considerable
Revenues besides, in Demesnes, and otherwise: This Vassallage over the People,
which the Peers of France had, being abolisht, the Power over those Tenants,
which before was in their Lords, fell naturally and of course into the Crown,
although the Lands and possessions divested of those Dependences did and do
still remain to the Owners; whereas here in England, though the Services are
for the most part worn out, and insignificant; yet for want of Providence and
Policy in former Kings, who could not foresee the danger a far off, Entails
have been suffered to be cut off; and so two parts in ten of all those vast
Estates, as well Mannours as Demesnes, by the Luxury and Folly of the Owners,
have been within these two hundred years purchased by the lesser Gentry and the
Commons; which has been so far from advantaging the Crown, that it has made the
Country scarce governable by Monarchy: But if you please, I will go on with my
discourse about Government, and come to this again hereafter?


Noble Ven. I beseech you, Sir, do.


Eng. Gent. I cannot find by the small reading I have, that there were any
other Governments in the World Anciently than these three, Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy. For the first, I have no light out of Antiquity to
convince me, that there were in old times any other Monarchies, but such as
were absolutely Despotical; all Kingdoms then, as well in Greece (as Macedon,
Epirus, and the like; and where it is said, the Princes exercised their Power
moderately) as in Asia, being altogether unlimited by any Laws, or any
Assemblies of Nobility or People. Yet I must confess, Aristotle, when he
reckons up the Corruptions of these three Governments, calls Tyranny the
Corruption of Monarchy; which if he means a Change of Government, (as it is in
the Corruptions of the other two) then it must follow, that the Philosopher
knew of some other Monarchy at the first, which afterward degenerated into
Tyranny, that is, into Arbitrary Power; for so the Word Tyranny is most
commonly taken, though in modern Languages it signifies the ill Exercise of
Power; for certainly Arbitrary Government cannot be called Tyranny, where the
whole Property is in the Prince (as we reasonably suppose it to have been in
those Monarchies) no more than it is Tyranny for you to govern your own House
and Estate as you please: But it is possible Aristotle might not in this speak
so according to Terms of Art, but might mean, that the ill Government of a
Kingdom or Family is Tyranny. However we have one Example, that puzzles
Politicians, and that is Egypt, where Pharaoh is called King; and yet we see,
that till Joseph's time he had not the whole Property; for the Wisdom of that
Patriarch taught his Master a way to make a new use of that Famine, by telling
him, that if they would buy their Lives, and sell their Estates (as they did
afterward, and preserve themselves by the Kings Bread) they shall serve
Pharaoh; which shows that Joseph knew well, that Empire was founded in
Property: But most of the Modern Writers in Polity, are of Opinion, that Egypt
was not a Monarchy till then, though the Prince might have the Title of King,
as the Heraclides had in Sparta, and Romulus and the other Kings had in Rome;
both which States were Instituted Commonwealths. They give good Conjectures
for this their Opinion, too many to be here mentioned; only one is, That
Originally (as they go about to prove) all Arts and Sciences had their Rise in
Egypt, which they think very improbable to have been under a Monarchy. But this
Position, That all Kings in former times were absolute, is not so Essential to
the intent I have in this Discourse, which is to prove, That in all States, of
what kind soever, this Aphorism takes place: Imperium fundatur in Dominio. So
that if there were mixed Monarchies, then the King had not all the Property;
but those who shared with him in the Administration of the Sovereignty, had
their part, whether it were the Senate, the People, or both; or if he had no
Companions in the Sovereign Power, he had no Sharers likewise in the Dominion
or Possession of the Land. For that is all we mean by Property, in all this
Discourse; for as for Personal Estate, the Subjects may enjoy it in the largest
Proportion, without being able to invade the Empire: The Prince may when he
pleases take away their Goods, by his Tenants and Vassals (without an Army)
which are his Ordinary Force, and answers to our Posse Comitatus. But the
Subjects with their Money cannot invade his Crown. So that all the Description
we need make of this Kind or Form of Government, is, That the whole possession
of the Country, and the whole power lies in the Hands and Breast of one man; he
can make Laws, break and repeal them when he pleases, or dispense with them in
the mean time when he thinks fit; interpose in all Judicatories, in behalf of
his Favorites, take away any particular man's personal Estate, and his Life
too, without the formality of a Criminal Process, or Trial; send a Dagger, or a
Halter to his chief Ministers, and command them to make themselves away; and in
fine, do all that his Will or his Interest suggests to him.


Doct. You have dwelt long here upon an Argumentation, That the Ancients had no
Monarchies, but what were Arbitrary.


Eng. Gent. Pray give me leave to save your Objections to that point, and to
assure you first, That I will not take upon me to be so positive in that; for
that I cannot pretend to have read all the Historians and Antiquaries that ever
writ; nor have I so perfect a memory as to remember, or make use of, in a
Verbal and Transient Reasoning, all that I have ever read; And then to assure
you again, that I build nothing upon that Assertion, and so your Objection will
be needless, and only take up time.


Doct. You mistake me, I had no intent to use any Argument or Example against
your Opinion in that; but am very willing to believe that it may be so. What I
was going to say was this, that you have insisted much upon the point of
Monarchy, and made a strange description of it, whereas many of the Ancients,
and almost all the Modern Writers, magnify it to be the best of Governments.


Eng. Gent. I have said nothing to the contrary. I have told you de facto what
it is, which I believe none will deny. The Philosopher said it was the best
Government; but with this restriction, ubi Philosophi regnant, and they had an
Example of it, in some few Roman Emperors; but in the most turbulent times of
the Commonwealth, and Factions between the Nobility and the People, Rome was
much more full of Virtuous and Heroic Citizens, than ever it was under
Aurelius or Antonius: For the Moderns that are of that Judgment, they are most
of them Divines, not Politicians, and something may be said in their behalf,
when by their good Preaching, they can infuse into their imaginary Prince (who
seems already to have an Image of the Power of God) the Justice, Wisdom, and
Goodness too of the Deity.


Noble Ven. We are well satisfied with the Progress you have hitherto made in
this matter; pray go on to the two other Forms used amongst the Ancients, and
their Corruptions, that so we may come to the Modern Governments, and see how
England stands, and how it came to decay, and what must Rebuild it.


Eng. Gent. You have very good Reason to hasten me to that; for indeed, all
that has been said yet, is but as it were a Preliminary discourse to the
knowledge of the Government of England, and its decay: when it comes to the
Cure, I hope you will both help me, for both your self and the Doctor are a
thousand times better than I at Remedies. But I shall dispatch the other two
Governments. Aristocracy, or Optimacy, is a Commonwealth, where the better
sort, that is, the Eminent and Rich men, have the chief Administration of the
Government: I say, the chief, because there are very few ancient Optimacies,
but the People had some share, as in Sparta, where they had power to Vote, but
not Debate; for so the Oracle of Apollo, brought by Lycurgus from Delphos,
settles it; But the truth is, these people were the natural Spartans. For
Lycurgus divided the Country or Territory of Laconia into 39000 Shares; whereof
Nine thousand only of these Owners were Inhabitants of Sparta; the rest lived
in the Country: so that although Thucidides call it an Aristocracy, and so I
follow him, yet it was none of those Aristocracies usually described by the
Politicians, where the Lands of the Territory were in a great deal fewer Hands.
But call it what you will, where ever there was an Aristocracy, there the
Property, or very much the Overbalance of it, was in the hands of the
Aristoi, or Governors, be they more or fewer; for if the People have the
greatest interest in the Property, they will, and must have it in the Empire: A
notable example of it is Rome, the best and most glorious Government that ever
the Sun saw; where the Lands being equally divided amongst the Tribes, that is
the People; it was impossible for the Patricii to keek them quiet, till they
yielded to their desires, not only to have their Tribunes, to see that nothing
passed into a Law without their consent, but also to have it declared, that
both the Consuls should not only be chosen by the people (as they ever were,
and the Kings too before them) but that they might be elected too, when the
people pleased, out of Plebeian Families. So that now I am come to Democracy.
Which you see is a Government where the chief part of the Sovereign Power, and
the exercise of it, resides in the People; and where the Style is, Jessu populi
authoritate patrum. And it does consist of three fundamental Orders. The Senate
proposing, the People resolving, and the Magistrates executing. This Government
is much more Powerful than an Aristocracy, because the latter cannot arm the
People, for fear they should seize upon the Government, and therefore are fain
to make use of none but Strangers and Mercinaries for Soldiers; which, as the
Divine Machiavil says, has hindered your Commonwealth of Venice from mounting up
to Heaven, whither those incomparable Orders, and that venerable Wisdom used by
your Citizens in keeping to them, would have carried you, if in all your Wars
you had not been ill served.


Doct. Well, Sir, pray let me ask you one thing concerning Venice: How do you
make out your Imperium fundatur in dominio there? Have the Gentlemen there, who
are the Party governing, the possession of the whole Territory? Does not
property remain entire to the Gentlemen, and other Inhabitants in the several
Countries of Padua, Brescia, Vicenza, Verona, Bergamo, Creman, Trevisi, and
Friuli, as also in the Vltramarine Provinces, and Islands? And yet I believe
you will not deny, but that the Government of Venice is as well founded, and
has been of as long continuance as any that now is, or ever was in the World.


Eng. Gent. Doctor, I shall not answer you in this, because I am sure it will
be better done by this Gentleman, who is a worthy Son of that honorable Mother.


Noble Ven. I thought you had said, Sir, that we should have done
Complimenting; but since you do Command me to clear the Objection made by our
learned Doctor, I shall presume to tell you, first how our City began. The
Goths, Huns, and Lombards coming with all the Violence and Cruelty immaginable,
to invade that part of Italy which we now call Terra firma, and where our
Ancestors did then inhabit, forced them in great numbers to seek a shelter
amongst a great many little Rocks, or Islands, which stood very thick in a vast
Lake, or rather Marsh, which is made by the Adriatique Sea, we call it Laguna;
here they began to build, and getting Boats, made themselves Provisions of all
kind from the Land; from whence innumerable people began to come to them,
finding that they could subsist, and that the barbarous people had no Boats to
attack them, nor that they could be invaded either by Horse or Foot without
them. Our first Government, and which lasted for many years, was no more than
what is practiced in many Country Parishes in Italy, and possibly here too,
where the Clerk, or any other person, calls together the chief of the
Inhabitants to consider of Parish-business, as choosing of Officers, making of
Rates, and the like. So in Venice, when there was any public provision to be
made by way of law, or otherwise, some Officers went about to persons of the
greatest Wealth and Credit, to entreat them to meet and consult; from whence
our Senate is called to this day Consiglio de pregadi, which in our Barbarous
Idiom is as much as Pregati in Tuscan Language: Our security increased daily,
and so by consequence our Number and our Riches; for by this time there began
to be another inundation of Sarazens upon Asia Minor, which forced a great many
of the poor people of Greece to fly to us for protection, giving us the
possession of some Islands, and other places upon the Continent: This opened us
a Trade, and gave a beginning to our greatness; but chiefly made us consider
what Government was fittest to conserve our selves, and keep our Wealth (for we
did not then much dream of Conquests, else without doubt we must have made a
popular Government) we pitched upon an Aristocracy, by ordering that those who
had been called to Council for that present year, and for four years before,
should have the Government in their hands, and all their Posterity after them
for ever; which made first the distinction between Gentlemen and Citizens; the
People, who consisted of diverse Nations, most of them newly come to inhabit
there, and generally seeking nothing but safety and ease, willingly consented
to this change, and so this State has continued to this day; though the
several Orders and Counsels have been brought in since, by degrees, as our
Nobility increased, and for other causes. Under this Government we have made
some Conquests in Italy, and Greece, for our City stood like a Wall between the
two great Torrents of Goths and Sarazens; and as either of their Empires
declined, it was easy for us, without being very Warlike, to pick up some
pieces of each side; as for the Government of these Conquests, we did not think
fit to divide the Land amongst our Nobility, for fear of envy, and the effects
of it: much less did we think it advisable to plant Colonies of our People,
which would have given the Power into their hands, but we thought it the best
way for our Government to leave the People their Property, tax them what we
thought fit, and keep them under by Governors and Citadels, and so in short
make them a Province. So that now the Doctors Riddle is solved; for I suppose
this Gentleman did not mean that his Maxim should reach to Provincial
Governments.


Eng. Gent. No, Sir, so far from that, that it is just contrary; for as in
National or Domestic Government, where a Nation is Governed either by its own
People or its own Prince, there can be no settled Government, except they have
the Rule who possess the Country. So in Provincial Governments, if they be
wisely ordered, no man must have any the least share in the managing Affairs of
State, but strangers, or such as have no share or part in the possessions
there, for else they will have a very good opportunity of shaking off their
Yoke.


Doct. That is true; and we are so wise here (I mean our Ancestors were) as to
have made a Law, That no Native in Ireland can be Deputy there: But, Sir, being
fully fatisfied in my demand, by this Centleman; I beseech you to go on to what
you have to say, before you come to England.


Eng. Gent. I shall then offer two things to your observation; the first is,
That in all times and places, where any great Heroes or Legislators, have
founded a Government, by gathering people together to build a City, or to
invade any Country to possess it, before they come to dividing the conquered
Lands, they did always very maturely deliberate under what Form or Model of
Government they meant to live, and accordingly made the Partition of the
Possessions; Moses, Theseus, and Romulus, Founders of Demacracies, divided the
Land equally: Licurgus who meant an Optimacy, made a certain number of Shares,
which he intended to be in the hands of the People of Laconia. Cyrus, and other
conquering Monarchs before him, took all for themselves and Successors, which
is observed in those Eastern Countries to this day, and which has made those
Countries continue ever since under the same Government, though Conquered and
possessed very often by several Nations: This brings me to the second thing to
be observed, which is, That wherever this apportionment of Lands came to be
changed in any kind, the Government either changed with it, or was wholly in a
state of confusion: And for this reason Licurgus, the greatest Politician that
ever Founded any Government, took a sure way to fix Property by Confounding it,
and bringing all into Common: And so the whole number of the Natural Spartans,
who inhabited the City of Lacedemon, eat and drank in their several convives
together: And as long as they continued so to do, they did not only preserve
their Government entire, and that for a longer time than we can read of any
Commonwealth that ever lasted amongst the Ancients, but held as it were the
principality of Greece. The Athenians, for want of some Constitutions to fix
Property, as Theseus placed it, were in danger of utter ruin, which they had
certainly encountered, if the good Genius (as they then called it) of that
People, had not raised them up a second Founder, more than six hundred years
after the first, which was Solon: And because the History of this matter will
very much conduce to the illustrating of this Aphorism we have laid down, I
will presume so much upon your patience as to make a short recital of it,
leaving you to see it more at large in Plutarch and other Authors. The Lands in
the Territory of Attica which were in the possession of the Common People, (for
what reason History is silent) were for Debt all Mortgaged to the great Men of
the City of Athens, and the Owners having no possibility of Redeeming their
Estates, were treating to Compound with their Creditors, and deliver up their
Lands to them: Solon (who was one of those State Physicians we spoke of,) was
much troubled at this, and harangued daily to the Nobility and People against
it, telling them first, that it was impossible for the Grecians to resist the
Medes (who were then growing up to a powerful Monarchy) except Athens the
second City of Greece did continue a Democracy; That it was as Impossible the
People could keep their Empire, except they kept their Lands, nothing being
more contrary to Nature, than that those who possess nothing in a Country can
pretend to Govern it. They were all sensible of his Reasons, and of their own
Danger, but the only Remedy (which was, that the great Men should forgive the
Common People their Debts) would not at all be digested; so that the whole City
now fully understanding their condition, were continually in an uproar, and the
People flocked about Solon, whenever he came abroad, desiring him to take upon
him the Government, and be their Prince, and they would make choice of him the
next time they assembled. He told them no, he would never be a Tyrant,
especially in his own Country; meaning, that he who had no more share than
other of the Nobles, could not Govern the rest, without being an Usurper or
Tyrant: But this he did to oblige his Citizens, he frankly forgave all the
Debts that any of the People owed to him, and released their Lands immediately;
and this amounted to fifteen Attick Talents of Gold, a vast sum in those days;
and betook himself to a voluntary Exile, in which he visited Thales, and went
to the Oracle of Delphos, and offer up his Prayers to Apollo for the
preservation of his City: In return of which (as the People then believed) the
hearts of the great ones were so changed and enlarged, that they readily agreed
to remit all their Debts to the People, upon Condition that Solon would take
the pains to make them a New Model of Government, and Laws suitable to a
Democracy, which he as readily accepted and performed; by virtue of which that
City grew and continued long the greatest, the Justest, the most Virtuous,
Learned and Renowed of all that Age; drove the Persians afterward out of
Greece, defeated them does by Sea and Land, with a quarter of their number of
Ships and Men; and produced the greatest Wits and Philosophers that ever lived
upon Earth. The City of Athens Instituted a Solemn Feast in Commemoration of
that great Generosity and Selfdenial of the Nobility; who Sacrificed their own
Interest to the preservation of their Country: which Feast was called the
Solemnity of the Seisactheia, which signifies recision or abolition of Debts,
and was observed with Processions, Sacrifices and Games, till the time of the
Roman's Dominion over them (who encouraged it,) and ever till the change of
Religion in Greece, and Invasion of the Sarazens. The Roman's having omitted in
their Institution to provide for the fixing of Property, and so the Nobility
called Patricii, beginning to take to themselves a greater share in the
conquered Lands than had been usual (for in the first times of the Commonwealth
under Romulus, and ever after, it was always practiced to divide the Lands
equally amongst the Tribes) this Innovation stirred up Licinius Stolo, then
Tribune of the People, to propose a Law; which, although it met with much
difficulty, yet at last was consented to; by which it was provided, that no
Roman Citizen, of what degree soever, should possess above five hundred Acres
of Land; and for the remaining part of the Lands which should be Conquered, it
was Ordered to be equally divided, as formerly, amongst the Tribes: This found
admittance, after much oposition, because it did provide but for the future, no
Man at that time being owner of more Lands than what was lawful for him to
possess; and if this law had been strictly observed to the last, that glorious
Commonwealth might have subsisted to this day, for ought we know.


Doctor. Some other Cause would have been the Ruin of it, what think you of a
Foreign Conquest?


Eng. Gent. Oh Doctor, if they had kept their Poverty they had kept their
Government and their Virtue too, and then it had not been an easy matter to
subdue them, Quos vult perdere Jupiter dementat; Breach of Rules and Order
causes Division, and Division when it comes to be Incurable, exposes a Nation
almost as much as a Tyrannical Government does. The Goths and Vandals, had they
Invaded in those days, had met with the same success which befell the Cymbri,
and the Teutones. I must confess, a Foreign Invasion is a Formidable thing,
when a Commonwealth is weak in Territory and Inhabitants, and that the Invader
is numerous and Warlike: And so we see the Romans were in danger of utter ruin
when they were first attacqued by the Gauls under Brennus: The like hazard may
be feared, when a Commonwealth is assaulted by another of equal Virtue, and a
Commander of equal Address and Valor to any of themselves. Thus the Romans run
the risk of their Liberty and Empire, in the War of Hannibal; but their Power
and their Virtue grew to that height in that contest, that when it was ended,
I believe, that if they had preserved the Foundation of their Government
entire, they had been Invincible: And if I were alone of this Opinion, I might
be ashamed; but I am backed by the Judgment of your Incomparable Countryman
Machiavil; and no Man will condemn either of us of rashness, if he first
consider, what small States, that have stood upon right bottoms, have done to
defend their Liberty against great Monarchs; as is to be seen in the example of
the little Commonwealth of Athens, which destroyed the Fleet of Xerxes,
consisting of a thousand Vessels, in the Streights of Salamis, and before the
land army of Darius of three hundred thousand in the Plains of Marathon, and
drove them out of Greece; for though the whole Confederates were present at the
Battle of Plataea, yet the Athenian Army singly under their General Miltiades,
gained that renowned Battle of Marathon.


Noble Ven. I beseech you, Sir, how was it possible, or practicable, that the
Romans Conquering so many and so remote Provinces, should yet have been able to
preserve their Agrarian Law, and divide all those Lands equally to their
Citizens; Or if it had been possible, yet it would have ruined their City, by
sending all their Inhabitants away; and by taking in Strangers in their room,
they must necessarily have had people less Virtuous and less Warlike, and so
both their Government and their Military Discipline must have been Corrupted;
for it is not to be imagined, but that the People would have gone with their
Families to the place where their Lands lay: So that it appears that the Romans
did not provide, in the making and framing their first Polity, for so great
Conquests as they afterward made.


Eng. Gent. Yes, surely they did; from their first beginning they were Founded.
in War, and had neither Land nor Wives but what they fought for; but yet what
you object were very weighty, if there had not been a consideration of that
early: For as soon as that great and wise People had subdued the Samnites on the
East, and brought their Arms as far as the Greek Plantations, in that part of
Italy which is now called the Kingdom of Naples; and Westward, had reduced all
the Tuscans under their Obedience, as far as the River Arnus, they made that
and the River Volturnus (which runs by the Walls of Capua) the two Boundaries
of their Empire, which was called Domicilium Imperii. These were the ne plus
ultra, for what they Conquered between these two Rivers, was all confiscated
and divided amongst the Tribes; the Rustic Tribes being twenty seven, and the
Vrbane Tribes nine, which made thirty six in all. The City Tribes were like our
Companies in London, consisting of Tradesmen. The Country Tribes were divided
like Shires, and there was scarce any Landed Man, who Inhabited in the City,
but he was written in that Tribe where his Estate lay; so that the Rustic
Tribes (though they had all equal Voices) were of far more Credit and
Reputation than the Vrbane. Upon the days of the Comtia, which were very well
known, as many as thought fit amongst the Country Tribes, came to give their
Voices, though every Tribe was very numerous of Inhabitants that lived in the
City. Now the Agrarian did not extend to any Lands conquered beyond this
Precinct, but they were le^t to the Inhabitants, they paying a Revenue to the
Commonwealth; all but those which were thought fit to be set out to maintain a
Roman Colony, which was a good number of Roman Citizens, sent thither, and
provided of Lands and Habitations, which being Armed, did serve in the nature
of a Citadel and Garrison to keep the Province in Obedience, and a Roman
Praetor, Proconsul, or other Governor, was sent yearly to Head them, and
brought Forces with him besides. Now it was over lawful for any Roman Citizen
to purchase what Lands he pleased in any of these Provinces; it not being
dangerous to a City to have their People rich, but to have such a Power in the
Governing part of the Empire, as should make those who managed the Affairs of
the Commonwealth depend upon them; which came afterward to be that which
ruined their Liberty, and which the Gracchi endeavored to prevent when it was
too late; For those Illustrious persons seeing the disorder that was then in
the Commonwealth, and rightly comprehending the Reason, which was the
intermission of the Agrarian, and by consequence the great Purchases which were
made by the Men of Rome (who had enriched themselves in Asia and the other
Provinces) in that part of Italy which was between the two Rivers, before
mentioned, began to harrangue the People, in hopes to persuade them to admit of
the right Remedy, which was to confirm the Agrarian Law with a Retrospect;
which although they carried, yet the difficulties in the Execution proved so
great, that it never took effect, by reason that the Common People, whose
Interest it was to have their Lands restored; yet having long lived as Clients,
and Dependents of the great ones, chose rather to depend still upon their
Patrons, than to hazard all for an Imaginary deliverance, by which supineness
in them, they were prevailed with rather to join (for the most part) with the
Oppressors of themselves and their Country, and to cut the throats of their
redeemers, than to employ their just resentment against the covetous Violators
of their Government and Property. So perished the two renowned Gracchi, one
soon after the other, not for any crime, but for having endeavored to preserve
and restore their Commonwealth; for which (if they had lived in times suitable
to such an Heroic undertaking, taking, and that the virtue of their Ancestors
had been yet in any kind remaining) they would have merited and enjoyed a
Reputation equal to that of Lycurgus, or Solon, whereas as it happened they
were sometime after branded with the name of Sedition, by certain Wits, who
prostituted the noble flame of Poetry (which before had wont to be employed in
magnifying Heroic Actions) to flatter the Lust and Ambition of the Roman
Tyrants.


Noble Ven. Sir, I approve what you say in all things, and in Confirmation of
it, shall further allege the two famous Princes of Sparta, Agis, and
Cleomines, which I couple together, since Plutarch does so; These finding the
Corruption of their Commonwealth, and the Decay of their ancient Virtue, to
proceed from the neglect and inobservance of their Founders Rules, and a breach
of that Equality which was first instituted; endeavor to restore the Laws of
Lycurgus, and divide the Territory anew; their Victory in the Peloponnesian
War, and the Riches and Luxury brought into their City by Lisander, having long
before broken all the Orders of their Commonwealth, and destroyed the
Proportions of Land allotted to each of the Natural Spartans: But the first of
these two excellent Patriots perished by Treachery in the beginning of his
Enterprise, the other began and went on with incomparable Prudence and
Resolution, but miscarried afterward by the Iniquity of the times, and
baseness and wickedness of the People; so infalliably true it is, That where
the Policy is corrupted, there must necessarily be also a corruption and
depravation of Manners, and an utter abolition of all Faith, Justice, Honor,
and Morality; but I forget my self, and entrench upon your Province: there is
nothing now remains to keep you from the Modern Policies, but that you please
to shut up this Discourse of the Ancient Governments, with saying something of
the Corruptions of Aristocracy and Democracy; for I believe both of us are
satisfied that you have abundantly proved you Assertion, and that when we have
leisure to examine all the States or Policies that ever were, we shall find all
their Changes to have turned upon this Hinge of Property, and that the fixing
of that with good laws in the beginning or first Institution of a state, and
the holding to those Laws afterward, is the only way to make a Commonwealth
Immortal.


Eng. Gent. I think you are very right; but I shall obey you, and do presume to
differ from Aristotle, in thinking that he has not fitly called those extremes
(for so I will style them) of Aristocracy and Democracy, Corruptions; for that
they do not proceed from the alteration of Property, which is the Vnica
corruption politica: For Example, I do not find that Oligarchy, or Government of
a few, which is the Extreme of an Optimacy, ever did arise from a few Men's
getting into their hands the Estates of all the rest of the Nobility: For had
it began so, it might have lasted, which I never read of any that did. I will
therefore conclude, that they were all Tyrannies; for so the Greeks called all
Usurpations, whether of one or more persons, and all those that I ever read of,
as they came in either by Craft or violence, as the Thirty Tyrants of Athens,
the Fifteen of Thebes, and the Decem-viri of Rome (though these are first came
in lawfully) so they were soon driven out; and ever, were either assassinated,
or dyed by the Sword of Justice; and therefore I shall say no more of them, not
thinking them worth the name of a Government. As for the Extreme of Democracy,
which is Anarchy, it is not so: for many Commonwealths have lasted for a good
time under that Administration (if I may so call a State so full of Confusion.)
An Anarchy then is, when the People not contented with their Share in the
Administration of the Government, (which is the right of Approving, or
Disapproving of Laws, of Leagues, and of making of War and Peace, of Judging
in all Causes upon an Appeal to them, and choosing all manner of Officers) will
take upon themselves the Office of the Senate too, in manageing Subordinate
Matters of State, Proposing Laws Originally, and assuming Debate in the Market
place, making their Orators their Leaders; nay, not content with this, will
take upon them to alter all the Orders of the Government when they please; as
was frequently practiced in Athens, and in the Modern State of Florence. In
both these Cities, when ever any great person who could lead the People, had a
mind to alter the Government, he called them together, and made them Vote a
Change. In Florence they called it, Chiamar il popolo a Parlamento e ripigliar
lo Stato, which is summoning the People into the Marketplace to resume the
Government, and did then presently Institute a new one, with new Orders, new
Magistracies, and the like. Now that which originally causes this Disorder, is
the admitting (in the beginning of a Government, or afterward) the meaner sort
of People, who have no Share in the Territory, into an equal part of Ordering
the Commonwealth; these being less sober, less considering, and less careful of
the Public Concerns; and being commonly the Major part, are made the
Instruments oft-times of the Ambition of the great ones, and very apt to kindle
into Faction: but notwithstaning all the Confusion which we see under an
Anarchy, (where the wisdom of the better sort is made useless by the fury of
the People) yet many Cities have subsisted hundreds of years in this condition;
and have been more considerable, and performed greater Actions, than ever any
Government of equal Extent did, except it were a well-regulated Democracy; But
it is true, they ruin in the end, and that never by Cowardice or baseness, but
by too much boldness and temerarious undertakings, as both Athens and Florence
did; The first undertaking the Invasion of Sicily, when their Affairs went ill
elsewhere; and the other by provoking the Spaniard and the Pope. But I have
done now, and shall pass to say something of the Modern Policies.


Noble Ven. Before you come to that, Sir, pray satisfy me in a Point which I
should have moved before, but that I was unwilling to interrupt you rational
Discourse; How came you to take it for granted, that Moses, Theseus, and
Romulus were Founders of Popular Governments? As for Moses, we have his Story
written by an Infalliable Pen; Theseus was ever called King of Athens, though
he lived so long since, that what is written of him is justly esteemed
fabulous; but Romulus certainly was a King, and that Government continued a
Monarchy, though Elective, under seven Princes.


Eng. Gent. I will be very short in my Answer, and say nothing of Theseus, for
the reason you are pleased to allege: But for Moses, you may read in Holy
Writ, that when, by God's Command, he had brought the Israelites out of Egypt,
he did at first manage them by accquainting the People with the Estate of their
Government, which People were called together with the sound of a Trumpet, and
are termed in Scripture, the Congregation of the Lord; this Government he
thought might serve their turn in their passage, and that it would be time
enough to make them a better when they were in possession of the Land of
Canaan; Especially having made them Judges and Magistrates at the instance of
his Father-in-law, which are called in Authors, Proefecti Jethroniani; but
finding that this Provision was not sufficient, complained to God of the
difficulty he had, to make that State of Affairs hold together; God was pleased
to order him to let seventy Elders be appointed for a Senate, but yet the
Congregation of the Lord continued still and acted: And by the several
soundings of the Trumpets, either the Senate or popular Assembly were called
together, or both; so that this Government was the same with all other
Demooracies, consisting of a Principal Magistrate, a Senate, and a People
Assembled together, not by Represention, but in a body. Now for Romulus, it is
very plain, that he was no more then the first Officer of the Commonwealth,
whatever he was called, and that he was chosen (as your Doge is) for Life; and
when the last of those seven Kings usurpt the place, that is, did reign injussu
Populi, and exercise the Government Tyrannically, the People drove him out (as
all People in the World that have Property will do in the like Case, except
some extraordinary qualifications in the Prince preserve him for one Age) and
afterward appointed in his room two Magistrates, and made them Annual, which
two had the same Command, as well in their Armies as in their Cities, and did
not make the least alteration besides, excepting that they chose an Officer
that was to perform the Kings Function in certain Sacrifices (which Numa
appointed to be performed by the King) lest the People should think their
Religion were changed: This Officer was called Rex Sacrificulus. If you are
satisfied, I will go on to the consideration of our Modern States.


Noble Ven. I am fully answered, and besides am clearly of Opinion, that no
Government, whether mixed Monarchy or Commonwealth, can subsist without a
Senate, as well from the turbulent State of the Israelites under Moses till the
Sanhedrin was instituted, as from a certain Kingdom of the Vandals in Africa;
where after their Conquest of the Natives, they appointed a Government
consisting of a Prince and a Popular Assembly, which latter, within half a
year, beat the Kings brains out, he having no bulwark of Nobility or Senate to
defend him from them. But I will divert you no longer.


Eng. Gent. Sir, you are very right, and we should have spoken something of
that before, if it had been the business of this Meeting to Discourse of the
particular Models of Government; but intending only to say so much of the
Ancient Policy as to show what Government in General is, and upon what Basis it
stands, I think I have done it sufficiently to make way for the understanding
of our own, at least when I have said something of the Policies which are now
extant; and that with your favor I will do. I shall need say little now of
those Commonwealths, which however they came by their Liberty, either by Arms
or Purchase, are now much-what under the same kind of Policy as the Ancients
were. In Germany, the Free Towns, and many Princes make up the Body of a
Commonwealth called the Empire, of which the Emperor is Head; this General
Union has its Diets or Parliaments, where they are all represented, and where
all things concerning the Safety and Interest of Germany in General, or that
belong to Peace and War, are Transacted; these Diets never intermeddle with the
particular Concerns or Policies of those Princes or States that make it up,
leaving to them their particular Soveraignties: The several Imperial Cities, or
Commonwealths, are divided into two kinds, Lubeck's Law, and Collen's Law,
which being the same exactly with the ancient Democracies and Optimacies, I
will say no more of them. The Government of Swizerland, and the Seven Provinces
of the Low Countries were made up in haste, to Unite them against Persecution
and Oppression, and to help to defend themselves the better, which they both
have done very gallantly and successfully: They seem to have taken their
Pattern from the Grecians, who when their Greatness began to decline, and the
several Tyrants who succeeded Alexander began to press hard upon them, were
forced to League themselves (yet in several Confederacies, as that of the
Etolians, that of the Achaians, etc.) for their mutual defense. The Swisses
consist of Thirteen Soveraignties; some Cities which are most Aristocraticall,
and some Provinces which have but a Village for their head Township. These are
all Democracies, and are Governed all by the Owners of Land, who Assemble as
our Freeholders do at the County Court. These have their General Diets, as in
Germany. The Government of the United Provinces has for its Foundation the
Union of Vtrecht, made in the beginning of their standing upon their Guard
against the Cruelty and Oppression of the Spaniard, and patcht up in haste; and
seeming to be composed only for necessity, as a state of War, has made Modern
Statesmen Conjecture that it will not be very practicable in time of Peace, and
Security. At their General Diet, which is called the States General, do
intervene the Deputies of the Seven Provinces, in what number their Principals
please; but all of them have but one Vote, which are by consequence Seven, and
every one of the Seven has a Negative; so that nothing can pass without the
Concurrence of the whole Seven. Every one of these Provinces have a Counsel or
Assembly of their own, called the States Provincial, who send and Instruct
their Deputies to the States General, and perform other Offices belonging to
the Peace and Quiet of the Province. These Deputies to the States Provincial,
are sent by several Cities of which every Province consists, and by the
Nobility of the Province, which has one Voice only: The Basis of the
Government lies in these Cities, which are every of them a distinct
Sovereignty; neither can the States of the Province, much less the States
General, entrench in the least upon their Rights, nor so much as intermeddle
with the Government of their Cities, or Administration of Justice, but only
treat of what concerns their mutual Defense, and their Payments toward it.
Every one of these Cities is a Sovereignty, governed by an Optimacy, consisting
of the chief Citizens, which upon death are supplied by new ones Elected by
themselves; these are called the Vrnuscaperie or Herne, which Council has
continued to Govern those Towns, time out of mind; even in the times of their
Princes, who were then the Sovereigns; for without the consent of him, or his
Deputy, called State-Holder, nothing could be concluded in those days. Since
they have Instituted an artificial Minister of their own, whom they still call
State-Holder, and make choice of him in their Provincial Assemblies, and for
Form sake defer something to him, as the Approbation of their Skepen and other
Magistrates, and some other Matters: This has been continued in the Province of
Holland, which is the chief Province in the Succession of the Princes of
Orange, and in the most of the others too: The rest have likewise chosen some
other of the House of Nassaw. This Government (so oddly set together, and so
composed of a State, intended for a Monarchy, and which, as Almanacks
Calculated for one Meridian, are made in some sort to serve for another, is by
them continued in these several Aristocracies) may last for a time, till Peace
and Security, together with the abuse which is like to happen in the choice of
the Herne, when they shall Elect persons of small note into their Body, upon
Vacancies, for Kindred or Relation, rather than such as are of Estate and
eminency, or that otherwise abuse their power in the execution of it, and then
it is believed, and reasonably enough, that those People (great in wealth, and
very acute in the knowledge of their own Interest) will find out a better Form
of Government, or make themselves a prey to some great Neighbour-Prince in the
attempting it; and this in case they in the mean time escape Conquest from this
great and powerful King of France, who at this time gives Law to Christendom.
I have nothing now left to keep me from the Modern Monarchies, but the most
famous Commonwealth of Venice, of which it would be presumption for me to say
any thing whilst you are present.


Noble Ven. You may very safely go one if you please; for I believe Strangers
understand the Speculative part of our Government, better than we do; and the
Doctrine of the Ballat which is our chief excellency: For I have read many
Descriptions of our Frame, which have taught me something in it which I knew
not before; particularly, Donato Gianotti the Florentine, to whom I refer those
who are curious to know more of our Orders, for we that manage the Mechanical
part of the Government are like Horses who know their Track well enough,
without considering East or West, or what business they go about. Besides, it
would be very tedious, and very needless, to make any Relation of our Model,
with the several Counsels that make it up, and would be that which you have not
done in Treating of any other Government: what we have said is enough to show
what beginning we had, and that serves your turn, for we who are called
Nobility, and who manage the State, are the Descendents of the first
Inhabitants, and had therefore been a Democracy, if a numerous Flock of
Strangers (who are contented to come and live amongst us as Subjects) had not
swelled our City, and made the Governing party seem but a handful; so that we
have the same foundations that all other Aristocracies have, who govern but one
City, and have no Territory but what they Govern Provincially; and our People
not knowing where to have better Justice, are very well contented to live
amongst us, without any share in the Managing of Affairs; yet we have power to
Adopt whom we please into our Nobility, and I believe that in the time of the
Roman greatness, there were five for one of the Inhabitants who were written in
no Tribe, but looked upon as Strangers, and yet that did not vitiate their
Democracy, no more than our Citizens and Common People can hurt our Optimacy;
all the difficulty in our Administration, has been to regulate our own
Nobility, and to bridle their faction and ambition, which can alone brced a
Disease in the Vital part of our Government, and this we do by most severe
Laws, and a very rigorous execution of them.


Doct. Sir, I was thinking to Interpose concerning the Propriety of Lands in
the Territory of Padua, which I hear is wholly in the possession of the
Nobility of Venice.


Noble. Ven. Our Members have very good Estates there, yet nothing but what
they have paid very well for, no part of that Country, or of any other
Province, having been shared amongst us as in other Conquests: It Is true, that
the Paduans having ever been the most revengeful People of Italy, could not be
deterred from those execrable and treacherous Murders which were every day
committed, but by a severe Execution of the Laws as well against their Lives as
Estates: And as many of their Estates as were Confiscated, were (during our
necessities in the last War with the Turks) exposed to sale, and sold to them
that offered most, without any consideration of the persons purchasing; But it
is very true that most of them came into the hands of our Nobility, they
offering more than any other, by reason that their sober and frugal living, and
their being forbidden all manner of Traffic, makes them have no way of
employing the Money which proceeds from their Parsimony, and so they can afford
to give more than others who may employ their Advance to better profit
elsewhere. But I perceive, Doctor, by this Question, that you have studied at
Padua.


Doct. No really, Sir, the small learning I have was acquired in our own
University of Oxford, nor was I ever out of this Island.


Noble Ven. I would you had, Sir, for it would have been a great honor to our
Country to have contributed any thing toward so vast a knowledge as you are
Possessor of: But I wish that it were your Country, or at least the place of
your Habitation, that so we might partake not only of your excellent Discourse
sometimes, but be the better for your skill, which would make us Immortal.


Doct. I am glad to see you so well that you can make your self so merry, but I
assure you I am very well here; England is a good wholesome Climate for a
Physician: But, pray let our Friend go on to his Modern Monarchies.


Eng. Gent. That is all I have now to do: Those Monarchies are two, Absolute,
and Mixed; for the first kind, all that we have knowledge of, except the Empire
of the Turks, differ so little from the ancient Monarchies of the Assyrians and
Persians, that having given a short Description of them before, it will be
needless to say any more of the Persian, the Mogull, the King of Pegu, China,
Prestor-John, or any other the great Men under those Princes, as the Satrapes
of old; being made so only by their being employed and put into great places
and Governments by the Sovereign; But the Monarchy of the Grand Seignior is
something different; they both agree in this, that the Prince is in both
absolute Proprietor of all the Lands, (excepting in the Kingdom of Egypt, of
which I shall say something anon) but the diversity lies in the Adminstration of
the Property; the other Emperors as well Ancient as Modern using to manage the
Revenue of the several Towns, and Parishes, as our Kings, or the Kings of
France do; that is, keep it in their hands, and Administer it by Officers: And
so you may read that Xerxes King of Persia allowed the Revenue of so many
Villages to Themistocles, which Assignations are practiced at this day, both to
public and to private uses, by the present Monarchs. But the Turks, when they
invaded the broken Empire of the Arabians, did not at first make any great
alteration in their Policy, till the House of Ottoman the present Royal Family
did make great Conquests in Asia, and afterward in Greece; whence they might
possibly take their present way of dividing their conquered Territories; for
they took the same course which the Goths and other Modern People had used with
their Conquered Lands in Europe, upon which they planted Military Colonies, by
dividing them amongst the Soldiers for their pay or maintenance. These Shares
were called by them Timarr's, which signifies Benefices, but differed in this
only from the European Knights-Fees, that these last Originally were
Hereditary, and so Property was maintained, whereas amongst the Ottomans, they
were merely at will; and they enjoyed their shares whilst they remained the
Sultan's Soldiers, and no longer; being turned out both of his Service, and of
their Timarr's, when he pleases. This doubtless had been the best and firmest
Monarchy in the World, if they could have stayed here, and not had a Mercinary
Army besides, which have often (like the Praetorians in the time of the Roman
Tyrants) made the Palace and the Serraglio the Shambles of their Princes;
whereas if the Timariots, as well Spahis or Horse, as Foot, had been brought
together to Guard the Prince by Courses (as they used to do King David) as well
as they are to fight for the Empire; this horrid flaw and inconvenience in
their Government had been wholly avoided. For though these are not planted upon
entire Property as David's were, (those being in the nature of Trained-Bands)
yet the remoteness of their Habitations from the Court, and the Factions of the
great City, and their desire to repair home, and to find all things quiet at
their return, would have easily kept them from being infected with that cursed
Disease of Rebellion against their Sovereign, upon whose favor they depend for
the continuance of their livelihood: Whereas the Janissaries are for life, and
are sure to be in the same Employment under the next Successor; so sure, that
no Grand Seignior can, or dares go about to Disband them, the suspicion of
intending such a thing having caused the death of more than one of their
Emperors. But I shall go to the limited Monarchies.


Doct. But pray, before you do so, Inform us something of the Roman Emperors:
Had they the whole Dominion or Property of the Lands of Italy?


Eng. Gent. The Roman Emperors I reckon amongst the Tyrants, for so amongst
the Greeks were called those Citizens who usurpt the Governments of their
Crmmonwealths, and maintained it by force, without endeavoring to Found or
Establish it, by altering the Property of Lands, as not imagining that their
Children could ever hold it after them, in which they were not deceived. So
that it is plain that the Roman Empire was not a natural but a violent
Government. The reasons why it lasted longer than ordinarily Tyrannies do, are
many; First, because Augustus the first Emperor kept up the Senate, and so for
his time cajold them with this bait of Imaginary Power, which might not have
sufficed neither to have kept him from the fate of his Uncle, but that there
had been so many Revolutions and bloody wars between, that all Mankind was glad
to repose and take breath for a while under any Government that could protect
them. And he gained the service of these Senators the rather, because he
suffered none to be so but those who had followed his Fortune in the several
Civil Wars, and so were engaged to support him for their own preservation;
Besides, he confiscated all those who had at any time been proscribed, or sided
in any Encounter against him; which, considering in how few hands the Lands of
Italy then were, might be an overbalance of the Property in his hands. But
this is certain, that what ever he had not in his own possession, he disposed
of at his pleasure, taking it away, as also the lives of his people, without
any judicial proceedings, when he pleased: That the Confiscations were great,
we may see by his planting above sixty thousand Soldiers upon Lands in
Lombardy; That is, erecting so many Beneficia, or Timarr's, and, if any Man's
Lands lay in the way, he took them in for Neighborhood, without any
delinquency. Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonoe. And it is very evident
that if these Beneficia had not afterward been made Hereditary, that Empire
might have had a stabler Foundation, and so a more quiet and orderly progress
than it after had; for the Court Guards, called the Praetorians, did make such
havoc of their Princes, and change them so often, that this (though it may
seem a Paradox) is another reason why this Tyranny was not ruined sooner; for
the People, who had really an Interest to endeavor a change of Government,
were so prevented by seeing the Prince, whom they designed to supplant, removed
to their hand, that they were puzzled what to do, taking in the mean time great
recreation to see those wild Beasts hunted down themselves, who had so often
preyed upon their Lives and Estates; besides that, most commonly the frequent
removes of their Masters, made them scarce have time to do any mischief to
their poor oppressed Subjects in particular, though they were all Slaves in
general. This Government of the later Romans is a clear Example of the truth
and efficacy of these Politic Principles we have been discoursing of. First,
that any Government (be it the most unlimitted and arbitrary Monarchy) that is
placed upon a right Basis of Property, is better both for Prince and People,
than to leave them a seeming Property, still at his devotion, and then for want
of fixing the Foundation, expose their Lives to those dangers and hazzards with
which so many Tumults and Insurrections, which must necessarily happen, will
threaten them daily: And in the next place, that any violent constraining of
mankind to a subjection, is not to be called a Government, nor does salve
either the Politic or Moral ends, which those eminent Legislators amongst the
Ancients proposed to themselves, when they set Rules to preserve the quiet and
peace, as well as the plenty, prosperity, and greatness of the People; but that
the Politics or Art of Governing is a Science to be learned and studied by
Counselors and Statsemen be they never so great; or else Mankind will have a
very sad condition under them, and they themselves a very perplexed and
turbulent life, and probably a very destructive and precipitous end of it.


Doct. I am very glad I gave occasion to make this Discourse; now I beseech
you, before you go to the mixed Monarchies, not to forget Egypt.


Eng. Gent. 'Twas that I was coming to, before you were pleased to interrogate
me concerning the Roman Empire. The Egyptians are this day, for ought I know,
the only People that enjoy Property, and are Governed as a Province by any of
the Eastern absolute Princes. For whereas Damasco, Aleppo, and most of the
other Cities and Provinces of that Empire, whose Territory is divided into
Timarr's, are Governed by a Bashaw, who for his Guards has some small number of
Janissaries or Soldiers; the Bashaw of Egypt, or of Grand Cairo, has ever an
Army with him; and diverse Forts are erected, which is the way European Princes
use in Governing their Provinces, and must be so where Property is left entire,
except they plant Colonies as the Romans did. The reason why Selim, who broke
the Empire of the Mamalukes, and conquered Egypt, did not plant Timarr's upon
it, was the Laziness and Cowardliness of the People, and the great Fruitfulness
of the Soil, and Deliciousness of the Country, which has mollifi'd and rendered
effeminate all the Nations that ever did Inhabit it. So that a resolution was
taken to impose upon them, first the maintaining an Army by a Tax, and then to
pay a full half of all the Fruits and product of their Lands (to the Grand
Seignior) which they are to Cultivate and improve: This is well managed by the
Bashaws and their Officers, and comes to an incredible sum; the goods being
sold, the Money is conveyed in specie to the Port, and is the greatest part of
that Prince's Revenue. And it is believed, that if all the Lands had been
entirely confiscated, and that the Grand Seignior had managed them by his
Officers, he would not have made a third part so much of the whole, as he
receives now annually for one half: not only because those People are extremely
industrious where their own profit is concerned: but for that, it is clear, if
they had been totally divested of their Estates, they would have left their
Country, and made that which is now the most populous Kingdom of the World, a
Desert, as is all the rest of the Turkish Dominions, except some Cities. And if
the People had removed as they did elsewhere, there would not only have wanted
hands to have Cultivated and Improved the Lands, but mouths to consume the
product of it; so that the Princes Revenue by the cheapness of Victual, and the
want of Laborers, would have almost fallen to nothing.


Noble Ven. Pray God this be not the reason that this King of France leaves
Property to his Subjects; for certainly he has taken example by this Province
of Egypt, his Subjects having a Tax (which for the continuance of it, I must
call a Rent or Tribute) Imposed upon them to the value of one full half of
their Estates, which must ever increase as the Lands improve.


Eng. Gent. I believe, Sir, there is another reason; For the Property there,
being in the Nobility and Gentry, which are the hands by which he manages his
Force both at home and abroad, it would not have been easy or safe for him to
take away their Estates. But I come to the limited Monarchies. They were first
Introduced (as was said before) by the Goths, and other Northern People. Whence
those great swarms came, as it was unknown to Procopius himself, who lived in
the time of their Invasion, and who was a diligent searcher into all the
circumstances of their concernments, so it is very needless for us to make any
enquiry into it, thus much being clear, That they came Man, Woman, and Child,
and conquered and possessed all these parts of the World, which were then subject
to the Roman Empire, and since Christianity came in have been so to the Latin
Church, till honest John Calvin taught some of us the way how to deliver our
selves from the Tyrannical Yoke, which neither we nor our Forefathers were able
to bear. Whence those People had the Government they Established in these parts
after their Conquest, that is, whether they brought it from their own Country,
or made it themselves, must needs be uncertain, since their Original is wholly
so; but it seems very probable that they had some excellent persons among them,
though the ignorance and want of learning in that Age has not suffered any
thing to remain that may give us any great light; for it is plain, that the
Government they settled, was both according to the exact Rules of the Politics,
and very natural and suitable to that Division they made of their several
Territories. Whenever then these Invaders had quieted any Province, and that
the People were driven out or subdued, they divided the Lands, and to the
Prince they gave usually a tenth part, or thereabouts; to the great Men, or
Comites Regis (as it was translated into Latin) every one (as near as they
could) an equal share. These were to enjoy an Hereditary right in their
Estates, as the King did in his part and in the Crown; but neither he, nor his
Peers or Companions, were to have the absolute disposal of the Lands so
allotted them, but were to keep a certain proportion to themselves for their
use: and the rest was ordered to be divided amongst the Freemen, who came with
them to Conquer. What they kept to themselves was called Demesnes in English
and French, and in Italian, Beni Allodiali. The other part which they granted
to the Freemen, was called a Feud: and all these Estates were held of these
Lords Hereditarily, only the Tenants were to pay a small Rent annually, and at
every Death or Change an acknowledgment in Money, and in some Tenures the best
Beast besides: But the chief condition of the Feud or Grant, was, that the
Tenant should perform certain Services to the Lord, of which one (in all
Tenures of Freemen) was to follow him Armed to the Wars for the Service of the
Prince and Defense of the Land. And upon their admittance to their Feuds, they
take an Oath to be true Vassals and Tenants to their Lords, and to pay their
Rents, and perform their Services, and upon failure to forfeit their Estates;
and these Tenants were divided according to their Habitations into several
Manors, in every one of which there was a Court kept twice every year, where
they all were to appear, and to be admitted to their several Estates, and to
take the Oath above mentioned. All these Peers did likewise hold all their
Demesnes, as also all their Manors, of the Prince; to whom they swore
Allegiance and Fealty: There were besides these Freemen or Francklins, other
Tenants to every Lord, who were called Villains, who were to perform all
servile Offices, and their Estates were all at the Lords disposal when he
pleased; these consisted mostly of such of the former Inhabitants of these
Countries, as were not either destroyed or driven out, and possibly of others
who were Servants amongst them, before they came from their own Countries.
Perhaps thus much might have been unnecessary to be said, considering that
these Lords, Tenants, and Courts, are yet extant in all the Kingdoms in Europe,
but that to a Gentleman of Venice, where there are none of these things, and
where the Goths never were, something may be said in excuse for me.


Noble Ven. It Is true, Sir, we fled from the Goths betimes, but yet in those
Countries which we recovered since in Terra firma, we found the Footsteps of
these Lords, and Tenures, and their Titles of Counts; though being now
Provinces to us, they have no influence upon the Government, as I suppose you
are about to prove they have in these parts.


Eng. Gent. You are right, Sir; for the Governments of France, Spain, England,
and all other Countries where these People settled, were framed accordingly. It
is not my business to describe particularly the distinct Forms of the several
Governments in Europe, which do derive from these People (for they may differ
in some of their Orders and Laws, though the Foundation be in them all the
same) this would be unnecessary, they being all extant, and so well known; and
besides, little to my purpose, excepting to show where they have declined from
their first Institution, and admitted of some change. France, and Poland, have
not, nor as I can learn, ever had any Freemen below the Nobility; that is, had
no Yeomen; but all are either Noble, or Villains, therefore the Lands must have
been Originally given, as they now remain, into the hands of these Nobles. But
I will come to the Administration of the Government in these Countries, and
first say wherein they all agree, or did at least in their institution, which
is, That the Sovereign power is in the States assembled together by the Prince,
in which he presides; these make Laws, Levy Money, Redress Grievances, punish
great Officers, and the like. These States consist in some places of the Prince
and Nobility only, as in Poland, and anciently in France (before certain
Towns, for the encouraging of Trade, procured Privileges to send Deputies;
which Deputies are now called the third Estate) and in others, consist of the
Nobility and Commonalty, which latter had and still have the same right to
Intervene and Vote, as the great ones have both in England, Spain, and other
Kingdoms.


Doct. But you say nothing of the Clergy; I see you are no great friend to
them, to leave them out of your Politics.


Eng. Gent. The truth is, Doctor, (...) could wish there had never been any
(...) the purity of Christian Religion, as als^ the good and orderly Government
of the World, had been much better provide^ for without them, as it was in the
Apost^lical time, when we heard nothing (...) Clergy. But my omitting their
Reve^end Lordships was no neglect, for I mea^ to come to them in order; for you
know that the Northern People did not bring Christianity into these parts, but
found it here, and were in time converted to it, so that there could be no
Clergy at the first: but if I had said nothing at all of this Race, yet I had
committed no Solecism in the Politics; for the Bishops and great Abbots
intervened in the States here, upon the same Foundation that the other Peers
do, viz. for their great possessions, and the dependence their Tenants and
Vassals have upon them; although they being a People of that great sanctity and
knowledge, scorn ^o intermix so much as Titles with us ^rofane Lay-Ideots, and
therefore will ^e called Lords Spiritual. But you will ^ave a very venerable
opinion of them, ^f you do but consider how they came ^y these great
possessions, which made them claim a third part of the Government. And truly
not unjustly by my ^le, for I believe they had no less (at ^e time) than a
third part of the Lands (...) most of these Countries.


Noble Ven. Pray, how did they acquire ^ese Lands? was it not here by the
Charitable donation of pious Christians, as it was elsewhere?


Eng. Gent. Yes, certainly, very pious men; some of them might be well meaning
people, but still such as were cheated by these holy men, who told them
perpetually, both in public and private, that they represented God upon Earth,
being Ordained by Authority from him who was his Viceroy here, and that what
was given to them was given to God, and he would repay it largely both in this
World and the next. This wheedle made our barbarous Ancestors, newly Instructed
in the Christian Faith (if this Religion may be called so, and sucking in this
foolish Doctrine more than the Doctrine of Christ) so zealous to these Vipers,
that they would have plucked out their eyes to serve them, much more bestow, as
they did, the fruitfullest and best situate of their possessions upon them:
Nay, some they persuaded to take upon them their Callings, vow Chastity, and
give all they had to them, and become one of them, amongst whom, I believe,
they found no more sanctity than they left in the World. But this is nothing to
another trick they had, which was to insinuate into the most notorious and
execrable Villains, with which that Age abounded; Men, who being Princes, and
other great Men (for such were the Tools they worked with) had treacherously
poisoned, or otherwise murdered their nearest Relations, Fathers, Brothers,
Wives, to reign, or enjoy their Estates; These they did persuade into a belief,
that if they had a desire to be saved, notwithstanding their execrable
Villainies, they need but part with some of those great possessions (which they
had acquired by those acts) to their Bishoprics or Monasteries, and they would
pray for their Souls, and they were so holy and acceptable to God, that he
would deny them nothing; which they immediately performed, so great was the
ignorance and blindness of that Age; and you shall hardly find in the story of
those times, any great Monastery, Abbey, or other Religious House in any of
these Countries (I speak confidently, as to what concerns our own Saxons) that
had not its Foundation from some such Original.


Doct. A worthy beginning of a worthy Race!


Noble Ven. Sir, you maintain a strange Position here, That it had been better
there had been no Clergy: Would you have had no Gospel preached, no Sacraments,
no continuance of Christian Religion in the World? or do you think that these
things could have been without a Succession of the true Priesthood, or (as you
call it, of true Ministry) by means of Ordination? does not your own Church
hold the same?


Eng. Gent. You will know more of my Church, when I have told you what I find
the word Church to signify in Scripture, which is to me the only rule of
Faith, Worship, and Manners; neither do I seek these aditional helps, of
Fathers, Councels, or Ecclesiastical history, much less Tradition: for since it
is said in the word of God it self, That Antichrist did begin to work even in
those days; I can easily believe that he had brought his Work to some
perfection, before the word Church was by him applied to the Clergy: I shall
therefore tell you what I conceive that Church, Clergy, and Ordination,
signified in the Apostolical times. I find then the word Church in the New
Testament taken but in two senses; the first, for the Universal Invisible
Church, called sometimes of the Firstborn; that is, the whole number of the
true Followers of Christ in the World, wherever resident, or into what part
soever dispersed. The other signification of Church is an Assembly, which
though it be sometimes used to express any Meetings (even unlawful and
tumultuous ones) as well in Scripture as profane Authors; yet it is more
frequently understood, for a gathering together to the Duties of Prayer,
Preaching, and Breaking of Bread; and the whole Number so Congregated is, both
in the Acts of the Apostles, and in their holy Epistles, called the Church; nor
is there the least color for appropriating that word to the Pastors and
Deacons, who since the Corruptions of Christian Religion are called Clergy;
which word in the Old Testament is used, sometimes for Gods whole People, and
sometimes for the Tribe of Levi, out of which the Priests were chosen: for the
word signifies a Lot; so that Tribe is called Gods Lot, because they had no
share allotted them when the Land was divided, but were to live upon Tithe, and
serve in the functions of their Religion, and be Singers, Porters, Butchers,
Bakers, and Cooks, for the Sacrifices, etc. So that this Tribe was styled
Clergy but figuratively, and the Allegory passed into the New Testament, where
the Saints are sometimes called Clergy, but never the Pastors or Deacons, who
were far from pretending in those days to come in the place of the Aaronical
Priesthood. The word Ordination in Scripture signifies lifting up of hands, and
is used, first, for the giving a Suffrage, which in all popular Assemblies was
done by stretching out the hand (as it is in the Common Hall of London.) In the
next place it is applied to the Order or Decree made by the Suffrage so given,
which was then (and is yet too in all Modern Languages) called an Ordinance,
and the Suffrage it self Ordination; which word proves that the first Christian
Churches were Democratical; that is, That the whole Congregation had the Choice
in this, as well as the Sovereign Authority in all Excommunications, and all
other matters whatsoever that could occur; for in all Aristocratical
Commonwealths the word for choice, is Keirothesia, or Imposition of hands, (for
so the Election of all Magistrates and Officers was made) and not Keirotoniae.
These Pastors and other Officers did not pretend to be by virtue of such Choice
of a peculiar profession different from other Men, (as their Followers have
done since Antichrists Reign) but were only called and appointed (by the
Congregations approval of their gifts or parts) to instruct or feed the Flock,
visit the sick, and perform all other Offices of a true Minister (that is,
Servant) of the Gospel: at other times they followed the business of their own
Trades and Professions; and the Christians in those times (which none will deny
to have been the purest of the Church) did never dream that a true Pastor ought
to pretend to any Succession, to qualify him for the Ministry of the word; or
that the Idle and Ridiculous Ceremonies used in your Church (and still
continued in that which you are pleased to call mine) were any way essential or
conducing to Capacitate a person to be a true Preacher or Dispencer of the
Christian Faith. And I cannot sufficiently admire why our Clergy, who very
justly refuse to believe the Miracle which is pretended to be wrought in
Transubstantiation, because they see both the Wafer and the Wine to have the
same Substance, and the same Accidents (after the Priest has mumbled words over
those Elements) as they had before, and yet will believe that the same kind of
Spell or Charm in Ordination can have the Efficacy to Metamorphose a poor
Lay-Ideot into a Heavenly Creature; notwithstanding that we find in them the
same humane Nature, and the same Necessities of it, to which they were subject
before such Transformation; nay, the same Debauch, Profanness, Ignorance, and
Disability to preach the Gospel.


Noble Ven. Sir, this discourse is very new to me. I must confess I am much
inclined to join with you in believing, that the power Priests Exercise over
Mankind, with the Jurisdiction they pretend to over Princes and States, may be
a usurpation; but that they should not have a Divine Call to serve at the
Altar, or that any person can pretend to perform those Sacred Functions without
being duly Ordained, seems very strange.


Eng. Gent. I am not now to discourse of Religion; it is never very civil to do
so in Conversation of persons of a different belief; neither can it be of any
benefit toward a Roman Catholic, for if his Conscience should be never so
clearly convinced, he is not yet Master of his own Faith, having given it up to
his Church, of whom he must ask leave to be a Convert, which he will be sure
never to obtain; But if you have the Curiosity when you come amongst the
learned in your own Country (for amongst our Ordination-Mongers, there is a
great scarcity of Letters and other good Parts) you may please to take the
Bible, which you acknowledge to be the Word of God as well as we, and entreat
some of them to show you any passage, the plain and genuine sense of which can
any way evince this Succession, this Ordination, or this Priesthood, we are now
speaking of; and when you have done, if you will let your own excellent Reason
and Discourse judge, and not your Priest, (who is too much concerned in point of
Interest) I make no doubt but you will be convinced that the pretense to the
dispensing of Divine things by virtue of a humane Constitution, and so
ridiculous a one too, as the Ordination practiced by your Bishops and ours (who
descend and succeed from one and the same Mother) is as little Justifiable by
Scripture and Reason, and full as great a Cheat and Usurpation, as the Empire
which the Ecclesiastics pretend to over the Consciences and persons of men,
and the Exemption from all Secular power.


Noble Ven. Well, Sir, though neither my Faith nor my Reason can come up to
what you hold, yet the Novelty and the grace of this Argument has delighted me
extremely: and if that be a Sin, as I fear it is, I must confess it to my
Priest; but I ask your pardon first, for putting you upon this long Deviation.


Eng. Gent. Well, this Digression is not without its use, for it will shorten
our business (which is grown longer than I thought it would have been) for I
shall mention the Clergy no more, but whenever I speak of Peerage, pray take
notice that I mean both Lords Spiritual and Temporal, since they stand both
upon the same foot of Property. But if you please, I will fall immediately to
discourse of the Government of England, and say no more of those of our
Neighbors, than what will fall in by the way, or be hinted to me by your
Demands; for the time runs away, and I know the Doctor must be at home by noon,
where he gives daily charitable audience to an Infinity of poor people, who
have need of his help, and who send or come for it, not having the confidence
to send for him, since they have nothing to give him; though he be very liberal
too of his Visits to such, where he has any knowledge of them: But I spare his
Modesty, which I see is concerned at the Just Testimony I bear to his Charity.
The Sovereign Power of England then, is in King, Lords, and Commons. The
Parliaments, as they are now constituted, that is, the assigning a choice to
such a Number of Buroughs, as also the manner and form of Elections and
Returns, did come in, as I suppose, in the time of Henry the third, where now
our Statute-Book begins; and I must confess, I was inclined to believe, that
before that time, our Yeomanry or commonalty had not formally assembled in
Parliament, but been virtually included, and represented by the Peers, upon
whom they depended: but I am fully convinced, that it was otherwise, by the
learned Discourses lately published by Mr. Petit of the Temple, and Mr. Attwood
of grays-Inne, being Gentlemen whom I do mention honoris causa; and really they
deserve to be honored, that they will spare some time from the Mechanical part
of their Callings (which is to assist Clients with Counsel, and to plead their
Causes, and which I acknowledge likewise to be honorable) to study the true
Interest of their Country, and to show how ancient the Rights of the People in
England are, and that in a time when neither Profit nor Countenance can be
hoped for from so ingenious an undertaking. But I beg pardon for the deviation.
Of the three branches of Sovereign Power which Politicians mention, which are
Enacting Laws, Levying of Taxes, and making War and Peace, the two first of
them are indisputably in the Parliament; and when I say Parliament, I ever
intend with the King. The last has been usually exercised by the Prince, if he
can do it with his own Money: yet because even in that Case it may be ruinous
to the Kingdom, by exposing it to an Invasion, many have affirmed that such a
Power cannot be by the true and ancient free Government of England, supposed to
be Entrusted in the hands of one man: And therefore we see in diverse Kings
Reigns, the Parliament has been Consulted, and their advice taken in those
matters that have either concerned War or Leagues; And that if it has been
omitted, Addresses have been made to the king by Parliaments, either to make
war or peace, according to what they thought profitable to the public. So that
I will not determine whether that power which draws such consequences after it,
be by the genuine sense of our Laws in the Prince or no; although I know of no
Statute or written Record which makes it otherwise. That which is undoubtedly
the Kings Right, or prerogative, is to Call and Dissolve Parliaments, to
preside in them, to approve of all Acts made by them, and to put in Execution,
as Supreme or Sovereign Magistrate, in the Intervals of Parliaments, and during
their Sitting, all Laws made by them, as also the Common Law; for which Cause
he has the nomination of all Inferior Officers and Ministers under him,
excepting such as by Law or Charter are eligible otherwise; and the Power of
the Sword, to force Obedience to the Judgments given both in Criminal and
Civil Causes.


Doct. Sir, You have made us a very absolute Prince; what have we left us? if
the King have all this Power, what do our Liberties or Rights signify whenever
he pleases?


Eng. Gent. This Objection, Doctor, makes good what I said before, that your
skill did not terminate in the body natural, but extend to the Politic; for a
more pertinent Interrogatory could never have been made by Plato or Aristotle:
In answer to which, you may please to understand, That when these Constitutions
were first made, our Ancestors were a plain-hearted, well-meaning People,
without Court-reserves or tricks, who having made choice of this sort of
Government, and having Power enough in their hands to make it take place, did
not foresee, or imagine, that any thoughts of Invading their Rights could enter
into the Princes Head; nor do I read that it ever did, till the Norman Line
came to Reign; which coming in by Treaty, it was obvious there was no Conquest
made upon any but Harold, in whose stead William the First came, and would
claim no more after his Victory, than what Harold enjoyed, excepting that he
might confiscate (as he did) those great men who took part with the wrong
Title, and Frenchmen were put into their Estates; which though it made in this
Kingdom a mixture between Normans and Saxons, yet produced no Change or
Innovation in the Government; the Norman Peers being as tenacious of their
Liberties, and as active in the recovery of them to the full, as the Saxon
Families were. Soon after the death of William, and possibly in his time, there
began some Invasions upon the Rights of the Kingdom, which begat Grievances,
and afterward Complaints and Discontents, which grew to that height, that the
Peers were fain to use their Power, that is, Arm their Vassals to defend the
Government; whilst the Princes of that Age, first King John, and then Henry
the Third, got Force together. The Barons called in Lewis the Dauphin, whilst
the King would have given away the Kingdom to the Sarazens, as he did to the
Pope, and armed their own Creatures; so that a bloody War ensued, for almost
forty years, off and on; as may be read in our History: The success was, that
the Barons or Peers obtained in the close two Charters or Laws for the
ascertaining their Rights, by which neither their Lives, Liberties, or Estates,
could ever be in danger any more from any Arbitrary Power in the Prince; and so
the good Government of England, which was before this time like the Law of
Nature, only written in the hearts of Men, came to be expressed in Parchment,
and remain a Record in Writing; though these Charters gave us no more than what
was our own before. After these Charters were made, there could not choose but
happen some encroachment upon them: but so long as the Peers kept their
greatness, there was no breaches but what were immediately made up in
Parliament; which whenever they assembled, did in the first place confirm the
Charters, and made very often Interpretations upon them, for the benefit of the
People; witness the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, and many others. But to
come nearer the giving the Doctor an answer, you may please to understand, that
not long after the framing of these forementioned Charters, there did arise a
Grievance not foreseen or provided for by them; and it was such an one that had
beaten down the Government at once, if it had not been Redressed in an Orderly
way. This was the Intermission of Par^iaments, which could not be called but ^y
the Prince; and he not doing of it, ^hey ceast to be Assembled for some years:
if this had not been speedily re^edied, the Barons must have put on their
Armor again; for who can Ima^ine that such brisk Assertors of their ^ights
could have acquiesced in an Omission that ruined the Foundation of the
Government, which consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, and having at that
time Marched near Five hundred years upon three Legs, must then have gone on
hopping upon one; which could it have gone forward (as was impossible whilst
Property continued where it was) yet would have rid but a little way. Nor can
it be wondered at, that our great Men made no provision against this Grievance
in their Charters, because it was impossible for them to imagine that their
Prince, who had so good a share in this Government, should go about to destroy
it, and to take that burden upon himself, which by our Constitution was
undeniably to be divided between him and his Subjects: And therefore diverse of
the great Men of those times speaking with that excellent Prince King Edward
the First about it, he, to take away from his People all fear and apprehension
that he intended to change the Ancient Government, called speedily a
Parliament, an^ in it consented to a Declaration of the Kingdoms Right in that
point; without the clearing of which, all our other Laws had been useless, and
the Government it self too; of which the Parliament is (at the least) as
Essential a part as the Prince; so that there passed a Law in that Parliament
that one should be held every year, and oftener if need be; which like another
Magna Charta, was confirmed by a new Act made in the time of Edward the Third,
that glorious Prince: nor were there any Sycophants in those days, who durst
pretend Loyalty by using Arguments to prove that it was against the Royal
Prerogative, for the Parliament to entrench upon the Kings Right of calling and
Dissolving of Parliaments; as if there were a Prerogative in the Crown, to
choose whether ever a Parliament should assemble, or no; I would desire no more,
if I were a Prince, to make me Grand Seignior. Soon after this last Act, the
King, by reason of his Wars with France and Scotland, and other great Affairs,
was forced sometimes to end his Parliaments abruptly, and leave business
undone, (and this not out of Court-tricks, which were then unknown) which
produced another Act not long after, by which it was provided, That no
Parliament should be dismissed, till all the Petitions were answered; That is, in
the Language of those times, till all the Bills (which were then styled
Petitions) were finished.


Doct. Pray, Sir, give me a little account of this last Act you speak of; for I
have heard in Discourse from many Lawyers, that they believe there is no such.


Eng. Genesis Truly, Sir, I shall confess to you, that I do not find this Law in
any of our Printed Statute Books; but that which first gave me the knowledge of
it was, what was said about three years ago in the House of Commons, by a
worthy and Learned Gentleman, who undertook to produce the Record in the Reign
of Richard the Second; and since I have questioned many Learned Counselors
about it, who tell me there is such a one; and one of them, who is counted a
Prerogative-Lawyer, said it was so, but that Act was made in Factious times.
Besides, I think it will be granted, that for some time after, and particularly
in the Reigns of Henry the 4th, Henry the 5th, and Henry the 6th, it was usual
for a Proclamation to be made in Westminster Hall, before the end of every
Session, that all those that had any matter to present to the Parliament,
should bring it in before such a day, for otherwise the Parliament at that day
should determine. But if there were nothing at all of this, nor any Record
extant concerning it; yet I must believe that it is so by the Fundamental Law
of this Government, which must be lame and imperfect without it; for it is all
one to have no Parliaments at all but when the Prince pleases, and to allow a
power in him to dismiss them when he will, that is, when they refuse to do what
he will; so that if there be no Statute, it is certainly because our wise
Ancestors thought there needed none, but that by the very Essence and
Constitution of the Government it is provided for: and this we may call (if you
had rather have it so) the Common Law, which is of as much value (if not more)
than any Statute, and of which all our good Acts of Parliament and Magna Charta
it self is but Declaratory; so that your Objection is sufficiently aswered in
this, That though the King is entrusted with the formal part of summoning and
pronouncing the Dissolution of Parliaments, which is done by his Writ, yet the
Laws (which oblige him as well as us) have determined how and when he shall do
it; which is enough to show, that the Kings share in the Sovereignty, that is,
in the Parliament, is cut out to him by the Law, and not left at his disposal.
Now I come to the Kings part in the Intervals of Parliament.


Noble Ven. Sir, before you do so, pray tell us what other Prerogatives the
King enjoys in the Government; for otherwise, I who am a Venetian, may be apt
to think that our Doge, who is called our Prince, may have as much Power as
yours.


Eng. Gent. I am in a fine condition amongst you with my Politics: the Doctor
tells me I have made the King Absolute, and now you tell me I have made him a
Doge of Venice; But when your Prince has Power to dispose of the Public
Revenue, to name all Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil that are of trust and
profit in the Kingdom, and to dispose absolutely of the whole Militia by Sea
and Land, then we will allow him to be like ours, who has all these Powers.


Doct. Well, you puzzle me extremely; for when you had asserted the King's
Power to the height, in Calling and Dissolving Parliaments, you gave me such
satisfaction, and showed me wherein the Law had provided, that this vast
Prerogative could not hurt the People, that I was fully satisfied, and had not
a word to say; Now you come about again, and place in the Crown such a Power,
which in my Judgment is inconsistent with our Liberty.


Eng. Gent. Sir, I suppose you mean chiefly the Power of the Militia, which
was, I must confess, doubtful, before a late Statute declared it to be in the
King: For our Government has made no other disposal of the Militia than what
was natural, viz. That the Peers in their several Counties, or Jurisdictions,
had the Power of calling together their Vassals, either armed for the Wars, or
only so as to cause the Law to be executed by serving Writs; and in case of
resistance, giving possession: which Lords amongst their own Tenants did then
perform the two several Offices of Lord Lieutenant, and Sheriff; which latter
was but the Earls Deputy, as by his Title of Vice-Comes does appear. But this
latter being of daily necessity, and Justice it self, that is, the Lives,
Liberties and Estates of all the People in that County depending upon it, when
the greatness of the Peers decayed (of which we shall have occasion to speak
hereafter) the Electing of Sheriff was referred to the County Court, where it
continued till it was placed where it now is by a Statute. For the other part
of the Militia, which is, the Arming the People for War, it was de facto
exercised by Commission from the King, to a Lord Lieutenant (as an image of the
Natural Lord) and other Deputies; and it was tacitly consented to, though it
were never settled by Statute (as I said before) till His Majesty's happy
Restoration. But to answer you, I shall say, That whatever Powers are in the
Crown, whether by Statute or by old Prescription, they are, and must be
understood to be entrusted in the Prince, for the preservation of the
Government, and for the safety and interest of the People; and when either the
Militia, which is given him for the execution and support of the Law, shall be
employed by him to subvert it (as in the case of Ship Money it was) or the
Treasure shall be mis-apply'd, and made the Revenue of Courtiers and Sycophants
(as in the time of Edward the Second) or worthless or wicked People shall be
put into the greatest places, as in the reign of Richard the Second; In this
case, though the Prince here cannot be questionable for it (as the Kings were
in Sparta, and your Doges I believe would be) yet it is a great violation of
the trust reposed in him by the Government, and a making that Power, which is
given him by Law, unlawful in the Execution. And the frequent examples of
Justice inflicted in Parliament upon the King's Ministers for abusing the Royal
Power, shows plainly that such authority is not left in his hands to use as he
pleases. Nay, there have befallen sad troubles and dangers to some of these
Princes themselves, who have abused their Power to the prejudice of the
Subjects; which although they are no way justifiable, yet may serve for an
Instruction to Princes, and an example not to hearken to ruinous Councils: for
men when they are enraged do not always consider Justice of Religion, passion
being as natural to man as reason and virtue, which was the Opinion of divine
Machiavil. To answer you then, I say, That though we do allow such Powers in
the King, yet since they are given him for edification and not destruction, and
cannot be abused without great danger to his Ministers, and even to himself; we
may hope that they can never be abused but in a broken Government: And if ours
be so (as we shall see anon) the fault of the ill execution of our Laws is not
to be imputed either to the Prince or his Ministers; excepting that the latter
may be, as we said before, justly punishable for not advising the Prince to
consent to them ending the frame; of which we shall talk more hereafter: but in
the mean time I will come to the Kings other Prerogatives, as having all Royal
Mines, the being served first before other Creditors where money is due to him,
and to have a speedier and easier way than his Subjects to recover his debts
and his Rents, etc. But to say all in one word, when there arises any doubt
whether any thing be the king's Prerogative or no, this is the way of deciding
it, viz. To consider whether it be for the good and protection of the people
that the King have such a Power; For the definition of Prerogative is a
considerable part of the Common Law, by which Power is put into the Prince for
the preservation of his People. And if it be not for the good of his Subjects,
it is not Prerogative, not Law, for our Prince has no Authority of his own, but
what was first entrusted in him by the Government, of which he is Head; nor is
it to be imagined that they would give him more Power than what was necessary
to Govern them. For example, the power of pardoning Criminals condemned, is of
such use to the Lives and Estates of the People, that without it many would be
exposed to die unjustly; As lately a poor Gentleman, who by means of the
Harangue of a Strepitous Lawyer was found guilty of Murder, for a Man he never
killed; or if he had, the fact had been but Manslaughter; and he had been
inevitably murdered himself, if his Majesty had not been graciously pleased to
extend his Royal Mercy to him; As he did likewise vouchsafe to do to a
Gentleman convicted for speaking words he never uttered; or if he had spoken
them, they were but foolishly, not maliciously spoken. On the other side, if a
Controversy should arise, as it did in the beginning of the last Parliament,
between the House of Commons, and the Prerogative-Lawyers, about the choice of
their Speaker, these latter having interested his Majesty in the Contest, and
made him, by consequence, disoblige, in limine, a very Loyal, and a very Worthy
Parliament; and for what? for a Question, which if you will decide it the right
way, will be none: for setting aside the Presidents, and the History when the
Crown first pretended to any share in the Choice of a Speaker, which Argument
was very well handled by some of the Learned Patriots then. I would have leave
to ask, what man can show, and what reason can be alleged, why the protection
and welfare of the People should require that a Prerogative should be in the
Prince to choose the Mouth of the House of Commons, when there is no particular
person in his whole Dominion that would not think it against his interest, if
the Government had given the King Power to nominate his Bailiff, his Attorney,
or his Referree in any Arbitration? Certainly there can be no advantage either
to the Sovereign or his Subjects, that the person whose Office it is to put
their deliberations into fitting words, and express all their requests to his
Majesty, should not be entirely in their own Election and appointment; which
there is the more reason for too, because the Speakers for many years past have
received Instructions from the Court, and have broken the Privileges of the
House, by revealing their Debates, Adjourning them without a Vote, and
committed many other Misdemeanors, by which they have begotten an ill
understanding between the King and his House of Commons, to the infinite
prejudice both of his Majesty's Affairs, and his People. Since I have given
this rule to Judge Prerogative by, I shall say no more of it; for as to what
concerns the King's Office in the Intervals of Parliament, it is wholly
Ministerial, and is barely to put in Execution the Common Law and the Statutes
made by the Sovereign Power, that is, by Himself and the Parliament, without
varying one tittle, or suspending, abrogating, or neglecting the Execution of
any Act whatsoever; and to this he is Solemnly Sworn at his Coronation: And all
his Power in this behalf is in him by Common Law, which is Reason it self,
written as well in the hearts of rational Men, as in the Lawyers Books.


Noble Ven. Sir, I have heard much talk of the Kings Negative Voice in
Parliaments, which in my Opinion is as much as a Power to frustrate, when he
pleases, all the endeavors and labors of his People, and to prevent any good
that might accrue to the Kingdom by having the right to meet in Parliament: for
certainly, if we in Venice had placed any such Prerogative in our Duke, or in
any of our Magistracies, we could not call our selves a free People.


Eng. Gent. Sir, I can answer you as I did before, that if our Kings have such
a Power, it ought to be used according to the true and genuine intent of the
Government, that is, for the Preservation and Interest of the people, and not
for the disappointing the Counsels of a Parliament, toward reforming
Grievances, and making provision for the future execution of the Laws; and
whenever it is applied to frustrate those ends, it is a violation of Right, and
infringement of the King's Coronation Oath; in which there is this Clause, That
he shall Confirmare consuetudines, (which in the Latin of those times is
leges) quas vulgus elegerit. I know some Critics, who are rather Grammarians
than Lawyers, have made a distinction between elegerim and elegero, and will
have it, That the King Swears to such Laws as the people shall have chosen, and
not to those they shall choose. But in my Opinion, if that Clause had been
intended only to oblige the King to execute the Laws made already, it might
have been better expressed by servare consuctudines, than by confirmare
consuetudines; besides that he is by another clause in the same Oath sworn to
execute all the Laws. But I shall leave this Controversy undecided; those who
have a desire to see more of it, may look into those quarrelling Declarations,
pro and con, about this matter, which preceded our unhappy Civil Wars. This is
certain, that there are not to be found any Statutes that have passed, without
being presented to his Majesty, or to some commissioned by him; but whether
such Addresses were intended for Respect and Honor to His Majesty, as the
Speaker of the House of Commons and the Lord Mayor of London are brought to
him, I leave to the Learned to Discourse; only thus much we may affirm, That
there never were yet any Parliamentary Requests, which did highly concern the
Public, presented to any King, and by him refused, but such denials did
produce very dismal effects, as may be seen in our Histories ancient and late;
it being certain, that both the Barons Wars, and our last dismal Combustions,
proceeded from no other cause than the denial of the Princes then reigning to
consent to the desires of the States of the Kingdom: and such has been the
wisdom and goodness of our present gracious Prince, that in twenty years and
somewhat more, for which time we have enjoyed him since his happy Restoration,
he has not exercised his Negative Voice toward more than one public Bill;
and that too, was to have continued in force (if it had passed into an Act) but
for six Weeks, being for raising the Militia for so long time; and as for the
private Bills, which are matters of mere grace, it is unreasonable his Majesty
should be refused that Right that every Englishman enjoys, which is not to be
obliged to dispense his favors but where he pleases. But for this point of the
Negative Vote, it is possible that when we come to Discourse of the Cure of our
Political Distemper, some of you will propose the clearing and explanation of
this matter, and of all others which may concern the King's Power and the
Peoples Rights.


Noble Ven. But pray, Sir, have not the House of Peers a Negative Voice in all
Bills? how come they not to be obliged to use it for the Public Good?


Eng. Gent So they are, no doubt, and the Commons too; but there is a vast
difference between a deliberative Vote which the Peers have with their
Negative, and that in the Crown to blast all without deliberating. The Peers
are Coordinate with the Commons in presenting and hammering of Laws, and may
send Bills down to them, as well as receive any from them, excepting in matters
wherein the People are to be Taxed: and in this our Government imitates the
best and most perfect Commonwealths that ever were; where the Senate assisted
in the making of Laws, and by their wisdom and dexterity, polisht, filled, and
made ready things for the more populous Assemblies; and sometimes by their
gravity and moderation, reduced the People to a Calmer State, and by their
authority and credit stem'd the Tide, and made the Waters quiet, giving the
People time to come to themselves. And therefore if we had no such Peerage now
upon the old Constitution, yet we should be necessitated to make an artificial
Peerage or Senate in stead of it: which may assure our present Lords, that
though their Dependences and Power are gone, yet that we cannot be without
them; and that they have no need to fear an annihilation by our Reformation, as
they suffered in the late mad times. But I shall speak a word of the peoples
Rights, and then show how this brave and excellent Government of England came
to decay.

The People by the Fundamental Laws, that is, by the Constitution of the
Government of England, have entire freedom in their Lives, Properties, and
their Persons; nether of which can in the least suffer, but according to the
Laws already made, or to be made hereafter in Parliament, and duly published:
and to prevent any oppression that might happen in the execution of these good
Laws, which are our Birthright, all Trials must be by twelve Men of our
equals, and of our Neighborhood; These in all Civil Causes judge absolutely
and decide the matter of Fact, upon which the matter of Law depends; but if
where matter. of Law is in question, these twelve Men shall refuse to find a
special Verdict at the direction of the Court, the Judge cannot Control it,
but their Verdict must be Recorded. But of these matters, as also of Demurrers,
Writs of Error, and Arrests of Judgment, etc. I have discoursed to this
Gentleman (who is a Stranger) before now; neither does the understanding of the
Execution of our Municipal Laws at all belong to this discourse: Only it is to
be noted, that these Juries, or twelve Men, in all Trials or Causes which are
Criminal, have absolute Power, both as to matter of Law and Fact (except the
Party by Demurrer confess the matter of Fact, and take it out of their hands.)
And the first question the Officer asks the Foreman, when they all come in to
deliver their Verdict, is this, Is he Guilty in manner or form as he is
Indicted, or not Guilty? which shows plainly, that they are to Examine and
Judge, as well whether, and how far the Fact committed is Criminal, as whether
the person charged has committed that Fact. But though by the Corruption of
these times (the infallible consequences of a broken frame of Government) this
Office of the Juries and Right of Englishmen have been of late questioned, yet
it has been strongly and effectually vindicated by a learned Author of late,
to whom I refer you for more of this matter. I shall say no more of the Rights
of the People, but this one thing, That neither the King, nor any by Authority
from him, has any the least Power or Jurisdiction over any Englishman, but
what the Law gives them; and that although all Commissions and Writs go out in
the King's name, yet his Majesty has no right to Issue out any Writ (with
advice of his Council, or otherwise) excepting what come out of his Courts; nor
to alter any Clause in a Writ, or add any thing to it. And if any person shall
be so wicked as to do any Injustice to the Life, Liberty, or Estate of any
Englishman, by any private command of the Prince, the person agrieved, or his
next of kin (if he be assassinated) shall have the same remedy against the
Offender, as he ought to have had by the good Laws of this Land, if there had
been no such Command given; which would be absolutely void and null, and
understood not to proceed from that Royal and lawful Power which is vested in
his Majesty for the Execution of Justice, and the protection of his People.


Doct. Now I see you have done with all the Government of England; pray before
you proceed to the decay of it, let me ask you what you think of the Chancery,
whether you do not believe it a Solecism in the Politics to have such a Court
amongst a free People; what good will Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, or
St. Edwards Laws do us to defend our Property, if it must be entirely subjected
to the arbitrary disposal of one man, whenever any impertinent or petulant
person shall put in a Bill against you? How inconsistent is this Tribunal with
all that has been said in defense of our rights, or can be said? Suppose the
Prince should in time to come so little respect his own honor and the Interest
of his People, as to place a covetous or revengeful person in that great
Judicatory, what remedy have we against the Corruption of Registers, who make
what Orders they please; Or against the whole Hierarchy of Knavish Clerks,
whilst not only the punishing and reforming misdemeanors depend upon him, who
may without control be the most guilty himself, but that all the Laws of
England stand there arraigned before him, and may be condemned when he pleases?
Is there, or ever was there any such Tribunal in the World before, in any
Country?


Eng. Gent. Doctor, I find you have had a Suit in Chancery, but I do not intend
to contradict or blame your Orthodox Zeal in this point: This Court is one of
those Buildings that cannot be repaired, but must be demolished. I could inform
you how excellently matters of Equity are Administered in other Countries; And
this worthy Gentleman could tell you of the Venerable Quaranzia's in his City,
where the Law as well as the Fact, is at the Bar, and subject to the Judges,
and yet no complaint made or grievance suffered: but this is not a place for,
it this is but the superstructure; we must settle the foundation first; every
thing else is as much out of Order as this. Trade is gone, Suits are endless,
and nothing amongst us harmonious: but all will come right when our Government
is mended, and never before, though our Judges were all Angels: this is the
primum quaerite; when you have this, all other things shall be added unto you;
when that is done, neither the Chancery (which is grown up to this since our
Ancestors time) nor the Spiritual Courts, nor the Cheats in trade, nor any
other abuses, no not the Giant Popery it self, shall ever be able to stand
before a Parliament, no more than one of us can live like a Salamander in the
fire.


Noble Ven. Therefore, Sir, pray let us come now to the decay of your
Government, that we may come the sooner to the happy restoration.


Eng. Gent. This harmonious Government of England being founded as has been
said upon Property, it was impossible it should be shaken, so long as Property
remained where it was placed: for if, when the ancient Owners the Britains fled
into the Mountains, and left their Lands to the Invaders (who divided them, as
is above related) they had made an Agrarian Law to fix it; then our Government,
and by consequence our Happiness had been for ought we know Immortal: for our
Constitution, as it was really a mixture of the three, which are Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy (as has been said) so the weight and predominancy
remained in the Optimacy, who possessed nine parts in ten of the Lands; And the
Prince but about a tenth part. In this I count all the Peoples share to the
Peers, and therefore do not trouble my self to enquire what proportion was
allotted to them, for that although they had an Hereditary right in their
Lands, yet it was so clogged with Tenures and Services, that they depended, as
to public matters, wholly on their Lords, who by them could serve the king in
his Wars; and in time of Peace, by leading the people to what they pleased:
Could keep the Royal Power within its due bounds, and also hinder and prevent
the people from Invading the Rights of the Crown; so that they were the
Bulwarks of the Government, which in effect was much more an Aristocracy, than
either a Monarchy or Democracy: and in all Governments, where Property is mixed,
the Administration is so too: And that part which has the greater share in the
Lands, will have it too in the Jurisdiction: And so in Commonwealths, the
Senate or the People have more or less Power, as they have more or fewer
possessions; as was most visible in Rome, where in the beginning, the Patricii
could hardly bring the People to any thing; but afterward, when the Asiatick
Conquests had inricht the Nobility to that degree, that they were able to
purchase a great part of the Lands in Italy, the People were all their Clients,
and easily brought even to cut the throats of their Redeemers the Gracchi, who
had carried a Law for restoring them their Lands. But enough of this before. I
will not trouble my self nor you, to search into the particular causes of this
change, which has been made in the possessions here in England; but it is
visible that the fortieth part of the Lands which were at the beginning in the
hands of the Peers and Church, is not there now; besides that not only all
Villanage is long since abolished, but the other Tenures are so altered and
qualified, that they signify nothing toward making the Yeomanry depend upon
the Lords. The consequence is, That the natural part of our Government, which
is Power, is by means of Property in the hands of the People, whilst the
artificial part, or the Parchment, in which the Form of Government is written,
remains the same. Now Art is a very good servant and help to Nature, but very
weak and inconsiderable, when she opposes her, and fights with her: it would be
a very Impar congressus, between Parchment and Power: This alone is the cause
of all the disorder you heard of, and now see in England, and of which every
man gives a reason according to his own fancy, whilst few hit the right cause:
some impute all to the decay of Trade, others to the growth of Popery; which
are both great Calamities, but they are Effects, and not Causes; And if in
private Families there were the same causes, there would be the same effects.
Suppose now you had five or six Thousand pounds a year, as it is probable you
have, and keep forty Servants, and at length, by your neglect, and the industry
and thrift of your Domestics, you sell one Thousand to your Steward, another
to your Clerk of the Kitchen, another to your Bailiff, till all were gone; can
you believe that these Servants, when they had so good Estates of their own,
and you nothing left to give them, would continue to live with you, and to do
their service as before? It is just so with a whole Kingdom. In our Ancestors
times, most of the Members of our House of Commons thought it an honor to
retain to some great Lord, and to wear his blew Coat: And when they had made up
their Lord's Train, and waited upon him from his own House to the Lords House,
and made a Lane for him to enter, and departed to sit themselves in the Lower
House of Parliament, as it was then (and very justly) called; can you think
that any thing could pass in such a Parliament that was not ordered by the
Lords? Besides, these Lords were the King's great Council in the Intervals of
Parliaments, and were called to advise of Peace and War; and the latter was
seldom made without the consent of the major part; if it were not, they would
not send their Tenants, which was all the Militia of England (besides the
King's tenth part.) Can it be believed, that in those days the Commons should
dislike any thing the Lords did in the Intervals, or that they would have
disputed their Right to receive Appeals from Courts of Equity, if they had
pretended to it in those days, or to mend Money-bills? And what is the reason,
but because the Lords themselves at that time represented all their Tenants
(that is, all the People) in some sort? and although the House of Commons did
Assemble to present their Grievances, yet all great Affairs of high Importance
concerning the Government, was Transacted by the Lords; and the War which was
made to preserve it, was called the Barons Wars, not the War of both Houses:
for although in antienter times the word Baron were taken in a larger sense,
and comprehended the Francklins or Freemen; yet who reads any History of that
War, shall not find that any mention is made of the concurrence of any assembly
of such men, but that Simon Monford Earl of Leicester, and others of the great
ones, did by their Power and Interest manage that contest. Now if this
Property, which is gone out of the Peerage into the Commons, had passed into
the King's hands, as it did in Egypt in the time of Joseph, as was before said,
the Prince had had a very easy and peaceable reign over his own Vassals, and
might either have refused, justly, to have Assembled the Parliament any more;
or if he had pleased to do it, might have for ever managed it as he thought
fit: But our Princes have wanted a Joseph, that is, a wise Councellor; and
instead of saving their Revenue, which was very great, and their expenses
small, and buying in those Purchases which the vast expenses and luxury of the
Lords made ready for them, they have alienated their own Inheritance; so that
now the Crown Lands, that is, the public Patrimony, is come to make up the
interest of the Commons, whilst the King must have a precarious Revenue out of
the Peoples Purses, and be beholding to the Parliament for his Bread in time of
Peace; whereas the Kings their Predecessors never asked Aid of his Subjects,
but in time of War and Invasion: and this alone (though there were no other
decay in the Government) is enough to make the King depend upon his People;
which is no very good condition for a Monarchy:


Noble Ven. But how comes it to pass that other Neighboring Countries are in
so settled a State in respect of England? does their Property remain the same
it was, or is it come into the hands of the Prince? You know you were pleased
to admit, that we should ask you, en passant, something of other Countries.


Eng. Gent. Sir, I thank you for it, and shall endeavor to satisfy you. I
shall say nothing of the small Princes of Germany, who keep in a great measure
their ancient bounds, both of Government and Property; and if their Princes now
and then exceed their part, yet it is in time of Troubles and War, and things
return into their right Chanel of Assembling the several States, which are yet
in being every where: But Germany lying so exposed to the Invasion of the Turks
on the one side, and of the French on the other; and having ever had enough to
do to defend their several Liberties against the encroachments of the House of
Austria (in which the Imperial dignity is become in some fort Hereditary) if
there had been something of extraordinary power exercised of late years, I can
say Inter arma silent leges: but besides their own particular States, they have
the Diet of the Empire, which never fails to mediate and compose things, if
there be any great oppresson used by Princes to their subjects, or from one
Prince or State to another. I shall therefore confine my self to the three
great Kingdoms, France, Spain, and Poland; for as to Denmark and Sweden, the
first has lately changed its Government, and not only made the Monarchy
Hereditary, which was before Elective, but has pulled down the Nobility, and
given their Power to the Prince; which how it will succeed, time will show.
Sweden remains in point of Constitution and Property exactly as it did
anciently, and is a well-Governed Kingdom. The first of the other three is
France, of which I have spoken before, and shall only add, That though it be
very true, that there is Property in France, and yet the Government is
Despotical at this present, yet it is one of those violent States, which the
Grecians called Tyrannies: For if a Lawful Prince, that is, one who being so
by Law, and sworn to rule according to it, breaks his Oaths and his Bonds, and
reigns Arbitrarily, he becomes a Tyrant and an Usurper, as to so much as he
assumes more than the Constitution has given him; and such a Government, being
as I said violent, and not natural, but contrary to the Interest of the people,
first cannot be lasting, when the adventitious props which support it fail; and
whilst it does endure, must be very uneasy both to Prince and People; the
first being necessitated to use continual oppression, and the latter to suffer
it.


Doct. You are pleased to talk of the oppression of the People under the King
of France, and for that reason, call it a violent Government, when, if I
remember, you did once to day extol the Monarchy of the Turks for well-founded
and natural; Are not the people in that Empire as much oppressed as in France?


Eng. Gent. By no means; unless you will call it oppression for the grand
Seignior to feed all his People out of the Product of his own Lands; and though
they serve him for it, yet that does not alter the Case: for if you set poor
men to work and pay them for it, are you a Tyrant, or rather, are not you a
good Commonwealths-man, by helping those to live, who have no other way of
doing it but by their labor? But the King of France knowing that his People
have, and ought to have Property, and that he has no right to their
Possessions, yet takes what he pleases from them, without their consent, and
contrary to Law; So that when he sets them on work he pays them what he
pleases, and that he levies out of their own Estates. I do not affirm that
there is no Government in the World, but where Rule is founded in Property; but
I say there is no natural fixed Government, but where it is so; and when it is
otherwise, the People are perpetually complaining, and the King in perpetual
anxiety, always in fear of his Subjects, and seeking new ways to secure
himself; God having been so merciful to mankind, that he has made nothing safe
for Princes, but what is Just and Honest.


Noble Ven. But you were saying just now, that this present Constitution in
France will fall when the props fail; we in Italy, who live in perpetual fear
of the greatness of that Kingdom, would be glad to hear something of the
decaying of those props; What are they, I beseech you?


Eng. Gent. The first is the greatness of the present King, whose heriock
Actions and Wisdom has extinguished envy in all his Neighbour-Princes, and
kindled fear, and brought him to be above all possibility of control at home;
not only because his Subjects fear his Courage, but because they have his
Virtue in admiration, and amidst all their miseries cannot choose but have
something of rejoicing, to see how high he has mounted the Empire and Honor
of their Nation. The next prop is the change of their ancient Constitution, in
the time of Charles the Seventh, by Consent: for about that time the Country
being so wasted by the Invasion and Excursions of the English, The States then
assembled Petitioned the King that he would give them leave to go home, and
dispose of Affairs himself, and Order the Government for the future as he
thought fit. Upon this, his Successor Lewis the Eleventh, being a crafty
Prince, took an occasion to call the States no more, but to supply them with an
Assemble des notables, which were certain men of his own nomination, like
Barbones Parliament here, but that they were of better quality: These in
succeeding reigns (being the best men of the Kingdom) grew Troublesome and
Intractable; so that for some years the Edicts have been verified (that is in
our Language) Bills have been passed in the Grand Chamber of the Parliament at
Paris, commonly called the Chamber d'audience, who lately, and since the
Imprisonment of President Brouselles and others during this King's Minority,
have never refused or scrupled any Edicts whatsoever. Now whenever this great
King dies, and the States of the Kingdom are restored, these two great props of
Arbitrary Power are taken away. Besides these two, the Constitution of the
Government of France it self, is somewhat better fitted than ours to permit
extraordinary Power in the Prince, for the whole People there possessing Lands,
are Gentlemen; that is, infinitely the greater part; which was the reason why
in their Asembly of Estates, the Deputies of the Provinces (which we call here
Knights of the Shire) were chosen by, and out of the Gentry, and sat with the
Peers in the same Chamber, as representing the Gentry only, called petite
noblesse. Whereas our Knights here (whatever their blood is) are chosen by
Commoners, and are Commoners; our Laws and Government taking no notice of any
Nobility but the persons of the Peers, whose Sons are likewise Commoners, even
their eldest, whilst their Father lives: Now Gentry are ever more tractable by
a Prince, than a wealthy and numerous Commonalty; out of which our Gentry (at
least those we call so) are raised from time to time: For whenever either a
Merchant, Lawyer, Tradesman, Grasier, Farmer, or any other, gets such an
Estate, as that he or his Son can live upon his Lands, without exercising of
any other Calling, he becomes a Gentleman. I do not say, but that we have men
very Nobly descended amongst these, but they have no pre-eminence, or
distinction, by the Laws or Government. Besides this, the Gentry in France are
very needy, and very numerous; the reason of which is, That the Elder Brother,
in most parts of that Kingdom, has no more share in the division of the
Paternal Estate, than the Cadets or Younger Brothers, excepting the Principal
House, with the Orchards and Gardens about it, which they call Vol de Chappon,
as who should say, As far as a Capon can fly at once. This House gives him the
Title his Father had, who was called Seignior, or Baron, or Count of that
place; which if he sells, he parts with his Baronship, and for ought I know
becomes in time roturier, or ignoble. This practice divides the Lands into so
many small parcels, that the Possessors of them being Noble, and having little
to maintain their Nobility, are fain to seek their Fortune, which they can find
no where so well as at the Court, and so become the King's Servants and
Soldiers, for they are generally Courageous, Bold, and of a good Mien. None of
these can ever advance themselves, but by their desert, which makes them hazard
themselves very desperately, by which means great numbers of them are killed,
and the rest come in time to be great Officers, and live splendidly upon the
King's Purse, who is likewise very liberal to them, and according to their
respective merits, gives them often, in the beginning of a Campaign, a
considerable sum to furnish out their Equipage. These are a great Prop to the
Regal Power, it being their Interest to support it, lest their gain should
cease, and they be reduced to be poor Provinciaux, that is, Country-Gentlemen
again: whereas, if they had such Estates as our Country-Gentry have, they would
desire to be at home at their ease, whilst these (having ten times as much
from the King as their own Estate can yield them, which supply must fail, if
the King's Revenue were reduced) are perpetually engaged to make good all
exorbitances.


Doct. This is a kind of Governing by Property too, and it puts me in mind of a
Gentleman of good Estate in our Country, who took a Tenants Son of his to be
his Servant, whose Father not long after dying, left him a Living of about ten
pound a year: the young Man's Friends came to him, and asked him why he would
serve now he had an Estate of his own able to maintain him: his Answer was,
That his own Lands would yield him but a third part of what his Service was
worth to him in all; besides, that he lived a pleasant Life, wore good Clothes,
kept good Company, and had the conversation of very pretty Maids that were his
Fellow Servants, which made him very well digest the name of being a Servant.


Eng. Gent. This is the very Case; but yet Service (in both these Cases) is no
Inheritance; and when there comes a Peaceable King in France, who will let his
Neighbors be quiet, or one that is covetous, these fine Gentlemen will lose
their Employments, and their King this Prop; and the rather, because these
Gentlemen do not depend (as was said before) in any kind upon the great Lords
(whose standing Interest is at Court) and so cannot in a change, be by them
carried over to advance the Court-designs against their own good and that of
their Country. And thus much is sufficient to be said concerning France. As for
Spain, I believe there is no Country (excepting Sweden) in Christendom, where
the Property has remained so entirely the same it was at the beginning; and the
reason is, the great and strict care that is taken to hinder the Lands from
passing out of the old owners hands; for except it be by Marriages, no man can
acquire another man's Estate, nor can any Grandee, or Titulado, or any other
Hidalgo there, alienate or engage his Paternal or Maternal Estate, otherwise
than for his Life; nor can alter Tenures, or extinguish Services, or dismember
Manors: for to this the Princes consent must be had, which he never gives,
till the matter be debated in the Consejo de Camera, which is no Junta or
secret Consejo de Guerras, but one wherein the great men of the Kingdom
intervene, and wherein the great matters concerning the preservation of the
Government are transacted, not relating to Foreign Provinces or Governments,
but to the kingdom of Castile and Leon, of which I only speak now. It is true,
there have been one or two exceptions against this severe Rule, since the great
calamities of Spain, and two great Lordships have been sold, the Marquisate del
Monastero, to an Assent ista Genoese, and another to Sebastian Cortiza a
Portuguese, of the same Profession: but both these have bought the entire
Lordships, without curtailing or altering the condition in which these two
great Estates were before; and notwithstanding, this has caused so much
repining amongst the natural Godos (as the Castilians call themselves still for
glory) that I believe this will never be drawn into an Example hereafter. Now
the Property remaining the same, the Government does so too, and the King's
Domestic Government, over his natural Spaniards, is very gentle, whatever it
be in his Conquered Provinces; and the Kings there have very great advantages
of keeping their great men (by whom they Govern) in good temper, by reason of
the great Governments they have to bestow upon them, both in Europe and the
Indies; which changing every three years, go in an Age through all the
Grandees, which are not very numerous. Besides, Castile having been in the time
of King Roderigo overrun and Conquered by the Moors, who Governed there
Despotically, some hundreds of years, before it could be recovered again by the
old Inhabitants, who fled to the Mountains; When they were at length driven
out, the Count of Castile found a Tax set upon all Commodities whatsoever, by
the Moors, in their Reign, called Alcaval, which was an easy matter to get
continued (when their old Government was restored) by the Cortes, or States;
and so it has continued ever since, as the Excise has done here, which being
imposed by them who drove and kept out the King, does now since his happy
Restoration remain a Revenue of the Crown. This Alcaval, or Excise, is a very
great Revenue, and so prevented, for some time, the necessities of the Crown,
and made the Prince have the less need of asking Relief of his People, (the
ordinary cause of disgust,) so that the Cortes, or Assembly of the States, has
had little to do of late, though they are duly assembled every year, but seldom
contradict what is desired by the Prince; for there are no greater Idolaters of
their Monarch in the World than the Castilians are, nor who drink deeper of the
Cup of Loyalty: so that in short, the Government in Spain is as ours was in
Queen Elizabeth's time, or in the first year after his now Majesty's Return,
when the Parliament for a time Complimented the Prince, who had by that means
both his own Power and the Peoples: which days I hope to see again, upon a
better and more lasting Foundation. But before I leave Spain, I must say a word
of the Kingdom of Arragon, which has not at all times had so quiet a state of
their Monarchy as Castile has enjoyed; for after many Combustions which
happened there, concerning their Fueros and Privilegios, which are their
Fundamental Laws, the King one day coming to his Seat in Parliament, and making
his demands, as was usual, they told him that they had a Request to make to him
first; and he withdrawing thereupon, (for he had no right of sitting there to
hear their Debates) they fell into discourse how to make their Government
subsist against the encroachments of the Prince upon them, and went very high
in their Debates, whch could not choose but come to the king's ear, who walked
in a gallery in the same Palace to expect the issue; and being in great
Passion, was seen to draw out his Dagger, very often, and thrust it again into
the sheath; and heard to say, Sangre ha de costar; which coming to the knowledge
of the Estates, they left off the Debate, and sent some of their number to him,
to know what blood it should cost, and whether he meant to murder any body. He
drew out his Dagger again, and pointing it to his breast, he said, Sangre de
Reys; leaving them in doubt, whether he meant that his Subjects would kill him,
or that he would do it himself. However, that Parliament ended very peaceably,
and a famous settlement was there and then made, by which a great person was to
be chosen every Parliament, who should be as it were an Umpire between the King
and his people, for the execution of the Laws, and the preservation of their
Government, their Fueros and Privilegios, which are their Courts of Justice,
and their Charters. This Officer was called. El Justicia d' Arragon, and his
duty was to call together the whole Power of the Kingdom, whenever any of the
aforesaid Rights were by open force violated or invaded, and to admonish the
King, whenever he heard of any clandestine Councils among them to that effect.
It was likewise made Treason, for any person of what quality soever, to refuse
to repair upon due summons to any place where this Justicia should erect his
Standard, or to withdraw himself without leave, much more to betray him, or to
revolt from him: Besides, in this Cortes, or Parliament, the old Oath which at
the first Foundation of their State was ordered to be taken by the King at his
admittance, was again revived, and which is in these words: Nos que valemos
tanto camo nos, y podemos mas, os eligimos nuestro Rey, conque nos guardeys
nuestros Fueros y Privilegios; y si no, no. That is, We who are as good as you,
and more Powerful, do choose you our King, upon condition that you preserve our
Rights and Privileges; and if not, not. Notwithstanding all this, Philip the
Second, being both King of Castile and Arragon, picked a quarrel with the
latter, by demanding his Secretary Antonio Perez, who fled from the King's
displeasure thither, being his own Country; and they refusing to deliver him
(it being expressly contrary to a Law of Arragon, that a Subject of that Kingdom
should be against his will carried to be tried elsewhere) the King took that
occasion to Invade them with the Forces of his Kingdom of Castile (who had ever
been Rivals and Enemies to the Aragoneses) and they to defend themselves under
their Justicia, who did his part faithfully and courageously; but the
Castilians being old Soldiers, and those of Arragon but County-Troops, the
former prevailed, and so this Kingdom in getting that of Castile by a Marriage
(but an Age before) lost its own Liberty and Government: for it is since made a
Province, and Governed by a Viceroy from Madrid, although they keep up the
formality of their Cortes still.


Doct. No man living that knew the hatred and hostility that ever was between
the English and Scots, could have imagined in the years 1639, and 1640, when
our King was with great Armies of English upon the Frontiers of Scotland, ready
to Invade that Kingdom, that this Nation would not have assisted to have
brought them under; but it proved otherwise.


Eng. Gent. It may be they feared, That when Scotland was reduced to slavery,
and the Province pacified, and Forces kept up there, That such Forces and
greater might have been employed here, to reduce us into the same condition; an
apprehension which at this time sticks with many of the common People, and
helps to fill up the measure of our Fears and Distractions. But the visible
reason why the English were not at that time very forward to oppress their
Neighbors, was the consideration, That they were to be Invaded for refusing to
receive from hence certain Innovations in matters of Religion, and the worship
of God, which had not long before been introduced here; and therefore the
People of this Kingdom were unwilling to perpetuate a Mungrel Church here, by
imposing it upon them. But I do exceedingly admire, when I read our History, to
see how zealous and eager our Nobility and People here were anciently to assert
the right of our Crown to the Kingdom of France; whereas it is visible, that if
we had kept France (for we Conquered it entirely and fully) to this day, we
must have run the fate of Arragon, and been in time ruined and oppressed by our
own Valor and good Fortune; a thing that was foreseen by the Macedonians, when
their King Alexander had subdued all Persia and the East; who weighing how
probable it was, that their Prince having the possession of such great and
flourishing Kingdoms, should change his Domicilium Imperii, and inhabit in the
Center of his Dominions, and from thence Govern Macedon, by which means the
Grecians, who by their Virtue and Valor had Conquered and subdued the
Barbarians, should in time (even as an effect of their Victories) be oppressed
and tyrannized over by them: and this precautious foresight in the Greeks (as
was fully believed in that Age) hastened the fatal Catastrophe of that great
Prince.


Doct. Well, I hope this consideration will fore arm our Parliaments, That they
will not easily suffer their eyes to be dazzled any more with the false glory of
Conquering France.


Noble Ven. You need no great cautions against Conquering France at this
present, and I believe your Parliaments need as little admonition against
giving of Money toward new Wars or Alliances, that fine wheedle having lately
lost them enough already; therefore, pray, let us suffer our Friend to go on.


Eng. Gent. I have no more to say of Foreign Monarchies, but only to tell you,
That Poland is both Governed and Possessed by some very great Persons or
Potentates, called Palatines, and under them by a very numerous Gentry; for the
King is not only Elective, but so limited, that he has little or no Power, but
to Command their Armies in time of War; which makes them often choose Foreigners
of great Fame for Military Exploits: and as for the Commonalty or Countrymen,
they are absolutely Slaves or Villains. This Government is extremely confused,
by reason of the numerousness of the Gentry, who do not always meet by way of
representation as in other Kingdoms, but sometimes for the choice of their
King, and upon other great occasions, collectively, in the Field, as the Tribes
did at Rome; which would make things much more turbulent if all this body of
Gentry did not wholly depend for their Estates upon the favor of the Palatines
their Lords, which makes them much more tractable. I have done with our
Neighbors beyond Sea, and should not without your command have made so long a
digression in this place, which should indeed have been treated of before we
come to speak of England, but that you were pleased to divert me from it
before: However, being placed near the Portraicture of our own Country, it
serves better (as contraria juxta se posita) to illustrate it: but I will not
make this Deviation longer, by Apologizing for it; and shall therefore desire
you to take notice, That as in England by degrees Property came to shift from
the few to the many, so the Government is grown heavier and more uneasy both
to Prince and People, the complaints more in Parliament, the Laws more
numerous, and much more tedious and prolix, to meet with the tricks and malice
of men, which works in a loose Government; for there was no need to make Acts
verbose, when the great Persons could presently force the Execution of them:
for the Law of Edward the First, for frequent Parliaments, had no more words
than A Parliament shall be holden every year, whereas our Act for a Triennial
Parliament, in the time of King Charles the First, contained several sheets of
paper, to provide against a failer in the Execution of that Law; which if the
Power had remained in the Lords, would have been needless: for some of them, in
case of intermission of Assembling the Parliament, would have made their
Complaint and Address to the King, and have immediately removed the
obstruction, which in those days had been the natural and easy way: but now
that many of the Lords (like the Bishops which the Popes make at Rome, in
partibus infidelium) are merely grown Titular, and purchased for nothing but to
get their Wives place, it cannot be wondered at if the King slight their
Addresses, and the Court-Parasites deride their Honorable undertakings for the
safety of their Country. Now the Commons succeeding, as was said, in the
Property of the Peers and Church (whose Lands five parts of six have been
alienated, and mostly is come into the same hands with those of the King and
Peers) have inherited likewise, according to the course of nature, their Power;
But being kept from it by the established Government, which (not being changed
by any lawful Acts of State) remains still in being formally, whereas
virtually it is abolished; so that for want of outward Orders and Provisions,
the people are kept from the Exercise of that Power which is fallen to them by
the Law of Nature; and those who cannot by that Law pretend to the share they
had, do yet enjoy it by virtue of that Right which is now ceased, as having
been but the natural Effect of a Cause that is no longer in being; and you know
sublata causa, tollitur. I cannot say that the greater part of the people do
know this their condition, but they find very plainly that they want something
which they ought to have; and this makes them lay often the blame of their
unsetledness upon wrong causes: but however, are altogether unquiet and
restless in the Intervals of Parliament; and when the King pleases to assemble
one, spend all their time in Complaints of the Inexecution of the Law, of the
multiplication of an Infinity of Grievances, of Mis-spending the Public
Moneys, of the danger our Religion is in by practices to undermine it and the
State, by endeavors to bring in Arbitrary Power, and in questioning great
Officers of State, as the Causers and Promoters of all these Abuses; in so
much, that every Parliament seems a perfect State of War, wherein the Commons
are tugging and contending for their Right, very justly and very honorably,
yet without coming to a Point: So that the Court sends them packing, and
governs still worse and worse in the Vacancies, being necessitated thereunto by
their despair of doing any good in Parliament; and therefore are forced to use
horrid shifts to subsist without it, and to keep it off; without ever
considering, that if these Counselors understood their Trade, they might bring
the Prince and People to such an Agreement in Parliament, as might repair the
broken and shipwrack'd Government of England; and in this secure the Peace,
Quiet and Prosperity of the People, the Greatness and Happiness of the King,
and be themselves not only out of present danger (which no other course can
exempt them from) but be Renowned to all Posterity.


Noble Ven. I beseech you, Sir, how comes it to pass, that neither the King,
nor any of his Counselors could ever come to find out the truth of what you
discourse? for I am fully convinced it is as you say.


Eng. Gent. I cannot resolve you that, but this is certain, they have never
endeavored a Cure, though possibly they might know the Disease, as searing
that though the Effects of a Remedy would be, as was said, very advantageous
both to King and People, and to themselves; yet possibly, such a Reformation
might not consist with the Merchandise they make of the Princes Favor, nor
with such Bribes, Gratuities and Fees as they usually take for the dispatch of
all Matters before them. And therefore our Counselors have been so far from
suggesting any such thing to their Master, that they have opposed and quashed
all Attempts of that kind, as they did the worthy Proposals made by certain
Members of that Parliament in the beginning of King James's Reign, which is yet
called the Undertaking Parliament. These Gentlemen considering what we have
been discoursing of, viz. That our old Government is at an end, had framed
certain Heads, which, if they had been proposed by that Parliament to the King,
and by him consented to, would, in their Opinion, have healed the Breach; and
that if the King would perform his part, that House of Commons would undertake
for the Obedience of the People. They did believe that if this should have been
moved in Parliament before the King was acquainted with it, it would prove
Abortive: and therefore sent three of their number to his Majesty; Sir James a
Croft, Grandfather or Father to the present Bishop of Hereford; Thomas Harley,
who was Ancestor to the Honorable Family of that Name in Herefordshire; and
Sir Henry Nevill, who had been Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth to the French
King. These were to open the matter at large to the King, and to procure his
leave that it might be proposed in Parliament: which, after a very long
Audience and Debate, that wise Prince consented to, with a promise of Secrecy
in the mean time, which they humbly begged of His Majesty. However, this took
Vent, and the Earl of Northampton, of the House of Howard, who ruled the Roast
in that time, having knowledge of it, engaged Sir R. Weston, afterward Lord
Treasurer and Earl of Portland, to impeach these Undertakers in Parliament
before they could move their matters; which he did the very same day,
accompanying his Charge (which was endeavoring to alter the established
Government of England) with so eloquent an Invective, that if one of them had
not risen, and made the House acquainted with the whole Series of the Affair,
they must have been in danger of being impeached by the Commons: but however it
broke their design, which was all that Northampton and Weston desired, and
prevented Posterity from knowing any of the Particulars of this Reformation;
for nothing being moved, nothing could remain upon the Journal. So that you see
our Predecessors were not ignorant altogether of our condition, though the
Troubles which have befallen this poor Kingdom since, have made it much more
apparent: for since the Determination of that Parliament, there has not been
one called, either in that King's Reign, or his Son's, or since, that has not
been dissolved abruptly, whilst the main businesses, and those of most concern
to the public, were depending and undecided. And although there has happened
in this Interim a bloody War, which in the Close of it, changed the whole Order
and Foundation of the Polity of England, and that it has pleased God to
restore it again by his Majesty's happy Return, so that the old Government is
alive again; yet it is very visible that its deadly Wound is not healed, but
that we are to this day tugging with the same difficulties, managing the same
Debates in Parliament, and giving the same disgusts to the Court, and hopes to
the Country, which our Ancestors did before the Year 1640. whilst the King has
been forced to apply the same Remedy of Dissolution to his two first
Parliaments, that his Father used to his four first, and King James to his
three last, contrary to his own visible Interest, and that of his people; and
this for want of having Counselors about him of Abilities and Integrity enough
to discover to him the Disease of his Government, and the Remedy: which I hope,
when we meet to Morrow Morning you will come prepared to enquire into; for the
Doctor says, he will advise you to go take the Air this afternoon in your Coach.


Noble Ven. I shall think it very long till the morning come: But before you
go, pray give me leave to ask you something of your Civil War here; I do not
mean the History of it (although the World abroad is very much in the dark as
to all your Transactons of that time for want of a good one) but the grounds or
pretenses of it, and how you fell into a War against your King.


Eng. Gent. As for our History, it will not be forgotten; one of those who was
in Employment from the Year 40. to 60. has written the History of those 20
Years, a Person of good Learning and Elocution; and though he be now dead, yet
his Executors are very unwilling to publish it so soon, and to rub a Sore that
is not yet healed. But the Story is writ with great Truth and Impartiality,
although the Author were engaged both in Councils and Arms for the Parliaments
side. But for the rest of your Demand, you may please to understand, that our
Parliament never did, as they pretended, make War against the King; for he by
Law can do no Wrong, and therefore cannot be quarrelled with: The War they
declared was undertaken to rescue the King's Person out of those Men's hands who
led him from his Parliament, and made use of his Name to levy a War against
them.


Noble Ven. But does your Government permit, that in case of a disagreement
between the King and his Parliament, either of them may raise Arms against the
other?


Eng. Gent. It is impossible that any Government can go further than to provide
for its own Safety and Preservation whilst it is in being, and therefore it can
never direct what shall be done when it self is at an end; there being this
difference between our Bodies Natural and Politic, that the first can make a
Testament to dispose of things after his death, but not the other. This is
certain, that wherever any two Coordinate Powers do differ, and there be no
Power on Earth to reconcile them otherwise, nor any Umpire, they will, de
facto, fall together by the Ears. What can be done in this Case de jure, look
into your own Countryman Machiavell, and into Grotius, who in his Book De jure
Belli ac Pacis, treated of such matters long before our Wars. As for the
ancient Politicians, they must needs be silent in the Point, as having no mixed
Governments amongst them; and as for me, I will not rest my self in so slippery
a Place. There are great disputes about it in the Parliaments Declarations
before the War, and something considerable in the King's Answers to them; which
I shall specify immediately, when I have satisfied you how our War begun;
which was in this manner: The Long Parliament having procured from the King his
Royal Assent for their Sitting till they were dissolved by Act, and having paid
and sent out the Scottish Army, and disbanded our own, went on in their Debates
for the settling and mending our Government: the King being displeased with
them for it, and with himself for putting it out of his Power to dissolve them,
now the business which they pretended for their Perpetuation was quite
finished, takes an unfortunate Resolution to accuse five principal Men of the
Commons House, and one of the Peers, of High Treason: which he prosecuted in a
new unheard of way, by coming with armed Men into the Commons House of
Parliament, to demand their Members; but nothing being done by reason of the
absence of the five, and Tumults of discontented Citizens flocking to
White Hall and Westminster, the King took that occasion to absent himself from
his Parliament. Which induced the Commons House to send Commissioners to
Hampton Court to attend his Majesty with a Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, and an humble Request to return to his Parliament, for the Redressing
those Grievances which were specified in that Remonstrance. But the King,
otherwise Counseled, goes to Windsor, and thence Northwards, till he arrived
at York; where he summons in the Militia, that is, the Trained-Bands of the
County; and besides, all the Gentry, of which there was a numerous Appearance.
The King addressed himself to the latter with Complaints against a prevailing
Party in Parliament, which intended to take the Crown from his Head; that he
was come to them, his loving Subjects, for Protection; and, in short, desired
them to assist him with Moneys to defend himself by Arms. Some of these
Gentlemen petitioned His Majesty to return to his Parliament, the rest went
about the Debate of the King's Demands; who, in the mean time, went to Hull, to
secure the Magazine there, but was denied Entrance by a Gentleman whom the
House had sent down to prevent the seizing it; who was immediately declared a
Traitor, and the King fell to raising of Forces: which coming to the Knowledge
of the House, they made this Vote, That the King, seduced by Evil Counsel,
intended to levy War against his Parliament and People, to destroy the
Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, and to introduce an Arbitrary
Government, etc. This was the first time they named the King, and the last: For
in all their other Papers, and in their Declaration to Arm for their Defense
(which did accompany this Vote) they name nothing but Malignant Counselors.
The Kings Answer to these Votes and this Declaration, is that which I
mentioned; wherein His Majesty denies any intention of invading the Government,
with high Imprecations upon himself and Posterity if it were otherwise: and
owns that they have Right to maintain their Laws and Government. This is to be
seen in the Paper it self now extant; and this Gracious Prince never pretended
(as some Divines have done for him) that his Power came from God, and that his
Subjects could not dispute it, nor ought he to give any Account of his Actions
(though he should enslave us all) to any but him. So that our War did not begin
upon a point of Right, but upon a matter of Fact; for without going to Lawyers
or Casuists to be resolved, those of the People who believed that the King did
intend to destroy our Liberties, joined with the Parliament; and those who were
of opinion that the prevailing party in Parliament did intend to destroy the
King or dethrone him, assisted vigorously His Majesty with their Lives and
Fortunes. And the Question you were pleased to ask never came; for both parties
pretended and believed they were in the right, and that they did fight for and
defend the Government: But I have wearied you out.


Noble Ven. No sure, Sir, but I am infinitely obliged to you for the great care
you have taken and still have used to instruct me, and beg the continuance of
it for to morrow morning.


Eng. Gent. I shall be sure to wait upon you at nine a Clock, but I shall
beseech both of you to bethink your selves what to offer, for I shall come with
a design to learn, not to teach: nor will I presume in such a matter to talk
all, as you have made me do to day; for what I have yet to say in the point of
Cure, is so little, that it will look like the Mouse to the Mountain of this
days discourse.


Doct. It is so in all Arts, the Corollary is short, and in ours particularly.
Those who write of the several Diseases incident to humane bodies, must make
long Discourses of the Causes, Symptoms, Signs and Prognostics of such
Distempers; but when they come to treat of the Cure, it is dispatched in a few
Recipes.


Eng. Gent. Well, Sir, for this bout, I humbly take my leave of you; nay, Sir,
you are not in a condition to use ceremony.


Doct. Sir, I forbid you this door; pray retire: to stand here, is worse than
to be in the open air.


Noble Ven. I obey you both.


Doct. I shall wait on you in the Evening.


The THIRD DAY.
Noble Ven. GEntlemen, you are very welcome: what, you are come both together!


Doct. I met this Gentleman at the door: But methinks we sit looking one upon
another, as if all of us were afraid to speak.


Eng. Gent. Do you think we have not reason, in such a subject as this is? how
can any Man, without Hesitation, presume to be so confident as to deliver his
private opinion in a point, upon which, for almost 200 year (for so long our
Government has been crazy) no Man has ventured; and when Parliaments have done
any thing toward it, there have been Animosities and Breaches, and at length
Civil Wars?


Noble Ven. Our work to day is, to endeavor to show how all these troubles may
be prevented for the future, by taking away the Cause of them, which is the
want of a good Government; and therefore it will not be so much presumption in
you, as charity, to declare your self fully in this matter.


Eng. Gent. The Cure will follow naturally, if you are satisfied in the
Disease, and in the Cause of the Disease: for if you agree that our Government
is broken, and that it is broken because it was Founded upon Property, and that
Foundation is now shaken; it will be obvious, that you must either bring
Property back to your old Government, and give the King and Lords their Lands
again, or else you must bring the Government to the Property as it now stands.


Doct. I am very well satisfied in your Grounds; but because this Fundamental
truth is little understood amongst our People, and that in all conversations
men will be offering their opinions of what the Parliament ought to do at their
Meeting, it will not be amiss to examine some of those Expedients they propose,
and to see whether some or all of them may not be effectual toward the
bringing us to some degree of settlement, rather than to venture upon so great
a change and alteration as would be necessary to model our Government anew.


Eng. Gent. Sir, I believe there can be no Expedients proposed in Parliament
that will not take up as much time and trouble, find as much difficulty in
passing with the King and Lords, and seem as great a change of Government, as
the true remedy would appear, at least I speak as to what I have to propose;
but however, I approve your Method, and if you will please to propose any of
those things, I shall either willingly embrace them, or endeavor to show
reason why they will be of little fruit in the settling our State.


Doct. I will reduce them to two Heads (besides the making good Laws for
keeping out Arbitrary Power, which is always understood:) the hindering the
growth of Popery, and consequently the providing against a Popish Successor;
and then the declaring the Duke of Monmouth's Right to the Crown, after it has
been examined and agreed to in Parliament.


Eng. Gent. As for the making new Laws, I hold it absolutely needless, those we
have already against Arbitrary Power being abundantly sufficient, if they might
be executed; but that being impossible (as I shall show hereafter) till some
change shall be made, I shall postpone this point: and for the first of your
other two, I shall divide and separate the consideration of the growth of
Popery from that of the Succession. I am sorry that in the prosecution of this
Argument, I shall be forced to say something that may not be very pleasing to
this worthy Gentleman, we being necessitated to discourse with prejudice of
that Religion which he professes; but it shall be with as little ill breeding
as I can, and altogether without passion or invectives.


Noble Ven. It would be very hard for me to suspect any thing from you that
should be disobliging; but pray, Sir, go on to your Political discourse, for I
am not so ignorant my self, but to know that the conservation of the National
Religion (be it what it will) is assential to the well ordering a State: and
though in our City the doctrinals are very different from what are professed
here, yet as to the Government of the State, I believe you know that the Pope
or his Priests have as little influence upon it, as your Clergy have here, or
in any part of the World.


Eng. Gent. I avow it fully, Sir, and with the favor you give will proceed. It
cannot be denied but that in former times Popery has been very innocent here to
the Government, and that the Clergy and the Pope were so far from opposing our
Liberties, that they both sided with the Barons to get a declaration of them by
means of Magna Charta: It is true also, that if we were all Papists, and that
our State were the same, both as to Property and Empire, as it was 400 years
ago, there would be but one inconvenience to have that Religion National again
in England, which is, That the Clergy, quatenus such, had and will have a share
in the Sovereignty, and inferior Courts in their own Power, called
Ecclesiastical; this is, and ever will be a Solecism in Government, besides a
manifest contradiction to the words of Christ our Savior, who tells us, his
Kingdom is not of this World: and the truth is, if you look into the
Scriptures, you will find, that the Apostles did not reckon that the Religion
they planted should be National in any Country, and therefore have given no
precepts to the Magistrate to meddle in matters of Faith and the Worship of
God; but Preached, That Christians should yield them obedience in all lawful
things. There are many passages in Holy Writ which plainly declare, that the
true Believers and Saints should be but a handful, and such as God had
separated, and as it were taken out of the World; which would not have been
said by them, if they had believed that whole Nations and People should have
been true Followers of Christ, and of his Flock: for certainly none of them are
to be damned, and yet Christ himself tells us, that few are saved, and bids us
strive to get in at the strait gate; and therefore I conceive it not to be
imaginable, that either Christ or his Apostles did ever account that the true
Religion should be planted in the World by the framing of Laws, Catechisms, or
Creeds, by the Sovereign Powers and Magistrates, whether you call them
Spiritual or Temporal, but that it should have a Progress suitable to its
beginning: for it is visible that it had its Original from the Power and Spirit
of God, and came in against the stream, not only without a Numa Pompilius, or
a Mahomet, to plant and establish it by humane Constitutions and Authority, but
had all the Laws of the World to oppose it, and all the bloody Tyrants of that
age to persecute it, and to inflict exquisite torments on the Professors of it,
In Nero's time (which was very early) the Christians were offered a Temple in
Rome, and in what other Cities they pleased, to be built to Jesus Christ, and
that the Romans should receive him into the number of their gods; but our
Religion being then in its purity, this was unanimously refused, for that such
a God must have no Companions, nor needed no Temples, but must be Worshipped in
Spirit and Truth. The Successors to these good Christians were not so
scrupulous; for within some Ages after, the Priests to get Riches and Power,
and the Emperors to get and keep the Empire (for by this time the Christians
were grown numerous and powerful) combined together to spoil our Holy Religion,
to make it fit for the Government of this World, and to introduce into it all
the Ceremonious follies and Superstitions of the Heathen; and which is worse,
the Power of Priests, both over the Persons and Consciences of Men. I shall say
no more of this, but refer you to innumerable Authors who have treated of this
Subject, particularly to a French Minister, who has written a Book, Entitled,
La Religion Catholic Apostolic Roman instituee par Nume Pompile; and to
the incomparable Machiavel in his Posthume Letter, Printed lately in our
Language, with the Translation of his Works. But I have made a long digression;
and to come back again, shall only desire you to take notice, when I say that
anciently Popery was no inconvenience in this Kingdom, I mean only
Politically, as the Government then stood, and do not speak at all of the
prejudice which men's Souls did and will ever receive from the Belief of those
impious Tenants, and the want of having the True Gospel of Jesus Christ
preached unto them, but living in perpetual Superstition and Idolatry: The
consideration of these Matters is not so proper to my present purpose, being to
Discourse only of Government. Notwithstanding therefore, as I said before,
that Popery might have suited well enough with our old Constitution, yet as to
the present Estate, which inclines to Popularity, it would be wholly as
inconsistent with it, and with the Power of the Keys, and the Empire of Priests
(especially where there is a Foreign Jurisdiction in the case) as with the
Tyranny and Arbitrary Power of any Prince in the World. I will add thus much in
Confirmation of the Doctor's Assertion, That we ought to prevent the Growth of
Popery, since it is now grown a Dangerous Faction here against the State.


Noble Ven. How can that be, I beseech you, Sir?


Eng. Gent. Sir, I will make you Judge of it your self; I will say nothing of
those foolish Writings that have been put forth by Mariana, Emanuel Sa, and
some others, about the lawfulness of destroying Princes and States in case of
Heresy, because I know all the conscientious and honest Papists (of which I
know there are great numbers in the World) do not only not hold, but even abhor
such cursed Tenants; and do believe, that when the Pope, by Excommunication
has cut off any Prince from the communion of the Church, can go no further,
nor ought to pretend a Power to deprive him of his Crown, or absolve his
Subjects from their Oaths and Obedience: But I shall confine my self to the
present condition of our Papists here. You know how dangerous it is for any
Kingdom or State to have a considerable, wealthy, flourishing party amongst
them, whose interest it is to destroy the Polity and Government of the Country
where they live; and therefore if our Papists prove this Party, you will not
wonder why this People are so eager to depress them. This is our Case: for in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, there was an alteration of Religion in
our Country, which did sufficiently enrage the Holy Father at Rome, to see that
this good Cow would be Milked no longer. He declares her an Heretic and a
Bastard, (his Sanctity not having declared null that incestuous Marriage which
her Father had contracted before with his Brothers Wife, and which that King
had dissolved to Marry her Mother) and afterward Excommunicated our Queen,
depriving her, as much as in him lay, of the Kingdom; some of the Zealots of
that Party (having a greater terror for those Thunderbolts than I believe
many have now) began to Conspire against her; and Plots grew at length so
frequent, and so dangerous, that it was necessary (as the Parliaments then
thought) to secure the Queen, by making severe Laws against a People, who did
not believe themselves her Majesty's Subjects; but on the contrary, many of
them thought themselves in Conscience obliged to oppose and destroy her: and
although that Excommunication, as also the pretended doubtfulness of the Title,
both died with that renowned Queen, yet a new desperate Conspiracy against the
King her Successor and the whole Parliament ensuing, not long after her
decease, those rigorous Laws have been so far from being repealed, that very
many more, and far severer, have been since made, and are yet in force. Now
these Laws make so great a distinction between Protestants and Papists, that
whereas the former are by our Government and Laws, the freest People in the
World, the latter are little better than slaves, are confined to such a
distance from their Houses, are not to come near the Court, which being kept in
the Capital City, mostly deprives them from attending their necessary
occasions; they are to pay two third parts of their Estates annually to the
King, their Priests are to suffer as Traitors, and they as Felons for
harboring them; in fine, one of us, if he do not break the Municipal Laws for
the good Government of the Country, need not fear the King's Power, whereas
their being what they are, is a breach of the Law, and does put them into the
Princes hands to ruin them when he pleases; nay, he is bound by Oath to do it,
and when he does it not, is complained against by his People, and Parliaments
take it amiss. Now judge you, Sir, whether it is not the interest of these
People to desire and endeavor a change, whilst they remain under these
discouragements, and whether they are not like to join with the Prince (whose
connivance at the inexecution of those Laws is the only means and hope of
their preservation) whenever he shall undertake any thing for the increase of
his own Power, and the depressing his Parliaments.


Noble Ven. What you say is very undeniable, but then the Remedy is very easy
and obvious, as well as very just and honorable, which is the taking away
those cruel Laws, and if that were done they would be one People with you, and
would have no necessity, and by consequence no desire to engreaten the King
against the Interest and Liberty of their own Country.


Eng. Gent. You speak very well, and one of the Reasons amongst many which I
have, to desire a composure of all our troubles by a settled Government, is,
that I may see these People (who are very considerable, most of them, for
Estates, Birth and Breeding) live quietly under our good Laws, and increase our
Trade and Wealth with their expenses here at home; whereas now the severity of
our Laws against them, makes them spend their Revenues abroad, and enrich other
Nations with the Stock of England; but as long as the State here is so unsettled
as it is, our Parliaments will never consent to countenance a Party, who by the
least Favor and Indulgence may make themselves able to bring in their own
Religion to be National, and so ruin our Polity and Liberties.


Noble Ven. I wonder why you should think that possible?


Eng. Gent. First, Sir, for the Reason we First gave, which is the craziness of
our Polity, there being nothing more certain, than that both in the Natural and
also the Politic Body any sinister accident that intervenes, during a very
Diseased habit, may bring a dangerous alteration to the Patient. An
Insurrection in a decayed Government, a thing otherwise very inconsiderable,
has proved very fatal, as I knew a slight flesh-wound bring a lusty Man to his
Grave in our Wars, for that he being extremely infected with the French
Disease, could never procure the Orifice to close; so although the designs both
at home and abroad, for altering our Religion, would be very little formidable
to a well-founded Government, yet in such an one as we have now, it will
require all our care to obviate such Machinations. Another Reason is the little
Zeal that is left amongst the ordinary Protestants, which Zeal uses to be a
great Instrument of preserving the Religion established, as it did here in
Queen Elizabeth's time; I will add the little Credit the Church of England has
amongst the People, most men being almost as angry with that Popery which is
left amongst us (in Surplices, Copes, Altars, Cringings, Bishops,
Ecclesiastical Courts, and the whole Hierarchy, besides an Infinite number of
Useless, Idle, Superstitious Ceremonies, and the Ignorance and Vitiousness of
the Clergy in general) as they are with those Dogma's that are abolished; So
that there is no hopes that Popery can be kept out, but by a company of poor
People called Fanatics, who are driven into Corners as the First Christians
were; and who only in truth Conserve the Purity of Christian Religion, as it
was planted by Christ and his Apostles, and is contained in Scripture. And this
makes almost all sober men believe, that the National Clergy, besides all other
good qualities have this too, that they cannot hope to make their Hierarchy
subsist long against the Scriptures, the hatred of mankind, and the Interest of
this People, but by Introducing the Roman Religion, and getting a Foreign Head
and Supporter, which shall from time to time brave and hector the King and
Paliament in their favor and behalf, which yet would be of little advantage to
them, if we had as firm and wise a Government as you have at Venice. Another
Reason, and the greatest, why the Romish Religion ought to be very warily
provided against at this time, is, That the Lawful and Undoubted Heir to the
Crown, if his Majesty should die without Legitimate Issue, is more than
suspected to Embrace that Faith; which (if it should please God to call the
King, before there be any Remedy applied to our Distracted State) would give a
great opportunity (by the Power he would have in Intervals of Parliament)
either to Introduce immediately that profession, with the help of our Clergy,
and other English and Foreign Aids, or else to make so fair a way for it, that
a little time would perfect the work; and this is the more formidable, for that
he is held to be a very Zealous and Bigoted Romanist; and therefore may be
supposed to act any thing to that end although it should manifestly appear to
be contrary to his own Interest and Quiet; so apt are those who give up their
Faith and the Conduct of their Lives to Priests (who to get to themselves
Empire, promise them the highest Seats in Heaven; if they will sacrifice their
Lives, Fortunes, and Hopes, for the Exaltation of their Holy Mother, and
preventing the Damnation of an innumerable company of Souls which are not yet
born) to be led away with such Erroneous and wild Fancies. Whereas Philip the
Second of Spain, the House of Guise in France, and other great Statesmen, have
always made their own greatness their first Aim, and used their Zeal as an
Instrument of that; And instead of being cozened by Priests, have cheated them,
and made them endeavor to Preach them up to the Empire of the World. So I have
done with the Growth of Popery, and must conclude, that if that should be stopped
in such manner, that there could not be one Papist left in England, and yet our
Polity left in the same disorder that now afflicts it, we should not be one
Scruple the better for it, nor the more at quiet; the Growth and Danger of
Popery not being the Cause of our present Distemper, but the Effect of it: But
as a good and settled Government would not be at all the nearer for the
destruction of Popery, so Popery and all the Dangers and Inconveniences of it
would not only be further off, but would wholly vanish at the sight of such a
Reformation. And so we begin at the wrong end, when we begin with Religion
before we heal our Breaches. I will borrow one Similitude more, with our
Doctor's favor, from his Profession. I knew once a man given over by the
Physicians, of an incurable Cachexia, which they said proceeded from the ill
Quality of the whole Mass of Blood, from great Adustion, and from an ill habit
of the whole Body. The Patient had very often painful Fits of the Chollick,
which they said proceeded from the sharpness of the humor which caused the
Disease; and, amongst the rest, had one Fit which tormented him to that degree,
that it was not expected he could outlive it; yet the Doctors delivered him
from it in a small time: Notwithstanding, soon after the man died of his first
Distemper. Whereas if their Art had arrived to have cured that (which was the
Cause of the other) the Chollick had vanished of it self, and the Patient
recovered. I need make no Application, nor shall need to say much of the
Succession of the Crown (which is my next Province) but this I have said
already, That it is needless to make any Provision against a Popish Successor
if you rectify your Government; and if you do not, all the Care and
Circumspection you can use in that Particular, will be useless and of none
effect, and will but at last (if it do not go off easily, and the next Heir
succeed peaceably, as is most likely, especially if the King live till the
People's Zeal and Mettle is over) end probably in a Civil War about Title; and
then the Person deprived may come in with his Sword in his Hand, and bring in
upon the Point of it both the Popish Religion, and Arbitrary Power: Which,
though I believe he will not be able to maintain long (for the Reasons before
alleged,) yet that may make this Generation miserable and unhappy. It will
certainly be agreed by all lovers of their Country, that Popery must be kept
from returning, and being National in this Kingdom, as well for what concerns
the Honor and Service of God, as the Welfare and Liberty of the People; and I
conceive there are two ways by which the Parliament may endeavor to secure us
against that danger; the first by ordering such a change in the Administration
of our Government, that whoever is Prince, can never violate the Laws, and then
we may be very safe against Popery; our present Laws being effectual enough to
keep it out, and no new ones being like to be made in Parliament that may
introduce it; and this remedy will be at the same time advantageous to us
against the Tyranny and Encroachments of a Protestant Successor, so that we may
call it an infallible Remedy both against Popery and Arbitrary power. The
second way is by making a Law to disable any Papist by name or otherwise, from
Inheriting the Crown; and this is certainly fallible, that is, may possibly not
take place (as I shall show immediately;) and besides, it is not improbable
that an Heir to this Kingdom in future times, may dissemble his Religion, till
he be seated in the Throne; or possibly be perverted to the Roman Faith after
he is possessed of it, when it may be too late to limit his Prerogative in
Parliament; and to oppose him without that, will I fear, be Judged Treason.


Doct. But Sir, would you have the Parliament do nothing, as things stand, to
provide (at least, as much as in them lies) that whoever succeeds be a good
Protestant?


Eng. Gent. Yes, I think it best in the first place to offer to his Majesty the
true Remedy; and if they find him averse to that, then to pursue the other
which concerns the Succession, because the People (who are their Principals,
and give them their Power) do expect something extraordinary from them at this
time; and the most of them believe this last the only present means to save
them from Popery, which they judge (and very justly) will bring in with it a
change of Government. But then, I suppose, they may be encouraged to propose in
the first place the true Cure; not only because that is infallible, as has been
proved, but likewise because His Majesty in probability will sooner consent to
any reasonable Demand toward the Reforming of the Government, and to the
securing us that way, than to concur to the depriving his only Brother of the
Crown. And possibly this latter (as I said before) may be the only way the
Parliament can hope will prove effectual: For if you please to look but an Age
back into our Story, you will find that Henry the Eighth did procure an Act of
Parliament, which gave him power to dispose of the Crown by his last Will and
Testament; and that he did accordingly make his said Will, and by it devise the
Succession to his Son Edward the Sixth, in the first place, and to the Heirs of
his Body; and for want of such, to his Daughter Mary, and to the Heirs of her
Body; and for want of which Heirs, to his Daughter Elizabeth, our once
Sovereign of Immortal and Blessed Memory, and the Heirs of her Body; and for
want of all such Issue, to the right Heirs of his Younger Sister, who was,
before he made this Will, married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and had
Issue by him. By this Testament he disinherited his elder Sister, who was
married in Scotland; and by that means did, as much as in him lay, exclude His
Majesty (who now, by God's Mercy, Reigns over us) as also his Father and
Grandfather. And to make the Case stronger, there passed an Act long after, in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, That it should be Treason during that Queen's
Life, and a Praemunire afterward, to assert that the Imperial Crown of England
could not be disposed of by Act of Parliament: yet after the Decease of that
Queen, there was no considerable Opposition made to the peaceable Reception and
Recognition of King James of happy Memory. And those who did make a little stir
about the other Title, as the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and a few
others, were apprehended and condemned according to Law. And, notwithstanding
that, since, in the Reign of K. Charles the First, there was a bloody Civil
War, in which Men's Minds were exasperated at a high rate; yet in all the
Course of it, the Original Want of Title was never objected against His late
Majesty. I do not urge this to aver that the Parliament, with the King's
Consent, cannot do lawfully this, or any other great Matter; which would be an
incurring the Penalty of that Law, and a Solecism in the Politics: But to
show, that when the Passions of men are quieted, and the Reasons other than
they were, it happens oftentimes that those Acts which concern the Succession
fall to the Ground of themselves, and that even without the Sword, which in
this Case was never adoperated. And that therefore this Remedy in our Case may
be likely never to take place, if it please God the King live till this Nation
be under other kind of Circumstances.


Doct. Sir, you say very well: but it seems to me, that the last Parliament was
in some kind of Fault, if this be true that you say; for I remember that my
Lord Chancellor did once, duringtheir Sitting, in His Majesty's Name offer them
to secure their Religion and Liberties any way they could advise of, so they
would let alone meddling with the Succession, and invited them to make any
Proposals they thought necessary to that end.


Eng. Gent. Hinc ille lachrimae. If this had been all, we might have been happy
at this time; but this Gracious Offer was In limine, accompanied with such
Conditions that made the Parliament conjecture that it was only to perplex and
divide them; and did look upon it as an Invention of some new Romanza,
(Counselors and those too, possibly, influenced by the French) to make them
embrace the Shadow for the Substance, and satisfying themselves with this
Appearance, to do their ordinary Work of giving Money, and be gone, and leave
the Business of the Kingdom as they found it. For it was proposed, that
whatsoever Security we were to receive, should be both Conditional and
Reversionable: That is, First, We should not be put into Possession of this new
Charter (be it what it will) till after the death of His Majesty who now is;
whereas such a Provision is desirable and indeed necessary for us for this only
reason, that when that unfortunate hour comes, we might not be, in that
Confusion, unprovided of a Calm, Settled and Orderly, as well as a Legal Way to
keep out Popery. Whereas otherwise, if we be to take Possession in that Minute,
it must either miscarry, or be gotten by a War, if it be true that Possession
be Nine Points of the Law in other Cases, it is in this the whole Ten: and I
should be very unwilling, in such a Distraction, to have no Sanctuary to fly
to, but a piece of Parchment kept in the Pells; and to have this too, as well
as other Advantages, in the Power and Possession of him in whose prejudice it
was made: this had been almost as good an Expedient to keep out Popery, as the
Bill which was thrown out that Parliament; which provided, that in the Reign of
a King that should be a Papist, the Bishops should choose one another upon
Vacancies. Those Counselors who put my Lord Chancellor upon this Proposal,
were either very slender Politicians themselves or else thought the Parliament
so. If Magna Charta and The Petition of Right had not been to take place till
after the Decease of those Princes who confirmed them, neither had the Barons
shed their Blood to so good purpose, nor the Members of the Parliament in
Tertio Caroli, deserved so Glorious an Imprisonment after it was ended. The
other Condition in this renowned Proposal is, That all Provision and Security
which is given us to preserve our Religion, shall cease immediately, whenever
the Prince shall take a certain Oath to be penned for that purpose; and I leave
it to all thinking men to determine what that will avail us, when we shall have
a King of that Profession over us, who shall not have so much Zeal for his
Religion, as he who is now the next successor has; but shall possibly prefer
his Ambition, and his desire to get out of Wardship, before the Scruples of his
Confessor; and yet may afterward, by getting Absolution for, and Dispensation
from such Oaths and Compliance, employ the Power he gets himself, and the
Security he deprives us of, to introduce violently what Worship and Faith he
pleases. This Gracious Offer had the fatality to disguist one of the best
Parliaments that ever Sat, and the most Loyal; so that laying it aside, they
fell upon the Succession, the only thing they had then left, and were soon
after Dissolved, leaving the Kingdom in a more distracted Condition than they
found it; and this can no way be composed, but by mending the Polity, so that
whoever is King cannot (be he never so inclined to it) introduce Popery, or
destroy whatever Religion shall be established: as you see in the Example of
the Duchy of Hanover, whose Prince some fourteen Years since, was perverted to
the Roman Church, went to Rome to abjure Heresy (as they call the truth)
returned home, where he lived and Governed as he did before, without the least
Animosity of his Subjects for his Change, or any endeavor of his to Introduce
any in his Government or People, and dying this last Spring, left the Peaceable
and undisturbed Rule of his Subjects to the next Successor, his Brother the
Bishop of Osnaburg, who is a Protestant, and this because the Polity of that
Dukedom has been conserved entire for many years, and is upon a right Basis:
and if our Case were so, we should not only be out of danger to have our
Religion altered (as I said before) whoever is King, but should in other things
be in a happy and flourishing condition. But I have made a long and tedious
digression to answer your demands: Now it is time you assist me to find the
Natural Cure of all our Mischiefs.


Doct. Stay, Sir, I confess my self to be wonderfully Edified with your
discourse hitherto, but you have said nothing yet of the Duke of Monmouth.


Eng. Gent. I do not think you desire it, though you were pleased to mention
such a thing, for I suppose you cannot think it possible, that this Parliament
(which is now speedily to meet by his Majesty's Gracious Proclamation) can ever
suffer such a thing to be so much as Debated amongst them.


Doct. Sir, you have no reason to take that for granted, when you see what
Books are Printed, what great and Honorable Persons frequent him in private,
and countenance him in public; what shoals of the middle sort of people have
in his Progress this Summer met him before he came into any great Town, and
what Acclamations and Bon-fires have been made in places where he lodged.


Eng. Gent. These things. I must confess, show how great a Distemper the People
are in, and the great reason we have to pray God of his Mercy to put an end to
it by a happy Agreement in Parliament. But certainly this proceeds only from
the hatred they have to the next Successor and his Religion, and from the
compassion they have to the Duke of Monmouth (who as they suppose, has
suffered banishment and dis-favour at Court, at his Instance) and not from any
hopes of expectations that the Parliament will countenance any pretense that
can be made in his behalf to the Succession.


Doct. It may be when we have discoursed of it, I shall be of your mind, (as
indeed I am inclined already) But yet nothing in War is more dangerous than to
contemn an Enemy; so in this Argumentation that we use to secure our Liberties,
we must leave nothing unanswered that may stand in the way of that, especially
the Duke of Monmouth's Claim, which is pretended to confirm and fortify them,
for (say some Men) if you set him up, he will presently pass all Bills that
shall concern the Safety and Interest of the People; And so we shall be at rest
for ever.


Eng. Gent. Well, I see I must be more tedious than I intended; First then, the
reasoning of these men you speak of, does in my apprehension, suppose a thing I
cannot mention without horror, which is, That this Person should be admitted
immediately to the Possession of the Crown to do all these fine Matters; for
otherwise, if he must stay till the Death of our Sovereign who now Reigns
(which I hope and pray will be many years) possibly these delicate Bills may
never pass, nor he find hereafter the People in so good a humor to admit him
to the Reversion, which if it could be obtained (as I think it impossible
Politically) yet the Possession must be kept by a standing Army, and the next
Successor cannot have a better Game to play, nor a better Adversary to deal
with, than one who leaps in over the Heads of almost all the Protestant Princes
Families abroad, besides some Papists who are greater; and when we have been
harrassed with Wars, and the miseries that accompany it some few years, you
shall have all these fine People, who now run after him, very weary of their
new Prince: I would not say any thing to disparage a Person so highly born, and
of so early merit; but this I may say, That if a Lawful Title should be set on
foot in his favor, and a thousand Dutch Hosts, and such like, should swear a
Marriage, yet no sober Man, that is not blinded with prejudice, will believe,
That our King (whom none can deny to have an excellent understanding) would
ever Marry a Woman so much his Inferior as this great Persons Mother was; and
this at a time when his Affairs were very low, and he had no visible or
rational hopes to be restored to the Possession of his Kingdoms but by an
assistance which might have been afforded him by means of some great Foreign
Alliance. Well, but to leave all this, do these Men pretend that the Duke of
Monmouth shall be declared Successor to the Crown in Parliament, with the
King's Concurence or without it; if without it, you must make a War for it, and
I am sure that no Cause can be stated upon such a point, that will not make the
Assertors and Undertakers of it be condemned by all the Politicians and
Moralists of the World, and by the Casuists of all Religions, and so by
consequence, it is like to be a very unsuccesful War. If you would have this
declared with the King's Consent, either you suppose the Royal assent to be
given, when the King has his liberty either to grant it, or not grant it, to
Dissolve the Parliament, or not Dissolve it, without ruin or prejudice to his
Affairs: If in the first Case, it is plain he will not grant it, because he
cannot do it without confessing his Marriage to that Duke's Mother, which he
has already declared against in a very solemn manner, and caused it to be
Registered in Chancery; and which not only no good Subject can choose but
believe, but which cannot be doubted by any rational person; for it would be a
very unnatural, and indeed a thing unheard of, that a Father who had a Son in
Lawful Matrimony, and who was grown to perfection, and had signalized himself
in the Wars, and who was ever entirely beloved by him, should disinherit him by
so solemn an asseveration (which must be a false one too) to cause his Brother
to succeed in his room. And whereas it is pretended by some, that His Majesty's
danger from his Brothers Counsels and Designs may draw from him something of
this; beside that they do not much Complement the King in this, it is clear,
his Brother is not so Popular, but that he may secure him when he pleases,
without hazard, if there were any ground for such an apprehension. But we must
in the next place suppose that the King's Affairs were in such a posture, that
he could deny the Parliament nothing without very great mischief, and
inconvenience to himself and the Kingdom; then I say, I doubt not, but the
Wisdom of the Parliament will find out diverse Demands and Requests to make to
His Majesty of greater benefit, and more necessary for the good of his People
than this would be; which draws after it not only a present unsetledness, but
the probable hazard of Misery and Devastation for many years to come, as has
been proved. So that as on the one side the Parliament could not make a more
unjustfiable War than upon this Account, so they could not be Dissolved upon
any occasion wherein the People would not show less discontent and resentment,
and for which the Courtiers would not hope to have a better pretext to strive
in the next Choice to make their Arts and endeavors more successful in the
Election of Members more suitable to their Designs for the continuance of this
present mis-government; For if this Parliament do mis-spend the Peoples Mettle,
which is now up, in driving that Nail which cannot go, they must look to have
it cool, and so the Ship of this Commonwealth, which if they please may be now
in a fair way of Entering into a Safe Harbor, will be driven to Sea again in a
Storm, and must hope for, and expect another favorable Wind to save them; and
God knows when that may come.


Doct. But Sir, there are others, who not minding whether the Parliament will
consider the Duke of Monmouths concern, so far as to debate it, do yet pretend,
that there is great reason to keep up the peoples affections to him; and
possibly to foment the opinion they have of his Title to the Crown, to the end,
that if the King should die re infecta, that is, before such time as the
Government is redrest, or the Duke of York disabled by Law to Succeed, the
people might have an Head, under whose Command and Conduct they might stand
upon their Guard, till they had some way secured their Government and Religion.


Eng. Gent. What you have started is not a thing that can safely be discoursed
of, nor is it much material to our design, which is intended to speculate upon
our Government, and to show how it is decayed: I have industriously avoided the
argument of Rebellion, as I find it coucht in modern Politicians, because most
Princes hold, that all Civil Wars in mixed Monarchies must be so, and a
Politician, as well as an Orator, ought to be Vir bonus, so ought to discourse
nothing, how rational soever, in these points under a peaceable Monarchy, which
gives him protection, but what he would speak of his Prince if all his Council
were present. I will tell you only, that these Authors hold, that nothing can
be alleged to excuse the taking Arms by any people in opposition to their
Prince from being Crimen Lesae Majestatis, but a claim to a lawful
Jurisdiction, or Co-ordination in the Government, by which they may judge of,
and defend their own Rights, and so pretend to fight for, and defend the
Government; for though all do acknowledge, that Populi salus is, and ought to be
the most Supreme, or Sovereign Law in the world; yet if we should make private
persons, how numerous soever, judge of Populi salus, we should have all the
Risings and Rebellions that should ever be made, justified by that title, as
happened in France, when La Guerre du bien public took that name, which was
raised by the insatiable ambition of a few Noblemen, and by correspondency and
confederacy with Charles, Son of the Duke of Burgundy, and other enemies to
that Crown.


Doct. But would you have our people do nothing then, if the King should be
Assassinated, or die of a natural death?


Eng. Gent. You ask me a very fine question, Doctor: If I say, I would have the
people stir in that case, then the King, and his Laws take hold of me; and if I
should answer, that I would have them be quiet, the people would tear me in
pieces for a Jesuit, or at least, believe that I had no sense of the Riligion,
Laws, and Liberty of my Country. De facto, I do suppose, that if the people do
continue long in this heat which now possesses them, and remain in such a
passion at the time of the Kings death without settling matters, they may
probably fall into tumults and Civil War, which makes it infinitely to be
desired, and prayed for by all good English men, that during the quiet and
peace we enjoy, by the blessing of his Majesty's life and happy Reign, we might
likewise be so wise and fortunate, as to provide for the safety and prosperity
of the next generation.


Doct. But if you would not have the people in such a case, take the Duke of
Monmouth for their Head, what would you have them do?


Eng. Gent. Doctor, you ask me very fine questions; do not you know that
Machivel, the best and most honest of all the modern Politicians, has suffered
sufficiently by means of Priests, and other ignorant persons, who do not
understand his Writings, and therefore impute to him the teaching Subjects how
they should Rebel and conspire against their Princes, which if he were in any
kind guilty of, he would deserve all the reproaches that have been cast upon
him, and ten times more; and so should I, if I ventured to obey you in this. I
am very confident, that if any man should come to you, to implore your skill in
helping him to a drug that might quickly, and with the least fear of being
suspected, dispatch an enemy of his, or some other, by whose death he was to be
a gainer; or some young Lass that had gotten a Surruptitious great Belly,
should come to you to teach her how to destroy the fruit; I say, in this case
you would scarce have had patience to hear these persons out; much less would
you have been so wicked to have in the least assisted them in their designs, no
more than Solon, Lycurgus, Periander, or any other of the Sages could have been
brought to have given their advice to any persons who should have begged it, to
enable them to ruin and undermine the government of their own Commonwealths.


Doct. Sir, this Reprehension would be very justly given me, if I had intended
by this question to induce you to counsel me, or any other how to rebel; my
meaning was to desire you (who have heretofore been very fortunate in
prophesying concerning the events of our changes here) to exercise your faculty
a little at this time, and tell us, what is like to be the end of these
destractions we are under, in case we shall not be so happy as to put a period
to them by mending our Government, and securing our Religion and Liberty in a
regular way.


Eng. Gent. Doctor, I will keep the reputation of Prophecy, which I have gained
with you, and not hazard it with any new predictions, for fear they should
miscarry; yet I care not, if I gratify your curiosity a little in the point,
about which you first began to Interrogate me, by presaging to you, that in
case we should have troubles, and combustions here, after his Majesty's decease
(which God avert) we must expect a very unsuccesful end of them, if we should
be so rash and unadvised, as to make the great Person we have been lately
speaking of, our head; and that nothing can be more dangerous and pernicious to
us than such a choice. I have not in this discourse the least intention to
except against, much less to disparage the personal worth of the Duke of
Monmouth, which the world knows to be very great, but do believe that he has
Courage and Conduct proportionable to any employment that can be conferred upon
him, whether it be to manage Arms, or Counsels; but my opinion is, that no
person in his circumstance can be a proper head in this case; for the people
having been already put on upon his scent of the title to the Crown, will be
very hardly called off, and so will force the wiser men, who may design better
things, to consent that he be Proclaimed King immediately, except there be some
other head, who by his Power, Wisdom, and Authority, may restrain the
forwardness of the multitude, and obviate the acts of some men, whose interest
and hopes may prompt them to foment the humors of the people. Now the
consequences of hurrying a man to the Throne so tumultuously, without the least
deliberation, are very dismal; and do not only not cure the politic distempers
of our Country, which we have talked so much of, but do infinitely augment it,
and add to the desease our State labors under already (which is a Consumption)
a very violent Fever too; I mean War at home, and from abroad, which must
necessarily follow in a few years: nor is it possible to go back, when once we
have made that step; for our new King will call a Parliament, which being
summoned by his will, neither will nor can question his Title or Government,
otherwise than by making Addresses, and by presenting Bills to him, as they do
to his now Majesty.


Nob. Ven. It seems to me, that there needs nothing more than that; for if he
consent to all Laws as shall be presented to him, you may reform your
Government sufficiently, or else it is your own fault.


Eng. Gent. We have showed already, and shall do more hereafter, that no Laws
can be executed till our government be mended; and if you mean we should make
such as should mend that (besides that it would be a better method to
capitulate that, before you make choice of your Prince, as wise people have
done in all ages, and the Cardinals do at Rome in the Conclave before they
choose their Pope) I say besides this, it is not to be taken for granted that
any Bills that tend to make considerable alterations in the administration,
(and such we have need of, as you will see anon) would either in that case be
offered or consented to; both Prince and People being so ready to cry out upon
Forty-one, and to be frighted with the name of a Commonwealth, even now when
we think Popery is at the door; which some people then will think farther off,
and so not care to make so great alterations to keep it out; besides the great
Men and favorites of the new Prince will think it hard that their King should
be so bounded and limited both in power and Revenue, that he shall have no
means to exercise his liberality toward them, and so may use their interest
and eloquence in both Houses to dissuade them from pressing so hard upon a
Prince who is a true zealous Protestant, and has always headed that party and
who is justly admired, if not adored by the people; and considering too that
all the power they leave him, will serve but to enable him to defend us the
better from Popery and Arbitrary power; for which latter Monarchy was first
Instituted. Thus we may exercise during a Parliament or two, love-tricks
between the Prince and his people, and imitate the hony-moon that continued for
about two years after his Majesty's Restoration till the ill management of
affairs and the new grevances that shall arise (which will be sure never to
fail till our true cure be effected, notwithstanding the care of the new King
and his Counselors) shall awaken the discontents of the people, and then they
will curse the time in which they made this election of a Prince, and the great
men for not hindering them. Then men will be reckoning up the discontents of the
Peers, sometime after they had made a rash choice of H. the 7th in the field,
who (had then no title) when they saw how he made use of the power they gave
him to lessen their greatness, and to fortify himself upon their ruins; when
it comes to this, and that the Governing party comes to be but a little
faction, the people (who never know the true cause of their distemper) will be
looking out abroad who has the Lawful title (if the next Heir be not in the
mean time with an Army of English and Strangers in the field here, as is most
likely) and look upon the Prince of Orange, or the next of kin, as their future
Savior (in case the Duke be dead in the mean time, and so the cause of all
their distrust taken away) thus most men, not only discontented persons, but
the people in general, looked upon his Majesty that now is, as their future
deliverer during our late distractions, when his condition was so weak that he
had scarce wherewithal to subsist, and his enemies powerful at home and
victorious abroad, which will not be I fear, our case. I Prophesy then (because
you will have me use this word) that if Nobles or people make any such
unfortunate choice as this during the distractions we may be in upon his
Majesty's death, we shall not only miss our cure, or have it deferred till
another Government make it; but remain in the confusion we now suffer under;
and besides, that shall be sure to feel, first or last, the calamity of a Civil
and Foreign War, and in the mean time to be in perpetual fear of it, and suffer
all the burden and charge which is necessary to provide for it, besides all the
other ill consequences of a standing Army. To conclude, I assure you in the
Faith of a Christian, that I have made this discourse solely and singly out of
zeal and affection to the Interest of my Country, and not at all with the
least intention to favor or promote the Cause or Interest of the D. of York,
or to disparage the Duke of Monmouth, from whom I never received the least
unkindness, nor ever had the honor to be in his Company; and to whom I shall
ever pay respect suitable to his high Birth and Merit.


Noble Ven. Well, Sir, your Reasoning in this point has extremely satisfied me;
and the Doctor, I suppose, was so before, as he averred; therefore pray let us
go on where we left.


Eng. Gent. I cannot take so much upon me as to be Dictator in the Method of
our Cure, since either of you is a thousand times better qualified for such an
Office, and therefore shall henceforth desire to be an Auditor.


Doct. Pray, Sir, let us not spend time in Compliments, but be pleased to
proceed in this business, and we doubt not but as you have hitherto wonderfully
delighted us, so you will gratify us in concluding it.


Eng. Gent. I see I must obey you, but pray help me, and tell me in the first
place, whether you do not both believe, that as the causa causarum of all our
Distractions is (as has been proved) the breach of our Government; so that the
immediate Causes are two: First, The great distrust on both sides between the
King and his People and Parliament; the first fearing that his Power will be so
lessened by degrees, that at length it will not be able to keep the Crown upon
his head: And the latter seeing all things in disorder, and that the Laws are
not executed (which is the second of the two Causes) fear the King intends to
change the Government, and be Arbitrary.


Noble Ven. I am a Stranger, but (though I never reflected so much upon the
Original Cause, as I have done since I heard you discourse of it) yet I ever
thought that those two were the Causes of the Unquietness of this Kingdom: I
mean the Jealousy between the King and his People, and the Inexecution of the
great Laws of Calling Parliaments Annually, and letting them sit to dispatch
their Affairs: I understand this in the time of His Majesty's Grandfather, and
Father, more than in His own Reign.


Eng. Gent. Then whoever can absolutely lay these two Causes asleep for ever,
will arrive to a perfect Cure; which I conceive no way of doing, but that the
King have a great deal more Power or a great deal less: And you know that what
goes out of the King must go into the People, and so vice versa: Insomuch that
the People must have a great deal more Power, or a great deal less: Now it is
no question, but either of these two, would rather increase their Power than
diminish it; so that if this cannot be made up by the Wisdom of this Age, we
may see in the next, that both the King will endeavor to be altogether without
a Parliament, and the Parliament to be without a King.


Doct. I begin to smell, that you would be nibbling at the pretense which some
had before his Majesty's Restoration, of a Commonwealth or Democracy.


Eng. Gent. No, I abhor the thoughts of wishing, much less endeavoring any
such thing, during these Circumstances we are now in; That is, under Oaths of
Obedience to a Lawful King. And truly if any Themistocles should make to me
such a Proposal, I should give the same Judgment concerning it, that Aristides
did in such a Case. The Story is short; After the War between the Greeks and
the Persians was ended, and Xerxes driven out of Greece, the whole Fleet of the
Grecian Confederates (except that of Athens which was gone home) lay in a great
Arsenal (such as were then in use) upon the Coast of Attica; during their abode
there, Themistocles harrangues one day the People of Athens (as was then the
Custom) and tells them, that he had a design in his head, which would be of
Infinite profit and advantage to the Commonwealth; But that it could not be
executed without the Order and Authority of them, and that it did likewise
require secrecy; and if it were declared there in the Marketplace, where
Strangers as well as Citizens might be present, it could not be concealed, and
therefore proposed it to their consideration what should be done in it: it was
at length concluded that Themistocles should propose it to Aristides, and if he
did next morning acquaint the People that he gave his approbation to it, it
should be proceeded in: Themistocles informs him that the whole Fleet of their
Confederates in the War against the Medes had betaken themselves to the great
Arsenal upon their Coast, where they might be easily fired, and then the
Athenians would remain absolute Masters of the Sea, and so give Law to all
Greece; when Aristides came the next day to deliver his Judgment to the People,
he told them that the business proposed by Themistocles, was indeed very
advantageous, and profitable to the Athenians; But withal, the most Wicked and
Villainous Attempt that ever was undertaken; upon which it was wholly laid
aside. And the same Judgment do I give, Doctor, of your Democracy at this time.
But to return to the place where I was, I do belive that this difference may
easily be terminated very fairly, and that our House need not be pulled down,
and a new one built; but may be very easily repaired, so that it may last many
hundred years.


Noble Ven. I begin to perceive that you aim at this, That the King must give
the People more Power, as Henry the Third, and King John did, or the Parliament
must give the King more, as you said they did in France in the time of Lewis
the Eleventh; or else that it will come in time to a War again.


Eng. Gent. You may please to know, that in all times hitherto, the Parliament
never demanded any thing of the King, wherein the Interest and Government of
the Kingdom was concerned (excepting Acts of Pardon) but they founded their
demands upon their Right, not only because it might seem unreasonable for them
to be earnest with him to give them that which was his own, but also because
they cannot choose but know, that all Powers which are Fundamentally and
Lawfully in the Crown, were placed there upon the first Institution of our
Government, to capacitate the Prince to Govern and Protect his People: So that
for the Parliament to seek to take from him such Authority, were to be felo de
se, as we call a self-Homicide; but as in some Distempers of the Body the Head
suffers as well as the Inferior parts, so that it is not possible for it, to
order, direct and provide for the whole Body as its Office requires, since the
Wisdom and Power which is placed there, is given by God to that end; In which
Case, though the Distemper of the Body may begin from the Disease of some other
part, or from the mass of Blood, or putrefaction of other Humors; yet since
that noble part is so affected by it, that Reason and Discourse fails,
therefore to restore this again, Remedies must be applied to, and possibly
Humors or Vapors drawn from the Head it self, that so it may be able to
Govern and Reign over the Body as it did before, or else the whole Man, like a
Slave, must be ruled and guided ab extrinseco, that is by some Keeper: So it is
now with us, in our Politic Disease, where granting (if you please) that the
Distemper does not proceed from the Head, but the Corruption of other parts,
yet in the Cure, Applications must be made to the Head as well as to the
Members, if we mean poor England shall recover its former perfect health; and
there fore it will be found, perhaps, Essential to our being, to ask something
(in the condition we now are) to which the King as yet may have a Right; and
which except he please to part with, the Phenomena of Government cannot be
salved; That is, our Laws cannot be executed; nor Magna Charta it self made
practicable; and so both Prince and People, that is, the Polity of England,
must die of this Disease, or by this Delirium must be Governed, ab extrinseco,
and fall to the Lot of some Foregin Power.


Noble Ven. But, Sir, since the business is come to this Dilemma, why may not
the King ask more Power of the Parliament, as well as they of him?


Eng. Gent. No question but our present Councillors and Courtiers would be
nibbling at that bait again, if they had another Parliament that would take
Pensions for their Votes; But in one that is come fresh from the People, and
understand their Sense and Grievances very well, I hardly believe they will
attempt it; for both Council and Parliament must needs know by this time-a-day,
that the Cause of all our Distractions coming (as has been said an hundred
times) from the King's having a greater Power already than the condition of
Property at this present can admit, without Confusion and Disorder; It is not
like to mend Matters for them to give him more, except they will deliver up to
him at the same instant their Possessions, and Right to their Lands, and become
Naturally and Politically his Slaves.


Noble Ven. Since there must be a voluntary parting with Power, I fear your
Cure will prove long and ineffectul, and we Reconcilers shall, I fear, prove
like our devout Cappuchin at Venice; this poor Man's name was Fra. Barnardino da
Vdine, and was esteemed a very holy Man, as well as an excellent Preacher,
insomuch that he was appointed to Preach the Lent Sermons in one of our
principal Churches, which he performed at the beginning with so much Eloquence,
and Applause, that the Church was daily crowded three hours before the Sermon
was to begin; the esteem and veneration this poor Friar was in, elevated his
Spirit a little too high to be contained within the bounds of reason; but
before his Delirium was perceived, he told his Auditory one day, that the true
Devotion of that People, and the care they had to come to hear his word
Preached, had been so acceptable to God and to the Virgin, that they had
vouchsafed to Inspire him with the knowledge of an Expedient, which he did not
doubt, but would make Men happy and just even in this Life, and that the Flesh
should no longer lust against the Spirit; but that he would not acquaint them
with it at that present, because something was to be done on their parts to
make them capable of this great Blessing, which was to pray zealously for a
happy Success upon his Endeavors, and to Fast, and to visit the Churches to
that end; therefore he desired them to come the Wednesday following to be made
acquainted with this blessed Expedient. You may Imagine how desirous our People
were, to hear something more of this Fifth-Monarchy; I will shorten my Story,
and tell you nothing of what crouding there was all night, and what quarrelling
for places in the Church; nor with what difficulty the Saffi, who were sent by
the Magistrate to keep the Paece, and to make way for the Preacher to get into
the Pulpit, did both; But up he got, and after a long preamable of desiring
more Prayers, and Addressing himself to our Senate to Mediate with the Pope,
that a week might be set apart for a Jubilee and Fasting three days all over
the Christian World, to storm Heaven with Masses, Prayers, Fasting and Alms to
prosper his Designs; he began to open the Matter, That the Cause of all the
Wickedness and Sin, and by Consequence of all the Miseries and Affliction which
is in the World, arising from the enmity which is between God and the Devil, by
which means God was often crossed in his Intentions of good to Mankind here,
and hereafter, the Devil by his temptations making us incapable of the Mercy
and Favor of our Creator; therefore he had a Design (with the helps before
mentioned) to mediate with Almighty God, That he would pardon the Devil, and
receive him into his Favor again after so long a time of Banishment and
Imprisonment; and not to take all his power from him, but to leave him so much
as might do good to Man, and not hurt; which he doubted not but he would employ
that way, after such reconciliation was made, which his Faith would not let him
question. You may judge what the numerous Auditory thought of this; I can only
tell you, that he had a different sort of Company at his return, from what he
had when he came, for the Men left him to the Boys, who with great Hoops
instead of Acclamations, brought him to the Gondola, which conveyed him to the
Redentor, where he lodged; And I never had the curiosity to enquire what became
of him after.


Doct. I thank you heartily for this Intermess; I see you have learnt something
in England: for, I assure you, we have been these twenty Years turning this,
and lal serious Discourses into Ridicule; but yet your Similitude is very pat;
for in every Parliament that has been in England these sixty Years, we have had
notable Contests between the Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman.


Eng. Gent. Well Sir, we have had a Michael here in our Age, who has driven out
Lucifer, and restored the true Deity to his Power: but where Omnipotency is
wanting (which differs the Frier's Case and mine) the Devil of Civil War and
Confusion may get up again, if he be not laid by prudence and Virtue, and
better Conjurers than any we have yet at Court.


Noble Ven. Well Gentlemen, I hope you have pardoned me for my Farce. But, to
be a little more serious, pray tell me how you will induce the King to give up
so much of his Right as may serve your turn? Would you have the Parliament make
War with him again?


Eng. Gent. There cannot, nor ought to be, any Change, but by his Majesty's
free Consent; for besides, that a War is to be abhorred by all Men that love
their Country, any Contest of that kind in this case ( viz. to take away the
least part of the Kings Right) could be justified by no man living. I say,
besides that, a Civil War has miscarried in our days, which was founded (at
least pretendedly) upon Defense of the People's own Rights: In which, although
they had as clear a Victory in the end, as ever any Contest upon Earth had, yet
could they never reap the least advantage in the World by it: but went from one
Tyranny to another, from Barebones Parliament, to Cromwell's Reign; from that,
to a Committee of Safety; leaving those Grave Men, who managed Affairs at the
beginning, amazed to see new Men, and new Principles Governing England. And
this induced them to Cooperate to bring things back just where they were
before the War. Therefore this Remedy will be either none, or worse than the
Disease: It not being now as it was in the Barons time, when the Lord who led
out his Men, could bring them back again when he pleased, and Rule them in the
mean time, being his Vassals. But now there is no Man of so much Credit, but
that one who behaves himself bravely in the War, shall out-vye him; and,
possibly, be able to do what he pleases with the Army and the Government: And
in this corrupt Age, it is ten to one, he will rather do Hurt than Good with
the Power he acquires. But because you ask me how we would persuade the King to
this? I answer, by the Parliament's humbly Remonstrating to His Majesty, that
it is his own Interest, Preservation, Quiet and true Greatness, to put an end
to the Distractions of his Subjects, and that it cannot be done any other way,
and to desire him to enter into debate with some Men Authorized by them, to see
if there can be any other means than what they shall offer to compose things;
if they find there may, then to embrace it, otherwise to insist upon their own
Proposals: and if in the end they cannot obtain those Requests, which they
think the only essential means to preserve their Country, then to beg their
Dismission, that they may not stay, and be partakers in the Ruin of it. Now, my
Reasons why the King will please to grant this, after the thorough discussing
of it, are two. First, Because all great Princes have ever made up Matters with
their Subjects upon such Contests, without coming to Extremities. The two
greatest, and most Valiant of our Princes, were Edward the First, and his
Grandchild Edward the Third: these had very great Demands made them by
Parliaments, and granted them all; as you may see upon the Statute-Book. Edward
the Second, and Richard the Second, on the contrary, refused all things till
they were brought to Extremity. There is a Memorable Example in the Greek Story
of Theopompus King of Sparta; whose Subjects finding the Government in disorder
for want of some Persons that might be a Check upon the great Power of the
King, proposed to him the Creation of the Ephores (Officers who made that City
so great and Famous afterward). The King finding by their Reasons (which were
unanswerable, as I think ours now are), that the whole Government of Sparta was
near its Ruin, without such a Cure; and considering that he had more to lose in
that Disorder than others, freely granted their desires; for which being
derided by his Wife, who asked him what a kind of Monarchy he would leave to
his Son? answered, a very good one, because it will be a very lasting one.
Which brings on my Second Reason, for which I believe the King will grant these
things; because he cannot any way mend himself, nor his Condition, if he do not.


Noble Ven. You have very fully convinced me of two things: First, That we have
no reason to expect or believe that the Parliament will ever increase the Kings
Power: And then, that the King cannot by any way found himself a New, and more
absolute Monarchy, except he can al^er the Condition of Property, which I think
we may take for granted to be impossible. But yet, I know not why we may not
suppose that (although he cannot establish to all Posterity such an Empire) he
may, notwithstanding, change the Government at the present; and calling
Parliaments no more, administer it by force, as it is done in France, for some
good time.


Eng. Gent. In France it has been a long Work; and although that Tyranny was
begun, as has been said, by Petition from the States themselves, not to be
assembled any more; yet the Kings since, in time of great Distraction, have
thought fit to convocate them again; as they did in the Civil Wars thrice: Once
at Orleans, and twice at Blois. I would not repeat what I have so tediously
discoursed of concerning France already, but only to entreat you to remember
that our Nation has no such poor and numerous Gentry, whlch draw better
Revenues from the King's Purse, than they can from their own Estates; all our
country people consisting of Rich Nobility and Gentry, of Wealthy Yeomen, and
of Poor Younger Brothers who have little or nothing, and can never raise their
Companies, if they should get Commissions, without their Elder Brothers
Assistance amongst his Tenants, or else with the free consent and desire of the
People, which, in this case, would hardly be afforded them. But we will suppose
there be idle People enough to make an Army, and that the King has Money enough
to Arm and Raise them: And I will grant too, to avoid tediousness (although I
do not think it possible) that the people will at the first, for fear, receive
them into their Houses, and Quarter them against. Law; nay, pay the Money which
shall be by Illegal Edicts, imposed upon the Subjects to pay them; Yet is it
possible an Army can continue any time to enslave their own Country? Can they
resist the Prayers, or the Curses of their Fathers, Brothers, Wives, Mothers,
Sisters, and of all Persons wherever they frequent? Upon this Account all the
Greek Tyrants were of very short Continuance; who being in chief Magistracy and
Credit in their Commonwealths, by means of Soldiers and Satellites, usurped the
Sovereignty. But did ever any of them, excepting Dionysius, leave it to his
Son? Who was driven out within less than a year after his Fathers death. Many
Armies of the Natives have destroyed Tyrannies: So the Decemvirate was ruined
at Rome, the Tarquins expelled before that: Our own Country has been a Stage,
even in our time, where this Tragedy has been sufficiently acted; for the Army,
after the War was done, fearing the Monarchy should be restored again, held
Councils, got Agitators; and though there were often very severe Executions
upon the Ringleaders, did at length, by their perseverance, necessitate their
Officers to join with them (having many good Headpieces of the Party to advise
them); and so broke all Treaties. And the Parliament too, adhering to a small
Party of them who consented to lay aside Kingly Government, and afterward
drove them away too, fearing they would continue to Govern in Oligarchy. I am
far from approving this way they used, in which they broke all Laws, Divine and
Humane, Political and Moral: But I urge it only to show how easily an Army of
Natives is to be deluded with the Name of Liberty, and brought to pull down any
thing which their Ringleaders tell them tends to enslaving their Country. It Is
true, this Army was afterward cheated by their General; who without their
Knowledge, much less Consent, one Morning, suddenly made himself Tyrant of his
Country. It as true, that their Reputation (not their Arms) supported him in
that State for some time; but it is certain that they did very often, and to
the last, refuse to be instrumental to levy Moneys, though for their own pay:
and so he, against his Will, was fain to call from time to time Parliamentary
Conventions. And it is most certain that he did, in the Sickness of which he
died, often complain that his Army would not go a step farther with him: and,
de facto, some Months after his death, they did dethrone his Son, and restore
the Remainder of the old Parliament, upon promise made to them in secret (by
the Demogogues of that Assembly) that a Commonwealth should be speedily framed
and settled.


Noble Ven. Sir, I am satisfied that an Army raised here on a sudden, and which
never saw an Enemy, could not be brought to act such high things for the Ruin
of their own Government; nor possibly, would be any way able to resist the Fury
and Insurrection of the people. But what say you of a Foreign Army, raised by
your King abroad, and brought over, whose Officers and Soldiers shall have no
Acquaintance or Relations amongst the people here?


Eng. Gent. All Forces of that kind must be either Auxiliaries or Mercenaries:
Auxiliaries are such as are sent by some Neighbor Prince or State, with their
own Colors, and paid by themselves: though possibly, the Prince who demands
them may furnish the Money. These usually return home again, when the occasion,
for which they were demanded, is over: But whether they do or not, if they be
not mixed and over-ballanced with Forces which depend upon the Prince who calls
them, but that the whole Weight and power lies in them, they will certainly,
first or last, seize that Country for their own Sovereign. And as for
Mercenaries, they must be raised ('it is true) with the Money of the Prince who
needs them, but by the Authority and Credit of some Great Persons who are to
Lead and Command them: And these, in all Occasions, have made their own
Commander Prince; as F. Sforza at Milan drove out by this trick the Visconti,
ancient Dukes of that State; and the Mamalukes in Egypt made themselves a
Military Commonwealth. So that the way of an Army here would either be no
Remedy at all, or one very much worse than the Disease to the Prince himself.


Noble Ven. Well Sir, I begin to be of Opinion, that any thing the King can
grant the Parliament (especially such a Parliament as this is, which consists
of Men of very great Estates, and so can have no interest to desire Troubles)
will not be so inconvenient to him, as to endeavor to break the Government by
force. But why may he not, for this time, by soothing them, and offering them
great Alliances abroad for the Interest of England, and ballancing Matters in
Europe more eaven than they have been; and, in fine, by offering them a War
with the French, to which Nation they have so great a hatred; lay them asleep,
and get good store of Money, and stave off this severe Cure you speak of, at
least, for some time longer?


Eng. Gent. There has been something of this done too lately; and there is a
Gentleman lies in the Tower, who is to answer for it. But you may please to
understand, that there is scarce any amongst the middle sort of People, much
less within the Walls of the House of Commons, who do not perfectly know, that
we can have no Alliance with any Nation in the World that will signify any
thing to them, or to our selves, till our Government be redressed and new
modelled. And therefore, though there were an Army Landed in this Island, yet
that we must begin there, before we are fit to repulse them, or defend our
selves. And the fear and sense of this People universally is, that if we should
have any War, either for our own Concerns, or for those of our Allies, whilst
Matters remain as they do at home, it would certainly come to this pass, that
either being beaten, we should subject this Kingdom to an Invasion, at a time
when we are in a very ill condition to repel it; or else, if we were
Victorious, that our Courtiers and Counselors in fragrante (or as the French
cry, d'emble), would employ that Mettle and good Fortune to try some such
Conclusions at home as we have been discoursing of. And therefore, if any War
should be undertaken without Parliament, you should see the People rejoice as
much at any disaster our Forces should receive, as they did when the Scots
seized the four Northern Counties in 1639. Or before that, when we were beaten
at the Isle of Rhee, or when we had any Loss in the last War with Holland. And
this Joy is not so unnatural as it may seem to those who do not consider the
Cause of it; which is the breach of our old Government, and the necessity our
Governors are under to make some new experiments: And the fear we are in, that
any Prosperity may make them able to try them, either with Effect, or at least
with Impunity. Which Consideration made a Court-Droll say lately to His
Majesty, (who seemed to wonder why his subjects hated the French so much); Sir,
it is because you love them, and espouse their Interest: And if you would
discover this Truth clearly, you may please to make War with the King of
France; and then you shall see, that this People will not only love them, take
their parts, and wish them Success; but will exceedingly rejoice when they are
Victorious in sinking your Ships, or defeating your Forces. And this is
sufficient to answer your Proposal for Alliances abroad, and for a War with
France. Besides this (to wind all up in a Word) it is not to be imagined, that
so good and wise a Prince as we have at this time should ever be induced (when
he comes to understand perfectly his own Condition) to let his own Interest
(granting his Power to be so, which is very false) contest with the Safety and
Preservation of his People, for which only it was given him; or that he will be
any way tenacious of such Prerogatives, as now, by a natural Revolution of
Political Circumstances, are so far from continuing useful to his Governing the
People, that they are the only Remora and Obstacle of all Government,
Settlement and Order. For His Majesty must needs know, that all Forms of
regulating Mankind under Laws were ordained by God and Man, for the Happiness
and Security of the Governed, and not for the Interest and Greatness of those
who rule; unless where there is Melior Natura in the Case. So God Governs Man
for his own Glory only, and Men Reign over Beasts for their own Use and
Service; and where an Absolute Prince rules over his own Servants whom he feeds
and pays (as we have said), or the Master of a great and numerous Family
Governs his Household; they are both bound by the Law of God and Nature, and by
their own Interest, to do them Justice, and not Insaevire or Tyranize over
them, more than the necessity of preserving their Empire and Authority requires.


Doct. But Sir, considering the difficulty which will be found in the King, and
possibly in the Parliament too, to come up to so great an alteration at the
first, and the danger that may happen by our remaining long in this unsettled
Condition, which does hourly expose us to innumerable hazards, both at home,
and from abroad; why may we not begin, and lay the Foundation now, by removing
all His Majesty's present Council by Parliament; which is no new thing, but
has been often practiced in many Kings Reigns?


Eng. Gent. First, the Council, that is, the Privy Council which you mean, is
no part of our Government, as we may have occasion to show hereafter; nor is
the King obliged by any Fundamental Law, or by any Act of Parliament to hearken
to their Advice, or so much as to ask it; and if you should make one on
purpose, besides that it would not be so effectual as what we may propose, it
would be full as hard to go down either with King or Parliament. But besides
all this, you would see some of these Counselors so nominated by Parliament,
perhaps prove honest, and then they would be forced to withdraw as some lately
did, because they found, I suppose, that till the Administration be altered, it
is impossible that their Councils can be embraced, or any thing be acted by
them which may tend to the good of their Country; those who have not so great a
sense of Honor and Integrity, will be presently corrupted by their own
Interest, whilst the Prince is left in possession of all those baits and means
to answer such Men's ectpectations: It being most certain, that if you have a
musty Vessel, and by consequence dislike the Beer which comes out of it, and
draw it out, causing the Barrel to be immediately filled with good and sound
Liquor, it is certain by experience, that both your new Drink, and all that
ever you shall put into the Cask, till it be taken in pieces, and the Pipes
shaved, and new modeled, will be full as musty, and unsavory as the first
which you found fault with.


Noble Ven. Now, Sir, I think we are at an end of our Questions, and I for my
part am convinced, that as the King cannot better himself any way by falling
out with his people at this time, so that his goodness and wisdom is such, that
he will rather choose to imitate the most glorious and generous of his
predecessors, as Edward the First, and Edward the Third, than those who were of
less worth, and more unfortunate, as Edward the Second, and Richard the Second.
And therefore we are now ready to hear what you would think fit to ask of so
excellent a Prince.


Eng. Gent. I never undertook to be so presumptuous; there is a Parliament to
sit speedily, and certainly they are the fittest every way to search into such
matters; and to anticipate their wisdom would be unreasonable, and might give
them just offense. But because all this tittle tattle may not go for nothing, I
shall presume to give you my thoughts, how the Cure must be wrought, without
descending to particulars. The Cause Immediate (as we have said) of our
Disease, is the inexecution of our Laws; and it is most true, that when that is
altered for the better, and that all our Laws are duly executed, we are in
health; for as we can never have the entire benefit of them, till our
Government is upon a right Basis; so whenever we enjoy this happiness, to have
the full benefit of those Constitutions, which were made by our Ancestors for
our safe and orderly living, our Government is upon a right Basis; therefore we
must enquire into the Cause why our Laws are not executed, and when you have
found and taken away that Cause, all is well. The Cause can be no other than
this, That the King is told, and does believe, that most of these great
Charters or Rights of the people, of which we now chiefly treat, are against
his Majesty's Interest, though this be very false (as has been said) yet we
will not dispute it at this time, but take it for granted, so that the King
having the Supreme execution of the Laws in his hand, cannot be reasonably
supposed to be willing to execute them whenever he can choose whether he will do
it or no; it being natural for every man not to do any thing against his own
Interest when he can help it; now when you have thought well what it should be
that gives the King a Liberty to choose whether any part of the Law shall be
current or no, you will find that it is the great Power the King enjoys in the
Government; when the Parliament has discovered this, they will no doubt demand
of his Majesty an abatement of his Royal Prerogative in those matters only
which concern our enjoyment of our All, that is our Lives, Liberties and
Estates, and leave his Royal Power entire and untoucht in all the other
branches of it; when this is done, we shall be as if some great Hero had
performed the adventure of dissolving the Enchantment we have been under so
many years. And all our Statutes from the highest to the lowest, from Magna
Charta to that for burying in Woollen, will be current, and we shall neither
fear the bringing in Popery, nor Arbitrary Power in the Intervals of
Parliament, neither will there be any Dissentions in them; all Causes of
Factions between the Country and Courtparty being entirely abolisht; so that
the People shall have no reason to distrust their Prince, nor he them.


Doct. You make us a fine Golden Age; but after all this, will you not be
pleased to show us a small prospect of this Canaan, or Country of rest; will
you not vouchsafe to particularize a little what Powers there are in the King,
which you would have discontinued? would you have such Prerogatives abolished,
or placed elsewhere?


Eng. Gent. There can be no Government if they be abolished. But I will not be
like a Man who refuses to sing amongst his Friends at their entreaty, because
he has an ill Voice; I will rather suffer my self to be laughed at by you in
delivering my small Judgment in this Matter, but still with this protestation,
that I do believe that an Infinity of Men better qualified than my self for
such sublime Matters, and much more the House of Commons, who represent the
Wisdom as well as the Power of this Kingdom, may find out a far better way,
than my poor parts and Capacity can suggest. The powers then which now being in
the Crown do hinder the execution of our Laws, and prevent by consequence our
happiness and settlement, are four; The absolute power of making War and peace,
Treaties and Alliances with all Nations in the World, by which means, by
Ignorant Councillors, or Wicked Ministers, many of our former Kings have made
Confederations and Wars, very contrary, and destructive to the Interest of
England, and by the unfortunate management of them, have often put the Kingdom
in great hazard of Invasion: Besides that, as long as there is a distinction
made between the Court-party and that of the Country, there will ever be a
Jealousy in the people, that those wicked Councillors (who may think they can
be safe no other way) will make Alliances with powerful Princes, in which there
may be a secret Article by which those Princes shall stipulate to assist them
with Forces upon a short warning to curb the Parliament, and possibly to change
the Government. And this apprehension in the People will be the less
unreasonable, because Oliver Cromwell (the great Pattern of some of our
Courtiers) is notoriously known to have Inserted an Article in his Treaty with
Cardinal Mazzarin, during this King of France's Minority, That he should be
assisted with ten thousand Men from France upon occasion to preserve and defend
him in his Usurped Government, against His Majesty that now is, or the People
of England, or in fine, his own Army, whose revolt he often feared. The Second
great Prerogative the King enjoys, is the sole Disposal and Ordering of the
Militia by Sea and Land, Raising Forces, Garisoning and Fortifying places,
Setting out Ships of War, so far as he can do all this without putting
Taxations upon the People; and this not only in the Intervals of Parliament,
but even during their Session; so that they cannot raise the Train-bands of the
Country or City to Guard themselves, or secure the Peace of the Kingdom. The
third point is, That it is in His Majesty's Power to Nominate and Appoint as he
pleases, and for what time he thinks fit, all the Officers of the Kingdom that
are of Trust or profit, both Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical, (as they will
be called) except where there is Jus Patronatus; These two last Powers may
furnish a Prince who will hearken to ill designing Councillors, with the means
either of Invading the Government by Force, or by his Judges and other
Creatures undermining it by Fraud; Especially by enjoying the Fourth Advantage,
which is the Laying out and Employing, as he pleases, all the Public Revenues
of the Crown or Kingdom, and that without having any regard (except he thinks
fit) to the necessity of the Navy, or any other thing that concerns the Safety
of the Public. So that all these Four great Powers, as things now stand, may
be adoperated at any time, as well to destroy and ruin the good Order and
Government of the State, as to preserve and support it, as they ought to do.


Nob. Ven. But if you divest the King of these Powers, will you have the
Parliament sit always to Govern these Matters?


Eng. Gent. Sir, I would not divest the King of them, much less would I have
the Parliament assume them, or perpetuate their Sitting: They are a Body more
fitted to make Laws, and punish the Breakers of them, than to execute them. I
would have them therefore petition His Majesty by way of Bill, that he will
please to exercise these four great Magnalia of Government, with the Consent of
four several Councils to be appointed for that end, and not otherwise; that is,
with the Consent of the Major part of them, if any of them dissent. In all
which Councils His Majesty, or who he pleases to appoint, shall preside; the
Councils to be named in Parliament; first all the number, and every Year
afterward a third part: So each Year a third part shall go out, and a Recruit
of an equal number come in: And in three Years they shall be all new, and no
Person to come into that Council, or any other of the four, till he have kept
out of any of them full three Years, being as long as he was in. And this I
learnt from your Quarantia's at Venice: and the Use is excellent; for being in
such a Circulation, and sure to have their intervals of Power, they will
neither grow so insolent as to brave their King, nor will the Prince have any
occasion to corrupt them, although he had the means to do it, which in this new
Model he cannot have. These Men in their several Councils should have no other
instructions, but to dispose of all things, and act in their several Charges,
for the Interest and Glory of England; and shall be Answerable to Parliament,
from time to time, for any malicious or advised Misdemeanor: only that Council
which manages the Public Revenue, shall (besides a very copious and Honorable
Revenue which shall be left to His Majesty's disposal for his own
Entertainment, as belongs to the Splendour and Majesty of the Government) have
Instructions to serve His Majesty (if he pleases to command them, and not
otherwise) in the regulating and ordering his Economy and Household; and if
they shall see it necessary, for extraordinary Occasions of treating Foreign
Princes and Ambassadors, or Presenting them, and the like Ostentation of
Greatness; to consent with His Majesty moderately to charge the Revenue to that
end. I verily believe that this Expedient is much more effectual than either
the Justitia of Aragon was, or the Ephores of Sparta: Who being to check the
King almost in every thing, without having any share in his Councils, or
understanding them, could not choose but make a sullen posture of Affairs;
whereas these both seem, and really are the King's Ministers, only obliged by
Parliament to act faithfully and honestly; to which, even without that, all
other Counselors are bound by Oath. As for the other Council, now called the
Privy Council, the King may still please to continue to nominate them at his
pleasure, so they act nothing in any of the Matters properly within the
Jurisdiction of these four Councils, but meddle with the Affairs of Merchants,
Plantations, Charters, and other Matters, to which the Regal Power extends.
And provided that His Majesty call none of the Persons employed in these other
four Councils during their being so, nor that this Council do any way
intermeddle with any Affairs, Criminal or Civil, which are to be decided by
Law, and do belong to the Jurisdictions of other Courts or Magistrates, they
being no established Judicatory, or Congregation, which either our Government
or Laws do take notice of (as was said before) but Persons congregated by the
King, as his Friends and faithful Subjects, to give him their Opinion in the
Execution of his Regal Office. As for Example, the King does exercise, at this
time, a Negative Voice as to Bills presented to him by the Parliament, which he
claims by Right; no Man ever said that the Privy Council had a Negative Voice;
yet former Kings did not only ask their Advice as to the passing or not passing
of such Bills, but often decided the Matter by their Votes; which, although it
be a high Presumption in them, when they venture to give him Council contrary
to what is given him by his greatest Council, yet never any of them have been
questioned for it; being looked upon as private Men, who speak according to the
best of their Cunning, and such as have no public Capacity at all. But if this
be not so, and that this Council have some Foundation in Law, and some public
Capacity, I wish in this new Settlement it may be made otherwise, and that His
Majesty please to take their Counsel in private; but summon no Persons to
appear before them; much less give them Authority to send for in Custody, or
Imprison any Subject, which may as well be done by the Judges and Magistrates;
who, if Secrecy be required, may as well be Sworn to Secrecy as these
Gentlemen; and I believe can keep Counsel as well, and give it too.


Noble Ven. But would you have none to manage State Affairs, none Imprisoned
for secret Conspiracies, and kept till they can be fully discovered? you have
made an Act here lately about Imprisonments, that every Person shall have his
Habeas Corpus, I think you call it: so that no Man, for what occasion soever,
can lie in Prison above a Night, but the Cause must be revealed, though there
be great cause for the concealing it.


Eng. Gent. This Act you mention, and a great many more which we have to the
same purpose, that is, against Illegal Imprisonments, shows that for a long
time the Power over Men's Persons has been exercised (under His Majesty) by
such as were very likely, rather to employ it ill than well; (that is) would
rather Imprison ten Men for Honorable Actions; such as standing for the
People's Rights in Parliament, refusing to pay Illegal Taxes, and the like;
than one for projecting and inventing Illegal Monopolies, or any other kind of
oppressing the People. This made first Magna Charta, then the Petition of
Right, and diverse other Acts besides this last, take that Power quite away, and
make the Law and the Judges the only Disposers of the Liberties of our Persons.
And it may be, when the Parliament shall see the Fruit of this Alteration we
are now discoursing of, and that State Affairs are in better hands, they may
think fit to provide that a Return, or Warrant of Imprisonment from one of
these Four Councils (which I suppose will have a Power of Commitment given
them, as to Persons appearing Delinquents before them) wherein it shall be
expressed, That if the Public is like to suffer or be defrauded, if the Matter
be immediately divulged; I say in this Case, the Parliament may please to make
it Lawful for the Judge to delay the Bailing of him for some small time,
because it is not to be judged, that these Councillors so chosen, and so
instructed, and to continue so small a time, will use this Power ill;
especially being accountable for any abusing of it to the next Parliament. And
I suppose the Parliament, amongst other Provisions in this behalf, will require
that there shall be a Register kept of all the Votes of these several Councils,
with the names as well of those who consented, as of such who dissented: And as
to the former part of your Question, whether I would have none to manage State
Affairs; I think there are very few State Affairs that do not concern either
Peace and War, and Treaties abroad, the management of the Arms, Militia, and
posse Comitatus at home; the management of all the Public Moneys, and the
Election of all Officers whatsoever; the other parts, of State Affairs, which
are Making and Repealing of Laws, punishing high Crimes against the State, with
Levying and Proportioning all manner of Impositions upon the People, this is
reserved to the Parliament it self; and the Execution of all Laws to the
Judges, and Magistrates; And I can think of no other Affairs of State than
these.


Doct. Do you intend that the Council for choosing Officers shall Elect them of
the King's Household, that is, his Menial Servants?


Eng. Gent. No, that were unreasonable, except any of them have any
Jurisdiction in the Kingdom, or any place or pre-eminence in Parliament annexed
to such Office; but in these things which concern the powers and Jurisdictions
of these several Councils (wherein, la guardia della laberta, as Machiavil
calls it, is now to be placed) I shall not persume to say any thing, but assure
your self, if ever it come to that, it will be very well digested in
Parliament, they being very good at contriving such Matters, and making them
practicable, as well as at performing all other Matters that concern the
Interest and greatness of the Kingdom.


Doct. I have thought that the Ephores of Sparta were an admirable Magistracy,
not only for the Interest of the People, but likewise for the preservation of
the authority of the Kings, and of their lives too; for Plutarch observes that
the Cities of Mesene and Argos had the same Government with Lacedemon, and yet
for want of erecting such an Authority as was in the Ephores, they were not
only perpetually in brolls amongst themselves, and for that reason ever beaten
by their Enemies, whereas the Spartans were always victorious, but even their
Kings were the most miserable of Men, being often called in question
Judicially, and so lost their Lives, and many of them murdered by Insurrections
of the People: And at last in both these Cities, the Kings were driven out,
their Families extirpated, the Territory new divided, and the Government turned
into a Democracy. And I ever thought that this expedient you propose (for I
have heard you discourse of it often before now) would prove a more safe, and a
more noble reformation than the Institution of the Ephores was, and that a
Prince who is a lover of his Country, who is Gracious, Wise and Just, (such a
one as it has pleased God to send us at this time) shall be ten times more
absolute when this Regulation is made, than ever he was or could be before; and
that whatsoever he proposes in any of these Councils will be received as a Law,
nay, as an Oracle: And on the other side, ill and weak Princes shall have no
possibility of corrupting Men, or doing either themselves or their People any
kind of harm or mischief: But have you done now?


Eng. Gent. No, Sir, when this Provision is made for the Execution of the Laws,
(which I think very effectual, not to say Infallible) although it is not to be
doubted, but that there will be from time to time many excellent Laws Enacted;
yet two I would have passed immediately, the one concerning the whole
Regulation of the Elections to Parliament, which we need very much, and no
doubt but it will be well done; that part of it which is necessary to go hand
in hand with our Settlement, and which indeed must be part of it, is, that a
Parliament be Elected every year at a certain day, and that without any Writ or
Summons, the People Meeting of course at the time appointed in the usual place
(as they do in Parishes at the Church-House to choose Officers) and that the
Sheriffs be there ready to preside and to certify the Election. And that the
Parliament so Chosen shall Meet at the time appointed, and Sit and Adjuorn as
their business is more or less urgent: But still setting yet a time for their
coming together again; but if there shall be a necessity (by reason of Invasion
or some other Cause) for their Assembling sooner, then the King to Call the
Counselors of these Four Councels all together, and with the consent of the
major part of them, intimate their Meeting sooner; but when the day day comes
for the Annual Meeting of Another Parliament, they must be understood to be
Dissolved in Law, without any other Ceremony, and the new one to take their
place.


Doct. I would have this considered too, and provided for, That no Election
should be made of any person who had not the majority of the Electors present
to Vote for him; so the Writ orders it, and so Reason dictates; for else, how
can he be said to represent the County, if not a fifth part have consented to
his choice, as happens sometimes, and may do oftener? for where seven or eight
stand for one vacant place, as I have know in our last Long Parliament, where
the Votes being set in Columns, he who has had most Votes, has not exceeded
four hundred of above two thousand who were present.


Noble Ven. This is a strange way; I thought you had put every Man by himself,
as we do in our Government, and as I understood they do in the House of
Commons, when there is any nomination, and then, if he has not the major part,
he is rejected.


Eng. Gent. This is very Material, and indeed Essential; but I make no doubt,
but if this Project should come in play in Parliament, this and all other
particulars (which would be both needless and tedious to discourse of here)
will be well and effectually provided for. The next Act I would have passed,
should be concerning the House of Peers, that as I take it for granted, that
there will be a Clause in the Bill concerning Elections, that no new Boroughs
shall be enabled to send Members to Parliament, except they shall be
capacitated thereunto by an Act; so it being of the same necessity as to the
Liberty of Parliament, that the Peers (who do and must enjoy both a Negative
and Deliberative Voice in all Parliamentary Transactions, except what concern
Levying of Money Originally) be exempted from depending absolutely upon the
Prince, and that therefore it be declared by Act, for the future, that no Peer
shall be made but by Act of Parliament, and then that it be Hereditary in his
Male Line.


Noble Ven. I am not yet fully satisfied how you can order your Matters
concerning this House of Peers, nor do I see how the Contests between the House
of Commons and them, can be so laid asleep but that they will arise again:
Besides the House of Commons must necessarily be extremely concerned to find
the House of Peers, which consists of private persons, though very great and
honorable ones, in an Instant dash all that they have been so long hammering
for the good of all the People of England whom they represent; were it not
better now, you are upon so great alterations, to make an Annual Elective
Senate, or at least one wherein the Members should be but for Life, and not
Hereditary.


Eng. Gent. By no means, Sir, the less change the better, and in this Case the
Metaphysical Maxim is more true than in any, viz. Entia non sunt multiplicanda
sine necessitate; for great alterations fright Men, and puzzle them, and there
is no need of it at all in this Case. I have told you before, that there is a
necessity of a Senate, and how short this Government would be without it, and
how confused in the mean time; the Roman Senate was Hereditary amongst the
Patricii, except the Censor left any of them out of the Roll during his
Magistracy, for some very great and scandalous offense; and in that case too
there was an Appeal to the People, as in all other Causes, witness the Case of
Lucius Quintius and many others. To show that there can be no need of such a
change here as you speak of, you may please to consider, that all differences
between the several parts of any Government, come upon the account of Interest;
now when this Settlement is made, the House of Peers, and the House of Commons,
can have no Interest to dissent; For as to all things of private Interest, that
is, the Rights of Peers, both during the sitting of Parliaments, and in the
Intervals, is left to their own House to judge of, as it is to the House of
Commons to judge of their own Privileges; And as for the contest of the Peers
Jurisdiction as to Appeals from Courts of Equity; Belides that I would have
that settled in the Act which should pass concerning the Lords House; I believe
it will never happen more, when the Government is upon a right Foundation; it
having been hitherto fomented by two different Parties, the Court-party
sometimes blowing up that difference to break the Session, lest some good Bills
for the People should pass, or that the King by rejecting them, might
discontent his People; to avoid which Dilemma, there needed no more, but to
procure some person to prosecute his Appeal before the Lords; some honest
Patriots afterward possibly might use the same policy which they learnt from
the Courtiers, to quash some Bill very destructive, in which they were
out-voted in the Commons House; otherwise it is so far from the Interest of the
Commons to hinder Appeals from Courts of Equity, that there is none amongst
them, but know we are almost destroyed for want of it: And when they have
considered well, and that some such Reformation as this shall take place; they
will find that it can never be placed in a more honorable and unbyas'd
Judicatory than this; And I could wish that even in the Intermission of
Parliamentary Sessions, the whole Peerage of England, as many of them as can
conveniently be in Town, may sit in their Judicial Capacities, and hear Appeals
in Equity, as well as Judge upon Writs of Error. Now as to your other
Objection (which is indeed of great weight) that the House of Commons must
needs take it ill, that the Lords should frustrate their endeavors for the
Peoples good by their Negative; If you consider one thing, the force of this
Objection will vanish; which is, That when this new Constitution shall be
admitted, the Lords cannot have any Interest or temptation to differ with the
Commons, in any thing wherein the Public good is concerned, but are obliged by
all the ties in the World, to run the same course and fortune with the Commons,
their Interest being exactly the same; so that if there be any dissenting upon
Bills between the two Houses, when each of them shall think their own Expedient
conduces most to the advantage of the Public; this difference will ever be
decided by right reason at Conferences; And the Lords may as well convince the
Commons, as be convinced by them; and these contests are and ever will be of
admirable use and benefit to the Commonwealth; the reason why it is otherwise
now, and that the House of Peers is made use of to hinder many Bills from
passing, that are supposed to be for the ease of the People, is, that the great
Counselors and Officers which sit in that House, do suggest (whether true or
false) that it is against his Majesty's Will and Interest that such an Act
should pass, whereupon it has found Obstruction; but hereafter if our expedient
take place it cannot be so, first, because our King himself cannot have any
designs going (as was proved before) which shall make it his advantage to
hinder any good intended his people, whose prosperity then will be his own. And
then because in a short time, the Peers being made by Act of Parliament, will
consist of the best Men of England both for Parts and Estates, and those who
are already made, if any of them have small Estates, the King if he had the
Interest, would not have the means to corrupt them, the Public Moneys, and the
great Offices being to be dispensed in another manner than formerly; so their
Lordships will have no Motive in the World to steer their Votes and Councils,
but their own Honor and Conscience, and the preservation and prosperity of
their Country. So that it would be both needless and unjust to pretend any
change of this kind. Besides, this alteration in the administration of our
Government being proposed to be done by the unanimous consent of King, Lords,
and Commons, and not otherwise, it would be very preposterous to believe, that
the Peers would depose themselves of their Hereditary Rights, and betake
themselves to the hopes of being Elected; it is true, they have lost the Power
they had over the Commons, but that has not been taken from them by any Law, no
more than it was given them by any; but is fallen by the course of Nature, as
has been shown at large; But though they cannot lead the Commons by their
Tenures, as formerly, yet there is no reason or color that they should lose
their Coordination, which I am sure they have by Law, and by the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government; and which is so far from being prejudicial to a
lasting Settlement (as was said) that it infinitely contributes to it, and
prevents the Confusion which would destroy it. If I should have proposed any
thing in this Discourse which should have Entrenched upon the King's Hereditary
Right, or that should have hindered the Majesty and Greatness of these Kingdoms
from being represented by his Royal Person, I should have made your Story of
the Capuchine Friar very Applicable to me.


Noble Ven. I see you have not forgiven me that Novel yet; but pray give me
leave to ask you one Question: Why do you make the Election of Great Officers,
to be by a small secret Council, that had been more proper for a Numerous
Assembly; as it is in most Commonwealths?


Eng. Gent. It is so in Democracies, and was so in Sparta, and is done by your
Great Council in Venice; but we are not making such a kind of Government, but
rectifying an ancient Monarchy, and giving the Prince some help in the
Administration of that great Branch of his Regality; besides, it is sufficient,
that our Parliament chooses these Councils, (that is always understood the Lords
and Commons, with the Kings Consent) besides, it is possible, that if such a
Regulation as this come in Debate amongst them, the Parliament will reserve to
it self the Approbation of the Great Officers, as Chancellor, Judges, General
Officers of an Army, and the like; and that such shall not have a settlement in
those Charges, till they are accordingly allowed of; but may in the mean time
exercise them. As to particulars, I shall always refer you to what the
Parliament will judge fit to Order in the Case; but if you have any thing to
Object, or to show in general, that some such Regulation as this cannot be
effectual toward the putting our Distracted Country into better Order; I shall
think my self obliged to Answer you, if you can have Patience to hear me, and
are not weary already; as you may very well be.


Noble Ven. I shall certainly never be weary of such Discourse; however I shall
give you no further trouble in this matter; for I am very fully satisfied, that
such Reformation, if it could be compassed, would not only Unite all Parties,
but make you very Flourishing at home, and very Great abroad: but have you any
hopes that such a thing will ever come into Debate? what do the Parliamentmen
say to it?


Eng. Gent. I never had any Discourse to this purpose, either with any Lord, or
Member of the Commons house, otherwise than as possibly some of these Notions
might fall in at Ordinary Conversation: For I do not intend to Entrench upon
the Office of God, to teach our Senators Wisdom. I have known some men so full
of their own Notions, that they went up and down sputtering them in every Man's
Face they met; some went to Great Men during our late troubles; nay, to the
King himself, to offer their Expedients from Revelation. Two Men I was
acquainted with, of which one had an Invention to reconcile differences in
Religion; the other had a project for a Bank of Lands to lie as a Security for
sums of Money lent; both these were Persons of Great Parts and Fancy; but yet
so troublesome at all Times, and in all Companies, that I have often been
forced to repeat an Excellent Proverb of your Country: God deliver me from a
man that has but one business; and I assure you there is no Man's Reputation
that I envy less, than I do that of such Persons; and therefore you may please
to believe that I have not imitated them in scattering these Notions, nor can I
Prophecy whether any such Apprehensions as these will ever come into the Heads
of those men who are our true Physicians. But yet to answer your Question, and
give you my Conjecture; I believe that we are not Ripe yet for any great
Reform; not only because we are a very Debauched People; I do not only mean
that we are given to Whoring, Drinking, Gaming and Idleness; but chiefly that
we have a Politic Debauch, which is a neglect of all things that concern the
public welfare, and a setting up our own private Interest against it; I say,
this is not all, for then the Polity of no Country could be Redrest: For every
Commonwealth that is out of order, has ever all these Debauches we speak of, as
Consequences of their loose State. But there are two other Considerations which
induce me to fear that our Cure is not yet near. The first is, because most of
the Wise and Grave Men of this Kingdom are very silent, and will not open their
Budget upon any terms: and although they dislike the present Condition we are
in as much as any Men, and see the Precipice it leads us to, yet will never
open their Mouths to prescribe a Cure; but being asked what they would advise,
give a shrug like your Countrymen. There was a very considerable Gentleman as
most in England, both for Birth, Parts, and Estate, who being a Member of the
Parliament that was called, 1640. continued all the War with them; and by his
Wisdom and Eloquence (which were both very great) promoted very much their
Affairs. When the Factions began between the Presbyters and Independents, he
joined Cordially with the latter, so far as to give his Affirmative to the Vote
of No Addresses; that is, to an Order made in the House of Commons, to send no
more Messages to the King, nor to receive any from him. Afterward, when an
Assault was made upon the House by the Army, and diverse of the Members taken
violently away, and Secluded; he disliking it (though he were none of them)
voluntarily absented himself, and continued retired; being exceedingly averse
to a Democratical Government, which was then declared for, till Cromwell's
Usurpation; and being infinitely courted by him, absolutely refused to accept
of any Employment under him, or to give him the least Counsel. When Cromwell
was dead, and a Parliament called by his Son, or rather by the Army, the chief
Officers of which did, from the beginning, whisper into the Ears of the Leading
Members, that if they could make an honest Government, they should be stood by
(as the Word then was) by the Army. This Gentleman, at that time, neither would
be Elected into that Parliament, nor give the least Advice to any other Person
that was; but kept himself still upon the Reserve. Insomuch that it was
generally believed, that although he had ever been opposite to the late King's
coming to the Government again, though upon Propositions; yet he might hanker
after the Restoration of His Majesty that now is. But that Apprehension
appeared groundless when it came to the pinch: for being consulted as an Oracle
by the then General Monk, whether he should restore the Monarchy again or no,
would make no Answer, nor give him the least Advice; and, de facto, has ever
since kept himself from Public Business; although, upon the Banishment of my
Lord of Clarendon, he was visited by one of the Greatest Persons in England,
and one in as much Esteem with His Majesty as any whatsoever, and desired to
accept of some great Employment near the King; which he absolutely refusing,
the same Person, not a Stranger to him, but well known by him, begged of him to
give his Advice how His Majesty (who desired nothing more than to unite all his
People together, and repair the Breaches which the Civil War had caused, now my
Lord Clarendon was gone, who by his Counsels kept those Wounds open) might
perform that Honorable and Gracious Work: but still this Gentleman made his
Excuses. And, in short, neither then, nor at any time before or after
(excepting when he sat in the Long Parliament of the Year 40.) neither during
the distracted Times, nor since His Majesty's Return, when they seemed more
reposed, would ever be brought, either by any private intimate Friend, or by
any Person in Public Employment, to give the least Judgment of our Affairs, or
the least Counsel to mend them, though he was not shye of declaring his dislike
of Matters as they went. And yet this Gentleman was not only by repute, and
esteem a wise Man, but was really so, as it appeared by his management of
business, and drawing Declarations, when he was contented to act; as also by
his exceeding prudent managing of his own Fortune, which was very great, and
his honorable Living and providing for his Family; his Daughters having been
all Married to the best Men in England; and his Eldest Son to the most
accomplished Lady in the World. I dare assure you, there are above an hundred
such Men in England, though not altogether of that eminency.


Noble Ven. Methinks these persons are altogether as bad an extreme as the
loquacious men you spoke of hefore. I remember when I went to School, our
Master, amongst other Common-places in the commendation of silence, would tell
us of a Latin saying, That a Fool whilst he held his peace did not differ from
a Wise man; but truly I think we may as truly say, That a wise man whilst he is
silent does not differ from a Fool; for how great soever his Wisdom is, it can
neither get him credit, nor otherwise advantage himself, his Friend, nor his
Country. But let me not divert you from your other point.


Eng. Gent. The next Reason I have to make me fear that such an Expedient as we
have been talking of, will not be proposed suddenly, is the great distrust the
Parliament has of men, which will make most Members shy of venturing at such
matters, which being very new, at the first motion are not perfectly
understood, at least to such as have not been versed in Authors who have
written of the Politics; and therefore the Mover may be suspected of having
been set on by the Court-party to puzzle them, and so to divert, by offering
new Expedients, some smart mettlesome Debates they may be upon concerning the
Succession to the Crown, or other high matters: For it is the nature of all
Popular Counsels (even the wisest that ever were, witness the people of Rome
and Athens, which Michiavil so much extols) in turbulent times, to like
discourses that heighten their passions, and blow up their Indignation, better
than them that endeavor to rectify their Judgments, and tend to provide for
their safety. And the truth is, our Parliament is very much to be excused, or
rather justified in this distrust they have of persons, since there has been
of late so many and so successful attempts used by the late great Ministers, to
debauch the most eminent Members of the Commons-House, by Pensions and Offices;
and therefore it would wonderfully conduce to the good of the Commonwealth,
and to the composing our disordered State, if there were men of so high and
unquestionable a Reputation, that they were above all suspicion and distrust,
and so might venture upon bold, that is (in this case) moderate Counsels, for
the saving of their Country. Such men there were in the Parliament of 1640. at
least twenty or thirty, who having stood their ground in seven Parliaments
before, which in the two last Kings Reigns had been dissolved abruptly and in
wrath, and having resisted the fear of Imprisonment and great Fines for their
love to England, as well, as the temptation of Money and Offices to betray it,
both inferred by the wicked Councillors of that Age, tending both to the ruin
of our just Rights, and the detriment of their Masters Affairs; I say, having
constantly, and with great magnanimity and honor made proof of their
Integrity, they had acquired so great a Reputation, that not only the
Parliament, but even almost the whole People stuck to them, and were swayed by
them in Actions of a much higher Nature than any are now discoursed of, without
fear of being deserted, or as we say, left in the lurch, as the people of
France often are by their Grandees, when they raise little Civil Wars to get
great Places, which as soon as they are offered, they lay down Arms, and leave
their Followers to be hanged; but although these two reasons of the silence of
some wise men, and the want of reputation in others, does give us but a sad
prospect of our Land of Promise, yet we have one Consideration, which does
encourage us to hope better things ere long. And that is the Infallible
Certainty that we cannot long Continue as we are, and that we can never
Meliorate, but by some such Principles, as we have been here all this while
discoursing of, and that without such helps and succors as may be drawn from
thence, we must go from one distraction to another, till we come into a Civil
War, and in the close of it be certainly a prey to the King of France, who (on
which side it matters not) will be a Gamester, and sweep Stakes at last; the
World not being now equally balanced between two Princes alike powerful, as it
was during our last Civil War; and if as well this danger, as the only means to
prevent it, be understood in time, (as no doubt it will) we shall be the
happiest and the greatest Nation in the World in a little time; and in the mean
time, enjoy the best and most just easy Government of any People upon Earth.
If you ask me whether I could have offered any thing that I thought better than
this, I will answer you as Solon did a Philosopher, who asked him whether he
could not have made a better Government for Athens? Yes, but that his was the
best, that the People would or could receive. And now I believe you will bear
me witness, that I have not treated you as a Wise man would have done in
silence; but it is time to put an end to this tittletattle which has nauseated
you for three days together.


Noble Ven. I hope you think better of our Judgments than so; but I believe you
may very well be weary.


Doct. I am sure the Parish Priests are often thanked for their pains, when
they have neither taken half so much as you have, nor profited their Auditory
the hundredth part so much.


Eng. Gent. The answer to Thank you for your pains, is always, Thank you, Sir,
for your patience; and so I do very humbly both of you.


Noble Ven. Pray, Sir, when do you leave the Town?


Eng. Gent. Not till you leave the Kingdom. I intend to see you, if please God,
aboard the Yacht at Gravesend.


Noble Ven. I should be ashamed to put you to that trouble.


Eng. Gent. I should be much more troubled if I should not do it; in the mean
time I take my leave of you for this time, and hope to wait on you again to
morrow. What, Doctor, you stay to Consult about the Convalescence? Adieu to you
both.


Doct. Farewell, Sir.


Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia.
FINIS.

