A TREATISE OF Consumptions: IN WHICH Their Nature, Causes and Symptoms are
briefly Explained; AND A New and Extraordinary Method by Specific Medicines is
Proposed for the Cure of Consumptions; even such as proceed from Ulcers of the
Lungs.

By Thomas Nevett, Chyrurgion.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood, and Sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and
Three Crowns at the lower end of Cheap Side, and Brabazon Aylmer at the Three
Pigeons in Cornhil. 1697.

TO THE READER.
I Remember a Remarkable Passage in some Observations upon the Bermudas
Berries, by a Dr. of Physic in the Country, addressed to the Honorable Esquire
Boil, who professes he had been for fifty years an exact Observer of the
Methodus Medendi, yet says the Dr. for my part I firmly believe, that
(Universal Evacuations being premised) the greatest Cures wrought in the World,
are by the use of Specifical Medicines. The higher the Seize of any have
been in understanding, the more freely have they acknowledged that the greatest
part of those things they did know, was the least of those things they did not
know; such men account it not shameful to renounce an Error, though never so
ancient, when persuaded thereunto by Truth and plain Demonstration: There are
other narrow Spirits (abundantly satisfied in their own knowledge) that believe
the Art of Physic has been taught by our Ancestors, in such an absolutely
perfect manner, as that nothing remains to the Industry and Diligence of
Posterity; it being too much their Humor to undervalue every Medicine that
they themselves are not Masters of, because they prefer their private Interest
to the public Good: But in the mean time where is that cordial Love to
Mankind, which is one of the Badges of true Christianity? Nay, where is the
Exercise of Reason? For how can a Man give his Opinion against a thing that he
never heard of before, or at least never experienced? I an sure, this
unjustifiable practice is the way to put a stop to all useful Knowledge and
Improvements: It is therefore expected from the Ingenious and Candid Reader,
that he should adhere to Truths Cause, by whomsoever it is pleaded, weigh every
Invention, not in the deceitful Balance of Custom, but in the just and even
Scales of Reason, approve what is agreeable, and reject what is contrary to it.

That I who am by Profession a Surgeon, should in such a polite and
inquisitive Age, adventure my thoughts in public concerning a Physical Case,
may be to some matter of admiration, and to others of severe censure;
especially such as may think I have invaded their Province. As for the latter,
I am persuaded nothing that I can say will remove their Prejudices, and for the
former, I shall only tell them, that being alaramd by some of the Symptoms
mentioned in the following Discourse, whereby I plainly perceived the
constitution of my own Body inclining to a consumptive state, I strenuously
applied my mind iq study the Nature of this Disease, and to find out, if
possible, some noble Specific Medicines, which might indeed deserve that Name,
and be able to oppose the growth of so fatal a Distemper, which has insensibly
flattered so many into the Chambers of Death. What I then labored for, and
searched after, I have since (by the Blessing of God) found, and with great
advantage experimented on my self and many others, and now think fit to
disclose for the good of all, not doubting but if a more Excellent Method and
Medicine then has hitherto been generally practiced, or prescribed, be
treasured up in the Hands of any Person whatsoever, he does more faithfully
perform the part of a just Steward, by a due Improvement, than a close
concealment of it. And on the same Account, I judge it more my Duty to Jerve my
Native Country, than mind the Clamours of Censorious Critics; not at all
questioning but in a little time, the efficacy of these Medicines will at once
bring Health to the Patient, and Reputation to their Author: And when the World
shall be convinced of the Power of these Remedies, by their Effects, I shall
think it seasonable to make them known, which many will now be apt to contemn
and neglect, until their Opinions be altered by Experience, and their
Prejudices removed by Demostration.

From my House at the Chyrurgions-Arms in Fen Churchstreet, October. 24. 1696. T.
Nevett.

A TREATISE OF Consumptions.
THe Design of this small Treatise is not to trouble the Reader with many
Divisions, or Subdivisions of Consumptions, but briefly to enquire into the
Nature and Causes of this Disease, as also to contribute my Mite, in order to
oppose its Fury, by pointing at such Specific Medicines as are most likely to
engage it with Success.

A Consumption in general, is a wasting of all the solid parts of the Body, for
want of a due Distribution or Assimilation of the Nutritious Juices.

By some Learned Men this is observed to be the Endemicall Distemper of
England; and indeed our Weekly Bills at once declare both the greatness of the
Disease, and the weakness of the Medicines wherewith its Cure has been
hitherto attempted. Besides, that which seems to justify this Observation, is
the pernicious custom of the Inhabitants of this Island, who immoderately and
unseasonably indulge their Appetites with several sorts of Meats and Drinks,
whereby the Tone of the Stomach is so vitiated, as that it cannot perfectly
ferment and volatilize the Chyle, which is commonly the internal procatartick
cause of most Distempers among us, and consequently of Consumptions from those
Distempers, from whence comes a colliquation of the Chyle in Lienteries and
Dysenteries, tormenting Colic and Iliack Pains, Hypocondriack Melancholy,
hysteric Fits, scorbutic Twitches, troublesome Catarrhs, sluggish Passage of
the Chyle through the milky Veins, scrophulous Tumors and Inflammations of the
mesenterick Glands, spasmodick Contractions or Convulsions of the Nerves,
preternatural Fermentation of the Blood and Spirits, Cachexys, Atrophys,
Obstructions, Fevers Hectical, inflammatory and putrid, Exulcerations of the
Lungs and Marasmus, with many other Diseases, whence come they Originally and
for the most part, but from the Weakness, Ill Habit and Indisposition of the
Stomach?

Now the proper Action of the Stomach is Chylification; for though the Meat we
take into our Mouths receives some alteration there in Mastication, by the
fermenting Juice that flows from the salivatory Glands, together with the
acrimonious Particles, and fermentaceous Spirits of Liquors which we drink, yet
it is not turned into a thick white Juice, till it has passed down through the
Oesophagus, or Gullet, into the Stomach, where by the help of its Fibers it is
closely embraced, and mixed with specific fermentaceous Juices, separated by
its inner Coat, and impregnated by the Saliva, then by a convenient Heat there
is made a mixture of all; for that the fermentaceous Particles entering into
the Pores of the Meat, do pass through, agitate and eliquate its Particles,
dissolving the whole Compages, in which the purer parts were intimately united
with the Crass, and making them more fluid, so that they make another form of
Mixture, and unite among themselves into the resemblance of a Milky Cream,
after which together with the thicker Mass with which they are yet involved, by
the Constriction of the Stomach they pass down to the Guts, where by the
Mixture of the Bile and Pancreatick Juice they are by another manner of
Fermentation quite separated from the thicker Mass, and so are received by the
Lacteal Vessels, as the thicker is ejected by stool.

After the purer part of the Chyle has been thus strained thorough the narrow
and oblique Pores of the Milky Veins, by the continual and peristaltick motion
of the Intestines, it is yet further attenuated and diluted with a very thin
and clear Lympha from the Glands of the Mesentery to expedite its passage
through those Numerous Meanders into the common Receptacle, from whence by the
constant supply of such like Lympha from the small Glands of the Thorax, it is
safely conveyed through the Ductus Chyliferus Thoracicus, subclavian Vein, and
the Vena Cava into the Heart.

The Chyle now mingled with the Blood, passes with it through the Arterys of
the whole Body, and returns again with the Blood by the Veins to the Heart,
undergoing many Circulations before it can be Assimilated to the Blood; for
every time the new infused Chyle passes through the Heart with the Blood, the
Particles of the one are more intimately mixed with those of the other, in its
Ventricles, and the Vital Spirit, and other active Principles of the Blood work
upon the Chyle, which being full of Salt, Sulphur and Spirit, as soon as its
Compages is loosned by its Fermentation with the Blood, the Principles having
obtained the Liberty of Motion, do readily associate themselves, and are
Assimilated with such parts of the Blood as are of a like and suitable Nature.

After the Chyle has been thus Elaborated, it becomes fit as well to recruit
the Mass of Blood, as to Nourish the whole Body, seeing it consists of diverse
Principles and Parts of a different Nature, therefore according to the various
Use and Necessity of every Part, and also that it may conform and fashion it
self to the different Pores and Passages, so it is severally appropriated, the
most volatile and subtle part is separated in the Brain, and adapted to refresh
the Animal Spirits, the Glutinous to nourish the Body, and the Sulphurous to
revive the Native Heat: And in its passage with the Blood through all the parts
of the body, all the mass of Chyle that is capable of being turned into Blood
is sanguified, the serous and saline part precipitated by the Kidneys, and
evacuated by Sweats or insensible Transpiration, the Bilious is deposited in
the Liver, and the rest of its Excrements retire to the several Emunctorys of
the Body.

Thus it comes to pass by the wonderful Sagacity of Nature, such extraordinary
Provision is made, that the purer part of the Chyle by these ways and means is
more purified; and when it is thus purified and sublimed, it is more capable of
reinforcing the Blood and Spirits, as also of corroborating the Tone of every
particular Part: Whereas when the Chyle is sour and dispirited, the blood
necessarily becomes vappid, the Animal Spirits that reside in the System of the
Nerves are infected with a Morbid Disposition, and all parts of the Body begin
to flag and waste. For indeed there is no other way to recruit the daily
Expense of Blood and Spirits, but by a continual Influx of laudable Chyle into
the blood vessels, which Chyle is made by the Fermentative Juice of the
Stomach, and this Fermentative Juice supplied from the Mass of Blood, so that
there plainly appears to be a fixed Correspondence betwixt the Blood and Chyle,
and a necessary Dependence all the Humors in the Habit of the Body have on the
Stomach; from whence it is reasonable to infer, That if the Chylifying Faculty
of the stomach be depraved, the Blood and Humors must necessarily sympathize
therewith, and in a manner proportionable to the Distemper of this part.

The immediate Cause of a Consumption of the Lungs is store of sharp,
malignant, waterish Humors, continually distilling upon the soft spongy
Substance of the Lungs, stuffing, inflaming, impostumating, and exulcerating
them, whereby their Action, which is Respiration, or a receiving in and driving
forth Air is depraved, as will more clearly appear by the following Description
of these Parts. It may not be impertinent to our Discourse if we should usher
in the Description of the Lungs, with a short account of the Trachea, Aspera
Arteria, or Windpipe.

The Trachea or Aspera Arteria is a long Pipe, consisting of Cartilages and
Membranes, which beginning at the Throat or lower part of the Jaws, and lying
upon the Gullet, descends into the Lungs, through which it spreads into many
Branchings, and is commonly divided into two parts, the Larynx and Bronchus;
the Larynx is the upper part of the Windpipe, the Bronchus is all the Trachea
besides the Larynx, as well before as after it arrives at the Lungs.

The Substance of the Lungs is soft, spongy and rare, curiously compacted of
most thin and fine Membranes, continued with the Ramifications of the Trachea
or Windpipe, which Membranes compose an infinite number of little, round and
hollow Vesicles, or Bladders, so placed as that there is an open Passage from
the Branches of the Aspera Arteria, out of one into another, and all terminate
at the outer Membrane that investeth the whole Lungs: These little Bladders by
help of their muscular Fibers contract themselves in Expiration, and are
dilated in Inspiration, partly by the pressure of the Atmosphere, and partly by
the Elastick power of the Air, insinuating it self into these Vesicles through
the Windpipe and its several branches: Their Lobes are two, the right and
left, parted by the Mediastinum, each of which is divided into many lesser
Lobules, according to the Ramifications of the Aspera Arteria; they have all
sorts of Vessels that are common to them with other parts, as Arterys, Veins,
Nerves, Lympheducts, but peculiar to themselves they have their Bronchia, or
the Branches of the Windpipe, for bringing in and carrying forth Air so
necessary to Life, that we cannot Live without it: And when we consider their
admirable Structure, (as well as the structure of every individual part of our
Body) how ought we to Adore the infinite Wisdom of our Creator! Now when these
small Vesicles or Bladders are repleat with Extravasated Serum, or purulent
Matter, the Natural Tone of the Lungs is so weakened, that we cannot enjoy the
Benefit of free and full Respiration, hard, scirrhous Tumors or Tubercles are
bred, attended with a dry and troublesome Cough, Oppression of the Breast,
difficult and short Breathing, preternatural Heats, Exulcerations, and other
deplorable Symptoms, according to the Degrees of Obstruction, and different
Nature of the included Humors.

The External Procatartick Cause of a Consumption of the Lungs is cold
Particles of Air, constipating the Pores of the Body, whereby the Serum which
ought to expedite the Motion, and temperate the Heat of the Blood is separated
from it, and thrown upon the Glands of the Larynx, and the spongy substance of
the Lungs themselves: For as the Lympha furthers the Motion of the Chyle, so
the Serum accelerates the Circulation of the Blood, being carried about with it
through the smallest Capillary Vessels and remotest parts of the Body, least it
should be inflamed with a burning Heat, or stagnate by excessive thickness;
during which circular motion they are both called by the same common Name, but
when some Portion of Serum is separated from the mass of blood, and retreats to
some one or more of the Emunctorys, according to their various Dispositions, it
derives a Name from those particular Parts on which it seizes, as when it
distills upon the Eyes, we call it Opthalmia, when upon the Nose Coryza, and
when upon the Thorax it goes by the proper Name of a Catarrh.

Now for as much as there is nothing makes a Separation of the blood more
commonly than the want of usual Transpiration, so nothing more conduces to the
Preservation of Health, than that the Pores of the Body should continually let
forth the hot Steams and Vapors that arise from the Ebullition of the blood;
but when after taking Cold the Skin and Habit of the body are on a sudden
stopped up, that the sulphurous and waterish Excrements of the blood cannot
pass through the Pores, they are again resorbed into the Mass of Blood, from
whence proceeds a Feverish Disposition; and unless they are carried off by
Stool, or precipitated by the Kidneys, are sometimes translated to the
Glandulous Parts of the Lungs, where by Degrees contracting more and more Heat
and Sharpness they inflame and exulcerate these tender parts.

Nevertheless though a Consumption of the Lungs is sometimes thus caused by
taking Cold, yet this comes to pass but seldom, unless in such Bodies whose mass
of blood being rendered Cachectick, through frequent Influxes of dispirited
Chyle, is predisposed to receive, and unable to free it self from this New
Influx of Catarrhous rheum: For suppose two Persons in like manner deprived of
the benefit of usual Transpiration, by some great Cold, which though
troublesome in the beginning, because of a violent and continual Distillation
of Extravasated Serum upon the Glandulous Coat of the Windpipe, and other
adjacent Glands, yet in the one of these it survives not the accidental
Feverish Disposition of the Blood, occasioned by the stoppage of the Pores:
For as soon as the Ferment cease, the separated humors, partly for want of a
new Influx of Serum, and partly by the Natural Heat of these parts, are
concocted into a thick sort of Phlegm, and coughed up; after the Expectoration
of which separated Serum the Glandulous parts presently recover their Natural
Tone, without any Remains of a Tumor, Cough, Shortness of Breath, or other
Inconvenience; but in the other this Feverish Ferment, occasioned by taking
Cold, is not transitory, but so Habitually fixed by means of some previous
Indisposition, as to increase the Effervescence and colliquation of the Blood
and Spirits; from whence all the Glands which are seated in the upper part of
the Larynx, as also the Glandulous Coat of the Windpipe it self are overflown
with a Deluge of hot distempered Humors, the substance of the Lungs distended
with hard Tumors, the Branches of the Windpipe comprest, and the Windpipe it
self from these Swellings irritated to Cough, by a continual tickling, which
promotes a frequent spewing out of hot sharp Humors all along the Aspera
Arteria, till at length these Tubercles growing very large, begin to inflame
and suppurate; immediately upon the breaking or opening of those Apostemes,
sometimes such a flood of corrupted Matter is poured out of their Baggs or
Cavitys, into the Branches of the Trachea, as completely suffocates and choaks
the Patient; but at other times this Purulent Matter, mixed with streaks of
Blood, and some thin Phlegm that is continually discharged from the Glandulous
Coat of the Windpipe, is coughed up by degrees, and then this deplorable Case
requires Specific Medicines, to cleanse and heal these Ulcers.

Such kind of Consumptions whose Original is store of malignant acrimonious
Humors, which are most apt to inflame and putrify, may be termed Acute, when
compared to others that proceed from Humors more mild and benign. There may be
likewise some difference made by omitting Bleeding, and committing some
egregious Errors in Diet, Exercise, Passions of the Mind, or any other of the
Non-Naturals: However, all Consumptions of the Lungs ought to be reckoned in
the number of Chronical Distempers, because they are contracted and augmented
by degrees, and no other way to be remedied; yet this does not prove them
incurable in their own Nature, for Reason and Experience both teach the
contrary: And indeed I must confess, it was from the marvelous Success of these
Remedies that I first imbibed this Notion, viz. Ulcers of the Lungs are in
themselves curable. Sometimes a Fever or other Acute Distemper may be
jugulated, when either Nature or Art carrys off the Morbifick Matter by a
sudden Crisis or plentiful Evacuation, but all hopes of dispatching a
confirmed Consumption of the Lungs instantly are groundless seeing many
inveterate Obstructions must be removed, abundance of tough glutinous Humous
attenuated and evacuated, the whole Mass of Blood and Spirits rectified, the
Habit of the Body meliorated, and the Tone of Several parts recovered, before
we can eradicate this fixed Distemper.

What will be the Issue and Result of this Consumptive Disease, may rationally
be prognosticated from its several Stages or Degrees: For when the Mass of
Blood by a continual Influx of sour dispirited Chyle is reduced to a sharp and
Hectical state, and the Serum which is separated from this corrupted Blood only
stuffs the Bladders and Glandules which are dispersed through the body of the
Lungs, this Distemper may be said to be in its Infancy or beginning, (and if
sovereign Remedies were then presented, they might obtain an easy Conquest)
but the increase is attended with a greater Distention of the Glands and
Bladders, as also an Inflammation of these Tubercles tending to suppuration:
For when the Animal Spirits which are necessary to the Natural Fermentation of
the Blood are vitiated with unwholesome Particles of a Foggy and thick Air, and
the Humor which for a long time has been contained in the Baggs or Cavitys of
the Lungs is overheated by some extraordinary Ebullition or Fermentation of the
Blood, with a total suppression of Expectoration, the Cough becomes more
violent, the Fever inflammatory, and all parts more tabid. In its further
progress or state all Symptoms advance apace toward their Extremity,
Suppuration now succeeds the Inflammation of these Tubercles, for that the
Purulent Matter is either breeding or already made, the Inflammatory Hectic is
changed into a putrid Intermitting Fever, attended with an Universal
Colliquation of the Nutritious Juices and plentiful Separation of them from the
Mass of Blood by all ways of Evacuation that Nature affords; whence the
Patients strength suddenly decays, and in a short time he is reduced to the
highest state of a Marasmus, with an Hippocratick Face.

Thus having demonstrated to the meanest Capacity the greatness of this
prevailing Evil, with its efficient and material Causes, Reason it self
presently suggests nothing less than great and noble Medicines can tame a
Distemper so formidable. It is no less obvious to the Understanding of every
one that professes any thing of Physic, that the sooner the Cure is begun the
better, the more moderate the Patient is in the use of the six Non-Naturals,
the more likely to succeed; the Spring time is the best Season, Universals are
to be premised, Extraordinary Symptoms and Circumstances peculiarly attended,
and such like things must run through the whole Course of Practice.

No doubt but the Chalibeate Mineral Waters when impregnated with the Volatile
Salts and Spirits of a serene Air, pleasant Society, delightful Recreations,
Morning and Evening Walks, regular Diet, Freedom from Business, vexatious
Thoughts, and the rest may be serviceable: But if the Jesuit were sentenced to
perpetual Exile, I think the Consumptive have no reason excessively to lament,
for I can tell them who has a Febrifuge Antihectical, without a Grain of the
Jesuit, more excellent far than the Peruvian Bark, because it makes a safe, not
a treacherous Peace, and can give a Reason of its working so stupendiously,
though they that know not how a thing can be done, think it impossible to be
done.

For my part, I do not believe any Medicine can work a Cure in the way of a
Charm, yet they that either know or use no other (at least for the most part)
than ordinary Medicines, cannot conceive how such wonderful Effects can be
wrought, unless by Enchantment.

The common Method of Cure is by Phlebotomy, or Opening a Vein, to abate the
Effervescence or Colliquation of the Blood, and prevent the Tumor and
Inflammation of the Lungs, by Vomits to relieve the Stomach oppressed with store
of ill Humors, and remove diverse Obstructions of several Bowels and small
Vessels, by Stomach-Purges gently to carry down the peccant Humors; and lastly
by Diuretics and Diaphoreticks with some mixture of an Opiate, plentifully to
carry off the Colliquated Serum by Urine, or the Pores of the Skin, without
raising a fresh Catarrh by a new Commotion of the Blood. After a due
Administration of these universal Evacuations, (which in their respective
seasons are highly necessary) the frequent Use of Pectoral Apozems and
Pulmonary Linctusses is next enjoined, to retund the Acrimony of the Humors
that Ouze out by the Windpipe, by their mucilaginous and incrassating quality,
and so mitigate the troublesome Cough. How far serviceable to this end and
purpose the neatest Forms of such Dispensations that I ever yet saw may be, I Will
not dispute, only this I must take leave to say, because to me (as also to the
unprejudiced I humbly conceive) it seems evident, that such fulsome Ingredients
of which they are compounded, are more apt to spoil a weak than recover a lost
Stomach, and consequently not the fittest Medicines Consumptive Persons may
have recourse unto: For how many by woeful Experience have found the constant
and frequent use of such Antistomachicks lead them from one Degree of this
Malady to another, 'till their decaying Appetite has been quite overthrown,
(and consequently their Hectic Heat inflamed) their Bodies so emaciated, as to
render them incapable of necessary Evacuations, and they themselves at last
given over to a Milk Diet, Asses Milk, some Chalibeate Mineral Waters, or such
like Liquids, to which the poor distressed Stomach Ecchos aloud, Miserable
Comforters all! If therefore I can, as I have Reason to believe, with Medicines
less offensive in Quantity, and more useful in Quality, restore the lost
Appetite, and do the same, if not greater Service toward the Concocting and
Expectorating that load of separated Serum with which the Pipes of the Lungs
are stuffed, (which will easily be perceived by the Patient in a few Weeks,
with due Care and Management) I think I have gained a great Point, for as much
as the Recovery of the Stomach may reasonably be looked upon as an Earnest of
the Cure.

The Medicines I do here recommend to my Contrymen as Specificks in the Cure
of Consumptions of the Lungs, arising from the forementioned Causes, have a
peculiar Faculty of warming, comforting and strengthening weak Stomachs,
attenuating and gently carrying off that load of Tartareous Matter which is
lodged in their rugous Coat, depraving both Appetite and Digestion. In their
Passage through the whole circumference of the Guts, they likewise dissolve
that crusted Slime and Filth which hinders the Pressure of the Chyle into the
Milky Vessels by the Peristaltick motion of their Spiral Fibers: Thus having
removed these Fundamental Obstructions, they hasten together with the Chylous
Mixture, which by this time is somewhat Invigorated toward the Relief of the
Sanguineous Mass, presently upon their Conjunction the Blood revives, and by
degrees becomes brisk and vigorous, able to cope with, and give some check to
the preternatural Hectic Heat, stop the Influx of Rheum into the Glandulous
Substance of the Lungs, concoct that which is already collected, and release
the Animal Spirits, entangled with a vicious disposition of the Nervous Juice.
Having gained these Advantages, things begin to look with another manner of
Aspect, the Habit of the Body grows firmer, the Mind chearfuller, the
Countenance fresh and brisk, the Emaciated Parts gather Flesh and Strength, the
Lungs and Glands of the Larynx recover their natural Tone, and the whole
Constitution improves toward a State of Health. Moreover, These Antiphthisicks
are really impregnated with such Volatile Spirits and Salts, that like unto
Lightning they penetrate the remotest Corners of the Body, exterminating the
very Seeds and Roots of this grievous Disease, powerfully and effectually, yet
pleasantly and securely, if plentifully taken in the manner of a Diet: For thus
in time they cheer up the drooping Animal Spirits, fortify the System of the
Nerves, and so influence the whole Sanguineous Mass, as that the Blood it self
becomes the most precious of all Natural Balsoms, marvellously cleansing the
putrid Ulcers of the Lungs, and finally reducing them to a perfect Cicatrix.

Wherefore let none be deceived by the flattering Nature of this Distemper in
the beginning, nor give themselves over for lost in the highest state, because
these reviving Cordials are calculated for the weakest Constitutions, seeing at
the same time they offend the Diseased Matter with the one hand; they support
Nature from sinking under any Evacuations with the other. It is therefore my
Advice to the Consumptive, or consumptively inclined, and their Interest (by
way of Prevention) to acquaint themselves in time with these Sovereign
Antidotes. Better Counsel I cannot give to the best of my Friends, if they are
desirous to save themselves a great deal of Pain and Misery, as well as
Charges, and render their Lives comfortable to themselves and serviceable to
others.

The Warmness of these Medicines, which is the only Objection that ever I met
with in the use of them, is so far from being a real Discouragement, as that
upon serious and judicious Considerations it becomes a Notable Argument to
enforce the taking of them, for otherwise they would be too weak to engage the
Original Cause of Hectic, burning and Putrid Fevers; whereas by this active
Principle of Heat, they work so effectually upon the whole mass of Chyle, as to
separate the sharp and dispirited from the Nutritious Particles thereof,
thoroughly insinuate themselves into all the Avenues of the Adversary, cut and
divide the tough viscous Humors that distemper the Veins, Arteries and Nerves,
destroy the Acidity of the Nervous Juice, recover the Natural Temper of the
Animal Spirits, sweeten the mass of Blood, by separating the Impurities thereof
by the Cutaneous Glands, gently forcing a Transpiration of the Feverish
Particles of the whole, and so banish that Preternatural Heat which is Proof to
all common Remedies. And that Diseases which carry in their outward appearance
a show of preternatural Heat are thus to be treated with warm Medicines, is
indeed observable to every discerning Eye: For the most malignant Fevers are
attackt and conquered by the briskest and warmest Alexipharmacks and the most
violent Erysipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire, is discussed and breathed out by
strong and Spirituous Fomentations, but are both of them exasperated by
refrigerating or cooling Medicines, and their preternatural Heat more and more
increased, till the one at length terminates in the cold sweats of Death, and
the other in a complete Mortification.

To multiply Instances of this kind is remote from my intended brevity,
therefore take this remarkable one for all: The Wife of Mr. Fowls, who belongs
to the Mint in the Tower of London, in the beginning of November, 1695. sent
for me to open a Vein; after a lamentable Complaint that she was nothing the
better, but the worse for all the Physic she had taken: I took leave, wishing
her to Exercise Patience, and continue in the use of those things the Dr. had
prescribed; though I also told her, if she found no Benefit, I would do her all
the Service I could, if she sent for me: About the middle of January following
she did send for me again, and told me Dr. H. her Physician, and Mr. W.
Apothecary, had given her over, therefore desired some Assistance, according to
my Promise: I found her in a very low Condition, under a Hectic Fever,
troublesome Cough, tedious Asthma, Colliquative Looseness, with a Complication
of Convulsive and Epileptick Fits, (of which she had sometimes to the Number of
Eighteen or Twenty in a day) Total Deprivation of Appetite, having for some
Months together received no other sustenance from Food, than what a Glass of
Sack with a Toast afforded, whereby all the Parts of her Body were wasted and
consumed to the highest degree of a Marasmus that ever I saw, resembling a
walking Ghost, or a perfect Skeleton, invested with nothing but Skin. For my
part I was not very forward to do any thing, fearing a few days would put a
period to her Life; neither indeed was the Season any ways inviting: However,
the good Opinion she was pleased to entertain of my Endeavors, encouraged me
more than I could her, and with the Blessing of God on both Method and
Medicines, without any assistance from the Bark or Mineral Waters, she was
quite freed from her Hecticd Heat, her Fits abated almost every day, her
Stomach returned, her Bones wire clothed with Flesh, and her Strength so far
recruited, as that she was able to walk several Miles together without a
Supporter, though she could not exchange the unwholesome, foggy, Tower Air, (at
this time more than ordinarily polluted with store of nasty black Particles,
from the smoke of Coals) for the fresh clear Country Breezes, till the latter
end of Summer. Before and since this prosperous Event I have given these
Remedies to others, and taken them my self several hundreds of times, and have
always found then Operations in offensive, for the most part successful, and
sometimes wonderful.

FINIS.

