Some REASONS for Annual Parliaments, in a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Have received yours, and find that you think that imperfect representations
of our Affairs, are the occasion that so many in your parts, who wish well to
the present Government, suspect that it is too tottering, and unsteady; but
with great grief of mind I must assure you, that the Thinking Men about this
Town, have as melancholy a prospect, of those Affairs: For since we see so
little is done for so great Taxes, we don't only deplore the successes against
us in Flanders, but expect great uneasiness at home; and we fear the King is
not fallen into right hands, and right measures to support his Throne, You know
me too tender of the Honor of the present Establishment, to imagine I will
expose the failures of it. But since you so earnestly entreat me to offer at
some Remedies, if I think our Circumstances require them, I shall not deny to
satisfy so good a Friend, in so just a Request, I think our Case calls for
schemes from every hand. I fear some Men about the King have false Notions
concerning Government it self; and that is an Error in the first Concoction. I
will not write too pointedly; but without accusing any body, am willing as far
as the brevity of a Letter will permit, to demonstrate, that a Limited is
preferable to a Despotick Monarchy. I believe it more suitable to the ends and
design of Government, more conducive to the safety and glory of the Prince, as
well as better calculated for the peace and happiness of the subject. I need
not use any other Arguments to prove this Assertion, than Quotations out of
History; where we shall find, that violent Convulsions, sudden and bloody
Revolutions, deplorable and desolating Civil Wars, do more frequently attend
the Despotick, than any other form of Government. The desire of Liberty is born
with Mankind, and the love of it so deeply ingrafted in our Hearts, that in all
Ages, and Nations of the Universe, it has given plain and evident discoveries,
how impossible it is to destroy it. The more vigorous the Efforts of Despotick
Monarchs and Governments have been to efface it, the more frequent and bloody
sacrifices have been offered by the People, for its Establishment; and more and
stranger Instances can be given of what is here asserted under a Despotick,
than under any other Form of Government. The frequent Rebellions, and repeated
Murders, committed upon the Persons of the Roman Emperors, after that
Government became Absolute: The deposing and massacring of so many of the
Gothish Kings in Spain and Italy; the innumerable Insurrections and bloody
Revenges upon the Persons of their Kings, practiced by the Subjects of those
Despotick Monarchs in Asia and Afric, in all Ages, and at this day in the
Empires of Turkey, and Persia, Mogul, Fez, Morocco, and Muscovy, are plain and
evident Proofs, of what is alleged, and may give a just distaste to every wise
and prudent Prince of a Government, which is always under the cruel
Circumstances, either of devouring their Subjects, or of being pulled in pieces
by them. Whoever will look into the Records of those Countries which I have
mentioned, will draw in his own mind too ugly and too ghastly an Image of
Absolute Power, to be in love with such an hideous Monster. I am not willing to
tax any man with so unnatural a Lust, but in Policy as well as Religion,
Princes and their Ministers should avoid all appearance of Evil; they should
not give the People the least umbrage to suspect so Fatal a Project is hatching
against their Liberties: Our Government has more than ordinary need to ward off
all occasions of Jealousy: For however unwilling some are to own Election to
be King William's Title, I hope no body dares affirm we were Conquered; and I
am sure he has not the Crown by the Jus Divinum, right of Lineship; and if his
Title is Election, I am as sure an elective Government has as much need of the
Peoples Love to continue it, as it had at first need of their Affections to
make it: And therefore without all question, a man cannot express his Love to
this Government more effectually, than by pointing out what are the true and
genuine Methods to conserve the esteem of all the honest and well-affected
Subjects. And two things present themselves to my thoughts, which I humbly
recommend to the Consideration of the present Parliament, His Majesty, and all
the People of England.

The First is Annual Parliaments. I suppose no body has forgot that at the
beginning of the Revolution, in the Act which was made for declaring the Rights
of the Subject, after the Grievances reckoned up, it says, that for redress of
all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening and preserving of the Law,
Parliaments ought to be held frequently, which must mean frequent Parliaments;
and not frequent Sessions of the same Parliament; or our Constitution is but
little amended by that Act. Our Ancestors understood the necessity and wisdom
of having frequent Parliaments, Alfred as you may see in the Mirror of
Justice, Chap. 1. Sect. 3. Ordained, That the Parliament should meet every year
twice, or oftener if need were. There are many Statutes in Edward the Thirds
time, that a Parliament shall be held once a year, and oftener if need be. That
Act is no less than three times reiterated in his Reign. Acts of the same
import are made in Richard the Seconds; and these Acts were made when
Prorogations, and long Continuances of the same Parliaments were not in Use.
Henry Sixths Reign was the first in which Prorogations began at all to be made
for any time, and they were but very little used till Henry the Eighths time.
But the usual way formerly was to call a Parliament, at least once a year, and
as soon as their business was done, to dissolve them. They adjourned themselves
for some short time, but the King did not prorogue at pleasure. That this was
the constant practice I appeal to the Parliament Rolls; but I don't so much
dote upon Antiquity, as to desire to revive that practice, unless I can prove
it reasonable and advantageous. I think it is very much so in the present
juncture. It cannot be unknown to King William, how much he has been Libelled,
because so many of his Officers are in the House. Those that wish him ill, have
hit the Blot: But it has disgraced him with those that wish him well. It is fit
the King should choose whomsoever he thinks fit to serve him in his
Employments; but it will be matter of scandal if the People think their
representatives are bought off, Whether by Places or Pensions. But if they are
chosen Annually, it will not easily be believed that an unfair Bargain can be
struck with them. Our Taxes will be less heavy whilst we think our
Representative Assessors pay their Proportion. How just the Clamours and
Suspicions of Mankind are, I don't determine, but I know they are great, and by
every body, and every where believed, and that by this course they would be
avoided; if the Accusations are well grounded, if Votes are purchased by
Places, or most of the Members are more than Ten times Re imbursed their own
shares of the public payments; then indeed the safety, and very being of the
Constitution is struck at, our Fundamentals are debauched, Our House of Commons
is become a Parliament of Paris, to do as the Court would have them: And
nothing but what they direct; Scotch Lords of the Articles are, as it were, by
a Court-Cabal introduced; and Membership instead of being a Deputation from the
People, is become a Preferment for life under the King. But whatever the
Malicious say, I am not willing to believe these things. But I am willing that
it should be made apparent for the future in every Parliament, that sits, That
there is no likelihood that it is Debauched, and that will be made apparent by
Annual Parliaments. But to lay aside the peculiarity of our present case; let
me treat of it under a General Consideration. And I will endeavor to show the
Expediency of Annual Parliaments; and that I shall endeavor to make good by
the nature of Parliaments, and of their Delegations, by which it appears that
the Members are Delegated by their Electors, to supply their places, in
Advising, Treating, Consulting, and Determining upon the Great and Important
Affairs of the Nation, which appear and are upon the Stage, in that juncture
wherein the Parliament is summoned. When such a Parliament is continued long
(...) answers the present Occasion for (...) were summoned, great
Inconveniences (...), and unlikely to follow. A man may be (...) represent me
in one juncture, whom I might very reasonably judge unfit to do (...) in
another. A man may be qualified, to Advise, Consult, and Determine about the
Improvement of Trade, and the Manufactures of the Nation; and yet may be unfit
to offer Advice in the great Affairs of Peace and War. A man may have knowledge
enough to act in such matters, who may want integrity, faithfully to represent,
and procure redress for Grievances, which will be springing up in any
Government. When Parliaments are Annually chosen, we can choose our
Representatives, with an Eye to the present Circumstances of Affairs, and the
present Exigencies of the Nation: But when the same Parliaments are continued
upon us, we are put upon the unreasonable Task of Prophetically choosing men
fit to represent Us amidst the unforeseen and unexpected Accidents, and Affairs
which may sall in, so long as the Prince and his Ministers thinks sit to
continue the Parliament then summoned. Besides, when the business of the Nation
has been, as it were Monopolized for many years, then whenever we have the
Opportunity of Electing a new Parliament, we are put (...) on the same
necessity of choosing a Kna^^ Skil^^^n the Rules of the House and Parliamentary
Laws, as we are sometimes in private matters of chosing (...) that is expert in
Pleadings, and the methods of the common Law, though we are not satisfied of
his moral honesty; whereas if every body had their turn, in a little time, all
the principal Freeholders would be instructed, and directed in the interest of
their Country.

Again, delegation imports in its own nature a power in the person, or persons,
who delegate, to revoke it at his or their pleasure, and can be continued no
longer, than during the time, and particular occasions, for which it is
granted; and is understood to be no longer in being, than the Constituents
think fit to continue it. And delegates are always upon their good behavior.
When Parliaments are not Annually chosen, but continued during the Princes
pleasure, longer than the present exigency for which they are called, the
nature of a delegation, and the undoubted privileges of those that choose them,
are quite altered and overturned; and the delegation is perpetuated, though it
should appear that the delegates are unfit for it, or unfaithful under it. From
delegates whom we our selves have empowered, they become absolute Masters; or
if delegates still, they are transformed from being the peoples delegates and
representatives, into the Princes delegates and creatures. By every repeated
prorogation the peoples Commission is cancelled, and their new Being is derived
from the Prince his will and pleasure, and measured out, and continued,
according to their humble compliance with what is demanded from them.

Again Annual Parliaments are best suited to a limited Monarchy, (which I hope
all Englishmen think the best) Annual Parliaments contribute most to the Ease
Safety, and Glory of the Prince, as well as to the Security and Happiness of
the Subject: By Annual Parliaments a Considence is begotten betwixt the Prince
and the People; the Prince can scarce demand that, which the people will
refuse, when the people have a confidence in him, and nothing contributes so
much toward that confidence as Annual Parliaments. I again say they remove all
the Jealousies which people retain of having their Representatives debauched,
which will be suspected when Parliaments are continued, they are a Curb upon
Designing Ministers, who for selfish and finister ends may be for endeavoring
to Embroyl the King and his people, and many times have proved very Uneasy and
Ruinous to Princes. They remove Grievances before they get to such an height as
to pinch the people so hard, as to occasion such loud and unmannerly
Complaints, as have many times obliged Princes from a mistaken point of Honor
to refuse their Redress, and so have engaged them in unnecessary disputes with
the people, which have lessened the Figure, Glory and Power of some of our
Princes, both here at Home, and amongst their Neighbors, more than any other
thing in the world. Whereas when a King of England does meet his people in
Parliaments Annually chosen he may reasonably expect to find them fraughted
with fresh desires to unite him closer with his people, to assure him of their
confidence, and affection, and to give him earnest of it, which places him in
the height of power, reputation, and glory. For a King of England encircled
with a confiding Parliament, is then in his Emperial Luster, more absolute than
any Monarch of the East, then he infallibly becomes the Terror of his Foes, the
stay and support of his Friends, and the joy, comfort, and darling of his
People.

As to the People, the continuing of the same Parliament, is a more fatal, and
likely to be a more (...) blow up all our Liberties, than either Quo
Warranto's, Regulations, or any other Methods practiced in the two last Reigns,
of which we complained so loudly, and with so much Justice. A Prince may more
certainly Bribe, than Quo Warranto or Regulate Parliaments. The Nation will be
awakened at those irregular steps: But a King may seem to proceed according to
Form, when he continues that Parliament which he has made his Pensioners. King
Charles the Second was his Arts-Master in this point: He was no Enemy to a Long
Parliament, whilst he had a Long List of many of their Names, of whom a certain
Great Man can give a good account; but as long as our King employs him, I will
not indecently reap up his faults; though if he can be caught at the same Work
now he ought to be exposed.

It will add Weight to what I have said, if we find it the practice of the
greatest, wisest, and most renowned Nations, to make provision for the
Frequency and Rotation of their Diets and Parliaments. And that the most
Glorious and Victorious Princes in those Nations have met most frequently with
their People in Parliament. I shall not instance from our own History; I
suppose no English Man ignorant how frequently our Edwards and Henry's put a
stop to the Course of their Victories, to meet their people in Parliament. Have
not the people of Spain made most careful provisions for the frequent meeting
of their States, with securities and cautions peculiar to themselves, and much
more exact than what other Nations can pretend to, and have not the greatest
and most victorious of their Kings been the readyest to enlarge their
Privileges, and most ex^^^^ (...) their (...) Charles's, were as careful of
meeting their people in their Diets, as of subduing and conquering their
Enemies: And it is observable, that King Charles, who was most exact in meeting
his people frequently, raised the Monarchy of Spain to its highest pitch of
strength, and glory; and his Son Philip, who offered at a despotick power, and
abhorred the meeting with his people, did first ecclypse the Glory of that
Monarchy, and threw it into that decay and consumption, under which it
labors to this day. Did not the French Nation upon their Conquest of, and
Settlement in Gaul, now France, establish the frequent meeting of their States?
And the most Victorious of their Princes have been most exact in meeting of
their people, oftener than Annually, as may be instanced in their Clovis, their
Pepin, Charlemaign, and the successors of Hugh Capet for several Ages. And
though Lewis the Eleventh, and most of his successors have endeavored to
suppress the States, and rendered that Monarchy despotick, yet it has
furnished ground for so many Commotions, Tumults, Leagues and Rebellions, as
have not only frequently put a stop to the course of their Victories, but
unravelled all their successes; and the subjects have many times returned with
interest the encroachment of their Princes upon their Liberties, and reduced
that Monarchy to the last gasp; and the struggles of the people of France, and
Parliament of Paris, during the minority of this present King, to recover their
lost Liberties, joined with many other instances which their History affords,
do plainly demonstrate the tottering, and dangerous condition of all despotick
Governments. (...) calamities was Germany exposed to; full of civil Wars and
discords within, by the Competition of Princes for the Empire; harrass'd and
depopulated from without, by the Hungarians, Slavonians, Vandals, and Danes, to
all which no remedy could be found, but by the establishment of frequent and
Annuals Diets; by the Golden Bull in Charles the Fourth's time; wherein the
absent Princes, Imperial Cities, and Hans Towns who send their deputies, take
especial care of changing the deputies every Diet, lest they should be bribed,
and gained by the Imperial Ministers. By this wise provision for frequent
Diets, peace was settled at home, competition of Titles for the Imperial
Dignity were extinguished, Foreign Invasions repressed, and the whole Body
preserved in health and vigor: In a word, their Annual Diets are an invincible
Barrier against the inundations of the Turks on the one side, and the
encroachments of the French on the other. And it is that only which has
preserved them from being swallowed up betwixt these two troublesome
Neighbors. I do omit to instance from Holland, Switzerland and Poland, which
have hitherto been preserved invincible, by the frequent Assemblies of their
States; for since the two first are Republics, and the last is an elective
Monarchy, where the Election proceeds without any regard to the Family of the
deceased King, they may not be thought proper instances to be followed in an
hereditary Monarchy, (as the True Sons of the Church will call ours) yet there
are some Recipe's which are good in all Cases, at all Times, and under all
Governments; of which kind I take Annual Parliaments to be one.

(...) what I have said, has any Weight with the present Parliament, we may
hope shortly to have a New one; and then it will be of great usefulness to set
down what are the great and indispensible Characters, or Qualifications of a
Parliament - man; and they are these; Sense, Courage, and Integrity.

Sense has diverse acceptations; but that sense that is required to capacitate a
Man for serving usefully, within those walls, is not the Learning of
Universities, but the knowledge of England. A Sense of Liberty, of what is
meant by our Rights, and properties A Sense of our Laws and Interest, of the
Nature of our Government, Of our Trade, of our natural strength and welfare. It
cannot be denied but that the Comparing of the Histories of other Nations. The
reading over the Systems of Policy, and the Lives of the Great and Exemplary
Patriots of Liberty in all Countries, mightily enlarge their understandings, and
adorn the Great speakers in that Assembly, but if a Man has not reduced all
that to the use of this Island, he has not the sense requisite for this post.
If his head is never so full of the Idaea's of Foreign Constitutions, if he is
not wise as to our Home matters; If he has Traveled Never so far for
Experience, If he is a Stranger to the Isle of Britain, he may make a
Loquacious Politician, a Florid Orator, a Statesman in Speculation, but he
will never make a Venerable Member of our Parliament. A man that understands
but well our English Manufactory, the natural products of our Country, the
balance of Merchandising, what Importations, and Exportations are to be
prohibited, or encouraged, what are the Grievances the people complain of,
which of them are reasonable to be redressed, and what are the proper methods
of doing it; he that knows how much we can give; what is fit to be given, and
can examine How what we have given is laid out, is more fitly Qualified for our
Senate House, than if he could discourse of Government, better than all those
learned men, who pretend so nicely to understand and distinguish the several
sorts: If the Countries and Corporations have any thing particular, in relation
to their Counties or Corporations to be represented, they ought to choose one
that understands the Nature of what they would have represented, or that is at
least capable of being thoroughly instructed in that matter. But at the same
time that they choose one for their particular purpose, they ought to consider
that he Votes for the whole Commonwealth, and therefore they must not choose any
man that is addicted only to their Interest, but should always deliberate
whether he is of public and universal spirit, as well as a proper Advocate for
them. But this will come in more properly, when I speak concerning Integrity.

The next Qualification is Courage: Although the Word Parliament signifies to
speak freely the mind, and though Liberty of Speech is always granted to all
Parliaments, yet Courage is necessary upon many accounts; it is often necessary
to withstand the Frowns of a Prince, it is necessary to bear a man above
popular Clamor, it is necessary when Peace and War is debated. There has scarce
been any Reign wherein the Princes have not Hectored some of the Members: There
is scarce any Sessions, but Arts are used to stir up the people against their
own Interest; and if a Parliament House upon the noise of a War should be
seized with a panick fear, the whole Nation would soon be dispirited, so that
it is necessary to have Courage to preserve his own Integrity, and to uphold
the hearts of those that he Represents.

Again, whoever would discharge the Office of a good Senator, must have
Integrity that is proof against Gain, against Fear, and Solicitation. If he
can be affrighted, or bribed, or overruled out of his own sense of things, he
is not fit for that place. Preferments may be added to, but must not change the
man: Threats must make him more watchful and resolute, and he must be sure to
distinguish between insinuation and argument. He must consider himself as a
public Man; he must not know his own interest, or the interest of the place
from whence he comes, when the general good of England comes in competion, he
must consider himself as well, and more the Representative of England, than of
that County, or Town, for which he serves: But when he has considered the
National Interest, then in gratitude and duty he is to consider the Interest of
the body of the Electors, more than his own private Advantage; he is to strip
himself of all Relation, and to be akin to the Commonwealth: His soul must
soar up into the exalted height of an Heroical Virtue, and he is to believe
that it is a pleasurable and noble enjoyment even to sacrifice himself and all
private Considerations for his Country; he is to lay aside all private
Capacities, and as it were to transmigrate into a public Alliance and
Affinity, Cum calculis suffragiorum sumeret magnanimitatem Reipublicae, as
Demosthenes used to advise the people of Athens in great Causes of Estate: He
used to advise, that when they took into their hands the Balls, whereby to give
their Voices (according to the manner then in practice at Athens) they should
raise their thoughts, and lay aside those Considerations, which their private
Vocations and Degrees might minister and represent unto them; and should take
upon them cogitations and minds agreeable to the dignity of the State: And
there is good Reason for this Advice; for certainly, if a man shall be only or
chiefly sensible of those respects which his particular vocation or degree, or
the State of the County or Town which sends him, shall suggest and infuse into
him, and not enter into true and worthy Considerations of Estate, he shall
never be able aright to give or take Counsel in Parliamentary Affairs, in the
business of the Senate House.

The Notion of integrity has been too much mistaken of late; the being of a
particular Church, or party, has Christened Men Honest, and in this last
Parliament pretending to be for King William has gained those that Epithet who
never understood a King as the Father of his Country, who make his Political
Capacity above the Laws of Men, if I may not say the Laws of God too. Integrity
in the Monarchy of England implies more of a National, then slavish Spirit,
more of Common Care, than Personal Adoration; And it is sad to think that any
Knave can Redintegrate his Reputation, only by being a Williamite, without
being Converted to an Englishman. Those cannot be thought (let them be as much
Williamites as they will) to preserve the Integrity of a Parliament Man, who
change or stifle their principles for a place; nor can those be thought fit
Members for that House, who either for their pleasure, or private business,
neglect coming up to Town, no more than those who have so many Offices, that
they can scarce peep within those doors, or who are so lazy and loytering, that
they come not till it is too late to hinder them, and so suffer the Nation to
be circumvented by the Artifices and Tricks of the Court, who always set them
on foot, when the House is empty. I would have my Countrymen beware (if ever
they choose again) of these self-interested, and careless Men. They ought, now
their all is at stake, to examine how their Members have behaved themselves,
and not sell themselves and posterity for a drunken bout. Let them choose no
MAN that has not Sense, Courage and Integrity, or that will not receive their
instructions. There are no Counties, and few Towns, wherein they don't
understand the Interest of their Country enough to give general instructions.
Let me recommend those to them I have hinted at in this Paper. Advise and order
them to learn the Art of Tacking, since we can hope for nothing without it. Let
them give no Money without good Country Bills, Let them give it in many
Parcels, and Tack something to each; order them to bring in Bills to regulate
the Militia, to encourage the Use of Fire locks amongst the populace; to
increase our Navy, to reduce all our part of the War to that Navy; to settle
such Salleries upon the Judges as may make ^^em impartial, to bring in a Bill
for Capital Trials; but it ought to be a better one than Sir William Whitlocks,
one more clear and more expertly drawn: And above all things order them to
bring in a Bill to secure Annual Parliaments, and the Elections of Members for
the future. Advise them to Ransack all our own Records, and to consult all the
several Governments upon that Head. Choose but once wise and honest brave men,
and they will find expedients to avoid the disputes, and baffle the Arts which
have rendered Elections precarious and illegal. They will find Methods to be
too hard for Court-tricks, and Spend-thrift Competitors: Choose no Man that is
not willing to be instructed, you have a Right to instruct them: It was the
Custom formerly to instruct all the Members; and the nature of the deputation
shows, that, that Custom was well grounded.

I come in the next place to consider of Estates as a Qualification, I allow
they may be some additional security for Men's good behavior in the Parliament
House; but they are far from being an indispensible Qualification. There have
been in all Countries Men that have been indefatigable in their Care, and
untainted in their Love of the public, who have had but very small share in
it. I will only name Cincinnatus, Attillius Regulus, and Paulus Aemilius,
amongst the Romans; and Aristides the just, amongst the Athenians. These noble
Patriots faithfully discharged many of the greatest and most honorable
Employments of their respective Republics, yet lived and dyed poor, nor had
the incorruptible Andrew Marvel our Countryman a much more plentiful Fortune.
Riches were so far from recommending Men to Magistracy amongst the
Lacedaemonians, that by the institutions of Licurgus, they were only allowed to
use Gold and Silver for the Utensils of a baser Nature. There was formerly, nay
there is a Law to this day, that the Electors should make an Allowance for the
expenses of Members; and it is likely that in the primitive use of Parliaments,
greater respect was had to their abilities, their spirit, and their fidelity,
than to their riches. But the manner of Choosing Parliament men is strangely
changed; can it be thought unlikely, that those who spend their Fortunes to be
chosen into the House, should re - imburse themselves when they are there? Can
it be believed that he that pays for his entrance as much as if it were an
Office, does not design an Office to make himself whole again? Can it be
thought such Men shall promote public Virtues, who are advanced to this
station by public Vices; who are more beholding to their Cups, than their
Merits for that Honor? Little do the Country that thus Prostrate the Nature of
our Parliaments, for brimmers of Ale and Wine, think, that those draughts let
them in, and give them too just a Title to slavery. It is a strange Alteration
that our Fore - Fathers should Reward the Men whom they pitched upon for that
business, and that nowadays we sponge upon them. We drink till we have lost
our senses, that we may distinguish which of the Competitors has the greatest
share of reasoning. This is an open and an avowed debauching of the
Institution: It were well there were no more base Arts practiced in this
matter. But till bribing and drinking will not so soon recommend Men, as the
Characters that I have named, till the Freeholders of the Counties, and the
Inhabitants of Buroughs go once about this business with sobriety, and without
little ends, and partial inclinations, we shall never come to a Reformation.
England will be without security, for we cannot fall into a solid security,
without a well - chosen Parliament. And we shall never choose a Parliament as
we should do, till the Electors choose more from Judgment, than Affection; more
from Confidence in their Worth, than for the Liberality of their
Entertainments. Although the Romans allowed the Candidates for any other Office
to cajole for Votes, yet it was entirely forbid to all Men that came into the
Senate. Nor was drinking for Parties any more in use when they chose Senators
at Athens, or Sparta, nay at the General Assembly of the Commonwealths, and
States of Greece (called the Council of Amphictiones) if any Man had but
desired to be chosen, he for that reason lost his Election. The Senate of
Venice at this day, to prevent the possibility of a Solicitation upon the part
of the Candidates; and to remove all fears, and that no other Consideration
than the merit of their Candidates may influence the Electors, has constituted
the Ballet; and though I don't hope to fee so nice a Reformation, yet I may
wish that such scandalous bribing, drinking, and solicitation, as is not any
where to be found, either in ancient, or modern policy, in the Choice of those
who are the Conservators of the peoples Liberties, may be banished likewise our
Elections. Our Neighbors of Scotland might instruct us how to choose Members,
who are so far from treating and carousing, that if it can be proved they
solicit any one Man, it destroys their Election. Whilst such corruptions as
are amongst us last, there can come no good; and we must degenerate into
slaves. It is in vain to talk of amendment, or to dream of Englands security,
till we choose our Parliaments aright; and till those that take least pains and
spend no money to be chosen, are sent thither. Therein does and will consist
Englands security: I wish to God all Mankind may be satisfied that it does so,
if this Parliament should be dissolved; which it must be, if the people have
the sense, honesty, and courage, to demand in a prudent manner to have it made
a Law that we should have Annual Parliaments.

The abuses of Elections will be prevented by Annual Parliaments, and will by
no other Method be prevented so certainly. When the Parliaments are chosen
Annually, no body will think it worth the trouble and expense of appearing and
striving for so short-lived an Office and Authority, which will indeed rather
be a burdensome Trust; so that those who have the best Reputation with them
will be chosen by the people: Nor will men sacrisice their Credit with the
people, either for Ambition or Avarice: If they are sure to be laid aside like
Almanacks, at the next Annual Election; so that the Cure of this evil is a
strong argument for what is proposed, and may serve to rouse my Countrymen out
of that supine stupidity and ignorance of their own good, into which they seem
to be sunk, and which is both the cause and effect of Tyranny, and makes us
with all our boasted Rationality worse than the Ox or the Ass, than the Beasts
of burden; for so are Men that don't know and consider.

When I first set pen to paper, I intended to have treated upon a second Head
of Discourse, which would have been by way of Prevention and Caution, against a
project, which will either set the whole Nation by the ears, or entayl slavery
upon us and our Posterity. The project upon which I intended to have descanted,
is the general Excise; but I have wrote a long Letter already, and the Notion
and Tendency of such an Excise deserves a whole Letter apart; when my Affairs
give me leisure to anatomize it, you may expect to hear of me at length, I
would refer you to such an Opportunity; but since I here mentioned it, I fear
you will think me to blame, if I don't a little, though with never so short
touches, explain my self upon it; but I will only at present give you the
Picture in Miniauture of that Excise which is already established; the
Never-to-be-forgotten Marvel, of whom I just now made mention, is the hand
that drew it. His Words are these:

Excise a Monster, worse than e're before,
Frighted the Midwife, and the Mother tore.
A thousand Hands she has, a thousand Eyes,
Breaks into Shops, and into Cellars pryes:
With hundred rows of Teeth the shark exceeds,
And on all Trade like Casawar she feeds.
Chops off the piece wheres'ere she close the Jaw,
Else swallows all down her indented Maw.
She stalks all day in streets, concealed from sight,
And flys like Bats with leathern wings by Night.
She wastes the Country, and on Cities preys.
Her of a female Harpy in Dog Days,
Black B -- of all the Earth born race most hot,
And most rapacious like himself begot,
And of his Brat enamored as't increased,
Bougred in Incest with the mungrel Beast.
What are my own Thoughts about a general Excise you may command, if you think
it needful, in the mean time,

I am, SIR, Yours Faithfully, N. N.

ERRATA.
Page 2. Col. 2. Lin. 5. read the same Parliament. Ib. l. 9. for altered r.
Alfred. p. 3. col. 1. l. 9. for Assertors r. Assessors. p. 4. col. 1. l. 10.
for convinced r. continued.


