GOODNESS Proved to be the BEST PROTECTION FROM THE ARRESTS OF ALL HARMS.

In A SERMON Preached before the University, upon Innocents Day, in Great St.
MARY'S Church in CAMBRIDGE.

By Robert Neville, B. D. Rector of Ansty.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley, at the Printing-Press under the Piazza
of the Royal Exchange, 1687.

To the Worshipful my much Honored Friend, RALPH FREEMAN, Esquire One of His
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace for the County of
HERTFORD.
Honored Sir,
YOU may perhaps be surprised to find your Name Usurped by me, to Grace and
Honor this trifle of a Sermon; unless you please to consider, that it is the
usual Fate of Persons of your obliging Temper, to receive Persecutions of this
Nature, as Returns of your Candor and Goodness: And I have only this to at one
for the Presumption of this Dedication; that I thought no person so fit to
Patronize a discourse of Goodness, as him, in whom all those bright Stars, that
make up the Constellation, shine with so great a luster.

Among all other Virtues which are resplendent in you, give me leave to trumpet
abroad your exemplary Sobriety, which does approach so near to singularity in
this age, that I can scarcely pay you your due praises, without a Satyr on most
others; who, by their intemperate Quaffing, make their Houses, like those
Enchanted Castles spoken of in Romances, which when a man has once entered,
there is no finding his way out again, by reason of an Enchanted Fountain there,
the free Drinking whereof lays him and his reason both asleep: So that now a
man can hardly avoid the Imputation of a Rude and Uncivil, unless he lose the
Reputation of a Sober Man, and Sacrifice his health to the humor of his
drunken Associates, and his Soul to the Devil, whose Factors they are, and for
whose interest they drive on that drunken Trade: But to these inconveniences
no Person is exposed under your Roof, where tho nothing (that may speak a
generous and hearty welcome) is wanting, yet you are a professed Enemy to all
Excess; and your Visitants may say the same of themselves, which Socrates did
of his Scholars, that they were well the next day. I have dwelt so long upon
this part of your Commendations, not because you deserve not greater, but
because I am not able to express them in other Subjects; like an ill Swimmer, I
have willingly staid long in my own depth; and though I am desirous to perform
more, yet I am loath to venture too far in the large Ocean of your Praises;
least by my ill commending your other Virtues, I should so far incur your
displeasure as to forfeit that Title, which I value my Self upon; Namely, That
of

Honored Sir, Your Most Faithful and Humble Servant R. Neville.
Ansty, Sept. 23th. 1687.
THE CHRISTIANS BEST PROTECTION From the Arrests of all HARMS.
1 Epistle general of St. Peter, chap. 3. ver. 13. And who is he that will Harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good?


WEre all who make a fair and plausible show of Religion, really such as they
pretend to be; discourses of this nature would be no more needful than the
Commendations of a great beauty, to one who is already a passionate admirer of
it. But on the contrary we see, how common it is for men, first to throw dirt
in the face of Virtue and Religion, and then persuade themselves it is her
natural complexion; they represent it to themselves in a shape not pleasing to
them, and then bring that as a plea, why they give it no better entertainment:
Men must know, that though Virtue and Goodness be so fair and complaisant as to
draw our affections, yet she is so modest withal; as to expect to be courted
by us; and it may be deny our first suit, to prompt us to a second address, and
heighten our importunity: and nothing has oftener forbid the Banns between men
and Religion, than their Neglect and Contempt of her, and abusing her by false
and slanderous reports; by saying, That Religion is the Mother of Danger; and
that the place of her abode, (like that of Archimedes grave) is septus Vepribus
and dumetis, beset with Briars and Brambles. I have read of the Cannibal
Anakims in the Confines of the Promised Land, that devour all that Travel
toward that Region; but let not our Melancholic and Aguish fancies transplant
all these into Christendom, and make them Emblems of those Harms and Dangers,
that attend those who are followers of Goodness; don't let us fancy that there
stands an Angel with a Flaming Sword, to keep us out of this Paradise of
Virtue; nor report to the World, that if a Man has no other guard but his own
Innocence, he lies open to the assaults of all dangers and misfortunes, which
is a mistake sufficiently confuted by St. Peter, who assures us, That Goodness
and Innocence is our best Protection from the Arrests of all Harms, in these
words of the Text. And who is he that will harm ye, if ye be followers of that
which is Quis est q^i nocere aut velit aut possit?
good? Upon which words Vorstius makes this Paraphrase; Who either will or can
harm you? as if the Apostle had said, you that are followers of Goodness, may
believe your selves secure, and above the Sphere of all Harms: For there are
scarce any so impious that will, or if they are so maliciously bent as to
attempt it, they shall not have power to Harm you: which being premised, the
Text will fall the more naturally into these two parts.

First, The Christians Protection from all Harms in these words, Who is he that
will harm ye? or as Vorstius glosses upon the words, Who will or can harm ye?
Secondly, The Qualification that entitles him to this Protection, namely his
being a Retainer to Goodness, or as my Text calls him, A follower of that which
is good.
First on the first, or the Christians Protection from all Harms, in these
words, Who is he that will Harm ye? a Christian is (...), out of gunshot, no
real evil can annoy or molest him: He has an Almighty protection to skreen and
secure him from it; if he will put on God's Livery, the Robes of Righteousness
and enter into Gods service; if he will get some dependence upon the Court of
Heaven, wait upon God, and become his Servant in Goodness and Innocence, he
shall have a Protection from the Arrests of all Harms; and this brings me to
the second general part in the Text, where we have

Secondly, The Qualification that entitles a Christian to this Protection,
namely, his being a Retainer to Goodness, or (as my Text calls him) A follower
of that which is good: Rari quippe Boni, now because good men are scarce and
Rare, so that by the great scarcity and dearth thereof, it is not easy to
discover what True Goodness is: it will be a worthy disquisition to Examine,
First, What Goodness is? Secondly, What are the good Fruits and Effects of it.
And Thirdly, From what Harms and Evils all Retainers to it are Protected?


First, I shall Examine, What Goodness is?

Goodness is a glorious Constellation, made up of these bright Stars, these
Heavenly Virtues and Graces, Love, Compassion, Courtesy, Abstaining from Sin,
doing works of Mercy, Unity, Peaceableness; as you may see in the eighth,
ninth, tenth, and eleventh verses of the Chapter of my Text; where the Apostle
exhorts the Jewish Converts to be of One Mind, having Compassion one of
another, to Love as Brethren, to be Pitiful, to be Courteous, not rendering evil
for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise Blessing: For he that will
love Life, and see good Days, let him refrain his Tongue from evil, and his
Lips that they speak no guile: Let him eschew evil and do good, let him seek
Peace and ensue it. After an enumeration of all which Christian Graces, having
in the twelfth verse of this Chapter, declared red Gods favor and kindness to
good Men that are possessed of them, he gives them this Protection from all
Harms, in these words of my Text, And who is he that will harm ye, if ye be
followers of that which is good? Of all the Attributes, by which a man may be
styled, Goodness has the chief place and sovereignty; and therefore God was
called by the Heathens, first Optimus, then Maximus; first, Good, and then
Great; there being no true Greatness without Goodness; and therefore that
execrable and bloody Tyrant, who caused his Executioners to turn the Cradles of
the Innocent Babes of Bethlehem into Graves, and rock them into a Dead sleep,
was improperly styled Herod the Great, because he was far from being Herod the
Good. A mere great Man without Goodness, is only so much Nobility by Patent,
not by Merit; or so much Heraldry without Honor; he stays perhaps a while in
the World, but it is only to fill up a number, and when he is gone there wants
One, and there is an End: But when greatness and Goodness meet in One Person, he
is highly to be valued and esteemed, like an Emrald or a Ruby set in Gold, --
aut ubi flavo
Argentum, Pariusve Lapis cum cingitur auro;


Every man is to be esteemed and honored as he is set down in Gods Herauldry,
and there Goodness has the pre-eminence, Proverbs chapter 12. verse 26. The
Righteous is better then his Neighbor, all good Men are of a Divine
Extraction; they may derive their Pedigree from God himself; and say with St.
Paul, and the Heathen Poet whom he quotes, (...). We are his Offspring, Acts
17.28. and may therefore boast of his Celestial Pedigree, with better reason
than Glaucus did in Homer, in these words, (...).

I glory and boast of this Celestial descent and extraction: and St. Hierom
would say of Paula a Noble Virgin, descended from Aeneas on the Fathers side,
and from Agamemnon on the Mothers, that she was Genere Nobilis, Sanctitate
Nobilior; Noble in Stock but more Noble in Goodness and Sanctity; (...), the
pious and good man is the best Man in all regards, says Clemens of Alexandria.

External Power and grandeur may render us dreadful and formidable; depth of
Learning may raise us in the esteem of the World, and make us the objects of
all men's admiration; our large Revenues and vast Estates may purchase us
external Respect and Honor, make all men strike Sail to us, and pay us the
constant tribute of outward Obeisance; but that which commands men's Hearts,
charms their Affections, and chains their Souls to us, is Goodness; which is a
great Friend to humane Conversation, the Foundress of all Societies; all other
excellencies (how great soever) appear Melancholy and solitary; they only put
on a glorious Aspect when in the possession of one, or few persons; and once
made common grow cheap and contemptible; but Goodness is better natured, and of
so public a Spirit, that without being communicable, it may no more be called
Goodness, than the Sun without its diffusive and expansive light, may be called
the Sun: as the good man's Religion, so also is his goodness and compassion
Catholic: He thinks it a kind of moral Judaism, to tie it either to persons or
places; as knowing that he is commanded by St. Paul, Galatians 6.10. To do good
to all men; and his language is what Tullie's was, in one of his Epistles to
Lentulus, I T^ntum enitor ut neque amicis, neque etiam alienioribus, opera,
consilio, labor, desim.
endeavor only that I may not be wanting, either to Friends or Strangers, by
my Pains, Counsels, or Labors, and he really is, what St. Hierom advised
Pammachius to be, caecorum oculi, manus debilium, claudorum pes, eyes to the
blind, a hand to the weak, and a foot to the lame, and consequently must needs
be very acceptable, and dear to them; and this brings me to the second
particular, namely,

The Good Fruits and Effects of Goodness, which are these that follow.

1. It Is a Lure to bring us the Love of Men. 2. It draws and attracts the Love
of God. 3. It assimilates and makes us like God.
1. It Is a Lure, to bring us the Love of men; The good man may have that
Character, which was given of the Roman Emperor Vespasian, Deliciae humani
generis, the Delight of Mankind, the darling of the World; for by his
Courtesy, Charity, Civility, and Peaceableness, he obliges all men, makes all
his Friends and thereby becomes also a Friend to himself; for as Seneca says,
Qui sibi amicus omnibus amicus, he that is a Friend to himself, is a Friend to
all the World: the good man will, if it be possible, quarrel with no man; he is
no man's Enemy, and therefore no man is an Enemy to him; and we may say the same
of him, that Cornelius Nepos did of Pomponius Atticus, Nullas inimicitias
g^ssit, quoa nec laedebat quenquam, neque si quam injuriam acceperat, maleoat
ulcisci quam Oblivisci.
He was infested with no Enmity, because he hurt no man, and if he had received
an injury, he was more willing to forget then to revenge it; so that goodness
is the best Policy, even in a worldly account; it is the best Decoy to allure
men to our Friendship. There is no such bait whereby to catch men as goodness
is, and it may therefore borrow our Saviors words, which he spoke to Peter and
Andrew his Brother, Matthew 4.19. Follow me and I will make you Fishers of men:
And then

2. Goodness draws and attracts the Love of of God; (...), God delights as much
in good men as in Heaven it self; and Hierocles, who recites that golden verse
of Pythagoras, does himself affirm, That God hates no man; but as for the good
man, (...).
he embraces him with an extraordinary Affection: and it was a saying much used
by the Pythagoreans, That (...).
God has not in the whole Earth, a more familiar place of Residence, than the
pure, the good Soul. A good man is Gods Heaven upon Earth; and therefore when
the Philosopher Heraclitus came by accident into a house where a good man
dwelt, he cried out presently, Hic Dij habitant, the Gods dwell here; the
Philosopher tells us that those things (...).
which are like and related to us, are for the most part pleasing; and how
pleasing then must the good man be to God, who resembles him in Goodness?

1. Tamerlain being presented with a Pot of Gold, asked whether the Gold had his
Fathers Stamp upon it, and being told that it had not his Fathers, but the
Roman Stamp, he refused to receive it; Goodness is Gods stamp, and as holy
Ignatius tells us, a good man (...).
is a piece of Money of Gods own Coin and Stamp; now if God does not see his
stamp of goodness upon us, he will never Own us for his. The very proper
character, and essential Tincture of God, is nothing else but goodness: nay I
may be bold to add, that God is therefore God, because he is the highest and
most perfect good: Whatsoever God does in the World, he does it, as it is
suitable to the highest goodness; The first Idea and Copy whereof is his own
Essence; virtue and goodness in the Creatures, as Plato well discourses, are
not therefore good because God loves them, and will have them to be accounted
such; but rather, God therefore loves them, because they are in themselves
simply good.

3. A third good Fruit and Effect of goodness, is, That it Assimilates and
makes us like God.

Goodness is that wherein God himself does most delight; and therefore all the
Actions of our Savior, while he was conversant here were but so many
testifications of his Mercy and Goodness, without the least tincture of
severity, two only excepted, his driving the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, and Cursing the Fig Tree; and yet in both these, his Mercy seemed to
ride in Triumph, and make Judgment follow its triumphant Chariot; the first of
these actions, though it brought some small reproach and smart upon the objects
of it, yet it did them no great Harm; and the second had as small a Taste of
severity, as being exercised upon a barren-Tree, a dull senseless Creature,
incapable of smart or punishment, but was merely exemplary to us; Christ being
pleased to punish our unfruitfulness in the Fig Tree, as the Persians were
accustomed to beat the garments in stead of the bodies of their Grandees, when
they had offended.

Summa (...) Religio im^t^^^ quem colis.
It Is the best and highest piece of Religion to imitate and resemble the Object
of our Worship, says Lactantius. (...).
And a man cannot Worship him aright, whom he does not imitate, says Clemens of
Alexandria; we must therefore endeavor to imitate and resemble God in
goodness; goodness being that God-like Quality, which exalts our humane Nature,
sublimates and heightens it into Divinity, and makes us like God: and thus
having shown you the good Fruits and Effects of goodness, I come now to show
you.

Thirdly, From what Harms and Mischiefs it Protects us; as namely, First, From
all those Harms and Mischiefs that men can do us. Secondly, From all the Harms
and Mischiefs that arise from sin. Thirdly, From those eternal Harms and
Torments, which those who are strangers to goodness shall suffer in Hell. First
on the


First, That goodness will protect us from all those Harms and Mischiefs that
Men can do us; Innocence is our most faithful guard; this is our Fidelissima
est Custodia ipsa innocentia. Haec Arx inaccessa, hoc inexpugnabile munimentum,
munimento non egere.
most inexpugnable and strong Fortress; to be so good, so innocent, as to need
No Guard, No Fortress, says Pliny in his Panegyric to Trajan. It was Seneca's
complaint, that he Vix quenquam inveni qui aper to ostio vivere possit.
could rarely meet with any, that might venture to live with open doors, and
it is the good man only that dares live so; his innocence will shield him from
all Harms; from the worst that men can breathe or Act against him: all the Harm
that men can do us, is either, First, By Words, or, Secondly, By Actions.


And the good, the Innocent man, is proof against both these

First, Men cannot hurt or harm him by Words. His innocence is a shelter, a
Sanctuary from the poisoned Arrows of a slanderous and evil Tongue: The whole
Earth is not big enough to cast a shadow, totally to Eclipse a good Man's
credit; the Teeth of his enemies malice many times do but file his innocence
the brighter; and (like rough Diamonds) the more it is cut it shines with the
greater luster: They are not only the beauties of a Face, which draw new Graces
from those black Spots and Patches, (which one would think) should disfigure
them: those shadows which a slanderous Tongue casts upon Innocence, makes it
but the more remarkable, in the same manner as an Eclipse is a cause of the
Suns being more taken notice of: The testimony of a good Conscience is more to
be valued by us than all Reports, though there were neither Friends, nor
Enemies, to Praise or Reproach us; Beauty and Comeliness will always find
satisfaction enough in the glass, Deformity vexation: now the Conscience does
the same for Virtue or Vice, that a Mirror or Glass does for faces: We should
therefore seek our Consolation in our own Breasts and Consciences, and when we
have done all we can, to deserve a good name, we may slight and contemn a bad
one; and be no more troubled when we are said to be guilty of what we are not;
than if we were said to be sick, when we find our selves well; and what wise
man will be troubled at that, which should rather move his laughter? And as
goodness gives us a protection from all harms by Words, so

Secondly, Does it shelter us from all the Harms that can arise from the
Actions of Men; Men can but kill the body, the death thereof terminates and
bounds their Malice; (...) says Socrates; they may kill but they cannot hurt
the good and Innocent; Death being no more to them than a dark Entry to a
glorious Palace, or a Shady Wilderness to a promised Canaan; thus Herod's
Tragical and Barbarous Cruelty acted upon the Innocent Babes of Bethlehem, did
but accelerate and hasten their eternal bliss; these tender Plants were but
transplanted from Earth to Heaven, but removed from their Earthly mothers
breast, to their heavenly Fathers bosom; the first blossoms of their Infancy
were by a compendious improvement ripened into heavenly Fruit; God lent them
the Wings of a Dove to fly to their Eternal rest, before some of them were able
to use their Feet. Now that goodness, that Innocence, will shelter us from all
the harms that can arise from the Actions of Men, I shall further prove to you
by these two Reasons and Arguments.

1. Because it procures us Almighty God for our Protector. 2. Because it
procures us the good Angels for our Guard.
1. Because it procures us Almighty God for our Protector, and this is
intimated to us in the verse foregoing my Text, for the Eyes of the Lord are
over the Righteous, so that he may with confidence borrow those words of the
Psalmist, Psalm 56.11. In God have I put my trust, I will not fear what man can
do unto me; or say as Paris did in Homer, God (...)
is on our side, and if God be with him what need he care or value, who is
against him? One in Livy said, Satis sibi Copiarum cum Publio Decio, and
nunquam nimium hostium fore.
That he had Forces and Strength enough, having Decius on his side, and that he
could never have too many Enemies. This a good man may apply to himself, and
say, that God alone is Forces and Strength enough, and having him his Friend
and Assistant, he can never have Enemies enough to deserve his fear, but may
buoy up himself with those words of Holy Anselm Nemo te laedat nisi qui deum
vincat.
That none can hurt him unless they can first conquer God; unless they can
overcome Omnipotency it self, slay Immortality, and confound the whole Host of
Heaven: As they say in Philosophy, That the Concupiscible faculty of the Soul
sets the Irascible on work; So Gods Love to the Good and Innocent, quickens and
incenses his Wrath against their Enemies. A sense whereof encouraged Tertullian
to discourse at this rate to Scapula the President of Africa, Nulla Civitas
impune latura est sanguinis nostri Effusionem.
That no City should go unpunisht, where their innocent blood had been shed;
and he gives him a Catalogue of several Presidents, who Qui in fine vitae suae
recordati sunt deliquisse quod vexassent Christianos.
when at the point of death, were touched with some remorse for their
Afflicting the Innocent Christians: and that in particular Vigellius
Saturninus, who first drew the Sword of Persecution against them was deprived
of his eyes. And that Claudius Herminianus in Cappadocia, after he had handled
them with great Cruelty, was, whilst alone in his Pretorian Palace, struck with
a strange Plague, and overrun with noisome Worms; and then he makes a warm and
close Address to Scapula himself; who having lately condemned innocent Mavilus
to the Beasts, was seized with a sharp Distemper; desiring him to forbear
(...), to fight against God.

Thus also was Herod Ascalonita smitten with a signal Vengeance from Heaven,
after the bloody Massacre of those poor Innocents, which he Sacrificed to his
Pride and Cruelty: his punishment being a complicated Judgment, made up of
Tortures both of Soul and Body; his Bowels, which were strangers to all
Compassion, were tortured with an intimate and ward heat, (...).
a slow fire, which to the outward Sense seemed not so vehement; but did
inwardly afflict and torment him, as Josephus tells us; and his body was the
subject of as many Tortures and Convulsions, as his Mind was of Terrors and
(...).
Distractions; every blow he received seemed to come from Heaven, and inflicted
by the strong hand of an enraged Deity: Every Creature (when God calls) is a
Soldier to fight for the Good and Innocent; the whole Militia of Heaven, even
thousands of Angels are Auxiliary Forces to them; and this brings me to the
second reason, why Goodness will shelter us from all harms, that can arise from
the Actions of Men; and that is,

2. Because it procures the good Angels for our Guard, Psalm 34.7. The Angel of
the Lord encamps about them that fear him, and delivers them; Infinite Legions
of Angels attend God in Heaven, and every single Angel is as strong as a whole
Army of Men; one Angel in the Book of Kings, is sent out against an Army of the
Assyrians; and in one Night a Hundred Fourscore and Five Thousand persons dye
by his hand; now all the Angels and Host of Heaven are the good man's
Lifeguard, and what humane Power is able to withstand them? The presence and
assistance of Angels to good men is no new thing, though their apparition is
now very rare; they had peculiar care over good Men in ancient times. Lot was
led out of Sodom by Angels: And Matthew chapter 2. verse 13. An Angel appeared
to Joseph to warn him to fly into Egypt, with the young Child, The Holy Jesus;
whose Life was chiefly sought by Herod, when he died and discolored all the
Coasts of Bethlehem with the blood of so poor Innocents. An Angel delivers St.
Peter out of Prison, Acts, chapter 5. verse 19. An Angel Comforts St. Paul in
the Tempest, Acts chapter 27. verse 23. And Socrates (in His Ecclesiastical
History) tells us that when the Citizens of Constantinople were dejected, for
Fear least the Persians should overcome the Romans, to whose protection many
Christians had committed themselves, a Company of Angels appeared to some, who
were Traveling to Constantinople, and bid them cheer up the Spirits of the
Inhabitants with this joyful News, that the Romans should defeat the Persians,
and come off Victorious. And our own Historians make mention of a Celestial
Herald, an Angel from Heaven, who appearing to JAMES the Fourth King of
Scotland, advised him not to Fight his intended Battle with the English; which
Counsel he neglecting, Himself with most of his Nobles and Army fell in that
fatal Battle.

And though the appearance of Angels is not now to be expected by us, because
never promised; and converse with them is a Blessing which our state of
infirmity cannot bear; yet is not their Ministry wholly ceased, they still
(though invisibly) succor and help us, Hebrews chapter 1. verse 14. are they
not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be Heirs
of Salvation? And this shall suffice for the proof, that goodness will protect
us from all those harms that men can do us either by Words or Actions. I now
proceed to show you.

Secondly, That Goodness will shield us from all the Harms and Mischiefs that
arise from Sin. There is incomparably more trouble in the ways of Sin, than in
those of Goodness and Virtue: Every notorious Sin is naturally attended with
some inconvenience, of Harm, Danger or Disgrace, which the sinner seldom
considers till the sin be committed, and then he is in a Labyrinth; and in
seeking the way out of a present inconvenience, he intangles himself in more.

There is a Divine Nemesis that attends wicked men; and Sin and the Fear of the
Divine Vengeance are chained together, as the Romans did their Malefactors to
the Soldiers who were to be their Keepers and Executioners: The sinner is
almost always haunted with inward gripes and twinges of guilt, though sometimes
he is not punished here visibly, nor scourged with a market Lash.

And who would not rather dye a thousand times than live under such a
Conscience, whose every Accusation is no less than a summons to Death? Neque
frustra sapientes affirmare soliti sunt, si recludantur Tyrannorum mentes,
ictus posse aspici and laniatus.
It is not for nothing (says the Historian Tacitus) that the wisest men have
told us, that were the hearts of wicked men laid open, we should see their
Swellings and Ulcers, Stripes and Torments; Here a bruise by Impatience, here a
swelling of Pride, here a deep wound which malice has made.

It is the good man only that leads a Comfortable and Happy Life, whereas
wicked men's Lives are Toilsome and Miserable, Jeremiah, chapter 9. verse 5.
They weary themselves to commit Iniquity. They take as much or more pains to go
to Hell, than good Men do to go to Heaven. (...).
Even the things of the Devil are not attained without Labor and Pains, says
St. Chrysostom. How Laborious is our Revenge? How busy our Cruelty? How
Watchful and Studious our Lust? What Penance does our Covetousness put us to?
How strangely does our Envy possess us, like an Evil and Malignant Spirit?
Which one in Stobaeus calls, (...), the Basest Spirit, and yet most Just,
because it punishes the Delinquent in the very Act; doing as Aelian speaks of
the Polypus, (...)
who, when he wants his prey devours his own Arms, the secret pangs of his Envy
gnaw and feed upon himself: Thus Men become (as I may so speak) Martyrs of the
Devil and damnation, and the subjects of all those Harms and Mischiefs, that
are of sins retinue, from which they might be freed; if they would once become
Proselytes to Virtue and Goodness.

Their very Enemies could say of the Athenians, That there was nothing that
they could count a Feast, but (...) the having done what they ought; and if a
Christian cannot outvye those Heathens, if he does not highly esteem of the
Feast of a good Conscience within him, and the Satisfactions that are to be
reaped from a good Life, which are present Happiness in themselves, and pledges
of future Glory; his palate is vitiated, he is no competent judge of Dainties,
And as goodness will shield its followers from all those harms and Mischiefs
that arise from Sin, so,

Thirdly and Lastly, Will it free them from the Eternal Harms and Torments,
which those who are strangers to Goodness shall suffer in Hell. Lactantius was
so hard in believing the roundness of the Earth, that he thought that those
Homines Pensiles (as they call them) those men that hang on the other Cheek of
the Face of the Earth, those Antipodes (whose feet are directly against Ours)
must needs fall from the Earth; but whither then should they fall? If they
fall, they must fall upwards, toward Heaven: So good Men, the Spiritual
Antipodes to Sin, may in some sense be said to fall, when they fall to
Repentance, to Mortification, and other good Duties, and when they fall off
from their Sins; but their fall is upwards, they fall toward Heaven; Hell has
no Power over them; for God has set his mark, stamped the Impress of his
Goodness upon them; and that is their Protection from all the Arrests of Satan;
That will keep them out of his dark infernal Prison: Hell is only a place for
Wicked men; it is their proper Center, and the Gravity and Heaviness of their
sins make them tend thither, Psalm 9.17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell,
and as the strong Magic of Nature pulls and draws every thing continually to
that place, which is suitable to it, and to which it belongs; so Hell,
wheresoever it is, will by a strong sympathy pull in all sin, and Magnetically
draw it to it self; as on the contrary true Goodness is always breathing
upwards, and fluttering toward Heaven, striving to Imbosom it self with God.

We may flatter our selves with what conceits we please, but so long as we are
void of Goodness, we do but Dream of Heaven, and I know not what fond Paradise;
we do but Court a painted Heaven, and woe happiness in a Picture; the glory of
Heaven being nothing else but innocence enthroned, and attired her in white
Robes, and Goodness Triumphant; Goodness with a Palm of Victory in her hand,
and a Crown upon her Head: And how happy will the Good, the Innocent Man be,
when he shall receive that Crown, with this deserved Encomium and Commendation?
Euge bone Serve! Well done Good and Faithful Servant! What a Ravishment and
Transport will it be to him? What an Oleo of High Tastes compounded together? O
then let us all be Followers of Goodness! This, This, is our best (...); the
best Charm against all Evils; The best Amulet and Preservative against all
harms; Our safest Port, our best Haven; here we can never suffer Shipwreck,
hereno storms can come at us to hurt us; here we are above the Sphere of men's
Power to harm us; in this blessed Station the Torments of Hell cannot reach or
fasten upon us. Goodness then is our best Asylum, our best Sanctuary, our
safest Refuge, from the harms both of Men and Devils; for says St. Peter, Who
is that will Harm ye, if ye be followers of that which is Good? Which God grant
we may all be, for his Dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Glory, and Adoration, both now and Ever,
AMEN.

FINIS.
Five Sermons lately Published by the same Author, and sold by Benj.
Billingsley.
1 A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen of the City of London at Guild Hall. 2. The necessity of Receiving the
Holy Sacrament, declared in a Sermon at a Conference of the several Ministers
of the Deanery of Braughin, in the County of Hertford, appointed by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London to be held at Ware. 3. The
great Excellency and Usefulness and Necessity of Humane Learning. 4. The Nature
and Causes of hardness of Heart, Together with the Remedies against it. 5. The
Things above proved to be the most Proper Objects of the Mind and Affections.
All Three Preached before the University, at Great St. Mary's Church in
Cambridge.

