THE LORDS AMBASSADORS OF THE STATES GFNERALL OF THE Netherlands: Their
Propositions unto the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT; As they were in French
presented unto the right Honorable the Lord Gray of Warke, etc. Speaker of the
Lords House, and the right Worshipful William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the
House of Commons the fourteenth of this instant March, 1643.
SIR,
IT is near two years ago that our Lords the States General of the United
Provinces of the Netherlands having understood of (to their great grief) the
Distractions of these Kingdoms, have ordained us their Ambassadors to go and
present their Interposition, to the end to mediate if it were possible betwixt
the King and His Parliament.

The good hope our Lords were in, that matters might in time by homebred
endeavors be brought to a better state and condition, made them to defer our
sending, which frustrated, and perceiving the Calamities of these Kingdoms to
a very great, and perilous height, and to burst and break out into open War.

Our Lords were forced to renew their care, and have qualified, and sent us
unto this Kingdom, to propose an Accommodation, and offer therein their
Intercession.

The King has so much approved of, and agreed unto our Presentation, that it
has pleased His Majesty to declare, that our Int^rposition is most welcome
unto him, and that he does accept of it, and Condescend unto a Treaty.

And we doubt not if the most Noble and Honorable Lords and Commons of the
Parliament (for reasons concerning the conservation of the true Religion, the
good of the King and His Kingdoms, and so many Millions of People who
otherwise by these ntestine wars are exposed to all hazard and miseries and
their inevitable and utter ru^ne) will condescend unto a Conference and Treaty
of Pe^ce, unto which we shall present our Interposition and Mediation if
acceptable, we doubt not (we say) but the great God of Peace and Concord, will
give in short time a good and happy issue out of these troubles, and bloody
Miseries.

Which happy issue to advance, we shall spare no sincere and most affectionate
endeavors according to our Instructions, and that in such manner as may or can
be expected from a State which is your very friend; And of such who in the same
profession of the true Religion, and special Interests so nearly Consederate,
esteem (And that most rightly) the good and evil, the well are and Calamity of
this State and Kingdom, most sensibly to concern them, and of which they
cannot but be partakers.

Delivered by the Lords Ambassadors of the Lords the States General, to the
Speakers of both Houses of Parliament at Westminster this 14 of March, 1643.
London Printed for H. T. 1644.


