A Crystal Mirror, OR Christian Looking-glass: WHEREIN The Hearts Treason
against God, And Treachery against Man, Is truly represented, and thoroughly
Discoursed on and Discovered.

WHEREBY The Soul of Man may be Dressed up into a Comeliness for God.

AND WHEREON A Duly and daily Gazing (after a Godly sort) may prevent the
putting an everlasting Cheat upon your Immortal Soul.

(...), Nosce teipsum. Solon.

To know your self is necessary.

He that beholds his natural face in this Spiritual Glass, and forgets not,
is blessed, Jam. 1. 23. 25.

Published for Public Good, by Christopher Nesse, Minister of the Gospel, in
Fleet Street, London.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for the Author, and to be sold by him. 1679.

To the Right Ronourable THE Lord Wharton.
My Lord,
YOUR Lord-ship is the only One of all my narrow Acquaintance (amongst persons
of your Rank and Quality) who has so much Divine Teachings about the hearts
Treachery, as (I can presume) your Honor is endowed with. You have been an
Honorable Owner and Honourer of the good ways of God (to my knowledge) for this
many years; and wherein you have not been an eminent Doer only, but as eminent
a Sufferer: In all which, your Honor cannot but have large Experience of the
Wily Workings of your own Deceitful Heart. Assuredly, Experimental (not
Notional) knowledge is the most expeditious and dexterous Doctress to Disciple
aright in this Deep Mystery. As that great Mystery of Godliness (the new name
in the white Stone, Rev. 2. 17.) no man can read, but he that receives it: So
this grand Mystery of (Iniquity, or) Ungodliness (which is called the depths of
Satan, Rev. 2. 24. and which lies lurking in a deep heart, Psalm. 64. 6.) is
better experienced inwardly, than exerted by any outward means whatsoever.
[Docet Experientia vera,] and [Experto creed Roberto;] I looking upon your
Lordship as an old Disciple, Acts 21. 16. A Gray Headed Christian and a Father
in Israel, 1 John 2. 13. could not but be confident, that this mystical Mirror
would find Acceptance; and the rather, seeing it is as useful for Lords as it
is for Ladies. Hereupon I presume to tender it (quale, quale est) unto your
Lord-ship's hands for a Blessing to your Heart.

To the Right Honorable THE Lady Wharton.
Madam,
SINCE my small and short Acquaintance with your Ladyship, I could not but be
one of the Admirers (amongst many others) of your great Gravity, and peculiar
Piety in this our loose and debauched Age: Whereas other Ladies of Honor does
glory in this, that they are Ladies of Pleasure too. (Alas, they do but glory
in their own shame, Phil. 3. 19.) Your Ladyship does esteem it your greatest
Glory, not only to be a Lady of Honor, but also a Lady of Holiness. This is
abundantly demonstrated not only by your repairing [duely] to the public means
of Grace, where you may enjoy them in power and purity, but also (to my
knowledge) your upholding [daily] the private worship of God in your Family.
This, this is that which makes you [truly] Honorable, and therefore ought to
be honored (as you are of God, so) of all good men, but especially of all good
Ministers. In pursuance whereof, I make hold to present to your Lady-ship (the
best Homage and Honor I can pay you) this Christian Mirror; which is a
Looking-glass for an elect Lady, for a Lady indeed. I doubt not, but while
other Ladies (in their Vanity) do, as it were, nail their very Eyes to their
literal Looking-glass, and that only for pluming the body as to man; your
Ladyship will be improving this mystical Looking-glass for the trimming of your
Soul as to God, that your inner man may become as amiable and acceptable to
your Heavenly Husband, Isa. 54. 5. as your outward man is to your Earthly one.

But to bring these two Streams into one Channel, let me now address my self to
both your Honors (two distinct persons) in one single (yet compounded)
application; seeing God has made you not only one Flesh by his holy Covenant
of Marriage, but also one Spirit by his holy Covenant of Grace and Adoption:
Although I dare not symbolize with those sordid Sycophants of Dionysius, who
licked up his very Spittle (that Excrement which the Tyrant slaver'd out of his
mouth in his outrageous fury) as if it had been the noblest Nectar; nor with
those Parasitical Priests that do palliate their Patrons with the Appellations
of Virtuous, Pious, and Religious, when (possibly) they are no better than
Vicious, Impious, and Irreligius ones. Should I use such flattering Titles, my
Maker would make me afraid, Job 33. last, yet though [Laus sordet in ore
proprio, non tamen in ore Alieno] a man's own mouth may not praise him, another
man's may, Prove. 27.2. Our Lord (himself) gave John Baptist his due praise; 1.
For his Constancy in Religion, saying, He was no Reed shaken with the wind.
2ly. For his Moderation in his Apparel, etc. Mat. 11.7, 8. And surely the
Servants of this Lord ought to own it as their duty to give due praise to the
Praise-worthie, to honor those whom the Lord honors, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and to
commend those whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10. 18. Thus Demetrius had a
good Report of all good men, and of the Truth it self, 3 John Epist. v. 12. and
Ruth has this Encomium; All the City of my people knows that thou art a
virtuous woman, Ruth 3. 11. her works (not her words) praised her in the gate,
Prove. 31. 31. So that all true acknowledgements (of the Grace of God discerned
in your Honors by the Spirit of Discerning) not only may, but must be made,
and yet be without the stinking breath of all base-minded Adulation. Give me
leave therefore (without offending the modesty of your Minds, and the humility
of your Hearts, (of both which there is an happy Conjunction in both your
bosoms) to call you truly Noble; not so much with Nobility by Parchment,
which the Favor of a Prince sets on, and his Frown or Fancy wipeth off
again: nor so much with a Nobility by Parentage; for the Noblest Blood upon
Earth is stained and tainted with High Treason against the great King of Heaven
None ever was so Nobly-born, as to be able (with Hercules) to kill the two
Serpents in the Cradle; to wit, Original Guilt, and natural Corruption. Hence
we read in Scripture, only of three Great men (and those none of the best; to
wit, Pharaoh, Jeroboam, and Herod,) who solemnized their Birth-days. Nobilis
non Nascitur, sed fit, ceu Renascitur: Nobles by their first birth are but
[Terrae-silii, ceu filiae] Earth-sprung, if not born [(...)] again, or from
above, John 3. 3. This, this is that which makes you (both) truly Noble; to
wit, your Second birth, [tantus quisque est, quantus est apud Deum] Act. 17.11.
Greatness without Goodness, is like the big swelling of an Hydropical person;
it is his Disease, but not his Ornament. Great persons have the greatest
difficulty to do Gods will, they have so much authority and advantage to do
their own wills: Their Sea-room is their Danger; their Honors and Riches are
like Fishes full of bones, which while Children feed upon, they are in danger
of choking. Now that it may be better with you both, and that your Goodness
may further sanctify your Greatness, and that you may be always delivered from
a Deceitful Heart, and at last inherit the sure mercies of David so prays

Your Honors most Devoted Servant, Christopher Nesse.

TO THE READER.
Candid and Christian Reader,
BEhold here a marvelous and mystical Mirror, or little Looking-glass (a
portable Pocketbook) I present to you; a Divine Glass, better than the best
Chrystal-glass in the world, which can only discover the disorders, defects,
and deformities of the Outward man, and how to regulate all these in order to
Acceptance with men; but this (through Grace) will discover all those of the
Inward man, and how to rectify them in order to your Acceptance with God. This
is not a Glass that makes a resemblance of the bare superficies and outward
face of things only, but it discovers the spots, freckles, and smutches of the
Hidden man, the Heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4. So that it is not only [(...)] Speculum, a
Looking-glass, but it is also [(...)] Perspecillum, a Perspective-glass, which
gives you a distinct prospect into every cranny and corner of your treacherous
Heart. It Is not a Glass that represents the bare Images of things (which can
never be handled by the hands of any man) but the things themselves, even such
things as your hands may handle of the Word of Life, 1 John 1. 1. It Is not a
dark and aenigmatical Glass like that of the Law of Moses, which was covered
with a Vail, 1 Cor. 13.12. and 2 Cor. 3. 13. But this Looking-glass of the
Messiah, the Law of Liberty, Jam. 1. 23. is as clear as Crystal, Rev. 21.
11.18. and 22. 1. unto the man whose eyes are opened, Numb. 24. 3. with Christ's
spittle and clay, Joh. 9. 6. and with his Eye Salve, Revel. 3. 18. And 'twill
plainly represent [pi al pi, Hebr.] mouth to mouth, and face to face, Prove.
27.19. even to the transforming of your Soul into the Image of Christ, 2 Cor.
3. 18. It Is not a Glass that gives false and flattering representations (making
foul things seem fair, or fair things foul) but according to their Nature, so
is their Color and complexion in a real Portraicture: It Is a Glass that
proposes to view the Anatomy or Dissection of the Heart, wherein the many
Fibrae or small threads of its Treachery [(...)] lying open with their faces
upwards, Hebr. 4. 13. are detected, Mark 4. 22. It Is a Glass, that, in the hand
of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. will tell you all that ever you have said or done,
Joh. 4. 29. It Is a Glass that may serve you as an Oracle to tell you, what you
ought to say and do at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, Isa.
8. 20. 16. It Is a Glass that affords an entire Representation of whole Man,
from top to toe, from side to side, yea and his Inside as well as Outside: It Is
a Glass, whose reflexive rays do not only scatter light (whereby you may
discern what is the pollution of your first birth, and what ought to be the
purity of your second birth,) but it also sparkles heat (to warm your Heart,
Luke 24. 32.) and fiery flames to burn up corruption in it, Isa. 4.4. They say
Wizzards, or wise men (so called) can show in their enchanted Glass (by their
Charms and Sorceries) the very Idea's, or Images, of those Thieves that stole
away the Goods of them, (who so devoutly, not to say devilishly) do consult
with them to know it, that they may recover their lost Goods again. This is
done by Collusion, one Devil discovers another for more Devilish ends, to wit,
that their Devotionist may become a Disciple to the Devil, and fall down (with
Saul) to worship him, for helping him to find his lost Goods. But behold, this
is a sacred Glass that will make a divine Discovery of those grand Thieves, (to
wit, Satan, Sin, and Death) amongst which Man did fall as he was traveling
(the wrong way) from Jerusalem to Jericho, from the Tree of Life to the Tree of
forbidden Fruit, and was stripped by them of his Garment of Innocence, sadly
wounded and left, not only half dead, but even stark dead in trespasses and
sins, Luke 10.30. Ephesians. 2. 1. Yea, this Glass discovers to you not only the
Malady (in the cases aforesaid) but also the Remedy, how you may be quickened
from your dead estate, how you may be healed of your spiritual wounds; and also
how you may recover your lost Goods, (as 1. The Image of God. 2. Favor from
God. 3. Fellow-ship with God,) provided you give not a careless cast of your
eye upon this Glass, but take a serious, awful, and conscientious Contemplation
of the natural face of your Inner man in it; and so long, until you be
metamorphosed into Christ's Image. That you may do so, and be so, is the hearty
Prayer of

From my Study in Fleet Street, July 12. (79. Your Brother in the best Bonds,
Christopher Nesse.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. OF the Heart in general: how corrupted by the Fall, and how those
Corruptions (of a deep Dye) are to be seen in God's Looking glass. Sundry
Motives to improve this Spiritual Glass. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of the Hearts Treason
against God. Some Heart-rowzing Considerations: as 1. Every one has an Issue
of Sin. 2. It begins betimes. 3. It runs long unstaunched. 4. No Physician but
Christ can heal it. 5. Man is naturally afar off from this right Healer. 6.
Christ has many Followers, and but few Touchers. Encouragements to improve
this true, All-Heal, Jesus Christ. 16 Chap. 3. Of the Hearts Treachery against
Man's self. How the Heart [was] treacherous in Jeremy's time, [is] so in our
time, and [will be] so to the end of the world. Of the matter, manner, and
measure of it. 35 Chap. 4. Of the measure of its Treachery. How it is more
treacherous than all the deceitful persons (both men and women) which weread of
in the Sacred Scriptures, though never so deceitful. 56 Chap. 5. It Is more
deceitful than all the deceitful things which the Holy Scripture mentions,
though never so deceitful, as the Serpent, Sorceries, etc. 80 Chap. 6. It Is
more deceitful than [All] as it puts a Cheat, 1. upon the highest Object; to
wit, God. 2. upon the noblest subject; to wit, the Soul: 3. And for the longest
time; to wit, Eternity. Several Objections against this Assertion are answered.
104 Chap. 7. Of the Hearts Treachery. 1. As to State. 2. As to Actions. The
State is twofold: 1. Temporal; 2. Spiritual. The Temporal State is twofold: 1.
Prosperity, whereby the Malady of the Hearts deceitfulness is handled, and the
Remedy against it. 123 Chap. 8. Of the Hearts Treachery in Adversity. Of the
Malady wherein it consists, and the Remedy whereby it may be cured. 136 Chap.
9. Of the Hearts Treachery, as to the Spiritual State, both in falsely
conceiving what we are in Gods thoughts, and what we are in our own. 1. In Gods
thoughts, that we are elected, etc. 2. In our own thoughts, where the grand
Objection is largely answered; to wit, whether a man may be an Hypocrite and
not know it. 159 Chap. 10. Of the false grounds of Self-deceiving; to wit, 1.
Outward Peace and Plenty. 2. A good Nature or Disposition. 3. Morality or
Civility of Life. 4. Restraining Grace. 5. External Profession. And 6. a
resting in Notional Knowledge. Helps for undeceiving, which do demonstrate the
difference. 1. Betwixt Nature and Grace. 2. Betwixt Civility and Sanctity. 3.
Betwixt Restraining and Renewing Grace. 172 Chap. 11. Of the Hearts Treachery
as to our Actions, especially those that are Religious. The Hearts Treachery,
1. as to performance of Duties in our undervaluing or overvaluing of them, etc.
and what fit Remedies may be against those Maladies. 196 Chap. 12. Of the
Hearts Treachery in the exercise of Graces, especially in mistaking. 1. Gifts
for Graces. 2. False and seeming Grace, for true and saving Grace. And 3. That
which is but common Grace, for that which is special; even the Grace of Gods
Elect. Lastly, How all those differ one from another. 217
THE Christians Mirror, OR Looking-glass that flatters not.
CHAP. I.
Of the Heart in general.

1. THere be two great concerns of fallen Man most necessary to be known, (though
much neglected) to wit, Hearts Treasure, and Hearts Treason or Treachery: the
former of these, (to wit, the inestimable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.) cannot
be prized or pressed after, without some true and due knowledge of the latter,
which is called the Plague of the Heart, 1 Kings 8. 38. and which every one
ought to have a sensible and an experimental knowledge of; even the Plague of
that fretting Leprosy, which is, (as Physicians do call it) Corruption totius
substantiae, universally spread over the whole Man, that dryes up, and draws
out the very Vital Blood and life of the Soul, the spots whereof are deeper
than the skin, (like the spots of Leopards, which no Art can cure, no water can
wash off) they are not only seated in the hands (and in other outward parts)
but they are sunk down into the Heart, and ingrained or ingraffed into the very
spirit, Levit. 13. 2, 3. Jerem. 13. 23. The spots are not only in the flesh
and bones, but also in the very sinews and inner parts, (where then is Man's
free will to good? etc.) so that all the scraping in the world will not fetch
it off, Levit. 14. 41, 43, 44, 45. Man's heart cannot be mended, but by making
it new, and by renewing it. Moses putting his hand into his bosom, found
Leprosy there, and there he left it also, Exodus 4. 6, 7. there he found it,
and there he left it, putting his hand into his bosom again.

2. [(...)] was a golden Sentence given to Mankind, by one of the seven wise
men of Greece, That every Man might know himself: and that this might be better
done, Man's gracious Creator has left him a Looking-glass, to wit, the Holy
Scriptures, wherein Man may behold his Maker, and himself also. 1. This
Looking-glass represents God to Man, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and though that
Representation be but through a Glass darkly, 1. in opposition to Man's seeing
God face to face in another World, 1 Cor. 13. 12. yet holds it out the clearest
discovery of God that Man is capable of in this lower World. 2. In opposition
to the Law of Moses, which was but a dark dispensation (in shadows and
ceremonies) compared with the Law of the Messiah (the Gospel) that blessed
Looking-glass of the Law of Liberty, Jam. 1. 23, 24, 25. Alas, poor mortal man
cannot behold the face of God (otherwise than in his Word and Works, Romans 1.
20.) or the brightness of his glorious Presence, the Majesty whereof would
swallow up mere Mortality, Exodus 33. 20, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 6. 16. [Vehemens
sensibile destruit sensum.] The object is over-violent for the faculty: Man
cannot see the Sun [in Rota] in the Circle, but only in the Beams. Moses saw
[Mercaboh velo harocheb] the Chariot in which God rode, but not the Rider in
it, as the Rabbin says; he saw his back-parts only, but his Face and Essence
could not be seen.

3. And 2ly this Looking-glass of the Word of God represents Man to himself,
and gives him a distinct and impartial character of himself, if rightly
improved. History makes mention of Momus (the carping Heathen) that found fault
with man's Maker, for not setting a Glass in man's Breast, that so his Heart
might be seen: But assuredly God has set such a Glass in his Word, that Man
thereby may see his own heart, when Christ opens his blind eyes to improve it:
and this is a Mirror that flatters not, a Looking-glass that makes a real
discovery; not like that famous Glass (we read of) at Athens, which would
represent the most deformed and discolored person to appear very beautiful;
nor like any of those Artificial Glasses, that have (all) Impostures in them;
as the Magnifying-Glass, that makes a thing look bigger than it is in quantity;
or the Multiplying-Glass, that makes a thing more than it is in number; or as
other fallacious Glasses, that represent things under our feet to seem above
our heads, and contra; things afar off to seem near hand, and contra; yea, to
seem of another Color and Figure, of another Posture and Situation than
indeed they are of in themselves: In all these, there is [deceptio Visus] a
deceiving of the sight: but no such thing is in this divine Looking-glass.

4. Augustine (writing to Nebridius) wondered at this strange Secret in plain
and common Looking-glasses, inasmuch as the lesser they are (according to their
Module or Size) they do represent any thing lesser than it is in it self; yet
let these same Glasses be made never so large, they never make the thing bigger
than it is indeed. Upon this observation that ancient Father cries out,
saying, [In hoc aliquid occultum latere putandum est] Some marvelous Mystery
lies hid herein. Thus you see there are many deceitful and false Glasses, that
make false Representations; but the Looking-glass of the Word of God is no
false or flattering glass. But as it is the Word of Truth (Dan. 10. 21. Joh.
17. 17.) and replenished with the Spirit of Truth (Joh. 14.17.) so it gives no
other than a true representation of the complexion of your Heart, all its
defects and deformities are discovered thereby, Hebr. 4. 12, 13. Mark 4. 22. As
the Word is a curious Critic, judging exactly, so it is a faithful Friend,
representing impartially. Never say you (as ignorant ones usually do) that you
have a good heart Godward, when this blessed Looking-glass plainly discovers
to you, that your Heart is a very naughty Heart, evil, only evil, and
continually evil, Genesis 6. 5. your inward parts are very filthiness, Psalm. 5. 9.
and as full of falsehood as of filthiness, Jer. 17. 9. etc. Infra.

5. There be various Representations (indeed) both of man's Malady and man's
Remedy, in this blessed Looking-glass of the Word of God. The Looking-glass of
the Law does discover all the spots of fallen Mankind, Romans 7. 9. both those
spots that are the spots of God's Children, to wit, Infirmities; and those that
be the spots (or rather deep stains, or Leopards-spots) of the wicked, to wit,
Enormities, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. But the Looking-glass of the Gospel discovers the
Water of the Spirit of Grace, and the Blood of the Lamb of God, wherewith those
spots are to be washed away, John 1. 29. 1 John 1. 7. Tit. 3. 5. Until the Law
(in the hand of a Mediator) fall upon man's spirit with full Conviction, Man is
a jolly, jovial Creature, (with Paul) Romans 7. 9. But when the Commandment
[comes] with a piercing penetrating Power, letting blood in the heart-vein (as
Acts 2.37.) Christ speaking to the heart with a strong hand (as Isai. 8. 11.)
and the Spots and Freckles of a sinful Soul are discovered to him, and
discerned by him; then (and not till then) does he repair to that Fountain that
is opened (in the sides of a bleeding and blessed Savior) to wash in, and to
be cleansed from all those spots of Sin and of Uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. to be
washed white in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. and to be clothed with the
Robe of his Righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.

6. The first Duty as to this Looking-glass: Be sure you take a view of your
self, and of the estate and complexion of your heart in this blessed
Looking-glass. Motives to stir you up hereunto are these: 1. This is a
Looking-glass of Gods own making, and therefore excellent. All those Glasses
forementioned (that give their false Representations) are glasses of Man's
making, and that for Curiosity and Ostentation; but this is of Gods making, and
that for Sanctity and Salvation. As it is said of the two Tables of the Law, the
Tables were the Workmanship of God, and the Writing was the Writing of God,
Exodus 32. 16. so it may be said of this blessed Looking-glass of the Gospel,
it is the Workmanship and Writing of God. It Is the Hebrew Idiome to put the Name
of God to many things, to show the superlative excellency of those things; as
the Hill of God, the City of God, the House of God, and the Sanctuary of God,
for the most excellent Hill, House, City, and Sanctuary: So this Looking-glass
may accordingly be called, the Looking-glass of God, to set off its excellency;
and its excellency calls loud upon you for the using of it.

The second Motive is, It Is a Glass that has been of singular use, and in
sublime estimation in all foregoing Ages and Generations. The Holy Patriarchs
dressed themselves (both as to Faith and Manners) by this Glass, in their due
and daily walking with God; and so have the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs of
God dressed themselves (all) by it, ever since God made it: Insomuch, that all
their Godly Examples are become as so many Looking-glasses unto us, to dress
our selves by, and to be followers of them, who through Faith and Patience do
now inherit the promises, Hebr. 6. 12. You must be a follower of them, so far
as they were followers of God (in his Word and Will) and of Christ (in a
Scripture-like Faith, and a Scripture-like life and conversation) 1 Cor. 11. 1.
the frailties of all those Holy Saints are Recorded in the Holy Scriptures [as
exempla Cavendi, non Cadendi] f^^ your caution (as dangerous Rocks and Sands at
Sea are marked) not for your imitation. These Servants of God dressed
themselves up (in this Glass) into Scripture-hearts, and into Scripture-lives,
and so are all safely landed in Mansions of glory: they are all got well home
to their Fathers house, out of this present evil world (so called) Gal. 1. 4.
And if you do as they did, (in dressing your self by this Glass) you shall (in
time) be where they are.

8. The third Motive is from the three excellent properties of this
Looking-glass, to wit, 1. Its Truth, 2. Its Largeness, 3. Its Lastingness. 1.
It Is a true Looking-glass, and gives no false Representations of persons or
things, as those fallacious and sophistical Glasses aforementioned do, but
discovers all truly and in every part, neither more or less than it is,
neither better nor worse than it is, neither fairer nor fouler than it is in it
self. 2. This is a large Looking-glass, that discovers the whole complexion of
the Heart from top to toe; the hidden Man of the heart may be viewed in it,
both entirely in the whole, and truly in every part. 3. It Is a lasting
Looking-glass, it waxes not old, dull and crazy, as common Looking-glasses do;
it is so Divinely steeled, that it will never wear off, nor contract any dust or
obscurity: though the smoke of the bottomless pit has endeavored to darken
the Sun and the Air of the Holy Scriptures, Revel. 9. 2. and many a false Gloss
has been cast upon this true Glass; yet has it as much light and transparency
in it self, as ever. To all which may be added a fourth excellent property of
this blessed Glass, wherein it transcends all other Glasses, which discover
only the face and surface (barely) of the body or outward things, but this
discovers the inside as well as the outside, and the hidden things of the
heart, as well as that which is bare and open.

9. The fourth Motive is, from the preciousness of the Soul, which is far more
precious than the body. The Lord Jesus did (assuredly) best know the worth of
Souls, because he (only) went to the price of Souls; and he tells you, that it
is but a bad bargain, to gain the World (though it is impossible for any one to
get all) and lose the Soul, Matthew. 16. 26. the Soul of one single person is of
more worth than is the whole World; then it is of much more worth than the body
of that person. It follows hence, that seeing you do use the common Glass to
trim and dress the body, (which is the worser part) that you may not be
unacceptable and uncomely to Men; how much more should you use this special and
Spiritual Looking-glass, for trimming and dressing your Soul (the better part)
that you may not be uncomely and unacceptable to God? This latter is of far
more consequence and importance than the former. How ought you then to look
into this Looking-glass of the Word, duly and daily, yea as often (at least)
as you look into the common Looking-glass! 'Twas grave and godly counsel, that
Tertullian gave to young Women [Vestite vos Serico pietatis, Byssino
sanctitatis, and Purpura pudicitiae; taliter pigmentatae, Deum ipsum habebitis
Amatorem] God himself will become a Suitor to such as do according to the
Apostles direction, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. The Prophet does so distinctly and
punctually declaim against the Women's varnishing vanities, as if he had
(indeed) fully viewed the Ladies Wardrobe in Jerusalem, Isa. 3. 18, 23. and had
taken a particular Inventory of them with their turrified heads and
stretched-out necks.

10. Such persons as spend too much time in dressing their Bodies by the common
Looking-glass, it may justly be feared, they spend too little time in trimming
their Souls by this blessed Looking-glass. Bernard excellently expresses this,
saying, [Vestium curiositas, deformitatis and mentium and morum indicium est,]
Overmuch curiosity in outward adorning, is a shrewd sign of the deformity both
of Minds and of Manners: or more plainly, excessive neatness in outward
ornaments, is a palpable evidence of too much inward nastiness. Mark what the
wisdom of God (himself) says, 1 Pet. 3. 3. [Whose adorning let it not be
outward, etc. but let it be the hidden man of the heart.] Women are not simply
or absolutely forbidden there to adorn themselves, so it be without Pride and
Excess, and suitable to their States and Estates in the World: otherwise good
Rebeccah (that immediate Daughter of Sarah) would have been blamed for wearing
those Bracelets and Earrings, which the Holy Patriarchs (Abraham and Isaac)
sent unto her for her adorning, Genesis 24. 30. and Godly Lydia (whose Heart the
Lord opened) would not have been a Seller of Purple, Act. 16. 14. If it were
lawful for her to sell it, assuredly it was lawful for some to wear it.

11. It follows then, that what is spoken by the Holy Ghost in 1 Pet. 3. 3. is
only spoken comparatively (and not simply or absolutely) that they make not
their outward adorning their chief Ornament, as the Daughters of Jerusalem did,
Isa. 3. 18. only for pride and wantonness, in the mean while altogether
neglecting the adorning their Souls: but surely those Daughters of Israel (in
Exodus 38. 8.) were better minded, who did willingly give up their
Looking-glasses, (which were then made of Brass, and whereby they trimmed
themselves) to the service of the Lords Sanctuary; by which free-will-offering
of theirs, they did most plainly and openly testify, that they preferred the
Worship and Glory of God, before their own gracefulness. Those were
(undoubtedly) religiously disposed women, that assembled (by Troops) to fast
and pray [Pethachohel] at the door of the Tabernacle; and these instruments of
the worlds Vanity (whereby they had formerly dressed their Bodies, but which
now they despised) they dedicate to God, to make the Laver of Brass; an
instrument whereby, through Faith, they might trim and sanctify their Souls.
Oh that we had many such Women in this great City, and such as Esthers Maidens,
Esth. 4. 16. Zech. 12. 14.

12. The second Duty in order to this Looking-glass, is, You must not only ^ook
into it, but love to do so: God looks not so much at what you do, as at what
you love to do. God indeed looks that you should look into the Looking-glass
that he (himself) has made for you to that very end: Yet to do so is not
enough, unless (also) you love to do so. Let it be far from you to do with this
Spiritual Looking-glass, as (History makes mention) one Praxyllis did with her
common one, which when it but truly discovered to her eyes her own real
Deformity, she quarrels with the Glass, and (in a rage against it) throws it
down, and breaks it all to pieces. You may easily conjecture whether the true
Representation of the Glass, or the woman's own Deformity, were more in fault,
or to be quarreled withal. Oh do not you quarrel with this blessed
Looking-glass of the Word, which God has most graciously given you, and has
not suffered it to be muffled up from you in an unknown Tongue (as in Popish
Times) to give no true and due prospect of your sinful self; but look into it,
and love to look into it; yea look into it with a God-blessing Spirit, saying
with the Holy Apostle, [I had not known sin] but by the Law (that precious
Looking-Glass) Romans 7. 7-9-18. As you were bred and born in sin, and have all
along lived in sin; so you may dye in sin, if you discern not (by looking into
this divine Looking-glass) your Souls Deformity.

13. The third Duty is, You must not only look into it, and love to do so, but
likewise to look wishtly and intently into it; not taking a slight and
glancing prospect only, but viewing all the defects and deformities of your
Heart with utmost intention of Soul, until there be some deep Impression
wrought kindly thereby upon your Affections: This is the very scope of the
Apostle James, in Chap. 1. 23-25. [He that beholds (says he) (...), the face
of his Nativity, that which Nature gave him, or that which he was born with
into the world, straightway he forgets what manner of man he was, to wit,
the fashion of his Countenance, and the spots represented in the Glass. Whereby
he most fitly notes out those weak impressions which the discoveries of the
Word leaves upon a careless hearer of it, who is not so deeply touched with
those Discoveries, as to be duly, truly, and thoroughly humbled for them, so
as to be brought out of self unto Christ.

14. The fourth Rule is, Labor for such a discovery of your Heart in this
Looking-Glass of the Word, that it may have an abiding Work upon you, that the
Word may be planted and engrafted in you: Until this be, the root of the Matter
(or of the Word, as the word [dabar] signifies) cannot be in you, Job 19. 28.
Nor the seed of God can be said to remain in you, 1 John 3. 9. The seed of the
Word must be hid in your heart, Psalm. 119. 11. Luke 2. 19. And the Law of the
Word must be writ in (as well as put into) your Heart, Jerem. 31. 33. Then does
the graft or root draw all your thoughts, cares, purposes and affections do
nourish it, and suck the sap of all to it. All the motions of your Soul and
Spirit will be cast [(...)] into the Mold of Religion, Romans 6. 17. like melted
Metal, takes the form of that mold which it is cast or poured into: then will
it be [(...)] a fruit-bearing Word, Col. 1. 6. and then will it drive you into
your Closet, or some by-corner (the secret places of the stairs, Cant. 2. 14.)
to bewail the plague of your own heart, 1 King. 8. 38. A due and true sense
whereof, is the best Prayer Book in the world. When you are sensible of
Sickness, you need no Book to teach you what to say to your Physician; and when
you find your self defrauded of your Inheritance, what to say to your
Counselor at Law; though you do (your self) consult Books about both those
Cases.

15. Thus if you be not a forgetful Hearer, as James 1. 23, 25. to let slip
these sacred Truths, which the Looking-glass of the Word represents to you,
Hebr. 2. 1. not feeling the power and efficacy of them: but on the other hand,
if the Word of God sinketh down into your heart as well as ears, Luke 9. 44.
And if also it finds place or room (as the word [(...)] signifies) in your
heart, John 8. 37. and so put you into anguish of Soul, and bitterness of
Spirit, for the naughtiness of your heart Godward, having Gods arrows (of
Conviction) sticking fast in you; then are you one, that (with the Angels) do
[(...)] 1 Pet. 1. 12. pry into this Looking-Glass, with the body bowed down (as
the word signifies) to discover and discern all your spiritual Deformity, not,
only with a Reflect act (which Philosophy says, is soon forgotten;) but also
with a Direct Beam (which Divinity says, takes deep Impression;) this holy
gaze transforms you into Glory; (as Moses in the Mount,) 2 Cor. 3. 18. and
brings you to Repentance unto Life, never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Go
on and prosper, 1 Chronicles. 22. 11, 13. in the Name of the Lord.

CHAP. II.
Of the Hearts Treason.

1. NO sooner have you got a saving look (through Grace) into this blessed
Looking-glass of the Law of Liberty, and viewed the hidden man of the Heart
from top to toe therein with the spectacles of the Spirit of God: but then you
will make a discovery, that your heart is top-full both of filthiness and
falsehood, both of Treason and Treachery, as full of the one as of the other:
and this is that evil treasure (which your Lord tells you of) is in every Heart
of fallen Mankind: and it is not an empty (or almost so) but an abounding
treasure, there is abundance of this evil treasure in it, Matthew. 12. 34, 35.
and Matthew. 15.19. The Heart is filled with all unrighteousness, Romans 1. 29.
it is so full, that there is no room for more; and though it may be (indeed)
fuller of evil practices, yet it cannot be fuller of evil principles: yea, it is
so exceedingly filled with them, and there is such abundance of them, that the
heart of man is ready to break with them, and there (plainly) is a superfluity
(or overflowing) of naughtiness, Jam. 1. 21. and an over-spreading abomination,
Dan. 9. 27. All persons have the running issue (of sin) in them, as that Woman
which came to touch Christ, Matthew. 9. 20. Luke 8. 45, 46. Those evil Principles
run out (otherwise the Heart would break with them, it is so full of them) into
many evil Practices, as the fore-quoted Scriptures do demonstrate.

2. First, the Heart is filled with all filthiness and Treason against God, the
great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19. 16. there is [crimen laesae
Majestatis] High Treason in it, not only intended, but abetted and executed in
many overt-Acts: we are all born with War and Treason in our Hearts against the
King of Heaven, and this breaks out upon all occasions, as soon as we come into
the World; no sooner do we learn to do any thing, but we first learn to rebel
against our Maker, in our pride and vanity; so that we are (all of us)
transgressors from the Womb, Isa. 48. 8. and we are estranged from the Womb,
Psalm. 58. 3. we are old sinners, hardened and habituated in evil, even from our
Mothers bellies; it has daily grown up with us; and quite turned away our
hearts from God, and all goodness: This is the birth-blot we bring into the
World with us; the first Man defiled Nature, and ever since, Nature has
defiled every Man, making him not only averse from God, but also adverse to
God; both a stranger to him, and straying from him; yea, a Rebel against him,
standing utterly across with an in^ate antipathy, waxing worse and worse every
day.

3. Thus the Looking-glass of the Word represents to you, first, your Malady,
and secondly, your Remedy: the issues of Death come out of the Heart, (while
it is an evil treasure) as well as issues of life; (when it becomes a good
treasure) it is the former by Nature, and the latter by Grace; and therefore it
must be kept [above] all keepings, as well as [with] all keepings [Kol-mismor
netzar] Prove. 4. 23. In order and tendency unto your more distinct knowledge,
(first) of your Malady, (this Spiritual, Mortal, and Fatal issue of sin) take
these following Soul-awakening Considerations. First this, That every one
naturally, (high and low, rich and poor, one and other) has an issue of sin (a
flux of Spiritual filthiness) running out of the Mouth, Eyes, and Hands, etc.
(as that Woman in the Gospel, Matthew. 9. 20. Mark 5. 25, to 35. had) this is the
epidemical evil, the universal disease of all fallen Mankind. Secondly, This
Spiritual issue begins betimes in every person, you bring it into the World
with you; so that if it be asked you, as once Christ asked [How long is it ago
since this came to him? Mark 9. 21.] your answer must be, (as it is there
answered) Even of a child: it is even from the Womb, as before: young Nettles
begin to sting betimes, and young Crab-fishes begin to go backwards betimes,
and young Hedge-hogs begin to be rough betimes: so our naughty nature soon
appears in little ones: Vaiezatha (the youngest of Hamans Sons, Esth. 9. 9.)
has one Letter (in the Hebrew name) bigger than all the rest; the Rabbis
reason is, because he that was youngest in years, was yet strongest in malice
against Mordecai and the Jews: and Augustine proves Original Sin with his [Vidi
Zelantem puerum] I saw a little Child rise up in such indignation, as if it
would have torn in pieces another strange Child, that was sucking its Mothers
Breast.

4. Then thirdly, This issue of sin may remain running many years unstaunched:
The Woman in the Gospel had her running issue twelve years: but Man may have
this issue unstopped, and undryed up, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, yea,
an hundred years. That Is a sad word, Isa. 65. 20. [but the sinner being an
hundred years old shall be accursed] and the more accursed, because so
long-lived, and yet dies in his sin, going down to the Grave with his bones
full of the sins of his youth, Job 20. 11. A sinner may do evil an hundred
times, and have this running issue an hundred years, (through the long
sufferance of God, Eccles. 8. 12, 13. yet it shall not be (always) well with
him, Isa. 3. 12. for his sin will be sure to find him out at last, Numb. 32.
23. he that has guilt in his bosom, has always vengeance at his back: where
Iniquity breaks its fast, there Calamity will be sure to dine, and to sup where
it dines, yea, and to lodge where it sups. Fourthly, consider, you may spend
your all upon Physicians (of no value) when you come to a sense of this issue,
and seek out to wrong healers, and be nothing the better, but rather the worse
for them: you may not only take much pains, but also suffer much pain to no
purpose, (as the Woman did) and yet go to everlasting pains, if you hit not of
the right healer and helper Mark 5. 26.

5. The fifth Soul-awakening Consideration is, you are naturally afar off from
this right healer and helper, Ephesians. 2. 13. as all Unregenerate proud ones are,
Psalm. 138. 6. God (the mighty healer [Jehovah Rophekah] the Almighty Physician,
Exodus 15. 26.) knows the proud afar off, as loathing to come near such
loathsome Lepers, having the botch of pride putrefying, breaking, and running
with loathsome matter. Hence God stands off from such, as odious and
abominable, he cannot endure the sight of them. The Chaldee Paraphrase is,
[Superbos a Coelo long propellit] he thrusts the proud far enough off from
Heaven, yea, he drives them down to Hell, to their Father Lucifer, that King
of all the Children of Pride, as Leviathan is called, Job 31. 34. every one in
the fallen, natural, unrenewed estate, is a proud Creature, and would (through
the instigation of the Devil, Genesis 35.) be a God to himself, and would lick his
own deadly wound whole, (as the beast did, Revel. 13. 3.) and so not be
beholden to Christ for any Cure. You must therefore be called by Grace to come
near to your right healer, Psalm. 148. 14. and be clothed with humility, 1 Pet.
5. 5. as the Woman with the issue in the Gospel was, who came trembling behind
her Savior, as if ashamed both of her Disease, the effect, and of her sin, the
cause of her misery; and as if she would have stolen a Cure, which would have
been but [pium latrocinium] an holy stealth, not wronging the owner, although
relieving the taker. The filling of a Vessel lessens not the Fountain.

6. The sixth heart-rouzing Consideration, is that Christ (the Christians true
All-heal) has many followers, and but few touchers: when the Multitude
thronged him, and pressed upon him, there was but one, to wit, this Woman with
her running issue that touched him: this brings you to the remedy of the
Malady, which is twofold. First, you must get a believing touch of Christ; and
secondly, you must keep your heart with all diligence, otherwise your
treasonable and treachorous heart can never be cured; your issues of sin will
continue running (without check and controlment) till your dying day, and so
undo you to all Eternity: the first of those Remedies respects the
treasonableness of your heart more especially, as the second does its
treachery: first of the first of them in general; the Woman in the Gospel had
both a long and a loathsome disease, she had lavished Money out of the bag, (as
Isa. 46.6.) to purchase some cure, but had procured none; nay, she had suffered
many things of the Physicians, who had (well-nigh) officiously killed her, and
had (utterly and altogether) exhausted her, she had spent all she had upon them
for their [(...)] doses (which signifies gifts) for which she had
(notwithstanding) paid dear (even her all) for them: when her own means and all
other means and help fail her, she repairs to Christ, (and not before) and
there by a touch of faith, was healed for nothing: she had nothing left her to
give Christ for her cure. A full Christ and a nothing-creature corresponds best
together.

7. As the Malady of this [Hemeroisse] or Woman with the Bloody Flux, is
proportionably and mystically yours; so her Remedy must be yours also: if you
do the like that she did, you may have the same help that she had: her practice
must be your pattern: first, she is sensible of her sore sickness, so must you
be of the plague and filthiness of your heart, 1 Kin. 8. 38. secondly, she
seeks and sues to the Physician, so must you do; the whole need not the
Physician but the sick, Matthew. 9. 12, 13. only sensible sinners (for none are
truly whole, though Justiciaries proudly conceit themselves to be so) are
capable of Cure and Comfort: such as see themselves Christless Creatures, cry,
Lord save me, I perish, Matthew. 8. 25. and Lord be merciful unto me, heal my
Soul, for I have sinned against thee, Psalm. 41. 4. The Physician has only the
face of a Man when he comes to visit you while in health; but if he do so when
you are sick, he has then the face of an Angel. Oh welcome, welcome is Christ
to a sin-sick Soul; till then you need not the Physician, and the Physician
has as little need of you. Thirdly, she came humbly to him, even behind him,
as unworthy to come before him: having a legal uncleanness upon her, Levit. 15.
25. so neither fit was she to touch any, or to be touched by any without
pollution. Thus must you come in all self-abhorrency to Christ, who has
respect to the lowly, Psalm. 138. 6. but resists the lofty, Jam. 4. 6. This made
Augustine cry out, saying, Ecce magnum Miraculum, etc. behold a great Miracle,
God is on high, Man lifts himself up in pride, and God flies from him; Man
bows himself down in Humility, and then God descends to him: the lowly he
raises higher, the lofty he thrusts lower.

8. And fourthly, she came believingly to him, saying, If I may but touch, I
shall be whole: This is a coming rightly to Christ, to believe you shall be
better by him, for he proportions his performing unto your believing, Mat.
8.13. As you believe, so shall it be done unto you. Faith has evermore an
happy hand, and always speeds in one kind or other; it ever has what it would
have, either in Money or in Money-worth, either in kind or in equivalency:
always [ad salutem] according to your weal, though not always [ad voluntatem]
according to your Will: He that believes, shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2.
6. no, nor so much as ashamed, Romans 9. 33. through any disappointment: this
good Woman does not only touch Christ's Garment with her bodily hand, but
himself also with an hand of Faith: and her Faith was a very glorious Faith,
not much inferior to that of the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 10. Go and do you
likewise. When you are made sensible of sin, and feel the bloody flux of
natural filth issuing out at your eyes, mouth, hands, and other parts, run to
Christ and touch him by Faith; then shall you find that Virtue comes out from
him to heal your Soul; but stay not afar off, out of reach and touch of our
Blessed Savior.

9. Having your eyes (through Grace) in some measure opened, to behold the
filthiness and treason of the hidden Man of your Heart, (for what signifies a
Looking-glass to those that are blind?) in the Looking-glass of the Word; then
take these following Encouragements, that you may come more believingly for a
saving-touch to the Lord Jesus. The first is, That Christ was given as a
Covenant (or as the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 2.) to open blind eyes, Isa.
42. 6, 7. by the Preaching of the Gospel, Act. 26. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5, 6. and
Revel. 3. 18. accordingly Christ (in faithfulness to his Commission from the
Father) healed the blind-man, whom they brought to him and besought to touch
him, Mark 8. 22. Christ (himself) became a leader of the blind, he (himself)
took the blind Man by the hand, v. 23. which he might have commanded to be done
by some other, but he did it himself, as holding it an honor (yea a pleasure)
to do a Man (in misery) any office of courtesy: and Christ leads him out of
the Town, (as unworthy of the favor of being witness of so great a work of
Mercy, v. 23. 26.) There he touches his blind eyes the first time, and made him
see Men as Trees, v. 24. then he touches him the second time, and made him see
[(...)] procul and dilucide, long lateque, all things clearly, v. 25. All
which shows, that you may expect the same kindness from Christ, according to
his Commission for your Spiritual Illumination; and this he does for you
gradually, and not all at once: when you can but darkly discern the Plague and
Leprosy of your heart, in the Looking-glass of God at the first, you must come
believingly to him again, till you see all clearly.

10. The second Encouragement, The poor and rich are alike welcome to Christ:
for while he was going along with the Ruler, (to heal his dying Daughter) he
neglected not the poor afflicted Woman, that had not one halfpenny left her
wherewith to help her self, Mark 5. 22. 26. no doubt but Jairus (the Ruler of
the Synagogue) could have wished the poor Woman farther off at this time, than
to be within reach and touch of Christ, because she hindered his Savior from
hasting to his Daughter, that was hasting to the very point of death: but this
sweet Providence to the poor Woman, must come in as a Parenthesis, for the
exercise of the Rulers Faith and Patience; his Daughter must be dead outright;
the poor Woman must be healed, and he confirmed thereby, ere his desire be
accomplished, that God may be glorified in all, and that it might be made
manifest, that Christ was no respecter of Persons, Act. 10. 34. not regarding,
either Wealth or Wisdom, Sex or Country, etc. which outward things neither
help nor hurt, neither please nor displease him, but as they are found in a
good or in a bad person: otherwise they are insignificant Ciphers without a
Numerical figure: Grace in Rags, is as acceptable to Christ, as Grace in Robes.

11. The third Encouragement is, That which separateth from the Congregation of
God, and from Communion with Men, does not separate from Christ, but rather
drives to him, as the filthy issue did this poor Woman; she had a legal
Uncleanness upon her, and therefore was to be separated both from touching, and
from being touched by any, Levit. 15.7, 11, 19, 25. neither of those could be
done without Levitical pollution: yet adventures she to draw near to Christ,
that she might touch him; she touches Christ, and had a blessed success: Thus
must you do, though your way has been before the Lord, as the uncleanness of a
removed Woman, Ezekiel. 36. 17. yet will he have pity for his Holy Name, v. 21,
22. He will pity you for his own Names sake, when he cannot do so for your
sake; and in that very Month [of your filthiness] find you, Jer. 2. 23, 24.
though he find you in your Blood, he will not leave you so, but makes that time
your time of love, and bids you live, when (in rigor of Justice) he might
bid you dye, even to all eternity, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6, 8. Oh be of good comfort,
the Master calls you, Mark 10. 49. Draw nigh to him [in duty] and he will
draw nigh to you [in mercy] Jam 4. 8. Sanctify him in your Approaches, Levit.
10. 3. and he will satisfy you with his Salvation, Psalm. 91. 16. The Lepers
(that were separated from the City for their Leprosy) could say one to
another, Why sit we here until we dye? 2 Kin. 7. 3, 4. and Esther said, I will
go unto the King, and if I perish, I perish, Esth. 4. 16. though it was not
according to the Law for her to do so, yet found she favor and sweet success,
Esth. 5. 2. But sure I am, it is according to the Gospel, that you should draw
nigh to Christ, who holds out his Golden Scepter for you to touch it.

12. The fourth Encouragement is, Though all other means and men fail you, yet
Christ will not fail you: Thus the Woman had spent all that she had upon
Physicians, which had all failed her, Mark 5. 26. and had proved Jobs miserable
comforters to her, who, instead of lightening her burden, had loaden'd her
more; they were Physicians of no value, that mistaking her disease, had applied
Corrosives instead of Cordials, and through want of skill, (it may be) though
there might be a good intent, they had almost killed her, and not cured her,
Job 13. 4. and 16. 2. Then, when all failed, Christ's holy hand is reserved for
a dead lift, and fails not: when the Psalmists flesh and heart (both) failed,
yet his God never failed, Psalm. 73.25, 26. When he was ready to swoon away in
himself, (having a death upon his helps, and a damp upon his hopes) then the
joy of the Lord was his strength, Neh. 8. 10. God was the Rock of his Heart,
whence flowed his Spiritual joy, that same precious commodity, which no good
can match, and no evil can over-match: you shall never find failing in him,
that yet forgives your failings, Psalm. 89. 33. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 31.
6. Josh. 1.^* Hebr. 13.5. It Is five times over in Scripture.

13. The fifth Encouragement is, Though your issue of sin be an old issue, and
that flux of filthy matter has been long upon you, eve^ from a Child, as
before; though you had i^ twelve years, as the Woman had hers, or twenty,
thirty, yea forty years; yet may you come with hope of Cure to Jesus Christ:
his Name [Jesus] (ab (...), sano) signifies an healer, and he is a nonesuch
Savior, yea for Nonesuch Sinners: even a Manasseh (in the old Testament)
found healing mercy with and from him, whose issue had run long, and the
filthiest matter imaginable (below that sin unto death) for he had been, first,
a defyer of God; secondly, he had been a Murderer of Men; and thirdly, he had
been a Worshipper of Devils, 2 Chro. 33. 1. 12. When the Rod spoke, he heard
it, (as Mic. 6. 9.) who would not hear the word, v. 10. Adversity whips many a
Soul to Heaven, which otherwise prosperity had coached to Hell: and a Mary
Magdalen (in the New Testament) found healing mercy from Christ, out of whom he
had cast seven Devils, Mark 16.9. As a Woman had first brought in death, (to
wit, Eve,) so this Woman must be the first witness of Christ's Resurrection: you
may not then despair of healing Mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15. [Omnipotenti Medicio
nullus insanabilis occurrit morbus] to an Almighty healer, no disease can be
found incurable. Jehovah Rephekah, I am the mighty God that heals you, Exodus
15. 26. If he will, he can make you whole, Matthew. 8. 2.

14. The sixth Encouragement is, That he certainly will do it; he will
assuredly heal all those that come to him humbly, and touch him believingly, as
the woman (with the issue) did; for (first,) Christ never sent any such away
unhealed while he was on Earth; and (secondly) he has now more power and love
(rather than less) that he is in Heaven: a glorified Christ (in his state of
exaltation) must needs be a fully accomplished Savior for poor sinners, if he
were so sweetly qualified to heal all that ever came to him for healing, while
he was in the form of a servant, and in his state of Humiliation. This poor
Woman comes trembling to Christ, but goes away triumphing from him: Faith in
Christ finds a sweeter welcome than it can expect; Christ turns himself toward
touchers, as he did toward her that came behind him, Matthew. 9. 22. May you but
find a praying heart, he will (undoubtedly) find a pitying heart: put in for a
share of Mercy (as she did with Jairus) while Christ is dealing Mercy.

15. Finally, seeing your heart is naturally an evil Treasure and Fountain, and
has the issues of death (not of life, Prove. 4. 23.) in it, as there is
saltness in every drop of the Sea* and bitterness in every branch of the
Wormwood: so there is sin in every action of the unrenewed Heart,] Omnis vita
infidelium peccatum est] says Augustine, The whole life of an Unbeliever is
sin; whatsoever an unclean person touched, though it were holy flesh, Hag. 2.
12. it was unclean: so every action of such (his very plowing and praying) is
defiled with sin; all his works are dead works, be they (for the matter of
them) never so praiseworthy, as not flowing from a principle of life within:
As the fountain casts out its bitter waters, so the heart does wickedness,
Jer. 6. 7. it is the stews of unclean; the shambles of bloody, the shop of
couzening, and a very forge or mint of all sinful thoughts: it is the source of
sin, a very Seminary [(...)] and seed-plot of all iniquity: as in the first
Chaos (Genesis 1. 2. etc.) there were the Seeds of all created things, so there is
in the heart the seeds of all folly, vanity, and villainy: in that Sea is not
that great Leviathan (the Devil) only, (who has both a strong hold of it, and
his strong holds in it, 2 Cor. 10. 4.) but also creeping things, (crawling
lusts,) innumerable, as Psalm. 104. 26. making that which should be the Temple
of God, to be a den of Thieves, a Palace of Pride, a very raging Sea of sin,
Isa. 57. 20. yea, a little Hell of black and blasphemous imaginations: [Homo in
se infernum habet] says Luther, Every Man naturally has an Hell in his heart:
if there may be a beam in the eye, Matthew. 7. 3, 4, 5. surely there is a whole
Wood in the Heart. Si trabs in oculo, tunc sylva in cord, says the Father:
and if the Tongue be not a City, or a Country of evil only, but a whole World
of evil, Jam. 3. 6. a newfound World of iniquity; how many such Worlds then is
the heart, the tongues treasure!

16. Oh then, Christ must be the true Hercules to cleanse this Augaean stable
of your filthy heart, by drawing that blessed River of Repentance through it,
to wash it clean: it is a touch of Christ that must stop your issue of death.
And that you may press to be a toucher as well as a follower of Christ, take
these following Motives. (1.) Adam touched the Tree of Knowledge, and caught
death; and will not you touch the Tree of Life, that you may live and not dye?
Genesis 3. 2. (Secondly,) Satan will touch you with his deadly touches, 1 John 5.
18. and have you not then need to touch Christ? (Thirdly,) Christ comes near to
you in the Gospel, that he may be touched, Romans 10. 8. (Fourthly,) he stretches
out the Golden Scepter of the Covenant of Grace, that you may take hold of it,
as well as touch the top of it, Esth. 5. 2. Isa. 56.4, 6. (Fifthly,) then
neither evil [nor Devil] shall touch you, 1 John 5.19. God charges both, as
David did his Soldiers, Beware that none touch my Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 5. 12.
If you be in Christ, and keep with him, and within touch of him, you are out of
the Devils reach; he may (indeed) touch, yea, bruise your heel, Genesis 3. 15. but
he can neither break your Head nor your heart. (Sixthly,) what pressing (from
all places in the Country) of those that have the Evil, is to the Court for a
Royal touch upon touching days! How much should there be to Christ the King of
Kings, and true Allhealer? (Seventhly,) the touch of the Loadstone is admirable
(whereof no reason could ever be rendered) but the touch of Christ, (that makes
the Heart point Heavenward) is more admirable. (Eighthly,) Daniel was touched
by Gabriel, over and over again, Dan. 9. 21. and 10. 10, 16, 18. Oh get Christ's
touch, Matthew. 8.3. both upon your eyes, Matthew. 9. 29. and upon your ears, yea
and upon your tongue, Mark 7.33. but especially upon your Heart, 1 Samuel 10.26.
This is not all, but you must get Christ's Allhealing Touch upon your Children
(as Parents do the Kings touch for their diseased Sons, or Daughters) Mark 10.
13. All these have the King's Evil (so called.) The evil of the Devil, (that
King of the bottomless pit, Revel. 9. 11) is upon them all: our lips are
polluted, Isa. 6. 7. Luke 22. 57. our tongues are set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3.
6. and so are all the rest, till Christ, (who is touched with our infirmities,
Hebr. 4. 15.) touch and heal them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Hearts Falsehood and Treachery.

1. THe second thing is, the second Malady, The heart is as full of Treachery
as of Treason, and of falsehood as of filthiness, and therefore stands in need
of the second Remedy, to wit, of keeping with all diligence, as a false and
deceitful Thief, (that has given his keeper the slip many times) is watched
and warded: first of the Malady, The Heart of Man is a false and treacherous
Heart; it was no less than so in Jeremy's day, Jer. 17. 9. (so superlatively
fallacious) and surely it is much more so in our day, that are cast upon the
dregs of time, and on the fag-end of the World, 1 Cor. 10. 11. the dregs of
things are always the worst of things, and so are the dregs of time; the old
World was worst a little before its destruction by water, Genesis 6. 5, 11, 12.
(all flesh had corrupted their way, and all the thoughts of the heart of man
[extensively] were only evil [intensively] and continually evil [protensively]
there was a general Ataxy in Church and State, in Families and Persons, (the
whole frame was out of frame) so this new World may be worst a little before
its dissolution by Fire, when the Son of Man comes to burn it, 2 These. 1. 8. 2
Pet. 3. 10. Iniquity shall abound, Matthew. 24. 12. a full Sea of Sin, and a
low-ebbe of Faith, Luke 18. 8. he will then find no Faith in most, true Faith
in few, a living Faith in fewer, and a lively and strong Faith in fewest of
all: in former Ages there was much heart-filthiness and heart-falshood, and in
our following Ages there is more; oh, how are the very banks of Blasphemy
broken down in our time, and wickedness now more brazen-faced with a witness
then ever! 'twas formerly night-work, as ashamed to show it self in the light
of the Sun, and in the sight of Men, 1 These. 5. 7. Act. 2. 15. but now it is
become more impudent and (plainly) a Noonday Devil, Men declaring their Sin as
Sodom, Isa. 3. 9. and hanging them out in the very sight of the Sun; not
unlike that unpardonable and unparalleld Villainy of incestuous Absalom, 2 Samuel
12. 12. and 18. 22. upon the top of the Palace, from whence David had looked,
liked, and lusted after Bathshebah. Thereby God wrote his very sin upon his
punishment.

2. As it was in the Prophet Jeremies time, so it is in our time, Men are apt
to speak the best of the worst, and of the goodness of the heart under the
badness of the life, making the heart still as a City of refuge to retire to,
as if it were good when all else be evil. The Prophet therefore opens a
casement to make a discovery of the falsehood and filthiness, of the treason and
treachery of the heart, saying, Jer. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Which words are a Doctrinal
Position, or Proposition, which consists of a Subject, of a Predicate, and of a
Copula, according to the Rules of Logic. 1. The Subject is the heart of Man,
taken comprehensively in Scripture, for the Mind, Soul, Conscience, Will, and
affections of Man; yea, for the whole Man, called the hidden Man of the heart,
1 Pet. 3. 4. for if the heart be engaged, all the whole Man is engaged. Thus
Hunters adventures their necks, yea their all, in leaping over hedge and ditch,
while they pursue their game, why? their hearts are engaged in their pleasures;
and thus it is with all, in their pursuit of either good or evil. The Heart was
the best piece, as Created, but is the worst piece, as corrupted: it is like
Jeremy's figs, as Created of God, nothing better, but as corrupted by the
Devil, nothing worse: when Man came first out of Gods Mint, he was a curious
Silver-piece, and shone most gloriously; he had then an honest, upright, and an
innocent heart, Eccles. 7. 29. he had then no dross, no tin mingled with his
Silver, no Metal better than it, but Gold, no Creature better than him but
Angels; the image of God was stamped upon his his heart, and he was crowned
with glory and Majesty, Psalm. 8. 5. he had knowledge in his Understanding,
obedience in his Will, and order in his Affections, etc.

3. But now alas, in the fallen Estate, how is this burnt Temple to be bewailed
by us, as the Jews did for theirs! Ezr. 3. 12. Man, (that curious Silver-piece
formerly) is now become the lost groat, Luke 15. 8. that has lost its sound,
its weight, its luster, and its superscription and Image: yea, instead of Gods
Image, Satan has drawn out his limbs upon it, so that Man's heart is now
altogether of another make; it is [Inversus Decalogus] a Diametrical opposition
to the holy Law of God: the heart of the wicked (in the state of degeneration)
is now of little worth, like an old, cracked, over-worn groat; though the
Tongue of the just, (acted by a new heart in the state of Regeneration) be as
choice Silver, Prove. 10. 20. Thus the Subject, to wit, the Heart of Man, (the
first particular) neither is what it was, (at first) nor what it ought to be
according to Gods Law: it is not, as it was created of God, very good (as all
other things were that God Created) but it is now very evil, as corrupted by
Satan; yea evil it self. And this corruption is remarked in Scripture for three
things; first, the Matter, secondly, the Manner, thirdly, the Measure of it:
first, the Matter (or Subject) that is corrupted, is the Heart, the principal
thing that both God and the Devil strangely striveth for; they both cry, My
Son, [my Daughter] give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. The Devil once strove with
Michael about Moses dead body, Jude the ninth verse: but doubtless it was his
purpose to set up an Idol (for himself) in the hearts of the living Israelites:
If Satan can but get the heart, (a strong hold of it, and his strong holds in
it, as before) he thinks himself well enough: and so Satan's eldest Son or
Vicar; 'twas the Watchword of Gregory the Thirteenth, in Queen Elizabeth's time,
My Son, give me thy heart: be in heart a Papist, and go where you will, do what
you will: and it is the heart that God mostly wishes for, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that
there were such an heart, etc. and that God mostly delights in, Psalm. 51. 17.
as in his bed of Spices, Cant. 6. 2. Thus there is a wonderful kind of
continual contention, (not so much of Earthly as of Spiritual powers) about the
conquest and possession of Man's Heart: but alas! through Man's transgression,
Satan mostly carries it, till Christ come to divide the spoil with the strong,
Isa. 53. 12. Satan is the strong-man armed, that (through Man's sin) enters
into the heart (as into his Palace) thus he entered into Judas his heart: when
he had concluded that cursed Contract of betraying his innocent Master, Luke
22.3. [then entered Satan] who (till then) had but stood at the door: and when
Satan has entered and taken possession, then he fills it, even from corner to
corner, as he did the heart of Ananias, Act. 5. 3. [Why has Satan filled thine
heart?] Alas! he fills it top-full of all unrighteousness, Romans 1. 29. as above
he fills it with Hells Household Stuff, and quarters his Legions of unclean
Spirits in this Isle of Man, and he keeps peaceable possession of his Palace
and Kingdom, until the stronger man (Jesus Christ) come (in the power of his
Word and Spirit) with a Writ of [Ejectione firmae] to dispossess that usurping
possessor, to conquer, plunder, and spoil the evil one, Luke 11. 21, 22. This
is Christ's reward for his ignominious death, Col. 2. 15. he shall divide with
the Devil in his demeans. It shall not be all Terra-Diaboli, or the
Devils-land, but there shall be Immanuels land too, Isa. 8. 8. whose Land is
planted with noble Vines, and his house (or heart) is furnished with graces as
the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Christ stands at the door of the heart and
knocks, Revel. 3.20. as well as Satan, both of them woes and wins it; sometimes
Satan avails and wins the heart by his insinuating temptations, and sometimes
our Savior does it by his exceeding great and precious promises, let in by his
Spirit.

5. Having shown the first particular, the subject or matter, the Heart of Man,
that it is corrupted by sin and Satan; the second thing to be spoke to, is the
Praedicate, or Manner how it is corrupted: and the manner of the corruption of
this matter (the heart) is manifold in Scripture: As (first) it is now a weak
heart in the fallen estate, Ezekiel. 16. 30. strong enough it is for sin, but
exceeding weak for duty: Oh, how weak is thy heart? (Secondly,) it is a wilful
heart, that is, rebellious and obstinate against the will of God, Deuteronomy. 2. 30.
not only the heart of Sihon (King of Heshbon) was an obstinate heart, but also
the heart of Gods own Israel was a rebellious heart, Jer. 5. 23. as soft as wax
in Satan's hand (pliable enough) and yet as hard as a stone (altogether
unplyable) in Gods hand: (3.) it is a stony heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26.
it is a flinty not a fleshy heart by nature; it is refractory, untractable, and
impenetrable, (resisting the Divine touches of the Word and Spirit) the natural
heart is wholly a stony heart, which none can draw or pull out, (as the word in
the Septuagint signifies) or change, but the hand of Heaven only: the
free will of Man cannot do it, but it is the free grace of God (alone) that of
these stones raises up Children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3. 9. [Garriant illi, nos
credamus] says Augustine, Let Men prate what they please of the free will of
Man to good, there is no such thing, believe it; the heart is naturally
insensible of the Word, inflexible to the Spirit, and impenetrable to the grace
of God in it self; it is to every good work Reprobate: it is as hard (fourthly)
as the Adamant, Zech. 7. 12. (which word signifies Untameable) that hardest of
stones, harder than the flint, Ezekiel. 3. 9. yea, than the nether millstone, Job
41. 24. Pliny says, the hardness of this stone is unspeakable, the Hammer
cannot break it, neither can the fire burn it, no nor so much as heat it:
[Hircino tamen rumpitur sanguine] yet if it be soaked in Goats-blood, 'twill
then dissolve into pieces; and so may the hardest Heart by the blood of Christ,
(the true scapegoat, Levit. 16. 21, 22.) if applied and improved by Faith.

6. (Fifthly) It Is a stiff-necked and uncircumcised heart, Jer. 9.23. Act. 7.
51. even in their very Circumcision there was an uncircumcision, unregenerate
Israel was to God as the Ethiopians, (those black Pagans that could not change
their color, Jer. 13. 23.) Amos 9. 7. that never did bleed for sin by Divine
compunction, but the foreskin of filthiness was still remaining, and that with
so much stiff-neckedness, as rendered them incapable of Divine impressions;
insomuch, as neither Ministry, nor Misery, nor Miracle, nor Mercy, could
Mollify, until the Lord give a new Spirit, the same heart in substance, but
renewed in its qualities: the strings (or heart strings) are the same, but the
Tune is changed, Psalm. 51. 12. Ephesians. 4. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 17. (Sixthly) It Is a
whorish heart, Ezekiel. 6. 9. that goes a whoring from God, and runs after false
lovers, that lie in wait for the very Soul, Psalm. 73. 27. Hos. 4. 12. and 9. 1.
The Heart of Man is full of Harlotry, and the Spirit of Whoredom causes it to
wander, not only from God, but also from under God, from under the precincts
of the Divine Will, and so from under the protection of the Divine Power; as
the Wife that forsakes her Husband, and plays the Whore with strangers, is
therefore worthily cast off by him, for (both) dissolving the Marriage-knot,
and for destroying true Humane Society, as Matthew. 19. 9. This Revolting Heart,
Jer. 5. 23. [Satanico impetu] driven by the devil, gaddeth after strangers,
Jer. 2. 25. 36. and casts God away (as) into a corner.

7. (Seventhly) It Is a divided Heart, Hos. 10. 2. a double heart, Psalm. 12. 2.
[an Heart, and an Heart, Hebrew] one Heart in the Mouth, and another in the
Body, being one thing in profession, and another in practice: halting between
two, 'twixt God and Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. 'twixt Christ and sin: being one
while for this, and another while for that, unconstant to both, and uncertain
of either, and constant in nothing but in inconstancy. The divided or
double-hearted man [(...)] the double-souled one, is not for Gods service, for
he will be served [truly] that there be no halting, and [totally] that there be
no halving: Hence the Apostle James advises the double-minded, or
cloven-hearted, to cleanse their hearts from that corruption that cleaves to
them, that their minds, mouths, and manners, might correspond all together,
Jam. 1. 8. and 4. 8. and hence the Prophet David prays, that God would unite
his heart, (that was so apt to be double, and divided betwixt the things of
God, and the things of the World) Psalm. 86. 11. that it might be fixed upon
God: And hence also God has promised to give oneness of heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
[I will give them one heart] opposed to this double and divided Heart, (being
partly for God, and partly for the world, as Ezekiel. 33. 31.) This boon you
should heartily beg (with David) that you may entirely cleave to God alone,
Deuteronomy. 10. 20. and 30. 20. and Act. 11. 23. and serve him without distraction,
in all simplicity and godly sincerity, 1 Cor. 7. 35. and 2 Cor. 1. 12. [Anima
dispersa fit minor] the heart divided is thereby disabled for duty: Therefore
the Prophet prays, Lord, thou art God alone, unite my heart, so that it may be
fixed (as Quicksilver is by Pyrotechny) on God alone.

8. The time would fail me to insist upon all the cursed Characters that the
Looking-glass of the Word of God represents to you, concerning the Heart of
Man, as (eighthly) It Is a froward and fretting heart, Prove. 17. 20. and 19. 3.
never pleased, whether full or fasting: (Ninthly) It Is an Hypocritical Heart,
Job 36. 13. hollow-hearted ones heap up wrath (against the day of wrath, Romans
2. 5.) turning Repentance into a form, and converting conversion (it self) into
sin; such foul sinners shall be cast into the hottest place of Hell, whereof
Hypocrites are as the Freeholders, and all other sinners but as Tenants to
them, Matthew. 23. 14, 15. 33. and 24. 51. (Tenthly) It Is an haughty heart, Prove.
18. 12. the pride of the heart deceives Man, Obad. v. 3. So bladder-like is
Man, (that bag of dust) that being filled (but) with the wind of earthly
vanities, he grows great and swells in his own conceit, strutting it all
along in his goings, as if he would knock out a star out of the Heavens at
every step and stride: but if once it comes to be pricked with the least pin of
Divine Justice, this poor bladder shrinks in, and shrivels away into nothing:
swelling is as dangerous in the Soul, as in the body, and a bulging wall is
near its downfall: (11ly.) It Is not only a proud and haughty, but also a very
naughty heart, 1 Samuel 17. 28. as it is an evil heart, Hebr. 3. 12. an impenitent
Heart, Romans 2.5. and a beastly Heart, Dan. 4.16. yea, seven abominations are in
it, Prove. 26.25. it is an evil treasure filled withal evil, Mat. 12.25. (12ly.)
To return to the Prophets character, Jer. 17. 9. he puts three together in that
one Verse; as first, It Is so deceitful, it cannot be trusted: seccondly, It Is
so desperately wicked, it cannot be governed: and thirdly, It Is so dark and
deep, that it cannot be discerned and discovered. The third thing is the
measure (as before the matter and manner) it is superlatively so in all these;
it is deceitful, desperate, and deep, or dark above all other things: if so,
then never say you henceforward, that you have a good Heart (Godward) when God
tells you the contrary in all the aforesaid.

9. This brings in the third particular in the Logical Position or Proposition;
to wit, The Copula that couples together the Subject and Predicate; the word
[is] the Heart [is] deceitful, desperate, and deep, or dark: it is not said by
the Prophet Jeremy, that it has been so for time past, or it may be so for
time to come, but that it ever [is] so in all Ages and Generations: As the
Hearts of our forefathers were deceitful, desperate, and deep Hearts, so they
are now such Hearts in our present day, and there will be such Hearts in
following Ages to the end of the World. There be two great Mysteries in the
World, and both are lasting Mysteries, that lasts so long as the World
lasts; and they are these: first, The Mystery of Christ in the flesh; and
secondly, The Mystery of sin in the Spirit. The first is the Mystery of
Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. (first) The nature of it, it is a Mystery: (secondly)
The quantity, it is a great Mystery; there be many other Mysteries, but this is
the great one, that has the crier crying [Ab-rech, or bow the knee] before it,
as Genesis 41.43. (Thirdly,) The quality of it, it is a sacred and holy Mystery,
not like the Mystery of iniquity: (Fourthly,) The certainty of it, [without
controversie] Mysteries may meet with contradiction, this great Mystery much
more, in all its three parts, the Doctrinal, Practical, and Providential parts
of it: tell Reason of a Crucified God, of the Incarnation, and of the
Resurrection, and 'twill laugh at them, as Sarah did at the promise, Genesis 18.
12. but Faith looking with better eyes than those of Reason, (as Ahraham did)
holds its hold of that which is confirmed beyond controversy. If carnal Reason
only teach you herein, you have a fool for your Schoolmaster, that can never
comprehend how God was manifested in the flesh, first, out of the bosom of his
Father; secondly, out of the womb of his Mother; and thirdly, out of the Types
of the Law, etc.

10. The second is the Mystery of Iniquity or Ungodliness, which is not only
personal and outward, 2 These. 2. 7. Revel. 17. 5, 7. but it is also mystical and
inward: and this is quite contrary to the former; for as the other is the
manifestation of God in the flesh, so this latter is the manifestation of the
Devil in the Spirit or Heart: and yet there is some correspondency (as well as
contrariety) betwixt those two great Mysteries; as both have the Apostles four
Dimensions, Height, Depth, Breadth, and Length: the Apostle thus measures out
the unmeasurable Mystery of Godliness, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. and it is not difficult
to discern the like Dimensions in the Mystery of Ungodliness: for first, there
is height in it, it does reach up to Heaven, as did the cry of Cains Murder,
and of Sodoms Uncleanness: secondly, there is depth in it, thus the steps of an
Harlot not only goes down to death, but also takes hold (as low as) of Hell,
Prove. 5. 5. thirdly, there is breadth in it, it has spread it self over all
the World: the Serpents seed has dispersed it self as far as either Adams or
Noah's seed ever went: alas, the whole World lies in [this Mystery of]
wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and fourthly, there is the length of it also, beyond
for this Mystery of Iniquity will continue so long as the World continues,
(wicked hearts there have been, wicked hearts there are, and wicked hearts
there will be to the end) yea, and beyond the end of the World, even to all
Eternity; inasmuch as Hell is a place of sinning, as well as of suffering, as
Revel. 16. 9, 11, 21.

11. Now this Mystery of Ungodliness (as it lies within doors) consists
mostly in the Treachery and falsehood of the Heart of Man, which the Prophet
Jeremy tells you, is (1.) deceitful above all things, Jer. 17. 9. the words in
the Hebrew are, [gnacob ha leb mi-col] which signifies strictly, The Heart is
deceitful above all: the word [things] is not in the Hebrew Text, but it is
employed only, and it may as well imply [persons] as [things] so the Text may
be supplied with the former, as well as with the latter, and be read thus; The
Heart is deceitful above all [persons] as well as above all [things] according
as that Text [Christ is Lord of all] Acts 10. 36. is understood of all persons,
as well as of all things: the sense then of the Prophets words must be, that
there is no deceitful person in the world, and no deceitful thing in the world,
so deceitful as the Heart of Man, [Adeo varium est Cor, adeo versutum and
versipelle: adeo tortuosum, anfractuosum, and fallax] it is so full of windings
and turnings, of crooks and corners, of crafty wiles, and cunning sleights,
that no [person] in his cheats, no [thing] in its Deceits can be a comparable
parallel to the Heart of Man, that has deceived the innocentest, strongest,
and wisest Men that ever were in the world, to wit, Adam, Samson, and Solomon:
this is here plainly and plentifully described, and oh that it were as duly
and deeply considered, to wit, the Hearts Treachery!

12. More particularly of the Matter, of the Manner, and of the Measure of this
corruption of the Heart, as it is in the fallen Nature: (1.) The matter that is
corrupted is the Heart, that principal part of Man, that [primum vivens, and
ultimum moriens] first living, and last dying part, in a Spiritual respect, as
well as in a natural; it is the Privy-Councel and Throne Royal, from whence all
Edicts and Commands come, for all humane thoughts words and deeds in the Isle
of Man: it is the fountain or spring (of all humane Actions) into which the
envious one has cast his deadly poison, (as the great Turk did into
Scanderbegs Wells) that all the streams (flowing from thence) might be
poisoned: It Is (plainly) the Palace of the great King, (as the initial Letters
of C O R imports; [C]amera [O]mnipotentis, [R]egis; the three first letters of
those three words spells [COR] the heart, which three words signify the
Chambers of the great King) either of the most high God, and of Jesus Christ
that mighty Prince, Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 3. 17. if renewed: or of Satan, that God of
this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. if unrenewed: and thus our Lord expresses
it. (1) the person possessing, is the strong Man, or Satan: (2.) the place
possessed, is the palace which he keeps in peace, to wit, the heart of Man,
Luke 11. 21. the word [(...),] signifies the Royal Hall or Palace of a King, 1
Kin. 21. 1. 2 Kin. 20. 18. as usurping Zimri burnt the Royal Palace, when he
saw he could hold it no longer, 1 Kin. 16. 18. just so the Usurper (Satan) will
burn or drown this Palace, when Christ comes to dispossess him of it, as Mark
9. 20, 26. casting him into the fire, and into the water, to destroy his Palace.

13. The Heart of Man is called and compared to a Palace, upon a threefold
account: (1.) Because of its magnificency and stateliness, such as Kings Houses
use to be, so is Man's Heart, a curious piece of Gods Workmanship: if the whole
body of Man be such exquisite Tapestry-work, Psalm. 139. 14. then how much more
is that principal part (which both God and the Devil so strangely strives for
to possess) the hidden Man of the Heart? it is a wonderful piece of neat
needle work, fearfully framed and fashioned, v. 15. whose Builder and Maker is
God, Psalm. 35. 15. This stately Palace has the outer and the inner Court, the
upper and the lower Rooms or Regions, the Mistress or Lady, and the Handmaids
or waiting Gentlewomen; to wit, the outward and inward senses, the
Concupiscible and Irascible passions, the Will and the Affections: the
Microcosme (or little World) to wit, Man, is a glorious Fabric, as well as the
Macrocosme or great World. (2.) Because of its Amplitude and spatiousness; a
Palace must be spacious, as well as stately; the Royal Houses of some Kings are
as large as little Cities, wherein persons of all quality are entertained: Thus
the Heart of Man is created with vast capacities, which though (as to the
substance of it) it be but a little lump of flesh, and so little, that (as one
wittily says) it would not serve a Kite to feed upon for one meal, yet it is
such a Capacious and Comprehensive thing, that all which the Kite flies over
(in a whole day) cannot serve it, yea, all the World cannot suffice it. [Vnus
pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis.] Alexander when he had Conquered one World,
wept, because there were no more Worlds to Conquer. And the ingenious Emblem
shows, that the whole round World cannot fill the three-corner'd Heart, but
still the Corners are all empty. Thus Solomon says, (who himself had
[varochab-Leb] largeness of Heart, as the sand on the seashore, 1 Kin. 4. 29.
capable of receiving 3000 Proverbs, and 1005 Songs, etc. 32, 33.) that God has
set the World in Man's Heart, Eccles. 3. 11. now that must needs be a very
spacious Fabric which can contain the whole World.

14. (Thirdly,) Because of its Altitude and loftiness; a Palace is an high
Building, over-topping all other Buildings; the Tower and Turrets whereof,
(like that Tower of Babel, Genesis 11. 4.) reaches up to Heaven: This ('it is true)
is an Hyperbolical expression, wherein too much is said, that enough may be
believed; as in all other Hyperbolical Scriptures: but it may be truly said,
(even without an Hyperbole) that the Heart of Man is a lofty thing, towering up
(even) to Heaven: this was not unknown to Nature. Horace the Heathen Poet tells
you, [Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia] we aspire as high as Heaven in our
a^mbitious folly; as Ovids proud Phaeton did to his own destruction: but it is
better known in Scripture, as Isa. 14. 12, 13, 14. there the Heart, (not of
Beelzebub, as some Ancients think, but) of Belshazzar (rather) said, I will
ascend into Heaven, above the height of the Clouds, and above the stars of God:
Thus also the Heart of the proud Prince of Tire was lifted up, to set his
Throne upon Gods Throne, Ezekiel. 28. 2, 6, 10. and Dan. 4. 30. and 5. 20. all
which were brought down from their imaginary Heaven, to the very Counterpoint
of a real Hell; but let your Heart be lifted up toward God in Holiness and
Heavenly-mindedness, as David's, Psalm. 25.1. and Jehosaphats, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6.
not as Hezekiahs, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.

15. Thus you see the first thing, the Matter (which has the Malady of
Corruption in it) to wit, the Heart; now come we to the second thing, to wit,
the Manner how the Heart is corrupted with this Malady, that is, by Satan, (the
grand Usurper) taking and keeping possession of this Palace, whereby the Temple
of God becomes an Idol-Temple, a den of Thieves, an house full of dunghill
Deities, Ezekiel. 14. 3. [Stercoreos deos suos super Cor suum sustulerunt] as
Piscator reads it; God complains of Israel, that they had advanced their
dirty Idols upon their very Hearts, a place where God only should (by right)
be, as it is, (or at least should be) Gods bridal-bed; it is Christ, and not
Satan, that should lie all night between our breasts, Cant. 1. 13, 16. but
alas, Satan has taken possession, (which is eleven points of the Law) and set
up his Throne in this Palace; whence he commands us to be ever serving diverse
lusts, Tit. 3. 3. and wherein he continually works, as the Blacksmith works in
his shop, Ephesians. 2. 3. working in us, (as well as working us up to) all manner of
Abominations: in as much as those tha^ go down into the deep, they see the
wonders of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 23, 24. so such as are helped (through the
conduct of Grace) to go down into the deep of their own hearts, Psalm. 64.6.
they see there the Works of the Devil, even the very depths of Satan, Revel. 2.
24. the manner (as well as method) of his corrupting the Heart. 1. Making it
untrusty, like a jugler or pilfering Thief, exceeding treacherous and
fallacious: 2. Making it unruly (as well as untrusty) like an unbroken horse
that is broken loose, or as a wild Asses colt, Job 11. 12. and as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31. 18. desperately wicked, etc. and 3ly,
leading it captive at his will, by his surprising snares, 2 Timothy 2. 25.

16. The manner (1.) of Satan's taking possession of the Heart of Man, was (in
general) by the fall; the first disobedience and transgression gave Satan
possession, and made him the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. he is called a
Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44. for (Ahab-like) he first kills, and
then takes possession; he first Murders Gods Image in Man, and then possessing
himself, he stamps his own fowl Image in the place of Gods glorious Image: but
particularly he takes possession, 1. By original propagation; fallen Adam begets
a Son in his own Image, Genesis 5. 3. not only like him as a Man, but also like
him as a sinful Man, Job. 14. 4. all (elect as well as reprobate) are born
Children of wrath: Ephesians. 2. 3. the Apostles [we] there includes all; yea, both
Jew and Gentile; all are lost in Adam, till found in Christ, Phil. 3. 9. 2. By
actual transgression, which lets down (indeed) the drawbridge to let Satan
enter, Joh. 13. 27. getting a fuller possession of him than before: Satan has
something in us, (though he had nothing in Christ, Joh. 14. 30.) that gives him
possession of us. The manner, 3ly, of Satan's keeping possession of us as his
own, is by Conquest, or rather by Cozenage, he pleads prescription for it; if
it be asked him, How long has thy tenure been? he answers, Even of a Child,
Mark 9. 23. hence is he Lord Paramount, and plays Rex in the Heart, till Christ
serve a Writ of Ejectment on him.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Hearts Treachery.

1. AFter (1.) the Matter, and (2.) the Manner, follows, (3.) the Measure, how
much the Heart is corrupted with Treachery and Deceitfulness: the Prophet
Jeremy tells you, [gnacob ha leb mi col] it is deceitful above all, whether
persons or things: 1. Let me show you how the Heart of Man is more deceitful
than any deceitful person in Scripture-Record; and (2.) how it is more deceitful
than any deceitful thing that the Holy Scripture does mention. First, of
persons, and they are two fold, 1. Male, 2. Female: first of the Males; and the
first instance to exemplify it, (by way of Allusion, is [Jacob] and the
rather, because the Prophet uses the same word [gnacob] from whence Jacob
(called in Hebrew Jagnacob) had his name, Jer. 17. 9. whereby is most
graphically and aptly deciphered and described, that the fleshly Heart does the
same thing to the Spirit (in doing of good) which Jacob did to his Brother, to
wit, catch it by the heel., and supplant it (as the word [gnacob] signifies)
while it is running the race of Christianity set before us, Hebr. 12. 1. 1 Cor.
9. 24. Though David was as wise as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14. 20. yet it
deceived him, and tripped up his heels, (as the word imports) Psalm. 39. 1, 2,
3. and so it did Peter, Joh. 13. 37, 38. though he were a pillar of the Church,
Gal. 2. 9. yet this supplanting heart, supplanted and over-turned this very
pillar: Oh little did those two great and good Men imagine, that their own
hearts had been so treacherous and deceitful!

2. Therefore Jacob (or Hebr. Jagnacob) is the first and most fit Scriptural
Allusion, to demonstrate the Hearts deceitfulness: as you have the name [Jacob]
many times in Scripture, so sometimes the Etymology of the name, especially
upon three occasions. 1. From his struggling with his Brother in his Mothers
Womb: 2. From his beguiling him of the birthright; and then 3ly, of the
Blessing. First, of the first of thos^; The word [gnacab] signifies
Calcaneariu^, or an Heel-Catcher; and because he not only strugled with his
Brother in Rebecca's Womb for priority, but also caught his Brother by the
heel or foot-sole there, as if he would have turned up his Brothers heels, or
(at least) have pulled him back, and so got to the goal (of the birth) before
him, Genesis 25. 22, 26. Hosea 12. 3. therefore did his Father call him Jacob; a
strange presage of what he should do in supplanting [Esau] which signifies
[perfect] because born with a Beard, (as some say) or however, with hair so
grown, as if he had been a Man already, rather then a Child; he was [factus and
perfectus pilis] and yet encountered by this supplanter at his Birth. Thus both
of them brought their own Names along with them into the World: [Conveniunt
rebus nomina saepe suis.] Oftimes Names and Natures answer each other. 2.
Though he could not bring down his Brothers head, by tripping up his heels in
the Womb, yet he supplants him in the World, gaining the birthright by
subtilty, (when he was grown up) which he got not by striving and struggling
with him before he was born, Genesis 25. 29, 33. Hebr. 12. 16.

3. And then thirdly in beguiling him of the blessing, (as well as of the
birthright) whereupon Esau (himself) gives the Interpretation of Jacobs Name,
[Hache Karah Shemo Jagnacob, Vajegnekebeni Zeh pagnamaiim] is he not rightly
called Jacob? for he has [Jacobd] me these two times; he first supplanted me
of the birthright, and now of the blessing, Genesis 27. 36. yea, and the good old
Man (his Father) says, in v. 35. Thy Brother came in subtilty, and has taken
away thy Blessing. Esau's Gloss or Allusion may be read (word for word) thus:
My Brother may well be called an Heeler, for he has heeled me these two times;
that is, he has come behind me, set his foot before me (as runners in a race
play fowl play to each others) and tripped up my heels twice: just so, and much
more than so, deals your Gnacob, (or deceitful) heart (as the Prophet calls
it) with you: As there was a struggling in Rebeckahs Womb, so there is a
Conflict in the Soul of the Elect; what can you see in the Shulamite, (or one
brought into Gods peace by Christ, as the word [Shulamite] signifies) but as it
were, the company of two Armies, Cant. 6. 13. the Army of the flesh, and the
Army of the spirit, both struggling for the birthright? and how does the
fleshly Heart take hold of the heel of the Spirit, (its Brother) they are [ut
fratres simul jacentes in eodem utero] as twinns lying both together in the
same Soul: This Holy David complained of, and groaned under, Psalm. 49. 5.
[gnaven gnakebi (the same words with the Prophets, Jer. 17. 9.) Jesubeni.] The
iniquity of my Heels (or Supplanters) do surround me with their snares: alas,
the best of Men have some dirt of iniquity cleaving to their heels, some
deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3. 13. he that is (already) washed, needs not,
save to wash his feet, Joh. 13. 10. or his heel of the unrenewed part, which
will be playing fowl play, trip up his heels, and cast him down too, Psalm. 18.
23.

4. And that not only [Zeh pagnamaiim] two times, as Jacob did his elder
Brother, (who was the Priest of the Family by his birthright) but even ten
times, yea times without number: oh, how often has the iniquity of your heels,
or this Heeler (your supplanting heart) catched hold of your heel, and pulled
you back from duty, not only from the new birth, but also to hinder your
growth in Grace, and in your passage and progress toward Heaven! nay, how often
has it tripped up your heels, and brought down your head, and given you many a
desperate fall, to the very breaking of the bones of your Soul! as it did
David's, Psalm. 51. 8. and had your falls been backward, (as that of Eli was, 1 Samuel 4. 18.) which (through Grace) were rather like Abraham's, Genesis 18. 2. a
falling forward only, Psalm. 37. 24. Cant. 2. 6. you might have got the fall of
an Elephant, thar rises no more; and had not the covenant of Grace (which
indeed permits a fall) also ensured Repentance after the fall, this
heel-catcher (your own treacherous heart) would not only have catched your
heel, but also your very birthright and blessing, and bereaved you of both for
ever: Jacob beguiled his Father Isaac, as well as his Brother Esau; and though
your [Gnacob] Heart may not beguile you of the birthright at one time, yet
will it at another time, either by force or fraud, as Jacob did; take heed of
it, 1 Cor. 10. 12.

5. The second Scriptural Allusion is, Laban beguiled Jacob, (who had beguiled
his Father and Brother) Genesis 29. 25. God frequently retaliates, and pays men
with their own coin; he had beguiling for beguiling, crying out, Why have thou
beguiled me with Leah for Rachel? Jacob in a cunning disguise deceives Isaac
into a mistake of the younger for the elder, and that by uttering three lies
with one breath, [I am Esau thy firstborn, I have done as my Father commanded
me, and calling his Meat, Venison, which the Lord had brought to his hands,
Genesis 27. 11, 12, 19, 20.] and here Laban beguiles the beguiler, (as if fallere
fallentem had been no fraus) with the elder for the younger, [in the morning
behold it was Leah!] Thus the Heart beguiles Man, who thinks he is embracing
the beautiful Rachel of a blessed estate, all the long nightime of Ignorance;
but in the morning of Regeneration, (when God says Let there be light) or
however, in the morning of the Resurrection, it then appears to be but a
blear-eyed Leah, of a vain presumption or profession: and how easily is a blind
Soul beguiled by a beguiling Heart (as blind Isaac by a beguiling Son)
persuading man to believe, (1.) That he is of the firstborn of God, (while he
is of the Children of wrath) (2.) That he has done as God the Father had
commanded him, (when possibly it never came into his Fathers heart, Jerem. 7.
31. (and (3.) That he has provided Venison for God, and fine flour, (when
indeed it is but coarse bran, and corrupt things: yea, (4.) entituling God to
all, as if the Lord did help him to his Provision and Worship, whereas it is all
but the cry of the Creature, and the earnestness of a natural Spirit, unsavory
to the Lord, Hos. 7. 14. Prove. 15. 8. Ezekiel. 14. 3, 4.

6. The time would fail me (as the Apostle says, Hebr. 11. 32.) to speak
largely of every Scripture-History, that (by way of Allusion) may evidence the
Mystery of the Hearts deceitfulness.

The 3d. Allusion is more briefly of others: As the Sons of Jacob beguiled the
Shechemites, Genesis 34. 13. (the Sons had something of the supplanting Image of
their Father) and under a pretense of Religion, v. 14. [We cannot do this
thing, and it would be a reproach to us, etc.) this treachery made Jacob stink,
v. 30. so the Heart of Man deceives Man, and that under as specious pretenses,
betraying him into the hands of cruelty, (as they did, when they had cozened
them into a Covenant, basely butchering them, while unable to help themselves)
into Satan's hands: oh, how will the deceitful Heart say, I cannot do this, and
I cannot do that, 'twill be a reproach, etc. yet will it run into greater sins
than those it pretends to shun (as they did) notwithstanding all this, the
Heart (with this plague sore of treachery on it) is not made to stink and be
abhorred, but like fools (as we are, Prove. 28. 26.) we trust it still, and
think there is sense in sinning, and reason enough to be mad after Idols, and
to be evil. The fourth Allusion is Hushai, 2 Samuel 16. 16, 17, 18, 19. As he
offered Absalom his service, that he might dive into his secrets, and defeat
his Counsels; yea, that he might overthrow his person and power, [Ambiguo
sermon ludisicando] by mocking Absalom with Ambiguities and Arguments,
accommodated to his ambitious humor, 2 Samuel 17. 11, 12. whereby he brought him
into the sublime dotage of a fools paradise; even so deals your deceitful heart
with you; how often does the flesh baffle and defeat the good counsel of the
Spirit, (quenching its motions and admonitions, 1 These. 5. 19.) as this Archite
did the good counsel of Achitophel? so the Scripture calls it, 2 Samuel 17.14. as
it was politic for attaining the end that Absalom did aim at, and the most
probable way to win all: how often does the fleshly Heart give crafty counsel,
(fitted to your humor) and betrays you into Satan's hands!

7. The fifth Scriptural Allusion to illustrate the Hearts treachery and
falsehood, is Jehu, 2 Kin. 10. 19. [Vajehu gnasha begnakebah] but Jehu did it in
subtilty, he played the [gnacob] and being homo [(...)] ambidexter, having the
use of both hands, [pelle vulpina aeque ac leonina uti potuit] he could be as
crafty as a Fox, as well as cruel as a Lion; Jehu subtly said, v. 18. Ahab
served Baal a little, (though he had served him more than any had done before
him, 1 Kin. 16. 31, 32.) but Jehu shall serve him much: intending one thing,
and pretending another thing; he pretends that Ahabs incomparable zeal for
Baal, should not be comparable to what he intends, and therefore he charge,
that if any of the Priests of Baal were wanting at his Sacrifice, they should
not live; by this Wile he caught them all into his snare, and slew them: but
alas, all the pretenses of Jehu could never be so fraudulent, for the
worshipping of Baal, as those of the deceitful heart are for the worshipping of
God: this desperately wicked Heart will sometimes pretend (with Herod) to come
and worship Christ, when (indeed) it intends to worry him, and to kill Christ
in the Cradle, Matthew. 2. 8, 16. This is the double heart, Psalm. 12. 2.
[leb-ve-leb] an heart and an heart, Hebr. one heart pretending in the Mouth,
and another heart intending in the Belly: as [a stone and a stone, Hebr.]
signifies deceitful weights, Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14. so [an heart and an heart]
imports a deceitful heart, such as those had in Jerem. 41. 17. and 42. 3, 5, 6.
20. who promised obedience to whatever God would command them, (whether
pleasing or displeasing) where in so saying, they did but dissemble in their
hearts, being resolved beforehand what to do, which was deep dissimulation,
thus in a pretense of Piety, to seek for Gods Approbation to their own (taken
up beforehand) resolution: The men of Zebulun, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. were better
men, they were not of a double heart, or Hebr. they were without an heart and
an heart; they had not one heart in the mouth, and another in the breast, but
were plain-hearted, and downright dealers, true Israelites in whom was no
guile, Joh. 1. 47.

8. The sixth Allusion, The Midianites, Numb. 25. 18. as they beguiled Israel
by the Counsel of Balaam, (who taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before
them, Revel. 2. 14.) with their cutthroat kindness, and counterfeit courtesies,
they gulled Israel into those two Sister-sins of Idolatry, which God so
severely punished, Numb. 24. 14. and 25. 3, 4, 5, 17, 18. even so your heart
will vex you with its Wiles, wherewith it begulles you; first plunging you into
sin, and then into punishment for sin: Gods commands stands good to you; vex
your heart that vexes you, mortify and cross the corruptions of it. Master,
spare thy self, is one of its Wiles, and is a cutthroat kindness; inasmuch as
Christ had said, He that saves his life, shall lose it: smarting experience
tells you, how your heart has cunningly plotted to ensnare you in sin, and to
bring you to ruin; therefore you may not walk in the way of your own heart,
Eccles. 11.9. (as Israel did in Midians way) but use it, (as well as take it)
for your enemy; yea, for your worst (as Satan is your greatest) Adversary.

9. This seventh Scripture-story, (whereby the treachery of the heart may be
illustrated, by way of Allusion) to wit, the Gibeonites beguiling Joshuah, Jos.
9. 22. (as is said before) add hereunto, that they did work wilily with Israel,
v. 4. [begnarmah] the same word with [gnarum] Genesis 3. 1. the Serpent was more
subtle, etc. Those Gibeonites exercised the subtlety of the Serpent, without
the simplicity of the Dove; they tell Joshuah, how they had heard the fame of
Gods Miracles in Egypt, but not a word of dividing Jordan, nor of the overthrow
of Jericho, these things were too new to be known to a people that dwelt afar
off, (as they pretended) but subtlely relate those things that were done long
ago, and were far and near talked of, v. 9, 10. Hereupon, Israel was gulled
into a compliance with them, not asking counsel of the Lord, (by the Urim and
Thummim) v. 14. through precipitancy and credulity, which are seldom
successful: thus also your heart will work Wilily with you, and strain hard to
save it self from Mortification, and to bring you into a sinful compliance with
it: oh take heed of precipitancy and credulity in this case; he that trusts his
own heart is a fool, Prove. 28. 26. he was no fool that said so, but a wise man,
yea the wisest of men, and so able enough to judge who are fools indeed: oh do
not neglect to ask counsel at the mouth of the Lord: consult with the wonderful
Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. and not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. do not confer
with your own fleshly heart; at the end of three days you will see your folly,
as Israel did, v. 16. Truth is the Daughter of time, and deceit will out at
length: oh that the seed of God (in you) may murmr at the League and
Compliance with your treacherous heart, as they did, v. 18. you may well say,
(as they said, v. 23.) thou art a cursed heart for thus beguiling me; and God
may turn it into a blessing, as he did to those cursed Canaanites, who after
this became Nethinims [i. e. given] to Gods Worship, 1 Chro. 9. 2. Ezr. 2. 43.

10. The word [Nethinim] signifies [Deodati] men given to God, devoted to the
service of Gods House; those were the posterity of the fraudulent Gibeonites,
whose punishment for their fraudulency, was that servile employment of
ministering to the Levites, (hewing of wood, and drawing of water for them) as
the Levites ministered to the Priests: and hereby, not only the Israelites (a
Royal Nation) were exempted from such slavish drudgery; but also those same
Gibeonites had their very punishment converted into a privilege, and their
misery into a mercy: for by this Sanctuary-service, they were brought nearer
the Church, and so nearer God, both to partake of the things of God, and to
behold his face in Righteousness: yea, and coming under subjection to Joshuah,
they became under his protection also, against those mighty Kings, Josh. 10. at
large. Thus likewise when your heart is (indeed) brought into subjection to
your blessed Joshuah or Jesus, it is both your privilege (to be but a
doorkeeper, Psalm. 84. 10. even a mighty King (as David) accounted it so) and
your protection too, when you are beleaguered with Troops of Temptations, and a
great body of corruptions, after your professed subjection to Christ: oh then
send your winged Messengers (of Prayers and Tears) to the Captain of your
Salvation, Hebr. 2. 10. saying, Lord Jesus, come to me quickly, and slack not
thy hand (as they did) Josh. 10. 6. if so, your Joshuah will come upon your
enemies suddenly, as v. 9. and he will discomfit them, as v. 10. yea, he will
brain them with hailstones, as v. 11. and rather than want time for the
pursuit of the Victory, the Sun shall stand still to lend light and time, etc.
otherwise, as those Gibeonites, (being of the posterity of cursed Cham)
beguiled Israel with pretense of Antiquity, into a League with them: even so
your heart will beguile you into a truce with it, though it be of the cursed
offspring, and should be mortifyed: 'twill cheat you with seeming Antiquity,
telling you it has been a good heart (Godward) ever since you were born; and
that 'twill be your servant, but a treacherous one: oh make it an hewer of
wood, and a drawer of water to Jesus your Joshuah.

11. Thus much of the Male-persons that were deceitful in Scripture-story:
(upon the last of which, I have been larger than I intended, being a little
warmed with the Allusion, yet abhorring to destroy the litteral sense of the
Holy Scriptures by wanton Allegories, as some have done, from the frothy
exuberances of their own addle brains:) now take a short survey of the
Female-persons, such as 1. Rachel, 2. Tamar, 3. Joseph's Mistress, 4. Jael, 5.
Dalilah, 6. the Witch of Endor; yet none of these asunder, nor all these
together, puts a comparable cheat on others, to that which your own heart will
put upon you, if you watch it not. (1.) Of Rachel, she deceived her own Father
of his gods, (goodly gods they were, that could not secure themselves from
stealing) Genesis 31. 30, 34, 35. etc. She puts them into the Camels furniture,
and sat upon them, saying, The custom of women is upon me. 'Twas a subtle, and
yet a sinful shift, whereby to hide her shame from her earthly Father; even so,
and much more than so, will your heart become wittily wicked: it is a wickedness
with a witness, to steal from ones own Father, especially Plate, Jewels, the
best of Goods; yet your heart will steal from you (its own owner) and that the
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. yea the best of Goods, and the best of Gods, 1
Cor. 8. 5, 6. your heart will take away your Lord, and you will not know where
it has laid him, as Joh. 20. 15. And you may be justly jealous, that your
heart is tainted with a love of Imagery, Ezekiel. 8. 12. (as you have chambers of
imagery in you, for there be many Idols set up in your heart, Ezekiel. 14. 3. 1.
Joh. 5. 21.) as Rachel was with her Mawmets: And you may surely say, (in
sadness of Spirit) to your Heavenly Father, Let it not displease my Lord, that
I cannot rise up, for the custom of sinning (which is both the custom of Men,
and the custom of Women too) is upon me: how often also is your heart wittily
wicked, in sitting upon your sins, to hide them by sinful shifts from the eye
of your Heavenly Father, (which yet is an all-seeing eye, and nothing can be
hid from the sight of it, Hebr. 4. 13.) without any due and true sense of the
evil of sin, when [consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati] that custom of
sinning (which is upon you) takes away all sense of sin?

12. The second Allusion is Tamar, who deceived her Father (in-law) Judah, by
putting upon her the attire of an Harlot, and sitting in the way-side to tempt
him, (upon a feasting day) Genesis 38. 12, 13, 14. etc. mark this by the way, that
Harlots in those times were nothing so shameless, (for she covered her self
with a Vail) as they are in our times, with their naked breasts, etc. to
inflame a Judah: the Father [Hierome] severely says, that all such shall be
damned for proffering poison, though there be none to drink it: mark also how
Judahs lust besots him, he gives her whatever she demanded, v. 17, 18. whereby
to prove him afterward a Partner in the Crime, she seals up her charge against
him with his own Signet, entangles him with his own Bracelets, and beats him
with his own staff, etc. v. 25. just so, and more than so, will your heart
(that is full of harlotry) deceive you, and cause you to commit uncleanness
with it in sinful thoughts, which (like Lots daughters, Genesis 19.32. to 35.) are
busy to contrive and compass some sin or other while you are fast asleep, and
your heart (as Tamar) will first tempt you to sin, and then accuse you for sin,
1 John 3. 20. 2 Samuel 18. 12, 13. writing down time and place, and bringing
forth undeniable evidences, saying, Discern whose are these; I pray thee; oh
sublime treachery! you must acknowledge all, condemn your self for having been
unrighteous, and know your sin again no more, as Genesis 38. 26.

13. The third Allusion is, Joseph's Mistress, which was a Blackmoore, a Gypsy,
(or Egyptian) and a very compound of impudence, fraudulency, and maliciousness,
Genesis 39. 7. to 14. (1.) Her impudence, that she who should be shame-fac'd by
her Sex, (as a woman) and grave by her condition and quality, (as a wife, and
that of a governor, so a Mistress) yet her lawless lust transports her beyond
all bonds and bounds both of Piety and Modesty, so as to make an impudent offer
of committing a Rape, not only upon a man, but upon her own manservant: oh
prodigious propudium, and a frontless forehead! not unlike the strange
impudency in the strange woman, Prove. 7. 13, 18. both of them barely and basely
solicit associates, whose beauty had captivated their wanton eyes and wicked
hearts. (2) Her fraudulency, when her uncessant solicitations, [day by day
violently renewed, and as valiantly vanquished] proved (all) unsuccessful, as
Josephus says, she feigned her self sick, (as Amnon did after, 2 Samuel 13. 6.)
not going with Potiphar to the Feast, that her solitariness might give a more
effectual opportunity for her solicitation, v. 11, 12. This became a strong
snare to Joseph, so that he must part either with his chastity, or with his
garment, (not daring to stay and parley with her) this second time is Joseph
stripped of his garment before; by the violence of envy in his brethren, Genesis
37. 31. now, by the vehemence of concupiscence in his Mistress; before, out of
constraint, now out of choice; before, that his Father, now that his Master
might be deceived by it: however, he, being good before the Lord, escapes from
her snares, as Eccles. 7. 26. (3.) Her maliciousness and treacherous cruelty,
she cloaks her own villainy under Joseph's garment, and as his coat had caused
his Fathers sorrow before, Genesis 37. 32, 33, 34. now it causes his own misery:
she incenseth her Husband, accusing first him of foolishness, (for bringing in
such an Hebrew) and then his servant of filthiness, which she both affirms by
words, and confirms by deeds, to wit, producing the Garment left in her
hands; no doubt but the accuser of the brethren had set her on, to charge that
upon the innocent, whereof she (herself) was only most guilty: all this, and
much more, will your heart do to you, 'twill first entice you to sin, and then
accuse you of sin, as before: 'twill shift off sin from it self, and lay the
fault upon company, occasion, etc. and not upon it self; as Apollodorus his
heart did, when he dreamed that he was taken by the Scythians, who flead off
his skin, and lifting him into the Caldron to boil him, his heart cried out
within him, [(...),] I am the cause of all this evil.

14. The fourth Allusion is Jael, who beguiled Sisera, Judge. 4. 18. and 19.
etc. with her [turn in my Lord, turn in to me.] Fair words make fools fain,
says the Proverb: she says unto him [fear not] and promises him protection
from his pursuers; she covers him with a rug or cover-lid [Stragula Villosa]
pretending both to hide him from his enemies, and to secure him from catching
cold, but indeed, intending to get him asleep, that she might the easier
destroy him: yea, as a show of greater respect, when he asked but Water, (to
cool him in his great heat, by his hasty flight on his feet) she gave him Milk,
v. 19. and Judge. 5.25. which was safer drink than water, yet more procuring
sleep, (which was her design) yea, she brought him Butter also in a Lordly dish
to eat, as well as Milk to drink; and all this kindness she showed him, to make
him sleep more securely under her protection, and to prepare him the better for
her Nail and Hammer, wherewith she fastened his head, (when fast asleep) to the
ground, as if it had been listening (there) what was become of his Soul: he that
boasted before of his Iron-chariots, lies now slain by a Woman with a Nail of
Iron, (a Nail of the Tent both long and strong enough, both to pierce his
skull, and to fasten this proud worms-meat to the ground) and all this carried
on with shows of great kindness: such are all the Murdering morsels of your
sinful heart; oh the flatteries thereof, (the Milk and the Butter) wherewith it
will lull you asleep in a false peace, (as the Sirens Songs) Deuteronomy. 29. 19. but
beware of the Tent-nail and the Hammer, at the upshot of all.

15. The fifth Allusion is Dalilah, who dealt deceitfully with Sampson, and
betrayed him into the hands of the Uncircumcised, Judge. 16. 4, 6. to 21. no
doubt but she allured him with all seeming signs of her love, that thereby she
might hide from him all suspicion of treachery; she might magnify his Heroic
exploits, and admire the prodigious and extraordinary strength whereby he
achieved them; and then desire (for her own private satisfaction only) to
know wherein his great strength did lie; and probably she added many fair
promises, and possibly not a few fowl Oaths, (Harlots abound with such Hellish
Rhetoric) that she would keep his counsel secret to her self: then she
prevailed, (1.) To bind him with three green withes, v. 7, 8. which he yielded
to, not only as a put-off, but also in a way of sport and wanton dalliance
with her: but this availed not; hereupon, (2.) after her blaming him for
mocking her, he yields to be bound with new Ropes; this proves unsuccesful
also: then (3.) she continuing her importunate allurements, brings him nearer
to the mark and mystery than before; and yields to have the seven locks of his
head weaved with the Web, and winded about the beam of the loom, v. 13, 14.
This likewise took not, as the other before it, he having feigned a false cause
of his strength three times to her, all along forgetting that Gods children
will not lie, Isa. 63. 8. as their Father is a God that cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2.
but at the (fourth) Assault she carries it, and conquers him; the great
Conqueror of Men, was at last Conquered by a Woman: he was so bewitched with
her flatteries, that she at last exhausted (as the Hebrew word [Dalal] from
whence her Name [Dalilah] comes, signifies) his very heart, v. 16, 18. which
whoredom had (indeed) taken away before, Hos. 4. 11. Thus this strong man
discovers great weakness, in yielding further and further, (even till it came
to Neck-break, and life it self, Prove. 6. 26. and 7. 21, 23.) to a treacherous
Strumpet, that had given just grounds of suspecting her treachery against him,
both in putting all those three former experiments upon proof, and in having so
many cutthroat Philistims ready by her; yet so besotted was he with his
sensual sins, that he reveals that secret to her, which cost him the loss of
his strength, of his eyes, of his liberty, of his life, yea of his God too All
this will your treacherous heart do to you, if God leave you in the hand of
your own counsel: 'twill make you sleep upon the knee of presumption, (as she
did him, v. 19.) 'twill cut off your Locks, or seeming graces, (those seven
locks, or seven spirits, Revel. 1. 4.) and you may not know that your God is
gone from you, as he, v. 20. and you may stand out for a while (as he did)
against the solicitations of your fleshly heart, (which hunts for your life,
and wars against your Soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11.) but woe to you if left of God (Hos.
9. 12.) to the lusts thereof; you fall, you fall, and may never rise any more:
as Dalilah was not alone in the room, but had her company of Philistims with
her; so your treacherous heart will not be alone, but will have its company of
deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. to be with it.

16. The sixth Allusion (among Scripture-Females) is the Witch of Endor, that
cheated Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 11, 12. with (indeed) Satan, for Samuel: That
[Spectrum Samuelis] or apparition of Samuel, whereby she beguiled Saul, was no
other than Satan, [the Devil] who first personates Samuels form, and then his
speech: Samuel (while alive) had told Saul, that rebellion is as Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Now he falls from the like to the same, and trades with Witches
(indeed) which he had turned out of his Kingdom, (1 Samuel 28. 3.) but not out
of his heart: and bids this Witch to bring him up Samuel. This is more than the
Devil (himself) can do; for it could not be (1.) the Soul of the true Samuel
that is here brought to Saul, it is not in the Devils power to degrade a
glorified Saint, and to bring him from glory: Satan fell from Heaven, and can
fetch none out of Heaven: neither was it (2.) the body of the true Samuel, for
the Devil has not the key of the Grave, but that key hangs at Christ's girdle,
Revel. 1. 18. Neither (3.) would the true Samuel have said, as v. 15. Why have
thou disquieted me? It can therefore be no other but Satan representing Samuel,
who can transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. and Samuel
(himself) could not have preached more gravely, severely, divinely, then this
foul fiend of Hell did, v. 16. etc.

But above all, (4.) this Apparition appears to be a mere cheat, in his
appearing in a Mantle; for the true Samuel could not (well) have a Mantle to
bring with him from the grave, and place of the dead: it could be nothing else
but only a garment (in show) of Satan's making, and by him put upon himself,
that he might the more speciously act the part of Samuel, both his person and
his habit, as well as his words and speeches, in his conference with Saul. Thus
as the Witch of Endor cheated Saul with a representative show, instead of a
real and true presence: even so your heart may cheat you with seeming instead
of saving grace; yea, the Devil is Gods Ape (thus far) in man's heart, that he
beguiles him so far by false representations, as to make him believe those to
be glorious truths, which indeed are no better than Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy
4. 1. and damnable errors, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

CHAP. V.
Of the Hearts Treachery.

1. FRom deceitful persons, the first, pass we on to deceitful things, the
second; and the Sequel will evidence in the Issue, that the heart of man is not
only as deceitful as both, but more than so: it is deceitful above all persons,
and above all things. (1.) The Serpent was more subtle than all the beasts of
the field, Genesis 3. 1. and beguiled Eve, v. 13. making her to eat forbidden
fruit. [Hanachash Hisheani Vaokel] The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Oh
how often have you cause to cry out to Jehovah (as she did) that your heart has
beguiled you, and you did eat the forbidden fruit of Sin! The Hebrew word
[Nasha] signifies, to surprise one by laying Ambushments, as Josh. 8. 7, 19.
Alas, every Creature-comfort (in the fallen state) has an Ambushment (a
Serpent lying in ambush) in it: [latet Anguis in Herba] there is a Snake in the
Grass, a Snare in every dish. You may cry out with the Sons of the Prophets,
[Mors in olla] there is death in the pot, 2 King. 4. 40. Had Eve thought there
had been death in the Apple, she would never have swallowed such a gilded bole
or morsel. 'Twas pleasant to the eyes, and fruit to be desired; but the ambush
(of the subtle serpent in it) she discerned not: oh the crafty and deceitful
Devil, that lays an ambush of real death, under the coverts and colors of
seeming life! hence he is called [(...)] 2 Cor. 11. 3. using [(...)] his crafty
subilety to cheat us of all graces, but especially of our simplicity; and
therefore does he muster up all his forces, and lies in ambush, all his frauds
do deceive and destroy us.

2. This old Serpent, when he was but young, outwitted our first Parents, even
in their state of innocence: now that he is old, and we but young, (all are but
children) Ephesians. 4. 14. how easily may he beguile us, especially having something
of himself in us, (which he had not in Christ, Joh. 14. 30.) to betray us into
his hands! this subtle serpent has his [(...)] set Ambushes, and composed
Stratagems, 2 Cor. 2. 11. whereby to ravish and corrupt our [(...)] or
judgments: you cannot be ignorant (if you be a Christian in truth, if you have
but more than the title of a Christian) of the cunningly-moulded-methods, (even
in your personal experience) of the darts and depths of Satan, wherewith he
deceives you: and he plays not at small games, but deceives whole Nations, (as
well as single persons) Revel. 20. 3, 8. even Gog (the covert enemy) and Magog,
(the overt or open one) the Pope and the Turk; yea, he deceives the whole world
that lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. This [Interpolator Creaturae] or broker
and brusher up of the vain things of the World, (as Tertullian calls him) sets
an alluring Gloss upon the Creature, and fits every one a pennyworth, as he
finds inclinations; he has an Apple for Eve, a Grape for Noah, and a Vineyard
for Ahab; he has a wedge of Gold for Achan, and talents of Silver for Gehazi,
etc.

3. It Is more than manifest, that this grand Pyrate at land, (as well as at
sea) hangs out false Colors, till his prey come within compass of his chain;
and that this sublime sophister, and old Impostor, can (both in himself and
instruments) cog a Die, wherewith to cheat you, Ephesians. 4. 14. [(...)] which is
[Artifex fallacia, or, fallax artificium] a cunning sleight of Gamesters and
Cheaters, such a conquering couzenage, that thereby (were it possible) he would
deceive the very elect, (even) fundamentally and finally, Matthew. 24. 24. as
others are. An eminent instance of this cheating Devil, you have concerning
Saul (aforementioned) to whom Satan (that old Serpent) did counterfeit Samuel
in speech and Habit, and with great gravity (Samuel-like) upbraided him with
sparing Agag, etc. Before the fact was done, he tempts Saul to it, under the
color of an act of mercy; and why should he be so cruel to his
fellow creatures? not a word of any stumbling block Satan lays in Saul's way, to
hinder this seeming work of Mercy before his doing of it: but now when it is
done, (though it was done through his tempting him thereunto) he presses it
with all aggravations upon his Conscience (in his day of distress) as an
heinous and horrible sin, that he might drive them into despair: and he played
the Sophister with Saul, in the prophetical part of that passage of Pageantry
(as well as in the Historical) [to morrow thou and thy Sons shall be wtih me] 1 Samuel 28. 19. wherein he could not mean [Heaven] with true Samuel, for that is
too good a place for bad Saul; nor [Hell] with himself (the true Satan) for
that is too bad a place for good Jonathan: but the state of the dead; the old
deceiver insinuating to Saul thereby, that the Souls of all men, (of the good
as well as of the bad) do go to the same place, and seeking to blot out of him
therewith all knowledge and apprehension of eternal life: oh miserable comfort
in distress! and no better can those expect that run to Witches, etc. for ease:
the Parasite and tempter before sin, will be a Tyrant and Tormentor after it;
when he has accomplished his end, his flattery goes no further, but turns into
fury.

4. Although Satan be all this, and much more against fallen Mankind, which makes
him their greatest adversary, yet has a man a worse enemy than he, to wit, his
own superlatively-deceitful and desperately wicked heart: every one carries a
tempter in his bosom, whereby he is drawn away and enticed, Jam. 1. 14, 15.
[(...)] entised, as a fish by a bait, yea, drawn away by his own bias of lust:
the Devil has only an insinuating slight, not any forcing or constraining
might; man's own concupiscence carries the greatest sway and stroke therein:
thence it is said, that [Deceit] as well as all other Soul-defiling-evils, come
out of the heart, Mark 7. 22, 23. Satan might besiege us days without number,
and without success too, if a treacherous party were not within, to let down
the Drawbridge, and to set open the Gates of the City for his entrance and
entertainment: There is deceit in the heart, Prove. 12. 20. and therefore Christ
tells you, it comes out of the heart; what is in the Well, will be in the
bucket: surely they are redeemed from deceit, (indeed) Psalm. 72.14. that have a
cover for their heart; (that well which is so full of crawling lusts) to wit,
the cover of Gods Spirit, Isa. 31. 1. Every vessel that wants a cover was
unclean, Number. 19. 15. so is the heart that is open to Satan's squibs for
ingress, and sinful thoughts for egress.

5. The second thing (next to the old Serpent) is Antichrist, the man of sin,
called primo-genitus Diaboli, the firstborn of the Serpents seed, that grand
Impostor, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with lying wonders, and
all deceivableness, 2 These. 2. 9, 10. that beast which does great wonders in
the sight of men, and deceives them that dwell on the earth, Revel. 13. 13,
14. This Son of perdition cheats the world [(...)] with wonders of a lie,
(which is an usual Hebraism) to denote the notorious fallacy and falsehood of
his wonders: they are either lying prodigies, or prodigious lies; such (as some
of themselves say) are for the most part false, yet were devised for good
intentions. This Ludovicus Vives (one of their own) further confirms;
affirming, that the Author of the Golden (or rather lying) Legend, had a brazen
face, corrupting the lives of their Canonized Saints with abundance of lies;
and that the devisers of those Fables did not set down what their Saints did,
but what themselves would have had them done: And the Doctrines of Popery are
like their Miracles, lying Doctrines; it being no other than a Farrago of
falsities and old Heresies: for (as the Centurists say, the old Heretics fled
(at the light of truth) and hid themselves in the Popish Clergy. And whence
does all this arise, but from their own treacherous and deceitful hearts,
whereby they are given up (judicially) to believe all those lies, because they
received not the truth in the love of it, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. that is the great
Gospel-sin which is punished by the righteous God with strong delusions, vile
affections, and just damnations: self-deceit is an Idol that all the world
worships, as well as it does the Beast, in its three Sons, self-conceit,
self-will, and self-love.

6. The third thing is false Prophecies, Doctrines, and teachings, the
publishers whereof are called deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 11. 13. that (like
Solomon's Harlot, 1 Kin. 3. 20.) would take away the living child, to wit, the
Scriptures of truth, from out of our bosoms; and lay, instead thereof, the
dead child of their own brainsick notions, and vain traditions: These are
said, by good words and fair speeches, to deceive the hearts of the simple,
Romans 16. 18. you have need therefore to look well to your inheritance, (as Kin.
21. 3.) that you be not beguiled of it by fraud, as well as by force: these
have cunning craftiness, and by a slight hand can cog a Die; (the common
practice of cheating Gamesters) lying in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. insomuch,
that if it were possible, they would deceive the very elect, Matthew. 24. 24.
which they cannot do (fundamentally and finally) because the deceived and the
deceiver are (both) with the Lord, Job 12. 13, 16. However, unstable Souls (so
called, 2 Pet. 3. 10.) are blown like Glasses into this or that form, at the
pleasure of their breath: And whence flow all those false divinations? the
Prophet tells you, Jerem. 14. 14. and 23. 26.) they are (all) the deceits of
those deceivers hearts, impudently lying to the Holy Ghost, (as Act. 5. 3.)
fathering the falsities of their own hearts upon the Spirit of truth: Thus the
deceitful heart first deceived those deceivers, and then these deceivers did
deceive credulous Souls with the deceits of their hearts.

7. The fourth thing is the deceitful bow, Psalm. 78. 57. Hos. 7. 16. a slack or
warping bow, [Resheth Remjiah] Arcus doli vel dolosus seu fallax, Hebr. will be
sure to deceive the Archer that shoots in it: 'twill turn back into belly, as
the Archers phrase is; and though he level both his eye and his arrow never so
directly to the mark, and think confidently with himself to hit it, yet in the
event the Arrow (through the warping of the bow) flies a quite contrary way,
yea, and sometimes reflects upon the Archer himself: Non semper feriet,
quodcunque minabitur Arcus; the bow smites not all it threatens, and [telum ob
arcus obliquitatem aliud minatur, and aliud ferit, interdum ctiam retro in
jaculantem reflectit] The illfashioned or casting-bow will turn in the shooters
hand, and send the Arrow sometimes one way, and sometimes another way; yea, and
sometimes it rebounds into his own sides: or if it be a rotten bow, (though
otherwise fair to look upon) when an Arrow is drawn to the head, it breaks in
the hand, and deceives the Archer: the same thing happens, when the string of
the bow is naughty, and breaks when the Arrow is drawn: This is no less than a
Divine Scripture-Allegory. Behold, such a fallacious, warping, and rotten bow
is man's deceitful heart; his purposes and promises are the arrows that he puts
upon the string, the mark he aims at is Repentance, to the which (in affliction
especially) he looks with an accurate and intent eye, as though he would
repent indeed; but alas, his heart deceives him, as being unsound in Gods
Statutes, Psalm. 119. 80. and hence it is, that his promises and pretenses do
fall at his foot, or vanish in the air as smoke; thus a deceiving (as well as a
deceived) heart, turns him aside, Isa. 44. 20. as it did those false
Israelites: oh then look to the secret warpings of your own heart; and seeing
you are Gods bow, you must be bent by him, and stand bent for him, Zech. 9. 13.
thereby you shall be like Jonathans how that never returned empty, 2 Samuel 1. 22.

8. The fifth deceitful thing is Riches, Mark 4. 19. they have deceitfulness in
them, as well as uncertainty, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Riches have never been true to
those that trusted in them, but ever have proved a lie in their right hand,
Isa. 44. 20. hence are they called lying vanities, Jon. 2. 8. and compared to a
flock of birds sitting upon a man's ground, which upon the least fright, takes
the wings and flies away: Riches have wings (says Solomon) and rather than
want, they will make to themselves wings, Prove. 23.5. yea, though they have not
the wings so much as of a little sparrow wherewith to fly to you, yet will they
make to themselves the large wings of a great Eagle, wherewith to fly from you:
oh how many have Riches served, as Absaloms Mule served her Master, whom she
lurched, and left (in his greatest need) hanging betwixt Heaven and Earth, as
if rejected of both: a spark of fire may set them on flying, a Thief may steal
them, a wicked servant may embezel and purloin them: a Pyrate or shipwreck at
sea, a Robber or bad debtor at land, yea an hundred ways sets them packing:
they are as the Apples of Sodom, that look fair, yet crumble away with the
least touch: golden delusions, a mere Mathematical Scheme or fancy of man's
brain, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Act. 25. 23. The semblances and empty shows of good,
without any reality or solid consistency: nec vera, nec vestra; as they are
slippery upon the account of verity, so they are no less in respect of
propriety and possession, for they are winged birds, especially in this, that
they fly from man to man, (as the birds do from tree to tree) and always from
the owner of them: this is a sore deceit and cozenage, yet your heart is more
deceitful, inasmuch as it will deceive you with those deceitful Riches, a quo
aliquid tale est, illud est magis tale: they are so, because the heart is so.

9. The time would fail me to speak of all the deceitful things that the holy
Scriptures calls so, besides those here insisted upon, as the sixth deceitful
things is favor and beauty, Prove. 31. 30. [Sheker haken vehebel haiophe]
gratiositas and venustas, is deceit and falsity (as the Hebr. signifies) in the
very abstract; not only as it is sometimes, but a painted and borrowed beauty;
but especially as it lasts not long, soon fades, satisfyeth none, brings
forth its own disdain, and gives occasion to many sins, to wit, Morosity,
Wantonness, Pride, Idleness, Imperiousness, etc. though it be true and genuine
(without painting) if it be not seasoned and sanctified with the fear of God:
alas, the best beauty in the world is but skin-deep; an herd of Smallpox,
(wherein God turns the fairest Creature inside outward, to let them see that
corruption, as Jobs phrase is, is their Mother, or some fore fit of sickness,)
soon and suddenly blasts it. And though it does escape both those, yet old age
or death will wither it at last; All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof, as
the flower of the field, fades away, Isa. 40. 6. not only as grass, but is
grass; and the flower [of the field] is more apt to be blasted and trodden down,
than the flower of the Graden: how many have foul Souls in fair bodies! as
Absalom, etc. It Is the fear of God that makes one all glorious within, (though
the world discern it not) Psalm. 45. 13. without which, beauty is but as a jewel
of gold in a swines snout, Prove. 11. 22. Such are like an Egyptian Temple, a
goodly Fabric without, and nothing but some filthy Ape or base Crocodile
(adored as a God) within; or like those painted Sepulchers, Matthew. 23. 27. that
had a beautiful outside, but nothing within, save stench and rottenness; and in
a word, their very locks, looks, and lips do lie, having fair faces, v. 25, 28.
and foul hearts; no one means has enriched Hell more (says one) than this:
better it is to have the rich Pearl (a godly Soul) in the ruder shell of an
ordinary body, than any Auxiliary or Artificial (yea) or natural beauty,
without the fear of God, which are then but as an ugly toad in a golden
Cabinet, notoriously deceitful, yet not so much as your heart, inasmuch as you
would not be deceived with beauty, if your heart did not first deceive you.

10. The seventh deceitful thing in Scripture, is deceitful dreams, Isa. 29. 8.
[in quibus fieri videntur, quae tamen fieri non videntur] says Tertullian,
those things seem to be done in dreams, which yet are never seen to be done at
all: Augustine writes a Chapter [de somniorum ludibrus] showing such a cheat to
be in them, that even false things seem to persuade me sleeping, of the truth
of them, even such as cannot be true to me waking; I own (says he) and (at
least seeminly) act, while sleeping, such things as I utterly disown when
awakeing: Thus, Lord (cries he in his Confessions) I my self do differ from my
self; where (Lord) is my Reason, that resists those things when I am waking? is
it asleep, when my senses are asleep?

11. And Solomon says, multitudes of dreams (as well as of words) as there may
be some matter in them, so they (both) want not their vanity, Eccles. 5. 3, 7.
Dreams are either natural or supernatural: (first) the natural, which are
exceeding fallacious, so not to be (much) regarded, unless in Physic, to
discover our constitutions, and in Divinity, our beloved sins: Thus the
ambitious man dreams of his honors, the covetous of his Coffers, and the
voluptuous of his pleasures; non somno sed somnio discernuntur] they are all
discerned what they be, not by their sleep, (for that is alike to all) but by
their dreams in their sleep: yet are those natural dreams but [vanae
jactationes negotiosae Animae] the idle tossings of a busy mind: the Soul of
man (finding all the senses fast bound up in sleep) enters then into the shop
of the fancy, and operates there, usually, according to the affairs and
employments of the day past, Eccles. 5. 3. [dreams come through multitudes of
business] yet variety of vanity is found in them, as idleness, or
unprofitableness, troublesomness, confusion, contradiction, absurdity, as well
as falsehood, and which is worst of all, the vanity of sinfulness. (2.)
Supernatural dreams, which be twofold, first from God, either to comfort,
Matthew. 2. 19. or to chasten, Job 7. 13, 14. secondly, from the Devil, which are
either mere illusions, whereby he gulleth the mind, as that of Job 4. 12, 16,
17. is supposed to be; or subtle insinuations, wherein he fastneth upon the
Saints such sins while they are sleeping, which he cannot prevail with them to
commit when awaking; the evil spirit, as he is a spirit, negotiates with man's
spirit.

12. Thus (and much worse) will your heart deceive you with false dreams,
(which you are commanded not to hearken unto) Jerem. 29. 8. and 23. 25, 32.
they are called [false dreams] because they are fallacious in deceiving you;
and they are called [your dreams] because you have an itch after them, you
listen to them and (at last) pays dear for them: as in downright dotages,
thinking all the time you sleep there is truth and reality in all your
self-pleasing conceptions; but when you awake, alas, it is but a dream, all
vanishes away; and you do find you have been but deceiving your self all the
while: just so your heart (while you are asleep in the state of sin) will fill
you with many self-flattering conceptions, as (1.) that your person is not so
bad as others, Luke 18. 11. and therefore you have no need to be better: alas,
this at best procures you but a milder Hell. (2.) That your state is blessed,
blessing your self in a false peace, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Psalm. 49. 11. Luke 12. 19.
Revel. 18. 9. (3.) That your actions are good, which may be right in your own
eyes, and yet be no better than ways of death, Prove. 16. 25. but if once God
awake you, by calling you with a strong voice, shaking you with a strong hand,
and pricking you in the heart-vein by his convincing Spirit; then you will
find your self grossly gulled with your dreams: if you would not dream, sleep
not; Self-examination is as rubbing of the eyes after sleep.

13. The 8th deceitful thing is deceitful Weights; to which may be added
Measures, Mete-yards, and Balances; Mic. 6. 11. Amos 8. 5. Hos. 12. 7. Prove.
11. 1. and 20. 16. 23. Levit. 19. 36. Deuteronomy. 25. 13. 15. All these may be
deceitful, and defrauding in bargaining with Chapmen; yet the original of the
wicked use of false Weights, etc. is from a deceitful heart: It Is said, their
Mete-yards, in those Scripture-times, were deceitful in their measuring for one
Chapman in wet weather, and for another in dry: for Leather-lines will be
longer in a foul season, but Cords of Hair or Hemp will be longer in a fair
one: Measures may be filled up with froth, though otherwise they be large
enough. And God expressly says, that a man shall not have in his bag diverse
weights, a great and a small; neither shall he have in his house diverse
Measures, a great and a small; they must not be kept (so much as) near him,
Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14. for others may use them, though he do not. And against the
use of false Weights, etc. this may be said briefly: (1.) That such as be false
and deceitful, are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 11. 1. and 20. 23. If so,
then those which are just and true be pleasing to God. (2ly.) Those that are
just, be said to be the Lords work, Prove. 16. 11. If so, then such as be
unjust, are no less than the Devils work. (3ly.) The blessing of a long life is
promised to him that is just in those things, Deuteronomy. 25. 15. and those that deal
deceitfully in them, are accursed, Mich. 6. 11, 12, 13, 14. Wealth gotten by
such fraud, will lurch a man, as the Devil does Witches when they come into
Prison. (4ly.) To be just herein, is to be like God; who is said to do all
things [numero, pondere, and mensura,] in number, weight, and measure; and all
just, (5ly.) Such as deceive with them, are called Canaanites, [he is a
Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand,] Hos. 12.7. Hebr. Canaan, a
Money-merchant, that matters not how he gets it, so he may but have it: whereby
Ephraim made himself rather seem to be of the Bastard-brood of Cain, and of
cursed Came, than of the Offspring of plain Jacob, that could say to Esau, I
have enough, my Brother. Thus Merchants were called Canaanites, as
Mathematicians are called Caldeans.

14. Besides, (6ly.) it is against the Royal Standard (both of Nature and of
Scripture) [quod tibi non vis, alteri ne faceres,] says Terence; and our Lord
says the same, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them, Mat. 7. 12. This is the sealed Weight and Measure of the Law, by which
you must converse with all men: you must love your neighbor as your self. Now
no man loves the passive part of being defrauded, therefore he must not love
the active part of defrauding others, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. They that live thus
unconscionably, shall be sure to die as uncomfortably. Such Cheats as these
(and worse) you will find in your own heart: As, (1.) you will weigh your own
sins in one balance, and the sins of others in another; thus Judah did Tamars
sin, in passing that severe doom, [let her be burnt] Genesis 38. 24. but when he
comes to sentence himself for his own sin, he deals more softly, [she has been
more righteous than I] v. 26. Those are deceitful weights, weighing the sins of
others with great weights, and our own sins with lesser. (2.) You may measure
out to your self six whole days, and yet curtail Gods seventh day, or
mis-employ it. If the very false weights and measures (themselves) be
abominable, how much more are they abominable that use them, Prove. 20. 10. and
in the more noble materials, the worse abomination: you should measure out a
whole seventh day to God, that gives you whole six days for work; and not buy
with a great measure, and sell with a little one. (3.) You may be slight in
weighing your state (as well as actions) in the balance of deceit; it should be
in the balance of the Sanctuary, as the Bereans did, Act. 17. 11. else, as
Belshazzar, you will be found light, Dan. 4. 25, 27. do all without partiality
[(...)] 1 Timothy 5. 21. not tilting the balance on the one hand: while you judge
your self, judge impartially.

15. The ninth deceitful thing, is a deceitful witness or testimony, Prove. 14.
25. [in thee are men that carry tales] Hebr. men of slanders, Ezekiel. 22. 9. or
Pedlars, (such as drop one tale here, and another there) tale-bearers, Exodus
23. 1. Levit. 19. 16. And a tale-hearer, is as bad as a talebearer; the one
carries the Devil in his tongue, and the other carries him in his ear: it is as
ill to be the receiver, as to be the raiser of a false report: Satan (himself)
was first a slanderer, and then a Murderer; and his Agents first do take away
the credit of the Church, (her vail) and then wound her, Cant. 5. 6. The
Primitive Christians were first belyed, and then cruelly tortured: thus were
they doubly Murdered, first by detraction, and then by deadly dealing. If a
good name be better than riches, Prove. 22. 1. then defaming a man is worse than
robbing of him; Actum est de homine, quando actum est de nomine; he that has
got an ill name upon him, is half hanged: It Is well worth your noting, that not
only those which make the lie, but also those that love it (when it is made to
their hands) are (both of them) shut out of Heaven, Revel. 22. 15. It Is an ill
sign men love lies, when they do so much listen to them, Prove. 17. 4. The
Devil does never starve his work for want of Instruments; he has his
Tale-bearers, and Tale-hearers, yea and Tale-believers too: he has his Knights
of the Post, that can lend an Oath for a need to any Cause or Party, that can
blow abroad (as with a pair of bellows) Prove. 6. 19. Hebr. that can vent them
freely and boldly, and will not stick to swear contraries, if required. Such
were these men of Belial, that Jezabel suborned against innocent Naboth, 1
King. 21. 10. and that were suborned against the Proto-Martys Stephen, Acts 6.
11. and against Christ (himself) Matthew. 26. 59. desperate Wretches, incarnate
Devils, that would swear any thing, as they were instructed by their Masters;
misreporting Christ's words in turning [destroy ye] into [I can destroy] and
[this] into [made with hands] yet God confounded the language of those
deceitful witnesses (as he had done the Babel-builders of old, Genesis 11. 7. so
he does to this day) they disagreed in their testimonies among themselves,
verse. 60, 61. and Mark 14. 56, to 59. with John 2. 19. Now if this (that is but
the Effect) be so abominable, how much more is the Cause? A deceitful heart is
worse than their deceitful mouth, Psalm. 109. 2. or tongue, Ps^^* 52. 4. and
120. 2. for it is the source and fountain thereof, Mark 7. 22. Matthew. 15.19. Oh
how often may your heart be a false witness to your self (being privy to all your
actions, 1 Kin. 2. 44. 1 John 3. 20.) when filthily flattered and suborned with
carnal Fallacies! 'twill not then cry, Oh what have I been, or oh what have I
done! Jer. 8. 6. happy is he that has the answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet.
3. 21. and can appeal (with Peter) from Conscience to Omniscience, John 21. 15.
17.

16. The 10th and last thing is deceitful Juggling and Enchantment; As (1.)
that of the Sorcerers of Egypt, pretending to imitate Moses in his Miracles,
Exodus 7. 11. 22. and 8. 7. yet all but juggles; their frogs were mere
phantasms, not gathered upon heaps, as those (Moses brought) were, verse. 13.
14. Had they been real Frogs, the plague had been increased by those, as if God
had not sent enough, but the Devil must send more; which yet he could not
remove from Egypt, God must do that by Moses prayer. (2.) That gaudy and goodly
Representation of the Glories of the World (Matthew. 4. 8. the devil showed
Christ) had no reality in it, but was a cheating phantasm; For 1. the glory of
any one Kingdom cannot be seen from the top of any one Mountain. 2. None can
see the glory of London from High-gate, but by going into it it is done. 3. Real
Glory cannot be seen [(...)] in a moment of time, Luke 4. 5. but successively,
one part of it after another: The Prince of the Air painted an airy Horizon
only, and showed (as God did Canaan to Moses from Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34. 1, 2.) a
mere Map of all the Riches and Royalties of the World in lively Colors; so
'twas but a Picture, not it self. (3.) Thus Judiciary Astrologers (that call
men off from a due observation of Divine Providence, which numbers our very
hairs, Mat. 10.30. and orders even contingent things, Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19.
5.) whose Art does arise from a natural itch (in fallen Mankind) of knowing
what God would not have known, Deuteronomy. 29.20. Acts 1. 6, 7. And were there any
certainty in that Art, no doubt but the Devil (himself) would have the best
knowledge of it (both by the subtlety of his Nature, and by his long Experience
in the world) yet has he been often deceived in his fallacious Oracles. And it is
remarkable, that the Caldaeans (who were undoubtedly most skilful in that Art)
could not foretell the ruin of their own Empire: Neither can Fortune Tellers
foretell their own Scourgings and untimely Death. This is such a cheat and
deceit, that wise Cato (though an Heathen) did wonder how such kind of persons
could forbear laughter, when they met one another, seeing they knew so well how
they did notoriously gull so many credulous people; therefore listen not to
them.

17. (4.) And lastly, the Cheats of Wizards or Witches (both white and black)
that have Collusion, as well as Delusion in them; (1.) The white Witches (or
wise men, or wise women, as they are ignorantly miscalled) that are said to
cure Diseases, and to help persons to lost Goods; alas, it is only done by
Collusion, one devil (for more devilish ends) giving way to another: The Devil
may take off what he (himself) has laid on; his Cures are only for a time, and
it is for some greater mischief; he may restore those Goods that he (by his
Agents) has stolen, that he may be worshipped of those to whom they are
restored: but without all peradventure, it is better to want your Goods, or your
Health (it self) than to go to the devil for them; they can never come from him
with a blessing. Your Lord would have nothing of the devils giving, Math. 4. 9,
10. And as if there were no God in Israel, why should you go to the Devil at
Ekron? 2 Kin. 1. 2, 3. the God of your mercies scorns you should seek him in
vain, Isa. 45. 11. 16. 19. (2.) the black Witches (so called) are (themselves)
cheated by Satan, and made to believe that they are transformed into Cats,
Birds, etc. all which is but a delusion, for no such transmutation can be, but
either by Creation or Generation; it is not by the first, for there cannot be
two Creators; nor by the second, for Generation must be in time, and not in an
instant. Thus the Devil deludeth them with conceits, (which are plain deceits)
that they are got over sea into foreign Wine-Cellars, whereas (all that time of
those conceits) they are so fast asleep, that they cannot be awakened; and
whatever is done, (if any thing) of that nature, it is all done by their
Familiars: but above all, they are cheated at last (those witches) with a
witness, who cannot save themselves from the stroke of Justice, by all their
familiars, but are always lurched by them at length: when Witches fall into
Justices hands, then those familiars, which had (as it were) worn out their
shoes in the Witches service formerly, will not now go barefoot for their
help; and then it is, that the Circle of the Halter is too strong for all their
spells.

18. Yet all those cheats and deceits do spring originally from a deceitful
deceiving, and a deceived heart, Isa. 44. 20. the pride of the heart deceives
those Sorcerers, Wizzars, and Witches, Obad. v. 3. making them think themselves
some great matter, whereas there is no such matter, but their hearts do befool
them into a fools paradise, and puts such a trick upon them, as the serpent did
upon Eve, Genesis 3. 13. [the serpent has deceived me] where the same Hebrew word
is used as here: a deceived heart (that so often deceives them) may well say to
them, as the heart of Apollodorus (the Tyrant) seemed to say in the boiling
kettle to him, (as before) It is I that have drawn thee to all this evil. This
is apparent in Simon Magus (who bewitched the Samaritans) he was bewitched
(himself) with his own bewitching heart (which was in the gall of bitterness,
and in the bond of iniquity, as bitter to God, as gall is to man, and in such a
bond as could not be loosed) this made him think himself (basely, and
blasphemously) that he was the great power of God, who was but a blab or
bladder blown up (as a bubble) by the Devil, and of his own heart, Act. 8.9,
10, 11. 21. 23.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Hearts Treachery.

1. THough all those persons and things (forementioned) be notoriously
deceitful, as has been manifested; yet the heart of Man is more deceitful than
them all: the Word of God, (which is the mouth of wisdom) tells you, that it
is superlatively deceitful; the Scripture of truth, Jerem 17.9. says, it is
deceitful above all; it exceeds them all, not only in one or two, but in many
respects, as (1.) it would put a cheat and deceit upon the highest object, even
upon God himself, so far as it can: all those persons and things (aforesaid)
cheats only their Fellow Creatures, but this deceitful heart would cheat God
(himself) the great Creator: hence Hypocrisy is the grand cheat of the heart;
wherein there is a covering of our selves with the fig leaves of an outward
profession, as if God (who has an all-seeing eye, and is indeed [(...)]
all-eye) could not see our nakedness through those thin coverings, and as if he
could not discern betwixt what we be, and what we seem to be: an Hypocrite
would cozen the God of Heaven, if he could but tell how: yea, and where there
is sincerity without Hypocrisy, the heart will often falsify with God, and give
him the slip in duty, starting aside like a deceitful bow, Psalm. 78. 37. 57.
(2.) It puts a cheat upon the noblest subject, to wit, the precious and
Immortal Soul; it is the Apostles phrase, [deceiving our own Souls] Jam. 22.26.
[(...)] using fallacies or false syllogisms, (which has a probable appearance
of truth, yet are false both in matter and form) to deceive, as the same word
is used, Col. 2. 4. since the heart has lost its uprightness, it has found
out many (tricks, wiles, or) inventions to deceive the Soul, either by false
reckoning, or by false reasoning. Now the Soul is of more worth than the whole
world; as Christ (who alone) went to the price of Souls, (and therefore best
knew the worth of Souls) tells you, Matthew. 16. 26. so it is better a whole
world should be cheated, than that a precious Soul should be so.

2. (3ly,) This is a Cheat that concerns the best, choicest, and chiefest
things; it is no less than about life and Salvation; all the other Cheats are
but petty-cheats to this. Jacob beguiled his Brother Esau of earthly blessings,
but this [Jagnacob] heart, will beguile of Heavenly: Tamar beguiles Judah of
external things, [his signet, bracelets, and staff,] but this would cheat you
of the white-stone, wherein is written the new name, that sealing and assuring
Spirit of God, Rev. 2. 17. and of that blessed bracelet of divine graces,
fastened all together with the knot of Humility, as the word [(...)] 1 Pet. 5.
5. signifies: yea, and of the staff of supporting grace, which upholds you in
your walking in Gods ways. Rachel cheated Laban of his false gods, but this you
of the true one. Dalilah betrays Sampson into the hands of his Temporal
Enemies, that put out his eyes, made him work in a Mill, etc. these were all
bodily evils only; but this betrays you into the hands of your Spiritual
Enemies, would put out the eyes of your understanding, and would clap you up
close prisoner to sin and Satan, the slavery whereof is abundantly worse than
Sampsons grinding in the prisonhouse. The Gibeonites deceived Joshuah for
their own preservation, but the tendency of this deceit is for your own
destruction: And thus it may be said of the other deceitful persons and things:
your heart will cheat you in (both) natural things, (as in feeding, sleeping,
etc.) and in civil things, (as in buying and bargaining) but the worst cheat of
all is, in Religious things, in the matters of life and Salvation, with a
bastard peace when not Married to Christ.

3. A Woman that is not Married, may (indeed) have children, but she cannot
have credit or comfort of them, because they are bastards: so the Soul (not
Married to Christ) may have false joy, which is not of Christ's begetting, nor
the fruit of his Spirit; there be [parelii, or] mock-Suns, that appear in the
cloud for a while, but continue not, [omnia verisimilia non sunt vera] every
like is not truly the same: there be mock-graces also; Satan (Gods Ape) wraps
himself in Samuels Mantle. (4.) As this cheat is in the best things, so it is a
cheat for the longest time, even for Eternity: time can never be recalled or
redeemed, if once you be lanched out into that endless Ocean, that bottomless
and boundless deep of Eternity: therefore must you fear and tremble to put an
everlasting cheat upon an immortal Soul, and that in a matter of eternal life
and Salvation. A man may weather out the point of other temporal cheats, and in
a little time recover himself, and redeem his loss again; but this Spiritual
cheat is (well-nigh) irrecoverable.

4. (5ly) It Is a cheating of our selves, which is a compound of many bad
Ingredients, a cheat made up of many aggravations: as (1.) it is contrary to the
Laws of God, even his positive Law: Let no man deceive himself, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
Gal. 6. 3. 7. 1 John 1. 8. Jam. 1. 22. 26. 1 Cor. 6. 9. and 15. 33. Deuteronomy. 11.
16. Job 15. 31. and Revel. 3. 17. (2ly) it is contrary to the very law of
Nature, which is always [sui conservativa] a self-preserver, and [charitas est
semper a seipso] charity should always begin at home, though it should not (at
any time) end at home; man needs not any positive Law or command [to love
himself] and therefore God has left none upon Record in Scripture, saying,
[Man, love thy self] for it is supplied by the Law of nature; yet this deceiving
our selves, cancels out that very Law. (3ly.) When a man flatters himself in
his own eyes, Psalm. 36.2. saying, they shall find no iniquity in me, Hos. 12.
8. in so saying, and in deceiving himself, 1 John 1. 8. Obad. 3. ver. Isa. 44.
20. thereby, that which should be the self-preserver, becomes the
self-destroyer; if the Sentinel (that is betrusted with the watch) become
(himself) treacherous, no wonder if the City or Castle be taken and ransacked
by the enemy. (4ly) There is an odd kind of tameness in this self-delusion,
wherein the heart deceives our own Souls; it is heinous enough (and we can well
enough be vexed at it) to be cheated by others; but oh, how tame and patient we
can be in this cheating of our selves! it is a self-pleasing evil, and a man may
sink with much complacency (in himself) into the bottomless pit herein. (5ly)
To be cheated in Commodities that a man is not much conversant in, is not much
marvelled at; as in strange foreign drugs we may easily be deceived, and none
can wonder at it; but to be cheated in things familiarly known to us, oh this
is odious and abominable; insomuch, that we can readily reflect upon our selves
herein, and cry out, [oh what a fool am I to suffer my self to be thus easily
befooled!] Yet this is done in self-deception, for what is a Man more familiar
with, than himself? and what ought he to be more conversant withal, than with
his own bosom? (6ly) To be deceived in trifles, is nothing, a man can bear it
well enough; but in matters of moment (as Inheritances, the whole livelihood,
etc.) this is unbearable: yet nothing is so weighty as Salvation, (that eternal
Inheritance) which men commonly bear too well to be cheated out of. (7ly) Such
as cheat themselves are pittyed of none; all men say, they should have been
wiser: so self-deceit (in matters of Salvation) is a pittiless evil; neither
God, Men, nor Devils, will pity us for cheating our own Souls.

5. (8ly) This self-deceit makes a man worse than the Devil in one respect, to
wit, in being for torment at the last, and not expecting it, but blessing
himself with vain hopes and expectations of better things; all which idle
dreams shall certainly perish, Job 8. 13, 14. whereas the Devil is for torment,
and expects it, Matthew. 8. 29. [Art thou come to torment us before the time?]
this is (indeed) no free confession of his Will, but it is extorted from him by
compulsion and unavoidable necessity; the Devil might know that the Son of Man
was to be the Judge of the world, (both of Men and of Devils) out of Dan. 7.
13, 14. and that himself (with his whole Kingdom of Devils) were reserved in
chains until that dreadful day; and that now he is only respited, and (as it
were) reprieved in respect of full torment, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jud. v. 6. and that
now he is only suffered, as a prisoner, [Non in arcta, sed libera custodia] at
large, to flutter abroad in the air, (as a Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians.
2. 2.) and to course about the earth, Job 1. 7. until that great day comes,
which he trembles to think on, Jam. 2. 19. therefore such as scoff at this
day, and make light of it, 2 Pet. 3. 3. 5. (with their golden dreams of a
fools-paradise) makes themselves worse than the very Devils.

6. (9.) This same self-flatterer falls, in that day, under the greatest
judgment, and doubtless his own misery, (for his groundless hope and vain
expectation of better things) makes worse things ten-fold worse when they come
upon him. Alas, how will such an one be all woe begone, when he meets with the
hottest Hell, whereas he blessed himself all along, that he was fairly going on
toward a delightful Heaven! it is better for a King to dream that himself is
become a beggar; for though that dream (while it lasts) does trouble and
torment him, yet no sooner is he awakened, than his grief and conceited misery
is all at an end; he finds himself but deluded with a false dream, he is a
King still, and this does comfort him: it is otherwise when a miserable beggar
dreams that himself is become some happy King; for though those self-pleasing
thoughts do tickle his fancy for a while, yet as soon as he awaketh, his sorrow
(after his false joy) returns stronger upon him than it was before: the foolish
hope, and groundless confidence of the Hypocrite shall be cut off, Job. 8. 14.
and that cut is a cutting and a killing cut, it is the worst and greatest cut in
the world: every wicked man is this Hypocrite, inasmuch as he grounds his vain
hope upon the general mercy of his maker, without any particular promise
brought home and wrought in upon the heart, Isa. 27. 11. presumendo sperat, and
sperando perit, (says the Father) he presumptuously hops, and by hoping
perishes: though he cannot tell of one tear he has shed for his sins, nor of
one hour he has spent in the mortification of his sins, yet does he (in
effect) but lay his own shadow for a bridge, and so must needs (under horrible
disappointments) fall into the bottomless pit: God will reject his confidences,
and he shall not prosper in them, Jer. 2. 37. false delights are always true
dangers, and brings (after) real torments. (In the sixth and last place) this
is the cheat of cheats, the very fountain and original of all other cheats; for
nothing could deceive us, if our own hearts did not first deceive us: 'twas a
good saying of Father Latimer, when he was cheated by his Chapman in buying a
commodity, and was told thereof; Alas, (says the good old Doctor) my cheating
chapman has far the worse of it; meaning thus, that if his own heart had
deceived him in his fond credulity, this amounted only to an outward loss: but
his chapmans heart had worse deceived him into acts of fraudulency and
cozenage, which amounted to inward guilt, and would prove a sting to his Soul.

7. Before we come from the general to a particular discovery of the hearts
deceitfulness, some general Objections against this great truth does lie in our
way; (just as Amasa's body did lie in the way of the Armies march, 2 Samuel 20.
12, 13.) which therefore must be removed out of the way, (as his body was
there) that we may march forward without any Remora or obstruction.

1. Object. The first Objection is: Methinks I hear some poor ignorant Soul
say, I know no such thing by my heart, that it is such an evil treasure, or
that it is so full of (both) treason and treachery.

1. Ans. Answer the first. Come, Soul, why do you say thus? may it not be
because you have not beheld the hidden man of the heart in the looking-glass of
the law of liberty? you know, a man may have his face sadly smutched and
besmeared with soot, and he not know it without the help of a look-ing-glass,
or of the eyes of others. Alas, the spots of Gods children (at the least) are
upon you, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.

2. Ans. Answer the second. If at any time you have (through grace) beheld your
self in the glass of Gods word, or have been told of it by the Ministers of the
Gospel; Alas, your speech bewrays you, that you have forgotten the complexion
of your heart so discovered, Jam. 1. 23. 25.

3. Ans. Answer the third. I beseech you take heed you be not of the number of
those that yet know not the plague of their own hearts, 1 Kin. 8. 38. The
Apostle tells you, that there be some in the world who are [past feeling] Ephesians.
4. 19. in some, [consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati] custom in sinning
takes away all sense of sin, whereby the heart contracts a k^nd of hoof and
hardness upon it; and the same Apostle tells you of some that have cauterized
Consciences, 1 Timothy 4.2. that, like those Devils, (Matt. 8. 29.) will have
nothing to do with Christ, (and their own hearts) as loath to be tormented
before the time: this is [non pax, sed stupor] not any true peace, but a
sottish stupefaction; a man that is sick unto death, yet if insensible of his
sickness, it is a sure indication of death's approaching.

4. Ans. Answer the fourth. Take heed (likewise) that you be not one of
Solomon's credulous fools, to trust too much in the goodness of your own heart,
Prove. 28. 26. This is, not only to be a fool, but also to be a proud fool, not
unlike Homers Ajax, that acknowledged no other God but his own Sword. Alas,
this trusting in your own heart, is no better than [Autotheism, which is as bad
as Atheism, or Polytheism] a becoming no less than a God to your self,
(according to Satan's early insinuation, Genesis 3. 5.) a falling down to worship
your self, which is no better than if you worshipped many gods, or no God at
all: oh do not thus sacrifice to your own net, Hab. 1. 16. Prove. 3. 5.

5. Ans. Answer the fifth. You must remember, that the heart is both a dark and
a deep place, so not easily discovered in all the disorders of it: it is called
[(...)] 2 Pet. 1. 19. an obscure, squalid, and filthy place, (for filthiness is
mostly found in dark places) and it is called a deep heart, Psalm. 64. 6. and
therefore not easily sounded (as the deep sea) by many fathoms: look as in your
house (or chamber) though all the furniture thereof be mis-placed and out of
order, yet during the darkness of the night none of this is discerned, but the
morning-light (springing into the room) manifests all: even so while you are
darkness (it self) Ephesians. 5. 8. Act. 26. 18. you know not what is out of order in
you; but when the blessed day star (Christ Jesus, Revel. 22. 16.) arises in
your hearts, then the disorders of your heart are discovered.

9. The second Objection to be answered and removed (thereby) out of the way,
is this: Another ignorant Soul may say, although it be true that some other
men's hearts be thus treacherous and deceitful, yet mine is not so, but I find
by experience, that it is an honest heart that is willing to pay every one their
due, and is not so bad as is here declared.

1. Ans. Answer the first. You must know that it favors too much of the proud
Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. to say, I am not as other men; do not you know that God
has fashioned all men's hearts alike, Psalm. 33. 15. and that as in water face
answers to face, so the heart of man to man, Prove. 27. 19. whole evil is in
man, and whole man is in evil, and by nature there is never a better in whole
mankind: oh consider, was it David's experience and exercise, (who cried, Lord,
incline my heart, and unite my heart, and quicken my heart, etc.) to bewail a
naughty heart? was it Solomon's, and Jeremyes, and Paul's, and whose not, to cry
out of a wicked and of a wretched heart? And shall you plead exemption from
such an epidemical evil? the pride of your heart deceives you, Obad. v. 3.

10. 2. Ans. Answer the second. It may be you were never yet led into such
temptation, as to draw out your corruption; when those two meet together, then
is your danger of a fall: Hazael had as good an opinion of himself (as you can
have of your self) when he said to the Prophet, [Am I a dag, that I should do
so and so?] 2 King 8. 13. He had a reverend respect to the Lords Prophet, and
thought also that no Rational creature could possibly commit such barbarous,
brutish, and inhumane Cruelties, such as he judged far fitter to be done by
some savage and ravenous beast, rather than by any reasonable creature, much
less by himself; [but what, is thy servant a dog?] so cursed and so cruel, as to
tear out men's entrails, and devour them, like a dog? Hazael could not imagine
himself so notoriously bad and base, as he after proved to be: He professes
himself here a Servant to Gods Prophet (crying out, as it were, Oh, be it far
from me to commit such Villainy, as the tearing in pieces young Children like a
dog) and yet in his practice afterward, he became a bloody Butcher to Gods
people. Alas, no man knows the depths of Satan, that lurks in the corners of
their own deep hearts: Little did Bishop Bonner imagine (while he was the Lord
Cromwell's Favorite (in Henry the 8th's time) and promised to further the
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, as much as his Predecessor had hindered it)
that ever he should prove such a common Cutthroat and General Slaughter-slave,
(as one, in a Letter to him, styled him) to all the Bishops of England: And as
little did this Hazael think it of himself, until Honors changed his Manners
(which rarely happens for the better) and until Satan's temptation and his own
(unthought-of) corruption met together to engender all these unparalleled
Villainies, when he came to be King.

11. There is a [(...)] or a common Seed-plot of sin in every man: there wants
nothing but the warmth and watering of the Devil's Temptations to make it bud,
Ezekiel. 7.10. Who would ever have suspected such monsters to lurk in such holy
bosoms, as Surfeiting and Drunkenness, etc. which Christ cautions his own
Disciples of, Luke 21. 34. Corruption in the best will have some out-bursts.
Hence blessed Paul saw cause enough (undoubtedly) to admonish such a pure soul
and mortified a man as young Timothy was (being under many Infirmities, 1 Timothy
5. 23.) That he might flee youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. and Exhort the younger
women with chastity, 1 Timothy 5. 2. Intimating thereby, that while he was
exhorting them to Chastity, some unchaste motion might steal upon his own heart
at unawares; well knowing, that the naughty nature in the best of fallen
Mankind, will have its flurts and flings out at some time or other, through
the Devils instigations; yea and though there were no Devil to tempt man, yet a
base heart would supply the place of a busy Devil, and act the Tempters part
against it self; It would have a supply of wickedness (as a Serpent has of
poison) from it self.

12. Answ. the third. It may be (likewise) that your corruption is in chains,
and under restraint, as it was with Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6. It was not the King
(there) that restrained himself from offering wrong to beautiful Sarah, but
it is expressly said, that it was God who restrained him, verse. 3. 17. either by
Sickness, whereof he should have died (as God threatened him) had he not
restored her to her husband without injuring her, or by the restraint of a
natural Conscience, which is a gift that God gives to men, yea to the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them, (to wit, in his
Worship and Ordinances) Psalm. 68. 18. without which Restraining Grace, Religion
would never be suffered (by wicked men) to be in the world, neither could there
be upholden any Commonwealth or Society among men without it: hence it appears
that the corruption of your heart is but like a Wolf in chains; your naughty
nature may be chained up from evil, when it is not changed (yet) into good;
notwithstanding this, you may be but as a tame Devil, or (at least) but as an
unclean Hog (only) in a clean place, where you cannot (with the Swine) wallow
in the mire of wickedness: but if ever God let you loose (by giving you the
reins of your own unruly corruptions, and by yielding you up to your own vile
affections, as Romans 1. 24, 26.) you will not stick at any sin, but run into all
excess of riot with others in the world, (as 1 Pet. 4.4.) and be as vile as the
vilest: David felt the transgressions of the wicked working and speaking (even)
in his own heart, Psalm. 36. 1.

13. Answer. The 4th Answ. And whereas you say, that you have an honest heart,
paying each their own; you must know, that you may be a good Second-Table-man
in Righteousness, while you are but a bad First-Table-man in Holiness: You may
give man his due, yet rob God of his due, Mal. 3. 8. As you must not break the
Commandments against your Creed, (by professing an holy Faith, yet practicing
an unholy Life;) so neither may you break one of the Tables (of the Decalogue)
against the other, by your resting in a Righteousness to man only, and (the
mean while) rejecting all true and due Holiness to God; this is not dividing
aright for God, which is supposed to be Cain's sin in his unrespected
Sacrifice. An honest and a good heart will give God his due, as well as Man his.

14. The Third Objection is, A third poor ignorant Soul may say thus, (or one
and the same Soul may make all these three Objections) I know not the
Characters of a self-deceiving heart, and therefore do I think mine own heart
to be an honest heart, that cheats me not.

In Answer thereunto you must know, there be four principal Characters (though
many more might be named) of a self-deceiving heart; As 1. a Silent. 2. A
Brawny. 3. An Untractble. And 4. an Unstable or Unconstant Heart.

(1.) A Silent Heart is always to be suspected for a self-deceiving Heart; the
Spirit of Man is an active lively thing, and therefore it is called (in the
Hebrew) Ruach, which signifies the Wind, (a thing that is always in motion, yea
Audible, though not Visible). Now if this Spirit grow senseless, stupid, and
silent (never examining comers in, or goers out of the heart) it is become
naughty and self-deceiving; this Candle of the Lord in you (as your Spirit is
called, Prove. 20. 27.) should examine (as the Sentinel upon the Watch) all
comers and goers, crying, (ever and anon) Who comes there? and Who goes there?
And as Joshuah did to the man, Josh. 5. 13. Who art thou for? Art thou for us,
or for our Adversaries? If your heart be silent herein, and say nothing in such
Christian Examinations, then such a [Traveller] as came to David's heart, 2 Samuel 12. 4. may be welcome to your heart. Mariners do say, there be more Ships
cast away in Calms upon Quicksands, etc. than in Storms upon Splitting Rocks.
If Despair (with Saul) has slain its thousands, sure I am, Presumption (with
David) has killed its ten thousands. If a Spiritual Calm or slumber be upon
you, then you cannot cry out, Who comes there, etc. The Philistims may be upon
you, and you know it not.

*2.) A brawny heart (that has lost its Tenderness) is a Self-deceiving Heart:
Josiah 's heart was tender, 2 King. 22. 19. this pleased God well; and so was
David's, when it smote him for cutting off Readiness lap, 1 Samuel 24. 5. But how
had he lost his Tenderness, when his heart did not smite him for cutting off
Uriah 's life, etc. One of a tender Constitution cannot endure the least cold
wind to blow upon him, but must have all Windows and Doors close shut, to
secure his tender body: Oh that you were as wise for your Soul (as he is for
his Body) in shutting all close, that not the least cold Air of sin may come
unto it: If your heart be not ever suggesting duty, or humbling for neglect, it
deceives you.

15. (3.) An untractable heart, (such as will not be handled, nor come to hand
in a parley) is a self-deceiving heart: David bids you commune with your own
heart, Psalm. 4. 4. and you should call your faithless heart to a faithful
account duly and daily, and you should view your works every-day, (as the Lord
your God did his, all the six days of the Creation, Genesis 1.) and happy is that
Soul that finds them good, (though not (very) good, as God did his works) in a
serious Self-Reflection; but if your heart fly from you, and will not commune
with you, saying, Oh what have I done? Jerem. 8. 6. it is a self-deceiving
heart. David prayed, Lord incline and unite my untractable heart; your windows
should be as those of the Temple, 1 Kin. 6. 4. broad inward, to give more light
inwardly. (4.) An unstable heart is a self-deceiving heart, if it will not
stand at the mark till your parley (with it) be brought to some blessed issue,
Jam. 1. 8. halting betwixt two; and is as much for Baal as for God, as much for
sin as for Christ, so is but (with Agrippa) almost a Christian: this
half-parlying (in self-tryal) undoes thousands, whose hearts are unstable in
it; it is the work of the Spirit to bind the heart, (as Psalm. 118. 27.) and to
convince thoroughly of the state either of sin or grace: without this, your
heart will slip you in self-examination, which is as the rubbing of your eyes
to see better where you are, and what you are doing.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Hearts Treachery in prosperity.

1. NOw come we to a more particular discovery of the hearts treachery, and
that in two grand respects, (1.) In respect of your state and condition in this
lower World; and (2.) in respect of your various actions, in order both to this
and to a better world. First of the first, to wit, your state and condition in
this world, which is twofold, 1. a Temporal, 2ly. a Spiritual state; in both
which your heart may deceive you, if you do not take heed to it, to keep it
with all keepings, Prove. 4. 23. Now 1. of the Temporal state, which is twofold;
1. the state of prosperity, 2. the state of adversity: first of the first of
these, to wit, the state of Prosperity: 1. Of the Malady. 2. Of the Remedy. 1.
The Malady, wherein the deceit of the heart is discovered in sundry
particulars; as the first Discovery is: Your deceitful heart may carry your
soul (at some times) further off from God thereby; just as the Moon, which, the
more Light she receives from the Sun of the firmament, goes the further off
from him; and sometimes (when she is in the full) the shadow of the Earth does
interpose itself, and so eclipses and darkens her: even so man is as the Moon
in the full (having fullness of all things) this oftentimes sets his Soul
further off from Christ, the sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. for Fullness and
Pride, or Haughtiness, are coupled together as the Cause and the Effect, Ezekiel.
16. 49, 50. Fullness brings forth Haughtiness, which is both the hate of Heaven,
and the gate to Hell, yea the very first firebrand that set Sodom on fire:
That Pride is the product of Prosperity, appears from Psalm. 73. 5, 6. Job 15.
25, 26, 27. and 1 Timothy 6. 17. And proud man (made so by Prosperity) God
beholds afar off, Psalm. 138. 6. They are got a great way from God, he drives
them (as the Chaldee Paraphrase there signifies) afar off from Heaven (as
disdaining to come near such loathsome Lepers) and thrusts them down as low as
to Hell at last: How often also does the interposition of earthly enjoyments
(which is but a shadow) eclipse and darken the Soul of man Godward?

2. The second Discovery is: In Prosperity the Soul of man is very prone to
forget both his Mercies, and the God of his mercies; for, Fullness breeds
Forgetfulness, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. and Saturity brings forth Security.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque seoundis;
Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.
Mercy is many times but a nine days wonder, and it is hard for (even) the
choicest Soul to keep the sense of a mercy (for any considerable time) warm
upon the heart: whereas, we should keep the loving kindness of God in
everlasting remembrance; but alas, it is with us, as it is with children, eaten
bread is soon forgotten, our luxuriant and wanton minds, soon forget Divine
favors, as Psalm. 106. 13. [they hasted, they forgot, Hebr.] which is a great
aggravation: forgetfulness should (indeed) be a grave, wherein we ought to bury
the Injuries done to us by Man, but not any of the loving kindnesses done to us
by God, Psalm. 103. 2.

The best use of a bad Memory, is to forget Injuries from man; but to forget
the Benefits of God, is gross Ingratitude: David felt some dullness and
drowziness in this respect, and he therefore rowzeth up his own Soul to this
Remembring-work. Oh, where is the man, the woman, that has their hearts as
much affected with Mercies, and that praises God as fervently for them, when
they are stale and old Mercies, as while they are fresh and new, and but lately
received!

3. The third Discovery is, In Prosperity the Soul of man is more prone to be
corrupted, and to contract the scum of filthiness; like the standing pool, that
will in process of time stink of it self, when running waters do retain their
own native sweetness: 'Twas Fullness that bred filthiness in Israel (as well as
forgetfulness) Jen. 5.7. It breeds this latter in good men, but the former
always in bad men: Cores and Bacchus are great friends to Venus, etc. Those
worshippers of Baal-peor first eat and drank, and then rose up to play, to wit,
with their Midianitish Mistresses, 1 Cor. 10.7. Number. 25. 3. 18. If Moab be not
powered from vessel to vessel, he will settle upon his lees, his taste remains
in him, and his scent is not changed, Jerem. 48. 11, 12. he has had no
changes, therefore he fears not God, Psalm. 55. 19. and the prosperity of
fools destroys them, Proverb. 1. 32. the Sunshine thereof does but ripen them
for destruction. Bernard calls Prosperity [Misericordiam omni indignatione
crudellorem.] Mercy (given in wrath) has abundance of wrath in it, and he had
no mind to any such Mercy: David carried it better when he watered his bed
with tears, in the time of his persecution, Psalm. 6. 6. than he did when he
washed his steps with butter (as Job 29. 6.) in the day of his prosperity.
Israel had strong Espousal-loves to God, while they followed him in a land that
was not sown, Jerem. 2.2. 'Twas not so well with them, when they came to rest
in a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Prosperity is too
strong Wine for some weak Brains; and therefore it is supposed that Elishah must
have a double portion (to that of Elijah) for he must be in favor with Kings,
and great at Court, etc. which things are very hard to bear with an holy frame
of heart, 2 Kin. 2.9.

4. The fourth Discovery is, The Soul of man is soon overcharged in Prosperity,
Luke 21. 34. Christ (himself) gives this caution to his own dear Disciples,
well knowing that the standing (of the best of fallen Mankind) is but a
slippery standing, and a very little thing will over-charge and overturn them.
If this might befall those green trees, what can dry trees (such as we are)
expect? Small Vessels cannot carry great Sails, but be in danger of
overwhelming; neither is every little boat fit to launch out into the wide
Ocean of worldly Felicity. There is (truly) danger to be without danger; and
Christ's Lambs mostly thrive best upon short (not overgrown) Pastures: The
intoxicating Cup of Pomp and Prosperity did hurt (even holy David (2 Samuel 11.
1. 11.) and godly Hezekiah (2 Chronicles. 32. 31.) when overcharged with it.

Alas, what are the best when left to themselves, and in the counsel of their
own hands and hearts? good David did that bad act at that time, which he would
not have done in Saul's time, and which Vriah (one of his worthyes) would not do
in his time: the best are too apt to furfeit of too much of the world;
abundance of the things of this life, is like fish that is full of bones, which
while Children eat too greedily, they are in danger of choking with it.

5. The fifth Discovery is, The Soul of man is more exposed to the temptations
of Satan in Prosperity than in Adversity; it is said that Neptune kills more by
Calms upon Sands, than by Storms upon Rocks: And yet Sea-room here is your
danger, unless (with blessed Paul) you have learnt to abound, as well as to be
in want, Phil. 4. 12, 13. for then is the Soul most secure, and least stands
upon its watch (as at other times) yea, and is the greatest object of Satan's
malice. Oh how maliciously did the devil say to God, [Doth Job serve God for
naught? have thou not blessed him with all Prosperity? Job 1. 9, 10.] God
delights in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm* 35. 27. But Satan stomachs
it exceedingly, and therefore speaks angrily to God, that Joh might serve God
well enough for such price and pay, and that he (himself) could find never a
gap in the hedge (of Divine Protection) that was round about him and his; he
could make never a breach, which he would gladly have done: But if you neglect
your watch never so little in your Prosperity (as you will be very prone to do)
then breaks in your Adversary, and comes over the gap to spoil you. Ambrose
elegantly illustrates this truth by the Oister, which, while she is tossed and
turmoiled by (her Enemy) the Crab in the salt-waters, keeps her shells so close
together, that she secures her self from all danger of being (then) devoured;
but when she lies securely upon the shore without fear of her foe, she opens
her self (then) to the warm Sun; which while she is in doing, then comes the
Crab, and puts a stone between the lips of her shells, thrusts in her Claws,
and easily, (as well as safely) draws out the fish: even so, the Soul, that is
tossed to and fro by the crabbed adversary, upon the brinish waters of
affliction, shuts up the heart and mouth close for fear of offending, Psalm. 39.
1, 2. but in the sunshine of peace and prosperity, the heart opens, and is
without a covering; then the Spiritual adversary finds free passage, entrance,
and entertainment.

6. The sixth discovery is, the Soul of man is prone in prosperity to grow lazy
in its devotion: The warmest Prayers are ever in the winter of adversity, Hos.
5. 15. Isa. 26. 16. Summer-prayers are but yawning, perfunctory, and
superficial devotion, not powered out with connatural violence: The Kingdom of
Heaven is not stormed.

The Jews in their Ceiled houses, were regardless of the House of prayer, Hagg.
1. 4. as their beds were too soft, so their hearts were too hard for any due
devotion; but Prayer is mostly the Daughter of Calamity, as it is the Mother of
Comfort. Affliction exciteth Devotion, as a pair of bellows blows up the fire:
Christ in his Agony prayed more earnestly, Luke 22. 44. And Martha (with her
Sister Mary) sent Messengers to Jesus, when their Brother [Lazarus] was visited
with sickness, Joh. 11. 3. Thus also under Gods Visitations we do mostly visit
God, in sending our Messengers of continued groans and earnest Prayers to him,
whom we much neglect in our prosperity; and therefore how justly may God say to
us, as Jephthah said to his Countrymen, [Do ye now come to me in your
distress?] when in your prosperity ye said to me [Depart from us] Judge. 11. 2.
7. God may say as much to most of us, who seldom seek to him, before plain
need drives us.

7. Having first discovered the Malady, the second work is a word of the
Remedy, in some following Rules and Directions, as special helps against the
hearts treachery, in a time of prosperity: 1. Direction is, in prosperity you
must (with holy Job) greatly fear adversity, Job. 3. 25. for God (says
Solomon) has set the one over against the other, Eccles. 7. 14. he has set
them (as it were) in Aequilibrio, in an equal balance; the one is up at one
time, and the other at another time: there is a vicissitude of all created
beings; there is foul weather, as well as fair; night as well as day; and
Winter as well as Summer: You must expect Sickness, as well as enjoy Health,
and Adversity as well as Prosperity: You may not say with David, [My mountain
is so strong I shall never be moved,] Psalm. 30. 6. for even the strongest
mountains melt at Gods presence, Judge. 5. 5. Psalm. 114. 3, 4, 6, 7. either when
God shows you the presence of his anger, or only hides from you the presence of
his favor: God goes (as it were) in a circle with David in that 30th Psalm,
and the various Providence that he was (at several times) under, made (as it
were) a piece of checkered work, the black of Misery, as well as the white of
Mercy. There is no man, no thing, that can say [I am] but God, whose Name it
is, Exodus 3. 14. and who only is Unchangeable, Hebr. 13. 8. If God find that
Prosperity makes us too light and frothy in his balance, then (as there is
need) he makes us heavy with Affliction, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

8. The second Direction is, Be sure that in your Prosperity you forget not
divine Threatenings, as you are apt in your Adversity to forget divine Promises.
As the higher that the River rises, the higher does rise the Boat that swims
in it: So the Mind of man (as the Boat) is apt to be lifted up with an high
and prosperous estate, as Obad. 3. Hab. 2. 4. (whereas in Prosperity you should
ever have your Mind below your Means, and in Adversity above them.) Now there
is no better way to keep down the Mind below the Means, than by making a
believing Use of Divine Threatenings, which shall certainly come to pass: It
cannot be otherwise but your heart will be lifted up above your brethren (as
Deuteronomy. 17. 20.) in prosperity, unless you be preserved from it by believing that
God is as certain in accomplishing his Threatenings, as he is in fulfilling his
Promises: If you take the Jewels of his Mercies, and make Idols of them (as
Israel did in the Wilderness, Exodus 32. 2, 3, 4.) or if you abuse any of his
Corn or his Wine, or any of his Flax or his Wool, (as Israel did in Canaan,
Hos. 2. 8, 9.) you must know, that God will not take it well at your hands; no,
he has threatened there to take them from you; you shall no longer be trusted
(as a Steward) with them.

9. The third Direction or help is, Look upon Prosperity as harder to bear with
an holy frame of heart, than is Adversity: But when Pharaoh saw there was
respite, he hardened his heart, Exo. 8.15. If you be Prosperity-proof (as the
Walls of some Castles are said to be Cannon-proof, and the Armor of some
Captains is said to be Musquet-proof) then you need not fear Adversity: If
Adversity has (in all) killed its Thousands, sure I am, Prosperity has killed
its ten Thousands: [Nulla Infoelicitas frangit, quem nulla Foelicitas
corrumpit] No Adversity can break him, whom no Prosperity can corrupt: Through
peace (and prosperity) Satan destroys many, Dan. 8. 25. as the Grecians did
Troy with their peaceable pretenses of entertaining the Trojan horse: The same
Manna melted by the heat of the Sun, which otherwise would endure to be baked
in an Oven-fire: Take heed that the warm Sunshine of prosperity melt not away
your very seeming to be religious, Jam. 1. 26. and you become only as the
Morning-dew, Hos. 6. 4. when the hot-fire of persecution does not shrink you
in: Luther uses this Proverb, [Bonos far dies, ossa requirit valde robusta;]
the sense whereof is, It requires more strength to carry well under good, than
under evil days: Travelers cast stones at laden, not at fruitless trees. So
does Satan, Job 1.2.7.

10. The fourth Help or direction is, In Prosperity be joyful, to wit, in God
and Godliness, Eccles. 7. 14. [beiom tobah heieh betob,] In a good day be you
in good, Hebr. which implies, You must (1) be in a good frame: (2) Take a good
course: And (3) be of good cheer, or be joyful, Delighting your self in Gods
great goodness to you, Neh. 9. 25. You must look beyond Mercies, at the God of
your Mercies, and be both thankful to him, and joyful in him; Let him that
rejoices, rejoice in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 31. Jer. 9. 23. Psalm. 33.1. Phil.
3.1. and 4. 4. Zech. 10. 7. Isal. 41. 16. If you be in such a good frame, and
(breaking off sinful courses) you take a good course (to wit, to be fruitful,
Acts 9. 31.) this may lengthen out your tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. If you serve
your God in the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. The more Wages God gives
you, the more Work he expects from you: For Solomon's Altar was four times as
big as that of Moses, and Ezekiel's Temple was ten times as big as that of
Solomon's; to teach you, that where God gives much, he also expects much. The
better man you are in your Temporal estate, the better man you should be in
your Spiritual too. If you fail herein, God may Curse your blessings, Malac. 2.
2. and blast your hopes, making you ashamed of your revenues, through his
fierce anger, Jerem. 12. 13. causing you to know the worth of Mercy, by the
want of it; yea and destroying you, after he has done you good, Josh. 24. 20.

11. The fifth Help and Direction is, Put your whole trust in God, (and not any
part of your trust in uncertain Riches, Mark 10. 24.) in the day of your
Prosperity; this is harder to do, than in the day of Adversity: For most rich
men think themselves simply the safer and the better by their Riches, and so
make their Gold (as it were) their God, and have a kind of Confidence and Hope
in them, Job 31.24, 25. While the Mammonist says to his Gold, [Thou art my
confidence] he (as it were) bows the knee (at least of his heart) and worships
before his golden god, saying to it, If thou fail me, I must needs perish; this
the Apostle expounds, calling it a trusting in uncertain Riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
which is (plainly) a Creature-confidence, and no better than flat Idolatry,
Col. 3.5. and spiritual Adultery, Jam. 4.4. yea and enmity with God, in a sense
both active and passive; for it makes a man (or this Mammonist) in his own
person actually to hate God, and (reciprocally) to be hated by God, for so
doing: Now, who would buy Gold at so dear a rate? Upon this account it is harder
to trust God in prosperity, than in Adversity; for in the former the creature
interposeth betwixt God and you, and therein you are apt to stay and stick
fast, and to go no further; whereby your trust in God is eclipsed, as the Moon
is by the Interposition of the shadow of the Earth, and the Sun is by the
Interposition of the body of the Moon 'twixt us and him: in the first, God's
goodness (only) draws you; but in the second your own Necessity drives you to
God.

12. The sixth and last Direction is, Look upon all your Plenty and Prosperity
(that you do enjoy) with no other than a Pilgrims eye, and use all with no
other than with a Pilgrims heart: This David did, acknowledging himself but a
Stranger and a Sojourner (even in the best and most flourishing estate that
ever he was in) 1 Chronicles. 29.15. looking through all his Riches and Honors, at
God the giver of them, ver. 12. Who gives all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy
6.17, 18, 19. Prove. 10. 22. Psalm. 75. 6, 7. and therefore has a Right and
Sovereignty to take from you (at pleasure,) as well as to give to you, Job 1.
21. You must (both) use and loose all with a God-blessing heart, knowing that
Pilgrims are subject to many miseries and molestations, both Satanical and
secular; and that the property (of all) is God's, even while the possession is
yours. This the Patriarchs acknowledged, Genesis 47. 9. Hebr. 11. 13. and the
Apostles, Hebr. 13. 14. and Prophets, Psalm. 39. 12.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Hearts Treachery in Adversity.

1. THe second Temporal state (wherein the Treachery of the Heart is discovered
also) is, The state of Adversity, which is a state that knocks at every man's
door (less or more) for man bears misery in his very name: There be four Hebrew
names for Man usually mentioned in the holy Scriptures, and these are [Ish,
Enosh, Gheber, and Adam;] and of these four, there be three of them that do
carry Misery in their very sense and signification: So that it is three to one
against every man, but he shall have his Adversity, or (as the word imports)
something to be against him in one kind or another, if yet he say not with old
Jacob, [All these things are against me,] Genesis 42. 36. The first name of Man in
Hebrew is [Ish,] so named [a sonitu] from sound or noise: for Man comes into
the world crying, and goes out of the world groaning; and all the time betwixt
those two extremes, or [Termini a quo and ad quem] the first term of birth, and
the last term of death, Man is no more than a sound or noise, while he is
acting his part upon the stage of the world (whether it be a public or private
part) all that time of his appearing upon that stage, he (indeed) may make some
noise (less or more, in his place or station; but when the time of his
disappearing comes (to wit, the day of his dying, as 1 Samuel 26. 10.) then all
his noise is at an end.

2. The second name in Hebrew for Man is [Enosh,] which has two
significations; first it signifies Misery, or Calamity, as if Man (in the
fallen estate) were made up of nothing else, but of Sin and Misery: Secondly,
it signifies (as some render it) Oblivion, as if Man (because of his misery)
were scarce worthy to be taken notice of, or remembered, Deuteronomy. 25.19. and 32.26.
Job 18. 17. Psalm. 34. 16. Eccles. 9. 15.

The third Hebrew name for Man is [Gheber] Lamen. 3. 1. I am the [Gheber] or
man, that has seen affliction; though the word (indeed) does signify [great,
or a great man] yet not so great, as to be beyond or above the touch (yea the
churlish touch) of trouble: No man was ever (yet) found in the world, either so
good or so great, as to be raised (either by his goodness or greatness) above
the reach of Adversity.

The fourth Hebrew name for Man is [Adam] which signifies [earthly;] which
plainly intimates, that suppose a Man (a son of Adam) do grow great in the
world, yet cannot he continue long in that greatness, because he is earth, He
is of the earth, earthly, Joh. 3. 31. and he is of the earth, earthy, 1 Cor.
15. 47. Dust he is, and unto dust he must return, Eccles. 12. 7. And (possibly)
his return may be like that Return in the term of Law (called Returna brevi) a
very short return, God knows how soon, how suddenly: All Adam is all Abel, (as
the Original runs elegantly) Psalm. 39.5. in his best estate is all over vanity;
or Adam is Abel's mate, Psalm. 144. 3, 4. (...), Soul and Soil; a puff of wind
is his breath, and but a bag of dust is his body, Jam. 4.14. a mere flash, and
a curious well-drawn Picture of Nothing.

1. Of the Malady. 2. Of the Remedy. First, the Malady.

3. The Deceitfulness of the Heart in this state of Adversity, is discovered in
the many branches thereof; as first, it is discovered by man's dullness to
understand the mind of God in his Afflictions, or the spring and original of
them from whence they come, whether from chance, or from God: God commands man
[to hear the rod, and who has appointed it,] Micah 6. 8. But alas, man is
exceeding dull and deaf to hear the voice of the rod, or the voice of God in
the rod: God speaks [once and twice, and man perceives it not,] Job 33. 14.
Herein Job (himself) was puzzled and at a nonplus, when he cried to God, [Shew
me wherefore thou contendest with me,] Job 10. 2. Those reflect acts of the
inner man, come hardly off with the heart of man; blind and dumb crosses (such
as we know not what they point at, and speak to us, nor from whence they come)
are never good: as in ascribing them to chance, as if things were of
themselves, and fall out well or ill of themselves, and the hand of the great
God were in none of them. The Pagan Philistims consult with their Diviners
about the causes of their Afflictions, 1 Samuel 6. 2. (When the hand of the Lord
was heavy upon them, 1 Samuel 5. 6. 9.) not knowing whether to ascribe them to
Chance, or to divine Providence, verse. 9. If you at any time harp upon this
string of Hap and Chance, (in the mean while, if not denying, yet (at least)
doubting of Gods all-ordering Providence) your heart does deceive you. The
Rabbis say, when Jeroboam's hand was withered up, 1 Kin. 13.4. that his lying
Prophets told the King, It was but a chance that had happened to him; and thereby
they withheld him from thinking upon God, who had smitten him; and from
reflecting upon himself and his sin, which was the procuring cause of that
Judgment of God. Still Satan and your own subtle heart will be suggesting to
you, that crosses are but common events, and such as had a time to come in, and
must have a time to go in; whereas nothing comes to pass in all the world, but
by Gods appointment, Amos 3. 6. Matthew. 10. 30, etc.

4. The second Discovery of the Hearts deceitfulness in Adversity is, in
ascribing your Afflictions to Fortune, which is worse than that of the
Philistims (aforesaid) of ascribing that which is called The hand of the Lord,
(1 Samuel 5. 6-9.) unto chance, 1 Samuel 6. 9. For Chance is a Scripture-word,
Eccles. 9. 11. Luke 10. 31. And it is said, Ruth 2. 3. that her hap happened
(Hebr.) to light in Boaz's field; this was a mere chance in respect of Ruth,
(who, being a stranger, knew not whose field it was,) yet was it ordered by a
sweet and secret Providence of God, in order to her Marriage to Boaz
afterward. That which is to us but casual and contingent, is yet by God
Almighty both fore-appointed and effected: That which is Casualty to man, is no
other than Counsel to God; and what is Chance to the ignorant man, is no less
than [the Lord] to religious Job, chap. 1. 21. [The Lord gives and takes.]
All Chances and Changes are as much in God's hand, as is Time it self, Psalm.
31. 15. Psalm. 91. 10. [No evil shall chance unto thee.] So this Chance may be
understood in a way of subservieney and subordination to Gods Providence: Yet
to ascribe evil to Fortune, is far worse; as if she were a Goddess, and ordered
all things both good and evil. We do not find that the very Philistims (in the
place before-quoted) while they dreamed of a Chance, did worship this Fortune
as a Goddess. Neither was she ever held to be so, (Hesiod mentions her not in
his Theogonia) till Homer made her so, giving her a Sovereignty over all humane
Affairs; and the succeeding Poets (that are said to lick up his Spewings) say,
[Sed te Nos facimus Fortuna Deam, coeloque locamus.] Juvenal. Satyr. 10.

5. The third Discovery is, Your heart will deceive you, in making you to look
more at the stroke that is given you, than at God who strikes it. Not much
unlike the Dog that runs at the stone which is thrown at him, but minds not
the hand that throws it: Oh! how prone is poor man to snarl at, and quarrel
with that trial and trouble (that is sent to afflict him,) saying to it, Art
thou come to torment me before the time, (as Matthew. 8. 29.) and many times may
curse it; whereas he should (chiefly) curse his Sin, which is the procuring
cause of his Misery. You may pore too much upon the matter of your Affliction,
and too little upon (both) the Procuring and the Efficient Cause thereof; your
own sin is the former that sends for it, and God's Justice (against your sin)
is the latter that sends it: Hence it is, that we cannot say to our affliction,
as Laban said to Abraham's servant, [Come in, thou blessed of the Lord, thou
art welcome,] Genesis 24. 31. Thou art Gods Angel, or Messenger, (wherefore
stand thou without?) I know that when thou have delivered thy Message, and
done thy Errand, thou will be gone, and stay no longer; and though thou be like
a froward Guest at an Inn (that is displeasing enough while he stays there)
yet pays nobly for all at parting: may you be but able to do thus, then you
[Accept] of the punishment of your Iniquity, as God says, Levit. 26. 41. then
do you kiss the Rod, yea and the Hand (too) that lays it on; As the Scholar (on
his Deathbed) did his Masters hand, crying, [Istae manus me ad Paradisum
portant,] Those very hands (that have given me blessed correction) helps me to
Heaven. Your heart will deceive you, if you look not beyond your Affliction, at
Gods faithfulness in your Affliction, saying with David, [I know, that out of
thy very faithfulness, O Lord, thou have afflicted me,] Psalm. 119.75. as if he
had said, Lord, thou had not been faithful to my Soul, without afflicting my
Body.

6. To ascribe any thing (whether good or evil) to fortune, is the grand
overthrow of all true Piety, as it is an Atheistical debasing of Divine
Providence: Cicero (himself) acknowledges, that it was ignorance of the Causes
of things, that brought in the names of Nature, Chance, and Fortune; as if all
things were either from themselves (which is called Nature or Chance) or only
so disposed by Fortune, (this fictitious goddess) and not by the true God, that
orders all, from the highest Angels to the lowest worms. Augustine argues
excellently; How can this goddess [Fortune] be sometimes good, and sometimes
evil? Is it (says he) because when she is evil, she is no more a Goddess, but
is turned suddenly into a malignant Devil? De Civitat. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 18.

Sir Walter Rawleigh calls Fortune, the God of Fools; a Goddess which is most
reverenced (when good) but most reviled (when bad) of all other Poetical Gods
or Goddesses: though Hesiod (who told the birth and beginning of all those
counterfeit Deities) has not a word of Fortune; yet after Homer had made her
the Daughter of Oceanus, or of the Sea (as if she had her Ebbings and Flowings
like it) she grew so great with the blind world, as to be accounted Omnipotent;
insomuch as all the concerns of Men (even from the highest Prince, down to the
lowest Peasant) were but [Fortunae ludus and ludibria] the very sport and
pastime of Fortune, tossing them like a Tennisball up and down, hither and
thither at her pleasure; abasing Wisdom, by making the possessors of it
miserable; and advancing Folly, (for, Fortuna favet fatuis, Fortune favors
fools) by making the owners of it prosperous and successful. This made the
great (but ignorant) Demetrius cry out, Oh Fortune, thou have exalted me, and
thou (the same) now go about to destroy me, A^rel. Vict. de Pertinace. Yet
among all the Philosophers, I find Plato most Divine in this point, saying,
Nothing ever came to pass under the Sun, whereof there was not a just preceding
Cause.

7. But Philip M^lancton says more plainly, [Quod Poetae Fortunam, id nos Deum
appellamus] that which the Heathen Poets call Fortune, we know it is no other
than God and his Providence, as Exodus 21. 13. [God has delivered him into his
hands,] that is, Divine Providence gives up some men to be slain, for some
secret sin, (neither repented of, nor punished by the Magistrate) by some
extraordinary casualty: the Hebrews therefore use the name of God, where others
use Fortune, because what men think to be done by Fortune, is indeed done by
the Providence of God: though a man be killed at unawares, as Deuteronomy. 19. 5. or
by an error or mistake, Numb. 35. 11. yet it is Gods Providence that it should
be so; for he is the Lord of our lives, and we are guilty of death by sin, Romans
6. 23. whereby we make frequent forfeitures of our lives; and it is therefore
the Lords great mercy that we are not (ever and anon) destroyed, Lam. 3.22.
[Homo proponit, Deus disponit] man purposes to knock down a tree, but God
disposes of his stroke, so that he knocks down a man: the very slipping of the
Axes head from the helve or handle, is the work of God: [disponit Deus membra,
and pulicis and culicis] God orders the very bitings of gnats and flies, says
Austin: even Lottery is guided by Providence, Prove. 16. 33. as in the finding
out of Achan, Jonathan, Jonah, and Matthias; and in dividing the land of Canaan
to the Tribes of Israel, Genesis 49. 13. etc. So that you may not attribute to
Chance (as if things were of themselves) or to Fortune, as if she ordered your
good or evil; if it were so, then there could be no order in things, but all
confusion; whereas, you behold a blessed harmony in all things, save only in
the corrupt actions of men, which yet the wisdom of God orders to his own
glory. How can that exact and regular motion of the Sun, (giving heat and light
to, and making Summer and Winter so orderly in all parts of the world) be
ascribed by any sottish heart to blind Fortune, the Axel-tree whereof is
infinitely too weak for the least motion of the world to be turned upon it? As
bad as those Assyrians were, yet did they ascribe their afflictions (not to
Fortune) but to the god of the Land, 2 Kin. 17. 26.

8. The fourth discovery of the Hearts deceitfulness in adversity, is, your
impatiency and weariness under Gods afflicting hand: oh, how weak are our
hearts to endure tribulation! Ezekiel 16. 30. Solomon says, If we faint in the
day of adversity, our strength is small, Prove. 24. 10. Man has no trial of his
strength, till he come into trouble; faintness then discovers weakness, and
weakness then causes weariness and impatiency: [As is the man, so is his
strength] said they to Gideon; rotten or weak boughs do break, when weight is
laid upon them, and so do earthen vessels when set empty to the fire; unsound
lungs cannot abide the frost-air, but a Joseph's bow will abide in strength,
though many Archers shoot at him, and both hate and hit him, yea, and sorely
grieve him, Genesis 49. 23, 24. being strengthened by the hands of the mighty God
of Jacob: but alas, how soon are we crying out of weariness (because of our
weakness) in running a while with the footmen of lesser troubles, Jerem. 12.5.
although God calls us not, (for he calls none but his champions) to run with
the Horsemen of greater Trials: hence affliction is called our infirmity, Prove.
18. 14. because of our natural imbecility to bear it, as well as to free our
selves from it: we cannot so much as bear words (much less wounds) for Christ;
and if we so startle* at a reproach for the Truth, surely we should never (as
one says) fry with a faggot.

9. The fifth discovery of the hearts deceitfulness in Adversity, is, you will
be very apt to restrain prayer in it, as Job 15. 4. Alas, when the body is out
of frame, (by distempers, or by external distresses) the spirit also
sympathizes, and will (often) be out of frame with the body; and the weakness
of the flesh many times (according to that in Matthew. 26. 41.) over-^ometh the
willingness of the spirit: A man at ^uch a time has work enough to bear the
bur^en of his own affliction, therefore deathbed Repentance is said to be very
seldom true Repentance; [sera poenitentia raro est vera] late Repentance is
rarely true, says Augustine; yet [nun-quam sero, si serio] it is never too late,
so there be but a real and a serious frame of Spirit: but alas, [there] is all
the danger; for penitent words may at such a time be only squeezed from us, by
pressing and oppressing pain, when such words flow not naturally from a living
principle within: you may howl upon your bed* you may brawl and murmr, (which
is as the howling of a dog (and no better) unto your God, Hos. 7. 14.) and not
pray one prayer in the Holy Ghost, Jude v. 20. all that time; your Spirit
(which is the lending part) will have then work enough to sustain the
infirmities o^ the flesh, (which is the borrowing part) Prove* 18. 14. Hereupon,
Job is charged by hi^ friends, [for casting off fear, and for restrainin^
prayer before God] Job 15. 4. it is true, Jo^ might possibly omit his stated
times of prayer (which he observed day by day continually, Jo^ 1.5.) through
the bitterness of his grief, an^ the unreasonableness of his foe-friends,
(which discomposed his spirit for Prayer) but that h^ should altogether refrain
and restrain prayer i^ his misery, was but a mere cavil against the good man,
who could not be so bad, as to for ^ear all prayer himself, and discourage
other from it too; this would have been a foul fa^^ indeed: for while prayer
stands still, the whole trade of godliness stands still; and to cast off
prayer, is to cast off God, Jer. 10. 25. yet as domestic discords may hinder
prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7. so may bodily distempers.

10. The sixth discovery of the Hearts deceitfulness in afflicton, is, that the
Soul of man many times will choose Iniquity rather than affliction, as Elihu
lays to Jobs charge, Job 36. 21. [take heed] be very wary for time to come,
because of thy natural proneness to it; it is with the hair of corrupt nature,
and the strong bias thereof may carry you down the hill before you be aware:
[regard not iniquity] turn not your face (as the Hebrew word signifies) toward
iniquity, by way of approbation, as men do usually turn their faces toward
that which they like and love; or give not so much as a leering look toward
sin, Psalm. 66. 18. [for this thou host chosen] rather than to bear thine
affliction (or thy poverty) patiently; that is, thou would rather be a
sinner, than a sufferer, and would better be a wicked, than a poor man; this
is a bad choice, for there is more evil in the least sinning, than in the
greatest suffering, inasmuch as the latter is a physical (or natural) evil, and
comes from an Holy God; but the former is a moral evil, and ever comes from the
cursed devil: Therefore should you not do the least evil, though it would
procure the greatest good. Hence the ancient Martyrs would not accept of
deliveranc upon sinful terms, Hebr. 11. 35. and they would not do so much as to
cast in one single grain of Frankincense to an Idol, although thereby they
might have saved their own precious Lives, well knowing that God stood in no
need of their lie for his glory, Romans 3. 7, 8. Sin is the greatest evil, (as
God is the greatest good) so it can never be (in it self) a matter or object of
free choice. [Quas non oportet Mortes praeeligere] says Zuinglius, What Deaths
ought not a man rather to make choice of, what torments not rather undergo, yea
into what deepest gulf of Hell (it self) must he not rather enter, than
wittingly and willingly to sin against God? Daniel chus'd rather to be thrown
to the Lions, than to violate his Conscience, and so to have that lion (through
guilt) roaring against him in his own bosom. The Armenian Mouse (some say)
will choose rather to dye, than to be defiled with any filth; insomuch that if
her hole be besmeared with dirt, her choice is rather to be taken than to be
polluted: Oh that you may imitate that little creature, so devoted unto
cleanness, as to part with her liberty (yea life) rather than with her purity.

11. The second thing is the Remedy against the treachery of your heart in
Adversity. Solomon bids you, In a day of affliction consider, Eccles. 7. 14.
that is, you must (when you are alone) sit down, pawse and ponder those things.

The first thing for you to consider (as a good Help and Remedy is, Who is the
Author of your Adversity: It springs not out of the dust, Job 5. 6. There is
no evil in the City which the Lord has not done, Amos 3. 6. Now could you but
make a believing use of the Sovereignty, Justice, and Graciousness of this Lord
of yours (from whence your Affliction comes as his Messenger) this would
wonderfully hedge in your treacherous Heart from deceiving you: As you must
believe that your Lord is too kind to do you harm, and too just to do you
wrong; So likewise that he has a Sovereign Power and Authority over you, and
is not bound to give an account of any of his matters unto you, Job 33. 13. Oh
consider, that while the rod lies on your back, yet it is still in a Fathers
hand; He is called [Pater Misericordiae] a Father of Mercy, but never [Pater
Vindictae] a Father (though he be called a God) of Vengeance: For although
those whom God loves he chastens, yet God does not love to chasten; He afflicts
not willingly, (or from his heart, Hebr.) Lam. 3. 33. It goes as much against
the heart with Him, as against the hair with you; hence Acts of Justice are
called strange Acts with God, Isai. 28. 21. therefore cample not against God,
whose Will alone is the supreme Reason of all; and it is not only Right, but
it is also the Rule of all Right, Romans 9. 20. Jer. 12. 1.

12. The second helpful Consideration is, What is the End, as well as, Who is
the Author. This Father of Spirits never chastens his Children for his own
pleasure, as fathers of the flesh often do ^venting their choler, and
disburthning themselves of that displeasure, which (perhaps without cause) they
have conceived against their children, Hebr. 12. 10. But the Lord never does
so; for Fury is not in him, Isai. 27. 4. He is a God, and not man, Hos. 11. 8,
9. Man is an angry, vindictive Creature; but God is full of Compassion,
abundant in Goodness, and slow to Anger, Exodus 34. 6. Nahum 1. 3. Yea, a
Nonesuch God for a nonesuch sinner, Mic. 7. 18. Though God may do with his
own what he pleases, yet does he never over-do with them; it is a pain to him
to be punishing of them, In all their Afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63.9.
He therefore never corrects for his own pleasure, but for our profit; the
ground always is displeased Love, and the end is always fuller embracements:
You may not pore upon the matter of your Adversity, more than upon the end of
Gods inflicting Affliction; his end is always a gracious end unto a gracious
Soul; it is to do you good in the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. and to make you more
a partaker of his Holiness, Hebr. 12. 10. and of the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness, verse. 11. to wit, increase of Grace, an heart left in a better
frame than 'twas found in, which is called [a coming out as Gold,] Job 23. 10.
A Physician gives his Patient physic that makes him sick, purges him even unto
a leanness, and bleeds him, [usque ad deliquium animi,] until he swoon away;
yet these are not the end of his undertaking, but it is to recover a more
healthful state, with better blood and nobler spirits: accordingly may God deal
with you, when he finds you under a surfeit of prosperity; The cup your Father
gives you, drink it, John 18. 11. that bitter potion brings sweet health.

13. Consider thirdly the Measure of it, as well as its End and Author: Your
God will certainly correct you in measure, Jerem. 30. 11. you shall not have
one lash more than needs; yea he will suit your burden to your back, and your
stroke to your strength. The Jews (with their Whip of three cords) would rather
give the Offender one lash too few, than one too many, that they might not
exceed the number of forty stripes (which were limited them by the Law, Deuteronomy.
25. 3.) as appears in Paul's case, 2 Cor. 11. 24. They are Bastards and not
Sons, that have not any stripes, Hebr. 12. 7, 8. But there was never any son
that had too many of them: God had one Son only, (to wit, Christ) [sine
flagitio] without the guilt of sinning; but he never had any Son (no not Christ
himself) [sine flagello] without the whip of suffering: The Jews (also) fitted
their whip to the strength or weakness of the person corrected; even so does
God, 2 Samuel 7. 14. [beshebet Anashim, Hebr.] Virga senum, aut hominum debilium:
[I will ^hasten him with the rod of men,] the word signifies of old and weak
men; or such as are sickly, who cannot strike hard; and God will not do so,
though he can; though he will be faithful to your soul, yet will he not be
cruel to your body; for it is but chastizing with rods, not scourging with
Scorpions; it is to break your sin, but not your soul, therefore he does it in
measure, 1 Cor. 10. 13. and only by peck-peck, (as the Hebrew signifies) Isai.
27. 8. not whole bushels at once; he will stay the rough wind, that his tender
plant may not be blown down; you shall not have the whole weight of his mighty
hand upon you, either to crush you to pieces, or to grind you to powder.

14. The fourth helpful Consideration is, What is the cause or occasion of your
Affliction: This was it that puzzell'd Job, (as before) Job 10. 2. You must
labor to spell out Gods mind in every trouble, that (by his Providence)
befalls you, and hear the voice of his rod, Micah 6. 9. never being satisfied
with dumb crosses; they have always a voice, if you have but an ear; they are
not dumb, if you be not deaf. God many times points out to Man his very sin by
the rod, and writes his sin upon his very punishment; Judge. 1. 7. that Lord of
Bezek had learnt so much ingenuity, as to acknowledge Gods art of Justicing in
a most exact way of Retaliation; his punishment did (to an hair) correspond
with his sin. The Apostle tells you, that unworthy communicating was the sin,
which was the procuring cause of the great Mortality at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. 30.
for God will be sanctified of all that draw nigh to him, Levit. 10. 3. Sin is
ever the occasion of Sickness and Suffering, when possibly it may not be the
immediate and particular cause; and Sin is the cause in general, when this or
that particular sin is but the occasion. Job's Affliction was not for a
punishment of this or that particular sin, but for the trial of his Grace, and
to evidence unto Satan, that he was no Hypocrite; yet did he acknowledge to
God, [I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver nf men?] Job
7. 20. He puts himself into the hands of his Justice, in hope of his Mercy: he
confesses his Malady (to wit, his sinning, to be the just occasion of his
suffering) and ardently enquires after a due Remedy: yet this good man desired
further to know (not so much to satisfy his Curiosity, as his Conscience) why
he was so afflicted, whether for sin or for trial; and if for sin, he begged of
God to Make him know his transgression and his sin, Job 13. 23. to wit, that
particular sin which thou chiefly strikes at.

15. Afflictions have a voice, (as above) and say to the afflicted, as the Lord
said to Joshuah, [Vp, and search, Israel has sinned.] Josh. 7. 10, 11. And as
the Mariners said to Jonah, [What evil have thou committed, what good have thou
omitted?] Jon. 1.8. Something surely is amiss, that God would have amended. It
is therefore meet to be said unto God (and that with a Surely) [I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more,] and though yet I be in the dark, and
know not the right and particular cause wherefore I am afflicted, [That which I
know not, teach thou me,] Job 34.31, 32. Alas, men are very apt to mistake
themselves herein, and (like the Child Samuel) when God calls one way, to run
another way, 1 Samuel 3. 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. Yea the Devil also deals with the
afflicted, just as the wretched Jews did with Christ, when they did blindfold
him, and bid him prophecy who smote him, Luke 22. 64. Thus Satan holds his
black hand before the eyes of men's Understanding, and then bids them prophecy
who smote them, and for what. Hence it is, that in our Afflictions we many
times grope like blind men, only guessing at this cause, and at that, but
seldom hitting upon the right; and therefore God must be sought unto for
direction herein, and besought also graciously to point out the sin he strikes
at: This Job had done once, Job 10. 2. and again, Job 13. 23, but Elihu would
have him to do it yet better, as he tutored him, Job 34. 31, 32.

Lastly, Consider these few following Directions. (1.) When you have thus
sought and besought the Lord for Instruction herein, Observe at what door does
your Conscience (awakened by the Word) lay your Affliction; for God keeps his
Petty-Sessions in the Court of Conscience, and therein you may hear his Voice.
(2.) Labor to have as deep a sense of Spiritual Evil, as of Temporal: A blind
eye may bring you to Christ for Cure and Comfort, when a blind Soul will not do
so. (3.) In your Adversity forget not Divine Promises, as in your Prosperity
you may not be mindful of Divine Threatenings. (4.) Let your mind be above your
means in Adversity, as it ought to be below them in Prosperity. (5.) Let not
your custom of being delivered from this or that particular Danger, encourage
you more than Gods promise of Deliverance from all evil. (6.) Be not more prone
to speak of your Miseries, than of your Mercies; of your Losses, than of your
Gains (as most men commonly do;) for if so, it plainly shows, you would rather
have your self pitied for the former, than your God praised for the latter.
(7.) 'Twill qualify your Sufferings, to take notice how many do suffer more
pains for eternal Pains, and for Damnation, than you have yet done for
everlasting Life and for Salvation. (8.) It may likewise comfort you to know,
that Christ by his Cross has taken away the Curse of your Cross, though not
the cross it self; which if he had done, then, as the Cross (indeed) would have
done you no hurt, so neither could it have done you any good; whereas how many
Saints have blessed the Lord for their sanctified Afflictions, and they would not
have been without them for a world, Psalm. 119.71.75. (9.) Know, that Misery,
('it is true) may be your Condition, yet (if you be truly godly) it shall never
be your portion; it is Mercy (not Misery) that is the portion of all the Vessels
of Mercy. (10.) Know also, that your God (who chastens you) will soon say, [It
is enough, etc.] 2 Samuel 24. 15, 16. It Is an excellent Note that Vatablus makes
upon this place, understanding [by the appointed time] the evening of the first
day, which (if so understood) does mightily commend the Mercy and Gentleness of
God, who, for three days of Pestilence threatened, sends it but one day only;
and then his bowels yern, Hos. 11. 8. and he cries even then ['tis enough,] he
cannot find in his heart to go thorough with destroying-work; for he is a God,
and not man, yea such a God as None is like him for pity and pardons: He may
[indeed] afflict, yea, he must do so; but he will not do so [for ever,] 1 Kin.
11. 39. No, he quickly repents him of the evil, and leaves a blessing behind
him, Joel 2. 14. (Lastly,) Let God vindicate his own Holiness, who, though he
pardon sin, yet will not patronize it, no not in his own Children, 2 Samuel 7.
14. Psalm. 89. 30. 32, 33. yet Paul may be happier in his chains of Iron, than
King Agrippa was in his chains of Gold: Oh that a bitter life may make you look
for a better life!

CHAP. IX.
Of the Hearts Treachery as to your Spiritual state.

1. HAving made some Discoveries of the Deceitfulness of your Heart in respect
of your Temporal state (whether Prosperity or Adversity,) we come now to your
Spiritual state, which is of mighty importance, and upon which your everlasting
weal or woe in the other world depends; Therefore must you keep your heart
with all keepings, and with your utmost Care and Caution, that you put not an
everlasting Cheat upon your own Immortal Soul, in this matter of such weighty
and eternal consequence.

1. The Malady. 2. The Remedy.
First, The Malady: And this cheat may befall you two ways. (1.) Your own Heart
may deceive you, in falsely conceiving What you are in Gods thoughts. And (2.)
in falsely conceiving what you are in your own thoughts. First of the first. You
may be deceived in conceiving what you are in God's thoughts; to wit, that you
are predestined to Life and Salvation, whatever you be, and however you live
in the world: Even all people have a natural proneness to bless themselves with
a false hope of their Predestination to life, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. and that they shall
have peace. Now the thoughts of God are in those two unchangeable Decrees of
Election and Non-election; which the great Apostle exemplifies by Jacob and
Esau, [Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, before they were yet born, or
had done either good or evil,] Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. There is no doubt but Esau
blessed himself in his own heart, and came presumptuosly to his Father for the
Blessing, thinking with himself that he had merited his Fathers Blessing, for
hunting him such savory meat; whereas (alas) neither Merit-mongers, nor profane
persons (such as he was, Hebr. 12. 16.) can have any room in the Lambs Book of
Life, or any share in the true blessing, [qua^tales] as such.

2. Effectual Vocation (which is Gods Counterpart to eternal Election) must
demonstrate to you this great secret, and undeceive your heart herein, 2 Pet.
1. 10. [Make your Calling sure, and thereby you make your Election sure.] For
there can be no demonstration of your Election [a priori] from any thing that
goes before it, because it is [ab aeterno] an eternal purpose, Ephesians. 3. 11.
and before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. It must therefore be
demonstrated [a posteriori] from something that comes after it, and that is,
the infallible fruit and effect of it, Acts 13. 48. [As many as were ordained
unto life, believed.] You must not think to go up to the [Vniversity] of
Election, before you have been trained up in the [Grammar-School] of Vocation:
You must begin your climbing work at the lowest step of Jacob's Ladder, if you
would ascend to the top of it, and come to know the thoughts and counsel of God
concerning you; you must spell out your eternal Election in your effectual
Vocation, and in your real and actual Sanctification: You may not conceive that
you have a room in the thoughts of God from all Eternity, though you cannot
experience any heart-changing, and life-changing work upon you; for the Word of
God (which is the transcript of the Book of Life) speaks quite contary, Deuteronomy.
29. 19, 20. Psalm. 69. 27. Job 34. 37. John 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.

3. Secondly, in falsely conceiving what you are in your own thoughts; you may
conceit your self to be as good as any, as godly as the best, yea and better
than the most, when (indeed) it is otherwise, and it is your own heart that
deceives you: Thus the proud Pharisee blessed himself with a conceit that he was
as godly a man as walked upon the ground, Luke 18. 11, 12. [He was not as the
Publican.] It Is true he was not, for he was worse than him, because he thought
himself better, and because he comes proudly and presumptuously to God, [velut
dignus qui cum Deo colloqueretur,] as one that thought himself worthy to hold a
parley with God himself; unto whom he showed not his wants, but his worth, and
before whom he stood not only on his Comparisons, but on his Disparisons, as if
he alone had been the whole piece, and all others but the remnant only: Thus
the Pride of his own heart deceived him, (as Obad. v. 3.) and made him think
himself a Nonesuch, prizing himself far above the just price of the true
Market, although his (pretended) Godliness consisted mostly of the [Negatives
[in his, I am not, not, not, etc.] and but of the formal part of the positives
(in his, I fast, and I pray, etc.) of right Gospel-Holiness.

4. As your great Grandmother [Eve] deceived herself in her saying, [I have
gotten a man from the Lord,] Genesis 4. 1. or, as the Hebrew may be read, [I have
got that famous man, the Lord] as if she had brought forth the Man (Christ
Jesus) who was that promised Seed of the woman, that should break the Serpents
head, Genesis 3. 15. those were [verba spei, non rei] the words of hoping, but not
of having the thing hoped; for that Son of hers [Cain] was [truely] of that
wicked one (the devil,) 1 John 3. 10, 12. So you may deceive your self, saying,
[I am begotten a new man by the Lord.] Thus those conceited cavillers (at
Christ's Person and Doctrine) presumed to call God their Father, Joh. 8. 41. as
if they had been all new men begotten and born of God, (as idolatrous
Israelites had done before them, Jerem. 3. 4, 5.) yet Christ tells them, [Vos
infernales estis,] Ye are from beneath, or from Hell, verse. 22. and of your
father the Devil, verse. 44. who has set his very limbs upon you, as his brand
or mark. God is no Father to such as have not him (1.) in their Heads, Psalm.
10. 4. (2.) Nor in their Hearts, Psalm. 14. 1. (3.) Nor in their Words, Psalm.
12. 4. (4.) Nor in their Works or ways, Tit. 1. 16. How dare such call God,
Father?

5. As Joseph was but the supposed Father of Christ, so God was but the
supposed Father of those Pharisaical Justiciaries, that did say of themselves
[they were never in bondage,] when (indeed) they were never out of bondage to
some Adversary or other; and even then when they said so, they were at that
very time Vassals to the Roman Caesar. And no better than these were those
counterfeiting Cheats [who feigned themselves to be just men,] Luke 20. 20. in
their acting upon the stage of the world the resemblance of Saints, just like
Players (in a Playhouse) do act the parts of Princes, or of persons of
Quality, although when the Play is over, they prove no better than certain
scoundrel-fellows, as above.

6. Thus Jacob (which signifies deceitful) played Esau's part to his blind
Father, Genesis 27. 15, 16. with verse. 19. (putting on rough garments to deceive,)
as too many do at this day, Zech. 14. 2, 3, 4. but it shall not be so for ever,
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; such cannot deceive an All-seeing
God, though they may deceive both themselves and others, yet this is for a time
only, 1 Timothy 5.24. and 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Saul under a disguise cannot hide
himself from the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. 8. Nor Jeroboam's Wife (though
disguised) from the Lords Prophet, 1 King. 14. 2-6. how much less can those
hide themselves from the knowledge of the Lord himself? Proverbs 5. 21. 2 Chronicles.
16. 9. Ahab disguised himself when he went down into the battle, yet Gods Arrow
finds him, 1 Kin. 22. 30-34. Things that are contingent and casual as to man,
are yet ordered by a divine Providence, and so become necessary and unavoidable
as to God: Jehosaphat was (indeed) endangered by Ahabs disguise, yet inasmuch
as he appeared what he was both to God and to man, the Lord was well-pleased
with him, and both helped and saved him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 29. 31. When Ahab's sin
(in Gods Arrow) found him out, (Number. 32.23.) under his disguise. David by
feigning himself a madman, may escape the hands of Achish; (even then) when the
Kings Champion's (Goloahs) Sword was in David's hands to discover him, 1 Samuel
21. 9. to the end, and chap. 22.1. But none can escape Gods hands, by feigning
themselves good men, if they be not good to God, as they seem to be good to
men. All these (Men and Women) well knew, that they were not the very persons
which they seemed to be.

7. But now the first and great Question to be answered is, Whether in this
Histrionical Hypocrisy (which is the greatest cheat in the world) a man may be
an Hypocrite, and not know himself to be so? Answer first in general: This
Hypocrisy is the grandest and greatest Cheat of the cheating heart of fallen
Mankind, as it is 1. A Cheat endeavored to be put upon God himself. 2. A
Cheat accomplished upon a man's precious and immortal Soul. 3. A Cheat for
Eternity. 4. A Cheat in things of greatest importance, and not in trifles, etc.
Therefore you have need to keep your heart with all diligence, that you be not
cheated thereby in this worst kind of Cheatery. Secondly, I answer in
particular. 1. Zanchy (who is called a Magazine of all Divine Literature) makes
two forts of Hypocrites. 1. Such as know not themselves to be Hypocrites, but
think-themselves sound, and good enough; and he instanceth it in that proud
Pharisee, that thought himself as good as the best, Luke 18. as I have already
shown you in the foregoing pages. His second instance is in Paul before his
Conversion, who thought he did God very good service in persecuring the Church,
(...) 22. 7. John 16. 1. and concerning the Righteousness of the Law he was
blameless, Phil. 3. 6. although his blind Zeal (which is as high metal in a
blind horse, or as fire in a Chimney-top) all that time transported him to
persecute the Saints; all this he did ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
alas, those Seals (of Error and Ignorance) were not as yet done away from his
eyes, Act. 9. 18. 'Twas not his purpose, but his mistake; hence he found mercy;
and when he had done so, he became as mad for Christ, as ever he had been
against him, Acts 26. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 13. and his word [(...)] Phil. 3. 14. shows
he had as much eagerness in preaching and pressing after the prize, as he had
in persecuting Christ's poor Saints and Servants.

8. There be others also, that bring a (third) Instance, to wit, Simon Magus,
whom not only Philip took for a Believer (and baptized him) but he might take
himself for one in his Historical Faith, while he continued with Philip, Acts
8. 13. And when the holy Simon (Peter) had detected this wicked Simon (Magus)
of Hypocrisy, yet was he not so wicked, but he begs the prayers not only of
Peter, but of the other Apostles, unto God for him, and that for the pardon of
his sin, that he might not be miraculously slain (as Ananias and Sapphira had
been, Acts 5. 5. 10.) Pray ye to the Lord for me, Acts 8. 24. The second fort
are such as know themselves to be Hypocrites, and their hearts are privy that
they do but dissemble in all that they either say or do in the service of God;
those be Hypocrites indeed, that know well (all along) themselves not to be
what they seem to be, and not to be unto God, what they seem to be unto men. As
concerning the first sort of these, whether they may (properly, and by a
genuine Idiome of Speech) be called Hypocrites, some Learned do doubt, saying,
A man cannot well be an Hypocrite, and not know it; and their reason is this,
because the true and proper notion of Hypocrisy is, to pretend one thing, and
to intend another; or to intend one thing, and act another.

9. The second particular Answer is this, That (notwithstanding what is said
above in the first Answer) I cannot but affirm, (in a sound sense) A man may be
an Hypocrite, and not know himself to be one, upon these following Grounds and
Reasons. The first Reason is, As Sincerity may be in a man, and yet the man may
not know it, (the most sincere Saints are ever most suspicious of their own
Sincerity;) even so (according to the Rule of contraries) Hypocrisy may be in
the Soul, and yet the Soul may not know it. That the former is true, is
manifest; inasmuch as the soundest hearts are evermore the most self-suspecting
hearts: No sooner had Christ said to his Disciples, [One of you shall betray
me;] but immediately all the true-hearted of them were filled with holy
jealousy, and each of them suspecting himself, said, [Master, is it I?]
whereas the false-hearted Judas came lagging (all behind) in this
self-suspecting work: None are more filled with Jealousies (about the soundness
and unsoundness of their hearts) than the soundest and sincerest Souls; but the
Hypocrite is that fool of Solomon's, that trusts in the truth of his own
treacherous heart, Prove. 22. 26.

10. The second Reason is, There is a natural Sincerity, and Plain-heartedness,
(that arises from some men's natural Constitution) which may beguile the Soul,
and make them think they are Evangelically sincere, when they are (in Gods
account) no better than Hypocrites: You may observe some natural men so candid
and ingenuous in their common dealings betwixt man and man, that they would not
(for a world) deceive their Neighbor in any thing: This was the Sincerity of
the Heathen King (Abimelech,) Genesis 20. 5, 6. who had not any purpose to wrong
Abraham, or to enjoy Sarah any otherwise than as his Wife; what he did
otherwise, was done out of Ignorance. This was indeed a good Second-Table
Sincerity. This deceives many a Soul, although they (altogether) be strangers
to the First-table Sincerity: a Sincerity as to man, may be in man, without a
Sincerity as to God: This is (it must be acknowledged) a good Nature; but alas,
it is no better than a bad Grace.

11. The third Reason is, There is likewise a Moral Sincerity (as well as
Natural,) to wit, a good Nature, and a sweet natural Disposition notably
improved, such as was in Socrates and Seneca (those two great Luminaries in the
Heathen world) eminently improved by a strict Education in the Liberal Arts and
Sciences: How much more may such a sweet candid Disposition from Nature be
higher improved, by a strict Education under the Administration of the Law of
Moses, (than could be attained unto by any heathen Theology) such as Paul had
(while a Pharisee) at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts 22. 3. and 26. 5. Moral
Virtues, which are not infused (as Theological Graces be) but are acquired by a
continued Instruction, and highly improved by a strict Education, may deceive
many Souls; and such may conceive themselves sound persons, and in a safe
Spiritual state and condition, yet stand upon a sandy foundation, and not upon
the sure rock (that Rock of Ages, Isai. 26. 4.) Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12. 1
Cor. 3. 11. And hence Augustine calls the best products of this Moral Virtue,
[splendida peccata] but shining sins. You see some things shine in the night,
and yet that shining does but proceed from Rottenness. [Sordet in ore Judicis,
quod fulget in conspectu Judicantis,] that which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is no better than [shining ^otton-wood, or] abomination unto God, Luke 16.
15. There may be [malum opus in bona materia,] Actions materially good, yet
Aims and Ends formally bad; as Jehu's zealous actions, which were not wrought
in God, Joh. 3.21. either quoad fontem, or quoad finem; his works neither
flowed from a right Principle, nor tended to a right End.

12. The fourth Reason is, This sweet natural Disposition may yet be most
highly improved under the Administration of the Gospel of the Messiah, (more
than under the Administration of the Law of Moses) which has nobler
Enticements, and better Promises, Hebr. 7. 19. 22. and 8. 6. and 9. 23. the
Gospel has a better Hope, better Promises, a better Sacrifice, and is a better
Testament, a better Covenant than the Law: This Gospel-Administration may
therefore bring some men to high Illuminations, to delightful tastes of
Spiritual things, yea and to some inferior Gifts and Operations of the Spirit
also, as those in Hebr. 6. 4, 5. all which may satisfy the souls of men, and
make them think themselves sound and sincere Saints and Servants of God, yet no
better than Hypocrites in God's eye: Alas, there is seeming Grace, as well as
saving Grace: There is no true Grace wrought by God, but Satan may have his
counterfeit to it; he is God's Ape, and has oftentimes imitated God. If God's
Servants work Miracles in Egypt, Satan's Sorcerers can do so with their
enchantments: As there is a false Faith, and a false Hope, as well as a true
and lively one, (every true Grace has its Mock-grace) so there may be a
seeming Sincerity, which is not a saving one.

CHAP. X.
Of the Hearts Treachery in Hypocrisy.

1. HAving showed you the first thing, to wit, the Malady, how you may be
mistaken about your Spiritual estate; I come now to show you the second thing,
to wit, the Remedy, How such a weighty and mighty mistake may be prevented,
that you put not an everlasting Cheat upon your precious and immortal Soul. In
order hereunto, I shall first make some Discoveries of the common Causes, and
groundless grounds of such a Mistake, the better to undeceive you from under
the deceivings of your own deceitful Heart. And I the rather take this Method,
because as in natural Distempers, when the Cause thereof is found out by their
proper Symptoms and Indications, then is the Cure accounted to be half done:
even so it is in Spiritual Diseases. The first false ground of those
Self-deceivings may be, an outward Peace, and plenty of worldly Goods: How many
do bless themselves herein, as if they were high in God's favor, because they
do enjoy those low and common Blessings; in the mean while not considering,
that they which have them, may be miserable with them; and they that want them,
may be happy without them: Paul was verily more happy in his chains of Iron,
than King Agrippa was in his chains of Gold, as above, etc. and not
understanding that the Sunshine of Gods favor is made to fall upon the evil
as well as upon the good, the Sun shines and the rain falls upon the just and
unjust, Matthew. 5. 45.

2. The Hebrew word for the [Sun] is [Shemesh,] which signifies a Servant;
intimating, that the Sun is the Servant-General to the world, shining
indifferently upon the evil and the good, and imparting both heat and light
without distinction to all: In like manner the Rain does not only fall upon
choice Flowers and Fruit Trees of the enclosed Gardens and Orchards, but also
upon the common Briars and Brambles of the barren Wilderness: Divine Love or
Hatred cannot therefore be read out of the having or wanting of these worldly
things, Eccles. 9. 1. The vast Empire of the Turks is but a Crust (faith
Luther) which the Master of the Family (the great Landlord of the World) casts
unto a dog, no better does he account that Grand Seignior. How many be there in
the world, that have these temporal things given them, as Michal was given to
David, to become a snare to him, 1 Samuel 18. 21. Thus men's plentiful Tables do
become Snares to them, Psalm. 69. 22. and thus all their Wealth and Honors may
be given to them (as Saul was given to Israel, Hos. 13.11.) in wrath, and not
in Mercy: Oh then take heed of all self-deceiving inward thoughts about these
transitory things, Psalm. 49. 11, 12. How did that rich Fool [(...)] talk with
himself (Dialogue-wise) like a fool! he did not only [think within himself] but
he also [talked to himself;] in casting up his Reckonings he was up with the
more, and down with the less; and after a long self-deceiving debate to and
fro, he at last comes to a self-blessing conclusion, to wit, of making his gut
his God; whereas that very night he was shot like a bird with a bolt (while
pruning her self in the boughs) and comes tumbling down to the earth: His glass
was quite run out, when he thought it had been but newly turned, Luke 12. 17,
18, 19, 20. Thus also Babylon glorified her self, Revel. 18. 7, 8, 9. yet she
shall not be glorified by God, for he has appointed shame eternal for her, and
shameful spewing upon her glory, Hab. 2. 16.

3. The second false ground of those Self-deceivings may be your good Nature,
which you should always account but a bad Grace. Let a man have never so sweet
a natural Constitution, never so complaisant and amicable a Disposition, yet
it is but still a corrupt and depraved Nature: The first man defiled Nature (by
his Fall,) and ever since Nature has defiled Man, yea every Man, not only
those that are morose, and of a cross-grained and crooked Temper naturally; but
even those also that have the most composed, calm, and candid constitution of
spirit from their birth only. The faithful Creator did sow good Seed in his own
Soil, but the Envious one (that Superseminator, Satan) came by night and sowed
his tares, Mat. 13. 24, 25. This malicious Enemy (the Devil) would not stay to
pour in his poison into every vessel of the heart of Man, as every man is born
and comes into the world; but he takes a craftier course in pouring his poison
into the very root and fountain of Mankind, to wit, into the first man (Adam)
that so all the branches and streams (arising thence) might be poisoned also:
God made man (at first) upright, but man (through the Devils instigations) has
found out many (sinful) Inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. God made man in his own
Image; he had [Knowledge] in his Mind, [Rectitude] or rightness in his Will,
and [Holiness] in his Affections; but the grand Cheater soon cheated him of
this excellency (as men use to cheat children) with an Apple: Man is now of
another make than God made him, [totus homo est inversus Decalogus] whole evil
is in man, and whole man in evil, and he is turned upside down (by his Fall)
into an universal opposition to the Law of God: hence the best nature in the
world is no better than a wild Olive, Romans 11. 24. and does retain, yea
maintain (and that very strongly) those two strong holds of Satan in it, to
wit, (1.) Enmity against God and all goodness; and (2.) Union with sin and all
badness. Nature (of the best Edition) is but Nature still.

4. The third false ground may be, your mistaking Civility for Sanctity, or
Morality for true Piety: There be some in our day that do cry up Morality for
Grace; but it is very observable, that since those Rationists (so called) have
done so, the world has more and more abounded with all kind of irrational
Immorality; which seems as a testimony from Heaven against that lying Doctrine.
It Is readily granted, that we must render to Nature the things that belong to
Nature; yet must we be as careful to render unto Grace the things that belong
to Grace, that we may do wrong to neither of them, either to God or Caesar,
Math. 22. 21. Now Civility or Morality is Nature (of the best Edition) rarely
refined and dressed up, yea decked with her choicest and chiefest Ornaments:
This is verily good (and 'twere well if there were more of it in the world) yet
it is not good enough to make you approved of God in Christ, you may
(notwithstanding all this) be as that house (which was possessed, dispossed,
and repossessed,) Matthew. 12. 43, 44, etc. [an house empty, swept and
garnished;] accordingly may your Heart be, 1. Swept well of foul Moral Vices.
2. Garnished handsomely with fair Moral Virtues. Yet 3. be no better than empty
of Christ: You must have a better Righteousness than that which is only Moral
(or Pharisaical) to make you current Coin in the Court of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20.
Alas, unless you have the Salt of Grace to season you, and the Life of Faith to
animate you, all your Civility and Morality is but as gay Attire upon a Leprous
body, and as Jewels and Bracelets upon the rotten and stinking carcass of
corrupt Nature, which the New-Novelists are embalming, yet (notwithstanding all
their perfumes) sends it out an horrible stench of Profaneness into all parts
of the Land.

5. The fourth false ground of this Self-deceiving may be your mistaking of
Restraining for Renewing Grace: the former is only, Gratia gratis data; but the
latter is, Gratia gratum faciens, according to the School-Notion. Restraining
Grace may indeed be called a Grace, as it is freely given from God to some
reprobate and even rebellious ones, Psalm. 68. 18. (as before.) Hereby Saul was
not only chained up from hurting David, (as Abimelech had been from hurting
Sarah, Genesis 20. 6.) but was made also to melt over him, 1 Samuel 24. 16. and 26.
21. Corruption of the heart is like a Wolf in chains; the worst of men (even
Pharaoh himself, that red dragon) was not always let loose upon Israel, but was
wonderfully restrained, Exodus 8. 8. 25. 28. and 9. 27, 28. and 10. 16, 17. Yea
and that old Serpent, the Devil (that great Dragon that set Pharaoh on all his
wicked work again Israel) is (himself) sometimes chained up with a mighty chain
of restraint, Revel. 20. 1, 2. still all this chaining amounts not to changing,
he is a Lion, a Devil still, though in chains. Take a Wolf, beat him black and
blew, break his bones, knock out his teeth, cut off his claws, and chain him up
never so fast, yea put a Sheeps-skin on his back; notwithstanding all this, his
wolfish nature remains still; and if ever he be set or get at liberty, he
will discover himself by worrying of Lambs, as bloody Bonner did by worrying
Christ's Lambs, when he was set at liberty in the Marian days from his
Confinement under King Edward the 6th, at which time while he was looking out
at his Prison-window, that famous Lady saw him, which said, It was never better
with Christ's Lambs, than when such Wolves (as he was) were chained up. And
verily, most sinners, yea the worst in the world, have some kind of
restraining Grace, inasmuch as though they do as much evil as they could, yet
never so much as they would, for there is a Greediness in them, Ephesians. 4. 19.
and they would sin with both hands earnestly, Micah 7. 3. Indeed, were not
wicked men restrained from evil, (by natural Conscience, outward
considerations, and the like) and constrained to be civil, there could be no
humane Society amongst men. But oh the blindness of those that take this poor
Counter, and set it up for a thousand pound as to God!

6. The fifth false Ground whereby your Heart may deceive you is, a mere
external Profession, without the power and practice of Piety: As (1.) you may
think well of your Spiritual state, because you are born in the Church. Alas,
you may be born in the Church, and yet not be of the Church. Thus profane Esau,
and scoffing Ishmael were (both of them) born in the Church, yet were they not
of the Church: And so were those murmuring Israelites born in the Church in the
Wilderness (so called, Act. 7. 38.) yet God was highly displeased with them, so
as to destroy them there, for being Murmurers, 1 Cor. 10. 5. 10. (2.) Because
you enjoy Church Priviledges; whereas those very Israelites (forementioned) had
Sacraments for their daily diet, and received them every meal, yet were
destroyed of the destroyer, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10. Alas, it is not the
[opus operatum] or bare enjoyment of Sacraments and Church Priviledges, that
can save the Soul; but it is a blessed improvement of Ordinances, and a true
enjoyment of Christ in them, that must show the truth and soundness of your
spiritual state. The barren Fig Tree is nearer cursing than the wild Brambles,
the one being in the Garden, where and whence better; the other in the
Wilderness, where and whence no better is expected. So that your being in the
Church, and your enjoying Church Priviledges, may aggravate your Condemnation,
not evidence your Salvation.

7. The sixth false Ground of this Self-deceiving, as to your Spiritual state,
may be your resting in a Notional Knowledge, without any Practical and
Experimental Knowledge: There is a form of knowledge, Romans 2. 20. as well as a
form of Godliness, without the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Knowledge is (indeed)
the key of the kingdom, Luke 11. 52. But you may have the wrong key (that will
not open the door into the Kingdom) if you have not saving and sanctifying
knowledge: Your tree of knowledge (if the tree of Life be not with it) will
want the sap of Grace, and then 'twill bring forth leaves only. You may have
light without heat; the Glowworm and rotten wood do seem to have much light in
them, but either of them (being cold by Nature) can have little heat. It Is a
certain great Truth, that one single Dram of Saving Grace is worth a whole
Pound of Notional Knowledge: Moreover, a Man is said to know no more than he
does practice; it is said of Christ [That he knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.] because
he did not practice sin: No doubt but Christ had an intellectual knowledge of
sin (for he had a perfect knowledge of good and evil) otherwise he could not
have reproved it; yet had he no practical knowledge of it, and therefore is he
said not to know it. As Christ knew no more of evil than he did practice (which
was none at all;) so you know no more of good than you do practice: Knowledge
and Profession without Power and Practice will make you (indeed) as Rachel,
beautiful, but barren; and (as Ephraim) a Cake not turned, Hos. 7. 8. baked on
the one side only, but plain dough only on the other side: these are castaway
Cakes (that are raw on the one side, and burnt or scorched on the other,) as
unpleasant to the palate (in both the sides) amongst men; accordingly
dough-baked Duties will not down with God. Irreligious Honesty and dishonest
Religion are both (alike) check-aside Groats, and Cakes not turned to the Lord;
the former is for a Second-Table man, and nothing for the first Table; the
latter is for a first-Table-man, and nothing for the second Table. Whereas the
two Tables are clasped together, and should not (being all but one Copulative)
be disjoined or disjoynted by any dispensatory Conscience.

8. Now having discovered the false Grounds of Self-deceit, which are the true
Causes of your Spiritual Distemper; in order to the completing of your Cure,
and to an effectual Application of the right Remedy, 'twill be expedient to
inform you, how you may distinguish betwixt false grounds and true, that you
may be undeceived. And that this may be done the more distinctly, and
particularly; the second Question (to be answered) shall be, How you may put a
difference 'twixt Nature and Grace, that you mistake not the former for the
latter? To this I answer, You may have a good Nature, yea a Nature better than
others; yet this is but a beautiful Abomination, and a smoother way to Hell and
Damnation: to mistake Nature for Grace, speaks out as much blindness, and
bewrays as much gross and sublime Ignorance, as to mistake the burnt Temple
for the built one. Ezra comes to Jerusalem, finds the Temple burnt, but leaves
it built: Could any Jew be so sottish as to put no difference 'twixt the Temple
as it lay in its own ashes (a ruinous heap) and as raised out of those Ruins a
glorious Fabric, much admired by Christ's own Disciples, Matthew. 24. 1. Alas,
Nature is the burnt Temble, (burnt down in the Fall) Christ our [Ezra] or
Helper, Hebr. comes and finds the Temple and Image of God demolished in you;
he lays a new foundation; rejoice in this, as they did, Ezra 3. 11. but mistake
not the one for the other, as if no need of Christ.

9. Grace is Christ's rebuilding the burnt Temple, and his restoring the lost
Image (of God) in you; when he changes the old Nature, and makes you to partake
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Thus when Christ comes to repair his Temple,
he is said to be then as the Refiners fire, and as Fullers soap, Mal. 3. 2, 3.
to show how the dross and dirt of sin is (even) so incorporated in the best
(yet depraved) Nature of fallen Mankind, that Christ must be both fire and
soap to the soiled Soul of man (in a Similitudinary way) before man can be a
new-man, a new creature, created (even out of Nothing, or out of that which is
worse than Nothing) in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 5.
17. Gal. 6. 15. This corrupt nature is called the wild Olive, Romans 11. 24.
which must be bro^en from the old stock, and not only so, but it must be
engrafted into the noble Vine, John 15. 1. Christ Jesus, or into that good
Olive Tree, Romans 11. 24. This same spiritual engrafting of the branch (which is
wild by Nature) is there said to be done [contrary to Nature,] which Phrase
plainly shows, that Nature cannot contribute any thing (unless it be
Contrariety and Contradiction, or Contrafaction) in this mighty work of Grace.
Plutarch wonders at the Fig Tree, that it should be so bitter in its root,
branches, leaves, stock and stem, and yet the fruit of it so exceeding sweet
and luscious: But it is more to be wondered at, that such sweet fruits (as those
of the Spirit) should ever grow upon the bitter stock of Nature; for [Gratia
non tollit, sed attollit Naturam,] Grace does not destroy, but refine Nature.
Man being by Nature in the very gall of bitterness, Acts 8. 23. Alas, none of
his actings can be of a sweet savor unto God, until he be engrafted into
Christ, and so partake of his sap and sweetness, and thence become a tree of
Righteousness, Isai. 61. 3.

10. After this first Answer (which is general) the second Answer is more
particular, to show that Nature (in her highest exaltation) can never become
Grace, for these following Reasons, drawn from corrupt Nature's defectiveness
since the Fall: As (1.) mere Nature can never teach a Man to feel the weight
and curse of a sin that was committed above five thousand years ago, to wit,
Adam's eating the forbidden fruit, which brought in all Misery on mankind.
(2.) Nor can it make a man sensible of original Corruption, and that he not
only carries about with him a very body of sin, but also that the very spirits
of sin runs in his blood; the feeling of which makes him cry out, [Oh wretched
man,] Romans 7. 24. (3.) Nor can it make a man see the sinfulness of sin,
especially of that great Gospelsin, (the sin of Unbelief) nor to see sin as the
chiefest evil, and accordingly to hate it, and to love Jesus Christ as the
chiefest good, Joh. 16. 8. It Is the work of Gods Spirit (and not of man's) to
convince hereof. (4.) Neither can Nature instruct a man in the Doctrine of
Self-denial, which is a Lesson that could never be learnt in Nature's School;
For corrupt Nature can never teach a man to mortify and destroy its own sinful
self. (5.) Nor can mere Nature enable a man to prefer God before himself, upon
this bottom of being persuaded that his Well-being depends more upon God,
than upon himself: Natures Lesson is [Quisque suae fortunae faber;] as if man
were a God to himself, Genesis 3. 5. Which was Satan's first Insinuation into the
first Man's sinning heart. (6.) Mere Nature can never make a man so resolute
for Christ, as to endure abundance of evil, and to refuse abundance of good,
that Christ may be retained, Hebr. 11. 36, 37. (7.) Neither could it ever yet
reform and rectify its own Irregularities, no not in the two greatest
luminaries in her own School: Natural Knowledge could never straighten (or set
to right) natural crookedness: This is evident in Aristotle (the most Rational
man) and Seneca (the most Moral man) that ever the Heathen-world saw; yet the
one kept his Strumpet, and the other was a biting Usurer, to their dying day.
Oh bungling Nature! that was screwed up [ad ultimum potentiae] to her highest
peg in those her two darlings, yet could she not redress those evils, nor can
she act any thing in a gracious manner, or acceptable to God. Woe to us, should
Salvation depend upon her actings: Therefore Austin says well, [Sub laudibus
Naturae latent inimi^i Gratiae,] Cryers up of Nature are always enemies to
Grace.

11. The third grand Question (in order to your undeceiving) to be answered is,
How does Moral Civility differ from true Gospel-Sanctity? To this I answer; You
may know that your Civility, and Moral Honesty, and a well-ordered Conversation
toward men, does only grow upon and flow from the stock of Nature (and not of
Grace, or from some supernatural Principles infused into your ^eart, not from
any New Birth, or Spirit of ^anctification that sanctifies and renews the whole
Man, Body, Soul and Spirit, 1 These. 5. ^3.) and so is no better than a wild
Olive, Romans 11. 17. 24. by these following Characters: (First.) If you be civil
only, and not thus sanctified, you will be top-ful of spiritual ^lindness,
Ignorance, and vain Imaginations about the things of God, and the good of your
Soul. You will then look upon Faith as an ^asi^ work, ['tis only believe,] and
on Salvation ^s a work of no such difficulty as is pretended, seeing that God
is (as you will then think) All Mercy, and the tender of this Mercy is to ^ll;
and it is but crying at the last gasp, [Lord, ^ave mercy upon me,] and this will
be enough to vast you over into Heaven. These and suchlike ^otten Reasonings
will abound in your igno^ant Soul: whereas none can read the new Name, ^ave
only they that receive it, Revel. 2. 17. And ^hese receivers do read no
otherwise than that ^oth Faith and Salvation are matters of very great
difficulty; their own Experience and ^he truth of Gods Word does meet exactly
together: and they do smartingly find; (1.) That it requires as much Almighty
Power ^o work Faith in their hearts, as to raise Christ from the dead, Ephesians.
1. 19, 20. And (2.) that the righteous (themselves) are scarcely fa^^^, 1 Pet.
4. 18. that is, they have much ado to ^et to Heaven.

12. The second Character is, Civility wanders in general Duties only, but
minds not special Duties, such as Self-examination Self-abhorrency, etc. And
it consists more in the Negative than in the Positive part of the Law: yea, and
is more conversant in the Duties of the second Table, than of the first:
Whereas true Sanctity is of a more extensive property, and observes special
Duties (such as Self-trial, Self-denial, etc.) as well as general; yea, and
does make Conscience of both Tables and parts of the Law; to wit, it is for the
Positive part, as well as for the Negative; and is as much for Holiness to God,
as for Righteousness to Man. The third Character briefly is, Civility, or Moral
Honesty takes cognizance of those sins only that make a great noise both in the
Courts of the world, and in the Court of Conscience yet, while it scruples at
Murder, Adultery, Drunkenness, etc. (called the Filthiness of the flesh, 2 Cor.
7. 1.) all along overlooks the filthiness of spirit* such as privy Pride,
secret Hypocrisy, Security in an evil state, Formality in Duty, etc. which
make but little noise in the world, and less noise in the Conscience. Small and
secret sins (which lie not in view upon the borders of the Isle of man, but lie
up in the heart of the Country undiscerned, undiscovered) those Civility
overlooks; but true Sanctity (in the man whose eyes are opened Numb. 24. 3.)
may not, will not, cannot do so. The fourth, Character is, Civility will
venture no further for its piety, than may consist with its peace; it likes
neither foul way, nor foul weather, in its passage and progress to its long
home. It Is exactly of the Duke of Bourbon's mind, who told Beza, he would
adventure no further into the Sea of Religion, than to get safe home to shore
at night. The fifth Character is, Civility can never count all its own Duties
[(...),] or Dogs-meat, as Phil. 3. 6. 8. For this is a piece of natural Popery
(born with us) to be Saviors to our selves, and to be saved by our own
Righteousness, and not by the Righteousness of another, to wit, of Christ.

13. The sixth Character is, Where Civility is alone without Sanctity, there is
always retained an Enmity in them against all those that overrun them in the
practick part of Godliness, and that spend more time for God and the good of
their Souls than they do; such persons will proclaim war against those zealous
ones, for being too precise, and for being Righteous (and Religious) overmuch,
Eccles. 7. 16. Those Civilians would fain find a more compendious way of
worshipping God, saying, (with wicked Jeroboam) It Is too much for you to do so
and so, 1 Kin. 12. 28. [Religiosum oportet esse, non religatum,] you need not
be so very strict and strait-laced in matters of Religion, you may provide more
for your ow^ ease and better accommodation: Thus the^ do plainly slander the
sweet Laws of Christ'^ Kingdom, and the pleasant ways of heavenl^ wisdom,
Prove. 3. 17. as if too heavy bond^ and too sharp cords, Psalm. 2. 3. not knowin^
that Christ's yoke is easy and his burden ligh^ Matthew. 11. 29, 30. and
therefore not to b^ cast away, no more than their own Garter^ or Girdles. Thus
also those [Devout persons* were Opposers of Paul, for his out-runnin^ them in
his Devotion, Acts 17. 17, 18. An^ it is very observable, that no Church could
b^ founded by the Apostle at Athens (the mo^^ famous City for Wisdom in all
Greece) for they were too wise to be saved by the foolishnes^ of Preaching, 1
Cor. 1. 23. those wise Gree^ foolishly jeared at Jesus and the Resurrection,
(...) at a couple of strange gods, Acts 17. 18. 2^ their Philosophy and Enmity
to the Power (...) Godliness consisted together. The sevent^ and last Character
is, Civility can never man Gods Glory its ultimate End (as true Sancti^ does)
but its utmost Aim (alas) is only for pacifying, but not at all for purifying
the Conscience: And the very height of its Ambition is to be pleasing and
acceptable to men, more than to God: Hence Augustine calls mere Civility
[splendidum Peccatum] a shining Sin.

14. The fourth great Question to be answered (in order to your undeceiving)
is, How may Restraining Grace be distinguished from Renewing Grace? Answer (1.)
Restraining Grace is no more than an awful fear that God puts upon the
Conscience of Man, which constrains him to forbear that Sin, which he does not
yet hate, and to leave what he does not yet loath: Such a man is only chained
up by his own fears (the dread of God is upon him) he is not yet changed from
his sin. As the Dog forbears the Carrion, because his chain is too short, or
his Masters Cudgel is over him. Whereas the grand Evangelical Motive is not
[formidine poenae, sed virtutis amore,] fear of punishment, but love to Christ:
Joh. 14. 15. [If ^ye love me, keep my Commandments,] and this Love of Christ
should constrain us (both to forbear evil, and to perform good) 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Hence the Apostle does beseech us, by the Mercies of God, Romans 12. 1. It Is true
indeed this slavish fear has little of Grace in it, yet it is better to have
this servile fear, than none at all, Psalm. 4.4. and 36. 1. Genesis 20. 11. Where
no fear is, there is no bridle to restrain from any kind of extravagancy.
Answer (2.) Restraining Grace does not mortify Sin, nor destroy the Root of
it; but only puts a band of iron and brass upon it for a time, (as Dan. 4. 14,
15.) so that the budding forth, and the outward Exercise of sin is only for the
present hindered: Thus Abimelech's Lust was not (a^ all) mortified, although God
withheld him from doing violence to Sarah; nor was Laban's heart changed, when
God chained him (...) from harming Jacob, Genesis 31. 24. 29. 42. Neither was
Readiness, in his deepest melting over David; the old heart remains when it is
hedged in from outward acts with a thorn-hedg^ of Affliction, Hos. 2. 6.

15. The (3.) Answer is, Such as have Restraining Grace only, (and not Renewing
Grace also) it is their great trouble, that they are held in so much and so long
in the stocks of Conscience: Alas, they would gladly be enlarged, and set at
liberty again (as gladly as a man that is set fast in the stocks, would be set
out of them at liberty) that they may find out their own old paths again, Hos.
2. 6. They do grudge at the hedge and wall that God has set 'twixt them and
their sin: Whereas we find David (with his new heart) blesses God for
hindering him from doing evil, 1 Samuel 25. 33, 34. But those men murmur that
they are hindered by this Restraining Grace, and not any real Diminution of the
inward substance and quality of it. The (4.) Answer is, This Restraining Grace
is always [ab extra] proceeding from an external cause or original; as the
burning Bush; Exodus 3. 2. had the light of fire continued upon it; but the
heat thereof was restrained by an outward overruling Power. And so it was with
the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 27. which had heat (as well as light) only it was
chained up and restrained at that time; the great God of Nature can chain up
any particular nature. In both these Instances, God restrained the combustible
matter, so that the green leaves of the Bush, and the living bodies of the Men
were not so much as singed by it. Thus also God restrained the hungry Lions
from devouring holy Daniel, Dan. 6. 22. and thus likewise God restrains the
rage of mon, Psalm. 76. 10. 'Twas not any inward Principle that restrained
profane Esau from harming his Brother Jacob, but it was an outward awe of his
aged Father, Genesis 27. 41. The days of mourning for my Father are a^ hand, and
their will I slay my brother Jacob.

Thus it appears that Restraining Grace differs from Renewing Grace, [quoad
fontem] the fountain and original from whence they flow: the latter is from an
inward Principle, the former from an external Cause or Motive, as is
exemplified in Scripture; (1.) 'Twas Pharaoh's knowing Joseph that made him
courteous to the Israelites, and that restrained him and his people from
exercising cruelty to them, Exodus 1. 8, 9, 10. (2.) 'Twas a Reverence that the
Israelites had to Joshuah and the Elders, etc. that restrained them from their
Idolatry, from their worshipping of Baalim and Ashtaroth, Josh. 24. 31. and
Judge. 2. 7. 10, 11-13. (3.) 'Twas an awful respect that Joash had to Jehoiada,
which moved him to do right in the sight of the Lord, all the days he lived
with him to instruct him, 2 King. 12. 2. whereas after Jehoiada's death, King
Joash hearkened to his flattering Courtiers, and left God's Temple to worship
Idols in the Groves, 2 Chronicles. 24. 24. 17, 18. And thus it is with all those
that carry well for the sake of a godly Father, or Mother, or Master, or
Minister, while they live, to awe and instruct them; but (as if akin to profane
Esau) after the death of those, then they run into excess of Riot and
exorbitancy. The (5.) Answer is, And as they differ each from other, [quoad
fontem] so likewise fifthly, [quoad finem] according to the End to which they
have a tendency. Restraining Grace is principally for this end, to uphold
Societies in the World, especially that Society of the Church: (as above.) Its
End is for the good of others, more than of a man's self that receives it; but
renewing Grace is primarily for the benefit of the Receiver, and secondarily
for others.

17. The 6 and (last) Answer is, They do differ in their Extent and Latitude in
respect of those four Circumstances; 1. Person* 2. Time. 3. Subject. and 4.
Object.

(1.) In respect of the Person. Restraining Grace is given to the good and bad
promiscuously; but Renewing Grace is given to the good only: Thus the former
was conferred upon the Heathen King Abimelech, upon wicked Saul, and the like,
as before; and the reason is, because the End of it is for the good of others,
as is aforesaid. It Is possible that the receiver of restraining Grace may
receive no benefit at all to himself by it, especially no benefit that
accompanies Salvation, Hebr. 6. 9. (2.) In respect of Time. Restraining Grace
may bind up a man from evil for a time only, and the man afterward may have
the reins of the bridle laid upon his neck, and he left loose to run riot in
the hands of his own counsel; as Israel, Joash, etc. aforementioned, and as
Saul, Herod, and many others. (3.) In respect of the Subject. Restraining Grace
may bind the hand, when not the tongue or the heart; it may leave both them at
liberty. Thus Readiness hands were sometimes tied up by David's Innocence and
Jonathan's Intercession, while his tongue and heart were at liberty to do David
a mischief. (4.) In respect of the Object. Restraining Grace may lay fetters
upon a man in his way to this or that notorious sin, and yet the man may have
elbow-room enough in his way to other sins. Thus Herod was restrained by his
reverence to the Baptist, from doing many evils (in his doing much good, Mark
6. 20.) yet was he at liberty for his sinning with Herodias: Whereas renewing
Grace (as it differs both as to its fountain and as to its end, so) it is
distinguishable in all those four Circumstances; 1. It Is not so Common. 2. It Is
more Durable. 3. More Extensive to all parts and faculties of body and soul.
And 4. More Universal against all sin.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Hearts Treachery touching Actions.

1. HAving discovered the Treachery of your Heart touching your state (both
Temporal and spiritual) I come now to discover what it is touching Actions;
which are threefold, Natural, Civil, and Religious Actions. Concerning your
natural and civil Actions, how you ought to watch your Heart from being
deceived herein, I must refer you (for brevities sake here) to my Crown and
Glory of a Christian, page 78. to 121. which I may enlarge upon (if the Lord
lengthen out my tranquillity) in due time, that this Treatise, Of the Treachery
of the Heart, may not swell into a too bulky (and above a pocket-) book:
touching your Religious Actions (which I therefore shall handle here only in
the general, referring you to every particular Religious Action or Ordinance,
(in my Walk and Work of a Christian upon Earth, till he come to Heaven.) And
these Religious Actions are principally two: The first is, your performing of
Duties; and the second is, your exercise of Graces.

1. Of the first of these; to wit; Take heed your treacherous heart deceive you
not in your performance of Duties. In order hereunto you must know, That [DVTY]
is your Homage and Fealty, which the creature (Man) owes to his great Creator;
it is your poor Pepper-corn you must pay to the Landlord of the world; it is the
Souls reciprocation unto God, showing forth the praises of him (as your
first fruits to him) who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The love of God constrains you, 2 Cor. 5. 14. to say, What
shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men, Job 7.20. A gracious heart is of
a rendering Disposition, Psalm. 116. 12. and can never do enough for God, that
has done so much for it; you must be ever Praising the glory of his Grace,
Ephesians. 1. 6. in due and daily Duty, which you may neither neglect, nor
carelessly perform.

1. The Malady. 2. The Remedy.
First, Of the Malady.

2. The first Deceit of the Heart in respect of performance of Duty to God
(which Mercy from God always requires) is, your Heart may be remiss and
negligent therein, not only before, but even after sincere Conversion. (1.)
Before Conversion, Your heart will then love a lazy Religion, (although some
Conviction to Duty be upon you) and such as costs you nothing, or very little;
whereas holy David would not offer to the Lord his God, that which did not cost
him something, 2 Samuel 24. 24. He would honor God with his substance, Prove. 3.
9. and lay out some cost for him, as the good Woman did in her Spikenard of
great price, John 12. 3. Whereas the Duty (which the unconverted perform) is
either none, or as good as none; there is small difference 'twixt [Nequam] and
[Nequicquam,] as good never a whit, as never the better: Though the carnal Jews
(undoubtedly) in their seventy years Captivity prayed often, as well as fasted
often, Zech. 7. 5. Yet Daniel excellently accounts for them, as if they had
performed no duty at all; [Yet made we not (at all) our prayer to God,] Dan. 9.
13. because they did it lazily, and more for breaking off their chains than
their sins. Thus likewise Paul (in his carnal and unconverted estate) while he
was educated in the strictest Order of the Pharisaical Religion, Acts 26. 5.
and (no doubt) [said] his Prayers often, yet all that time never [made] his
Prayer (as it is phrased, Job 22. 27.) unto God at all; and therefore he was
never reckoned to pray (indeed) until after his Conversion, Acts 9. 11. Yea,
and (2ly) after Conversion, Oh what a secret willingness will you find in your
treacherous heart, either altogether to omit duty, or to be slight and
perfunctory in the performance of it: Smarting Experience will suggest to you
something of an over-satisfying content, sometimes to be disappointed of duty.
Ask your Heart, Has Morning-occasions and company never hindered you of your
Morningduty, or (at least) made you to post it cursorily over? But you must
know, that though God (upon some occasional hindering Occurrences) may give you
a Dispensation for this or that particular hour of Duty, yet that Dispensation
may not be construed by you as a plenal discharge from Duty.

3. Indeed many persons plead their multitude of business to be their
hinderance from performing of Duty; but I say, not only, that multitude of
works wants not sin, no more than multitude of words, Prove. 10. 19. Eccles. 5.
3. but also the more business and occasions you have in the world, the more
need you have to perform Duty (more strictly) for sanctifying those your many
Occasions: for your Employments (as well as your Enjoyments) should all be
sanctified by Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. House-occasions, and Field-occasions, yea
all occasions stand in need to be sanctified, Levit. 27. 14. 16. 18. Reverend
Mr. Pemble says excellently, that there is no outward Calling so very full of
various Employments, but that in the space of twenty four hours, some time
might be spared and redeemed for Religious Duties. It Is true, God does not
expect so much Duty from you (that live in an outward Calling) as he does from
those whose Calling is the Ministry (who should dedicate their whole times and
their whole talents unto God) yet know, that God gives to none a license to be
lazy; and if you neglect your Duty to God, you will be in danger of Judgments
from God, [Let us go and sacrifice to our God, lest he fall upon us with his
plagues] Exodus 5. 3. As omission of Diet breeds Diseases in the Body, and makes
work for Death, or for the bodily (Physician: So omission of Duty breeds
Distempers in the Soul, and I makes work for Hell, or for the Soul-Physicians:
Alas, it was Omission of Duty (a Sin of Omission) that banished Moab from the
Church, to the tenth Geveration, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4, 5. and that D^muld many to the
pit of Hell, Matthew. 25. 42. And if you be lukewarm (only) in Duty, (though you
omit it not) God will spue you out of his mouth, Revel. 3. 16. into some base
place; any (the worst) place is good enough to receive God's spewings.

4. The second Deceit is, When you are brought from Sin to Duty, and from the
Omission to the Observation of it; then may your heart deceive you in
overvaluing Duty, in living upon it, and resting in it: We are not ignorant of
Satan's devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. that envious one. If he cannot keep you too much
on the left hand, he will throw you too far on the right, and make you set up
duty in Christ's stead; and cause you to give it that honor, which is due to
Christ: Just as Darius his Mother did obeisance to Ephestion, mistaking him for
Alexander (himself) saluting the Favorite for the Prince. When the Devil (in
conjunction with your own heart) can no longer prevail to make you undervalue
Duty (in neglecting of it) then (alas) he will strongly tempt you to overvalue
Duty, and to set it up as a Savior to you; well knowing how offensive it is to
Christ to justle in any Competitors or Corrivals with him in the matter of
Salvation, who will be one and all, or he will be none at all; As Christ trod
the Wine Press alone, Isa. 63. 3. to bring you into his Wine-cellar, Gant. 2.
4. So besides him, there is no Savior, Isai. 43. 11. And though Christ must
sit upon the Throne himself alone, yet then will he have his Train (to wit,
Holy Duties) to fill the Temple, Isai. 6. 1. So that you must distinguish them,
and know the one from the other, as your Father Abraham knew his Lord (Christ)
from the two created Angels, Genesis 18. 2, 3. You must give to duty the things
that are duty's, and to Christ the things that are Christ's: The three Wisemen,
when they saw the Star (that was their guide to Christ) did not fall down to
worship it, but Christ himself to whom it led them. They did not offer their
Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense to the Star, but to Christ, who is called The
bright and Morning Star, Revel. 22. 16.

5. As the Dyal cannot tell you what is the hour of the day, unless the Sun do
shine upon it; so your best Duties cannot show you any hour or time of Joy, any
further than while The Sun of Righteousness (the Lord Christ, Mal. 4. 2.) does
shine upon them. Alas, what does Elijah's Mantle signify to Elisha, unless he
have also the Lord God of that Mantle, 2 Kin. 2. 14. Therefore take heed you
rest not in bare Duty; you must not live upon duty, but upon Christ in duty;
for your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. You must let go your Duties
in point of Justification, and yet hold them (as your life) in point of
Sanctification, for Duty should not dye while you live; you must do them, but
you may not glory in them, [Let him that gloryeth, glory in the Lord,] 1 Cor.
1. 31. Thus blessed Paul suffered the loss of all his duties, [Non quoad
substantiam, sea quoad qualitatem and officium justificandi,] Phil. 3. 7, 8. He
did not depend upon his Duties for his Justification (as before he had done in
his Pharisaical state,) nor laid he now the stress of his Salvation upon them,
but he cast the great burden of both upon the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22. Alas, as your
goodness (in Duty) extends not to God, Psalm. 16. 2. and you cannot be profitale
to him, Job 22. 2, 3. God receives nothing at your hand, (by all) Job 35. 7. So
when you have done all you can, you are still but an unprofitable Servant, Luke
17. 10. Your best Duties are but filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. though they be pure
in the fountain, as flowing from the Holy Spirit, yet are they muddy in the
stream, as they run through the dirty channel of your corrupted heart; and
therefore those Popish Doctrines (of Merit de Congruo, and de Condigno, and of
Supererogation) are no better than lying Doctrines.

6. The third Deceit of the Heart is, After you have been an overvaluer of Duty
some time, Satan (and your own heart) may beguile you, 2 Cor. 2. 11. to become
an undervaluer of Duty again in the days of your Knowledge, as before you had
been in the days of your Ignorance: Thus the Adversary of your Soul will toss
you into extremes, backward and forward, yea and backward again, making you to
slight and contemn Duties again, but upon another bottom now; to wit, under a
pretense of making Christ your All: As if Christ had given you now a license to
be lazy: But surely you never so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. As you have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so should you walk in him, Col. 2. 6. and being
delivered (by him) therefore must you serve him in Holiness and Righteousness
all your days, Luke 1. 74, 75. And seeing you are bought with the price (of his
blood) therefore must you Glorify him with your body and spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
for you are not yet come to your rest, Deuteronomy. 12. 9. and until you be come to
your eternal Rest (or Sabbath) you must not cease from your spiritual work,
labor or duty, Hebr. 4. 10. So that Duties must not dye, while you live; and
as long as you are on this side Heaven, so long must you be doing Duty on
Earth; This is the place of our performing work, and that of our receiving
wages: You may not transfer all your work from your self upon Christ, as if
nothing were due from you, and to be done by you. 'Twas a good Saying of
Austin's [Acti agimus, and servati sumus* ut serviamus.] We are acted by the
Spirit of Christ, that we (our selves) may act for Christ; and we are saved by
our Savior, that we may serve our Savior. Though God made us without our
selves, he will not (says that Father) save us without our selves: There is a
triple-Homage (to wit, of Reverence, of Obedience, and of Thankfulness) which
is your poor Peppercorn you must carefully pay to the Lord and Landlord of all
your Mercies: They that would have healing, there is something required to be
done by them; they must step into the opened Fountain, Zech. 13. 1. as the
diseased did into the Pool of Bethesda, Joh. 5, 4.

7. If you compare Revel. 1. 6. with 7. 14. together, these two Scriptures will
show you, that not only Christ does wash you, but that you must also wash your
self in the blood of the Lamb; and hence is it, that the Lord calls upon you,
to this washing work, Isai. 1. 15. God will give you Grace, just as Boaz gave
Ruth corn, Ruth 2. 15. He could have given her an Ephah of Barley (ready
winnowed to her hand) without more ado; but mark, she must gather it up into
gleanings, and beat it out of the ears, etc. Though the corn was Boaz's gift,
yet all this was Ruths duty, which was all the price she should pay for it.
Thus the very Heathen could say, [Dii laboribus omnia vendunt,] God sells all
his blessings for man's labor; it is all one charge to him, yet thus he gives
both Grace and Knowledge; and God's promise of Mercy is no exemption to man
from Duty. He promised deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity, yet for that
will he be enquired after, Ezekiel. 36. 12. 37. [Ora, labora, and admota manu
invocanda est Minerva,] were good Sayings of wise Heathens. Duty is the way to
Mercy: Oh then take heed of being weary of duty, (which is near of kin to a
reprobate mind. A Child of God may be weary in it, but never of it, for he is
a serving Son, Mal. 3. 17. If once you become too good for duty, you will
assuredly prove too weak for holiness: A little Child gathers strength by its
due and daily sucking the breast, but if it be Tonguetyed, or hindered from
sucking by any other impediment, 'twill sensibly (as well as insensibly) soon
pine away. Our Spiritual life is as our Natural life, both which Lives are
within us, yet neither of them do arise and are nourished from our selves, but
from something that is without us. Hence is it, that you stand in as much need
of daily bread for your Soul, as you do for your Body: And this Bread of Life
comes dish'd up to you in divine Duties. Therefore by these things you live,
and herein is the life of your spirit, Isa. 38. 16.

8. The fourth Deceit of the Heart herein is, 'Twill wander from God in duty,
it cannot watch with Christ one hour, Matthew. 26. 40. nor attend the Lord
without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. much less can you abide with Christ one whole
day, (as those Disciples did) Joh. 1. 41, etc. your spirit will not be steadfast
with God, Psalm. 78. 8. 37. but your heart will deal un^^ithfully with him, and
start aside from him ^^ke a deceitful bow, (as above) verse. 57. 'twill b^ like
Reuben, as Unstable as water, Genesis 49. 4. This is for Lamentation, and should
be for Lamentation to you, that you should bring such a slippery heart before
the Lord in Duty, that will not serve God so entirely, as it has served sin:
Alas, you have served sin with your whole Heart, (Soul and strength) but you
could never serve God so: your heart has been divided in his service, Hos. 10.
2. We are (all of us) too much [(...)] double-soul'd, or double-hearted, (as
James phraseth it,) Jam. 1. 8. hence comes our unstableness in Duty, and our
halting and halving 'twixt God and the world, and 'twixt Christ and sin: This
is that corruption which that Apostle calls upon us to cleanse away, (cleaving
so fast to us) Jam, 4. 8. and then there would be more Constancy and Evenness,
more Stability and Entireness in our Minds, Mouths and Manners before the Lord:
This is absolutely necessary in all those that draw nigh to God, Levit. 10. 3.
and the contrary is abominable, Isai. 29. 13. We may (all of us) say in this
case as Joseph's brethren said in another case, [We are verily guilty,] Genesis
42. 11. Therefore you have need to watc^ your heart, (Prove. 4. 23.) like a
thief, that will either steal away from you by fraud, or ^eak away from you by
force, ere ever you be aware: And to pray with David, Lord, fix and unite my
heart, [that, as thou art God alone, so my heart may be to thee alone,] Psalm.
86. 10, 11. Lord, bend it and bind it fast with cords, (as a Sacrifice or
untamed Heifer) to the horns of the Altar, Psalm. 118. 27. that you may serve
God with singleness, 2 Cor. 1. 12. cleaving to him with full purpose of heart,
Act. 11. 23. Deuteronomy. 30. 20. and sitting close to him, (as the word [(...)] 1
Cor. 7. 35. signifies) as close as Mary did to Christ, Luke 10. 40. while
Martha was distracted with many things.

9. The fifth Deceit of the Heart is, 'Twill be weary of Duty, as well as
wander in and from Duty; this us^ers in that. If your heart be divided,
disjointed, and (thereby) disenabled for Duty (for [Aninia dispersa fit minor]
a stream divided into several channels runs the weaker, [Vis unita fortior,] if
contracted into one, the same becomes the stronger;) 'twill soon also grow
weary of Duty, and cry, Oh what a weariness is it, Mal. 1. 13. where the Jews
come puffing and blowing into the Temple, as if they had lost their pant with
carrying some Carrion-sheep upon their shoulders for Sacrifice; as if God had
called them to no other service, but servile drudgery; but God (knowing the
language of their hearts) detects their Hypocrisy, telling them, he presses
upon no man, neither likes he that service that is pressed out of people, as
Verjuice is pressed out of Crabs: All his Saints, Subjects and Soldiers are
Volunteers, a willing people, that bring their Free-will-offering to him, Psalm.
110. 3. They dare not cry out of weariness as those did, nor account the
Sabbath a burden, as they did in Amos 8.5. who were (as it were) in the stocks,
or little-ease all the Sabbathservice, though they do (themselves) perform no
better works than dead works all the time, either for fashions sake, or for
fear of the Law. Oh let it not be so with you, let the Sabbath be a day both of
desires and of delights to you, Isa. 58. 13. and take as much pleasure therein,
as one walking in the Spring-garden of Spiritual Duties (arm in arm, and heart
in heart) with your dear Lord Jesus: you must not only [Deo servire, sed and
adulari,] be unsatisfiable, unwearied in his service, as one that never does
enough for him, that has done (and suffered) so much for you.

10. The sixth Deceit is, You may look more at the Acceptance of the Action
performed, than at the person performing: It Is true, in the Covenant of Works,
(the first Covenant) God first accepted of the Action, and then of the Person;
for the tenure of that Covenant runs in those terms, [Do this and live.]
Ambrose (the Father) has an excellent descant upon it; to wit, [Homo prius
probandus, quam approbandus,] Man must first be proved (in this Covenant of
Works) before he be approved: When God (the Creator) called all his created
things good, and very good, at the end of every days Creation, yet when he had
created Man, he speaks not one word of the goodness of his creature [Man,] and
why so? 'Twas because Man must first be tried, and then (if he deserved it)
commended; but alas, Man [bal Jalin, non pernoctavit] abode not one night (as
the Hebrew word signifies) in his honorable estate, wherein he was created,
Psalm. 49. 12. He failed in his action, so God accepted not of his person: But
it is otherwise in the second Covenant (the Covenant of Grace,) for herein the
person is accepted first, and then the action from that person; As in the case
of Abel, Genesis 4. 4. and Hebr. 11. 4. his Sacrifice was respected and accepted,
because by Faith his person was justified; [The Lord had respect to Abel, and
to his offering,] God's respect there was first to his person, and then to his
Action or Offering: Whereas the first Covenant was made betwixt an holy man,
and an Holy God; Man then stood upon his own legs, and by his own strength, and
he had then no backdoor, no surety: But this second Covenant is made with us
in Christ, and it is now, Live and do, (as the first was, Do and live;) because
we live in Christ, that therefore we do our actions acceptably in him, Ephesians.
1. 6.

11. The seventh Deceit is, You may look that your person may be accepted (in
Duty) more for the Actions sake, than for Christ's sake: If your heart be not
lifted up and raised to a due height in Duty, 'twill be a low creeping heart,
and then will it pore too much on self, and the Duty done, and too little on
Christ; Whereas no Israelite was to offer up his own Offering, but he must put
it into the hand of the Priest (who was a type of Christ our High Priest) and
he must both bring it, and burn it before the Lord for the Israelite, Levit. 1.
15. You should therefore eye your self less, and your High Priest more in all
your Duties; especially considering, that it is he who carries the names of all
the Tribes of Israel upon his Breast Plate into the Holy of Holies, Exodus 28.
29. It Is he who must present your person with acceptance to his Father, saying,
Lo here am I, and the children which thou have given me, Hebr. 2. 13. Yea, and
it is He that must present your actions too, or they will never come with
acceptance upon Gods Altar, Isa. 60. 7. It Is Christ's work to pick out the Weeds
from the Flowers in all our Duties, he takes away the Iniquity of our holy
things; and what Flowers and Fragrancies (of his own Spirit) he finds in our
Duties, Cant. 4. 16. those he binds up in Nosegays, and so presents them to the
Father for us: He Eekes out all our defects with his own fullness of sweet
odours, Revel. 5. 8. and 8. 3* presenting nothing to God, but what is pleasing
to him, as perfumed by his Merit.

12. The eighth Deceit is, You may be puffed up with Pride after enlargement of
Duty: When Spiritual Fire is at any time vouchsafed to be sent down from Heaven
upon your Heart in Duty, then is Satan's time in tempting you unto
Self-admiration, whereby you may forfei^ the heart-warming presence of God at
another time: This is Satan's Chemistry, to bring evil out of good; to wit,
Spiritual Pride ou^ of a divine (enlarging) presence, which i^ quite contrary
to God's Chemistry, in bringing good out of evil, to wit, a sanctified Use of
temporal trouble. Indeed God would never suffe^ any sort of evil (Natural or
Moral) to be in the world, if he knew not how to extract some good out of all
evil. The spirit of (or spiritual) Pride is the worst sort of Pride, as the
spirit of poison is the worst sort of poison [Corruptio optimi est pessima.] As
this sort o^ pride is the corruption of the best thing (to wi^^ divine Duty) so
it becomes to be of the wor^^ nature, Morbus Satanicus, the Devils Disease It Is
the worst kind of Theft, as it is a stealing from God his declarative Glory;
'twas Bernard's Descant [Vxor gloria viri, and gloria uxor Dei] as the Wife is
the glory of man, 1 Cor. 11.7. so Glory is the wife of God, and therefore God
is as jealous of his Glory, as a man is of his wife; [His Glory he will not
give to annother, Isa. 42. 8. 12. Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8. it is as sublime
an Impudence, as to rob the King of his Queen; and yet this you may do, in
robbing God of his Glory (the chiefest Flower and Jewel of his Crown) when you
exalt your self (after enlargement) more than your God, which is a grosser and
greater Crime than that which proud Haman was charged withal, [Will he force
the Queen before my face,] Esth. 7. 8. Hence arose that harshsounding Sentence
of Austin, [Duty damus more than Sin, and Duty damus more than it saves,] the
sound sense whereof must be this, When men are found priding for duty, and
resting in duty, the Devil deceives them, and so far their duties have
accidentally a damning nature, especially when they are deceived with seeming
for saving Duty; As the Witches in Lorain (which Dr. Preston speaks of) were
deceived by some seeming broad pieces of Gold, which proved at last no better
than an heap of yellow dried leaves of the Aspin-tree; thus when we write up
service, and God writes it up sin; Satan cheats us with seeming Service and in
this sense Duty (accidentally) madamn. Duty (indeed) saves none; that ^^
Christ's work to save, and not the work o^ Duty: Duties be good Evidences (as
Grace be) but both be bad Saviors.

13. Thus far of the first thing, to wit, the Malady. The second particular is
the Remed^ briefly; Would you have relief against those deceits aforesaid, then
take these following Rules. Rule the (1.) Mind the Principle you^ act from in
Duty; God looks more at the principle of Duty, than at the performance, or Duty
it self; he looks not so much at what you do, as [with what spirit] you do your
duty. Alas, a Cain may offer sacrifice as well as an Abel, Genesis 4. 3, 4. and a
Doeg may step as far into the Sanctuary as a David, I Sam. 21. 7. yea, a proud
Pharisee may step far further into the Temple than a penitent Publican, Luke
11. 10, 11. 13. yet with differing spirits and principles: All your Deeds and
Duties should be made manifest that they are wrought in God, Joh. 3. 21. that
is, from a good principle, as well as from a good End: Jehu did excellent
things for God, 2 King. 10. 16. yet that which spoiled all was, that all his
high and noble exploits did spring from a low and ignoble spirit and principle,
in not pursuing Gods praise so much, as his own promotion. The (2.) Rule is, Go
forth in the strength of the Lord into every Duty, Psalm. 71. 16 Take heed of
fetching Materials of Duty from your self, making Duty a matter of Wit, of
Memory, and of natural Abilities. Alas, this is but a lifting up your own tool
upon Gods Altar (which will not polish, but pollute it,) Exo. 20. 25. Duties
that are made up of parts, words and wit (as Abanah and Parphar, rivers of
Damascus) may indeed scour, but it is Duty done in Gods strength (as Israel's
Jordan) can cure the Leprosy, 2 Kin. 5.12. 14. As Elisha's staff in the hand
of Gehazi cannot cure, 2 Kin. 4. 29, 31. so Duties (performed never so
gloriously by our own abilities) cannot help: what cares Satan for all their
Adjurations, Act. 19. 13, 14, 15. where he sees not, feels not the evidence and
demonstration of God?

14. The third Rule is, Never sit down satisfied in Duty, without the supply of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 19. who must help your infirmities, Romans
8. 26. Gre. [(...),] lift with you as at a log, and bearing up the heavier end
of Duty for you; God said betimes ['Tis not good for man to be alone,] Genesis 2.
18. It Is not good that man should be alone at any time, but especially in Duty;
he stands in as much need of an helper for his Soul, as he does for his Body.
Martha would not serve Christ alone, but she would have Christ to bid her
Sister (Mary) help her, Luke 10. 40. So do not you serve Christ alone in Duty,
but desire him to bid his Spirit help you therein* Christ tells you, [(...)]
seorsim a me, without me* (and my Spirit) you can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. you
cannot pray as you ought, Romans 8. 26. As you must do Duty from a principle of
Life (habitual Grace, or a renewed frame of heart, in Faith and Love) so you
must call in the help of the Spirit, to excite that spring and principle,
crying, Awake, O North Wind, come thou South, blow upon my Garden, etc. Cant.
4. 16. and praying, Lord, quicken me in thy way, Psalm. 119. 37. As endeavors
[withou God] cannot, so God [without endeavours] will not quicken that
spiritual principle; the flint must be struck upon the steel, or there is no
fetching of fire out of it: You should stir up your self for, and interest
Christ in all your Duties, that the sword of the Lord and of Gideon may go
(hand in hand) together, Jud. 7. 18. 20. The (4.) Rule is, Do Duties for right
Ends, as well as from a right Principle, by a right Strength, and with a right
Supply. Right ends of Duty are, 1. That God may be honored by it. 2. That your
thankfulness to the God of your Mercy may be expressed. 3. That those Duties
may be profitable to others, Tit. 3. 8. And lastly, That your Soul may meet
with Christ in them. You should cry in every Duty, have over (Lord) for Heaven,
getting a full tide of Affections; and cry with David, Oh that I had wings,
Psalm. 55. 6. and wind in my wings. Zech. 5. 9. Revel. 12. 14. even the wings
of a dove, wherewithal you may fly to the Ark of Mercy, as Noah's dove did.

15. The fifth Rule is, See that your heart rest not short of Christ in any
Duty. Let go your hold of no Duty, until you find something of Christ in it;
and until you get not only an handful, but an armful (with old Simeon, Luke
2.28.) yea an heartful of the blessed and beautiful Babe of Bethlehem therein.
Indeed you should have commerce with Heaven, and communion with Christ in duty,
which is therefore called the presence of God, or your appearing before him,
Exodus 23. 17. and Psalm. 42. 2. Your Duties then must be as a Bridge to give you
passage, or as a Boat to carry you over into the bosom of Christ. Holy Mr.
Bradford (Martyr) said, He could not leave Confession, till he found his heart
touched and broken for sin; nor Supplication, till his Heart was affected with
the beauty of the Blessings desired; nor Thanksgiving, till his Soul was
quickened in return of Praises; nor any Duty, until his heart was brought into a
duty-frame, and something of Christ was found therein. Accordingly Bernard
speaks, [Nunquam abs ^e absque te recedam, Domine,] I will never depart (in
duty) from thee without thee, O Lord. Augustine said, h^ loved not Tully's
elegant Orations (as formerly* because he could not find [his] Christ in them;
nor does a gracious Soul empty Duties. Rhetorical flowers and flourishes
(expressions without impressions) in praying or preaching, are not true bread,
but a tinkling Cymbal to it, and cannot be put off with the empty spoon of aerie
Notions, or lovely (that are not also lively) Songs: If Christ talk with you in
the way (of duty) your heart will burn within you, Luke 24. 16. 32.

(6.) The sixth Rule is, Neglect not the [Magnalia, or] great Duties of
Christianity, while you do observe (it may be oversolicitously, even to
Superstition) the [Minutula, or] lesser Duties; as the Pharisees in their
straining at gnats, and swallowing camels, Matthew. 23. 23, 24. As Saul, that
scrupled eating flesh with the blood, 1 Samuel 14. 33. yet not at all the
shedding of the blood of the Lords innocent Priests, 1 Samuel 22. 16, 17, 18.
And as those wicked Priests seemed to make Conscience of putting the price of
Blood in the Treasury, but none at all of imbrewing their hands in the innocent
Blood of the Lamb of God, Matthew. 27. 6, etc. the price of that Blood may not
lie in their chest, yet the Blood it self may lie on their Consciences, v. 25.

(7.) The seventh Rule is, You must persevere in Duty all your days (as
before.) You may not be a young Saint, and an old Devil; like the New Mood,
that gives light for a while in the former part of the night, but goes down
into darkness long before the Night is gone. You may not be a lightsome
Professor in your Youth, and have your light wrapped up in darkness in your old
Age; but your Grace (like good liquor) should run fresh to the bottom, and your
last days should be your best.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Hearts Treachery in exercising of Graces.

1. THe Deceits of the Heart concerning Grace, are manifold to be here
discovered; as (1.) You may mistake Gifts for Graces. (2.) False and seeming
Grace, for true and saving Grace. (3.) Common Grace, for special Grace, which
accompanies Salvation, and is peculiar to the Elect of God: All these are over
and above those Deceits aforementioned, in mistaking Nature for Grace, Civility
for Sanctity, and Restraining for Renewing Grace. You may think that you are
exercising the very right and real Grace of God, when it is only some Mock-grace
that is exerted and exercised in you: In order to the undeceiving of your Soul
herein, you must (1.) know what this Grace of God's Elect is; which Spirit of
truth the world cannot receive, Joh. 14. 17. And (2ly.) how to distinguish it
from those other (falsely supposed) Graces, which the Non-elect world may and do
receive. First of the (1.) to wit, What right Grace (which the Apostle calls
true Holiness) is, [(...),] Ephesians. 4. 24. the Holiness of Truth, Gr. or true
Holiness, in opposition to that which is falsely and feignedly supposed only to
be so. This right and real Grace, or Holiness, is called (in Scripture) The
Riches of his Glory, Romans 9. 23. The Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and the very
life of God himself, Ephesians. 4.17. yea, the very Image of the heavenly Adam, 1
Cor. 15. 49. wherein we resemble Christ, not only as a picture does a man in
outward Lineaments, but as a Child does his Father in Countenance and
Conditions. This resemblance consists not in Corporeal Substance, so much as in
Divine Qualities. Grace (in truth) is the choicest frame and excellency that
flesh and blood is capable of: It Is (as Reverend Mr. Robert Bolton defines it)
the most glorious Creature of the Father of Lights, flowing immediately from
his blessed face. As in the hand of Moses the Serpent was turned into a rod,
Exodus 4. 4. so in the hand of the Messiah our crooked Natures are made straight
by Grace (the Lion is changed into a Lamb, etc. Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8.) and our
rough spirits are made plain thereby, Isa. 40. 4. It Is the work of this blessed
Carpenter (so Christ is called, Mark 6. 3.) to hew and square many a knotty
piece of Timber, that it may become fit materials for his holy Temple.

2. The second thing you are to know is, how to distinguish the right from the
wrong; and (first) how Grace is distinguishable from Gifts? (which may be your
first enquiry.) To which I answer (1.) in the general. It Is possible a man that
has Grace, may think he has nothing but Gifts; and ('it is as possible) that a
man which has nothing but Gifts, may think that his Gifts are Graces: He that
has Gifts, has (indeed) an excellent thing, and that which we are commanded
to covet earnestly, [(...),] zealously affect (as it is the best Ambition) 1
Cor. 12. 31. Yet is there a more excellent way: (...) excels (...), Graces are
better than Gifts, 1 Cor. 13. 1. etc. Gifts are (indeed) excellent things, as
they are Spiritual things (flowing from the Spirit assisting, if not
indwelling;) in this respect they are better than all the Gold of Ophir, which
is but a natural thing, and has only a natural excellency; but spiritual Gifts
are not only spiritual things, but be a part of the purchase of Christ's Blood,
and a blessed fruit of his Ascension into Heaven, Ephesians. 4. 8. And it must
needs be an excellent thing to become a Savior of Souls by Ministerial gifts,
(to save souls and to pluck them out of the fire, Jude 23. This is an
excellency denied to Angels, who are but ministering spirits, and the Word of
Reconciliation is not committed to them: The Office of preaching the Gospel is
taken from the Angels (who first preached it to the Shepherds, Luke 2.10, to
15.) and given to the Ministers: Though an Angel certified Cornelius that his
Prayers were accepted, yet does not the Angel preach the Doctrine of Redemption
to him, but refers him (for that) unto Peter, Act. 10. 3. 5. Notwithstanding
all this, a man may save others, and not save himself, but be a cast away, 1
Cor. 9. 29. at last: Hence the Apostle exhorts Timothy that he be careful to
save himself, as well as others, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Those Hypocrites (Preachers)
that in Christ's Name had cast out Devils, were (as unknown to Christ) at
length cast out to Devils, Matthew. 7. 22.

3. The second Answer is more particular, for distinguishing Gifts from Graces;
They differ (1.) In their original, though both come from one and the same Holy
Spirit, yet it is in a different respect; for Gifts do flow from the Spirit, as
he is an assisting Spirit only, and not an indwelling Spirit also. But Grace
always flows from the Spirit, as both Assisting and Indwelling too: it is thus
illustrated; As a Carpenter may both build an House, and beget a Child, yet
one and the same individual man is the original of both these, but with this
difference; the house (that he builds) partakes of his Art only, and the Child
(he begets) does partake of his very Nature: So Gifts, though they do come from
the same Holy Spirit (that works saving Grace) yet are they but [Opera ad
extra] external Operations, and not the proper and genuine fruits of an
Indwelling, as well as of an Assisting Spirit. A Pilot is said to be (in
Philosophy) the [forma assistens] to guide the Ship in its Navigation; but it is
the Soul that is the [forma informans] to guide the Body in all its Motions and
Operations. Oh see that the Spirit be your [Soul] in Grace, as well as your
[Pilot] in Gifts. (2.) In their Object; Gifts are more for Honor, than for
Holiness; but Grace is more for Holiness, than for Honor: 'Twas Readiness cry,
(who had got the Gift of Prophecy, when he was among the Prophets, 1 Samuel 10.
10.) Yet honor me now among the people, 1 Samuel 15. 30. Let gifted men have but
the Honor, and let who will (for all them) take the Holiness. Gifts are (all)
for a Glory that is without, but Grace is (all) for that Glory which is within,
Psalm. 45. 13* Reverend Mr. Bridges says excellently, Tha^ as Gifts are the
fruit of Christ's Ascension, E^phes. 4. 8. so they are (all) for Ascensions and
Glories, for the fine-spun Notions, for the quaint and quirking Speculations of
sounding brass, and tinckling Cymbals: But true Grace falls in with a crucified
Christ, saying, (with the Apostle) I determined to know nothing. (to profess no
other skill) among you, than Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. It Is not
(a^ Children are) for the gaudy flowers among the Corn, but (as the Husbandman)
for the Corn it self.

4. Gifts and Grace differ (3ly) in their subject; Gifts may be given to a
wicked man [i^ordine ad aliud] for the good of others, (as a Nurse may meet
with bountiful gifts and good keeping in her Masters house, not so much out of
respect to her self, but for the sake of her Masters Child, which she has in
her Nursery:) But Grace is special favor, the Receiving subject whereof is
only those that are Elected and Accepted in Christ; it is a Favor which God
shows only to his people, Psalm. 106. 4. He uses to do so only to those that
love his Name, Psalm. 119. 132. Whereas a wicked Judas (a Devil) may be the
subject of receiving Gifts; he undoubtedly had as shining Gifts as any of the
Disciples, insomuch that they were so far from suspecting him for betraying of
Christ, that each of them rather suspected himself, saying, Master, is it I?
Yet all his Gifts (though shining) were but as those Torches and Lanterns which
he abused to betray his Master: So that a man may perish with Gifts, but never
any man can perish with Grace. Noah's Carpenters were gifted to build an Ark,
for saving Noah and his Family; yet had they not Grace to save themselves from
the universal Deluge. (4ly.) They differ in the Effects. 1. Gifts are
[Ministrantia,] but they are not [Sanctificantia.] They do administer [ad
lucrum Ecclesiae,] to the advantage of the Church; yet do they neither
sanctify nor save every gifted Administrator; such an one may cast out Devils,
yet at last be cast out to Devils, Matthew 7. 22. 2. Gifts fit a man only for a
common Profession, effecting a form of knowledge, Romans 2. 20. and a form of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. yet cannot renew the heart, nor raise it up beyond a
common frame. 3. Gifts and Sin may consist together; for though they be diverse,
yet they are not contrary. There is as much room for the Devil as ever, yea
possibly more; For the Gift of Knowledge may make room for the Devil of Pride,
1 Cor. 8. 1. 4. As Gifts cannot break off Union with Sin, so neither can they
bring into Union with Christ. 5. Gifts are only good at doing, they are very
bad at suffering-work. Lastly, In Duration; Gifts continue not, 1 Cor. 13. 8.
they dwindle into nothing, Heb. 6. 6, 7. but Grace is contrary in all these
respects.

5. The second Deceit, (which is the second enquiry) is your taking and
mis-taking [seeming] Grace for [saving] grace, or false for true grace: that
you may be undeceived herein, learn to distinguish them by these following
Characters. (1.) False grace in an unsound and hypocritical heart, has
evermore its actings and exercise from foreign and extrinsick motives, as
carnal respects, by and base ends, the applause of men, etc. Just like Puppits
in a dance, that have no principle of life in them, but are acted by an
external force: but true saving grace has not only an inward principle, but
also a propensity to comply with the Law of God; there is a law in the mind,
Romans 7. 23. which is writ in the heart, Hebr. 8. 10. this is called a Law,
because it carries an authority with it, and sways down the Soul into a
conformity to the will of God; this makes the sound heart to love Gods precepts
because they are pure, Psalm. 119. 140. and inclines it as a strong bias,
(stronger then all the external motives) to love the Gospel for the Gospels
sake. Whereas the Hypocrite does only [uti Deo, ut fruat^^ Mundo] use God, to
enjoy the world, as Austin says. Thus Jehu obeyed Gods will, but it was that
he might attain to a Crown and Kingdom. The (2.) Character is, such as deceive
themselves with false and seeming grace, never look for, nor labor after true
and saving grace; such never search nor suspect themselves; Judas came lagging
in at last, saying, Master, is it I? Such never put themselves under a serious
and strict scrutiny, saying, Am I yet got beyond the seize of an
Hypocrite? Holy jealousy is a blessed frame of spirit; and a solemn suspicion
of being deceived, is a comfortable sign of a sound sincerity: He that never
doubted, never truly believed; and such as go on in an uninterrupted estate,
(blessing themselves all along with bare shows of grace) have a dangerous
symptom of destruction upon them: Until Egypts dough was spent, God gave no
Mauna; and so long as the Bridegrooms wine lasted, Christ turned no water into
wine. The (3.) Character is, False grace is never comforted with Gods presence;
such hearts dare never set themselves solemnly in the sight of divine
Omnisciency, (as Job did, Job 31. 6. and David, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. and Peter,
Joh. 21. 17. sincere Souls all:) for they know, though they may deceive men,
they cannot deceive God, Gal. 6. 7. whereas true Grace dare appeal to
Omnisciency about the general frame of the heart. Though it undoubtedly
trembles in that Appeal, for its frequent frailties, as Job 42.5, 6. yet is it
confident its Integrity will carry weight: for though it may depart from God
out of weakness, yet never out of wickedness, Psalm. 18.21. and though acts (yet
not ways) of wickedness be found in it, Psalm. 139.24.

6. The fourth Character is, false grace is never attended with humility; if
the more you profess, the prouder you grow, you have just cause to suspect your
self: but with true grace, the more Holy you are, the more humble you will be:
as the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 8. Luke 7. 7. Notional knowledge puffs up (as
above) but the divine light of saving knowledge shining into a dark heart, 2
Pet. 1. 19. discovers your ignorance, (that there is more you know not, than
that you know) this humbles: the people thought the Centurion worthy; yea, and
Christ (himself) thought the man worthy; yet the man does think himself
unworthy. The more experimental knowledge you have, the more sense of your own
ignorance you will have also; and the more faith, the more sense of your
unbelief, Prove. 30. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 2. Mark 9. 24. It Is a blessed frame; to be
kept hungry and humble, under an Enjoyment of grace, crying, Lord I still want
this grace and that grace. The (fifth and last) Character is, false grace never
grows, unless it be worse and worse: gilded things loose their luster and
glory by wearing, and pretenses to grace do rathe^ wither than thrive or
prosper. God complains that they went backward rather then forward, Jerem. 7.
24. False grace, like bad salt, loses gradually its own Acrimony and
smartness, until it be cast to the dunghill; whereas true grace, as a grain of
mustard seed, grows to a tree; from a morning glimpse, to a perfect day, Prove.
4. 18. from smoking flax, to a burning flame, Matthew. 12. 20. Nicodemus grows
from timerousness to boldness, Joh. 3. 1, 2. and 19. 39. when Judas (with all
his goodly shows of grace) did dwindle into nothing: if there be never so
little meal in the barrel, never so little Oil in the Cruise, yet it being fed
with a supply from heaven, multiplies into abundance: if you grow from fervency
to formality, from strictness to looseness; if you can loose the sweetness of
your spirit without remorse, it is a shrewd sign; but if you have received grace
in the truth of it, then you grow, 1. [forma] in loveliness to Christ. 2.
[Suavitate] bringing sweeter Cane to God, Isa. 43. 24. 3. [Robore] better
rooted, the house of David growing stronger, 1 Samuel 3. 1. And fourthly,
[vigore] every grace that is feeble will be nourished, Hebr. 12. 13. you then
grow both in kind and degree: growing youth often measure themselves, they have
better appetites than older people.

7. The third deceit, (which is the third enquiry) is your taking and mistaking
common grace for special: that you may be undeceived, know, that there is a
common grace, which is, (1.) more than civility, it being of a more evangelical
and heavenly nature than civility is. (2.) It Is more than restraining grace,
which is conversant only about sins and duties, out of a servile awe and fear
of God; but this seems to carry out the Soul with some raised affections and
love to Christ. (3.) It Is more than mere outward gifts; which raise up a man
above ordinary, only for an usefulness to others; but this seems to renew the
man, and make him another man than he was before. (4.) It Is more than seeming
grace or formality, which has only [verisimilia] seeming true, but not [vera]
really true, a mere show and shadow of godliness; but This is a real work upon
the Soul, as Hebr. 6. 4, 5. declares, being not only an enlightening work,
and a partaking of gifts, but also some Spiritual taste of the sweetness of
Christ, and of the powers of the world to come: yet observe, all this amounted
not to special grace in three things: 1. Their light was not humbling, there is
mention of their enlightening, but not a word of their humbling: the more of
saving light is let into the Soul, the more self-abasement does that light
beget there; the more precious that Christ is in our eyes, the more vile we are
in our own eyes; they closed with Christ in a way of pride and presumption
only: 2. Their gifts were not renewing and sanctifying; they made them useful
to the Church, but did not change their hearrs: they were tinkling cymbals, in
their lovely expressions, but not vessels of gold in any divine and lively
impressions: their Speech and Spirit did not walk hand in hand together. 3.
Their taste was neither refreshing nor ravishing, it did not draw the Soul after
a farther and fuller enlargement and enjoyment of Christ; they had but slight
and loose desires after Christ and Salvation: bare glances of heavenly glory,
may stir up an overly wish, even in a very Sorcerer, causing him to say, [Oh
let me dye the death of the righteous] Numb. 23. 10. but this falls far short
of those serious longings of Soul after Christ, and after grace and strength,
to serve him with our spirits in the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1. 9. 'Twas, alas,
but a taste they had, as a Cook may taste of his Masters sauce, but he lets none
go down; their taste neither refreshed nor ravished them, as a right taste of
Christ does, Psalm. 34. 8. a little makes us long for more, it makes us long for
larger Communion with Christ in his graces, as well as in his comforts.

8. Common Grace is distinguishable from special Grace; (1.) As it comes from a
common Original, as from Illumination, Conviction, etc. Common things to the
bad as well as the good, if sitting alike under the droppings of the Sanctuary,
where the Hammer of the Word is always battering: Though some there be which
(as the Anvile) grow harder by beating; yet others there be, that cannot bear
off the blow; but (as Herod, Mark 6. 20.) are wrought on and brought up to do
many things: This is found in Servants as well as in Sons: You must labor for
that Grace which never was, nor ever can be given to a Reprobate. The Original
Cause of Grace is threefold; 1. Primary. 2. Meritorious. 3. Immediate. As to
the Primary Cause; first, Special Grace flows from Election, from the Electing
Love of God, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. But common Grace comes not from God, as he
gives out Elective Love to some, but as he is the Author of common Gifts to
many. Secondly, The Meritorious Cause. Special Grace is from Christ, as a
Redeemer of those that receive it; Common Grace is from Christ as a Benefactor
to them that receive it; and though as (a) Redeemer, yet not as (their)
Redeemer. 3ly. The Immediate and next efficient Cause of special Grace is, the
indwelling Spirit, (called the Seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. and The Divine Nature,
2 Pet. 1. 4. A living principle from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.) But the
next efficient Cause of common Grace is, the Spirit only assisting [but not
indwelling,] casting some supernatural light upon the Soul of man. The second
difference 'twixt Common and Special Grace is, Common Grace is seated in a
common spirit; so called, because it cannot do more than others, Mat. 5. 47.
Such a Spirit cannot do any singular things for God, and such as are above a
common and ordinary Attainment: Hence it is, that when Special Grace loses its
luster, and an overly Indifferency seiseth upon the Soul, it is hard to
distinguish it from common Grace; save only, That special Grace is sensible of
it, and bewails it; but common Grace is too too-well contented with it. But
Caleb was of another (and better) Spirit, Numb. 14. 24. The third Difference,
Common Grace has only common effects, their profession of Godliness and
performance of Duties are but common things, flowing rather from a work on
them, than in them; it is rather a forced than a natural work from a new Nature;
it is rather a flash, than a fire of divine affection; a transient motion, but
no abiding principle. The truths of the Word (which they sit under) passes
through them, as water through a Conduit-pipe, leaves only a dew, but sinks not
in, as rainwater into the earth, to make it fruitful: a bare taste of any dish
(though never so good) nourishes not into strength and stature: Therefore has
it (4.) Common defects; as 1. It minds not the intrinsecal wickedness of the
heart. Nor 2. The spiritual exactness of the Law. 3. Common Grace minds mostly
Negative Precepts. 4. If positive, not in their full extent as to occasions and
circumstances. 5. It Is a stranger to the mystery of the new birth. 6. It Is
without fear of being deceived, being more exercised in Self-flattery, than in
Self-reflection; using rather the false glasses of Satan, than the Spectacles
of the Spirit. 7. It Is always barren; If Grace be not right in respect of its
root, it must always be defective in respect of the fruit, so comes to nothing
at last, Heb. 6.6, 7. 2 Pet. 2.20. This is the Grace that may finally be fallen
from; Time and Temptation wears off the gilt, and turns seeming Sanctity into
real Sensuality: many young Saints (Seraphick in their Knowledge, and seeming
to have their eyes fixed to the Stars) prove but old Devils, and fall at last
into the pit of Sensuality. Oh keep your hearts, etc.

FINIS.

