Extract of the States General their Resolution.
Thursday, 28th. October. 1688.
UPon mature deliberation, it is found fit, and resolved, that notice be given
to all their Ministers abroad, of all the Reasons which induce their H. and M.
to assist the Prince of Orange, going over to England in Person, with Ships and
Forces', with Orders to the said Ministers, to make use thereof in the several
Courts where they reside, as they shall think most convenient; and that it be
also writ to the said Ministers, that it is known to all the World, that the
English Nation, has of a good while, very much murmured and complained, that
the King (no doubt, with the Evil Council, and inducement of his Ministers) had
gained upon their Fundamental Laws, and labored through the violation thereof;
and by the bringing in the Roman Catholic Religion, to oppress their Liberty,
and to ruin the Protestant Religion, and to bring all under an Arbitrary
Government: That as this inverted and unjust Conduct was carried on more and
more, and that the apprehensions thereupon were still greater, and that thereby
such diffidence, and aversion, was stirred up against the King, that nothing
was to be expected in that Kingdom but general disorder and confusion. His
Highness the Prince of Orange, upon the manifold representations, and the
reiterated and earnest desire, which was made to His Highness by several Lords,
and other Persons of great consideration in that Kingdom; as also upon the
account, that Her Royal Highness, and His Highness Himself, are so highly
concerned in the Welfare of that Kingdom, could not well endure, that through
strife and disunion, they should run the danger, however it went, of being
excluded from the Crown, held himself obliged to watch over the Welfare of that
Kingdom, and to take care thereof; and also had the thoughts of assisting the
Nation, and giving them a helping hand, upon so many Just and Good Grounds,
against the Government that Oppressed them in all manner of ways that lay in
his Highness Power, for that His Highness was persuaded that the Welfare of
this State (the Care whereof is also entrusted to him) was in the highest
manner concerned, that the said Kingdom might continue in Tranquillity, and
that all misunderstanding between the King and the Nation might be taken away.
That His Highness well knowing, that to succeed in so Important and Laudable a
Cause, and not to be hindered and prevented by those that were Evil inclined
toward it, it was necessary to pass over into that Kingdom accompanied with
some Military Forces, has thereupon made known his Intentions to their
Highness, and desired assistance from their Highness, that their Highness
having maturely weighed all things, and considered that the King of France, and
Great Britain, stood in very good Correspondence and Friendship one with the
other, which their Highness have been frequently very well assured of, and in a
strict and particular Alliance; and that their Highnesses were informed and
advertised, that their Majesty's had labored upon a concert to divide and
separate this State from its Alliances; and that the King of France has upon
several occasions showed himself dissatisfied with this State, which gave cause
to fear and apprehend, that in case the King of Great Britain should happen to
compass his aim within his Kingdom, and obtain an absolute power over his
People, that then both Kings, out of Interest of State, and Hatred and Zeal
against the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to bring this State to
Confusion, and if possible, quite to Subject it, have resolved to commend His
Highness in his undertaking of the abovesaid Designs, and to grant to him, for
his Assistance, some Ships and Militia, as Auxiliaries; that in pursuance
thereof, His Highness has declared to their Highness, that he is resolved,
with Gods Grace and Favor, to go over into England, not with the least insight
or intention to Invade or Subdue that Kingdom, or to remove the King from the
Throne, much less to make himself Master thereof, or to invert or prejudice the
Lawful Succession, as also not to drive thence, or persecute, the Roman
Catholics, but only and solely to help that Nation in Re-establishing the Laws
and Privileges that have been broken, as also in maintaining their Religion
and Liberty, and to that end, to further and bring it about, that a free and
lawful Parliament may be called in such manner, and of such Persons, as is
regulated and qualified by the Laws and Form of that Government, and that the
said Parliament may deliberate upon, and establish, all such matters as shall
be judge'd necessary to assure and secure the Lords, the Clergy, Gentry, and
People, that their Rights, Laws and Privileges, shall be no more violated or
broken, that their High and Mightinesses hope and trust, that with Gods
blessing, the Repose and Unity of that Kingdom shall be Reestablished, and the
same be thereby brought into a condition, to be able, powerfully, to concur to
the common benefit of Christendom, and to the restoring and maintaining of
Peace and Tranquillity in Europe. That Copies hereof be delivered to all their
Foreign Ministers, residing here, to be used by them as they shall see occasion.

FINIS.

