The New and Strange Imprisonment Of the People called QUAKERS In the CITY of
BRISTOL.
By Nailing them up in their Meeting House the 7th. of the third Month called
May, 1682.
And the Result of the Trial, upon the tence of a Riot against them. Signified
by Persons of Credit, and immediate Sufferers in the said City. To be added to
their late Distressed Ease.
They shall be Ashamed of their Envy against my People,

Isa. 26. 11. Bristol Newgate Prison, the 8th of the 3d Month May, 1682. Dear
Friend,
AS to our Meeting Yesterday, the Sheriff, etc. came about Ten in the Morning:
Proclamation was made. The Meeting not departing immediately thereupon he
caused the Doors to be Nailed up upon them, (having first sent seven Men
Friends hither) and so kept Eight^ seven Women and fourteen till three in the
Afternoon, (which was five Hours in that Confinement in their Meeting Room)
allowing no way out for any Necessity: Which was not only Arbitrary, but an
Inhumane Act.

In the Afternoon, the Meeting was at the Door of the other Meeting House;
whereto came Tilly, etc. This Meeting began, as usual, about Twelve. Friends
not departing on Command, were Fastened in, there also; and kept in the Rain
(it being an open Court) till between four and five in the Afternoon. And then
many, or most of them, were had to the Tolzey, before the Deputy Mayor John
Hix. Who after a while was pleased to let them all go home, to appear to day,
which many of them did. The Prosecutors aim to make a Riot of this Afternoon
Meeting: Because when the Door was opened, our Friends pressed to go out, to go
to their Homes. The Justices to day could not accord about it: So they were
dismissed till to Morrow Morning. A more punctual Account, I hope some Friends
will send up. The seven men were sent for from hence also, and Discharged.
Doubtless its not the Kings mind, that under color of Execution of the Law, we
should be abused contrary thereunto. We are now Nineteen Prisoners here.

Thy Affectionate Loving Friend.

Bristol the 10th of the 3d. Month May 1682.
LAst Post a short Account was given of the Disturbance of our two Meetings the
last First day, the Issue of which was not determined till Yesterday, when a
Jury was Impannelled, in order to Enquire after a Riot. Patrick the Abusive
Constable and Informer, Swore at a great rate, and so did another, (whose Name
I have not yet an Account of.) The substance was, that about Thirty of the
Women came and forcibly opened the Door, and laying Hands on him, they Rescued
themselves from the place they were Confined to.

The Justices were not very Credulous of the Informers, knowing the
Improbability of our Women Friends laying Violent Hands on the Officers; so
gave the Women liberty to make their own Defense, which was performed in good
Language, and very Succinct. They told the Justices, how they were there
Peaceably met. And how the Officers and Informers Guarded the Door, and
Imprisoned them; by reason they did not immediately depart, after their
Proclamation. That after this Confinement, they took liberty to call out six or
eight, (one while) and dismiss them. Then to call again, and do the same to
another, such like.

Further, the one Informer commanded several of them to Bridewell: And yet
Helliar called them back, after they were far on their way; and remanded them
to the Confinement at there Meeting place. That when the usual time was come for
their Departure. They rose in a Body, and were going Peaceably away. That some
of them were got almost as far as the Street, without any molestation. And that
then, they were all brought back again to the Confinement of the Meeting place,
and there kept in the Rain. The Informers, without regard to their Sex; Age or
Quality, (some of which were considerable, as Martha the late Widow of Sheriff
^^^ne, her Sister Sarah Can, Mary Gouldney, Mary Wall, etc. taking up the
places of shelter, to Drink Ale, and Smoke Tobacco in. In short, the defense
the Women made, had so effect, that first the Justices were divided, and some
argued for them, Old Sir John Knight in particular. (For which he was Abused on
the Bench, and had Reflection cast on him, by Brand the Sheriffs Companion.)
And next, the Jury would not believe the Informers; so brought in their Verdict
No Riot, but guilty of an Unlawful Assembly. This Verdict so displeased the
Sheriff, that he Menaced the Jury with having them up to London: Saying, If he
could not have Justice here, he would have it there. The Jury's Verdict is
grateful to the most Discreet, Substantial Magistrates and the Sober Citizens;
though the Informers Huff at it, taking all amiss, that does not quadrate with
their wicked designs.

The Inhumanity and Baseness of John Helliar, Sheriff Knight, etc. Is much
cried out against, in that they brought Nails and Hammer to Nail up the Morning
Meeting House, and there kept the Women and Men together, well nigh six Hours,
without any Convenience of Ease or Refreshment to Nature. And this Hilliar was
so sensible of, that he told them, next time they should Chamber-Potts. Its too
large to insist on all their Sordid Abuses. So I refer to another time.
Yesterday the Meeting again Disturbed: And on the occasion of an Ancient man
speaking two or three words, their Names taken, and the Meeting made a
Conventicle; which is what they greedily aim at.

Bristol the 13th of the 3d. Month 1682.
YEsterday, by that time about 30 Friends were met, in their
Meeting-House-yard; the Sheriff, etc. came, who strictly examined Friends, as
he uses to do, what they do there, commanding the Kings Peace to be kept. A
Serious Woman Friend told him, We do keep the Kings Peace, and we came here to
keep our Peace with the King of Kings. The Sheriff was pleased to send her and
three Women more to Newgate: Whence after about six Hours they were let go home
to appear to day; which they attended to do, but were not called for, (so that
is over.) So small occasion the Sheriff can take to send Friends to Prison.
Several Justices care not to be forward in this work.

Thy Affectionate Loving Friend.


