THE LETTER Sent by the States General of the UNITED PROVINCES Of the Low
Countries TO HIS MAJESTY, By their Trumpeter: Together with His MAJESTY'S
ANSWER To the said Letter.

Translated out of French into English.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by His MAJESTY'S Printers: Anno DOM. 1673.

THE LETTER Sent by the STATES GENERAL Of the United Provinces TO HIS MAJESTY,
By their Trumpeter.
SIRE,
AS we have never desired any thing more then to merit the good Will of Your
Majesty, and to cultivate a Friendship which had been heretofore Hereditary
between Your Majesty's Kingdom and this Republic; so we were beyond measure
troubled when we saw Your Majesty exasperated against us, and that by the
Artifices of evil minded persons, Your Subjects and Ours have been overwhelmed
with those miseries which are inseparable from War, and brought to shed that
blood which has been always dear to either side. The sad experience we had
thereof on both parts in the preceding War, had given us cause to believe at
the same time, that after we were reunited, the Peace would be a blessing
which was no more to be ravished from us. And we were the rather persuaded of
it, because the New Alliances we were entered into, seemed able to make our
Union eternal: But seeing Divine Providence, for the Chastisement of the two
Nations, has permitted that things should not continue long in that happy
estate, we no sooner perceived a Misunderstanding arise, but we thought our
selves obliged to use all imaginable endeavors to stop the progress of it, and
to omit nothing that might contribute to the preventing so great an evil as
that of a Rupture. In order to which, being certainly informed that Your
Majesty was offended at a Medal, which we had not suffered to be sold, but that
we thought it very innocent, we immediately suppressed it, and caused the very
Stamps to be broken, for fear there might be some made secretly; And to give
Your Majesty essential proofs of the esteem we had of Your Friendship, we
yielded to Your Majesty whatever You were pleased to demand of us in behalf of
the Inhabitants of Surinam, how prejudicial soever the thing were to us, and
whatsoever reason we otherwise had not to consent to it. At the same time we
sent the Sieur Van Beuningen to Your Majesty for removing, if it were possible,
the sinister impressions which some labored to possess Your Majesty with, and
for perfecting a Regulation proposed by Your Majesty's Ambassador between Your
East India Company and Ours. Since that, although the little success which the
said Sieur Van Beuningens Negotiation had had, gave us but too great cause to
fear that we should not succeed better for the future; yet we no sooner
understood that there were some who would persuade Your Majesty, as well
against all likelihood of truth, as truth it self, That we treated underhand
with France to the prejudice of Your Majesty's interests, but we gave order
without delay to our Ambassador with Your Majesty, to declare to Your Majesty
in our name, That to show the falsehood of those reports which were spread
abroad to our disadvantage, and to give Your Majesty essential and
unquestionable marks of the sincerity of our intentions, we were ready to enter
into such an Alliance with You, as You should think fit, how strict soever it
should be, and to go far beyond any thing we had hitherto done, for securing
the Peace of Europe. Then followed the affair of the Flagg, wherein we think
our conduct has been with all imaginable respect toward Your Majesty's
Person: And although the Answer we gave to Your Ambassadors Memorial be such,
as we shall always be ready to submit to the judgment of all Europe, Yet upon
complaint that it was obscure and insufficient, we sent an Ambassador
extraordinary to Your Majesty, and gave power to him, as also to our ordinary
Ambassador, to clear what should be thought obscure, and to add what should be
necessary. But in stead of entering into regular Conferences with them, and
letting them know what was defective in our Answer, they were neglected, and no
Conference granted them upon the point which might have ended all our
differences, till an hour after Your Majesty's Declaration of War had been read
and approved in Your Council.

All this, SIRE, does sufficiently evidence, with what application and zeal we
have labored to satisfy Your Majesty, and to extinguish in its beginning, a
Fire which is ready to consume all Christendom. And as we have not entered into
this War, but from an indispensable necessity of defending and protecting our
Subjects, we have ever since the Rupture, as much as we were able, sought Your
Majesty's Friendship, and never given over the making overtures of Peace. Upon
which account, we sent our Deputies Extraordinary to Your Majesty the last year
in the month of June, in the year, 1672. who were confined to Hampton Court,
without having any Audience given them, or being heard what they had to say on
our part. A Minister from the Elector of Brandenburgh passed also into England
upon the same subject, and charged himself at our request, with the
representing to Your Majesty, the ardent desire we had to see Your Majesty
entertain other sentiments, and our disposition to do any thing in our power,
to acquire again the honor of Your Majesty's good correspondence. Since that,
upon the Proposition made by the Mediators of a general Truce, for as much as
according to our judgment, we could not consent to it without hazarding the
safety of our States; yet to evidence to Your Majesty, how great a desire we
had to give you all possible marks of our Respect, and to the end to procure to
Your Subjects, all the advantages which they could have received from a general
Truce, we offered one by Sea to Your Majesty for the term of a year, or a
longer time, if Your Majesty thought convenient; judging, that in the condition
things were then in, we could not give a greater proof of the ardent passion we
had to smooth the way to a happy Reconciliation, then by putting all Your
Majesty's Subjects into a condition of tasting the sweetness of Peace, while
ours should suffer all the incommodities of War. The Ministers of the King of
Spain have represented the same things from time to time to Your Majesty, and
have often repeated their instances to incline Your Majesty to Peace: But
besides all these advances, and the steps we have made in public, we have made
use of other means which we judged more efficacious; And his Highness the
Prince of Orange, as well of his own inclination, as at the request we have
several times reiterated to him, has used all imaginable ways of regaining
the honor of Your Majesty's friendship for us, and representing to You the
advantage and glory Your Majesty might acquire, by re-establishing the Quiet of
Christendom, and giving us a Peace which we had so often and so ardently
desired. But albeit we had all reason to hope, that the instances of a Prince
who has the honor to be so nearly related to Your Majesty, and whose personal
merit is so well known, would at last prevail over those who are ill-affected
to us; and that besides we could hardly believe, that after His Highnesses
interests and ours were become common, and were no longer separate in any
thing, Your Majesty would retain Your former sentiments, and go about to
involve in our ruin one of the most Illustrious Princes of Your blood; we have
nevertheless with great sorrow seen, that all these reasons have been alike
weak, and that Your Majesty has not been induced by any motive to abate any
thing of Your first rigor. So that when we expected a favorable Answer to our
Overtures, it has been declared to us at Cologne, that no Peace was to be
hoped, unless there were accorded, not only to Your Majesty and the Most
Christian King, but also to the Elector of Cologne and the Bishop of Munster,
such Conditions as never were demanded of a Free People, and which can so
little be proposed as Articles of Peace, that they can only be the consequences
of an Absolute Conquest, the subversion of the Reformed Religion, of which Your
Majesty and the Kings Your most Illustrious Predecessors, have been the
strongest Support and Defenders, and which carried with them at once the utter
ruin not only of us, but also of the Low Countries belonging to the King of
Spain.

This has obliged us on our side, after we had resolved upon a necessary
defense, to press our Friends to enter into a stricter Alliance with us; And
it has pleased GOD so to bless our endeavors, and the means we have used in
order thereunto, that the most August House of Austria has declared in our
favor, and the most Serene King of Spain in particular has concluded with us
a League Offensive and Defensive, in pursuance whereof he has already declared
War against the King of France. Things being thus, SIRE, Your Majesty will
easily believe that the consequences must be greater, but before the evil be
past remedy, we thought fit to make one final essay, and to assure Your
Majesty, that whatsoever change has happened in Europe, our deference and
respect for Your Majesty is still the same; and that how considerable and how
potent soever our Allies are, we are not the less disposed to give Your
Majesty all the satisfaction which You can reasonably pretend; And we have this
happiness, that our Allies are of the same mind with us herein; we presume
therefore to hope that Your Majesty will not refuse at our request and their
intercession, what we have not been hitherto able to obtain; And that You will
not augment the desolation which is already but too universal.

But that we may omit nothing that may dispose Your Majesty thereunto, we
beseech You to reflect upon all that has passed since the beginning of the
War, and at the same time to consider that it is from a particular one become
general. When Your Majesty engaged in it, we were the only Enemies; At present
a great part of Europe is no less interessed therein then we; And Your Majesty
cannot continue a War, which has already been so ruinous, without declaring it
against those who are united with us, and without hazarding the Safety of all
Christendom, if the Arms of the King of France should be victorious through the
succors given by Your Majesty to him. And Your Majesty can no longer take it
ill that we yield not what Your Majesty might demand of us for France, since by
an indispensible necessity we can no longer do it but with the agreement of our
Allies. So that as the General Treaty appears accompanied with many
difficulties, and that we foresee that it will be a means to continue this
unhappy War, which we desire to put an end to speedily, especially with Your
Majesty, we shall think our selves very happy if any of these considerations
may make impression upon Your Majesty's mind, and dispose You to resume those
sentiments which we have heretofore with joy observed in Your Majesty, and in
which, upon the reconciliation we promise to our selves, we doubt not but Your
Majesty will continue for ever. In the mean time we pray God,

SIRE, To crown Your Majesty's Reign with felicity, and to bless Your Royal
Person with health and long life. At the Hague, the 25. of October, 1673. Your
MAJESTY'S Most humble Servants, The States General of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries. GASP. FAGEL. By Command of the abovesaid, H. FAGEL.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER To the Letter sent from the STATES GENERAL OF THE UNITED
PROVINCES Of the Low Countries, by their Trumpeter.
High and Mighty Lords,
ALthough your Letter of the 15th / 25 of October, considering the present
conjuncture of affairs, the matter it contains, and the manner of sending it by
a Trumpeter, when your Deputies at Cologne were in frequent Conferences with
Our Plenipotentiaries there, have more of the nature of a Manifest then a
Letter, and that consequently you may not perhaps desire to have any Answer
made to it; yet for the Vindication of Our Honor, as well as for the
undeceiving that part of the World which may be abused by it, We would not
suffer it to remain without a distinct Reply, from point to point as they lie
in your Paper (which We send you by the same hand that brought Us yours;) and
the rather because it may so have fallen out, that by the great revolutions
which have lately happened in your affairs, and the change of your Ministers,
even your selves may have taken for truth what evil-minded persons have so
maliciously suggested to you, thereby to seduce your own people as well as Ours.

There will need no great proofs to convince the World that many offensive
Medals, Inscriptions and Libels were these last years past dispersed every
where in your Provinces, to the derogation of Our Honor, and that of the whole
English Nation, since the notoriety of them was so universal: but to this day
neither We nor any body else knew ye had disowned any part of them, until your
aforesaid Letter told Us you had at the time they were complained of to your
Ambassador here, caused the Stamps to be broken, for fear new Impressions
should be secretly made by them, neither do you tell Us that ever you inflicted
the least Punishment upon the makers or dispersers of them.

As to the affair of Surinam; Could you make the World or Our People believe
what in this Paper you affirm, your selves would have outdone your Medals, and
would be more injurious then they, fastening a Reproach upon Us which We have
been as far from deserving, as you, We hope, will be from being believed in the
accusation. You say, you agreed to whatsoever We demanded in favor of Our
subjects remaining at Surinam. Did We not continually press their Release from
the time of Our Surrendering that place into your hands, till the beginning of
this present War, and is there not yet the greater part of them remaining
there? Are they there detained your Slaves at Our desire? Did We send Our Ships
thither only for a color, with intention to subject them to your Tyranny more
entirely and with the greater decency? and not to deliver them from it? Was not
the Officer We sent thither, Major Banister, confined presently upon his
arrival, and not suffered to speak with his Country men, or acquaint them with
the care We had of them? Did he not protest against the Governor for having
broken the Capitulation in Eighteen several points? And will you say all this
was done according to what We desired? Had you been so tender of the blood of
both Nations as in your Paper you pretend, you would not so long, and with so
much obstinacy have persisted in oppressing those Our Subjects whom you detain
in that Colony. And it is manifest, that if you could cast all the blame hereof
upon Us, you have a mind to do it. All We can say therefore to this your
assertion, is, That you have indeed granted Us in words all We asked, but that
We have never obtained any thing of you in deeds.

What followed, was the pretended Satisfaction you say you offered at all times
to make Us in relation to the Trade of Our Subjects in the East Indies. It was
solemnly promised by the Treaty of Breda, that things should be adjusted by
Commissioners to be sent hither by you when there should be more leisure for
it. But you well know that Our Ambassador whom We sent after the said Treaty to
reside with you, could obtain nothing in that matter by all his instances that
could in any wise satisfy Our East India Company. Nor did the Sieur Van
Beuningen, who seemed to have come hither expressly upon that account, offer any
more in all his Conferences with Our Commissioners upon that subject. It is
true, the Ambassador Boreel produced here a full Power from you to treat and
conclude an Offensive and Defensive League with Us, but We could not accept the
Proposition, because the conditions of it were not sufficiently equitable; and
that instead of giving Us satisfaction in Our complaints, he would never so
much as admit of their being mentioned. On the contrary, his whole discourse
tended to nothing else but to persuade Us, that the States General offered Us
this League as a mark of their Friendship, and for Our security alone, seeming
indifferent whether it were accepted or not; and magnifying continually the
greatness of your Forces by Land and Sea, as sufficient to defend you against
the formidable power of France; and often threatening Us, that you could make
such a League whenever you pleased with France, and even against Us, if We
accepted not what his Masters offered Us. The sum of these two points is, That
the Sieur Van Beuningen was pleased to discourse concerning the Satisfaction
demanded by Us in point of Trade in the East Indies, but departed without
offering any thing; and the Sieur Boreel offered Us a League Offensive and
Defensive, without giving Us Satisfaction for the past Injuries, or security
against future; And all this to the end the Injuries We had complained of, that
till then were peculiarly your Acts, might by a solemn Treaty be declared Our
own.

The next matter of offense given Us was (as you well observe in your Letter)
the affront committed against Our Flagg in the month of August, 1671.
Complaint was made thereof to your Ambassador residing here, and he assured Us
he would procure Us a fair satisfaction thereupon: but three or four months
time passing, without the least notice being taken thereof by you, We held Our
Self obliged to send our Extraordinary Ambassador to demand Satisfaction of you
in more earnest terms then We had done before; To which not receiving any
satisfactory Answer, he had order to return. Soon after he was followed by an
Extraordinary Ambassador from you, who affirmed that he had no Powers to make
reparation for this affront, or any other of those things We had so often
complained of, but to agree upon terms of Regulation in the business of the
Flagg for the future; yet saying withal, that of himself and without
consulting you again, he could not put any thing in writing concerning it. The
arrival of the said Ambassador Extraordinary was about the time We were ready
to make open Declaration of War against your State; which We could no longer
delay, because the Spring was coming on, and the said Ambassador persisted,
that his Instructions permitted him not to do any thing upon Our Demands;
neither was he able to produce any thing to justify his delay, but the
offering Us to write to his Masters for larger Powers and Instructions.

The War following upon this, In the heat of it, Three Deputies arrived here
from you without any Passports from Us, or giving Us notice of their coming,
according to the Customs and Usages of War. Whereupon We might well have
confined them (as you say We did) but We contented Our Self with warning them
to abstain from coming to lodge in this Our City, appointing them instead
thereof, Lodgings in Our Palace of Hampton Court, with all other conveniences
suitable to their Character, and dissembling what We knew passed between them
and persons they practiced upon to cause tumults and disorders in Our City, or
to disturb the progress of the War. Notwithstanding which, We forbore not to
send to them some of the Principal persons of Our Council, to confer with
them and hear their Proposals. To whom they made this only Answer, and
persisted therein to the time of their departure, that they had no Authority or
Instructions to make any Propositions, but were content to hearken to those
that should be made to them, and to transmit them to their Masters; hoping that
while they amused Us with this appearance, the Deputies you had sent at the
same time to the Most Christian King, might have concluded a separate Treaty
with him.

And can you flatter your selves with the opinion, that the World should look
upon this proceeding as a convincing proof of your ardent desires for Peace?
Did ever Prince or state send an Ambassador with design to obtain that which
the Ambassador was not empowered either to conclude or sign, especially to a
Prince with whom they had War? It is much more rational to believe what you did
was to gain time, whilst you endeavored to put in execution those threats in
relation to France, that the Sieur Boreel had before given us.

The Minister of Brandenburgh never declared that he came hither to make Us any
overtures of Peace, or that he had any other Commission then to incline Us, at
the recommendation of His Master, to hearken to those that should be made Us.
He came hither at the time that the Ambassador Extraordinary of His most Serene
Majesty the King of Sweden arrived, in order to the offering Us the Mediation
of their Master, which We readily embraced, as likewise a Proposition made by
them to Us for a Suspension of Arms. But a little after, when they proposed the
same thing to you, you thought fit absolutely to reject the Suspension; and
were so long bargaining upon the choice of a place for treating the Peace, that
many months passed without producing any other effect, then your gaining your
point in naming the City of Cologne for the Congress: Which being agreed to,
and Our Fleet ready to put to Sea, you sent Us word you would then accept a
Cessation of Arms by Sea. To which We found Our Self obliged to make answer,
That a Peace might be made in much less time then the terms of a Partial
Suspension be agreed upon: although it appeared to Us a mere artifice, invented
only to charm the Common Peoples ears, and make Us consume unprofitably all Our
preparations for equipping Our Fleet. In a word, when Our Merchants might
really have received benefit by a Suspension, you absolutely refused it, and
would then only yield to it when you saw your Provinces like to suffer by the
progress of the War.

The Ministers of Spain never offered Us any Conditions: nor performed any
other Office, then in general terms to incline Us to the thoughts of Peace,
which We ever accepted kindly from them.

Neither did Our Nephew the Prince of Orange, ever make Us any Overtures for
Peace: We must needs avow, That the manner of your comportment toward him,
till the year last past, was no very good Argument to persuade Us, that your
intentions of living in a good correspondence with Us, were real and sincere:
And although We were unwilling to show Our resentment of his usage publicly,
lest We should give occasion to his enemies to do him more harm; yet so soon as
the good will of the people prevailing against the Louvestein Party, had
conferred upon him that Power and Authority in the Government which his
Ancestors had so well merited, We applied Our self with more zeal and efficacy
to make the Peace; being further encited thereunto by the unexpected success of
the Arms by Land of the most Christian King. We forthwith sent Ambassadors
extraordinary to him, to be present at the Treaty; which the Louvestein Party
would have managed to the excluding of Us, if the Virtue and Generosity of that
Prince would have permitted him to admit it: But so soon as Our Ambassadors
were seen upon the place, the Deputies withdrew themselves, and never after
appeared; following that fundamental Maxim you had laid from the beginning of
this War, to divide Us by any kind of Artifices, thereof to make your own
advantage.

As to your insinuation of Our intention to ruin Our Nephew the Prince of
Orange, ye know your selves sufficiently the injustice of that reproach. And
whilst at Cologne you openly complain to the Mediators, that We are too zealous
in advancing his Interests, you would have our Subjects believe We are guilty
of ill nature toward him. And the better to improve this abuse you add,
without giving or having any the least ground for it, that Our demands at
Cologne tend to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and the ruin of Our
Nephews family. We cannot conclude Our remarks upon this Letter or Manifest
framed by you, with design to abuse your people and Ours, and involved in terms
of respect for Our Person, and fair words about a Peace, without adding what
ought to be convincing to the most obstinate amongst you; At the same time you
would persuade Us to break Our Word and Faith given to Our Allies, not to Treat
separately, you establish it for a fundamental point, that you cannot break the
word you have given yours, without wronging your honor; as if your honor
ought always to be dear to you, but Ours of little or no value with Us.

In the mean time, you make the proceedings of your Deputies at Cologne to pass
for the fairest and most ingenuous that may be, reproaching that of Our
Plenipotentiaries as rude and insincere; saying, That notwithstanding all your
endeavors, We would never yet abate of Our first rigor. Herein we appeal to
the Mediators themselves, who will not be wanting to do Us justice, in letting
the World know, that Our said Plenipotentiaries have retrenched at least one
half of their first demands, whilst yours have continually excused themselves
from giving an answer upon any one of them, except that of the Flagg, with
which they seem inclined to gratify Us for the future, but in terms very
equivocal, and which shall not take notice of any right We ever had to it for
the time past: And this is the only thing you have shown the least disposition
to yield to Us, during the whole course of this Negotiation: And having made no
further advance in the overtures of Peace, which you say you made Us by Our
Nephew the Prince of Orange, the Ministers of Spain and Brandenburgh, and by
those of the Mediators themselves, you do not so much as mention one word of it
in your said Letter; handling the matter of the Peace in general terms, to
acquire to your selves the reputation of it, and not making Us one Proposition
but that of dividing Us from Our Allies; an Action which you esteem too low for
a Commonwealth, but suitable enough to a King.

If you have a desire to promote the Peace in good Earnest, instead of specious
expressions, send Powers without further delay to your Deputies at Cologne, to
draw up Just and Equal Articles with Ours; and the World shall see how ready We
shall be to Comply with them, and to resume those sentiments of Friendship and
esteem, which the Kings Our Predecessors have always had for your State: And to
manifest to you that we are truly

From Whitehall, the 7th. of November, 1673. Your good Friend, CHARLES R.

FINIS.

