A Philosophical and Divine DISCOURSE Blazoning upon this Blazing STAR: Divided
into Three Parts;

The I. Treating on the Product, Form, Color, Motion, Situation, and
Signification of COMETS.

II. Contains the Prognostics of Comets in General, and of this in particular;
together with a CHRONOLOGY of all the Comets for the last 400 years.

III. Consists of (1.) the Explication of the grand Concerns of this COMET by
Astrological Precepts and Presidents. (2.) The Application of its probable
Prognostics Astrologically and Theologically.

By Christopher Nesse, Minister of the Gospel, in London, 1681.

A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Late BLAZING-STAR: With some probable
Prognostics upon what may be its Effects.
ABlazing Star is called a Comet from the Latin word Coma, the Hair, because it
seems to send forth Streamers of flaming Hair to those that behold it a far
off. There be various Opinions of Authors concerning those Comets: some whereof
are so improbable, that only to report them, is enough to refute them. As, 1.
Democritus dreamed that Comets were the Souls of famous Men triumphing in
Heaven. 2. Thaddeus thinks that they are the Secrets of Nature, and (like the
occult Quality of Philosophers) ought not to be enquired after. 3. Paracelsus
supposes that they are Fires carried about by Spirits which are conscious of
their own Fates. 4. Anaxagoras imagines them to be a Conjunct Apparition of
Planets; because when Planets come near together they seem to touch one
another, and that Conjunction of 2 or 3 Lights into one, causes the
Phoenomenon, or Appearance of a longer Star; which by varying its Place,
varieth its Form also. 5, Appianus and Proetorius (both) acknowledge that
Comets are Meteors, or Vapors exhaled, yet deny that they are inflamed, or fer
on fire in their own Bodily Matter, but only enlightened by the Refract Rays of
the Sun and other Stars, both upon its Body and Tail. 6. But this last Opinion
of Aristotle is most probable; that a Comet is a Fiery Meteor made up of
Copious, Viscous and Fat Vapors, drawn up into the highest Region of the Air
by the influence of the Sun and Stars; and then when it is ripened, takes
Fire, and shines in the Figure of a Star, to the Astonishment of all its
Beholders. Besides those (properly called) Comets engendered in the Elementary
Region, it is supposed there be some other new Stars sometimes seen above the
Moon in the Aetherial Region, such as that which appeared in Cassiopoea, in the
Year 1574. every way like a Star in Form and Light, save only its Splendour and
Magnitude exceeded the greatest of Planets. This could not properly be called a
Comet: 1. Because it removed not from that Point of Heaven wherein it first
appeared, but kept constant in the Constellation till it disappeared. 2.
Because it continued in view for a whole Year, and more than a Quarter. 3.
Because it had neither Hair nor Tail or Train, as Comets have; which likewise
remove from one part of Heaven to another, and never continue so long as that
did. It Is not improbable that such new Stars God (for a time) withdraws from
Men's sight, that the Sign of his Anger or Favor might be the more admired:
For these do not waste away, as (properly called) Comets do; but only lie hid
from the Eye, seeing Heaven cannot admit of new Bodies. That Star which
appeared to the Wife Men, Matthew. 2. was not a Natural, but a Miraculous Star.
1. Because it shone not in the Celestial, but in the Elementary Region; yea, in
the lowest part of it, so as to guide the three Men to a certain House over
which it stood. 2. Because it had not the Motion of a Natural Star, but such as
was Accommodated every way to the Travel of the Wise Men. 3. Its Progress was
unequal, sometimes Appearing, and sometimes Disappearing. 4. It did not only
shine forth by Night, but also by Day. Yea, 5. With such a Splendor, as far
exceeded, not only that of the Stars, but also the Sun it self; as Ignatius,
Chrisostom, etc. do testify. Some say, that Star in Matthew. 2. was the Holy
Ghost which appeared (at Christ's Baptism) in the Form of a Dove, as at his
Birth in the Form of a Star, being most Consentaneous to those Eastern Sages:
For as a mighty Draught of Fish was the aptest Sign to make Peter (a
Fisherman) to follow Christ, so this Sign of a Star was best accommodated to
these Men of the East, it being most familiar to them in their frequent Study
of the Stars. But more probably Chrisostom judges it was an Angel [(...)] a
certain invisible Power to be the Guide of their Journey, as the Pillar of
Glory was Israel's in the Wilderness, Exodus 13.21, 22. Yea, some do affirm that
it was the same Angel who appeared also to the Shephards, Luke 2.9. But the
Elementary Comets cannot in any proper Sense) be called Stars (though their
common Name be Blazing Stars.) Because, 1. They have a different Form, no way
congruous to that of Stars. 2. They grow Greater and Lesser. 3. They have an
Uncertain and Vagabond Motion. 4. Their Matter is an Hot and Dry Exhalation,
which is Slimy and Sulphurous; and which being spent, they vanish away: Those
things hold no Congruity with proper Stars. Philosophy says, that those Comets
are composed of a Matter full of Mettalline or Mineral Vapors, which is both
thrust out of the Bowels of the Earth by an Internal Heat from the
Subterraneous Spirits, and extracted thence also by an External Heat from the
Celestial Bodies; whereby likewise it is drawn up into the Upper Region. One
part of this Fuliginous Smoke, thrusting up, and cleaving close to another,
till it become as big as a Mountain, then it hangs pendulously, and mellows
kindly into a Combustible Substance. Then takes it fire; and the Color of that
Star by whose force it is Generated and Governed: And when all this is done,
though it be of a vast Magnitude, yet through the great Distance of Place* it
seems to us as a very little Spangle or Spur-Rowel, if severed from its Train
or Streamer. Touching these Comets, These four things are principally
considerable after their Product or Generation. 1. Their Form. 2. Their Color.
3. Their Motion. 4. Their Signification. 1. Of their Form, which is various:
one Comet has a Beard, another a Tail, and a third is Hairy round about. This
flows from the Flame of the fired Vapor diversely dispersed. 1. If it spread
its Flame upon its former part, then it is called (...), Barbatus, a Bearded
Comet, as having the Flame (as a Man's Beard, or a Horses Main) hanging
downward. 2. If from the latter part the Flame sputter out behind, following
after the Body, then it is called Candatus, a Tailed Comet. But 3. If it spit
Fire from all parts round about, then is it called Crinitus, an Hairy Comet,
when it is surrounded with Rays of Fire, as the Bushy Head is with Hair. Thus
the diversity of Flames produces diversity of Forms in them, yet mostly such
as have Trains or Tails; for the hinder part (being not so compact as the
former) soonest takes Fire, and sputters out a Flame (as we see in Squibs or
Fuzzees) like a long Besomor the Tail of a Peacock. 2. Of their Color, which
Distinction they derive from the Dominion of the Planet in their Generation,
which may easily be discerned by their various Colors. Comets have their Dusky
and Leaden Color from Saturn, Splendid from Jupiter, Fiery from Mars, Golden
from the Sun, Silver from the Moon, Yellow from Venus, and of changeable
Colors from Mercury: And all these various Colors are supposed to be various
Indications of differing Natures, as the Planets (from whence they derive them)
do differ in their Natures and Influences one from another. 3. Of their Motion.
Comets are of an Erratick Motion, as the new Stars immitate the fixed Stars, so
do Comets immitate the Planets in their Motions: Some are moved according to
the Motion of the Primum Mobile (to speak ex Hypothesi) to wit, from East to
West; but some slowlier fulfilling that Motion, and others more swiftly
exceeding it. Their Motion is therefore called Erratick, because it is not
Regular and Certain, as that of the fixed Stars is, whose Rising and Setting
are certainly known; but the Motion of Comets is sometimes nearer, and
sometimes further off from the Zodiac, as the Motion of the Planets is: Yet
not altogether as the Planets, which never remove far from the Zodiac, but
have always certain and well known Bounds of their Motions: whereas Comets have
an Irregular Motion, and (as to the Zodiac) plainly Eccentrick, wandering far
from it in their remote Appearances; and though Motion from East to West be
Regular, yet this happens by Accident, only because the Upper Region of the Air
(wherein Comets are both Engendered and Fired) is whirled about with the
Heavens; hence the Comet therein wheels about with it. 4. Of their
Signification. The principal thing intended, to wit, the Prognostics of them.
It Is true, there be some who deny altogether their Significancy; as Erastus,
Gryneus, and others: but it is too too manifest that Comets are not mute things,
but that they are Signs which God places in Heaven, to preach something to Men
on Earth. No Man in his right Mind can say, that the most wise God does make
any thing in vain, or that the Father of Lights should hang out such a strange
and stupendous Light up aloft (to be seen far and wide) and this not to
portend some extraordinary thing. Consult Antiquity, there is found. 1. That
Greek Proverb, [(...),] There is no Comet which brings not some Evil. 2. That
Verse of Manilius,

[Nunquam Futilibus Resplenduit Ignibus Ether.] God never Fires his Beacon
(set upon so high a Hill) but those below had need look to themselves. 3. That
other Trite Verse (which is a Synonymon and Synbolizeth with the two former

Et Nunquam Coelo Spectati Impune Cometae That is, never does the Earth 'scape
Scot-free, when Heaven holds forth a Blazing Star to her View. This is
confirmed by all Histories, especially those of later Times, whereof I could
give many Instances. The Chronology of Comets (to go no higher than the 13th
Century after Christ to this present) does afford us most Direful Effects of
many Comets frequently appearing within that compass of time, a particular
Account whereof a single sheet cannot completely comprehend, especially to
Discourse upon them all, Phisitally, Politically and Theologically,. The Rules
of this Astrological Art (whereby to make Right Prognostications) must be
acknowledged to be Obscure and Doubtful to Instance in that one Astrological
Axiom [ That the Prognostics of Comets do depend all upon Mars and Mercury.]
T^^s is hard to be Demonstrated, for none can prove what is the Influence of
this or that Star in Heaven, as they may the Operation of Rhubarb or other
Druggs on Earth; Yet Ptolomy (with others) make this Maxim (aforesaid) thus
far probable, saying, The Effects of Comets (which are rarely Good, but mostly
Evil) are of two sorts, 1. Such things as are Savage, Bloody, Mortiferous, etc.
(portended by them) be ascribed to Mars, and other things that are Inconstant,
Moveable and Uncertain, be ascribed to Mercury. The Assertion here may be true,
though the Application be false; for Astrologorum Decreta non sunt praetoria;
their Rules are not Infallible, yet Examples have more perspicuity and
certainty in them, I shall only give the two last and latest Exemplifications
of Comets, the one in 1664, and the other in 1677. That in 64 was a forerunner
of most Dreadful Dispensations, as the Sweeping pestilence in 65 and the
Swallowing fire in 66. The former falls fowl upon Persons, the latter upon
Habitations. The last in 1677. was a forerunner of the most Damnable Plot (yea
a Complication of Plots) that ever Hell invented: Now God has lighted up
another Torch to give us a new Warning, that being forewarned we might be
forearmed also, especially with those Arms of the Church, to wit, prayers and
Tears (our Desperate Malady has not yet met with an Effectual Remedy) lest
those Matchless Mischiefs which are Imminent over us may not also be Incumbent
on us. There is certainly something more than ordinary God has upon the Wheel,
to lighten up such a Blaze as this in the very depth of Winter, which is a time
Diametrically contrary to the very Nature of Comets, for Cold and Moist Weather
is altogether unapt to produce those Hot and Dry Vapors whereof a Commit
consists. A Winter Comet is therefore like Winter Thunder, which is commonly
called the Worlds Wonder: The proper time of engendring those Meteors is
Antumn, for in Springtime there is supposed to be too much Moisture and too
little Heat to congregate those Vapors, and in Summertime there is so much
Heat as plainly Segregate and Disperses those Exhalations, but Wintertime is
wholly opposite to their existency, and quite contrary to the constituting of
them: Therefore this Extraordinary and preternatural sign must needs signify
some Extraordinary and supernatural thing, even some Sweeping, Swinging or
Scourging, yea some Cutting or Killing Dispensation, for the (...) or
Apparition Extraordinary (which I saw with my own Eyes) had a threefold
Resemblance, 1. Of a Broom, 2. Of a Rod, 3. Of a Sword, 1. Of a large Broom, or
Besom, yet Dreadful to behold by its sparkling Aspect, as if God were coming
to Sweep Babylon with his dreadful Besom of Destruction, as he has promised,
Isa. 14, 22, 23. It Is true, God has his [ Scopas purgatorias, as well as
perdito^ias;] his Brushing, as well as Crushing, Besoms. The former is for
Sion, which God Brushes only for its Ornament, the latter is for Babylon, which
God Crushes also for its Overthrow. God grant this Unclean Spirit of Babylon
may be Swept out of our Land, Zach. 13.2. Even by a Parliamentary Besom. 2. Of
a long and fiery Rod, wherewith God may Swinge or Scourge the Inhabitants of
the Earth a God may indeed Chastize Sion with Rods (gently and favorably as a
Father his Children, not to break their Bones, but their Stomachs,) but God
will Scourge Babylon with Scorpions, as 1 King. 12.11. He will break her with
his Rod of Iron, Psalm. 2.9. like a Potters Vessel, that can never be patcht
together again: She shall feel the weight of God's mighty hand upon her, to
Crush her to pieces, and to Grind her to Powder. 3. Of a prodigious flaming
Sword, possibly not unlike that which God placed at the Garden of Eden, turning
every way to keep the Gate thereof, Genesis 3.24. There the [Cheru^] or Angel had
[Lahat Chereb] a Flaming Sword, a great Elegancy in the Hebrew, and a Material
Sword made of Steel; if brandisht. will Dart out bright and dazzling flames,
according to that of Vorgils Aemad. 8. [Ipsem Terribilem flammasque Vomentem]
God bless us from this Material and Brandisht flame Vomiting or Glittering
Sword, Ezekiel. 21, 9, 10, 14, 28. God may call for such a Sword. Ezekiel. 38, 21.
Levit. 26.25. If we give no better Audience and Obedience (than we have done)
to the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. as we have
smarted under the Sword of the Angel, which is the Pestilence, 1 Chronicles
21.16.27. So God may bring upon us the Sword of the Enemy, whose Mercies are
Cruelties. Oh God forbid that he should Hiss for the Flies of Egypt to bite us,
or the Sea of Babylan (which is worse) to sting us, Isa. 7.18. The Star (it
self) that shouteth forth this flaming Sword, I have not beheld, it being as
yet hid in the Sun beams, going down a little after the Sun, a little before
the New Moon, and a little before Fiery Mars, being not far from all these
three in the Horizon, nigh to Aquila and to the Milken Allyc; All which would
afford over curious and too critical Speculations, according to the Rules of
Astrological Art, which I therefore omit. Though Comets (in themselves simply
considerate, or in their Houses wherein they are seen) do not make future
Events uncontroulably legible, yet when they are placed in Conjunction with the
Sacred Scripture, they are not without their proper Instruction, but foretell
singular things, provided the word of God (who is the Creator of Comets) be the
Rule of that Interp^etation. Though we Christians should not be afraid of the
sign of Heaven, as the Blind Heathen were, Jer. 10.2. Yet may we not altogether
despise those Divine Monitors and footsteps of Providence (though obscure)
seeing it is God's Method (frequently Recorded in History) that when he is about
to punish a City or Nation, he is wont to give them warning thereof first by
some previous Prodigies, and to hang out some Conspicuous signs of Divine
Displeasure in the Air, to be beheld of all Men: And though Comets (for the
most part) are loud Preachers from Heaven (which Popish Prelates cannot
silence) of Gods wrath for Men's sins, yet may they publish Joy to some, as well
as sorrow to others, for the Setting of one may be the Rising of another; the
Falling of Old Favorites may be the Rise of New ones; as Haman's fall was
Mordecai's rise. Thus the Tiburtine Sybel Interpre^ed that Comet (of a vast
bigness) that appeared at Christ's Birth, saying [Hic puer major te est, etc.]
This Child that is now born is greater than thee. O Roman Emperor, and he
comes to set up a Kingdom that shall destroy the Roman Kingdom. Might we have
the same liberty to suppose this strange Star to be an Angel, as some do that
in Mat. 2.2, 9, 10. Then has He a drawn flaming Sword in his hand Ready to
destroy our Jerusalem, as that Angel had, 1 Chronicles. 21.16. Oh pray, pray, pray
that God may repent him of that Evil, and say to the Angel, It Is enough, stay
thy hand and put up thy Sword into its sheath, v. 97. and 2 Samuel 24.16. but
suppose it such an Angel as stood in Balaam's perverse way with a drawn Sword
in his hand, Numb. 22.23. or rather that Angel of the Covenant, out of whose
mouth comes a sharp Sword, Rev. 19.15, 21. Oh pray, pray, that this Sword may
slay not only the grand Balaam of Rome, but even Babylon too, and all her proud
Helpers* as he has there both Prophesied and Promised: This is the Hearty
Prayer of C. N.

London, Printed for J. Wilkins, and J. Sampson, 1680.

A Second SHEET, further Blazoning upon the Blazing-star.
With a Chronology of COMETS for the last 400 years.
HAving spoken to the Products, Form, Color, Motion and Signification of
Blazing-stars, in the first Sheet: A further Account of the Prognostics of
Comets in General, and of this present COMET in particular (which the first
Sheet could not contain) I insert and send forth in this: The General
Prognostics of COMETS (according to the best Rules of Astrology) are deduced
from an Ancient and Received Tristich or 3 Latin Verses.

Octo Comet a Mala haec fulgendo per Aethera Signat
Ventus, Sterilitas, Aq^a, Pestis praedominantur
Rixa, Tr^mor, Moritur Dux, F^t Mutatio Regni.
This plain, yet pithy Poetry does (in our native Language) signify, That
Comets Blazing in the Air does portend 8 several Mischiefs, as the
Predominancy, 1. Of Storms and Tempests. 2. Of Drought and Dearth. 3. Of great
Floods and Inundations. 4. Of Plague and Pestilence. 5. Of Troublesome Fears
and Jealousies. 6. Of Quarrels and Contentions 7. Of the Death of great
Captains, 8. Of Alterations in States and Kingdoms. Those Prognostications in
general are not altogether improbable, if considered either, 1. Physically, 2.
(...), or 3 ^he^logically, by a Judicious mind: 1. Physically considered, so
^omets (probably) are not only natural Si^^^, but also natural Causes mostly of
much Evil, through sometimes they may be also of much G^o^.. It Is a Maxim in
Phi^osophy, That natural Causes must produce the like natural Effects: now it
may be rationally argued, That Comets are Natural Cause (as well as Signs) 1.
Of Drought, Dearth, Plague, etc. 1. Because without a great Heat, a Comet
cannot be incorporated, and much moisture must of necessity be consumed by its
flames when once it is sired: This, as the Cause, produces Drought as its
effect, and Drought brings forth Dearth, 2. Because the I athess (and so by
consequence the Fertility or Fruitfulness) of the Earth is exhaled, not only to
the compounding of the Comet (whereof it is mostly constituted, as in the first
Sheet) but also exhausted by the continued, Hames of the long burning Comet so
near to it, as the Region of the Air is; the follows the P^agu^ as another
Effect of Drought and D^ard^) all those Three having a mutual connection each
with the other and producing one another. 3. Because so many l^^^ and dry
Vapors and Exhalations (as must make up the mo^ntanous mass of a Comet) come
to be sired and so dispersed hither and t^^ther in the Upper Region* they
cannot bat corrupt the Air whereby the Bodies of men and beasts are infected:
this brings pestilential Diseases. Secondly, Come's in like manner do not only
naturally (...), but also produce hor^ible Tempe^s. dread^^^ Earth ^^^es,
(...). because in such a Massy multitude of Exhalations there must be much that
cannot take ^ire and be wholly consumed (as we s^e in ingne^^ulim^^, in out
Kitching hire) some fuel will shuffle out, and escape burning, and so it may
happen ^^m^n a^y fire) this part therefore that remains unconsum'd, is the
engendring Matter of most boisterous Winds, and of most terrible Earthquakes,
etc. for there is the same matter for causing the Blustering Wind above the
Earth. that there is for a dreadful Earthquake within it: because when those
remaining Vapors of the C^^^^ do flutter abroad in the Air, they do engender
Storms, but when those ^umes do fall into the Caverns of the Earth, and come to
be pent up therein* by an An^^peristasi^ both increased and enraged they do
naturally endeavor an Enlargement, which, they do with that mighty Violence,
as shakes the Earth: ^^ow seeing those Physical presages seem so probable, I
cannot ^^d Reason enough to render the P^l^^cal and ^b^el^g^^^^ presages (which
are the 2d and 3d) less probable than the first: especially considering how the
Manners of men's minds do follow mostly the Temperament of their Bodies* As that
Adage in Greek (post (...)) after Dearth comes the Plague* is Rational, for
^ood corrupted must fill men's bodies with many malignant Humors, So *it is no
less rational to affirm, That when those Vicious fumes of Comets are conveyed
into the Blood and Spirits of Men's Bodies, and so infect the with much Choler
and Melancholy, thence must necessarily arise much Envy, Hatred, sharp
Contests, and Land des^roying Wars. It Is not at all dissonant from Truth, That
those hot and dry Vapor dispersed by the Comets combustion should stir up
Anger in Choleric Constitutions. And out of A^^g^^ arises Quarrels, out of
Quarrels, Conquests, and out of Conquests strange Changes both in Church and
State* And I see not, but that Comets may portend the Death of Great n^n, for
their Intemperance, Delicious fare, (of all sorts) and Exorbitancies in
Pleasures, Night-watchings, etc. (wherewith they do commonly indulge themselves
above all men) must needs expose them most to contra^t the worst of Distempers.
The more Luxuriously any men live, the sooner they must be infected with the
Contagion of Comets* Yea ^artholme boldly Asserteth, That Comets are Signs sent
on purpose to premonish Princes of their Ruin without Repentance and
Reformation.

The Probability of those Prognostications by Comets may be best Demonstrated
by an Induction of Instances and Examples drawn out of Chronological History of
Comets: And to go no higher therein than those last foregoing Centuries near to
our own Times; I find most marvelous Testimonies there recorded,

As, (I.) in the year 1347* a Comet appeared not far from the Bull Ey; After
which followed such a dreadful sickness, that raged all the World over, and
continued forty years together: Insomuch, that (as Authors say) it destroyed
the Third part of men in Europe.

(II.) In the year 1363. a Blazing star broke forth, and brandished its bright
Beam's all-abroad for 3 Months together: Immediately after which, Arises that
burning and shining Light Dr. John Wicklis, who was as an Angel sent from
Heaven for a marvelous Reformation on earth. So that Comets, as is aforesaid)
portend good as well as evil: for the Consumption of such a multitude of
hurtful Vapors as passes away in the Expiration of a Comet, why may it not
(if only it be considered physically and naturally) have good Effects as well
as evils? especially, if it be considered politically and theologically; thus,
no Comet can be so obnoxious, but as it portends Sorrow to some, so it does Joy
to others, as this did, which was a Cordolium to the Romanists, but a Cordial
to those of the Reformed Religion.

(III.) In the Year 1375. There appeared another frightful Comet, which had
such infinite. Swarms of Locusts following it, as almost destroyed the Kingdom
of France, in all the Fruits thereof, as if God had sent one of the Ten
Plagues of Egypt upon it, Exodus 10.14. his formidable Army, J^el 2.4.10.11.
Locust has its name in Hebrew from Multitude, wherewith the very Sun is
darkened as with a mighty Cloud, and the Green things of the Earth so devoured,
that the Egyptians make the Docust their Hieroglyphick for Famine, because of
both their numerosity and Voracity. And as the Locusts of Egypt were all
drowned in the Rod Sea, as well as Restrained from G^shen; So those Locusts
aforesaid. had the British Sea, not only (through Divine Grace) for their
Boundary beyond which they could not pass) but also for their Sepulcher,
wherein they were (with a most Hideous storm) all driven, and wherein also they
were (with a most horrible noise) all drowned.

(IV.) In the year 1390* Another Comet Blazeth out, after which did follow a
most furious Pestilence in this our Nothern* Region, so exceedingly outrageous
it was* that in a very little space of time a Thousand and some Hundreds dyed
of the Plague in that one City of York.

(V.) In the year 1400.

(VI.) In the year 1401.

(VII.) In the year 1402.

(VIII.) And in the year 1403. All those several years, (Immediately Succeeding
one another) produced several Comet Successively, and portending great things,
for at that time, Tamberlan destroyed the Turkish Empire, and John Hus, (with
Jerome of Prage) began their famous Reformation in Bobemia, from whence many
Tumults arose, and afterward brave Zisca waged War successfully against those
who call themselves CATHOLICS, whereas CACOLICKS is their more proper Title:

Then (IX.) In the year [1458.] Another Comet broke forth in the sign of the
Bull. After which that Fat Bull of Bashan (the Pope) dyed, and A'phonsus King
of Arragon, and in the following year James King of Scotland.

(X.) In the year [1472] Another Blazing Star appeared in the sign called
Libra, which was first of a slow motion until it came to Arcturus, and then it
Ran swiftly through the whole Hemisphere between the Poles of the Zodiac and
the Aequicoctial. And lastly when it Blazed about from the thirteenth of
J^nuary* to the last of February, it Blazed out its last in Aries, as if that
Battering Ram had batterd it into nothing; After which many Princes and great
men (too long to Relate) dyed, and so to be weighed in Heavens Libra and
Balance, wherein this Comet Appeared.

Again, (XI.) in the year [1477.] A Saturnine Comet (of a dusky leaden
Complexion) appeared; which was attended with so great a Drought, that not only
the corn in the Fields, but the Trees in the Woods were plainly Burnt and
Withred, yea many deep and broad Rivers, were wholly Dried up, as if the Flames
of that Comet, had been another Behemoth to Drink whole Rivers dry. Likewise a
most noisome Plague followed this, and the Death of many Princes.

Also, (XII.) In the year 1491.

And XIII.) in the year 1492. Two Comets appeared, both which were forerunners
of an horrible Murrain of Cattle, and of a fatal Mortality of many Princes.

(XIV.) In the year 1500. A comet having a Northern Latitude, blazed forth in
April, under the sign of Capr^corn for 15 days, then followed the Famine and
Pestilence in Germany, then Pope Paul was pushed down (as with the Horns of
Capricorn, where the Comet appeared) from his Inf^llible Chair, to his more
Infallible Grave, then dyed also the King of Swedeland, and the Queen of
Bohemia, with many other Princes.

XV. In the year 1522. Another Comet of a Saturnine color (as before) broke
forth, which ushered in a most dreadful Plague, and that Sweating Sickness
which was most peculiar to English Bodies, dogging them (as it were) into all
Lands.

Again, XVI. In the year 1533. A mighty Comet appeared in July and August, on
the outside of the Zodia^k, nigh to the Constellation called P^rs^^^, and
Streaming it^ Tail toward the West; After which followed the Plague,
Earth-Q^ake, and that Monstrous Mut^ny at Munster in G^rmany, yea and then did
our Henry the VIII. Unhorse the Pope here, by throwing out the Popes Supremacy
in England.

(XVII.) In the year 1556. A pale Comet appeared for two Months, of a most
swift Motion, directing its Course from Spica Virgi^is to Boots. from thence
again to ^^p^e^s and to Saturn, (which Planet was then in Ari^s) and then
disappeared: After which came the Plague, Famine, Mu^^ain, etc. but especially
those Bloody Marian days wherein so many Holy Martyrs were committed to the
Mercy of the merciless Fire

(XVIII.) In the year 1558. Another pale Comet arose, which foreran the Fall of
some Kings and ^ueens, and some Princes of all Ranks.

(XIX) In the year 1560. Appeared another Comet in December which foreran a
most fatal Plague here in L^^don, the great (and unheard o^) Frost, and many
Monstrous Births in several Counties of England, (with sundry other ^rodigies)
followed after.

XX. In the year 1572. A new Star then appeared (mentioned in the first sheet.)
After which were those Bloody Butcheries at that Treacherous Royal Marringe at
Paris, whereat more Blood than Wine was powered out and Dr^nk. To Omit (as I
have done sundry for Brevities sa^e) those three new Stars which were seen in
the years 1602. 160^. and 1607. after all which marvelous Mutations and strange
Revolutions happened in the World, as Chronological Histories do abundantly
declare.

I pass on to the year 1618. Wherein the (XXI.) Comet blazed forth (even in
the VVinter Season) with a very long Tail or Train: After which our Queen ^nn,
and the Emperor of Germany departed the World.

Then in the year 1652. The (XXII.) Com^t (of a Saturnine and L^nar color)
appeared in Gem^^^ near to Or^o^s Shield, moving (besides its Diurnal
Revolution,) with an oblique motion toward the Pl^^ad^s, and passing by the
Head of M^d^s^^ (that fatal Star,) It came lastly to P^rs^^^s where it was
almost Vertical to England,) and there it Vanished: Its Tail tended toward the
North-East, and it Appeared not above ten or twelve Days in D^cember, and then
Disappeared. Now the Products of this Blazing Star, are yet fresh in most men's
Memories, in what Motions and Commotions, yea strange Mutations of Monarchy
into Aristocracy and of that into Democracy and then into Monarchy again, so
that the Land seemed to Ring Changes and all were turned ^psi e d^w^ both in
Church and State.

In the year 166^. the (XXIII.) Co^et of a Saturnine dusky Complexion) was seen
in the beginning of Dec^mber, etc. And the sad effects thereof (in the Plague
and Fire of London) are still fresher in the Memories of most men.

Then in the year 1677. Another Comet appeared about April, the effects whereof
were not only War at Sea and Land, unheard of Hailstones, etc. but also the
Damnable opish Plot from which we cannot yet be sa^e, no not by a Parliamentary
Power.

Now in this year 1680. Another (the XXV.) Comet appears in December also (and
I see not why this should not have such severe Significancies (which ought
justly to be seared) as well as all those before aid in this Compendious
Chronology of Comets, seeing this is one of those Methods and VVays, whereby
God talks with M^^, not only by the Tongues of his Prophets and Apostles, but
also by the very Elements disposed into Diverse forms, ^e^^ must hear God in
h^^^ P^^rk^ as well (...) ^n his Word.

The best Prospect several Dusky Evenings would allow me to take to this COMET,
not a tittle obscu^ed with the Splendor of the M^^^, was this, according to my
Astrolabe, this Star made its fist appearance to me in the sign P^sces,
ascending our Horizon from the Southern Line betwixt Peg^sus, and the Southern
Triangle to ^ndromeda, then it advanced with its exceeding long Train until it
got beyond M^dus^s Head, which is reckoned (by all Authors) an unluckly
Constellation. The streamer of this Star (I have observed) has stretched out
it self from the lowest Line of the Hemisphere at the very bottom of the
Aequinoctial Colure (below Pisce^) through the Tropic of ^ancer, through part
of Pers^n^ between Au^iga and C^pella even to the Solstitial Colure (which is
one fu^l quarter of the Celestial Globe) until it had a Direct Parallel Line
with the North Pole and the upper end of its Tail or Train: This therefore,
having a greater both Latitude and Longitude (in its Rays) then any I ever saw
or lately read off, must needs be the greater Prodigy, and so may produce more
prodigious Effects, which may (possibly) be distinctly and particularly spoke
to in a third sheet, as wanting Room in this second. In the mean time, How
ought this Outcry from Heaven [of Fire, Fir^,] in this astonishing ^lame,
Rowze us up out of our slumber of security, that we be not such sottish sensua
ists as to take no notice of Gods great Works, but grunt at them (like Swine)
and go our Ways: It Is the Bru^^sh Man that knows them No^. Psalm. 92.6. Such
Brutish Spirits as Regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Operations of his
Hands, the Lord will pluck them down and not build them up, ^sal. 28.5. Like
rotten Ruinous Houses never more to be Rebuilt or Repaired because they Regard
not the Works of Gods Hands, God will Reward them acc^rding to the Works of
their H^nds v. 4. Ducunt Volem^m F^ta No^^ent^m ^rahunt says, Se^^ea. The Vast
Regions of the Air is as fowly Infected with a stinking malignant Contagion at
the extinguishing of a great Comet, as a large Room is with the stinking Snuff
of a great Candle, when it is rudely Blown out. As D^n^el said of his dreadful
Dream, Dan. ^.^9. God Almighty b^ess u^ (in this Nation Prince and People) from
the D^reful consequences of this Come^, and let them be to those that Have the
lord and are Enemies to Jesus Christ.

S^ pray, C. N.

FINIS.
Publish^d by L. Curtiss, on Ludgate Hill. 1681.

A third Sheet, showing a further and fuller Blazoning upon this particular
BLAZING-STAR.
MY Method in this third Essay, shall be (first,) the explication of the grand
concerns of this Comet, to wit, its Color, Situation, Motion, etc.
(secondly,) the Application of its Portents and Significancys: First, the
Explication, this is done two ways, 1. By Astrological Precepts or Maxims, 2:
By Astrological Presidents or Examples. (1.) The Apothegms or Rules (which they
call Maxims) in Astrology, are 1, that there are Prognostics I diomatick
(which predict the natures and manners of Nations and Metrapolitan Cities) and
Symptomatick (which presage the more than ordinary Accidents that befall
Countries and Cities, whether good or evil; the former of these two I omit, as
not concerning our Comet so much as the latter does: The 2d. Rule is, That
Comets and other fiery Meteors are always (...), Significant, and never (...),
or Insignificant. The 3d. Rule is, That Comets have the strongest Influence
upon those Countries and Cities upon which they are most Vertical or over their
heads in a direct Perpendicular line, and in whose Signs they are most
conspicuous. The 4th. Rule is, The Significancies of Comets are derived from
their Colors, which is taken from the Dominion of the Planet in the generating
of them, this [(...)] or proper Temperament of the praedominant Planet is
easily discerned by the complexion or color of the Comet: If it be red, it
borrows that color from Mars, which is predominant in its Generation: if dull
and dusky, then it is Saturnine as before, and so of the rest, and as they have
the like Color with this or that Planet, so they have the like Influence. The
5th Rule is, Comets have their Significations from the Signs of the Zodiac
wherein they are situated, as if they appear in the Watery Signs, they portend
Famine and Plague, if in the Airy Signs, the follow furious Storms and
Fractions or Factions; If in the Fiery Sign, then Fire and Sword sticceed, etc.
The 6th. Rule is, the significancy of Comets is drawn from their differing
Positions to the Sun, for a Morning or Evening Comet portendeth the Death of
some Prince, but the Eastern Comet presageth a quicker accomplishment and
dispatch of such a Royal Death than does a Western one. The 7th. Rule is,
Prognostics of Comets are further taken from their Motion: If the Comet be
without motion, and be fixed in one point of the Heavens (as that over
Jerusalem was, a little before its Destruction) it denotes some long and
lasting evil; if it be moveable from one Sign to another, it is an Indication of
Commotions, Wars, and (perhaps) of Civil Wars. If it move fast and soon decay,
it is a Sign Gods Wrath will come shortly and be short though it be sharp. The
8th. Rule is drawn from the magnitude and form of the Comet, as well as from
its Duration, for the greater that a Comet is, and the longer that it
continues, the more horrible are its effects and indications; if also its form
or figure be with a Tail or Train, then it (as with a finger) points out
thereby that Evil is denounced against those Countries, especially toward
which its Brush or Tail is extended, and the longer that the Train is, the
longer will that evil be upon them: The 9th. Rule is borrowed from the
Celestial Houses wherein the Comet appears, for Comets are most obnoxious to
those Countries over which they are either Vertical, or in whose Signs they are
most seen: And to mention no more of those Celestial Signs or Houses (wherein
this Comet is said to appear in its Retrograde motion,) Astrological Rules
place. 1. Norway, Bavaria, Fez, etc. under Scorpio, in which Sign this
Blazing-Star is said to have its first rise. 2. Spain, Hungary, etc. under
Sagittary. 3. Greece, Lithuania, Saxony, etc. under Capricorn. 4. Tartary,
Russia, Swedeland, etc. under Aquarius. 5. Portugal, Galitia, Normandy under
Pisces. 6. England, France, Germany under Aries: I mention no more but these 6
Houses of Heaven (omitting the other 6,) because Mathematick Professors have
observed this present Comet has had some short residence in all these 6
Celestial Signs or Houses, first in Scorpio, and last in Aries, so that
according to Astrological Rules) all those Countries and Cities which are
placed under those 6 Signs aforenamed shall be affected and infected with the
force and influence of this Blazing-Star, not only this and that Land, but even
all those Lands over which it appeared, having extender it self over the
greatest part of Europe, as well as other parts of the World, and perhaps its
effects may begin in those Countries over which its appearance (or rather
existence) began: while this Comet was in Scorpio, though it then did exist,
yet could it not appear, being then hid in the Beams of the Sun, yet going down
before the Sun, and shooting its Rays and Stream of Fire (as it were) against
the Sun, which posture of a Comet (stay Astrologers) does always portend the
Fall of great men, but this Comet having its Retrograde motion into, and some
short stay and situation in those 6 several distinct Signs (the Sun
oven-running it, and leaving it every Night farther and farther behind it) must
have likewise some several and distinct Effects and Prognostics, for
(according to the Rules of this Art) a Comet 1. in Scorpio Prognosticateth Wars
and Worldly Changes, Drought and Dearth, Robbery by Land, Piracy by Sea,
Miscarriage of Women with Child, etc. 2. a Comet in Sagittary signifies Losses,
Crosses to Great men, great contentions about Civil and Sacred things,
malignant Fevers, and much Mortality. 3. In Capricorn, it portends Murders,
Massacres, Thefts, Plague and Famine, Death of Princes by Poison, all Despite
against Religion and the Religious. 4. In Aquarius, a Comet presages long Wars,
great Cruelties, Terrible Thunders and Lightnings, Famine, Pestilence, Rot and
Murrain. 5. In Pisces, it foreshews contention about Civil Rights, as Men,
Division about Sacred Truths as Christians; unnatural Relations among
Superiors, Inferiors and Equals, uncivil and (it may be) civil Rebellions,
scarcity of Fish, and great losses both at Sea and Land, etc. 6. A Comet in
Aries foretells Diseases in the Head natural, and discomposures in the head
political (as this Sign is the Head of all the twelve Signs) as likewise the
Death of those that are Heads of Families of Corporations, of Cities, of
Countries and of Kingdoms. Now this present Comet having had its Stage and
Theater in all those 6 aforesaid Signs, may possibly Prognosticate all those
evils aforesaid to befall some of those Regions seated under all those Signs
which it has run through betwixt its rise in Scorpio, and its failure in
Aries. According to my best Intelligence, this Comet took its fist Flame by the
hot Beams of the Sun (before it was gone out of the Sign Scorpio) wherewith it
hard its Conjunction, and wherein it had its absconding (for some time from the
Sight of men, and likewise it lost its last Flame(according to my strict
Observation) by the cold Beams of the Moon, even the Half Moon, wherewith it
met about the middle of this Month January: Foreign Letters do fully testify
that this Comet waded out of the Sunbeams (wherein it first lay hid) much
sooner in other Countries beyond Sea, than it did in our Land, so that it must
have its Existence (if not its Appearance in the Month of November, continuing
all December until the 16 of January, the Time of its Disappearance. This Comet
(besides its Diurnal motion, wherein the Sun (that race-running Champion) did
daily overrun it) had its Retrograde motion, wherein it marches backward
farther and farther on the East side from the Sun, and nearer to our Zenith, or
point of the Heavens directly over our heads, before the attaining of which
point it vanished out of sight; so that is this backward motion it fulfilled a
mavelous course, from nigh to Cor Scorpij (where it had its first being and
beginning in this Northern Hemisphere. From Scorpio this Comet advances almost
all along the Aequinoctial Circle through the Solstitial colure by the Milky
way into Sagittary, and by Antiuous and the Dolphin into Capricorn, so by
Cygnus, Aequulens and Pegasus (striking through the Tropic of Cancer, it came
into Aquarius, and so (crossing the colure Aequinoctial) it passed into Pisces
near to the Southern line, and from thence into Aries, in which 6th. Sign I
last saw it, where this Aries, or (as the word signifies) the Battering Ram,
did (as it were) batter down both the Star and its Blaze quite out of Sight.
Indeed the long Blaze or Tail of this Comet extended it self to many other
Constellations (besides these aforenamed,) as Aquila, Lyra, Cepheus, Andromeda,
the Triangle, Cassiopeia, Medusa's head, even to Auriga and Capella, as if it
had been a Messenger sent to visit all the most famous Constellations in the
full half part of the Northern Hemisphere: The last appearance I had of it, was
this, its Train (then weaning away) darted it self forth betwixt Cassiopeia and
the Pleiades (or 7 Stars) facing (as it were) the Bulls Eye and bright Jupiter
himself (who was then in that Sign of the Bull) yea and that most Glorious
Constellation (of all others) to wit, Orion, with both the Greater and the
Lesser Dog: Star.

A more particular Description both of the Star it self, and of its Train
seems necessary to the fuller Explication, before we can come to the
Application of All, and 1, concerning the Star it self, I do find it was a
Phenomenon found in various Complexions, which perhaps its several Paralaxis
or differing scituations might occasion. The first Account we had of it, was
from the Mathematick Professor at Hamburgh who says he took his prospect of it
in his Tube, and there in saw the Comet (it self) to be fiery and glowing like
the flames of a Bakers Oven 2. Other Artists (that have viewed it by their
Telescopes) say they saw it of a bright, splendid color; as the former Aspect
was from Mars, and so it was a Martial Star (which it might well be, while it
had the Tincture of the first Sign, wherein it first existed, for Cor Scorpij
has the same complexion with the Planet Mars, of a red and fiery color) so
this latter was from Jupiter, which made the Comet a Jovial Star, portending
Jovial or Joyful things, as the former does War and Bloodshed, The 3d. Account
we have from Foreign Mathematicians is, that at its first appearance it had a
mixture of diverse colors, which it borrowed from Mercury, so became a
Mercurial Star, and betokening a mixture of differing Dispensations, of good as
well as of evil; but the 4th. and most universal Prospect of it was, that it
has been of a dusky and leaden complexion from its first appearance to its
last disappearance, this color it borrows from Saturn (as is said before) and
makes it a Saturnine Star, of the most sullen influence of all the three other
Planets aforenamed; so that no less than 4 Planets are (as it were) called in
to the composition of this Comet, and though some doubt may be made concerning
the 3 former, to wit, Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, yet none can question this
last the 4th. of them, inasmuch as many Millions of eyewitnesses do
unanimously concur that for a long time to its last extinguishing, it had no
other complexion but that of Saturn, the signification whereof cannot be good,
as the Satirical Poet represents him in this Hexastich.

Pale and of Ashy color, Malcontent,
A Cataline to Mortal Temperament,
That would blow up the Capitol of Man,
With Envious Influence, Melancholy, Wan,
And if Ill hate be in an Heavenly Breast,
This Planet with that Fury is possessed.
The 2d. Description is of its Tail or Train, which some Foreign Artists
discovered by their Tubes and Telescopes to be red and fiery all along from the
body of the Star (which then to them appeared red as before,) but it was pale
toward the end of the Stream, having the resemblance of those long Streamers,
which Men of War (Ships of the first Rate) do carry with them; so that 1, As to
its Color which was Red at the beginning, and pale at the end of it, and 2. as
to its Resemblance of a War-Streamer, it plainly portends as if the Red Horse
[War] should Usher in the pale Horse [Death] which 2 colors the Seal-Prophecy
mentions, Revel. 6.4.8. War is commonly accompanied with Fire and Blood, 2
King. 3.22. Isa. 9.5. and 63.1.3. and Death is commonly called pallida Mors, as
it causes a paleness of face. And if there were no Deception of Sight in those
who call this Saturnine Comet a black Star (such as Chronology speaks of)
then may it also denote the Black Horse in that Seal Prophecy. Rev. 6.7. to
wit, Famine, which discoloureth and denigrateth the Countenance, as Lam. 4.8.
but whatsoever was the Color of the Train, all conclude (even from ocular
Demonstration) that it was pale, and the portent thereof is bad enough; yet 3.
as to the Length of this Streamer, it was conspicuous to every common eye to
have a most prodigious extent, so that whether we take it, 1. as Gods Sweeping
Broom, or 2. as Gods Swinging Rod, or 3. As Gods flaming Sword (as in the first
Sheet) it evidently declares that the great God has great punishing
Instruments, either to sweep away, or to swinge, or to slash and slay his
Adversaries, Those that took the Longitude of this Train by Jacobs Staff, etc.
give us this Account, that the true dimension of its Blaze or Tail, was about
70 Degrees in Longitude, now suppose (as is generally supposed) that every
particular Degree is 60 miles, then the Train of this Comet by this very
computation, must be no less than about 427 miles long, yet considering the
height of its situation, as the magnitude of a Planet, so the longitude of
this Comet (in its Streamer) is much more than can be taken by the best sight
or prospect. The latitude or breadth of this Tail is computed by Artists also
to be no less than 2 Degrees, which amounts unto an 120 miles, oh then what a
Predigious Streamer must this be, that is 4270 miles long, and an 120 miles
broad. In longitude it excels all Europe (which from St. Vincent in Portugal
to Constantinople, bears but 3800 miles) and in latitude it exceeds the
Northern part of England, and every part of Scotland or Ireland. This
introduces the 2d. part, to wit, the Application. It is therefore very
incongruous and unchristian, yea rather brutish and barbarous for any Mortal
man to despise or deride such a prodigious piece of work from the Immortal God
(as is longer than the 4th part of the World, and broader than many Countries
and Kingdoms) As some Princes of the World have lately done at this Comet, as
it is rePorted of them: It Is writ, the French King frothily despised and
derided this present Comet, saying, It had spoiled his sport at a grand Ballet
( or Dance (composed with much curiosity, for his Sons ( the Dauphins)
Diversion, when it was privately proved before him it pleased him well, but
when it came to be publicly performed in his presence before his Nobles and
Ladies of Honor, there happened a Baffle in the Actors, which did frustrate
his expectation, hereupon he jeeringly s^offed that the Influence of the Comet
was fallen upon his Dance to spoil it, p^ssibly before its portents pass away,
it may (in good earnest) soil and spoil more of the French Dances. It Is storied
of Vespasian, that he scorned an Hairy Comet shining in his Sight, saying it
concerned the King of Parthia who wore long Hair, and not himself who would not
were any long Wiggs, (which this very blaze may possibly scorch) so it
denounced no woe to him; notwithstanding he soon after smarted, for his jesting
with Gods edge-tools. Any despite done to a man's work is a despite done to
the Workman himself, it is God that Works Signs and Wonders in Heaven and
Earth, Dan. 6.27: Such as are Despisers of Gods Signs and Wonders, God will
make them for Signs and Wonders in the World, Act, 13.41. Deuteronomy. 28.46. Thus God
hanged up Pharaoh (as it were) in Gibbets, as a Sign and Wonder to the World,
because he despised Gods Signs and Wonders in the World. Something of this
Divine Wrath Philip the 1. King of Spain did feel, when he took no warning at a
Blazing-Star, sent (it seems) to foreshew his Death, which followed soon after,
and when he lay in his dying Agonies, he continued crying out [ Ha Cometa, Ha
Cometa, etc.] I took no warning by thee; but Charles the Great, (or Ludovicus
Pius his Son, as some say) did better who did Fear at the Sight of a great
Comet, blazing out before him, and when Egmundus his Astrologer (unwilling to
see his Prince sad, urged to him Jer. 10.2. That he should not be dismayed at
those Signs, etc. he prudently and piously answered, It was not the Sign (the
Comet) but the maker of that Sign (God himself) that he feared, yet would he
praise God for his tender clemency (withal) in Rebuking their slug^ishness with
those his Signs. They were not Fools but wise men that said we have seen his
Star in the East, Math. 2.2. 'twas a Star of Christ's making, as well as leading
to him, Where a Blazing Star led them to the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4 2.

Mortals in Vain did never Gaze,
When Comets did in Heaven Blaze.
Besides what I have said in the Chronology of Comets aforementiond (all
fore-warnings of following Evils) a little may be ad^ed, to wit. 1. Soon after
that Comet in the year 1^37. with its very long Train, the French burnt
Southampton, and did much more mischief upon the Coasts of England. 2. Soon
after that in the year 1440. followed here, the Barons Wars twixt York and
Lancaster; God bless us from the like 'twixt York and Monmouth. And 3. Soon
after that Star which appeared in the year 1580. The Rebellion broke out in
Ireland, through the Popes Instigation, who sent Italians and Spaniards to
assist the Irish (against Queen Elisabeth in the 22 year of her Reign, October
the 8. God bless us from the like Eruption now. Here withal take a little
enlargement upon that Star in Cassiopaea 1572. (aforesaid) which gave Caution
and Counsel to Charles the 9th of France (the Author of the Massacre at Paris)
as likewise did Beza in his Poem concluding thus,

Tu vero, Herodes, Sanguinolen^e, T^^e. Yet this bloody Prince (another Herod's)
took no warning, but first wallowed in the Blood of Protestants, and at last
God plagued him with such an eruption of Blood in his own Body (then full of
Blood, being in the flower of his Age) that he wallowed in his own Blood and
was also Choked with it. And upon that Comet in the year 1618. which foreran
the Desolations of Germany, God bless us from the like Desolations: the Bishop
of Spalata (that Turn-Coat, as bad as he was) said of that very Comet, that it
was no Fantastic Phoenomenon, but Real and Significant, a true Exhalation,
Inflamed, and no Deception of sight about it: I would to God we did not
exercise wild Fancies more than solid Judgment about these Prodigies, as this
Comet, the fiery falling Bullet, and other Apparitions most Dreadful (of a
Northern and Southern Army fighting in the Air: (...)) according to credible
Information: Alas we know not the Signs of the Times. Math. 16.3. Luke. 21* 11.
and Act. 2.9. Such as Dubartus describes in his Dodekastick, or 12. Verses
showing how all Prodigies prognosticate manifold Evils unto persons and places
of all Ranks and Qualities.

Here in the Night appears a flaming Spire,
There a fierce Dragon folded all in Fire;
Here a bright Comet, there a fiery ^st^eam,
Here flying Lances, there a burning Beam;
Here se^ms an Honned Goat environd Round
With Fiery Flakes about the (...) bound,
There with long Bloody Hair, a Blazing Star,
Threatening the World with Famine, Plague and War*
To Princes Death, to Kingdoms many Crosses.
To all Estates inevitable Losses,
To Herdsmon Rots, to Plowmen hap^ss Sedsons,
To Sailors storms, to Cities civil Treasons.
If we consult. 2ly, Paradigms; or Examples, as we have hitherto Apothegms or
Astrological-Rules (which are the Placits of Astrologers and (possibly) are
only ad placitum to be received) with the other in the Chronology, it may
portend either one of, or some of, yea all of those Evils which they portended,
not only to other Lands but also to our Land, over which it was almost
Vertical in Pers^us and Medusa's Head when it Vanished: Sed manum de Tabula, ne
Caldaizare videar, I withdraw my hand, least I should seem to speak like a
Caldean, whom it better becomes to speak like a Christian and like a Gospel
Minister wherewith I shall Conclude. The Men of Issachar were in great account
with David. (literal) who had Understanding of the Times, and did know what
Israel ought to do. 1 Chronicles. 12.32. A prudent man foreseeth an evil and hides
himself, Prove. 22.3. He foreseeth it not by any unlawful Divination, or by
Gazing as common Star-Gazers in their Unwarantable Judiciary Astrology do) but
by a Judicious observation of those extraordinary Beacons which the
wonder-working God fireth in the Firmament (which he never does but to give
warning that some mischief is ready to make an Invasion.) As also by a solid
Collection and Connection of causes and consequents: as, If God be the same
that ever, as Holy, Just, Powerful, etc. and, If Sin be the same that ever, as
foul, loathsome, and God-provoking, etc. Then such effects and events will
follow such causes and courses: As there be natural signs (sometimes) of an
ensuing Judgment which prudent thinking Men can readily discover. If Elias see
but a Cloud (though no bigger than a man's hand) come from the Top of Carmel, he
can tell that it will cover the whole Heavens as with a black Curtain, and that
a great Rain will follow after, 1 Kin. 18.44.45. The most tender Tempers are
most sensible of the change of Weather. A Moses (who converseth with God (as a
man with his Friend) is quick-sighted, and espies Gods wrath at its first
setting forth. Numb. 16.46. The more faithful and familiar that men are with
God, the sooner do they see his wrath arising and running forth: were we such,
and had we our Eyes in our Heads, as wise men. Eccles. 2.14. and Understood we
the Times, as those of I^sachar did, knowing, by a singular Sagacity, both what
is to be done, and when to do it, we shall be of great Account with our David
Spiritual and may yet Retrieve, Retrench and Redeem some part (at least) of
those evils that are Imminent over us, before they be Incumbent on us: It
remains that we ply our Spiritual Oars and Row hard as did the Disciples.
Joh. 6.19. our Jesus will certainly come to us, though sent we be both in the
Deep, (so as we cannot feel bottom) and in the Dark so as we cannot see Shore;
though the Child be come to the Birth and there is not strength to bring forth,
2 Kings 19.3. yet Christ will come and Midwife it into the World, and after
this Day of Rebuke, will bring his Spouse into his Wine-Cellar under his Banner
of Love and will draw out his best Wine (which he reserved last) for her even
the promises of the latter day: which shall be as Life from the Dead, Romans
11.15. even so come Lord Jesus come quickly Cito, Citius, Citissime, l^mera,
be^amenu. Soon and in our Days.

So prays C. N.

FINIS.
Published by L. Curtiss on Ludgate Hill.


