THE ABSOLUTE AND Peremptory Decree OF ELECTION TO ETERNAL GLORY REPROBATED.

In A SERMON Preached before the University in Great St. MARY'S Church in
CAMBRIDGE.

By Robert Neville, B. D. Rector of Ansty.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley, at the Printing Press under the Piazza
of the Royal Exchange, 1682.

To my Truly HONORED FRIEND, and quondam Chamberfellow at KINGS COLLEGE IN
CAMBRIDGE. THOMAS FOVNTAIN, Esquire
Honored Sir,
THere are two dangerous Opinions in the World, against which, as against two
Rocks, we may suffer Shipwreck, Pelagianism on the One hand, and Calvinism on
the other; these are the Scylla and Charybdis, between which if we do not steer
our Course evenly and carefully, we may Ruin and Undo our selves: Pelagianism
pleads too much for a Natural Power and strength in man; it ascribes too much
to man, and makes him by Nature Omnipotent; it makes a God of him in Power and
strength: And Calvinism, like Medusa's head in the Poet, turns men into stones,
robs them of all their Powers and Faculties, and determines them irresistibly
to all their Actions, by a Necessity no less unavoidable, than the falling
stone moves toward the Center; the latter of these Opinions wrongs Nature in
defect, by allowing her no strength, which by Consequence must make men
desperate; the first wrongs Nature in Excess, by allowing it too much strength,
which must needs blow men up with too swelling a Confidence; and both of them
do equally destroy the reason of our Application to God for strength; for
neither will the man that is well in Conceit, nor yet the desperate, apply
himself to a Physician; because the one cries there is no need, the other,
there is no help. The former of these two, namely Pelagianism, sets up and
trafficks upon its own Credit, and depends upon the large stock of its own
natural Abilities; and scorns to own the Grace of God so far, as to take it
into a share and Partnership with it: The other, namely Calvinism breaks, when
it needs not, and then declares it self a bankrupt, and pretends Insufficiency,
that so it may upon easier terms Compound with God for its debt of Obedience;
because the Absolute Decree of Reprobation has taught men to fancy they have
no power, it also makes them to have no Will to obtain Salvation; They are of
opinion, that the Goats are more numerous than those few Sheep, which are
within the little Fold of the Absolute Decree of Election; which is
diametrically Opposite to St. Paul's Doctrine, 1 Timothy 2.4. That Christ will have
all men to be saved; and as contrary to St. Peter's 2 Pet. 3.9. who affirms,
that the Lord is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to Repentance; and having so good Seconds as these, I shall not need to fear to
enter into the Lists against the Asserters of that unjust Decree; A Decree too
Arbitrary and Tyrannical to be Enacted by the just, gracious, and merciful King
of Kings; A Decree, as Arbitrary as that Government, their great Patron Calvin
set up at Geneva, after the Expulsion of their Lawful Bishop; to whose both
doctrine and discipline your great Reason and Learning have always made you a
professed Enemy; so that I assure my self that you will kindly accept of, and
not pass your Decree of Reprobation against this discourse now devoted to you by

Honored Sir, Your Faithful and humble Servant, R. Neville.
Ansty, October. 25. 1682.
A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY, At Great St. MARY'S CHURCH IN
CAMBRIDGE.
EPHESIANS. I. the former part of the 4th. Verse. According as he has chosen us in
him before the Foundation of the World.


THere is no one Conceit that engages men so strongly to persist in Sin, as
the Persuasion that Gods Irresistible Decree is the Cause or all Events, of all
their Actions; and though they are not arrived to so high a degree of
Blasphemy, as to adventure to Define God, totidem verbis, the Author of Sin:
yet (which is tantamount) some men are of Opinion, that because all things
depend on Gods Decree; all the Sins they commit, are entailed upon them by A
Fatal Necessity; and that they are but as so many links of one Fatal Chain,
wherewith they are fettered and fast bound to Satan; and that all their Care
and Industry cannot take off one Link from that Chain; nor Deduct one single
transgression from the whole Sum, and numberless number of their iniquities.

Others again, on the other hand, think they have Gods Absolute Decree for
their security; and ground their hopes of Heaven upon no other basis, no other
bottom, letting loose the reins to all licentiousness, because they assure
themselves that Gods Decree of Election to Eternal Glory is passed in favor of
them: When alas, that Decree of Election, which they build upon, is grossly
mistaken by them: God having determined by his Decree of giving Christ, to call
men from a vicious course of Life to Christianity; which is only an Election
to Evangelical Grace and Holiness; and a separating men to the participation of
those singular benefits, contained in the Gospel, not an Absolute Decree of
Election to Eternal glory, without any regard of their Works and Actions: and
this is clear and evident from this Clause of the verse, that contains my Text,
[that we should be Holy and without blame before him,] which immediately
follows these words of my Text, According as he has chosen us in him before
the Foundation of the World.

In which words are these two general parts.

First, Gods Eternal Decree of Election [He has chosen us before the
Foundation of the World.]

Secondly, The Author, the Procurer of this Decree, namely Christ, [He has
chosen us in him] in or through Christ:

First on the

First, Or Gods Eternal Decree of Election [He has chosen us before the
Foundation of the World] for the better understanding whereof, it is necessary
to acquaint you with a threefold acceptance of this word [Election.]

First, It imports some special Dignation and Favor, or a special separation
of some persons, to any particular Office or Function: in which sense, Luke
6.13. Christ is said to have chosen twelve, whom he named Apostles: Or else it
implies some eminent Prerogative, and Dignity, given to one above another,
without any intention of excluding the person, that is not so Dignified, from
Eternal Salvation; and in this sense I take those words, Romans 9.11. that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand; where the word [Election]
signifies a special separation of Jacob, to an eminency and Prerogative above
Esau; because God had said verse 12. The Elder shall serve the Younger; and
verse 13. Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, but this is not the sense
that the Text here speaks.

Secondly, The word, Election, or Choosing, imports a peremptory Decree of
Election to Eternal Life: and in this notion it is most frequently taken by
Divines; but the word [Chosen] in the Text will neither admit of this sense;
but imports rather

Thirdly, An Election to Evangelical Grace, or Gods free and undeserved Mercy,
in Decreeing to bestow Christ upon all, as the most Effectual means to engage
men to Holiness of Life; that is, by what Christ has done and suffered, for
Gentiles as well as Jews, to call and bring home sinners of all sorts to
Repentance; and this farther appears from the ninth and tenth verses of the
chapter of my Text, where, the Mystery of his will according to his own good
pleasure (which is all one with his choosing us, here in the Text) is specified
to be, the gathering of all things, both Jews and Gentiles together in Christ:
and this is the Subject of the second chapter, and of a great part of this
Epistle.

Now that these words [He has chosen] imply only an Election to Evangelical
Grace, and not any Absolute Decree of Election to Eternal Glory; I shall
further evince and manifest to you, by these following reasons and arguments;

First, Because God has declared in Scripture, that those, who believe in
Christ, and persevere in that Faith, shall be saved; and that such, as will not
believe in Christ, nor persevere in that Faith, shall be Damned; Which
declaration of his is inconsistent with any such Absolute Decree.

Now the Adequate Objects of the Divine and Peremptory Election to Eternal
Glory, are All, and only Such, who believe in Christ, and persevere and dye in
that Faith: and the Objects of Reprobation are such, and only such, who either
believe not, or persevere not in their Faith: John 3.36. He that believes on
the son, has everlasting life, and he that believes not the son shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him: and John 6.40. This is the will of
him that sent me, that every one, which believes on the son, may have
everlasting life. And as the objects of the Divine Election are such as
believe, so are they also such as persevere in that Faith, Matthew. 24.13. He
that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved, and the first Epistle of
John 2.24. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you,
ye also shall continue in the son, and in the father; i. e. you shall continue
in the favor of God. From which places of Scripture it is clear and eminent,
that when any mention is made of Gods Will and Decree, either of saving or
damning any; no other Will or Decree, of his is meant, but only that, whereby
he will save Believers, and damn all Unbelievers.

Secondly, No Absolute Decree can be inferred either from this, or any other
Text of Scripture; because thereby we should destroy the nature of Grace and
Virtue; which are nothing else, but an Habitual Power and ability in the
rational Soul of man, to bear all sensible pain and loss, and forbear all
sensible pleasure and profit, out of love to Reason, and the Divine Law: this
excellent power and ability of the Soul, as far as it is natural, or acquired by
our own acts and endeavors, is of moral Consideration; but as it is
supernaturally wrought in the Soul, or infused into it by the Spirit of God, so
far it concerns Theology, and is above the sphere of morality; but because
Grace is confessed by all to be the perfection of Nature; and acquired and
infused virtue are not (...), or inconsistent; I have thrust them into one
definition, in which Divines and Philosophers both agree: Now if we were
determined irresistibly either to Vice or Virtue, by any peremptory Decree of
the Almightie's; this definition of Grace or Virtue, would be a vain and
useless notion; and all the Divines and Philosophers, that have been since the
Creation, would have been great Cheats and Impostors: and all the excellent
Discourses to incite men to Virtue, or deter them from Vice, which they have
penned with such admirable Reason and Rhetoric, would be but idle and
unprofitable Harangues; and as insignificant to the impotent race and nature of
men, as the practical Rules of Dancing to a Cripple, or a Metaphysical Lecture
to a natural Fool: to which I may also superadd, that Virtue and Vice would be
dashed together and confounded, were our Actions the result of necessity,
occasioned by any such Decree; for as Justin Martyr says very well, (...).
If it be fatally Decreed, that one should be good, another bad, the one cannot
be approved or accepted, nor the other blamed or censured: Now if any such
Absolute Decrce should be supposed to be passed in favor of any; we must
either Assert, that God Decrees to Save them, be they never so lewd and
dissolute, which is contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel; or else that
God does irresistibly determine them to the use of such means, as must
necessarily bring them to heaven; which would make men utterly incapable either
of Reward or Punishment; for as Clemens Alexandrinus has truly told us, (...).
Neither Rewards, nor Punishments are just, if the Soul has not a free Power
both to embrace and refuse evil. Neither is it possible any man should repent
of doing what he could not but do, or of omitting to do, what was never in his
power to effect, no more than that he cannot fly like a Bird, or move like an
Angel: I must indeed confess, that it is God that works in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. but this is so far from taking away
our power, that it is brought as a reason by St. Paul, why we should work out
our Salvation, spoken of in the twelfth verse: God does indeed work it in us;
but how? By giving us the knowledge of his promises, by exciting and
strengthening us by his Spirit: He works it who supplies us with all sufficient
means to work it; he does it, but not without us, not whilst we lie like men
asleep, or like dead men in their graves: God works the Ability to Act, but not
the Act it self; for if he did, it would be his Act, not Ours; much less does
he work it forcibly, and irresistibly;

And though by his primitive and natural will, he would have all men happy;
happiness having been the very end of their Creation; and though he forbids
sin, and detests it, as contrary to his Essential Goodness; yet he may justly
permit it; and the will of man may have in it self a power for natural and
sinful actions: it may resist Gods grace, it may obstruct its workings and
operations, it may receive the grace of God in vain; and Heb. 10.29. Do despite
to the Spirit of Grace, and Jude 4. abuse and turn the grace of God into
wantonness: I shall conclude this particular, with those words of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem (...).
It is Gods part to bestow Grace, but it is your parts (as ye are men) to
receive and keep it.

Thirdly, No Absolute Decree of Election can be supposed to be made by God,
because he has granted the will of man a Patent for Freedom; which freedom is
incompatible with any such Decree. We are not drawn by secret and invisible
wires, but move voluntarily, and from a principle within; we are not hurried by
external accidents, but steer our own course; we are free Agents, and God made
us so when he made us men; and our actions are voluntary, not necessary, (...).
Goodness (says St. Basil) is the work of our will and choice, not of
necessity; if it could be wrought in us against our will, it could not be
Goodness or Virtue: They who would have been wiser than God, and seemed to
murmur, that in their natural Constitution there was not (...), a necessity of
being good, and an impossibility of being evil, did (as St. Basil tells them)
(...).
neither love goodness, nor hate wickedness; and that in this vain desire, to
raise man to that pitch, which nothing but fancy could set up, they much
dishonored him; and that in seeking to make him more than an Angel, they made
him less than a man.

God made man after his own image, indu'd him with a reasonable Soul, having
the use of Understanding, and freedom of will; he gave him power to consider,
and deliberate, to consult and choose, whereby he was made master of himself,
and Lord of his own actions: for if God should force the will of man, it were
(in effect) a destroying the nature of his Creature, which the grace of God was
never designed for, but rather to strengthen and assist it. We read indeed of
infused Habits; and what then? Though we should, as we may, grant that good
habits are infused to us, yet they are not infused without our own concurrence:
they are poured into us, not as water into a cistern, but as into living
Vessels, fitted and prepared for them; for if they were infused into us without
our own aid or help, without our preparing our selves for their reception, they
could never be lost.

God only uses such means to save us, as are necessary for one, who is to deal
with rational Creatures, and such as he intends either to reward or punish: He
makes use of his Calls, his Promises, his Threatenings, his Judgments, his Grace
Preventing, Exciting, and Assisting; in a word, he uses all means but violence
and coaction: If we were under the ties and restraints of necessity, or were
overpowr'd by some secret irresistible Cause, we should not be so much Agents,
as Patients, and be the objects of Compassion, rather than of censures or Penal
Inflictions: from whence Porphiry was wont to say, (...).
He that is moved by Force and Compulsion, is no less where he was, than if he
had not been moved at all; for whatsoever alteration in appearance may for the
present be made by Necessity and Violence, when the Compulsion is taken off,
every thing returns to its first natural state: But without peradventure in all
moral Accounts, Man is to be supposed to be in that State, in which his own
choice did first place him, and in which he would still have been, had not
violence removed him: So that Seneca was in the right, when he said Magnum
humanae imbecillitatis patrocinium necessitas, Quae quicquid cogit excusat.
Necessity is the great Sanctuary of humane Infirmity, which excuses all its
Acts of Compulsion.

God has placed before every man Good and Evil, that he Vt bonum non
necessitate obiret, sed voluntate.
might do good, not out of Necessity, but willingly, says St. Cyprian; for
it is no Commendation not to commit that Evil, which we had not the Power to
Act, Nulla laus est non facere quod non potes.
says Lactantius: Will you say a Lion is a Lamb, when he is within the Grates?
Will you call an Eunuch chaste? Or a man in fetters patient? Was Bajazet no
Tyrant when he was in the Iron Cage?

In this consists our Obedience, that we many times do That which is contrary
to our own inclinations; but that we always do That, which if we would, we
might not have done: For it is impossible for any finite Creature, who has not
his compleatness and perfection within himself; to purchase Heaven upon other
terms than these, that he might have lost it: St. Augustine, that great Champion
for the grace of God, says, Homo potest peccare, and Deum negare, sed si nolit
non facit.
A man may Sin, and deny God, but he does not unless he will: in a word, God
Commands Obedience, but does not Force it. In fine, if any shall be so
irrational, as to maintain the Necessity of sinning, they run into that absurd
paradox of the Stoics, and place all sins upon the same level of equality,
equalizing the smallest frailties and infirmities of humane Nature to the most
horrid and flagitious crimes; they multiply sins at a strange rate, but withal
lighten the weight, and extenuate the guilt of sin, allow it to be only a
Notion, and instruct men to entertain slight thoughts of it; For prevention
whereof it will be necessary to acquaint you, that all the Providence of God,
how apt soever they are, in their own Nature, to affect the Spirits, and awaken
the Consciences of men; yet being intended by God only as motives,
perswasives, and convictions; and not designed as instruments of violence to
force the Soul, leave men still in the Natural Liberty of their wills; and work
in such manner, as is fit for a reasonable Soul, not leading it in chains, nor
dragging it by Violence like a Slave. And St. Cyril of Jerusalem speaks the
same sense; (...).
God is prone to Beneficence and Mercy, but yet he expects that the will of
every man should accompany his Grace and Goodness, by making a good Choice, and
this is rendered as the reason of men's being rejected by God, Prove. 1.29.
Because they did not choose the fear of the Lord: Sin, as St. Cyril of
Jerusalem affirms, is (...)
An Evil, but Voluntary, Branch, that grows from free will; and that we sin
voluntarily, the Prophet tells us, Jer. 2.21. I had planted thee a noble Vine,
wholly a right seed, how then art thou turned into a degenerate plant of a
strange Vine unto me? Upon which words the forenamed Father makes this Descant;
(...), etc.
The plantation was good, the fruit evil, and that evil was chosen, he that
planted it therefore is not culpable, because it was planted to a good end,
though wilfully it brought forth bad fruit: for, as the Royal Preacher says,
Eccles. 7.29. God made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions;
so that you see plainly, man is so set in the Horizon, either of Happiness, or
Misery, that he may betake himself to which of the two he pleases, and make
himself either a Saint of Heaven, or a Fiend of Hell, either an Angel, or a
Devil. God would not limit his happiness, he left him power to increase it, to
polish and beautify himself; or if he refuse it, he gives him liberty to ruin
himself; according to that of the Prophet, Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have
destroyed thy self.

Fourthly, No Absolute Decree of Election can ever be supposed to have been
made by God, because Christ died for all; which could not be said, if there
were any such Decree, only to choose some few persons to Eternal Life, and
exclude all others: Now that Christ died for all, is clear and evident, from 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for All, and (as it is in the 4th.
verse of that chapter) will have all men to be saved; the force of which words
the Contra-Remonstrants endeavor to avoid, by telling us, that the word [All]
is to be taken there, not Pro singulis generum, sed pro generibus singulorum;
not for all of every kind, but for some few only of every sort and nation;
which distinction of theirs cuts the sinews of the Apostles Exhortation, and
enervates the strength of his reasoning: For these words of his [who will have
all men to be saved] are used by St. Paul as an Argument, why Prayers and
Supplications are to be made, not only for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, verse 2. but also for All Men, verse 1, and that because God will
have all men to be Saved: Now if these words [All Men] were to be understood of
some few only of every sort and Nation, the Scripture might have said with far
more reason, that God will have All Men to be damned; since that of every
Nation and Condition, (according to the Contra-Remonstrants) the number of the
damned does far exceed the number of the saved; and reason requires, that the
Denomination should be taken from the Major part. Our safest position then
concerning Christ's death and satisfaction, is this, that he died for All: For
those that Perish, as well as for those that Perish not; Luke 19.10. For all
that were lost: That Christ died for the Elect, the Contra-Remonstrants
themselves will grant; and that he died also for Castaways, and those that
Perish, is clear and evident from 1 Cor. 8.11. where the Apostle tells us, that
unless we temper our Christian Liberty with prudent Charity, it is possible that
through our knowledge a weak Brother may perish for whom Christ died: One for
whom Christ died (if St. Paul speaks truth) may perish, and be a castaway; and
the words in the following twelfth verse do more strongly confirm this Truth;
where the Apostle says, when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their
weak Consciences, ye sin against Christ, to whom they were so dear, that he was
willing to dye for their Salvation; and that therefore we sin against Christ
himself, whilst by our imprudent use of our Christian Liberty, we rob him of
any of those, whom he Redeemed, not with Corruptible things as Silver and Gold
but his most precious Blood. 1 Peter 1.18. Christ tasted Death for every man?
for the ungodly; Romans 5.6. In due time Christ died for the ungodly? for the
unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Christ died for Judas as well as
Peter, as Judas and Peter were both sinners, quoad Impetrationem
Reconciliationis, as to the Impetration of Reconciliation, which was obtained
for All, promiscuously, and without distinction, as Sinners: But only the
Faithful, Penitent, and Obedient, are concerned in the Fruits, and good
Effects, of this Reconciliation; of which Judas could not participate, because
through his own default, he was an Infidel, an Unbeliever: The Death of Christ
was not as Beneficial to Judas, as to Peter; because Judas superadded a new
Infidelity to his former sins, which Peter did not.

Christ has purchased Salvation for as many as will believe it; He shed as
much Blood for Judas as for Peter. Peter Believed, and Repented and was
therefore saved; Judas would not believe, and was therefore condemned.

And now let me remove one Objection of the Contra-Remonstrants against the
universality of Christ's satisfaction, and I will conclude this particular.

They Object,

That the Death of Christ is, in it self, a sufficient ransom for the whole
World, if we look upon the intrinsic worth and value of it; but that Gods
Decree, and Christ's intention was, that a few persons only should recieve the
benefit of it.

What is this better, than to cast a Reflection upon Gods Justice, and blemish
his Goodness? For, if God (after he has declared in Scripture, that 1 John
2.2. Christ is the propitiation for the Sins of the whole World) should
secretly Resolve and Decree, not to extend the benefits of his Death to one
half of it, but confine them only to some few Select Persons; we might justly
impeach his Truth and Sincerity, question his Justice, and say Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? If the Death of Christ were
sufficient for All, and yet All were not redeemed by it; the impediment must be
either in God, who will not accept this ransom, or in Christ that offers it;
there being no impediment in those, for whom it is offered; which, if any, must
be their sins: but they can be no impediment, because the Ransom was paid to
take away sin, according to that of John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the World; therefore the impediment must be in God; who
will not allow that Christ's death should be sufficient for all; and so Gods
Secret Will must be repugnant to his Revealed Will in Scripture; which but to
imagine, is to abuse his Sincerity and Justice; and make him like the
Inhabitants of Biscay; who, when any of the Spanish Kings come into the
Frontiers of their Country, customarily proffer him some few small pieces of
Brass, called Maravides; but tell him withal, that he must not take them: So
these men make God offer the Blood of his Son to all mankind for their
Redemption; but then they say his secret Will and Decree is, that they shall
not All take or receive, the benefit of it. And what is this better than to
make God injure his own Justice, and trapan and mock his poor Creatures?

You see then there can be no impediment in God; and as not in him, so neither
in Christ, that offers this Ransom: For if, as the Calvinists affirm, the
sufficiency of the Ransom were, in it self, the Cause, that that might be
rightly said to be given for All, which is only given for some few, because in
it self it was sufficient for All, though God would not allow, that All should
enjoy the benefit of that sufficiency; then Christ might be said to have died,
even for Infidels, and Unbelievers, as such; because the price of Christ's
blood, if considered in it self, in its own worth and value, is sufficient even
for the Redemption of these; when yet, according to Gods revealed will in
Scripture, though Christ obtained Reconciliation for all, the benefit thereof
accrues only to those, that Repent of their sins, and apply that
Reconciliation to themselves in particular, by Faith and Obedience; and this
brings me to the Fifth reason, Why no such Absolute Decree of Election, to
Eternal Glory, can ever be supposed to be made by God;

And that is,

Fifthly, Because Christ, who died for All, shed forth his Blood, upon terms
befitting Mercy and Justice, which could never have been, if there were any
such Decree; and this invites me to take in the

Second General Part in the Text; where we have the Author, and Procurer, of
this Decree of Election, namely Christ; He has chosen us in him, in Christ;
Matthew 26.28. this, says Christ, is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins; and this effusion was, upon terms
befitting Mercy and Justice: For though God was mercifully affected toward
man, yet out of respect to his Truth and Veracity, he would not allow his Mercy
to save any, till his Justice was satisfied; and therefore he made Christ, who
shed his blood for us, the Foundation of our Election; and that not in the
sense of the Contra-Remonstrants; who tell us, that God first decreed the
Salvation of some few Select persons, and then the giving of Christ, as a means
to bring this Decree to pass; so that with them, God the Father is the Author
of Our Election, Christ but the instrument or executor, whereas (if we will not
derogate from the power of Christ) he is to be so held the Foundation of our
Election, as to be the Author and Procurer thereof: Christ paid the large score
of our sins by his precedent satisfaction, before God would choose any person
to Life Eternal; not that God could not have acted otherwise, but that he might
have some regard to his abused Justice, before he opened a door of Mercy: It Is
true indeed, that his Will and desire, to save Sinners, went before either the
Actual giving, or his Decree to give them a Savior; for John 3.16. God is said
to have loved the World, and out of his love to have given his Son: but That
his Will, or Desire, was no peremptory Decree to save sinners; for then the
whole satisfaction of Christ would have been vain and unprofitable; because
there would have been no need of His being reconciled, who did before love
peremptorily, and with so great a Love, as to confer eternal Life upon those,
who were the Objects of it: so that Christ may be styled the Foundation of Gods
Decree of Election upon a double account.

First, Because unless Gods Decree of giving a Mediator had gone before, there
had been no place for his Decree of saving them, who believe in this Mediator.

Secondly, Because this Mediator satisfied the Divine Justice, which before
obstructed God's being simply Reconciled to sinners; so that That satisfaction
to Gods Justice being first made, God resolved afterward to carry on the whole
business of our Salvation, by that very Mediator, by whom his Mercy and Justice
were reconciled; by that Mediator, who Titus 2.14. Gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity. Now to what end did Christ bleed a whole
Life for sinners, if God had before determined, that only some few select
persons, tied fast to him by an Absolute Decree, should taste the benefits of
his Death? Hear therefore what Clemens Romanus says in this case; let us
consider how precious his blood is to God; which being shed for our Salvation,
(...).
brought to the whole World the grace of Repentance: You see then, that whoever
espouses the Doctrine, of an ABSOLUTE DECREE, seems to contract the beams of
Gods Love, and Philanthropy, which are universally diffused upon all, who do
not (as that sullen Tree in India does it leaves against the beams of the Sun)
wilfully close their eyes against them.

There is no person now under Heaven, for whom Christ did not dye; Christ's
Death is no enclosure, no Monopoly for some few, it is common to All; His blood
is a (...), an universal remedy for the sins of the whole World.

I now come to the Uses that may be made of this whole Discourse; is it so that
no Absolute Decree of Election can be inferred either from this or any other
Text of Scripture? this then may serve,

USE, I.

First, To comfort those, who are under the dismal Apprehensions, that they are
(by some secret Decree of Gods) made Reprobates to all Eternity, thereby they
are sunk into the very gulf of Despair; which makes them fancy the terrors
of the Divine vengeange set in Battle Array against them, and the Curses of the
Law thundering out their sentence of condemnation: and the mouth of Hell gaping
wide, to swallow them up and devour them: these frightful apprehensions do
continually haunt them, like so many ghosts and Apparitions; and follow them,
like their own shadows. To whom let me return this answer; that this their fear
is groundless and unreasonable; and that it is only, either some sudden storm
raised within them by the power and subtilty of the Devil; or else it is the
result of their Melancholy, which is of a very impressive temper, and Poetic
Nature; and is apt, like a dark room, to receive in the Images of Objects
without, in very strange and monstrous Shapes and Representations; let them
therefore be courageous, and rouse up their fainting and desponding Souls; for
there is help at hand; there is an immovable Rock for them to Anchor upon, in
the midst of these waves of despair, which will not suffer them to be quite
overwhelmed by them; they have a Merciful and Loving Savior, who by the
sacrifice of himself has purged away their sins, and delivered them from the
curse of the Law, and the Wrath to come; and satisfied the Divine Justice, and
obtained Reconciliation and pardon for them: O then if there be any consolation
in Christ, let them raise up their drooping and dying Spirits! Let them not
Dye, only out of a fear and Apprehension that they must Dye! Let them not
determine and devote themselves to Death by a fatal Necessity! God has passed
no Absolute Decree of Reprobation against them, and why then should they Enact
one against themselves? If they will be saved, they may; God affords them the
helps of his Grace and Spirit; Let them not therefore shut the mouth of the
bottomless pit upon themselves, nor (like contented Vassals) kiss their chains,
and hug their fetters being their own Jailors. The door is open, they may come
out, there is Light enough to guide them out, and all the darkness, they were
in, shall vanish at the brightness, of Gods Grace and Mercy, as a Mist before
the Sun: Let them therefore roll away those Grave-stones, they have pulled upon
themselves, by the strength of their fancy and imagination! Which they will
be the better enabled to Do; if they will but consider, that they, who
sincerely endeavor to please God, and keep his Commandments, have not the
least ground from Scripture, to suspect any secret Decree of Gods, that shall
cause their Ruin or Damnation: and whatever the secret Decrees of God are,
concerning the Eternal state of men, they must not be made by them, the
standard and rule, either of their Duty or Comfort: Let them not therefore
search into Gods secret Decrees, but his Revealed Laws; and since he has given
them rules of Life, which (upon the severest penalties) he requires them to
Study and Practice: let them not turn aside from these, and make it their
business to trace his Cabinet Counsels: let them not gaze at the Stars to read
their destiny, and not look to, but disregard their feet, and by that
negligence experiment the worst Fate, they could have portended; For, I think,
we may say, our wild fancies about Gods Decrees, have in event Reprobated and
Damned more, than those Decrees, upon which they are so willing to charge their
ruin. And as the thoughts of Gods Absolute Decree of Reprobation should not
drive men into despair, on the one hand; so neither should the thoughts of
their being chosen by Gods Absolute Decree of Election make them presumptuous
on the other; and this brings me to my

II. USE, or use of Reproof to those Predestinarians, who think they are so
fast tied to God by his Absolute Decree of Election to Eternal Glory, and that
they are such special Confidents and Favorites of Heaven, that all their sins
shall not be able to separate them from the Love and Favor of God: they have,
through the false perspective of presumption seen their names written indelibly
in the Book of Life, and are therefore of opinion, that all their Provocations
and Rebellions against Heaven, cannot disturb their Horoscope, nor reverse
their fatal and destined bliss and happiness; and herein they resemble the
Scholars often Marcus in Irenaeus, who pretended, they were (...), naturally
spiritual, and that they could be no more blemished or tainted, by all the sins
and debaucheries in the World, than the Sunbeams can be profaned or sullied
by a Dunghill: but let me tell those, who have espoused this dangerous Opinion;
that continuance in sin, and Gods favor, are inconsistent; that there is no
Absolute Decree of the Almighties will secure Heaven to them; their Holiness is
the best security, that they can give, or God will take for it: This is the
Tenor of the Gospel, and this is the sum of our Commission, that are the
Preachers of it: We cannot give out Copies of Gods Decrees, or give men an
immediate Assurance of Heaven, but we must proceed, by a just inference from
those Conditions, and Qualifications, which the Gospel expresses: We search not
the Records of Heaven, but the Books of the Scripture; whereby Isa. 3.10, 11.
We may say to the Righteous, that it shall be well with him; and to the wicked,
that it shall be ill with him; which is the same sense with that St. Augustine
spoke when he declaimed against the Fate and Necessity of the Stoics, Deus
Praedestinavit bonitati mercedem tribuere malum punire.
God has Decreed to reward Goodness, and punish wickedness: If therefore you
desire that Heaven and Happiness should make their approaches to you, make you
your approaches to God in Holiness; Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will
draw nigh to you. This is the standing Law of Heaven, and God will not recede
one Iota or tittle from it: For, it is not because our Brains are filled with a
strong Conceit of Gods Eternal Love to us, or because we swell into a mighty
bulk with aerie fancies and presumptions of our Election, that we become the
more dear and acceptable to God; unless our sins sink, as our Hopes keep up,
unless our sins Ebb as much as our Hopes do flow: It is not a pertinacious
imagination, of our Names being enrolled in the Book of Life, or of the
Debt-books of Heaven being crossed, that can Entitle us to Heaven; Nor will the
fancying our sins washed away with the blood of Christ, whilst the foul stains
thereof remain in our Souls, make us ever the Cleaner; he who thinks, that God
is so certainly espoused to his soul, as to be bound to take it for better, for
worse, being far from the Kingdom of God: To which Kingdom that we may All at
length arrive, God preserve us all from this fatal and dangerous Opinion,
either of Absolute and Peremptory Election, or Reprobation; and this we beg of
him for the sake of that Mediator, whose Blood was a Propitiation for the sins
of the Whole World; to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor,
and Glory, and Praise.

FINIS.
Three Sermons lately published by the same Author and sold by Ben. Billingsley.
1 A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen of the City of London at Guild Hall.

2 The necessity of Receiving the Holy Sacrament, declared in a Sermon at a
Conference of the several Ministers of the Deanery of Braughin, in the County of
Hertford, appointed by the Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of
London to be held at Ware.

3. The great Excellency and Usefulness and Necessity of humane Learning,
declared in a Sermon preached before the University, at Great St. Mary's Church
in Cambridge, Aug. the 7th. 1681.

As also another by an Ingenious Author.

The Italian Ship or Paul's Transportation to Rome a Discourse on Acts the 27
and 15 made on March the 20th. 1681. by Will. Ramsey B. D. and then Lecturer in
Isleworth in Middlesex.


