THE New and better ART OF AGRICULTURE.
This Humble and Faithful MEMORIAL I do most Humbly and Faithfully Dedicate and
Present

TO His most sacred Majesty CHARLES the Second, King of England, etc. To his
Royal Consort Queen KATHERINE. To their Royal Hignesses the Duke and Duchess
of York. To all the Nobility, Knights, and Grand Gentry. To the most Reverend,
and Right Reverend the Lord Bishops, and all the Inferior Clergy of England,
etc.

To the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, and the Common Council of the City of
London. To all the Merchants and Grand Citizens of the same, and of all other
Cities and Towns Corporate in England, etc. And to all others whatsoever that
shall think fit to be concerned therein any way -- for it does, or may concern
any or every Person, either upon the general or particular Account.

England and Wales and the Limits of Berwick upon Tweed, is North and South
about 320 Miles upon the vulgar Account, and generally every such Mile is about
a Mile and a half of measured Miles; and from East to West about as much, and
so may reasonably be allowed and accounted to be 400 measured Miles square
(that is Land and Sea together) but by reason that the Form, as to the Land
only, is very irregular, it may be reasonable to take off for the Sea three
eight Parts, though that be manifestly too much.

Now where the Form is regular, and all Land, 400 measured Miles square would
contain 160000 such measured Miles singly square; but cutting off three ^ll
Eights, or 60000 measured Miles singly square, there remains really to be
^ccounted of 100000 such singly square measured Miles.

One measured Mile singly square, contains 640 Statute-Acres, though there were
no Hills, but all a Flat, in all 64000000 of Statute-Acres. -- I allow or
account that at least the one eighth part of this (generally) is Plowed and
^owed every year (besides all that is laid every year Fallow) that is 8000000
of Acres.

In the now common way (one with the other) they allow at least two Bushels and
a half for the Seed for one Statute-Acre, one sort of Corn and Grain with the
other; and so 20000000 Bushels, or 2500000 Quarters is to be accounted one
years Seed.

In my way I allow at most but half a Bushel for one Statute-Acre, which is but
the fifth part of their allowance; that is 500000 Quarters; that is, 2000000 of
Quarters less than what is sowed in the common way.

Wheat is commonly (one time and place with the other, at, at least 30 s. per
Quarter, Rye at 24 s. Barley at 20 s. and Oats at 12 s. so all accounted
together, comes to above 20 s. a Quarter, and 2000000 of Quarters to 2000000 l.
which is too much to be cast away every year, for two Quarters is more than
enough to support one Person all the year with Bread and Drink, and so to
support every year 1000000 Persons, Men, Women, and Children.

When the Husbandman has twelve times his Seed again, or more, say 32 Bushels
or 4 Quarters, he counts himself in a good prospering way; and when it is
generally so, it is a plentiful year, and 4 Quarters may be so worth 4 l. and
when every Acre, one with the other in England, etc. yields 4 l. that is for
8000000 Acres 32000000 l. for an Increase of the Stock, or Wealth of the
Kingdom in this Part, that is by Tillage only.

In my way (though at double Charge to the common way, as by a strange mistake
it is accounted) I have sufficient cause to hope, and in all Submission to Gods
Will to be certain that every Acre, one with the other, shall yield 10 l. and
clear 4. l. So that if 8000000 of Acres were Ploughed and Sowed my way, the
Crops (according to but the former account) would be worth 80000000, and the
Tithes 8000000, and the 4 l. per Acre cleared, amounts to 3200000 l. That is
^he Kingdom would be enriched 24000000 ever year more than in the common ^ay.

But I expect to have it objected, that if my way was generally used upon
^000000 of Acres, it would be too great Cheapness and Plenty, which (though ^t
be hard that men should repine at Plenty, which is a Blessing from God) may be
thus prevented -- by Tilling less -- say by 3200000 of the 8000000 of Acres
aforesaid, and laying down 4800000 Acres -- And thus the Balance between the
common way and mine, would be about even, and the Kingdom as much enriched, as
now it may be judged to be, as aforesaid, and the Tithes as much, ^^ly not so
much saved out of the Seed, though as much proportionably.

Note, That if there were found or made Manure enough (competently) for 8000000
of Acres before, when 4800000 Acres shall be laid down for other Uses, and
consequently more Cattle of all sorts, and so more Manure; and but ^00000 Acres
in Tillage to be there with enriched, the Land must necessarily be made more
Fertile, and productive of better Crops than formerly.

If it be objected, That if 4800000 Acres be taken from Tillage, and laid down
for other uses, it will be long, (if ever, the more barren part of it
especially) before it can be brought to produce good Grass for Pasturage or
Mowing Grounds -- To this I truly Answer, That I do certainly know how to make
it bear indifferent good Grass the very first Year, and better and more yearly
for many Years after.

If it be objected, That Tillage imploys more Hands than other sorts of
Husbandry: And that by so lessening the Tillage, great Numbers of the poorer
sort will be undone for want of Work -- To this I answer faithfully and
understandingly, That I know diverse honest, beneficial, and not enslaving ways,
which if prosecuted (as I could demonstrate in act, were I in Stock sufficient)
may set not only all the Poor in England, but five times more, if we had them
to work all the Year.

All those that out of a Generous and Noble Love to, and Zeal for the Public
Good, shall freely Contribute what they please, more or less, (I need not say
any more, but that Virtuous Deeds are their own most proper Reward) and he that
loves the public good, deserves Love, Honor and Thanks from all; and in this
case from me peculiarly.

And for those that shall advance any thing more or less, for obtaining a
proportionable Profit to themselves; this business in my Management, shall and
will afford to them 20 l. for each 100 l. p. annum for so many Years as shall
be agreed on, and their Money again at the end of those Years.

Those three great Difficulties (which I hope) this Paper rightly considered
will take off, are these.

First, Though I mean most Faithfully, I cannot give such Security as is
usually expected in Money matters; my own Faith as a Christian, and Honor as a
Gentleman, together with my own Bond or Judgment is all I offer, or that the
Advancer can reasonably demand or expect, all things considered.

Secondly, Some Persons may perhaps have an unkind suspicion, that I will not
put the Money, to be thus obtained, to this use intended -- But he that in any
good measure understands that I shall have a much more great and certain
advantage, by persuing this course (having fit encouragement) than by any other
that can be taken, will easily believe; that Self-Interest will deny that.

Thirdly, Whether in my way there may be produced 10 l. per Acre, per annum.
one with the other -- The answer and demonstration of this you shall be fully
satisfied in, when you shall come and fairly discourse it with me; for it would
be too long and inconvenient to enlarge upon that here; and then you will find
it to be a most Evident Truth -- And whoever gets over these three first
Styles, has no cause of any other Doubt or Objection.

My now Lodging is in White-Friars at Mr. Standen's House next Door to the
Golden Bottle.

Where whosoever (having read this Paper, and rightly considered it) shall
incline to be concerned in any way, may find me, or by leaving a Note sealed
for me, appointing some certain time and place, I shall meet accordingly to
such just Directions -- For it would be equal to Hercules his Labors, for me,
among such vast Numbers and various Humors, to seek and find, fit, and willing
Persons to be concerned with me in this great business.

If any Pious, Generous Person should happen to fall sick before he has had
time fully and effectually to consider of this Paper and its Contents, in case
he should dye, may do an Excellent and Hourable Work, to appoint in their Wills
expressly -- So that such Legacy may be sure to come to my Hands, and be rightly
and duly paid me, without delay, suit or trouble, which the very Nature of this
business is against -- such Legacy, be it more or less, will tend to the
advancing this Business to its proper height and best Perfection.

Be pleased to understand these Truths, that the Proposer is a Gentleman, and
was a Col. of Horse in his late Majesty's Armies; Has been several times
undone by, or for his Fidelity, having lost a considerable Estate he had in
Possession, and a greater he had Right to; has served and suffered about forty
three Years, and not yet effectually relieved, which is the cause he wants
Stock to carry on this great and good Work without help; And therefore takes
this course to obtain a considerable Stock, and all that shall Contribute to it
any way, shall thereby Advance a public good, Augment (if they engage in it
that way) their own Intrests or Estates, and raise a deep Sufferer and his
Family out of his undeserved Ruins -- which even alone is a Noble act, but
altogether much more.


