Innocnt the 11 Pope of Rome. London Printed for J: Dunton at ye black Raven in
ye Poultrey


THE DEVILS PATRIARCK, OR A Full and Impartial Account Of the NOTORIOUS LIFE Of
this Present Pope of Rome INNOCENT the 11th.

Wherein is newly Discovered his Rise and Reign; The Time and Manner of his
being chosen Pope; His Prime Procession, Consecration and Coronation; The
Splendor and Grandeur of his Court; His most Eminent and Gainful Cheats, by
which he Gulls the silly People; His Secret and Open Transactions with the
Papists in England, Scotland, France and Ireland, and other Protestant
Countries to this very day; Together with the Rest of the Hellish Policies and
Infamous Actions of his wicked Life.

Written by an Eminent Pen to Revive the Remembrance of the almost forgotten
Plot against the Life of his Sacred Majesty and the Protestant Religion.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black-Raven in the Poultrey. 1683.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Candid and Courteous Reader,
WHen a sudden and surprising Invasion is made upon us by a Foreign Power,
every Right-thinking Mind cannot but Judge it high time to Fire our Beacons.
Aesops Witty Wisdom, (in his Fable of the Shepherd-Boy, that cried out falsely,
as well as frequently, [The Wolf comes, the Wolf comes, Help, Help.] to the
People,) has in the Apologues Moral a very shrewd Congruity, with our present
Case, though there wants not also some Disparity.

(1.) The Congruity consists in these particulars,

First, Every Shepherd should be careful to preserve the Flock committed to his
Charge; so ought every Mystical, as well as the Literal Shepherd, (whether
(...) aut (...), Young or Old,) to be.

Secondly, Both ought to cry out of Probable and Approaching Dangers. It was
not at all Improbable, that the Wolf was a coming, because he used frequently
to do so.

Thirdly, When Dangers be both Probable and Approaching, (for it is the Nature
of the Beast to worry the Sheep,) then it is the Duy of Both, not only to Cry
out, but to Crave Help from the Peoples Hands, yea to quicken up their
Assistance with strong and Reiterated Outcrys, That the Abaddon, (a bad one
indeed,) the Apollyon, or Devouring Beast, is just a coming.

Fourthly, All Hands are few enough to Help the Lord against this Mighty, (yea
in the Romish phrase, Almighty,) Beast.

Fifthly, All private Works must be left, (both in City and Country,) for
stopping the strong Current of a Public and Common Calamity.

Sixthly, As the Sheep of Aesops Shepherd were Grazing, [in eminentiori Loco,]
upon Lofty Mountains, yet not Inaccessible to the Wolf: So the Sheep, which
Gospel-Shepherds are feeding, and which the Romish Wolf would Worry, are
likewise Grazing upon the Holy-Hill of Zion, the highest of all Hills, yet not
so high, but, when the Sins of the Sheep do open a passage, becomes Accessible
to the Wolf also. Where the Beast has been before, Treading down the Green
Pastures, and fouling the Residue with his foul Feet, he has some hope for
returning thither again, especially, seeing the Nest-Egg of Romish Relics is
still left behind to encourage his Return: Bloody Bishop Bonner could once
Briskly Brag, Such as like to Sup our Broth, we will make them love to Eat our
Beef too: God grant us a good Deliverance from such Barbarous Butchers, and
Beastly Butcheries, from that Brutish People, Skilful to Destroy.

(2.) As to the Disparity,

First, The Outcry of Aesops Shepherd-Boy was only, [Joci gratia,] a false
Holloe for Sport-sake, a Boyish-Trick, playing the Wag with the Masters of the
Sheep, to whom he was but an Hireling-Servant: But the Outcry of our Shepherds
have been ever more Real and Serious, from the many Essays and Attempts, which
Rome has really made to Reduce (as Colemans Phrase is,) this Northern Heresy
to her Obedience: She has all along, ever since the Reformation of Religion
here, with all her Fraud and Force, with all Her Craft and Cruelty endeavored
to reenter with her Deformation of it, and to Recover both her Nest, and her
Nest-Egg, from which she was forced.

Secondly, Our Outcry has not been made by some one Novice, or of many Novices
only, but also of the most Grave, most Judicious, and most Thinking Discerning
Fathers of the Sheepfold, who, with Moses, could espy the very first Outgoings
of Wrath, and, with Elijah could Observe a Black Cloud, though no bigger than a
Man's Hand: All these at Sundry Times, and in Diverse Manners, have (...), as
with one Mouth Sounded Loud Alarms.

Thirdly, Though those called in to be Assistants against the Wolf, in the
Fable, [nihil esse comperiebant,] found nothing of real Danger. Yet those
called together to Assist against the Wolf of Romes Incursions, have upon
undeniable grounds found out a Real Danger, Witness His Majesty and
Privy-Councils Reiterated Proclamations, the Unanimous Votes of Four Successive
Parliaments, (all called upon for their Assistants, etc.) The Forms of Prayer,
Composed and Imposed by the Bishops, for the Fast appointed by Authority, upon
the Account of the Popish Plot, as also the Murder of Justice Godfrey, and the
Just Execution of some Grand Conspirators.

Fourthly, The Sheep-worrying Beast in the Fable, is expressly called a Wolf
only, though there be other Beasts as obnoxious to Sheep. But this Molock of
Rome is such a Bloody Beast, as no Name could sufficiently express his
Bloud-Thirstiness. Hereupon (1.) Daniel calls the First Beast, (or Assyrian
Empire,) a Lion. The Second, (the Medo-Persian,) a Bear. The Third, (the
Grecian,) a Leopard. But the Fourth, to wit, (the Roman Empire,) he calls a
Beast in general, (without any name,) as if Exceeding, (as well as Including,)
the Savage Nature of all the Three former, Dan. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 23. (2.) John
also, (as well as Daniel,) calls him a Beast in the general, ( without, because
above any Name,) yet makes he him a Monstrous Beast, Compounded of all the
Three Beasts aforesaid, as having the Feet of a Bear, the Mouth of a Lion,
Himself like a Leopard, and the Dragon giving him Power, Revel. 13.2. And
though Rome Heathen has done much against Christ's Sheep, Slaying its
Thousands, yet Rome Antichristian has done more, and far outdone it in
Slaying its Ten Thousands: So that this Beast, (above all Names,) is a Beast
with a Witness, an Hyperbolical Behemoth, as if many Beasts made up One, (so
the Hebrew Plural Faeminine signifies,) far beyond the most Bloodthirsty Wolf,
yea the most Savage Cannibal, for Eating the Flesh and Drinking the Blood of
Poor Protestants, even to an high Inebriation, as the Sequel will more fully
Demonstate: Take but this Taste here, It Is credibly Related, That in the space
of Eight Hundred Years, this Monstrous Beast, (who has all Cruelties
Concentred in him,) has been the Death of Twelve Millions of Christians. Idaea
Reform. Antichr. Tom. 1. Part 2. Sect. 2. Cap. 6. To Instance only one Specimen
of this Portrayed Beast in this place, to wit, Pope Julius the Second, (who
was turned up Trump, and Triumphed in the Chair of Pestilence, in the Fifteenth
Century) that made a shift to Worry (in Seven Years space of his Papacy) no
fewer than Seven Hundred Thousand Sheep. See Baleus de Actis Romans pontif. lib.
7. It Is one of Luthers Divine Raptures, that Cain (the Firstborn of the Devils
Patriarks) shall be Murdering his Brother Abel to the end of the World: and the
Older he grows, the more Bloodthirsty he becomes: This Romish Runnet (as is
commonly said of the Common in Dairy Houses) the Older it is, it grows so much
the Stronger. If the Beast were so Bloody in that Century aforementioned, how
much more may he be expected in this present Pope. Seeing [Morsus moribundae
Bestiae sunt maxim mortiferi,] The lost Bitings of a Dying Beast are mostly
most Deadly: and whether this be yet past, Sub Judice lis est, it is a matter of
Controversy, and if not, I would ask my Countrymen Protestants, Is this a
Beast fit to be Courted into England? which is indeed the Bloody
Scarlet-Colour'd Whore, that better deserves to he Carted out of it, and out
of the World also.

Fifthly, It does not appear, that the Wolf in the Fable was ever restrained
from any Attempts by those frequent outcries for Assistance, seeing the Report
of his approaching was false until the last. But this Beast of Rome has had
many signal and singular restraints by King and Parliament, etc. But above all,
by an Invisible and an Overruling Hand; so that she has been constrained to
alter her Methods, and to take new Measures, Foisting her dead Brats into the
Bosom of Innocent Protestants, which though it need not the Wisdom of a Solomon
to Discover, yet requires it the Power of a Parliament more fully to
Determine, in a way of Vindicative Justice.

Sixthly and Lastly, I wish with all my Soul, that there may be found more
Disparity than Congruity in the Catastrophe and Closure of the Fable, as
Relating to our present Case. The Apologue indeed concludes thus, that whereas
the Husbandmen had been often abused by the false Alarms of the Boy, leaving
their Ploughs standing Idle in the Field to deliver the Sheep when there was no
Danger, then the Wolf coming in good earnest, the Boy cries out, but was not
believed by them, whom he had so often deceived, hereupon the Wolf prevails
against the Boy, Worries the Sheep without resistance, Gluts himself with their
Flesh and Blood, and escapes away scotfree, without so much as a blow for that
unparalled mischief: The Moral of this last part is, as Solomon, with his
wonderful Wisdom, helps us to Interpret it, saying, Woe be to that Land, that
has [(...), ovium Pastorem] no wiser than a Child, Eccl. 10.16. Alas, He is
not able, (though never so willing) to Deliver his Flock, etc. Solomon says
also, But in multitude of Counselors there is safety, Prove. 11.14. This
Shepherds Boy had so much Wit in him, as to call in more helping Hands to his
own, though he did often cry so Childishly, and at last (through his own foolish
fraud) fruitlesly without success. We have had many loud Alarms Trumpeted out,
crying, [The Romish Wolf is coming, Help, Help,] and though none of the many
have been false outcries, as before, yet would to God the Helping Husbandmen
may not (through so many Disappointments) grow weary of Appearing, so let the
Devouring Beast have his Blond-Thirsty Lust satiated upon the Protestant-Sheep,
and all this without any resistance and opposition. But though this Apologue of
Aesops be thus significantly suitable in its Moral, yet have we a Divine
Parable (to Wit, that of Jothams, Judge. 9.) that infinitely Transcends it in
its signal and singular Signature as to our present Calamitous Condition.
Bloody Abimeleck (a base Bastard) Usurps the Kingdom, which by subtle
practicing upon his Kinsfolk and the Men of Shechem he craftily compassed, and
(by the help of his vile Vagrants and Villainous Followers, Hired with the
Treasure of Baal-Berith) as cruelly constituted the Foundation of it, in
Murdering (like a bloody Tyrant) Seventy Innocent, and all Legitimate
Competitors to make his way to the Throne, Good Jotham only escaping, He takes
the boldness (notwithstanding his Personal Danger) to make his mind (yea and
Gods too) known to the Men of Shechem from the top of Mount Gerizim (that
Blessing, not Mount Ebal that Cursing Mountain) Before he took to his Heels,
and fled from the Tyrant. As this Sacred Apologue of Jotham's, (who, though but
a young Man, was vir bonus, dicendi peritus, a good Man, and a good Orator, one
that could declare his Mind fitly, and durst do it Freely, being [(...)]
Inspired of Gods Spirit) does therefore far (I say) Transcend the aforesaid
Fable of Aesop, so it more highly merits a larger Descant upon it, were I not
bound up to the Narrow Limits of a Short and yet Succinct Preface. Hereupon,
all that I am Allowed to Add, is, to let the Iugenious Reader know, that the
Hebrew Doctors do Understand by the Fig Tree in the Parable, Renowned Deborah
their Deliveress, as by the Olive Tree Othniel, or Ehud, and by the Fruitful
Vine, Gideon with his Numerous Offspring; what is meant by the Bramble needs
not much Explication, it being not a Tree, but a Shrub (the Product of Gods
Curse upon the Earth, Genesis 3.17, 18.) Prickly, Barren, Base, Abject, good for
nothing, but to Stop Gaps, or Kindle a Fire: Abimeleck was a Right Bramble
indeed, who grew in the base Hedg-Row of a Contemptible Concuhine, who horribly
scratched and drew Blood to purpose, when once he had (by the help of
Baal-Beriths Treasure) scrambl'd up to a Dominion over Israel, whereunto he was
Handed by his hired Beggarly Rascals, and Debauched Desperado's: The (...) or
Moral Hereof (as to us) is obvious to every common Understanding, and neither
the Explication, nor the Application is any matter of Difficulty: I shall
therefore conclude my Praeliminary part with this pathetical Epiphonema, as a
Golden Key to open the Mystery of Iniquity: Oh England, England, Thou have had
thy Delivering Deborah (Queen Elizabeth) who saved thee in Gods Hand from the
Cursed Canaanites, that dealt cruelly with thee in the Marian Days, Thou have
also had thy Othniels, Ehuds who did stab the Red Letter Cause with their very
Pens (as King James) excellently and unanswerably Accomplished, though he was
but left handed for the Sword, having for his Motto [Rex pacificus] which one
wittely Englished [put up thy Dagger Jamy] And some Abusive wits limn'd his
Picture with a Padlock upon his Sword, yet his Learned Writing did so
effectually vindicate his undoubted Right against Pope Paul the Fifth, that
there was no need of Martial Warring (Cedant Arma Togae, etc.) There was no
occasion for Mars, where Minerva was his Bellona; which made his Un-Holiness
Decline the Encounter: Thou have likewise had thy Gideon with a fruitful
Offspring, stout Assertors of the Reformed Religion, should thou? now forsake
the Fitness, the Fatness, and the Fruitfulness of thy Truly. Noble Figtree,
Olive and Vine (which indeed has cheered God and Man) and at last embrace a
Base Bramble, that exotic, dry, empty, Saples Kex and Weed of a Foreign
Power, to wit, that of the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition and the wicked one,
which is the threefold Black-Brand, wherewith Antichrist is Stigmatized by the
Holy Ghost. How far this threefold Character agrees with the Pope; See the Man
of Sin, lib. 1, chap. 4. Foulis History of Romish Treasons and Usurpations per
totum, and Nesses Discovery of Antichrist, page 55. to 63. etc. what their own
Authors Report of them may be best believed: That this Babylonish Brat is a
Bastard like the Bramble Abimeleck, and and not Legitimate, or Heaven-born,
their own very Creatures are constrained to Confess.

As First, Platina, who was the Pope's own Secretary, and Keeper of the
Vatican-Library, yea a Writer by Commission from Pope Sixtus the Fourth.

Secondly, Benno Uspergensis, one of Romes own Cardinals.

Thirdly, And Math. Parisiensis a Benedictin Monk of the Monastary of St.
Albans here in England, All these three (none of them writing out of Prejudice,
so they would have bewrayed their own Nest, but Impartially and in Truth) do
Unanimously Describe the Popes to be Limbs of the Devil; the last of which
Relates, How [ Diabolus, and Inferorum Contubernium, etc.] that the Devil and
All his Hellish Crew Wrote Gratulatory Letters to the Pope and his Clergy, for
sending more Souls to Hell, than ever went before, Math. Paris Hist. Angl.
Guil. Conquest. Anno. 1072. page 10. Yea none of them can deny, but that some
of the Popes sold themselves to the Devil for their obtaining of the Popedom by
his Craft. Therefore the Men of Shechem or England need no Jotham to Proclaim
to them, (seeing the very Romanists themselves say enough) that if in Truth ye
Anoint this Pope to have Dominion over you, and Return again to put your Trust
in his shadow, ye will be not only Notoriously disapointed in your Shelter
under such a Shadow (for the Bramble-Bush cannot yield any good Shade; the
silly Sheep flying to it for shelter, are sure to lose part of their Fleece, if
not of their Flesh too) But also a Fire will flow fiercely forth from this Base
Bramble to Devour you, and your tallest Cedars: This one Terraefilius or
Bastard will destroy all your trueborn Sons: He that has but half an eye, may
both see and foresee the Matchless mischeifs that must be its Consequences,
which they that are so Hot for a Popish Successor (while they yet profess
themselves to be good Protestants) do not Duly and Truly Consider. But I must
not detain you too long in the Porch, for fear of your catching cold. Having
Dispatched the Prologue, consisting of a Double Apologue, (which may be further
Illustrated and Applied in the Epilogue) Let me now hand you to the House it
self, wherein you may take a plain Prospect of this present Pope limn'd to the
life in his Right Red Vermilion Colors.

The Notorious LIFE Of this present POPE of ROME, [INNOCENT, XI.]
THis present Pope of Rome was Cardinal Odeschalchi of Come in the Duchy of
Millaine, when called to the Roman-Chair, whether we wrong him in reckoning him
among the Base Brambles of the Cursed Earth, is the [(...)] Postulatum, or
Grand Enquiry. In the General let Dr. Prideaux give the Answer for me, who
Writes a Compendious History of the Lives of all the Popes, and after he has
past the Patriarchs, (and the tolerable Popes) He begins at Anno Dom. 606.
with Usurping Nimrods, (a worse Name than Brambles) and Reckons Thirty Eighth
Popes (Cruel Hunters all,) from that Year, to 847.

The First of which Black Bed-Roll, was Boniface the Third, and Leo the Fourth
was the Last.

His next Rank were (as he Styles them) Rank Luxurions Sodomites, whereof He
Reckons Forty, from the Year 855. to 996. the First of them was Pope John the
Eighth (in plain English, Pope Joan, the Rank Whore, which God would have, to
Declare to all the World, That the Church of Rome is the Apocalyptick Whore,)
and the Last of that Number was Gregory the Fifth.

His Third sort of Popes, from the Year 999. to 1240. that He presents to our
View, are another Bundle of Forty Popes again, whom He Dignifies with that
Honorable Title of Egyptian Magicians; the First of this Black Regiment was
Sylvester the Second, and the Last was Caelestine the Fourth.

His Fourth Prospect of Popes He gives, is another lovely Cluster of Sower
Grapes, consisting of Eight and Thirty Popes, from the Year 1243. to 1503. The
Captain whereof is Innocent the Fourth, and the Lieutenant (that brings up the
Rear) is Pius the Third, All which he Brandeth for a Company of Devouring
Abaddons, All Bad-ones beyond Bounds.

Yet still there be worse behind, [Occupat extremum Scabies,] which as some do
English, not only the Scab, but the Devil comes hindermost. It Is the Divine
Doom inflicted upon the Church of Rome, as an Apostate, to be waxing worse and
worse, therefore it may the less be wondered at, that the last Classis of Popes,
(which are the very Dregs of Time,) must be the worst, and thereupon are
worthily Stigmatized with the worst Appellation. The Words of the Reverend
Author aforesaid, Run thus, [after the Devouring Abaddons,] To fill up the
Mystery and Measure of Iniquity, the Incurable Babylonians do next step upon
the Stage, [ Curavimus Babylona, and non est Sanata, Jerem. 51.6.] We would
have Cured Babylon, but she could not be Cured, for the rest of the Men that
were not Killed by those Plagues, Repented not of their (1.) Murders, (2.)
Sorceries, (3.) Fornications, (4.) Thefts, Revel. 9.20, 21. This last and worst
Rank reaches from the Year 1503. to this present 1683. betwixt which Two
Periods the Number of Popes are Twenty-Five, (the fewest Number of all the Five
Classes, yet have the Foulest, both Name and Nature.) whereof Julius the Second
leads the Van, and this present Pope, (the subject of our Discourse,) brings up
the Rear.

I would have given some short Remarks upon these several Classes, (thus
dignified and distinguished with those Five aforesaid Honorable Titles,) and
upon the several Popes, as they stand in Rank and File, under their several
Banners in every Classis, had it not been beside my present purpose, and would
it not have swollen this Discourse too much. I shall therefore satisfy my self,
and the Reader with Two Remarks only.

The First Remark is, That the Leader of the Van in the Second Rank, is a
Virago rather than a Virgo, a Pope of the Faeminine Gender, that Taught
Gramarians to Decline Papa with Haec not Hic: The name of this Female Pope,
(John or Joan) both in a Literal and Mystical Sense, shows that Rome may well
be called the Whore of Babylon, Romish Chronologers have not Inserted her Name
in the Catalogue of Popes, which Marianus Scotus Renders this Reason for,
[Propter Turpituidinem Rei, and Sexum Muliebrem,] because the wrong Gender
would be a Reproach to them. Wherefore to avoid the like Disgrace, the Porphiry
Chair, (or Groping-stool) was Ordained, Ubi ab Ultimo Diacono, etc. Where the
lowest Deacon must make the Experiment, etc. Hence it is, That these Popes who
have called themselves [Johns] are so ill ordered in their common Catalogues,
some making that John which Succeeded [ Adrian the Second] in the Year 872. to
be John the Eighth, and others John the Ninth: Ingenious Platina forequoted,
does only (of all the Romanists) Reckon Pope Joan as the Eighth of the John's,
and so farward: And it is proboble enough (says Dr. Heylin, a Man Fair and
Favorable enough) that God suffered that Proud See of Rome to fall into such a
profound Reproach, the more to cut the Coxcombs of the Succeeding Popes in
their Highest Ruff and Riotings, and the better to beat down their Big Brags of
a continued Succession, whereof they are frequently Boasting. As [Remember Lots
Wife] is a due Caution to us, so I see not why [ Remember Pope Joan] should not
be likewise a true Check to them: The Truth of this Story, as to matter of
Fact, Mr. Alexander Cook (my quondam Predecessor) in his Book of Pope Joan
has proved it by Irrefragable Arguments, and has most Industruously battered
down all the Objections which the most Mercurial Wits of Rome could raise
against it. See his Book, and Dr. Heylins Cosmography in Folio the last
Edition, page 107. etc. The Bastard Abimeleck aforementioned did Desperately
grudg, that it should be said [a Woman had Braind him] Judge. 9.54. Sure I am,
this base born Brat of Rome (the Head of the Church) has Received (were He
sensible) a Deadly Wound by the hands of a Woman likewise, with this difference
only, the former was Active, and Designing, the latter was Passive, and never
purposed the Wounding: It Is such a Reproach to the Roman Chair as will never be
wiped off; this is the Semiramis, the Amazoman Queen, the She-Captain, that
stands in the Front of the Second Rank, to wit, of the Luxurious Sodomits.

The Second Remark is, concerning Julio the Second, who stands as a stout
Generalissimo of the last Rank, to wit, of Incurable Babylonians, and He is
most fitly placed in that Station, as having far more of the Soldier, than of
the Prelate in Him, keeping Italy, all his Popedom, in continual Wars, and for
a pregnant proof, that this Romish God, was a Man of Metal, This is the Pope,
who passing over Tyber-Bridg, first Brandished his Sword, and then threw his
Keys into the River, saying, If Peter's Keys would not serve his Turn, then
Paul's Sword should do it Home.

Such a Thrasonick Bravado would better become Julius Caesar the Emperor of
Rome, than Julius Secundus the Bishop of Rome. But I have been thinking, that
it is a Thousand pities, Famous Pope Joan had not her Lot in this Last Rank too,
yea, and (were it not to Dethrone and Disposses this Heroic Hector) She might
have stood in the Captains place there, as She does in the Second Rank, [Detur
digniori] is the Rule, She best deserving it: for where could that Whore of
Babylon (as above) be better placed? than among the Incurable Babylonians, and
where could that Incurable Whore have been better ordered? than in the Front of
that File of Defiled and Defileing Beasts.

However, this present Pope, Cardinal Odeschalcho, (who has changed his Name
into Innocent the Eleventh,) is Represented to our View as standing upon the
Tail and Fag-end of those Incurable Babylonians: We use to say, Such a person
as Labors under a Mortal Incurable Disease, has a [Miserere Mei Deus,] writ
upon his Door: who it is, that Writes the Continuation of Dr. Prideaux's
Introduction, I know not, yet he Writes an Epitome of this our Cardinal
Odeschalcho's public Actions and Transactions, since his coming to be Groped
in the Porphyry Chair: and we are much obliged to that Author (who ever he is)
for fixing this present Pope under the Head of Incurable Babylonians, but I
know not (in all the World) how to Reconcile the White Character that Author
gives him, and the Black Title be seteth over him. The Description of his Life
there, seems to carry no Congruity with an Incurable Babylonian. It Is great
pity, that any mistaking Candor should make such a Disparity: but to let that
pass, come we now to give a more full and Impartial Account of his Rise and
Beginning, etc. So far as Historians lends any light hereunto.

I find that this Person (so soon as any Fame found him) had his first noticed
Capacity at Come, a place of note in the Dukedom of Millain in Italy, a Town,
made the more Famous by being the Birthplace of the two Famous Plinys, and
situated on the South Side of the Lacus La^ius, which from this Town has now
the name of Lago di Como, through this Lake the River Addua runs; yet (as
Geographers say) their two Waters do not mingle: Which two Remarks has
occasioned in Me two Wishes in this man's behalf. The first is, that as Pliny
became the more Famous for stopping Trajan the Emperor from persecuting the
poor Christians in the Empire, by writing elegantly to Him, that He found no
greater fault laid to the charge of the persecuted, save this, that they did
(Cantas Ante-lucanos canere) sing Psalms before day; upon which Letter the
persecution ceased: So would to God this present Pope might write such an
effectual Letter to the French King in the behalf of the poor persecuted
Protestants in France, (sure I am, he can find no worse faults in them) so stop
the persecution there, this would make him more Famous, than ever the Recovery
of his Regalitys (he has been so long contending for) can Render Him: whereas,
to be outvy'd by a blind Heathen (such was Pliny) in such a good Work of Piety
and Charity (which are Works highly cried up at Rome) may Render Him for ever
Infamous. Especially if He be found to push it on and promote it, instead of
putting a stop to it. The second Wish is, Oh that this pretended Vicar of
Christ may learn some Divine Lesson, even from the very Nature of his own
Country-River, which will not mingle its pure Streams with the puddle water of
a corrupted standing Lake: not to play the Huxter in Sophisticating, and
Adulterating the truth of the Gospel, by mingling it with corrupt Traditions.
There is certainly most Evangelical Doctrine in that Levitical Law, thou shall
not let thy Cattle Gender with a diverse Kind, thou shall not Sow thy Field
with a mingled Seed, neither shall a Garment mingled of Linen and Woollen come
upon thee] Levit. 19.19. to show, that Miscelanees in Religious Worship are
both hateful to God, and hurtful to Men: and not only the nature of His River,
but also naturalists do teach Him not to mingle the Inventions of Men, with the
Institutions of God, for they say, that though Gold be so Ductile, as to be
willing to mix and incorporate it self with other Metals, save only with
Latten, notwithstanding, as to its outward Luster, it be so like it self: so
the true Church (which is called a golden Candlestick) will not mix or embody
her self with the false (commonly called the Latin) Church, which stagnateth
like a stinking Lake, though she resembles the Spouse, and sits in the Temple
of God, 2 These. 2.4. but indeed is the Apocalyptick Whore, and the most Capital
Enemy to the Flock of Christ, in all the last Ages: This present Pope, while he
was in his public Capacity (omitting his private, as not worth Recording) at
this Town of Come, went under the name of Benedict Odeschalci, of the Title of
Saint Onuphrius and was created a Cardinal under Pope Innocent the 10th. March
the 6th. in the year 1645. Upon which take these Remarks.

First, It Is not easy to Assign the Reason why his proper praenomen (that of
Benedict) should become so disgustful to Him as to change it into Innocent (the
Name of his Predecessors in the Chair) seeing it was (as it signifies) a
blessed Name, and also the Name of some Popes before him, but more of that
change of Names afterward, when we come to his Popedom.

Secondly, There may a more probable conjecture be given for the change of his
Surname, to wit, Odeschalcho, more especially when it is Allowable to give an
Italick Name an Attick Etymology, and so [nomen quasi notamen] that Name has
an evil sound, sent, and sense, signifying (not a Golden) but a Brazen Song.
That which sents and savours of Brass (we usually say) is unpleasant to the
Palate, and it is the more likely this Name might be disgustful to his Palate,
seeing his Predecessor Sergius the Second, even quarelled with his own Name,
which (before he was Pope) was [Bocca di Porco] signifying Swine-Mouth, or
Hog-Face, and thinking that ill-sounding Name not suitable to his Dignity, he
therefore changed it. And upon such an Honorable President, if Hog-Face was so
odious a Name to the former, why might not also Brass-Face or Brazen-Face (as a
Face of Brass is an approbrious Phrase amongst us) be odious to this latter.

Thirdly, As to the Title of Saint Onuphrius he was dignified with at Come, I
shall only say at this time (though much more might be added) what Tradition
tells us of this Onuphrius, that he was a monkish Man, who lived a solitary
Life for sixty years, in which space he saw no Man: had our Odes. chalcho
Imitated this monkish Patroon, and trod in this Pattern's Steps, he had never
become a Cardinal, much less a Pope, unto which conversing with Men, and
conveying Kindnesses to them (to oblige their Votes at Election) are necessary
Ingredients, and which he to the utmost improved.

Fourthly, As to his being made a Cardinal while at Come: this is one of the
highest pitches and pinacles of Pride (the very next to the loftyest Spire of
the Pope himself) that the Romish Clergy Aspire to, for the Cardinals are the
Popes Senators or Privy Counselors, and are called Cardinals, which is
derived from Cardo, the Hinge of a Door, because upon them (as the Door hangs
upon the Hinge, and turns which way we will, either for opening or shutting)
all the important Affairs of the Roman Church hang and are turned which way
they please: thus the word [Cardinal] is usually used thus, that whereupon any
thing most turns and depends, as to East, West, North, and South, are
called Cardinal Points of the Compass. Thus also those four principal Virtues,
[Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance] are called the Cardinal Virtues.
And thus the Word is generally taken to denote something that is Chief and
Principle: So these Cardinals are: But the Hinge, upon which these Cardinals
did themselves at the first Hang, was very Low, and their Original Extract very
Contemptible: For this great Office did creep into the Roman Church thus, Pope
Marcellus in the Third Century divided the City of Rome into 25 Parishes (some
Authors call them Diocesses) over each of which He appointed a Presbyter, whose
work was Assigned to Baptize Heathens Converted, and to Bury the Dead within
their several Precincts: These were afterward called Cardinals, or Principal
Priests, or Deacons, because they had [Curam Animarum] the Cure of Souls
committed to them, and had others (in Sacred Orders also) under them: There be
Three sorts of Holy Orders, so called, to distinguish them from their Four
other Orders, (Doorkeeper, Readers, Exorcists, Acolyths, or Taper-bearers,)
These are, First, The Subdeacons, (whose Office is the Gropeing Work, etc.)
Secondly, The Deacon (who, with the former, has the Honor only to kiss the
Bishops Hand at the Ordination,) See Rosses View, etc. page 451. The Third, Is
the Priest, whom the Bishop Kisseth to show his Parity in Respect of Order,
Idem Ibidem. These same 25 Priests of so many Parishes in the City, being
always so nigh the Pope, the more that he grew up gradually into his Grandeur,
the higher did he draw up these Priests (his Appurtenances) their posture all
along keeping pace with the Popes Pomp, Adeo ut quod in principio Oneri fuit,
Tandem Aliquando Honori esse Caepit. So, that which at first was but a Poor and
Burdensome Office, became at length an Employ of Dignity and Honor: Thus Dr.
Heylin Testifies, That Pope Paschal the First caused the Priests of the
several Parishes in Rome, by reason of their nearness to his Person, their
presence at his Election, to be Honored with a more Venerable Title, that is,
to be called Cardinals, See Cosmogr. page 107. at the Top. Thus from a company
of pitiful Parish Priests, they account themselves not only Check-Mates to
Princes, but also Compeers with Kings themselves; but indeed they ought to be
esteemed the principal Limbs of the Beast Antichrist; yea, they are so far
Incorporated with the Pope himself, that they must not (forsooth) so much as be
let Blood without his special License; it is (no doubt) for fear least the Head
should be so concerned in these his Special Members, as to Die with them by
Sympathy: The Number of them at their first Roman Constitution (for want of a
Divine Institution) were, as is aforesaid, Twenty Five, which Dr. Potter
worthily Observes to be the exact Root Number of Six Hunndred Sixty Six, the
Namber of the Beast; but now they are Multiplied like a Numerous Spawn, into
much more than Double the Number; that depends wholly and solely at the Popes
pleasure, who can Blow them out of his Mouth as many as he pleases; he can
Breath out a Cardinal with as much ease, as he Breaths out the Holy Ghost; yea,
for Doing some Notable Jobb in Hand, he can Breath out, or rather Spit out of
his Palate or Palace, a matter of Sixteen Cardinals at one Spit, as this
present Pope has lately done; Oh what an Improving Leap and Advance has he
now made, whereas while he was but a Cardinal, he is then but a Created
Creature of the Pope, but now that he is become a God Almighty the Pope, he can
be a Creator of his Creatures: Monstrum Horrendum, etc. Prodigious were his
Privileges, (which not Christ, but Antichrist, bestowed upon him while a
Cardinal,

As First, When ever he Rode abroad to take Fresh Air, His (Sir) Reverence was
so Glorified (yet not so much as Christ was at his Transfiguration) with his
Right Reverend Red Hat, and Rich Robes, that the Splendour of Beth these Dazel'd
all Spectators Eyes, yea, the very Blast of his Body but passing by, Blew off
all their Hats, and Bore so hard upon them, as to Blow them over, and made them
fall down to Worship Him, and to ask of Him his Patriarchal Blessing, which He
rarely bestowed with that Ingenuity, as He in the Story did, who in so doing,
said, [Si Populus Vult Decipi, Decipiatur.] Light cheap Words make Fools fain.
No doubt but His Shadow, (as he is now Pope, and Peter's Successor) can cure as
many Diseases, as that of Peter's did. Pope Innocent the Fourth, Graced the
Cardinals with a Red (Fools Cap, or) Hat, by his Ordinance in the Twelfth
Century; and in the Fourteenth, Pope Pius the Second Advanced their Splendour
yet Higher, with most Stately Scarlet Gowns, (Dr. Heylins Cosmogr. page 108. at
the bottom.) Thus were they Attired in such Antic, Gaudy and Pedantick
Dresses, as neither Christ nor his Apostles ever Strutted about in, which must
Declare to all the World, that this is the Antichrist, and none need say of
Him, as John Baptist said often to Christ, [Art thou He that should come, or
may we look for another?] No, this is the Red Letter-Man, in his Red Hat and
Scarlet Gown. This is the Bloody and Scarlet Colored Beast.

The Second eminent privilege this Cardinal was dignified with by his Creator
the Pope, is, that whatever condemned Malefactor (just going to the place of
Execution) could but be so happy as to meet this Man in his Ponticalibus in the
way of his Progress, He was immediately to be Acquitted, and his Life spared,
that He might evermore Admire and Adore this his Romish Savior. It Is pity his
clemency is not more exercised out of design in this Life-Saving Work: Oh what
a choice Act of Mercy might He sometimes do here in but crossing the way at a
right Juncture, betwixt Newgate and Tyburn, when his Pontifical Presence is
blessed with such an excellent Virtue as both to satisfy the Nations Law, (which
is mortally broken) and Save also the Life and Soul of the condemned.

A Third Immunity He had also in that Cardinal Capacity, was, that no Cardinal
can be Condemned for the most Capital Crime, except He can first be Convicted
by the Testimony of Seventy Two Witnesses. By this means, a Cardinal may safely
venture to be the greatest Villain in the World, not only because the
Canon Law says [Ecclesia sit libera] let Churchmen be free from secular
Censures, but also (though the aforesaid may fail) if they do but observe their
own Jesuitical Rule [si non cast, tamen caute] He may without hazard
perpetrate Whoredom, Treason, the worst of wickedness, so he do it with
caution, and he deserves to be hanged seventy two times over, that will act his
Villainy in the presence of seventy two persons, that may all come in as joint
Witnesses against Him: The Law of the true and only wise God ( supposing the
Testimony of two or three Witnesses sufficient) is but comparatively an Insipid
Sentence: but the Law of their Lord God the Pope is far more profound, saying,
two or three and twenty are not enough of Witnesses, even against the Inferior
Clergy. There must (say they) be twenty seven against a Deacon, sixty four
against a Priest, and seventy two against a Bishop-Cardinal. Dianae compendium,
page 85. No wonder if the Romish Clergy be the greatest Rogues, and vilest
Villains in the World: No wonder if they carry so deep, and so Epidemick a
Tincture as the only and unparalled Tools to be employed by Beelzebub; for
Murdering of Kings, Blowing up of Parliaments, managing not only Private and
Personal Assasinations, but also Public and National Massacres, to
Astonishment; to say nothing of Burning down Cities and Market Towns, and many
more Matchless Mischiefs, whereof how far this their Holy Father (both while
Cardinal, and when Pope) in Conjunction with his Unholy Sons have been guilty,
the Sequel will Demonstrate; and that Ex abundanti.

A Fourth Privilege (or rather a Prerogative) this Cardinal had, while so, was,
That whosoever would dare to Offend or Injure (in any kind) his Worship or
Cardinalship, though the Offense were only an opprobrious Word, and though the
Offender were so Lofty as a King or an Emperor (who apprehend themselves above
the comprehensions of the Law) yet the Popish Canon Law Runs thus severely
against them, [Laesae Majestatis Rei Sunt, cujus cunque sint Ordinis, Imo
Imperator ipse, etc. Et In paenas Bullae Caenae Incurrent.] Such Offenders
against a Cardinal (yea though it be the Emperor himself) shall be Judged
Guilty of High Treason, and shall Incur the Pains and Penalties of
Excommunication, Deposition, etc. Was not this a Lofty Beast then? Exalting
himself above all that is called God, or Magistrates, even of the very highest
Form, 2 These. 4.4. He might, while in that Capacity only, challenge the
Stoutest King or Emperor, to affront his Cardinalship, while he stood thus
strongly Guarded by his Canon Law, to Batter them down with its Horrible and
Terrible Canon-Bullets; nay, That Canon Law did not only thus secure his
Person, but it also extends to protect his very House, and all his Hang-bys, or
Menial Servants, to all his Creatures and Favorites in his Presence; even all
these his Appertinances are troubled with that Disease called [Noli me Tangere]
They must not (forsooth) be touched, though never so Criminal, it is an Affront
of the highest Nature, even High Treason it self, and therefore (with my
consent) should any of his Clerks be afflicted with the King's Evil (as they are
overrun with the Popes-Evil) a Caveat shall be Entered to Debar them of the
Royal-Touch, least by a Male-Improvement thereof, they turn their Canon-Mouth
against the King: How, neither the Cardinal, nor any of his Attendants (every
one bearing for his Motto, the same with the Base Thistle, [Nemo me Impune
lacessit,] none can touch me without Pricking their own Fingers) stand
Fortified with the Grand Diabolo's, or Great Canons of that Canon Law. See
Dianoe Compendium, page 93.

The Fifth Prerogative this Cardinal had, above all Kings and Emperors, is,
That whereas They, Poor Low Shrubs (in comparison of such a Tall Cedar as a
Cardinal is) must humble themselves to the very Foot of the Pope, must Honor
the very Shadow of his Shoe-strings, or rather Adore the Sparkling Diamonds,
wherewith the Buckles of his Pantofle is most Richly Enambled, and the Highest
Honor that those Kings and Emperors must have vouchsafed to them, (a Glorious
Vouchsafement and Low Condescension in his Unholiness indeed) is only to Kiss
the Stinking Toe of his Gowty Gulls: but when this Cardinal came to pay his
Visits, and do his Homage, unto his Mighty God Pope Clement the Tenth, (his
immediate Predecessor) he had the Honor (without any prostrating posture, save
only a slight Congee) to Kiss his Holinesses Hands, with a Mental Reservation
too, (Right Romanist like) wishing him well in his Grave, that he might (upon
such an Irresistible Resignation) yield up his Pontifical Chair to him: Nay,
the Royal Complement of Kissing the Popes Hand only, was not all the Honor he
had from him, but he is allowed to Kiss the Popes Mouth too. Lorinus the
Jesuit, in Act. 6. does acknowledge this Ceremony (as to matter of Fact) to be
the Cardinals Prerogative above Kings and Emperors: If the Kissing of the
Bishop by the Priest at his Ordination, do declare a Parity, as above: So this
likewise must be an Indication, that a Cardinal is a Popes Fellow, yet Advanced
above Kings and Emperors, (contemptible Titles and Offices to his) by this
mutual Embracement. The Hebrew Rabbis do Read these words, [Gnal Pi Jehovah]
Deuteronomy. 34.5. which we Translate [According to the Word of the Lord] in this
Sense, That Moses Died at the Mouth of Jehovah, (which indeed the Hebrew Words
do Genuinely and Gramatically signify,) as if God had taken away Moses his
Soul out of his Body with a Kiss in a most friendly manner: could this Lord God
the Pope (Clement the Tenth) have done so to Cardinal Odeschalcho, when he
Kissed him, it had been no better than Osculum Iscarioticum. rather a
Treacherous, than an Amicable Kiss, in spoiling his Market, of designing to
become his Successor upon the Papal Throne, and then had the World wanted him
for Pope Innocent the Eleventh, though both the Place and the Title might have
been supplied by some other Person: Had this happened so, That Pope might have
cried Quits for his wishing (in his Mental Reservation before mentioned) the
Pontifical Chair before the Time: what loss this might have been to the Roman
Church, I know not, but this I know upon more Infallible proofs than his own
Infallibility, that had he Died at the Mouth of his Lord God the Pope, when
that Complemental Kiss passed betwixt him and his Predecessor, he had
undoubtedly passed off the Stage with less Guilt, the Horrid Popish Plot, the
Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and a Thousand more Diabolical Intriegues
since that, will lay with weight upon some Bodies Conscience sooner or later.
Veniet, Veniet, qui male Judicata Rejudicabit Dies: There is a Day coming,
which shall Judge Righteously all Matters over again, (though at present they be
Hushed up in Judgment) and this may be done even in this World.

I add to all the former the Sixth Privilege, For so many must be the Number,
that it may the better Symbolize, and carry a Correspondency with the Number of
the Beasts Name, which consists of Three Sixes, [666.] and therefore several
Popes bore the Number of Sixtus, and had I been of the Conclave (an Honor I am
no way Ambitious of) I would have advised the Cabal, that this Pope Elect
should have taken upon him no other Name, save that former Name of Sixtus, and
I would have pressed this Cogent Argument, That seeing there had been before,
Sixtus the First, the Second, the Third, the Fourth, and the Fifth, now One
that will be Styled Sixtus the Sixth, not only makes the Odd Number Even, but
also the very Name will carry along with it a most Grateful Sound and Symphony:
This only would have been the mischief thereof, that it might have Bordered a
little too near the Number of the Name of the Apocalyptick Beast, for this Name
would have consisted of Two Sixes, (Sixtus the Sixth) but that Name consists of
Three: notwithstanding this little difference (in an Unit) it might have
Sounded some Alarm to the World: This so much necessary Sixth Privilege which
this Cardinal Odeschalcho had, was, That his Cardinalship did Constitute him an
Ecclesiastic Prince, whereby he became a fit Mate and Side-Fellow (standing
upon equal and even Ground) with the most Potent Secular Prince in Europe, and
therefore to Comport with this Princely Greatness, the Canon Law allows him a
proportionable Grandeur, Sumptuous Furniture, and all manner of Pompous
Splendour for Supporting the Honor of that Dignity, for to be one of the
College of Cardinals is the Penultimate Promotion in the Roman Church, it being
the very Highest and Uppermost Step, from which one or other of these Crafty
Climbers, Lands at last into Peter's Chair. And seeing Wealth is an
Indispensible Perquisite, as it is commonly called the Sinews of War, so it is
no less the Nurse to Honor, yea, often times more than Virtue, upon this
account, Their Canon Law allows them most Rich Revenues, most Rapacious Offices
and Employs, wherein (as if they had got the Philosophers Stone) they turn all
they touch into Gold and Guineys: The Italian Author of the Just weight of the
Scarlet Gown, gives a Candid and Ingenuous Account, (keeping the Scales even)
of those Crafty Intrigues, and many Subtle Tricks, that those Arch-Politicians
do put in Practice to Enrich themselves, to fill their Coffers by Sale of
Offices that are Vacant, by Pensions from the Court of Foreign Princes, (both
France, Spain, and Germany) who all strive, not only to Counterballance one
another, but also, by a pretty Greaso-Fisto, with Yellow Ointment to Tilt the
Balance, and so sometimes Advance their own Faction uppermost, through the
prevailing Interest of those their closely obliged Creatures the Cardinals, who
have such a mighty Influence upon all Debates and Resolves in that Pragmatick
and Superintendent Court, which Lords it, and Laws it, (or at least would
willingly do so) not only over Gods Herritage the Church, but also over the
whole Habitable World.

The Scarlet Gown Author, in his Epist. Dedic. speaks of the several
Applications that are made to this Consistory of Cardinals, from all Popish
Princes and States, especially from the Two Mighty Kings of France and Spain,
by their Ambassadors, who ever lay Ledger at that Court, and who always Address
themselves to the most Politic and Powerful of these Cardinals, striving to
Outvie each other in their proffer of Fat Penssons to them, giving them the
best Spiritual Dignities and Promotions their Two Kingdoms can afford them,
(which in either of them are plentiful enough) provided always, they will be
engaged thereby to Espouse (as much as ever they may) the Interests of their
Benefactors Crown, to which they are thus obliged. Herein these
Court-Pensioners do Try the Trick of a Treacherous Judas, (who with his [Quid
Dabitis?] What will ye give me? and I will betray my Innocent Master, etc.)
rather than play the part of Faithful Peter, (whose Successors, though unlike
him, save only in Denying his Lord, they would be reputed) in Defending his
Innocent Master from those that Assaulted him: for notwithstanding never so
strong Engagements and Assurances; Oh what a slippery Hold either or both those
great Princes have of these their Cardinal Engines, who frequently (and upon
very slight occasions) are found to warp into the contrary Faction, which
Verifies the Vulgat Proverb, It Is Hard to make a Fast Bargain with a Loose
Chapman: They however, in playing thus at Fast and Loose can notably serve
their own Ends, and like Bad Lawyers can take a Bribe upon both Sides, when
they are Courted by both the Kings. Especially those Cardinals that sit nearest
the Papal Chair, and are in the fairest Capacity to Climb next into it, as was
the Happy Case of this our Cardinal, and therefore must be Highly Courted by
Foreign Agents in the Name of their Masters; The Height of whose Ambition it
was to oblige him. Thus we see this Benedetto Odeschalcho had fair
opportunities for gaining Wealth enough to maintain his Grandeur, the Canon Law
does Command these Cardinals, that, besides their Living upon the Churches
Revenues, to catch what they can for themselves, (may we Add, Per Fas and
Nefas, Vel Vi, Vel Clam, Vel Precario, either by Hook or Crook, to wit, the
Crosier Staff,) upon the Account of Aggrandizing the Roman Clergy, which
Poverty would render Contemptible, Dianae Compendium, page 88.

How far this Cardinal complied (as who of that Catholic Faith would not) with
that Canon-command, we shall have an Account By and By: But before we can come
to that, Here are Two mischievous Stumbling-stones lays in our Way like a
Couple of Blockado's, which who ever were able to Roll away out of our Way,
would do us a very great Kindness; when set fast.

The First is this, Suppose this Cardinal had been a Monk, it is not to suppose
what ought not to be supposed; for some Benedicts (as his Fore-Name and some
Popes Name were) had been Benedictine Monks, and at their entrance into their
Monasteries had solemnly vowed perpetual Poverty; how could this Monkish Man
with a good Conscience Relinquish his vowed Poverty? Gather Riches so fast that
he got the Devil and all, (as will appear afterward) became an Ecclesiastic
Prince, Ride his Progress in all Prince-like Equipage, never proud Haman more
Highly Honored, and never any Triumphant Caesar or Conqueror better Arrayed
than He in his Richest Robes for Splendor and Glory: Let any Man come forth
and tell me the Consistency of these two Contraries, and erit mihi magnus
Apollo. He that can rightly Reconcile them, shall be my Oracle.

Tush (says the Romish Casuists, one of the New Quacks the Jesuits) I can with
a wet Finger make these two Contraries Jump friendly into one, two odds make
even (as Two odd Threes make even Six, still he will harp upon the Number Six,
as above) and why may not two at odds meet in even also. This is the Learned
Gloss of the Popish Casuists upon this Case of Conscience in the General, but
more particularly (he says) this Vow of Poverty was taken with a mental
Reservation, that he resolved to be poor, no longer, than while he could not
possibly be Rich, and so the word [Perpetual] in the Vow must be vox aequivoca,
and to be taken with equivocation, etc.

Such Dirt-Dawbers (that Dawb with untemper'd Mortar) are the Jesuitical
Casuists, yea, many Monks can play the pranks of a Monkey (there is not much
difference betwixt their Names) who can slip his Collar on for his Masters
Pleasure, and with as much ease, can slip it off again for his own, The Monk
can play at fast and loose with his strict Vow as well as the Monkey with his
strait Collar. But above all Casuists that speak home to this Case, hear what
an Infallible Pope (papa in Cathedra non potest errare) and that Innocent the
10th, (one of the last before this) speaks; He surely, cannot speak but like
a most profound Oracle: I have heard some Judicious Clients say, when I want
Council, I will go to the Head, and not to the Tail, meaning, to the
profoundest Counselors at Law, and not to the mean, pitiful, underling
Lawyers: let us do so here, omitting all other scribbling puny Casuists in
Popish Schools, and hear what this great Oracle says out of Peter's unerring
Chair: This Pope Innocent the Tenth, when he was but Cardinal Pamphilio, made a
promise in the Conclave to Marry his only Nephew into the Family of the
Barberinos (one of the three grand pontifical Factions, Paulino and Pamphilian
being the other two, in that Sacred College or Consistory) the same Promise he
privately made to his Nephew also; howbeit, he soon changed his mind (being then
not in the Papal Chair and so, nor Infallible) and promoted Him to a Scarlet
Gown (instead of a Wife) which was far better, and which (he thought) would
best prevent diverse Emergent Differencies that were likely to arise by Marrying
one of the Pamphilian Family to a Wife of the Barberinos, a contrary Faction,
which yet had been wheadled into a Belief of this great Match for their
She-Cozen, because it was so solemnly and publicly promised by the Cardinal
(the Uncle of the Gentleman, or in plainer Terms, the Father of the Bastard) in
their Sacred College of Cardinals, where there was a dead weight of Living
Witnesses thereof. Notwithstanding this Promise, a Sacred thing in it self,
made in a Sacred place, and before so many sacred Persons (according to Popish
Sentiments) he made a shift to cozen both them and their She-Cozen: whereupon,
not long after His Assumption into the Papal Chair (no doubt but his Nephew in
his new Scarlet Gown, gave his Uncle an heaty lift thither) Cardinal Antonio
Barberinos; having still the grumbling of his Gizzard for the late cheating
affront, makes his Address to his New-Created and Now-Crowned Holiness
(expecting nothing but what was Holy Redresses suitable to his new Title, to
sweeten unto all his new Crown and Dignity) He therefore brake out into those
words to this new Pope Innocent the 10th. (into which he had changed his Name
Pamphylio) saying, Most Blessed Father, your Transactions about your Nephew (in
Marrying him to a Scarlet Gown, and not to our Cozen) does not well correspond
with your promises made to us in the Conclave, when you was but Cardinal:
Hereupon his new Un-Holiness (with a great deal of Gravity, as became his
Place) as Un-Holily Answered, thus saying, Tell me my Lord, who was He, that
made such promises to you? Was it not Cardinal Pamphilio? Yes, says Antonio,
upon which the Pope turns short upon him, and bids him go challeng his Promise
of Pamphilio, for he was not the Man of that Name now, His Name was Innocent
the Tenth, and not that Man you Imagine me to be: At this, Antonio Raged, and
like a new Mongi Bello, Fire started out of his Eyes, and like Old Orlando,
stamps with his Feet upon the Ground, when he heard the Infallible Chair speak
more Fallibly and Fallaciously, than ever the Devil did at his Delphos-Oracle:
In this Transport his Voice also Vomited out some severe Invectives against his
Lord God the Pope, and in an High Disgust, Uncivilly turns his Tail upon his
Blasphemed, as well as Blaspheming Idol, Excommunicates himself from the Sacred
Consistory, and from the Metrapolitan City of Rome (the very place of his own
Nativity) flies into France to be Protected by the French King, at whose
Devotion he had all along been in the Faction, leaving all his Riches (he had
Vastly scraped together) and Revenues behind him: See the Substance of this
whole Story in the Author of the Just Weight of the Scarlet Gown, his own
Preface to his Book; who tells us likewise, page 68. That this Don Antonio
Barberino (who thus Dis-resented this profound, more than Jesuitical, the
Diabolical Salvo of his Holy Father) was none of the Best, who kept for his
Miss or Whore, La Checa Bufona, upon whom he wasted most Vast Sums of Money,
etc. page 69.

Mark here, This Papal Distinction without a Difference (to wit, it was not
Innocent the Pope, but Pamphilio the Cardinal, that made the Promise, and
therefore not at all obliging, etc.) is the Best Bramble-Bush, that the
Infallible Chair it self can find out, wherewith to stop the Gap in a Romish
Conscience; and if this will serve as a sufficient Salvo for the Supreme Pope
himself, much more for his Underling, a Cardinal; and so our Odeschalcho is
brought off with flying Colors; It was not Odeschalcho the Cardinal that Vowed
perpetual Poverty, it was only Odeschalcho the Monk that did so, I am not He
that made that Vow, it is not obliging to me, as a Cardinal, but least of all,
as now I am Pope.

Such slippery Tricks of the Monkey, we find the Jesuits can play, as well as
the Monks; for Casimer the Jesuit could (by his Fervent Prayers to his Founder
Ignatius Loyola) obtain an effectual Dispensation for his Acquitment from his
Holy Orders to Embrace a Crown, the Jewels whereof had a Sovereign Virtue to
Salve all Wounds of Conscience, and to give him a Quietus Est: Hereupon he
became the King of Poland: but while I think of it, Take this pleasant Story, I
have sometimes Read with complacency, it is this, The Bishop of Triers (I think,
but am sure it was one of those Bishops that are the Electoral Princes of the
Emperor of Germany) was found fault with for some Notorious Extravagances in
his Public Ministrations, by a very Grave Senator, Who told him, Such Gross
Actings were a Scandal to his Lawn Sleeves and Mitre; all the Apology that
Proud Prelate could make for himself, was this, He Answered, That he did not
those things as he was a Bishop, but as he was a Prince: But the Senator
Replies in a cutting Reprimend, saying, If the Devil get the Prince for such
Crimes, I pray you; what will become of the Bishop. This Nonplus did not admit
of a Rejoinder; and is there not par Ratio in both these Cases of Conscience
aforementioned, If the Devil get Pamphilio the Cardinal for breaking his
Promise, (contrary to Psalm. 15.) what will become of Innocent the Pope; it may
be, he has got them Both together at one Mouthful (being but one Individual
Man) already, seeing Pope Innocent the Tenth, who was before, Cardinal
Pamphilio, is now Trip'd off the Stage, and out Odeschalcho is got into the
Chair in his Room: So likewise, If the Devil get the Monk for breaking his Vow
of perpetual Poverty, what will become of the Rich Cardinal, sure I am, Though
the Devil has not already made one Mouthful of them both, yet, the Pope (the
Devils Eldest Son) has done it, for both Odeschalcho the Monk (as some say)
and Odeschalcho the Cardinal are at once Swallowed up by this present Pope,
Innocent the Eleventh.

The Upshot of the whole in a word is this, I Refer to the Judicious Reader,
whether this Grave Senator, or the Jesuits ( Azorius, Navar, etc.) yea the
Infallible Chair it self, be the better Casuist; and whether Don Antonio
Barberino, the Crock-Back Nephew to Pope Urban the Eighth, were not a
Straighter Man of the Two, that Abhord those wicked Evasions of Pope Innocent
the Tenth, as above.

But having well wearied both my Self and my Reader, with lifting at this great
Stone that lay in our Way, and yet cannot get it Removed out of the Way half so
well as was Amasa's Stabbed Body, that stopped the March of the Army, 2 Samuel
20.12. It Is high time to leave it, and to try our Strength in a Lift or Two at
the Second, which in like manner obstructs our passage, in giving a particular
Character of this present Pope.

The Second Objection is, Whether these pretended Governors of the Church, the
Popish Prelates and Cardinals, abounding in all manner of Pride, Pomp and
Luxury, can by any sober Mind be Deemed the Rightful Successors of Christ and
his Apostles, who all did so often Recommend Self-denial and Humility, etc.

To this, in short, I shall Answer, with a Story that I have Read many Years
ago, and which I have lately met with in the History of Cardinals, page 46. The
Author of Nipotismo di Roma, (wherein he shows how Sedulous every Pope is to
promote his Nephews or Bastards) Relates the Matter of Fact thus, being both an
Eye and an Ear-Witness thereof in Person himself, saying, I Remember a certain
Sermon I heard in a Covent in Rome, and in the presence of Two Cardinals, (it
may be our Odeschalcho was one of them) and Cardinal Sacchetti was the other;
The Preacher was a Bare Footed Franciscan, who seemed a poor pitiful Creature
to look upon, yet geting into the Pulpit (on the first Sunday in Lent) in a
very great Auditory, after an Ave-Maria, and Two or Three Cringes (as is usual)
with his Knee, rising up again upon his Feet, and pulling his Cappuce or Cowle
upon his Head, down almost over his Eyes, he paused a while (in this posture)
without speaking a word, and fixing his Eyes steadfastly upon the Cardinals that
stood before him, without Naming any Text at all, he breaks out abruptly into
these words, [St. Peter was a Fool, St. Paul was a Fool, all the Apostles were
Fools, all the Holy Martyrs, all the Primitive Saints of the Church of Jesus
Christ our Redeemer, were Fools.]

The Cardinals were strangely Stunned with these words, and stood as Insensible
as Two Statues, the People also, and I among the rest, Admiring this unusual
Freak, were content enough to Attend the Attendency of it: The Friar, after
some small silence (which he purposely did, to observe the Resentments of his
Auditory) began his Discourse as follows, [ You that are Prelates, do not you
believe, you shall be Saved? I know your Answer, Yes, Father Friar, we do. And
you People, you are certain of Paradise? without Doubt, you will say, Yes too.
Yes, says the Friar, What, will Turning Night into Day, by Feasting, Sporting
and Luxury? Will Frequenting Play Houses, Whore-Houses, and a Living in all
manner of Debauchery, bring you [People] to Heaven?

As for you [Prelates,] Will your Wearing Purple aad Scarlet, Will your
Glittering in Gold and Silver, Will your Riding abroad, and Carreeceing about
in Gaudy Coaches, and when you come out of them, Will the having your Silken
Trains carried after you in the Street, bring you to Heaven? Will your Spoiling
the Walls of the Church, to Adorn the Walls of your Chambers, and will your
Subtracting from Christ, to bestow upon the World, bring you thithither? Would
you Oh Romanists, be Saved in this manner? Is this the way to Salvation? which
we are told is not a Broad but a Narrow Way.

Then certainly all the Apostles, and all the Saints of the Primitive Church
might have been Saved in the same Way, as well as you; and then as certainly
they were all Mad Men and Fools, to Wander up and down in Sheep Skins, and Goat
Skins, being Destitute, and Afflicted, to Undergo the Hard Trials of Cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments, yet higher,
they were Mad Men and Fools to be Stoned, to be Sawn Asunder, to be Slain with
the Sword, and to be Tortured and Tormented, not Accepting Deliverance, etc.
Heb. 11.35, 36, 37, 38. If your Way be the Way to Heaven.

But the mistake is on your part, Oh Romanists, They were all prudent and pious
Men,, It Is You that are the Madmen and Fools, and not They. It Is You that
propose a new way of Salvation to your Selves; which will best comport with
your own Vanity and Villainy, even such a way, as is not only contrary to the
Holy Gospel, but to the very light of Right Reason also.

This single story is sufficient of it self, to Demonstrate what kind of
Successors these Cardinals (and amongst the rest our Odeschalcho) are to the
Apostles, The pattern and the portraiture do correspond like Harp and Harrow,
which made the Italian Painter Draw the Pictures of Peter and Paul, with a very
deep Tincture of a Red Vermilion Color in both their Complexions, and when
some Cardinals blamed him for putting an Abuse upon their holy Predecessors
(to Limn them more like Good Fellows, who had been taking a Cup of Nims, a
little too much of the comforting Creature) He Smartly yet Modestly Answered,
No, Gentlemen, you mistake my Genuine meaning, for there you may behold those
two Holy Apostles no other than Blushing at you their such Unholy Successors.

I shall conclude this Paragraph with that strange Prayer of a Protestant
Divine upon his Reading a Gazet, who there found, how in the Vacancy of the
Roman See, some Cardinals were consulting, that the next Pope when Created,
should be bound to discard his Nephews, those Suckers of the Churches Treasure.
He Zealously Ejaculated this shor, but pithy, Petition, saying, [ God Almighty
Remove these good Thoughts out of the Minds of these Cardinals, for the Scandal
of their Church, are the Edification of ours, and Disturbances amongst them,
gives a Sweet Repose to us: History of Cardinals, page 132.

Suitable to that before, is this, that which follows after. Another Divine
Discoursing with Cardinal Odeschalcho's Chaplain, and asking him what he was,
he Answered, I am a Priest, and pray you, says the Minister, what is your
Master whom you Serve, Oh Sir (quoth he) it is my Lord Cardinal: Go to then,
said the Enquirer, pray what is your Work? Oh Sir (says he) I Say Service in
my Lords Chapel; Say Service, (says the other) then you are not so good as an
Horse or an Ass, for both these dumb Creatures do Service, and doing Service
is better than Saying Service: but the Discourse ended not here, the Opponent,
a little too Pragmatical, must ask some more Questions, being too much
Question-sick, further, saying, I pray you Sir, who gave to you the Name of
Priest, and to your Master the Name of Lord Cardinal, seeing St. Paul Names no
such Offices among the Officers of the True Church? Ephesians. 4.11. The Respondent
Replys, Oh Sir, Our Holy Mother the Church gave to me the Name of Priest, and
to my Master the Name of Cardinal. Upon this, the Questionist makes this brisk
Repartee, saying, [God Almighty Bless me with my Fathers Name, for all that
Bear only their Mothers Name, (as you say, You and your Lord do) be no better
than Bastards, or if you will have it in a cleaner Dress, that is to say, the
Popes Nephews: But enough of this Facetious Discourse.

Now it is High time to take a more particular View of our Odeschalcho, whom we
have Uncharacterized but little as a Cardinal hitherto, seeing our main Design
is, to give him a more Ample Character as Pope, where the Mystery of Iniquity
must be more fully opened in a large Field of Discourse.

As John the Divine gives a Graphical Description of the Picture of his Double
Beast in general; how He gradually Rose, both out of the Earth, and out of the
Sea, Revel. 13.1, 11. So my present Task is to Limn to the Life the very Person
of this present Scarlet Colored Beast, the Pope in particular, showing, First,
How he rose up Step by Step to the Pontifical Chair, into which this our
Cardinal Odeschalcho was Ushered with abundance of Pompous and Solemn
Ceremonies: It Is indeed an usual Saying, That Ceremonies are but Indifferent
things; yet this is a most certain and Tried Truth, (to the great Detriment of
many, much Damnified hereby) that though Ceremonies be in truth but things
Indifferent to Salvation, yet Experience (the best School-Mistress) Teaches,
they are things Necessary to Preferment. None can Climb up (not Jacob's, but)
Antichrist's Ladder, save such as have the Cheveril Conscience of a
Latitudinarian, who can stretch out and Gape wide as the Greedy-gut once did,
(in his Eating a Fish Dinner) who swallowed down Bones and all, till he had
like to have been Choked: We must suppose our Odeschalcho had a Throat wide
enough, he was not at all so Scrupulous as the precise Ones among us, but could
Gulp down any Romish Ceremony (though never so Corrupt and Unscriptural)
provided it might but give him an Hearty Lift into the Seat of Infallibility:
It Is as much beyond Questioning, as the most Received Maxim in Philosophy, That
such as are most Defective in their Morals, are most Zealous to supply it with
abundance of Ceremonials: How far this our Odeschalcho was Deficient in
Morality, let the Author of the Scarlet Gown (his own Countryman, the
Italian) be heard to speak, His Relation Runs thus, Benedetto Odeschalcho was a
very Rich Prelate, who a long time Courted Don Baerberino for preferring him to
be Clerk of the Chamber, which place he was Ambitious of, (that he might be the
better Acquainted with all the Grand Intrigues of the Consistory) and which the
Don had promised him upon his paying down upon the Nail a Round Sum of Money
for it: But finding that his Purchase proved nothing, save only a company of
Court Complements, and that this Crooked-back Don Antonio dealt but Crookedly
with him, in making the Fool fain with Fair Words without Deeds, he (being
wearied with a little sprinkling of Court Holy Water only,) began to think of
the Proverb too late, That a Fool and his Money is soon parted: He hereupon
Resolves to take new Measures, and to try whether (against, and to Confute all
Gramer Rules,) the Faeminine Gender might not prove more Worthy than the
Masculine, and whether the Gray-Mare might not prove the better Horse; so makes
he his Application to that Famous Strumpet, that Imperious Jezabel, Sister in
Law, etc. to Pope Innocent the Tenth, Don Olympia, wherein it is Remarkable,
that he deals in both with the Dons, and with the Greatest Dons too, the one an
Ambitious, and (as to the Court Faction in Rome) a very Potent Cardinal; but
the other (when he shifts his Sails unto, and makes his Second shift) was no
less than an Omnipotent Creatress; for she could Create what Cardinals and what
Popes she pleased, with her Irresistible Charms: No wonder then, if, when at a
loss, he falls upon this new Expedient, and Turns Don Antonio into Don Olympia,
yea Turns from the former to the latter, as being better furnished with
Conveniences for him: he now thought it nothing so Commodious to Court a Lord,
as to Court a Lady, especially One so Accomplished both with an Almighty Power,
and with a Bewitching Beauty.

Et si qua latent, Meliora putat, Ovid. Was not this a Brisk Madam, and well
worth a Prelate, yea a Cardinals Courting: The Substance of this Account,
(though here dressed up in other Language) may be seen in the Scarlet Gown
Author, page 21. who says further, That this Benedetto Presented this Lady with
Rich Love Tokens, wherewith at length he Got into Her -- Favor: But above all
(says the said Italian) with One Amourous Bribe more than Ordinary, and most
to be Remarked; which matter (as that Author Relates it) was managed after this
manner, Our Odeschalcho, going one Day (as he did often) to pay his Respects to
this his Lady Don Olympia, about the Coronation of her Brother in Law Pope
Innocent the Tenth, a Goldsmith came at that very time, and showed Her a very
fair Cupboard of Rich and Modish Plate to Sell, and perhaps prompting the Lady
to Buy it, as conducing much to the Grace and Honor of that Great Days
Solemnity: Olympia Vieweth it thorough and thorough in the presence of this
Odeschalcho (Her Paramour) and other Lords, and no doubt had more than a Months
Mind to it, but how to compass it without her own Cost and Coin, was her
present Project, in order to this, She first highly commends every Vessel by it
self, both Metal, Workmanship and Luster, and then all in the whole, saying,
It was a goodly and curious Cupboard of the New Fashioned Plate, but she was a
Poor Widow (she should have said, a Rich Harlot) so pretending she was not able
to Purchase it; lastly, upon this she withdraws immediately to her Chamber,
leaving the By-stander Odeschalcho (who admired all for her sake) to make out
some better proof (than yet he had done in all his former Gifts) of his Cordial
Affections to Her. This Prelate, being but (as the same Author calls him) a Man
of mean Undestanding, was the more easily Ensnared with the wily Wit of a
Woman, which, at a pinch, does usually exceed that of a Man (who Requires more
Deliberation) even of such as have deeper Reaches and Capacities than our
shallow Odeschalcho: Hereupon, under this sudden Surprise, he calls the
Goldsmith to him, Asks the Price of the Plate, 'twas below his Honor in his
Amorous Expectations to bid him lower than was Asked, he paid down Eight
Thousand Crowns for it, and without more Ado, sent it in to the Lady, as a
Present from Him, to her in her Chamber, that this Gift (as Solomon says)
might make Room for himself thither also: Don Olympia was so Transported (both
with the Success of her Craft, and with the Possession of so much Plate, all
costing her Nothing, save only Casting a Figure about a Credulous Fool,) that
Immediately she went to the Pope where she was Domina, Faec totum, and whether
she had free Access Night and Day, See Scarlet Gown, page 81. at the bottom,)
Begs of him for Odeschalcho, not only the Clerkship in the Chamber, but soon
after a Scarlet Gown also. How far this She-Don Helped him with her Hand (if
not in Person, yet by Proxy) into Peter's Chair, I know not, it is enough to know
here that Odeschalcho's Familiar Converse with this Famous Woman, but Infamous
Whore, gives Ground enough to believe, that He was Defective in Morals, and
therefore was under a Necessity to Eeek that out with Ceremonials: No wonder
then, if such a Man of Immorality should become (as it were) a very Compound of
Ceremony: His Election to the Chair consisted of Ceremony; his Coronation in
the Chair consisted of Ceremony; but above all, his whole Worship and Devotion
in the matters of Religion consists of Ceremony; only a Word or Two as a
Byblow upon this last, it being beside the Scope of our present Design. This
present Popes Worship is drawn forth in such an Antic and Pedantick Dress, so
far from the Simplicity of the Gospel, that no thinking Mind can look upon
Popery to be any better than Foppery, sure I am, the Romish Church is far past
her Meridian, seeing she can scarce be now seen for the length of her own
Shadow, the Shadows of her Evening are stretched out, in turning Doctrine into
Sophistry, and Discipline into Ceremony, and though the Hedge of her Ceremonies
may favorably protect Carrion-Crows, yet is it pricking and Vexatious enough
to harmless Doves.

But to Wave that in this place, and come to that Compound of Ceremonies,
managed by a Master of Ceremonies, at the Election of this present Pope: No
sooner was his Predecessor, Pope Clement the Tenth Dead, (for though the Keys
of Heaven, Hell and Purgatory, hang at the Popes Girdle, yet there is the
Mischief, the Key of the Grave was by some Mishap or other dropped from it,
otherwise the Pope had been equally as Immortal as Infallible,) but the
Congregation of Cardinals (having Nine Mornings after his Death Sung Dirges for
the Repose of his Soul, and preparing themselves with Holy Water, Incense,
etc.) did all Repair to the Conclave, and with them Two Masters of Ceremonies,
and the Secratary of the College, etc. were all close shut up together, in
order to Elect a New Pope: Then Processions came Thick and Threefold from all
Churches and Monasteries, Singing, [Veni Creator, etc. Come Holy Ghost, etc.]
Round about the Consistory, Imploring the Inspirations of the Spirit to come
upon the Cardinals: The first Step or Ceremony, was, The Three chief Cardinals
of the several Orders, with the Cardinal-Chamberlain, took an Exact Survey of
all the parts of the Conclave to see that all be close, and shut up on all
sides, as if they would shut out the Holy Ghost from coming among them; for
upon the Death of Pope Clement the Fourth, when the Conclave could not agree
(being divided and Rent in pieces by the Feuds and Factions of the French and
Spanish Interest) about the Election of a Successor, one of the Cardinals
(perhaps supposing that they were too close shut up in the Conclave,) Cried,
You must Order the Uncovering of the Roof of the Consistory, to make way for
the Holy Ghost to come down upon us: The Conclave puts so much stress upon this
same Ceremony, that not strictly to observe it, is a Nullity of the Election.

The Second Ceremony at the Election of this Pope, was, The Master of the
Ceremonies, (after a Recital of the Cardinals Privileges, which each Swore to
Observe, in case he were chosen Pope,) Rings a Bell and calls them all to Mass,
at which they Sang the Hymn, [Veni Creator Spiritus,] and the Prayer of the
Holy Ghost, to Implore His Illumination upon them: But I am afraid they could
not find one Promise to ground their Prayer upon, for the promise of the
Spirits coming is only to those that Seek him in Spirit and in Truth, and that
are found in Due Order, and not in such Disorders as Usually attend the
Conclave, which once gave occasion to an Old Cardinal of Sicily, (who, after
long Absence, coming to a Popes Election, and finding nothing but Animosities,
Factions and Fractions among them,) to complain, saying, Number ad Hunc Modum
fiunt pontifices Ro^a^s? etc. I expected that fervent Prayers, as in Times of
Old, should have procured some fit Man to be pointed out by the Holy Ghost to
us for a Vicar of Christ, but (says he) If promising Rewards for Pensionary
Votes, If Cajoling, Cursing and Threatening Revenge be your way of Canvasing
your Elections, then farwell for me, and so the good Old Man Returned Home to
his Country, and could never be persuaded to see Rome any more.

The Third Ceremony, was, To Elect a Pope by Scrutiny, (waving the Two other
ways of Inspiration or Compromise,) which they thus managed, Each Cardinal has
a List of all the Cardinals Names given to him, he Wrote down in a piece of
Paper, whom he would have chosen, went to the Altar, puts his Scroll into the
Golden Chalice standing thereupon, and so Returned to his place, when all had
so done, the Prims Bishop took out all the Papers, delivered them to the Prime
Deacon, who unfolded them all, and without mentioning the Elector, Read aloud
the Names of the Elected: The Prime Priest Reckoning the Voices, pronounced the
Majority of Votes to fall upon Cardinal Odeschalcho: Hereupon he Rang a Silver
Bell, and a Pan of Coals was brought in, and all the Paper Billets, wherein the
Names of all the Cardinals were Written, were Burnt.

Good God, How far the Ancient Church of Rome is now Run from the Primitive
Pattern? How far is that Church at this Day Run a Whoring? more like Babylons
Whore, than Sions Spouse, who both Asked and Received Directions from the
Blessed Bridegroom, how she might follow the Footsteps of Christ's (not
Antichrists) Flock: I would gladly Ask of any Man, how many of these (and many
more, for Brevity, omitted) silly Apish as well as Popish Tricks and Trinkets,
were put into practice at the Election of St. Matthias into Traitorous Judas's
Bishopric and Apostleship, Act. 1.20. to 26. The pure Simplicity of that
Primitive Ordination makes our Pope Innocent the Eleventh look more like an
Unholy Apostate, than any Holy Apostle, whose Successor he yet presumes to be
Reckoned, who in Truth is rather a Successor of Judas in betraying Christ, as
he is the Antichrist, than any of the Holy Apostles, who were fervent followers
of the Sacred Footsteps of their Sweet Savior, and who Commands us to follow
them no farther, than they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. They make that Holy
Child Jesus the Regula Regulans, or Rule Ruling, and themselves only the Regula
Regulata, the Rule Ruled, they would not have us to follow the Dark Side of the
Cloud of Witnesses, as the Egyptians did, and were Drowned, but the White-side
thereof, as the Israelites did, and were Saved. Neither do we ever find that
St. Peter passed under those Comic and Theatrical Ceremonies when called to
his Apostleship, or ever so Preferred or Enriched any of his Nephews or
Bastards, as the Pope (his pretended Successor) does now.

The Fourth Ceremony wherewith this present Pope had his Pompous Inauguration
at his Election, was, Still more like Apostatical, than Apostolical, to wit, No
sooner was the Majority of Votes (even Two parts of Three) acknowledged to fall
upon our Cardinal Odeschalcho, through the Almighty Influence of his Old
Grateful as well as Humble Servant, Don Olympia, who could not, with either
Honor or Advantage, so soon forget her Stately Cupboard of curious Silver
Plate, well knowing, her lasting Gratitude to Him would be an Encouragement to
others in that Court, to make their Addresses in the same manner to Her. No
sooner (I say) was this Odeschalcho owned to be the Pope Elect Duly, though
never so Factiously and Surreptitiously; but presently the Wicket, or rather
Wicked Hole (well called the Golden Door, through which the Hungry Cardinals
Receive all their Meat, as well as Air, during their, sometimes, long
Confinement,) was then broken open, at which stood an Infinite Number of Poor
People, on whom this New Pope bestowed his Papal Benediction, and to whom He
Remitted all their Sins. The Formality of opening this Golden Door, was thus
Observed, This New Pope came with a Golden Mallet in his Hand (all He meddles
now with must be Gold,) His Silver Age is now turned into a Golden One, his
Silver Cupboard of Plate before purchased, is now turned into a Golden Door,
and into a Golden Mallet, yea, better than all this. Here was, by Virtue of the
Philosophers Stone, a Silver, or rather a Leaden, or Copper Cardinal (as
Odeschalcho signifies) into a more Illustrious and Golden Pope. With this
Golden Mallet he strikes at the Golden Door, which while He was in Doing, there
were Workmen Ordered without to Break it open, which done, all the Chips,
Stones, Dust and Dirt, (that fell from this Golden Gate, while it was in
opening,) are gathered up, and preserved as the choicest and most Inestimable
Relics; and as to the Golden Mallet which this New Pope held in his Hand, He
Nobly gave to Cardinal Sforza (according to Custom) who was his great Crony and
Correspondent, oftenest in his Company, and especially in most Grace and Favor
with him, for Lending him such an effectual Lift into Peter's Chair. Now let any
Man of a Sober Mind Judge, what kind of Successor this present Pope is to Poor
Peter in his Chair; the Apostle Peter says of himself, [Silver and Gold have I
none,] Act. 3.6. But this Pope (his pretended Successor) has Silver for
himself, and for his Olympia too, yea, and a Golden Mallet to give away, etc.
Simon Peter Rejected Simon Magus, when he would have Hired of him the Gift of
Miracles, Asts 8.19, 20, 23. whereas this Pope will do nothing without Ready
Money. St. Peter paid his Tribute to Temporal Princes, even at his Lord Christ's
Command, both for himself and for his Master, Matthew. 17.24. to the last; But
this Pope (being Antichrist) Scorns any such Disgraceful Motion, No, it is below
his Unholy Highness to pay One Penny; he Received not Peter's Patrimony upon any
such Ignoble Terms: The Law of the Land, says, That a Man's Heir is Obliged to
pay the Debts, and to perform the Duties of the Inheritance, otherwise the Heir
is Disinherited, and the Inheritance Divided among the Creditors: But the Popes
Canon Law says, Peter's Keys of Authority, with all the Profits and Emoluments,
belong to the Pope, who holds them fast in his Hand; but as to his Key of
Doctrine, wherein He Taught Universal Subjection to Secular Governors, is a
Duty no way Incumbent upon Him; these are great Encumbrances to Popes, and
would be unsupportable Burdens to our Sacred Inheritance* Yet in this the Pope
likes well enough to Imitate his Predecessor Peter in, He dearly loves to Catch
with his Angling Rod such Fishes in his Sea or See, as have a piece of Silver
in their Mouths, Matthew. 17.27. and it will do no Harm, if now and then a piece
of Gold be found there also, for then will he be furnished with Materials, not
only for a Silver Cupboard of Plate, but likewise for making his Golden Doors,
and his Golden Mallets.

The Fifth Ceremony should have been, When the Golden Door was opened, He
should have proceeded to the Porphiry Chair, the Chair of Exploration, where
the Youngest Cardinal-Deacon should have Examined Things and Things. But this
Customary Ceremony is now a Days Antiquated as Superfluous and Unnecessary,
since commonly those Popes that have been lately Elected, had given sufficient
proof by their Bastards of their Virility, and that they were known beforehand
to be of the Right Masculin Gender, and indeed I think it need not be much
Doubted, but rather than fail, rather than this Pope should have this trouble
given him, Don Olympia her self might have come in with her Testimony, and have
assured them Viva Voce, they might undoubtedly spare the Labor of Exploration,
for she has had some Experimental Knowledge (which is the Best) of his Manhood
and Gallantry. And now, when I think of it, I cannot but Imagine this Groping
Chair a very ill advised Injunction, however upon this Account, That whereas
the Romanists do usually Style their Head, The Lord God their Pope, now if as
they say, He be indeed a God, they do but Debase him (if not Ungod him) in
Trying whether be be a Man: Methinks the Words of Christ, with but a little
Variation, might serve the pretended Vicar of Christ: as the Lord did Evidence
the Truth of his Resurrection, by saving, [If I be a Spirit, I should not have
Flesh and Bones,] Luke 24.39. So this Vicar might give a Repulse to his
Gropers, by saying, [If I be a God, I should not have Manly Members.] There is
only this Difference, Christ was willing to be Handled, but his Vicar is
unwilling, unless by Olympia, therefore this Rude Ceremony was Omitted.

But the Sixth Ceremony (and so many there must be to comport still with the
number of the name of the Beast, 666.) is a Ceremony of Ceremonies, So it
supplies the late omission of the fifth by way of Redundancy: for this
introduces all the Splendor and Grandeur of his prime Procession,
Consecration, Coronation, etc. (1) His first Procession after his Election was
thus pompously managed: this great Man, or rather, this great God was mounted
upon Men's shoulders in the most splended Equipage imaginable, such as Solomon
in all his Glory was never Arrayed with (for you must suppose this Pope to be
the goodly Lilly, or rather the glorious and gaudy Tulip, that our Lord speaks
of Matt. 6.28, 29.) However such as neither Christ himself ( who was greater
than Solomon, Matt. 12.42.) nor much less his Apostle Peter (whose Successor
this Pope pretends to be) ever took upon them the like prodigal and pompious
Grandeur. This Pope was now Arrayed in Scarlet Robes, Furred with Ermines quite
through, and Adorned with the Richest Gold and Silver Laces, there was placed
upon his Head a most glittering and glorious Tripple Crown of Gold, and a most
Rich Collor of Gold all curiously Enameld with the choicest Jewels and chiefest
precious Stones: there were put into his Hands two Golden Keys (pretended to be
the same, that Christ gave to Peter, and that Peter at his Death bequeathed to
the Popes successively) which are for opening and shatting the Gates of Heaven
(a place where Himself is never like to come) for whom he pleases: and over
his Head was carried a most stately Canopy with lofty, flying, and most gaudy
Streamers, and He Himself under it most Trim, with his Artificial Locks finely
curled and powdered with a Vast Tower or Fruz upon his Forehead (in the very
Dress of the Mystical Whore) and in all this Antic Dress and Pedantick
Pageantry, this Pope was presented to the people, who (together with his Page)
made thereupon loud Acclamations: [Vive le Papa, Vive le Papa] all along as He
made his Progress to Peter's Chair: mark here, while this Apocalyptick Beast was
thus mounted upon Men's shoulders, He was then carried like a Conqueror, who
had now made a complete Conquest over the whole Conclave of his
Fellow-Cardinals, and now had stoutly Stormed (in despite of all fraud and
force, yea, of Fate it self) the pontifical Chair, and in this posture He was
not only like King Saul, who was higher by the Head and shoulders than all the
People, but also as a mighty Nimrod, who was to Trample them all under Foot,
His Feet standing as high as their Heads: but the most significant Ceremony in
his passage from the Golden Hatch or Wicket, to his Chair of State, was this, a
lump of Flax was carried before Him Burning, whereat these words were
proclaimed.

-- Sic Transit Gloria Mundi. It Is the Prayer of prudent and pious Protestants,
that an happy Blast may descend from Heaven to blow out for ever all this
Antichristian Glory. Even so Amen and Amen.

Thus was he brought to his Chair of State, which was likewise covered with
Scarlet, all richly Embroidered, Fringed round about with a Gold and Silver
Silk Fringe, and gloriously bedeckt with Golden Balls and Crosses, and which
was placed upon as Lofty and as Costly a Throne as was that of Solomon's, 1
Kings 10.18. Thither was he brougt upon Men's shoulders, and when gently taken
down (for fear of hurting the good old Man) there was He seated, there was He
consecrated, and there was He crowned, etc. when all this solemnity is
accomplished, then His Herald (dressed up in a Garb comporting with the Pomp)
proclaims by sound of Trumpet, His great Lord and Master, to be now [the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords] and as if that were not sufficient, He had his
Parasites prepared to cry loud [God Bless our Lord God the Pope] Thus He, who
trod under foot only the People before, must now trample upon the Necks of
Kings and Emperors, Instance only in poor Emperor Frederick, who was
constrained to lay sprawling under the proud Popes Feet, on whose Neck He
insolently trampled at Venice: It Is therefore one part of this Pompious
Magnificency, that this Magnifico has two Swords standing erect by his Chair
of State at his right Hand, to denote, that not only the Sword of
Excommunication, but also the Sword of Civil Dominion belongs to him also: To
say nothing of the number of Gaudy Beads, Agnus Deis: and abundant more Romish
Trumpery exposed to public View, for the better setting off the Solemnity of
his Inauguration: I think 'twas about well, that, together with his Title
aforementioned, this also [God of Gods.] was not superadded, so exalted Him
above the most High God, as well as over all Lords, Kings, and Emperors. The
Roman Canon and Ceremonial Law commands the People to say at the Popes
Instalment [thou art our God the Pope] and Pope Martin could calmly and
complaisantly receive the Complement of the Sicilian Ambassador saying [thou
art the Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World] so was this, but
to declare to all the World, that it is He who sits in the Temple of God,
exalting Himself above all that is called God, if not above the true God
Himself, the Pope dare dispense with, if not disanul or contradict the Law of
God: Sure I am, never did any mortal Man look more like proud Lucifer (who said
ero ficut Altissimus, I will be like, If not above, the most High, Isa. 14.14.)
than this present proud Pope in his pontificalibus exposed to View with all
those Additional Formalities did go, all which, yet one more must still be
added, to wit, the change of his Name, his old Name [ Odeschalco the Cardinal
must be turned into Innocent the 11th. How Nocent this Innocent was, the sequel
will demonstrate. Yet follows he the Pattern of Bocea di Porco or Hog-face, who
was the first Pope that changed his Name, thus when his Successors were
Cowards, they must be called Leo, if he were a Tyrant, called Clement, if a
Rustic, Urbanus though never such a Turbanus, or trouble World: If an Athiest
then Pious. So if never so obnoxious, or Nocent then it must be Innocent. The
Popes of these later Years have been generally short lived, to Instance only
in a few of the last Edition, Cardinal Chigi was Elected Pope, in the year 55.
April the 7th., called himself Alexander the 7th, one troublesome enough to the
Church, etc. He soon trips off (Whether from the goodness of God or his own
good Nature, I shall not say) gave up the Ghost, and Resigned up the Chair to
Cardinal Rospiglioss, who succeeds him June 20th. by the Name of Clement the
9th, in the Year 67. The loss of Candia afflicted him much more, than the
burntng of London, and hastened his Death in the Year 70. The Conclave being
shut up above Four Months (a long time to be in the Dark, where they made day
of Wax Candle, Having neither Windows nor Holes to let in light) at last had so
much light as to Elect Cardinal Altieri, which was the doting Pope that
Created our Cardinal Howard (who is after to be mentioned) and then Dies in
the Year 76. having born the Name of Clement the Tenth. So gives place to our
Cardinal Odeschalco, etc. what a black Character they all bear in the History
of Cardinals, I must rather request the Reader to observe it there than to
expect it here; especially of this present Pope Don Olympias grand Favorite:
but above all, I wonder at that Irish Prophet Malachi (which Dr. Heylin
mentions in his Cosmog. last Edition p. 106.) who lived in the 11th, Century,
contemporary with Bernard, yet undertook to give an account of all the Popes
from that time to this day, and this He does by Symbols and Hierogliphicks, and
omitting all others, as beside our purpose that which is most remarkable, is
the character, He so prophetically Imposes upon this present Pope
Symbolically, and in an Hieroglyphick way plainly Styles Him, Bellus
In^atiabilis, an Insatiable Beast, I have been thinking since I found it that
this Malachi the Irish Prophet (not to meddle with his other predictions, etc.)
has Accommodated this character so congruously to this Odeschalco, as if he
had been the Jewish Prophet Malachi, who infallibly had the Infallible Spirit,
what kind of Spirit (this Popish Saint, a Cestertian Monk, Archbishop of
Dublin in Ireland) was endued with, is not easy to Determine, yet is there
found such an Admirable Harmony inter signum and signatum, the Person and the
things do Symbolize to Astonishment, as Messingham, Bussier, etc. do observe.

Conveni^nt Rebus Nomina Saepe Suis. That this present Pope should be pointed
out (as by the Finger) to be an Insatiable Beast, above Five Hundred Years
before He was Born, must be acknowledged Mirabile Dictu. If several of the true
Prophets of God did so Truly Foretell of Nebuchadnezzar, that He would Arise,
and become Gods Battle-Axe to Hew down the Degenerate Generation of the Jews,
bring them to literal Babylon, keep them Captive there for Seventy long Years,
etc. And if several of the True Apostles of Christ did so Truly Foretell of
Antichrist, that he would Arise out of the Earth and out of the Sea, and become
the Devils Patriarch to tread down the outward Court of formal Professors,
carry them Captive to Mystical Babylon, keep them in Captivity for one thousand
two Hundred and sixty long Years, etc. And both these, Some Hundred of Years
before they both came to pass: Why may we not call this strange Prophet, (that
thus long before foretold of this Individual present Pope, that he would Arise,
and become an Insatiable Beast) The Prophet Malachi the Second, notwithstanding
he was one of the Monkish Order, I cannot but Judge His Testimony is therefore
so much the stronger, for it is a received Maxim [firmum est probandi Genus quod
etiam ab Adversario Sumisur, quum Veritas etiam ab Inimicis Veritatis probari
possit] it is the strongest kind of proof, when the very Enemies of the Truth
are constrained to bear Witness to it. Hereupon Ludovicus Vives de
probabilitatis Instrumentis says thus [Amici contra Amicum, and Inimici pro
Inimico Invincibile Testimonium erit] which in plain English must thus be
explained. The Testemony of a Papist against a Papist, and of a Papist for a
Protestant is a Testimony without exception, and more Infallible than this
Infallible Pope, against whom this Popish Monk, Malachi, bears such an
undeniable Testimony, though his Friend as of the same Religion, yet Honors He
Him with no better a Title, than that of an Insatiable Beast.

The whole Scope of all the following Discourse is no other than a Descent and
Comment upon that Black and Beastly Brand, wherewith this Irish Prophet (Monk
Malachi) Stigmatized him with, so many Hundred Years before He was in Rerum
Natura, or had any Existence: Now that He has been so long in his present
Being, and has been Acting (like the Devils Patriarch) his Devilish part in
the Tragedy upon the Theater of the World, ever since September the
Twenty-First, in the Year Seventy Six, whereon He was Consecrated and Crowned,
etc. as above. Time is always the best Expositor of the most Abstruce and
Obscure Prophecies; and what a full and perfect Exposition Time it self has
already made (and may hereafter make more) upon this very Text and Title of
this Irish Prophet Malachi, concerning this Pope, is my Task I have before me
to Demonstrate.

First, In General, That this present Pope is a Beast, is as plain, as if Writ
with a Beam of the Sun upon a Wall of Marble. Seeing both the Prophet Daniel,
and the Apostle John, do Unanimously call the whole Series of those Roman Popes
no better than Beasts, yea, such Beasts as are beyond and above all Names, as
in the Preface.

It Is manifest enough even out of their own Authors (such as Wrote the Lives of
the Popes) How that many, if not most of them, were Men of Sin with an Accent;
yea, Beasts rather than Men; yea, even Monsters in Iniquity: See Dr. Heylin's
Cosmog. page 106, 107, 108. of the last Edition, where you have a Black-Bed
Roll of their State and Story, to the number of Thirty one, which is a lucky
Number, called an even Hitter, and is said, a Knave and One and Twenty, (or in
plainer English, a Knave, that stands for ten [Knaves] and One and Twenty more
(of the same litter, or letter) wins all at the Game of Noddy this Christmas
time, wherein The Knave (...) is turned up Trump with a witness: See also
Ness's Discovery of Antichrist, page 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. where you have
a Compendious Landscape of but a few of the Popes Lives (all gathered out of
their own Roman Writers) to show in short, what Beasts, what Monsters of Men
they have been: And that this great Truth may be Completely Confirmed by the
Mouth of even Three Witnesses, See also Dr. Scalter in his Comment upon the
Second of Thessalon. page 115. where he says, [If a Man may be so bold with
the Pope, as John Baptist was with our Savior (and why should Christ be more
Rudely Handel'd than Antichrist) Asking, [Art thou He that should come, or do
we look for another?] The like Answer may most properly be Returned, [ Go and
Tell what you heard and seen, to wit, God is Contemned, the Devils are
Worshipped, Religion is Profaned, Superstition is Hallowed, Beastly Lust is
Practiced, and Parricide is not only Perpetrated, but Patronized,] with much
more Horrid Hellishness those [Parum probi Homines] or Wicked Popes have done:
Is not this the Man of Sin, the Apocalyptick Beast, the Matchless Monster,
Prophesied of in the Word, that should come into the World and play Rex, and
his Pranks in it: Now it is below this present Pope to be better than his
Predecessors, He Scorns to Degenerate from the Worst of them, choosing rather to
Imitate them, than Holy Peter. The Irish Prophet Styles him a Beast, and Time
has proved him so. Our next Work is to show him the Insatiable One, for Craft
and Cruelty.

The Epithet Insatiable has Variety of Acceptions, according to the Variety
both of its Subject and Object. There be various Passions of the Mind of Man,
that are Headstrong, Extravagant and Insatiable, whereby Man is turned into a
Beast, as Thus,

First, The Passion of Lust, when it grows Unruly and Ungovernable,
Transporting the Monk out of his Monastery into the Nunnery among the Nuns, or
suppose the Man a Cardinal, or a Pope, when he is Exported out of all Bonds and
Bounds of Temperance and Continency, his Unruly Lust causes him Rudely to
break His Vow of Chastity, and He hereupon Applys himself to his common
Curtezans, or Don Olympia's, then is the Beast truly Styled Insatiable. Or

Secondly, When that Passion of Bloud-Thirstiness has the like prevalency over
the Mind of Man, makes him as Savage, and as Bloudy-Minded as a Butcher or
Beast, insomuch, that He Delights to Wallow in the Blood of others, yea, to be
Drunk with the Blood of the Saints (which is the Trick of the Beast,) then is
the Beast Rightly Branded with being Insatiable, and then it is High Time for
good Protestants to put up this good Prayer, Lord, let this Drunken Insatiable
Beast, Spue and Fall, and never Rise up any more. or

Lastly, (To Omit other Exorbitant Passions and Affections of Mankind,) the
Third Case is, When the Connatural Passion of Covetousness has got such a
Predominancy over the Man's Mind, that it Metamorphoses him into a Muck-worm,
yea, into a Mole, that Subterraneal Blind Creature, which lives altogether
within the Earth (being Restless, as out of its Center, while out of it) and
has nothing to do with Heaven: Must Evermore have his Mouth and Claws full of
Earth, when the Man will Extract Gain out of a very Dunghill, a Vast Revenue for
Indulging Stews, and that as a Necessary Convenience, [Ad purgandos Renes]
especially in the Three Hot Months of the Year, when the Man does practically
approve of that Motto, [Lucri bonus est odor ex re qualibet,] and that other
too, [Lucrum o Lotio est Optabile,] These were the Old Symbols of some Great
Men of Rome, who thought all Gain Sweet, though Got out of the Piss-Pot, etc.
And this Great Man of Rome is no Changling from them, He is for getting the
Devil and all, with his Gain from all Quarters, Isa. 56.11. and Micah 3.3. per
Totum. Then also is the Beast Insatiable, and upon this Third Account it is,
that the Prophet Malachi the Second, aforesaid, calls in His Characters, this
very Odeschalcho (the present Pope) Bellua Insatiabilis, as a late Learned
Writer does well Interpret it: Though this Beast of Rome has been Insatiable
enough as is supposed, in the First Case and Account of Insatiability, when he
looked upon Carnal Concupiscence with Romish Spectacles, and according to the
Popish Doctrine, but a Peccadillo, a Trick of Youth, a Venial Sin; He had that
Flesh-pleasing Circular saying, [ Confess after Sin, Sin and Confess, in
Infinitum,] in great Veneration, as a Sovereign Cure for a Popish Conscience,
and indeed, it is a wonder that all the World (which lays in Wickedness, 1 John
5.19.) will not easily turn Papists, that they may Sin, in Sins of all sorts,
with Peace, wherein they can Bless themselves with Pardons prepared and to be
Purchased: But to let that pass, seeing the Jesuits Rule, [Si non cast, tamen
caute] Anticipates Intelligence of such Deeds of Darkness, till the Pond come
to be Scowred again, wherein were found Thousands of Infants Skulls, which, as
it promoted the Destruction of Abbeys here, so in Time every where, yea, of
Rome it self, that Brothel-House of Babylon. My Work at present is, to give him
his due Character of an Insatiable Beast in both the other Respects, with a
little Transposition of the Third, (as coming next to Hand into the Seconds
place) to wit, both as a Greedy and as a Bloody Insatiable Beast.

This Prophet Malachi (the Irish Monk) has Divine Warrant to call this Pope an
Insatiable Beast, seeing the Prophet Isaiah calls such Priests (ejusdem Farinae
of the same Brann with this High Priest) Greedy Dogs, which can never have
enough, Isa. 56.10, 11. and though they were dumb Dogs and could not bark, yet
could they bite well enough, perverting the House of God for Prayer into a Den
of Cutthroat Thieves: How far this Pope has been the Jewish Prophets Greedy
Dog, and the Irish Prophets Insatiable Beast, falls first in Order to
Demonstrate: so His most Eminent and Gainful Cheats, whereby he Gulls the silly
People, do here follow.

He is (in the General) the Grand Impostor of the World, so the Pope was called
by Doctor Morton Bishop of Durelm many Years ago, whose Elaborate Book
Discourses the many Legerdemain Tricks wherewith He deceives Nations, and all
and only to pick their Pockets.

May we but be let in a little to behold the Bowels of this Grand Cheat, and
View but a while his Guts and Garbage, 'twill soon be Discerned that he is the
Devils Patriark, bearing upon his Bannet the Abomination of Desolation: The
time would fail to tell, How many Families this Abominable Beast has made
Desolate: what else is the whole Cento and Fardle of Popery, but a
Concatenation of Wiles to compass a purse? What is the chief Design of this
Balaam of Rome, but a continual conjuration for an House-full of Gold and
Silver? Witness his lying Legends, His Mock-Miracles, Praying for the Dead, and
a Thousand more nimble Tricks too tedious to enumerate, but above all, His
Doctrine of Purgatory, The Fire whereof does more effectually warm tke Popes
Kitchen, than Torture any Soul He Damns into it. It Is a Cheat of Cheats:
Methinks the Apostle Peter points at this Pope, (who pretends to be his
Successor) while he speaks of such, as through Covetousness with feigned Words,
do make Merchandise of Men, and when He names Balaam the Son of Bosor, who
loved the wages of Iniquity so far, until the Dumb Ass forbad the madness of
the profane Prophet, yet He cannot pass off without passing a Divine Doom,
saying, whose Judgment now of a long time lingreth, and yet their Damnation
slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2.3.15, 16. How can it slumber long, when the cry of his
cheating Tricks (together with that of Blood) is gone up to Heaven to fletch
down Gods Vengeance upon this Popes Head, and upon his whole Popedom: Let the
Apostle Paul also Join Issue in this matter with his beloved Peter, (both which
are represented Blushing, as before, at such pitiful pretended Successors) who
says likewise [as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these the Messiah,
Men of corrupt Minds, and Reprobate concerning the Faith: But they shall
proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all Men, as
theirs also was, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Now what were Jannes and Jambres, but a couple
of Gipsy or Egyptian Coujurers, that cheated the People with their lying
Miracles, etc. And such have some of the Popes of Rome (that Mystical Egypt,
Rev. 11.8.) been, etc. [Habemus Reos Confitentes] Popish Authors do acknowledge
it, and did Moses muzzle the Mouths, and made their Cheats manifest to all Men?
How much more will the Messiah (who is greater than Moses, Heb. 3.3.) confound
in due time this Grand Impostor. It Is impossible for any Man of a Sober Mind to
think otherwise, especially, If he cast but a seeing Eye upon [Taxa Comerae
Apostolicae] the Apostolical Chamber in the Vatican at Rome, where this Pope
has opend his Pedlars Pack, exposed all his Vendible Commodities (for Romae
Omnia Venalia) to the best Advantage of commending them to his Chapmans Eye, no
Shop so well furnished, or affords such a Tempting Prospect in any of the Walks
of the Royal Exchange Chambers, and that which gives the most Splendid and
Decoying Luster is, there you have the Pope himself in his Grandeur, Courting
in Customers, good Man, He dare not trust his Vassals, a pack of Knaves, He
has found them long, would go Snips with their Master, He has now Learnt by
His Loss. Keep the Shop Robin, and it will keep thee. There himself stands
crying in the very Language of Folly (not of Wisdom) who so is simple, let him
turn in Hither, Prove. 9.16. He Cants in his Proselytes with Pedlars Pedantick
Oratory, Coying them in with come along my Cronies, my Soft Pates (for you must
suppose He is of the same Sentiments with that Crafty Shopkeeper, who once
Boasted, He would not sell all his Children and Fools, his Customers, for some
Hundreds of Pounds in the Year) come along my Corculums, look about you,
Gentlemen, what lack you? Lo, here is a Goose-Giblet Pie, wherein every Palate
may please it self, what will ye buy? I am just now upon my last Legs, my long
Lease of 1260 Years is now at its last Gasp and Expiration, what, never a
packing-penny among you all for a poor packing-off Pope: But are you Desirous
to know his Wares (all very Vendible to the Credulous, that never think of the
Cheat) what are his Commodities in particular? I will tell you, where you have
them all named, and we are not a little obliged to the Infallible Holy Ghost,
that will take all the pains in giving us a Distinct Catalogue of all this
Infallible Ghostly Fathers Commodities: He tells you, Rev. 18.12, 13. in
Antichrists Stately Shop, you may have for Ready Money [the Merchandise of Gold
and Silver, precious Stones and Pearls, fine Lennen and Purple, all Silk and
Scarlet, all Thine or Sweet Wood, all manner of Vessels of Ivory, all manner of
Vessels of precious Wood, of Brass, of Iron, and of Marble; yet more, yea, and
Cinnamon, Odours, and Ointments, yea, Frankincense, Wine and Oil, yea, fine
Flower and Wheat, yet more, there be Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, (I wonder
Asses are left out) and Chariots, and Slaves, (no doubt on it, but the greatest
Ware is behind) the Souls of Men.

Who will not say here [God bless us] what a Shop is this? So Capacious, and so
Accommodated with all the choicest and chiefest Commodities, that this lower
World can afford: Here Is the Riches of both the Indies (Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones thereof) Here Is the Riches of all Countries and Kingdoms,
betwixt East and West, North and South: Here Is the very Quintessence and
Compendium of Europe, of Asia, of Africa, and of America: is not this the Grand
Impostor, that even called for a packing-penny to a poor Pope, who has so much
of Treasure, enough to serve himself and enough to sell to others. But I wonder
He exposes his Scarlet to Sale, Having so much use for it to Array the Scarlet
Whore: as also that the Beast should be a Seller of Beasts, and above all, I
wonder what price He sets upon the Souls of Men: seeing our Lord Christ (who
best knew the worth of Souls, because He only went to the price of Souls)
Valued one Soul worth the whole World, Matthew. 16.26. Surely He must be the
Antichrist, who sells Souls for Trifles: In a Word, surely, This Pope is Jack
of all Trades: Here he is a Goldsmith, with his Gold and Silver, and it may be
a Banker, I wish him to become a Bankrupt. Here he is a Jeweller, with his
Pearls and Precious Stones. Here he is a Linnen-Draper, with his Fine Linen
and Purple, (I doubt He wants the Scotch-Cloth.) Here you have him a Silk-Man
with his Silks of all sorts, and fear not, but he has Satin (or Satan) enough.
Here he is a Turner, that Sells all sorts of Vessels, wherewith he Turns, the
World Upside Down; this He effects by Vessels of Wrath, but He Sells for Slaves
the Vessels of Mercy. Here you have him one while a Brazer with his Brass;
another while an Iron-Monger with his Iron; yea, sometimes a Stone-Cutter, with
his Marble, and why not a Tinker too, being a Kin to him, that instead of
mending some Holes, made many more, yet was well paid for his pains. Here he is
a Druggist, with his Cinnamon, Odours and Ointment, etc. not one Sophisticated
Drug amongst them all. Here he comes as a Vintner with his Bottles of Wine to
comfort the Heart, and his Cruises of Oil to Cheer and Clear the Countenance;
it is well if there be not a Tincture of the Wine of Sodom among Hands. Yea,
rather than fail, He becomes a Corn-Chandler, affording you Wheat, either
broken into Flour (with Bran enough in it) or in the whole Grain, but a little
Musty by laying in a bad Granary or Garner, the Apostolical Chamber. Yet lower,
nay rather than sit Idle, he will come as a Rustic Drover to Sell Beasts, and
Sheep, and Horses, (well Mouthed and Manned all, and made as Tame as Asses.) And
at last he comes as a Coach-Maker, who has his Charots to Sell, but have a care
they carry you not to Purgatory instead of Abraham's Bosom. But to Crown up the
Catalogue of all his Commodities, Note, that which we Read Slaves, does
fignifit [Bodies,] which he Sels for Slaves, and the Souls of Men too. And so
Lastly, he becomes a Body-seller, and (to make a thorough-whole-sale Trade, a
Soul-seller also. Let us all (with Moses) turn aside to see this great Wonder,
sure I am, never did Proteus turn himself into so many Shapes, never did any
Jesuit (this Popes Creature) Convert himself into so many Callings, as His
Master is here Represented in. The Pope has made a Monopoly of all Employs to
himself, both in City and Country. And the greatest Merchants Shop (whose
Riches lay not there, but in the Warehouse) cannot, though taken both together,
be compared to the Apostolical Chamber. One coming into a Merchants Shop (I
knew the Man, a Rustic Carrier) and seeing no Goods therein, Bluntly Asks the
Apprentice (sitting alone in the Shop) what was Sold there? the Malapert Youth
Answered; We Sell Loggerheads, say you so, says the Rustic, Then you have a
Quick Market for them, seeing I see but One left in the Shop. There is no
Danger of any Citizen or Countryman either Missing (what Wares he would be at)
or Mistakings of that Nature, for here is all things Exposed to View. There is
yet One Mischief mentioned, Revel. 18.11. where (this Rich Shop is Inventory'd)
that No Man Buyeth. His Merchandise any more: This will break him at last.

But let my Countrymen take these Two Cautions,

First, Have a care of a Cheat in his corrupt Commodities: for he sells them
all in a very dark Shop, not suffering you to exercise your own Reason, you
must take all upon his cracked Credit, and comply with His price in an Implicit
Faith, and in a blind Obedience you must believe what the Pope believes, and he
is no such Fool as to discommend his own Wares, He best Embraces Blindfold
Buyers, Ignorance is the Mother of his Merchandise.

The Second Caution is, It Is dangerous venturing into this Apostolical Chamber,
least this Grand Cheat pick your pockets, for though his Wares be naught, being
all for Impositions, He will impose them upon you, and he will not trust you to
the door for fear you give him the slip, He must have Ready Money paid down
upon the nail.

Have a care you be not cox'd out of good Gold for bad Ware: And before you
Saddle your Ass to Ride down to this Arch Huxter in Mystical Egypt, let me
beseech you to consider a little in your considering Cap, whither it were not
far better for you, to make your Buying Bargains with Christ than with
Antichrist, for the former Invites Chapmen to buy his true Treasure,
unsearchable Riches, Gold Tried in the Fire, Royal Robes of his own
Righteousness, the choicest Opthalmicks or Eye Salve, the Waters of Life, the
Wine of the Spirit, the Milk of Cousolation, etc. And all these without Money
and without Price, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 3.18. Ephesians. 3.8. Isa. 66.11, etc. but the
latter Wheadles simple ones (as above) to buy his Trash and Trumpery, yet
credulous Fools must part with much Money, and a prodigious price for them, etc.

But some may say, these Commodities of the Pope, as set down in the Catalogue
under such Glittering Titles, Rev. 18.12, 13. Gold, Silver, etc. look nothing
like to Trash and Trumpery: To this I answer, the Book of the Revelation is so
Abstruse and Mysterious, that it requires another Revelation to unfold its
Mystery: I confess, I have consulted some Learned Interpreters upon the place:
But that which is Instar Omnium, and gives a Nonesuch Interpretation is the
chief Auditor of the Apostolic Chamber in his Infallible Account Book.

Never did the profoundest Interpreter (no not the Accutest of their own Popish
Postillers) make a plainer Explanation of any Dark Scripture, than this Popes
Auditor General has made of Rev. 18.12.13. All the Voluminous Quirks of the
most Mercurial Jesuits [Cajetan, Mendoza, Salmeron, etc.] are comparatively but
Insiped Stuff, and dull Descants to that one Auditors Record of the Romish
Merchandise in this Popes Apostolical Chamber. Yea, the Chaldee Paraphrase, or
Onkeles (so much cried up in the World) is but a Jejune Piece to it. This is
the Master Piece of all, wherein what be the Romish Pearls and precious Stones,
etc. are made so Legible and Intelligible, that every common Capacity may both
Apprehend and Comprehend the right Notion of them.

In that known Court-Rolls and Rate-Book, is Registered, and made public the
common and current Price of a many choice and curious Commodities, as Pardons,
Indulgences, Licenses, Absolutions, etc. whatever you have a mind to buy:
Indeed the Cries of Vendible Wares in the Streets of London [will you buy this,
etc. and will you buy that, etc.] are both [(...) and (...)] manifold and
somewhat hard to be understood, especially in some of the cries: but the cries
and outcryes in the Streets of Rome, do far exceed the best of ours, yea that
of Dainty Trotters, Curious Trotters: But they that have a mind to Trot to
Rome, may There hear far better Cries, as this for one [will ye buy any Bodies,
will ye buy any Souls of Men?] This is a Raree-Show Indeed, and such a
Tickling, Tempting-Cry, as will cause empty Houses, who would not Run out
(though the Pot be boiling upon the Fire, and the Spit turning at it) to see
the Wonders of the Beast? Revel. 13.3, 13, 14. Who would not but desire to be a
Chapman for (at least to Cheap) his Rare Commodities?

But because it may seem a little below His Highness and Holiness, to become a
common Crier, He has learnt the Trick of our Nimble Quacks and Don Quick-Sots;
as every common Quack and Mountebank, Prints now his Bills, Hands them out
Gratis with much Generosity, yet catches Children and Fools enough to pay for
them; there you have set down, Elixir Vitae at so much, Elixir Salutis at so
much, the Golden Spirit at so much, the Scurvy Spirit at so much, Sovereign
Powder for so much, the Plaster, called All-Heal, for so much, and Twenty
Rarities more (all Arcanums) none Attains to such a Secret as himself; every
thing Exposed is good for all things, if but a Thumb-Bottle of his Liquor be
Bought, 'twill Cure all Diseases; if but a little of his Balsom be Applied,
'twill Heal all Wounds. What Madmen be these to be either Slain or Die in the
midst of so many Antidotes, etc. Yea, the Mountebank goes a little further, He
comes forth Cum Regis Privilegio, makes Experiments upon himself, both in
Stabbings and Poisonings, Builds his Theater, whereon he Exposes all his
Cheating Tricks to Public View, and when the Credulous come not in fast enough
to make their Markets there, his Merry-Andrew must Dance upon a Rope, play
Twenty pretty Pranks (yet all the while more Knave than Fool) to Decoy them,
and yet when all is done, few more than the Rabble are Caught in the Snare.

So this Grand Quack the Pope, and Master-Mountebank, Prints his Bills Cum
Privilegio, commends to the Life his Cursed Wares, Acts all the parts of the
former to a Thread, yet Advances upon an Higher Stage. And indeed, His Wares
have a strange Operation. If but a Thumb-Bottle of his Wine of Fornication be
Drunk, it will strangely Intoxicate even the Kings of the Earth. And his
Jesuits Powder will work Wonders.

But not to detain you in the Dark any longer, If you have a mind to be
Cheated, or only to see his Cheats, you will find his Printed Bills, Published to
the whole World with Antichrists Arms stamped upon them, in his Taxa Camerae
Apostolicae, where you have the Scarlet Whore's Adulterated Wares particularly
Represented, both in their Species, Properties, Profits and Prices, yea, and
there is Morsus Diaboli, the Herb called Devil-bit, to wrap them up in, cast
into the Bargain.

Take only an Antipharmacon, a Divine Allay and Preservative, along with you,
least your Nostrils be offended, and your Vital and Animal Spirits contract any
Tincture of Contagion, while I am (to satisfy your Curiosity) but a little way
Digging into this stinking Dunghill. I have good Warrant for this my good Work,
in laying open the Cheating Abominations of this Scarlet Colored Beast. As
that Man of God, great Elijah could not tell how to Ridicule enough the
Profane Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18.27. Much more may I Ridicule the Grand
Master of them, and this cannot be better done, than by giving you but a brief
Landscape of the Roman Merchandise, a bare Recitatim whereof is a sufficient
Refutation to any Sober and Right Thinking Mind.

The Apostolical Chamber Posts up its [ Si Quis, etc.] If any one want this or
that Popish Trumpery, they may come and be welcome at this present Popes
Warehouse, provided always they come with Money in their Hands, and come up to
the current Price (by Canon Law) of each Vendible Commodity: come along my
Hearts, My Son, Give me thy Heart. You shall have Robin Hood Penniworths,
enough for your Money in all Conscience: because you are all Friends, you shall
all be very Kindly Used, and so Farewell.

A Schedule or List of the Romish Wares, this Pope (the Lord of the Manor)
Exposes to Sale by Inch of Candle, take as follows,

Imprimis, He Exposes his Pick-pocketing Pardons of all sorts and sizes, and
the Prices thereof (in some of them) are set down in Black and White upon the
Popes Tables hung out to Public View, or something Equivalent. As*

First, A Pardon for the Third part of your Sins, equally Divided by
Indifferent Persons, for Seven Pound Ten Shillings, and if you would Buy off
the other Two parts, 'twill Cost you Two and Twenty Pound Ten Shillings, and a
very Rich Penniworth.

Secondly, A Pardon for Forty Eight Years Sins, as you can Agree with this
Innocent Pope; He is a very Innocent, you may possibly Wheedle him to your own
Terms with Nuts and Apples, etc.

Thirdly, A Pardon for Two Thousand Eight Hundred Years, confirmed by Pope
Paschal the First, by Boniface the Eighth, and by Gregory the Ninth, and now
under a New Ratification by this Pope Innocent the Eleventh; this may be had
Dog-cheap, only for saying a few very short Prayers in the right Critical Hour,
betwixt the Elevation of the Host and Three Agnus Dei's, This would keep you
out of Purgatory for a long time upon easy Terms.

Fourthly, A Pardon for Thirty Three Thousand Years at a very low Rate, only
for once going up a pair of Stairs, which, you must suppose, were the very same
that Christ Ascended, when he appeard before Pontius Pilate. Here Is great Wages
for a little Work; and he is a Fool in Grain, that will not Purchase such a
cheap Pardon for so long a Time, provided he may have general Warranty for
securing his Bargain till that Time be Expired; and much more of this Trash,
etc.

Item, Absolutions of various Prices, according the Crime committed. As

First, For Sacrilege, Ten Shillings and Six Pence.

Secondly, For Symony in a Priest the same Price, but in a Layman the odd
Eighteen Pence shall be Baited. Kindly done.

Thirdly, For Perjury, it is a Rich Pennyworth at Nine Shillings.

Fourthly, For Murder, If it be a Priest that is Killed, it cannot be Dear at
one [Two Pence] more than a Mark, I would never be a Priest there, where my
Life is no higher Valued. But you may Kill your Father, Mother, Wife or Sister,
etc. upon easier Terms, That shall but cost you Ten Shillings and Six Pence.

Fifthly, For Adultery, Deflouring a Virgin goes at Nine Shillings, but Incest
with Mother, Sister, etc. is cheaper, passing at Seven Shillings and Six Pence.
And the Whore that Destroys her Bastard Child either before or after Birth,
has the self same Sum to pay.

Sixthly, For Burning a Neighbors House is Dog-cheap at Twelve Shillings; but
for Burning Heretical Cities, it is severely Punished with being Canonized for
Saints, etc.

Item, Licenses for what you List.

First, If you be a Priest you may keep a Whore, paying only Ten Shillings and
Six Pence; and if a Layman it will cost you no more; that the one may not
Deride the other.

Secondly, A License to be Lazy, and to become an Abby-Lubber, and so to be
Inutile pondus Terrae, Living there like Hogs in the Stie, unuseful to Mankind,
unless to the Wanton Nuns.

Thirdly, A License to be Licentious, and to have the liberty of the Stews the
Three Hot Months of the Year, there is the Roman Recipe prescribed (with Dr.
Pope's probatum est) ad purgandos Renes. This Grand Quack, or great Mountebank,
is Tender of his Proselytes Health, Allows this Remedy (which God never thought
of, when he said, It Is not good for Man to be alone, Genesis 3.18.) to prevent his
Popelings (under the Vow of Chastity) from falling into Acute Fevers, and to
show how good Natured he will be to them (Remembering it had been his own
needful Privilege and Practice) you may have these Two last Licenses (both to
be Lazy and to be Licenticus) Gratis. Gra-Mercy upon his Kind Heart, they shall
not cost you a Penny.

Fourthly, Yet a License to Eat Flesh in Lent, will cost you much more, for his
Un-Holiness Infallibly Judges this to be a far greater Sin than to keep a
Whore. Yea, and many more Indulgences.

Item, Here you may have Holy Water Chymically prepared, Secundum Artem
Diabolicam, for driving away the Devil, hence comes that Popish Proverb, to
express something that is Hateful, [A Man loves it as well as the Devil loves
Holy Water.] You must suppose, that Water which the Pope Conjures into the like
Holiness with his own, is able to Conjure away the strongest Devil in Hell.

Item, You may have Holy Oil, compounded according to the same Art, only it is
an Arcanum and Magisterial. The Pope has been so kind to let the World know
how he makes his Holy Water, Pissing it out by Conjuration; but he has a mind
to be private in Consecrating his Holy Oil, and when he has done his best to
it, have a care you eat it not with a Romish Sallet, least it be mixed with
Jesuits Powder; however, it is good enough to Liquor your Boots after your long
Journey to Rome.

No doubt but it serves notably as an Unguent for (far better than for
anointing the Sick to make them well) the Popes Charet Wheels, makes them run
glib in all Transmarine Countries, and is now calling for a wast over into
ours; do not you hear Him at Callice, Crying, have over for Dover, have over
for England: God grant Him contrary Winds, but if the Prince of the Air must be
permitted to lend Him a lift with a Favonian or Favorable Wind, God grant,
this proud Mystical Pharaoh of Spiritual Egypt, Rev. 11.8. May meet with no
better a Fate and Fare, than that Litteral King of Egypt did; who, though for
ought we know to the contrary, had as fair way and weather into the midst of
the Red Sea, as Israel had, yet when Irrecoverably brought into an unavoidable
Noose (which He could not Slip nor Retreat from) then God looked out of the
black side of the Cloud (which was toward His Host, as the bright side was
toward Israel) with an angry Countenance, took off His Charet Wheels, made them
(though never so well Oyled with His Priests Holy Oil) drive Heavily, then
dows'd Him with a Witness, and drowned Him (too) with a Vengeance, Exodus
14.7.20. 22, 23, 24, 25, etc. I cannot but be confident, that the Lord will
look through this black cloudy Dispensation, with a look of Love upon his own
People (as he did upon poor perplexed Peter, Luke 22.61.) and with a look of
Wrath upon this great Leviathan, His Holy Oil shall fall His Chariot Wheels,
and they shall never become as the Chariots of Aminadab, England cannot ever be
a willing People to Receive Him:

Item, Here you may have His Holy Salt also, this is soundly Conjured likewise
into as good an Holiness as that of His Holy Water, or as that of His own
Holiness: and with this Holy Stuff the Beast works His Mighty Miracles and
Wonders: What place soever has this Holy Salt scattered upon it, neither the
Devil nor any of his evil Spirits have any power against it: It Is a wonder
there should be so many Houses, Haunted with Hobgoblins all over His Holinesses
Dominions, Surely, either His Holy Salt has lost its efficatious Virtue, or
Himself has lost the Right Art to Consecrate it, or more likely, the Devil is
in His Priests that they Improve it not. It Is a wonder this old Scphister does
not dash whole handfuls of this Holy Salt in the Eyes of those Raw Freshmen
(those Novicet as he calls the Protestants) and so to blind them for ever. But
though this will not do ( His Holy Salt having lost its Efficacy) He has a
better Trick behind far more Bloody, He would Bleed and Burn those He cannot
Blind: If His Holy Salt have lost its Savor (as indeed it has,) otherwise
there could never have been so much Carrion, for want of Seasoning, both among
Popes and His Popelings) what is it good to, but to be cast to the Dunghill, and
to be Trodden Underfoot? Matthew. 5.13. England is as the Garden of Eden, never
any Pope that passed through the Porphury Chair (ever since the Writ of
Ejectment was by an Almighty Hand Served upon Him to dispossess that Devil in
the Reformation) but He has licked his Lips, and longed after some sweet
Lettuces, that Grow in this English Garden, God grant it may be, as the Law
calls that Writ, an Ejectione Firmae: that this evil Spirit (once cast out) may
not find the House of our Land (which, God knows is now neither Swept of Moral
Vices, nor Garnished, with Moral Virtues, but too much overspread with
Epidemical-Immortality) empty also of all Grace, and so Return with Seven worse
Spirits than the forwer, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. I would to God, England were not
so much like Jericho, whose Situation was pleasant, but the Waters were
naughty: Our fresh River of Thames seems to Run so near the salt Waters of
Tybur (ever since the Beast fouled our Fountains with his Feet, Ezekiel. 34, 18.)
that they taste a little Brackish and somewhat Imbibed with the Salt-Sea of
Rome, It Is too much Tinged with the Tincture of its Holy Salt, Oh where is that
Elisha, that will take a Cruse of better Salt (than this Popes Holy Salt is)
happily to hand in, that our Waters may be Healed, etc. 2 Kings 2.19, 20, 21.

Item, Here is exposed to Sale the Holy Milk of the Virgin Mary, which, some of
the Popes Doctors affirm, is as Sovereign and Salvifical as the Blood of her
Son our Savior. However, It Is commended most Highly for never-failing to cure
Consumptions, far exceeding the Milk of an Ass, or that of the Red-Cow. What
Fools are the Consumptive and Phtisical Popelings, that have such a Ready Cure
by them, yet so many dye of a Consumption, which is so Ranting and Regnant a
Disease in those Hot Climates: Nay, What a Fool is the Consumptive Pope or
Antichrist himself, who does not by this trusty trick disapoint the Divine Doom
passed upon him, what need he Fear [that the Lord shall CONSUME Him with the
Spirit of his Mouth.] 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Seeing an Hearty Draught of this Holy Milk
will cure the Consumption: This Pope might then say as one of his Holy
Predecessors once said, I will have my Will [Al despito di dio] in Despite of
God; But the mischief is, neither the Pope nor his Popelings dare take a
sufficient Dose of this Salutiferous Antidote, for fear of marring the General
Market hereof, it is a long time since the Blessed Virgin gave her Milk, and
they can expect none in her Glorified Breasts, the old Stock (suppose every one
take but a little sup, though that is not enough) must needs be far spent in
above Sixteen Hundred Years, and where or how these Traders make their old
Store bring in new, I know not, unless that Image of the Virgin (which bid
Bernard Good Morrow at his entrance into the Church, and whom that Father
Rebuked, because She a Woman, took upon her (contrary to the Truly Apostolical
Canon) to speak in the Church, might supply, for that Idol of Stone might
equally and as Probably have Milk in its Breast as well as a Voice in its
Mouth: But that which spoiled the expectation of this fresh supply of Holy
Milk, was the Discovery of a crafty Priest that was crept into the Hollow Belly
of this Holy Image, and that gave Holy Bernard the Hearty Salutation, and sure
I am, there could not be much Holy Milk in such a Profligate Priests Breast,
who durst put such an affronting Cheat upon so Holy a Father. But suppose there
were supply then, it is above 500 Years ago, and this cry [will ye have any holy
Milk, etc.] that Milk-street Market must needs be down ere now, seeing all
their Milk-Maids (whereof they cannot have many, while the Indulged Stews
afford his Unholiness such a vast Revenue) are now surely sitting upon their
Empty Pales: But I had forgot my self that the Beast can work Wonders, and can
multiply that Holy Milk (though but little from the Blessed Virgin) as well as
Christ did the Barley Leaves; Yea, He has done it to such an overflow, that the
Priests (all the Popedom over) do expose this Holy Milk to Sale, all pretending
that theirs is the very Milk of the Virgin Mary, which, were all they have in
their Consecrated Dairy's gathered together into one place, Solomon's prodigious
Molten Sea could not possibly contain it. Nay, hereby they put the greatest
Dishonor upon the Holy Mother of our Lord (whom they pretend to Adore) in
making Her such a Milk-Beast, as Ten of the best Cows in Holland cannot give
the like quantity in Ten Years.

Item, Holy-Bread is here to be had: The Pope (good Man) takes care for your
Table, and to furnish it so far as Holy Water, Holy Oil, Holy Salt, Holy Milk,
and Holy Bread will go: But surely all these do but look like a Lent Dinner, I
hope his Holiness keeps a better Table for Himself: If you be a Water Drinker,
here is the best of the Kind, Holy Water for you, of the Popes own making, I
should have said, Consecrating: If you be a Milk-Sop, Here Is the best of the
Kind, Holy Milk, the self same your Savior Sucked out of the self-same
Breasts, when he was a Child, and who will not be content with the same Fare
that Bred the Blessed Babe of Bethlehem, the Holy Child Jesus, and because the
Master of this Lent-Feast, will not undervalue you as a sort of sorry
Sucklings, He is so Kind-hearted as to allow you Bread to your Milk, that you
may sup it and not suck it, is not biting and supping good Fare? especially, of
Holy Bread and Holy Milk. You must not expect a Glass of Wine, for I find not
any Holy Wine in the Popes Ware-shop. Perhaps he and his Priests Monopolizes it
wholly to themselves, for in the Eucharist, the Cup is forbid to you of the
Laity, you must suck Wine out of the Bread, If you would have it, and can catch
it.

Neither must you grudge that you have only Bread (though it be but course
Barley Bread, such as you were never possibly brought up with) it is however
Holy Bread, and the Holier, and so more satisfactory, because (as this
Mart-Master tells you) it is a Fragment of those same Five Loaves wherewith
Christ fed the Multitude, and picked out of the Twelve Baskets (that were taken
away) by some of the Popes nimblest Snips, but I wonder how they have kept it
from Moulding ever since, The Molded Bread wherewith the Gibeonites cheated
Joshua, was not so many Hours old, as this Holy Bread is Years, at this Day. If
it be Sound Bread that is shown you, take heed you be not cheated with it, as
Joshua was with the Moldy: But you will say, why is Holy Salt prepared for the
Table, when the forementioned Fare needs it not? Answer, You must know it is not
set there for Fashion-sake only, as ordinarily, for

Item, Here you may have Holy Fish too, and of the self-same two Fishes
wherewith Christ Fed the Multitude also, the Bread and the Fish were taken out
of the same Baskets; and if you suppose it Fresh Fish, then there is use for
your Salt, but to prevent your Second Objection about the use of your Oil, you
must rather suppose it Holy Fish Salted with that Holy Salt, (it could never
have otherwise kept so long sweet for this Sixteen Centuries) and then your
Holy Oil will make your Holy Fish (so called) slip down the better, and be
modish enough, and what would you have more, is not here enough for a Four
Penny Ordinary.

Item, Besides this Belly-Timber, here you are Treated with a Numberless Number
of Rarieties. As

First, The Asses Tail upon which Christ Rode; not a word of his Ears.

Secondly, Joseph's Breeches both Threadbare and out of Fashion, they will do
you neither Credit nor Service.

Thirdly, A Feather from the Cock that Crew, and awakened Peter's Conscience;
yet this Startles not Peter's Successor for his Apostasy; as also a Feather from
Grabriels Wing, taken up at such a time when as Angels cast their Feathers.

Fourthly, Choice Hair Cloth, the same as Elijah and John Baptist wore, good
enough for the Pope to do Penance in, for forcing the Witnesses into Sackcloth.

Sixthly, Whole Cart Loads of Apostles Bones, sometimes those of a Thief (as
once) drops in among them; good for I know not what.

Item, Sold at a very Reasonable Rate,

First, An Holy Rag clipped off from Christ's Seamless Coat; it is a wonder how
the Pope got it from the Soldier to whom it fell by casting Lots, and it is a
wonder they have not clipped it all away by, this time.

Secondly, The Holy Relick of the very Slippers Christ wore, when He, being
weary with walking about doing Good, put off his Shoes, for the ease of his
Feet, surely they were made of well Tan'd Leather, that lasts still, and are
not Rotten to Dirt ere this Day, and I wonder the Pope does expose them, and
not Monopolize them to himseif, for they cannot want a Virtue to Cure his Gouty
Golls: It Is strange we hear nothing of his Shoes (in the Popes Warehouse) the
Latchets whereof, John Baptist (though the Greatest Born of Women) thought
himself Unworthy to Unloose, Matthew 11.11. Luke 3.16.

Thirdly, The very Linen Cloth with which Christ was wrapped in the Sepulcher,
as likewise that wherewith Christ wiped his Disciples Feet. I am thinking the
Man that Cries in our Streets, [Here's your strong lasting Linen Cloth,] might
do good Service in this Romish Market.

Fourthly, The very Needles, Thread, Work-Basket and Scissers, of the Virgin
Mary, which would be excellently useful for an Exchange-shop, and could not
sail to bring in a whole shoal of Chapmen, etc. How the Pope comes by all these
Rich Commodities for all kind of Customers, is the Question? But the Infallible
Tradition of the Church must be the Satisfactory and Silencing Answer.

Item, Lastly, Here you may have, whatever your Heart wishes, or Need does
Require. Is it any of those many things mentioned in Revel. 18.12, 13. Rich
all, here they are to be had. Want you Holy Bells (Baptized with Godfathers
and Godmothers) God Bless our Empty New Erected Steeples, etc. Or want you
Holy Beads, made of Glass, Wood, Stone, Coral or Amber; Holy Wax for your
Candles; Holy Knives for Cutting Heretics Throats; or Holy Roses, this
Christmas time, a Rare Present for Princes; or what else soever, all is Holy
that comes from his Unholiness; and all have a Power to drive away the Devil,
yet the Devil takes most of those that are taken with these [Piae Fraudes] Holy
Cheats. None of their Names are Writ in the Lambs Book, Revel. 13.8. God Bless
every good Englishman from the Beast and his Cheating Tricks.

Having taken a short prospect of the Craft of this Insatiable Beast (to keep
close still unto the Irish Malachi's Character of this present Pope) let us now
take a brief View of his Cruelty. He is a most Accomplished Beast, his
Infallible Unholiness is Described by an Infallible Hand (the Spirit of Truth
himself) in his most Horrible Accoutrements, no less than Seven Heads to Plot.
with, for the more crafty carrying on of all his Gainful Cheats, and no less
than Ten Horns to push his Plots endway with, and to push all down (that stand
in his way) with Unparrallel'd Cruelty. To pretermit all former Bloody Plots in
foregoing Ages of this present Popes Predecessors, against all Protestant
Countries, ever since the Reformation, and against England in particular, both
in Queen Elizabeth's, King James's, and in King Charles's the First's Time. I
shall confine my self to Characterize this Insatiable Beast, the Devils
Patriarch, that now Possesses the Roman Omnipotency.

His Name is Innocent the Eleventh, who after his Instalment, was Arrayed with
a White Surplice, wherein he Worshipped that God which had now Constituted him
the Universal Monarch; in this White Garment he seemed as pure as Innocence it
self, there was nothing surely under it, but Meekness, Gentleness, and
Lamb-like Innocence. You might then stroke the Beast, He would not spurn you,
you might put your Hand into his very Mouth, He by no means would Bite you. No,
He had newly put on the Name of Innocent, and He was (what ever he had been
while a Cardinal) now become an Innocent Pope, a Toothless Innocent Milk-Sop,
that would neither Kick, nor Fling, nor Scratch, nor Bite; but the mischief
was, He soon after going to his Court-Office, De propagandi Fide to a Consult
there, coming thither without his White Garment (that Reached down to his Foot)
His Red Shoes, and Red Stockins, were there Unhappily Discovered. At that
Consult He Declared his Determinations, That he Resolved (Adjuvante Diabolo) to
Reduce all the Heretical Countries in Europe into the Subjection of His Roman
See, and He said (for a flying Argument) 'twas below both his Higness and his
Holiness to prove such a poor Puny, as his Predecessors, in playing such small
Games as they had done; He would (for his part) Take New Measures, and Make
such Methods, as neither God nor Devil could be able to Disapoint him of his
Design. Whereupon for the better Propogation of his Popish Faith, He proposes
these following Expedients, and not only so, but Imposes them also upon that
his Privy Council, who dare not gainsay their God.

The First Proposal Imposed, was this, Go forth you my Emissaries, and Debauch
the Heretical Countries, Foist your Loose Principles, (Calculated for, and
Accomodated to, the Depraved Natures of Mankind in general) this will soon
bring Men to Loose Practices; It Is found by Experience (says He in great
Gravity, comporting with his Grandeur) a Prosperous Bait to Catch, and a
Powerful Hook to Hold whole Shoals of Proselites. I am a Fisher of Men, as my
Predecessor Peter was, yet I have a Trick, which He (simple Fisherman) never
thought of, or Practiced; I can make Men Atheists in their Lives, and then they
will turn Papists the sooner, for stopping the Mouths of their Natural
Consciences (which will be Barking) the better with my precious Pardons,
whereby I can make the worst of Sins Venial, etc.

The Second Expedient propounded by this Pope there was this, You Jesuits must
be my Locusts, my Beutefeaus to go into the Courts of all these Kingdoms, and
set them all on a light Fire (in Warring one against another) that my Religion
(which has grown very cold ever since Unhappy Luther called the Pope,
Antichrist) may be warmed again with those very Flames that I (by you my
Engines) have kindled. You know, Christ has made me a Fisher of Men, as
before, and I find it best Fishing in Troubled Waters. Nay, I am the true
Salamander, that can best live in the Flames, of Foreign and Secular Princes
Contentions, etc.

The Third Proposal was, to Depose those Kings that will not Truckle, and to
Expose their Kingdoms, primo occupaturo, the first that can win it, let them
wear it, I will warrant the Assault of the Aggressor, etc.

The Fourth nimble Trick he Proposed was, saying, Though I have a Thausand more
Reaching and Effectual Knacks to offer, yet seeing you know them all so well,
it is superfluous to mention more, save only this, which is, Instar Omnium. You
must in Reducing all others, Begin with that Stubborn Kingdom of England,
which has been more fatal to my Tripple Crown than all other Kingdoms, and
when you have made a Breakfast of that, then make your Dinner of this, etc. and
your Supper of that, etc. and so go on and my Blessing go with you.

Thus ended the Seraphical or rather Diabolical Oration of this Innocent Grave
old Gentleman that never did, nor ever will do Harm to any.

This done, the Damnable Popish Plot was in all its Parts and Paragraphs
contrived, etc. The Romish Fry of Priests and Jesuits, (who were soon Hatched
and grew Fledge under his Holiness's Wing) came Flying over in great Wild-goose
Flocks into England, we may suppose they came fully furnished with their
Pick-Iccks of Pardons, with their Padlocks of Auricular Confession, and all
other useful Engines to promote their Hellish Project, the Sum whereof in the
general was, to Subvert the Established Government and Religion of this
Kingdom, and to Reduce the same to the Foppery of Popery, yea, and 'twas
concluded at the Consult (which these Romish Emissaries came to Accomplish)
that no manner of Tolleration should be granted to any sort of Protestants, but
all such should be Extirpated Root and Branch, and if all other means failed,
it should be effected by Fire and Sword.

The chief Conspirators, who designed, and were engaged to carry on this Bloody
project, must be thus Ranked in a lasting Record.

First, The Fountain of these Bitter Waters, and Original of all, was this
Present Pope Innocent the 11th, who in the Congregation [de propaganda Fide]
consisting of about 350 Persons, (all fit Tools for the Devils Work) and held
about December 1677. as soon as he was well warm in Peter's Chair, He Plots
(even in that cold Season) work Hot enough for poor England: Then was it He
belchd out that nocent rather than Innocent Oration aforementioned, Declaring
further, that this Kingdom was a part of St. Peter's Patrimony, and was
forfeited to the Holy See, by the Heresy both of Prince and People, and so must
be disposed of as he thought meet: though this Pope was the primus motor, the
primum mobile, or great Wheel that moved all the lower Orbs, and set all the
lesser Wheels on Work, yet let us take a short view of his Under-Engines,
before we more fully give him his due Character, upon this last (which at the
last day will be a great) Account also, to wit, his Plots, as before, his
Cheats, in the one a crafty Fox, in the other a cruel Tiger, and surely whoever
were the Instruments, the Members, the Hands and the Feet for Acting this
Bloody Plot, to Reduce England to the Roman Rotten Religion, we shall find Him
the Head and Principal Agent. My Design is here to set the Saddle upon the
Right Horse: It Is a Thousand pitties, that the petty larceners should be Hanged
and Beheaded, (though that be no more than what both Distributive and
Commutative Justice most Justly Required) and the grand Thief (that set them
all on work) escape Scot-free. How many did pity those poor mercenary Rogues
that were Executed for that Inhumane and Cowardly Murder of that Eminent
Patriot Esquire Thinn, when they saw Count Connismark, the great Rogue, (that
set his silly Vassals on Work) to be acquitted. but there is a [(...)] a
Vengeance (even in the Judgment of no better than Barbarians, Act. 28.4.) which
will not suffer either the one or the other long to live; because the God of
Justice has peremptorily said, that the Bloody and Deceitful Men shall not
live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23.

Take here a Distinct List and Catalogue of the chief Plotters in this Late and
Damnable Plot, and View them from Head to Foot, from Top to Toe, as they stand
Ranked in our English Records, and Orderly Registered for everlasting
Remembrance.

First, This Present Pope Innocent the Eleventh, the Master of all the Misrule
and Matchless Mischief: as the Philosopher says of Finis, it is primus
Intention, but ultimus Executione; So must I say of this Fino Filth, He is the
first in Intention, (his Cursed Character being the principal end proposed in
this present Discourse) yet must He come last in Execution, not only in the
Method of this Platform, but also (for ought I yet see) in the Measures of Gods
Providence: For the Law of Justice (compared to the Cobweb that catches the
lesser Flies, but cannot keep the great ones, etc.) is too Low and Short Handed
(as to Man) to Reach so High and so Far as the Great Goff of Rome, Yet surely
in due Season His Sin shall find him out by the great God, Numb. 32.23. unto
whom we must leave Him, for He is the God of Vengeance, Justice is His, and He
will Repay, Deuteronomy. 32.35.43. Romans 12.19.

Secondly, Cardinal Howard, by Birth both an English Man, and Brother to the
Great Duke of Norfolk; So one of the Popes first and fittest Engines to Betray
England into His Holinesses Hands, that thereby this Cardinal might the more
Merit Saint Peter's Chair upon this Popes Departure from it, and then this Sweet
Bit (our Land) would prove a Sowceing Augmentation to Peter's Patrimony:
Therefore, as the Pope was Lord High Admiral in the whole See of Rome; So, it
was concluded by the Cabal in the College de propaganda fide, that this same
English Cardinal, should be his Vice Admiral, and hereupon He was dispatched
away from Rome to be the Popes Legatus a Latere, or a None Such Nuncio into
England, upon such an unparalleld Errand, as never any Ambassador durst
undertake, which was to take possession of it in this Popes Name, as if it had
been elapsed into his Hands for want of either Heir or Possessour, though,
Blessed be God it has both, and needs none of the Popes false Claims, or foul
usurpations: and to make this Cardinal more brisk in his exploit, the Pope
Creates Him Archbishop of Canterbury (as if there had been a Vacancy too) and,
that Sees Vast Revenue being looked upon as too little a Bribe for so Heroic
an undertaker, the Pope ordains Him Forty Thousand Crowns per Annum out of His
own Coffers (where there is Gold and Silver enough, etc. Rev. 18.12, 13.) as a
necessary supplement to that pitiful Archbishopric (the Best and Richest in
England) that He might be had in more Veneration, and the better Support His
Authoritative Grandieur: And as if this alone were below this Innocent Harmless
Pope (like another proud Haman) to lay His Violent Hands only upon our
Mordecai (the Bishop of Canterbury, as well as King Charles the Second) to
Dispossess them both of their Crown and Miter, but He daringly Dispossesseth
(so far as the good will of the evil Beast would stretch) most of our other
Bishops, promoting His own Popelings as so many Interlopers in their places, as
Father Perrot to York, Corker to London, Whitebread to Winchester, Strange to
Durham: Godder to Salisbury, Napper to Norwich, etc. I appeal to all those
Bishops (whom this Pope would have turned out to Grazing, unless they could
have turned in to Him) whether His Name and His Nature do correspond well
herein, and whether they would not have had hereupon far greater Reason to
brand Him (as in Scripture, this is King Ahaz) saying likewise, this is Pope
Nocent, rather than Pope Innocent the Eleventh: All must Truckle to Cardinal
Howard His Nuncio.

Thirdly, Johannes Paulus de Oliva, comes in next to play his pranks, and as He
had been the Father General of the Jesuits in all Lands, so this Pope
Constitutes Him his Rere-Admiral, to Mann and to Manage a right Romes Great
Man of War, the Provincial of the Jesuits in London, in so noble an Attack: but
is Attacking in a Military manner, proper Work for an Olivas, whose Name
carries an Olive Leaf (that Badg of Peace) in its Mouth, but it seems, He will
be like his Great Master, Pope Nocent-Innocent, there is War in his Heart.
Which minds me of a Story concerning the foregoing Pope Innocent the Tenth, who
bare for part of his Arms [a Dove with an Olive Branch in her Mouth] Whereupon
our Turn Coat and Runagate Doctor Baily wittily Quibbles upon Oliva vera,
profoundly perverting it to Oliverus, and highly Courted that Protector with
his Seraphick Comparison of the Olive and Oliver. See his Life of Fisher, p.
260, 261. It Is the genuine Character of a Jesuit to have Honey (or the Olive of
Peace) in his Mouth, and to have designed (yea Consecrated) Swords and Daggers
in his Heart. Oh brave Olive, Oh brave Oliver, the handle of the Sword that
should have been Sheathed in our Bowels, Reached to Rome, and was held in this
Brave Olivas Hand.

Fourthly, Pedro Jeronimo de Corduba, Provincial of the Jesuits in New Castle
in Spain, the Pope must have here a Paul (as His Third Engine) and a Peter (as
this Fourth) engaged with Himself herein, though both Jesuits (without whom no
Mischief in all Europe can be managed, the Hand of Joab or Jesuit is in all)
to make this Damnable and Diabolical Plot more like Apostolical: That Work
which this Pope cut out for him, was to be a Grand Pilot in his Country, and
to give the Plot a lift endways, both with Money and Men, under the notion of
Pilgrims: and where this Popish Pedro or Peter played his pranks like a right
Beautifeu to Sow his Seed of Contention betwixt that Crown and this, thereby
the more to facilitate the further Progress of the Plot.

Fifthly, La Chese a Jesuit too, and Confessor to the French King (and so must
be Privy to all his Royal Designs) He was also a Grand Pilot in that Country,
whose hands were directed to Steer a right Course herein by that conceited
Coxcomb, our Coleman, who was hanged for his pains in Betraying his own Native
Country.

Sixthly, Another Jesuit (I have not his Name, and indeed it is not worth
enquiry) who is Confessor to the Emperor of Germany, must Create Fends
betwixt Him and our King: That, with all these pretty Diversions, we might be
wheadled into a Gazing abroad, while they by their English Jesuits, etc. could
cut our Throats at Home: Mark here, what a Sacred Number is Six, with them
there must be Six of Foreign Assistants (the Number of the Beast is Three
Sixes as before) and still Jesuits every where must be the Instruments of
Cruelty, though the Pope be the hand to Improve them: I the less wonder at
this, since I Read that passage in the Jesuit Muffeius, writing the Life of
Ignatius Loyala their Founder, He there Ingeniously confesses, that their
Father Imitated the Devil in using Tricks to Convert (or rather Pervert)
Disciples, etc. You may Swear, that all the Jesuits do Patrizare and will Try
the Devils Tricks with the best of Juglers, etc.

But are our Jesuits in England asleep all this while? No, the Pope has
Domestic Tools as well as Foreign.

This Popes Domestic Engines employed here, were These

First, The Provincial of the Jesuits, for the Time being in England, who was
White-Bread, who would have made Brownbread and Brann of us, but he fell into
his own Pit, etc.

Secondly, The Benedictine Monks at the Savoy. The Duke of Savoys Country was
called Malvoy, because it was pesterd so notoriously with Thieves as made it
Mala Via or Malvoy, that is, a Dangerous Passage, but when the Thieves were
Rooted out, its Name was changed into Salvoy or Savoy, the way thence to
Somerset House, makes the Application more easy.

Thirdly, The Jesuits and Seminary Priests, who were Sowing their Tares among
the Wheat (like the Envious one their Father) all over the Land, they being
about the Number of Eighteen Hundred, a large black Regiment under Roman
Colors.

Fourthly, Many Lay-Papists both of the Nobility and Gentry (too well known to
need naming) who had all Commissions Sealed by Brave Oliva aforementioned, both
for Civil and Military Employ, and sent them by this Pope, as the Highest Marks
of his Favor.

Fifthly, Multitudes, Multitudes of the Lay-Papists among the Commonalty. Even
all the Papists in England could not choose but be Engaged in so Glorious and
Meritorious a Matter; and this is the more probable, If not only their General
Principles Imbibed with their Religion, but also the Popes particular Test (for
Anathematizing us Heretics) Imposed Universally on them, be but well
considered.

Sixthly, For still we must have the Six in Adoration of Six Hundred Sixty Six,
etc. All the English Covents beyond Sea, (as St. Omors, etc.) must be almost
drained Dry, and Transported Incognito's hither, to Corroberate the better
carrying on of the Catholic Cause, which was now become as Catholic as their
Religion, having likewise all the most Eminent of the Popish Clergy in Europe
Engaged to help at a Dead Lift, and to Lift England to Rome. Hereby this Plot
became the Unanimous Act of the whole Romish Church, whose Infallible and
Innocent Head (this Pope) Adjur'd them to it, upon the forfeiture of their
Fathers Blessing. Though we may not Imagine every Individual Popeling could
know the whole Intrigue (for there might be a Wheel within a Wheel) yet in the
Lump they pay to this Pope their Blind Obedience, however the Guilt both of the
parts, and of the whole, falls upon the Innocent Conscience of this Pope, which
all his Holy Water cannot wash off, and make him as Innocent as his Name,
should he Conjure Tibur it self.

Now when His Holiness had thus well furnished his Holy Cause with Men (a
double Set of Sixes, a Jury of Twelve, I cannot say, All Good Men and True, No,
not so much as the Foreman himself) His next Care is to be supplied with Money,
the Sinews of His Holy War, and though his own private Exchequer be Puteus In
exhaustus (as he once said of England, when it was his Ass to Ride on, and
therefore would fain bestride her soft Back again,) an Inexhaustible Fountain,
yet the Old Crafty Fox liked better to get some Bearers, well knowing that many
Hands make lighter Work. Hereupon by his Apostolical Command, as well as
Example. A Vast and Prodigious Fund was quickly Erected for so Great and Pious
a Work.

First, The Pope himself, to be a good Pattern to others, conveys into his
Sacred Treasury by Paulus de Oliva, or Paul Olive, Eleven Thousand Crowns, I
wonder He made it not even Twelve, and the Crown's, Pounds; His own full
Coffers Revel. 18.12. might well enough have born it besides; the Regaining of
England to His Revenue would well enough have Countervail'd that Cost.

Secondly, The Catholic King (His Eldest Son) of Spain shames his Holy Father,
in Advancing Ten Thousand Pounds by Peter Jeronimus; thus his Indian Gold was
Expended.

Thirdly, His Most Christian Son of France (to show himself the better
Christian, or rather Antichristian,) Advances Ten Thousand Pound more by
Father Le Cheese, what a shame it is, that His Holiness should be out done by
both his Sons, when it was peculiarly His Cause, and He would have Run away
with the Profit.

Fourthly, I wonder we hear nothing of the Emperors Charity, was it because he
was too Nigardly, or because the Malcontents of Hungary kept his Coffers
Empty; however, diverse considerable Sums were transmitted to Coleman by Foreign
Ministers, among whom, He from Germany might be one.

Fifthly, But the English Jesuits (supposing the Emperor to be too Narrow
Soul'd,) Ex Abundanti, supplied all Defects, they having Threescore Thousand
Pound per Annum, Estate in Land here, and an Hundred Thousand Pound Ready Cash,
a constant Running Stock in the way of their Trade, which (you know) is the
Mystery of Iniquity.

Sixthly, The Benedictine Monks (not to be thrust out as Rotten) contribute out
of their Blessed Treasure, Six Thousand Pound to purchase the Popes
Benediction, whom they also exceeded in their Benevolence, etc.

Seventhly, God Bless us, here is the Third Six again, and so we have got the
exact Number of the Beast, Six, and Six, and Six, or Six Hundred Sixty Six, and
to make up this Number complete, the English Catholic (as well as Romon)
Grandees were free Contributors of most Ample Benevolencies to this so Great
and so Glorious a Work.

No sooner had this Innocent Pope thus provided Himself (though He as to his
part, comes off but Stingily) with quantum sufficit (or rather suffocat, as to
Justice Godfrey) both of Men and Money: He then sends forth His hungry Beagles
to Hunt the harmless Hare, that never gave them the least provocation: but He
must do it, it is the nature of the Beast to worry the Harmless, and it is the
custom (which is a second nature) of this Innocent Pope to be notoriously
Nocent to the Innocent.

The First Innocent, He Assaults with his greedy Hounds, is no less than our
King (God Bless Him) Grove and Tickering are hired to shoot Him, Conyers and
Anderton to stab Him, four Irish Ruffians to Godfrey Him, Sir George Wakeman to
poison Him: Out of the way with Him, any way (they cry) since He will not
comply with our Plot.

Secondly, The Duke of York shall fare no better, unless He will turn Tenant to
this Innocent Pope for his Kingdom, as well as for his Religion, and pardon the
Murderers of his Brother, the Burners of the City, etc. and the Massacrers of
the People, etc.

Thirdly, Because their Horrid and Hellish Plot had taken Wind by Doctor Oats's
Depositions given in to Justice Godfrey (whereby their Bloody Designs, both of
Murdering the King and the Duke of York too, If he would not comply, and upon
His Majesty's Murder, of Firing Westminster, Wapping, Rotherith and Southwark,
as they had done London, and to lay all upon the Presbyterians, etc. as
likewise of making a General Massacre at the same time by a secret listed Army
of Five Hundred Thousand Cutthroats, whereof the Lord Bellasis was to be
General, etc. were all Discovered) this good Magistrate must have his Mouth
stoped from telling Tales, etc. wherein the Pope succeeded so far as to make
this Man the First Martyr of our Religion, and a fair Ransom of our Realm.

The like was Attempted upon Justice Arnold, though no other Crime was found in
either, save a faithful Discharge of their Oath and Duty. Nor against Justice
Pie neither, yet Bodnam the Papist prevailed to knock down his Clay-Crust with
his Bill, whereby this good Pie (a serviceable Dish in Hereford-shire) was
Destroyed.

Fourthly, The Popes Agents (being now Fleshed in Protestants Blood, yet unable
to stifle the Plot, when it once was Declared by both Houses of Parliament that
there was a Traitorous Design of the Pope to Subject this Kingdom to his
Tyrannical Government, by these Five pernicious Lords in the Tower, whereof
Stafford lately Executed was, etc.) do then club their Wits, not only with
this Pope (the Devils Eldest Son) but even with the Devil himself, how they
might handsomely Sham it, and this they labor in the very Fire to Accomplish.

Fifthly, Then began they to play their Popish pranks in Blasting the Kings
Evidence, Sir Dennis Ashburnham, the Saint Oniers Boys, are brought in to
Accuse Doctor Oats of Perjury, as Lane and Osborn did of Sodomy, the like
pranks against France, Bedloe, Dugdale, etc. but their Bowl Runs not here
without a Rub for their Design of Subborning Alderman Brook and Captain Bury,
being Discovered, this Discovered also that all the aforesaid Tools were but
the Popes or the Devils Trunks through which he spoke, as he used to do in his
Dumb Images, which the Father of Lies taught to say what he listed, yet must be
his Oracles.

Sixthly, They, being Non-plus'd herein also by the Overruling Hand of God,
begin new Methods by the Popes Advice (and indeed, what should direct Hands and
Feet but the Head) then thought of shifting the Plot from their own shoulders
by Forging several Sham-Plots, all to be Fathered upon the Protestants: thus at
a pinch they are Ingeniose nequam, wickedly witty.

Heu quantum subitis casibus Ingenium. Yet this was but to new Vamp a pair of
their old Boots, for that Impious Pope Pius the Fifth, taught his Popish
Priests, that when they had by the Powder Plot blown up the King (James) Lords
and Commons, to Father that filthy Fact upon the Puritans: the Father of Lies
is put hard to his Trumps, when he is so low Run, that he has no new Tricks in
his Tinkers Budget to stop holes with, but is forced to bring forth his old
Baffoold Stratagems. However He is Resolved to drive this Tinkers nail (new
pointed) so far as it would go with his Hammer.

In Order to this, They start many Shamplots, wherewith they indeed began
betimes, even in 1661 (as Captain Yarranton Demonstrates, when the Crown was
scarce warm upon our King Charles his Head: but that and all other
Successively, were but low Games compared to this, for then they had not such a
Damnable Plot Discovered to Palliate as now, even this Plot of Plots that was
Hatched at Rome as soon as this Innocent Pope stormed Peter's Chair, his Miter
was scarce warm upon his Head (put upon him in the Year 1676.) but presently
the Devil enters into him (as if he had taken Judas's Sop) and sets both his
Head and his Heart to contrive this Bloody Design, which for two full Years
(like that strange River Related in History) Ran underground, before it brake
forth and was Discovered in the Year 1678. Now when that Devil and his Deeds of
Darkness was brought to Light (though long wrapped up in Samuels Mantle) by the
Father of Lights, who always overshoots Satan in in his own Bow, these white
Witches would fain Conjure him down with multiplyd Sham-plots: Indeed, one
begetting another Corruption Unius was Generatio Alterius.

The First was, The Clapping up of Mr. Clapool into the Tower, before their
plot was Discovered, that they might have him at Hand to Father the Kings
Murder upon, so soon as he should fall by their Hands, whereas all the Treason
that can be charged upon this modest Gentleman, is, that he has led a Retired
Life for many Years, and only seekt to betray the Secrets of Nature by hard
Study, as also that he Married Olivers Jewel, which rendered him more fit to
Fasten their Designs upon.

The Second was, A Raising of the Report, that Justice Godfrey was a Papist
(one of their Creatures said so much to my self) and that he was Murdered by
the Protestants, etc. This, by Nevils means, was made the common Discourse in
every Coffehouse, to amuse the Nation, and to give them a Diversion from the
Papists. The now Honest Mr. Dangerfield knows it to be true.

Of the same Bran was a later Report that Justice Godfrey Hanged himself, for
which N. T. was Pillory'd, both could not be true, if the one, then not the
other, whereas neither is true, for he neither Hanged himself, nor dyed he by
Protestants but by Papists Hands: still the Death of one Sham-plot gave Life to
another, and one Bafled begat another to the end of the Chapter.

The time would fail (as Room I am sure does) to Reckon all Romes Plots.

The Third was (to omit Netervils endeavoring to Suborn Captain Bury and
Alderman Brooks, etc.) The Duke of Buck. was an Eyesore for saying (I suppose)
he would never turn Papist, till they can eat up the Devil, as, they say, they
do God in their Host.

For this they first Accuse him of Treason, and this failing, of Sodomy.

The Fourth was, The Earl of Shaftsbury was their greatest stumbling Block,
because His Sagacity had so often Countermined their Devilish Designs, Hereupon,
Plots upon Plots were laid against his Life: both by Men and Women, in City and
Country.

The Fifth was, Sir William Waller had (while in Commission) been a Thorn in
their Sides, for daily Ferreting the Foxes out of their Holes, where they had
Eathed themselves, and openly Condemning their Trumperies to the Flames of a
Purgatory-fire above ground: no wonder then, if they at that time sought to
blast his Reputation, as they (to wit, Monson, whom he had committed to
Newgate) and Nevil, aforementioned, (alias Pain) do now seek to Destroy his
Life, the Preservation whereof the whole Nation, yea, the whole Protestant
Interest are obliged to Pray for, He being an Active Instrument in Gods Hand
for the Preservation of both.

But the Sixth (and still this Mystery of Iniquity Runs all in Sixes both in
the Real and in the Sham-plots, in the former and in the latter Distribution.)
was a Plot of Plots, a Wickedness with a Witness indeed: which (in some sense)
was worse than either the Irish or Parisian Massacre, wherein good Men only
lost their lives, but herein they must lose their Reputations too, as Branded
with Rebellion to Posterity. 'Twas worse than the Cruelty of Nero, who only
wished all the People had but one Neck, that He might cut them all off at one
Blow: but here was more than a bare wish, a crafty endeavor to blow up all the
Protestant Lords (the Duke of Monmouth, etc.) All the Protestant Gentry and
Yeamonry in City and Country at one Blast, by fixing High Treason upon them all
Universally: and when the Knife was at our Throats, God sent Sir William Waller
to turn up the botton of Mad-dame Celliers Meal-Tab, where all the Bran of this
Brutish Intreague was Discovered, Cum multis aliis quae nunc perscribere longum
est.

These and a Thousand more pretty Innocent Pranks has this Pope Innocent the
Eleventh played in poor England, though not in his Person, yet by his Proxy,
whatever His Slaves and Vassals have Acted here, even Matchless Villainies, All
have been by an Implicit Faith, and by a Blind Obedience to his Apostolical (or
rather Apostatical) Commands; but surely that Servant who will be Hanged for
his Master, or for his Masters Fault more than his own, must needs have more of
Blind Charity, than of a Solid Judgment.

One would Admire, that any Humane Breast could be so Capacious as to contain
in it so much Villainous Venom as this Innocent Pope has poured out upon
England; but is here all? No, Scotland, France, Ireland and Holland, yea, and
all other Protestant Countries, must likewise be Wounded with the Poisonful
Sting of this Fiery Flying Serpent, this Great Red Dragon, Mounted aloft upon
the Highest Theater in the Christian World, has his prospect into all these
places, and, as if He True Basilisk, Kills downright with his very Looks, His
Looks are Top-full of Fascination. To tell distinctly how he has Bewitched
with his bare Looks all those Lands aforenamed, would Require another Volum.
Take here only a very Brief Landscape hereof, which yet may serve to satisfy,
that this pretended Head is Top-full of Poison, and this Catholic Head of the
Church Transfuseth a Fatal Poison into all the parts of the Body; his Venom is
as Universal as his Headship.

As First, For Scotland, He sent several Jesuits to Preach there under the
Notion of Presbyterians, who Industriously Blew up the Coals of Discontent
among that People, knowing that Oppression makes Wise Men Mad, Aggravating to
them their Unbearable Burdens under Episcopal Tyranny, exciteing them to
Vindicate their Religion and Liberty with the Sword, and promising them in the
Popes Name, That they should be Assisted with Eight Thousand Catholics to
overturn the Government.

Oh how did this Pope Laugh in his Lawn Sleeves, to see himself so Successful.
See Dr. Oats Narrative, Art. 1, 74, 11.

Secondly, As to France, How far this Innocene Pope has been Nocent there, How
far his Tincture of Lucifer has turned his Christian Son into Antichristian,
may be Legibly Read, even in Capital Letters, in the Bloody Whales upon the
Backs of the Hugonots, but most of all in that Detestable Test, which wounds
not their Bodies only, but their Souls also, unless they will Abjure the
Protestant Religion, Anathematize all Protestants, this has Turned out of
France many Thousands of the Tenderest part of that People into Foreign
Countries, though it be so Diametrically contrary to the Sacred Edicts of
Nauts, so solemnly Sworn to by the French King. Yet this Pope, by his
Omnipotency, dare Absolve him from this Oath, and Undertakes to make Sin a
Duty. See Sir William Waller's Account of the present State of the Protestants
there. And see also, The Politics of France. And whether all this Contest
betwixt the Father and the Son, about the Regalia's, be not all a Juggle,
(seeing the poor Protestants are among hands so sevearly Persecuted, and
pestilent Jesuits so Cordially Embraced,) Time will Declare.

Thirdly, As to Ireland, Dr. Oats Deposes, Narrat. page 65, 66. That this
Innocent Pope sent his Bloody Irish Hounds, Commissions, Arms, and Eight
Hundred Thousand Crowns, that they might cut the Throats of the Protestants
again, as they had done by another Innocent Popes Order in One Thousand Six
Hundred Forty One. The Death of the Duke of Ormond should lead this Popish
Dance, the Pope looses of his Bloud-Hounds (Four Jesuits) who Undertook to
Dispatch the Duke, Twenty Five Thousand Irish were to Rise, and play their Old
Bloody Game, wherein they were Experienced, and Artificial Gamesters. These
were to Join with a French Army to be Landed there, and as good Gamesters of
that Kind as they, so fall on to their Old Trade of Massacring, etc. Yea, some
of those Irish Cattle had a Dispensation from this Pope to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, provided they promise to Betray their Garrisons, and
other Trusts. So that when you see a Papist swallow those Oaths, you may Swear
it is with such a proviso, He has some Trust or other to Betray.

Fourthly, Holland, There this Innocent Pope has set his Foul Foot (of the
Beast) to purpose, in sending his Most Christian Son, most Unchristianly to
Scourge them for their Heresy, and to overrun their Country with his
Rapacious Army; and had not God Almighty put an Hook into the Jaw of that Proud
Leviathan at Utrech, He had laid their Land under an Absolute Desolation. To
say nothing of His Intrigueing Influences to plunge them and us into a War to
Wast and Weaken each other that He might the easier worry us both: To say
nothing of Hungary and other parts of Germany, nor of the Three Northern
Crowns; in all which he has thoroughly, tried the same Trusty Tricks of Divide,
and Command, etc.

Yet while this Pope is thus Malevolent; and Mischievous abroad (embroiling all
Countries with his Contagious Evomitions) He is all this while Mighty
Magnificent and Magisterial at Home, strutting about in that Splendor and
Grandeur, as if He were more than a Mortal Man on Earth, one of the Immortal
Angels of Heaven, Resembling the Angelical Nature, not only in Innocence, in
his Name Innocent, but also in Luster and Glory, as to his Garb and Deportment.
Grant Him to be one of the Angels Order, yet undervalue him not, by reckoning
him among the Inferior Rank. No, let him be Reputed no less than proud Lucifer,
a Prince or Principality among them, etc. Isa. 14 14 As to his Innocence, Angel
like, I can say, little of it, and sure I am nor no body else (unless some of
his Sycophants who can be content to lick up his Slaver, as once one Parafite
did a Tyrants) no further than his Name [Innocent] will be the Guarranty: To be
Nocent in Nature (as the premisies have proved him) and to be Innocent in Name,
is to make himself a complete lump of Contradiction: However this Whore of
Babylon can exactly Imitate Solomon's Whore in wiping her Mouth, and saying I
have not done those mischiefs in all those Lands aforementioned: But as to this
Splendor and Glory, Angel-like, I have more to say than I have room for, as to
his Roman Grandeur, never was Jaddus (the High Priest of the Jews) so Richly
Arrayed for Glory and Beauty, when Great Alexander met him and fell down to
Worship him for a god, as this Roman Pontifex in all his pompious
pontificalibus is, either sitting in his Chair of State, or standing upright,
or strutting about. The Prophet Ezekiel most graphically Describes this
Anointed Cherub, that Seats himself in the Holy Mountain of God, and sits as
God (that is a degree above an Angel) covering himself with every precious
Stone, the Rubys, the Diamonds, the Jasper, the Sapphire and Emerauld, etc.
Ezekiel. 28.2.13, 14, 15, to 20. Oh what a glittering and glorious Scarlet
colored Beast is this, thus bedeckt with Radiant Jewels. No wonder if they
give him this Canting Courtship [ Thou art the prime of all Bishops, the Heir
of the Apostles, an Abel for primacy (sure I am, not for Religion) a Noah for
Government (not for Righteousness) an Abraham for Patriarkship (not for Piety)
a Melchisedeck for Order, an Aaron for Dignity, a Moses for Authority, a Samuel
for Judicature, a Peter for Power, yea, a Christ for Unction, but none of them
for Holiness, though that be his Title: No wonder if his pickthanks go yet
higher, in calling him their Lord God, their Creator in whom they must Believe,
and whom they must Obey upon pain of Damnation] no wonder if they say to this
their God three times [Oh Thou that take away the Sins of the World, have
Mercy on us. Thou can make a Sin to be no Sin, and contra] No wonder if
Popelings Kiss the great Toe of their Great God, in a Country where God has
Toes, which Moses (who came nearest him) could not Discern, and much less Kiss,
Deuteronomy. 4.12, 15. No wonder if Kings and Emperors hold the Stirrup, to this God,
when weary with walking, and would Ride, one Beast upon the back of another, no
wonder if Odeschalcho thought his Name too base for a God, as Octavian did,
when chosen Pope at Eighteen Years old, cast off his Name because Heathnish,
and calls himself John the Thirteenth, but he proved such a God as used to
drink Healths to the Devil, and in his Diceing would Pray, that Jupiter, Venus,
and all the Devils would help him.

This was a Mad Jack indeed, and as Bad a God, who should be All good.

To conclude, come my Countrymen, how can you like to Worship such a God, (who
is rather a Devil Incarnate, or the Devils Patriarch) can you stoop to kiss his
stinking Toe, can you hold his Stirrup (as too many are doing) till he get upon
your own Backs and Ride you to the Devil, Grave Bishop Ushar feared a Massacre
approaching, and that this very Pope would be the chief Agent in it? Can you
Court in a bloody Villain, who will certainly cut your Throats? Can you like to
Trade with such a Cheat (that is as Crafty as Cruel, having as much of the Fox
as of the Lion) in his Trash and Trumpery before mentioned? This Pope had great
hopes of Reentry into England by his hopeful Plot, hereupon Cottingtons Bones
were brought to be Buried here, to take possession of it as Jacob did in like
matner of Canaan: Indeed, the late Comet frighted him into such a cold Sweat,
as nothing but a Dutch Stove could bring warmth into him again, and the
Cockatrice laid by the Prophetic Hen in Campideglis Garden stunned him a
little; But now he Recovered with warm Clothes and hot Cordials again, yet I
hope it is but a lightning before his fall: God forbid, that the Imperial Crown
of England should again Truckle to the Miter and Tripple Crown of this Pope:
Erasmus Satirical Drollery prevailed against the Pope, as well as Luthers
Argumentative Gravity, I wish the like Efficacy to this Discourse, and let all
good People say, Amen.

FINIS,

