A DECLARATION OF WAR, By the States General against the French, Hague, March
12. 1689.
THat the States General being in perfect Peace and Tranquillity in the Year
1672, with such an entire Confidence in the Treatles of Peace, Friendship and
Alliance Established between the French King and this State, That they were
unprovided of whatever might serve for their Defense against so powerful a
King, not being able to imagine that the said King, without any just cause,
would break the said Treaties, were yet contrary to all expectation fallen upon
with so sudden and heavy a War, that the State was in a short time brought into
great danger, and might have been entirely subverted, had they not reflected
upon the Reasons which the said King Declared had moved him to the War, to wit,
the Increase of his Honor and Glory; and firmly trusted that Almighty God
would not suffer their destruction, undertaken with so great Injustice, whereby
they were encouraged in that desperate state of Affairs, under the prudent
Conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange, to stand our all extremities in
the defense of the true Reformed Religion, their Liberty, and Country; That it
having pleased God to pour out his Mercies upon the State, after the spilling
of much innocent Blood, and the great suffering of the Inhabitants by the
Cruelties of the French, a Treaty of Peace, Commerce, and Navigation was
Concluded in the year 1678. with the French King at Nimeguen: which the States
on their part exactly and religiously observed; but that on the contrary the
French King soon after, by a publict Edict, laid heavy burdens upon the
Commerce of the State, and endeavored from time to time, by all manner of way,
as well in, as out of Europe, to molest the same: favored the taking of their
Ships and Goods, and sought, as far as in him lay, as well directly as
indirectly, entirely to ruin their said Commerce and Navigation, causing even
their Ships of War to be visited by force, and some of them to be attacked in
time of Peace; That the said King had finally by new Impositions and Vexations
hindered the Inhabitants of these Countries from vending in France, their
Manufactures, and product of their Fishery, and had on frivolous pretenses laid
such great and unjust impositions upon their Trade, that it was impossible for
them to continue it any longer; slighting with great contempt all the Instances
made by the States on occasion thereof, and denying their Ambassadors in France
the Honor and Respect which they had always enjoyed; That the said King having
begun the Terrible Persecution against those of the Reformed Religion within
his Kingdoms, had involved therein the Subjects of this State, residing there
on account of their Trade, forcing Women from their Husbands, and Children from
their Parents, and treating even the Consuls of this State in a cruel and
unheard of manner, contrary to the Law of Nations, and the express Tenor of the
Treaties; That the said King had farther showed his ill design against this
State, by the continual motion of his Troops toward their Frontiers, thereby
to oblige them to make extraordinary Preparations by Land and Sea, to the
exhausting of their Revenues; That he had sometimes with fair Words and solemn
Assurances, and even by Overtures of an Alliance, endeavored to amuse them,
but that when ever they went about to provide for their own security, and the
farther strengthening of the Treaty of Nimeguen, by making Defensive Alliances
with any of the Princes their Neighbors, He had always opposed them, and even
threatened them with a War on account thereof. Lastly, that the said King has in
full Peace caused the Ships, Goods, and Persons of the Subjects of this State
who were residing in France, upon the public Faith of the Treaties, to be
seized, and the Masters and Seamen of the said Ships to be imprisoned, and most
babarously treated, to force them to change their Religion, and the said Ships,
Goods and Effects to be sold, although it is expressly stipulated by the Treaty
of Commerce, that in case of a War, the Subjects on both sides shall be allowed
six months time to retire with their Goods, or otherwise to sell or dispose of
them; which was followed with the plundering and burning of diverse Villages
within the Territories of this State; and afterward with a Declaration of War,
for which no other reason was given than that the States had made Extraordinary
preparations by Land and Sea, although they had as^ured the said King that they
were only intended for their own necessary defense, and that they would not
concern themselves with the Election of Cologne; That the States having thus
made manifest the Evil Designs and Machinarions of the French King against this
State, do admonish their Subjects seriously to reflect upon the Treatment they
are to expect from him in matter of their Religion, Liberty, Estates, and
Persons, and that they will call to mind the cruel Persecution he has
undertaken against his own Subjects, and in what manner the Towns and Places,
who thought they had surrendered upon good Conditions have been Treated, and
whole Countries destroyed which his Troops have been forced to quit. Upon all
these Considerations, and for the preservation of their Religion, and Liberty
and the repairing the Injuries there Subjects have so unjustly suffered, the
said States do Declare War against the said King of France, and all his
Subjects Countries and Dominions, both by Sea and Land, strictly commanding. 1.
That none of the Inhabitants of this State, or any Forreigner residing within
their Territories, shall transport any thing to France that is useful in War, or
Correspond with the French to the prejudice of the State. 2. That all
Contraband Goods which shall be taken going to France, shall be declared Prize.
3. That good security shall be given by all persons carrying any Contraband
Goods out of these Countries, that they are not designed for France. 4. That
all ships laden with contraband goods as shall be found on the French coasts
shall be taken for good prize. 5. That all ships ought to have lawful
Pass-ports. 6. The Men of War not to molest any Ships having such Pass-ports,
and not being bound with any Contraband Goods to any Ports in France. 7. That
such as shall be found offending here-In, shall be punished with Confiscation
of Ship and Goods. 8. That the Commanders of the Ships of War shall punctually
govern themselves in this matter according to the Treaties made in relation
thereunto, with other Kings, Princes, and States. 9. That the Admiralties shall
have the Cognizance of these Offenses. 10. 11, 12. The Moneys arising by such
Confiscations shall be disposed of, as has been heretofore practiced in like
Cases; And as to the Seizure, etc. former Placaers to be observed. 13. None of
the Inhabitants of this State shall Insure any French Ships or Goods, or others
bound to France, on Forfeiture of the Sum Insured.

Given at the Hague the 9th of March, 1689.
Reprinted at Edinburgh in the Year, 1689.


