A TRUE ACCOUNT Of this Present BLASING-STAR.
Presenting it self to the View of the World. This August. 1682. with Sundry
Considerable Remarks and Observations thereupon.
WHereas I formerly Published, for public good, in the Year 1680. a small
Treatise of Three Sheets, and some few Pages (as a Supplement thereunto) In my
wonderful Signs of wonderful Times. Page, 37, 38. 39, and 40 upon that most
Prodigious and most Stupendous Comet (then Appearing) above all that have been
this many Hundred Years. And therefore It deserves Larger and more Learned
animadversions upon it, from the Acutest and Exactest Artists in the World.
These my former Labors, finding so much Acceptance and Success both in City
and Country, I have now Renewed the like Essay, as the great God is now
Renewing the like Occasion and Object in this present Year 1682. It Is an
undeniable Duty to Study Gods Works, as well as Gods Word, to Read the Book of
Nature, as well as the Book of Scripture, Especially when and wherewith (when
Drawn over) He would hide this View, As this Comet now is: Who can but wonder
that such Strange Lights should be thus frequently Hanged forth in the Heavens,
and such frightful Beacons should be thus fast Fired in the Firmament, There
being but one Year betwixt the Former and the Latter, and the former being so
Tremendous, as cannot easily, (however not yet) be forgotten, nor can its
Dreadful Effects be as yet Accomplished, when Lo another Starteth forth to the
Worlds Amazement. The first fair and full View I got of this New Comet. was
upon this 20th of August. betwixt Eight and Nine at Night, When the Sky was
very clear, save only one Black Cloud near it, which seemed to be a Curtain
that God had Drawn off, to give the World a fairer and fuller prospect of this
Strange Streaming Star, any thing Rare and Extraordinary is exposed to public
Light as in a Dark Lantern again: According to the Best prospect I could then
(both with Glasses and without) obtain, I Immediately Drew up those following
Animadversions (Quales quales Sunt Raptim Suggestas) in writeing;

I made my principal Remarks, (1) upon the Kind or Form of this new Comet. (2)
upon its Color. (3) upon its Situation. (4) upon its Motion, and (5) upon its
Signification.

First, As to its Kind, Comets are some of one Kind, and some of another;
distinguished by their several forms of appearance, and I observed that this is
not. (1) (...), Barbatus, or a Bearded Comet; having no Flame falling downward
(like a man's Beard that hangs down from the Head, or like an Horses Main, that
hangs down from the Neck) from the former part of its Body: nor, (2) Is it
Cometa Crinitus, an Hairy Star, Surrounded with Rays and flashes of Fire (as
the Bushy Head is with curled and crisped Hair) and spurting forth its Flames
from all its parts round about. But, (3) It is Cometa Caudatus; A Star with a
Tail or Train, Sputtering out its Fire from the hinder part of its Body in its
Descending Motion: It passed along downward like a Fuzzee, or Fired Squib,
Fuzzing out its Flames in the form of a Birch-Besom, or the Tail of a Peacock;
which was the very same form of the late formidable Comet.

Secondly, As to its Color; I could not find that this is of a Duskie Leadon
Complexion, as Saturn is, and as the last Dreadful Star was: neither did it
seem so Fiery as Mars is, and Fomahant or Campus, that fixed Star of the first
Magnitude: nor did it appear Golden as the Sun, Pale and Wan, as the Moon, or
yellow, as Venus: but it was seen splendid as Jupiter; from whose Dominion or
Predominancy in its Generation and Preduction, It has derived its Luster and
Beauty, appearing in the splendor of a Star, of the first Magnitude in the
eighth Sphere of the Heavens. So it becomes and may truly be called a Jovial
Star.

Thirdly, As to its Situation, though Comets be mostly Erratick, as the
Planets, and fix no where in the Heavens as do the fixed Stars; yet this at
present seems situated not far off from Vrsa Mayor, which is above it, as Cor
l^onis is under it, and has a North Latitude, at no great Distance from the
Northern Pole; but much less from the Artick Circle: Having that Glorious Star
(Arcturus) in its view.

Fourthly, As to its Motion, This at present may be well conjectured to be Slow
from its present Situation, whereof we have a plain and familiar Instance in a
common Ocular Demonstration: As the Nave of a Cart-wheel must move much slower
than the Ring or remotest Rim of that Wheel moves, because the former is
nearer to, and the latter is farther from the Axle-Tree upon which they both
are turned: Now that which has the lesser Circle and Circumference to run,
must needs move slower than that which has one ten times greater to compass,
when both the one and the other must exactly run round their Circular Course at
one and the same precise point of time: The Rim runs round as soon as the Nave,
though it have the far greater Circles. And the Nave is no sooner about than
the Ring, though it have the far lesser Circumference, The like may be
demonstrated upon all Wheels which are moved upon one Axle-Tree, the parts
whereof make their Launches in motion lesser or larger, as they are distant
from their Canter, (nigher or remoter) all proportionably concurring to
accomplish their Course and Circumference together: So it is with this Blazing
Star, Now seated so nigh the Northern Pole, it has the like motion with the
external part of the Nave, or Ends of the Spokes, fixed in it, which fulfill
their Course no faster than those Ends fastened in the Ring or Rim of the
Wheels, though they have a smaller Circle: And this is the true Reason, why
this Comet sets now about eleven a clock, and rises again about three; because
it is whirled about by the primum mobile, in that part of the Firmament, which
is so nigh the Northern Pole: Therefore it can have no long recess out of our
Horisontal fight, this is plainly exemplified by the Sun, which in the Tropic
of Cancer (nigher our Zenith, and the Northern Pole) has shorter Nights and
longer Days, than when it is farther off in the Tropic of Capricorn. Now
whereas the great Bear (being so nigh the lesser Bear or Pole) never sets at
all to us, but runs its own Circle Night and Day in our Horizon, never visiting
the other Hemisphere: So it is but rational, that this Star, situated so nigh
to it, should have only a short dip under the Globe of the Earth, showing it
self a little while to the other Horizon. The long Train whereof, never all,
sets at all, but some part of its top may be discerned in a clear Sky, in
remoter places, etc. So that saving these few hours betwixt Setting and Rising,
it is sputtering out its Flames in our Hemisphere for twenty hours together.

Therefore (Fifthly) Its Signification must needs be the more Signal and
singular, which for want of Room in this half sheet, I must Refer the Reader to
my three Sheets upon the last Astonishing Comet, and to my Signs of the Times.
Page 38, 39, 40. Where I have Enlarged, here only Observe the difference of
this from that, The Blazing Star in 1680. was a Lesser Body with a greater
Train, This in 1682. is a greater Body with (yet) a Lesser Tail: that was
Saturnine and Sullen, (Portending the sad Inundations, Desclations and
Hurricans, etc. Since happened) This is Jovial, prognosticating Joy Jovialty
and Jollity, etc. Yet both Concur in being the forerunners (that the former
and this the latter and more Immediate) of that great Climacterical Conjunction
this next October in the Sign Leo which mostly Respects the Northern part of
the World. As there was but one Year 'twixt that Comet and this, so there is
but one Month 'twixt this Comet and this great Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter with Mars in the Fiery Trigon, which falls out very Rarely, In the
space only of about 800. Years (the exact Revolution hereof being above 794,
Years,(the first in the World (as Tychobrake says) was under Enock the Second
under Noah, the Sixth under Charles the Great, When the Roman Empire. was
Translated into Germany: Now the 7th ( which is Sabattical) is at hand and may
bring a Sabbeth of Rest, Those Superior Planets now Returning to the point and
posture They were placed in at the Worlds Creation Alsted Encuclop. Uranosc,
Lib. 11. Page 125. And Kepler long ago f^retold, that the Conjunction of those
Superior planets in Leo would destroy and Drain up the Dreggs of the Roman
Church, It Is not Improbable, that As all the other Six Revolutions (before
mentioned) had some Grand Remark upon them, so may this Sabbatism or 7th have
much more seeing it happens in the last Times, and great are the Promises of
the Latter Day: Especially seeing this Last Conjunction is Vsherd in with two
Praecursors or Harbingers (two World-Amazing Comets) as with a double Signet
Sign or Autoritative Broad-Seal: and this Seal is Doubled (like Pharaohs
Dream) to Import both the Assurance, and the Expedition of what great things
God is about to do: If the former Signal Comet (the like whereof has not been
this 800. Years) put the Pope into such a Cold Consternation, and shaking
Paroxysm, that nothing but a Dutch Stove could keep him warm, what more may
this Latter do which has so great a Conjunction at the very Heels of it. all
which are loud alarms to awaken the Slumbring World. David says, the Heavens
Declare the Glory of God, They are the Catholick-Preachers of his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness, a Book, that was Imprinted at the New Jerusalem by the hand of
Jehovah himself, and is not to be Sold but to be seen (at the Sign of Celestial
Glory) by all that looks up to Heaven; it is our Duty (says Mr. Caryl on J^b.
vol; 3. P. 221.) to Study the Heavens and to be Accquainted with the Stars,
Especially those Extraordinary ones, always sent to signify some great Matters
to Come, and I wish with Honest Not. Tompson (in his Intellgence this Aug. 22.)
Heartily that this Comet may presage no worse things to us than the Destruction
of all Plotters, Perjurers, Swearing Masters

Truly so Thus Prays C. N.

London Printed for L. Curtis 1682.


