A New SURVEY of the BOOK of Common Prayer, Humbly proposed to this Present
PARLIAMENT, In Order to the Obtaining a New Act of UNIFORMITY.

By a Minister of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1690.

THE PREFACE.
GOD has wrought very graciously, and in an Extraordinary manner, for the
deliverance of this Church and State from Popery and Arbitrary Power, in such a
way of Peace as other Ages can scarce parallel. But Beneficium postulat
Officium, God's great Goodness calls for some suitable return in the way of
Love, Thankfulness, and Obedience. And no doubt but the Lord expects some Work
that is Great and Excellent; somewhat more than ordinary for the good of that
Church, which he has so wonderfully preserved. And if you would know what we
shall render unto the Lord for all his Benefits. What more? What better than
for Protestants with one Heart and one Mouth to glorify God the Father of all
our Mercies, and to Worship him with one consent. And oh that the All-wise God
would inspire this Great Council of the Nation with Wisdom from above, what,
and how to act effectually for this Blessed Union: Which (as Mr. De L' Angle in
his Letter to his Lordship, the Bishop of London) will rejoice Men and Angels,
and bring down a Thousand Blessings of Heaven and Earth upon those that shall
contribute the most unto it, Vnreas. of Separ. p. 424. It is to be hoped that
the Glory of so Great and Good a Work will be due to our present Governors
next under God. And since we are told in the Preface before the Common Prayer,
that in the Reigns of several Princes of Blessed Memory since the Reformation,
the Church upon just and weighty Considerations her thereunto moving, has
yielded to make such Alterations in some particulars, as in their respective
times were thought convenient. Therefore I have added Arguments for such
Concessions and Alterations in this Worship, as may be effectual in order to
the Desired Union. Though I have had God's Glory for my end, yet I know no Man's
Integrity in the Cause of God and of Religion; nor the most unfeigned Desires,
and Endeavors for the good and Peace of Church and State, can exempt him from
the common fate, that attends things of this Nature, which are sure to be
unacceptable with some, if not pass for an unpardonable Offense against the
Church of England. If I knew that there were any thing, but Truth and Charity,
I would blot it out. If it be possible, and as much as in me lies, I would
live peaceably with all Men.

The Motives and Inducements to write were these:

First, A Zeal for God. God's Honor is intimately concerned in his Worship.
What Soul that has any sense of God and Religion can bear so much dishonor as
is done to God in his Worship? Several casting a contempt upon it by their
unhandsom Speeches, and ill Examples, prejudiced and prejudicing others against
it. Many scarce look upon it as the Worship of God, and mind nothing less than
to be devout in it. And since the Worship of God lies under contempt, or a
great abuse and unprofitableness in the performance of it, is there not reason
to be offended at it. I am not satisfied, and cannot be satisfied without some
endeavor to redress the Evil.

Second Motive was a desire to discharge this part of my Ministerial duty to my
own, and the Peoples better Edification. Does the World think it is nothing to
Ministers, that have a concern for the Peoples Souls to see how little this
Worship is done to Edifying? How great a guilt lies upon their Congregations
upon that very account! Surely guilt enough to lay them low in misery. And the
sense of this put me upon another Design, (which was first in my intention) a
short piece Argumentative for Conformity to the Prayers. And therein first to
satisfy Peoples Consciences in a peaceable Submission and Communion in this
Worship, though they do not like every thing in it best. I urge, that they
themselves will not suffer their Children and Servants to leave their Worship
in their Families, under pretense that another is better: But the Governors
Authority over the several Families in the Nation reaches as far as theirs in
their own Family, in all things, Sin only excepted, so far as they may be
obeyed without disobeying God. Secondly, To excite them to a Devout use of the
Prayers, with some Helps and Directions for their Edification in it. Thirdly,
To keep them within the Bounds of Christian Charity, toward those that differ
from us; as knowing that without Charity all is nothing worth. Time and
Opportunity called for this first, though less studied or accurate, and plain
in its Language.

Third Motive was a compassionate Concern for some, who have suffered much by
the severity of the Laws, and a desire to prevent their future sufferings. I
know there are those, that dissent from this Worship, that would, very heartily
would, if their Consciences had been satisfied, have Conformed to it; If they
did not, they knew they were like to pay for it: But by such Concessions as to
take them in, they will be safe for the future from fear of Trouble and
Sufferings.

Fourth Motive was a desire to do my part toward the remedying the Evils which
have eventually followed the Act for Uniformity. And surely in an Age, that
has smarted so much, as this has done for Contentions about these
Common Prayers, it concerns every one to put to his helping hand. I shall
conclude with a Pathetical and Affectionate Speech of that Reverend Prelate,
Dr. Hall, who used to say, War with none but Rome and Hell, and was a true Son
of Peace. Bishop Hall's Works, p. 426. But thou, O Lord! How long? How long
shall thy poor Church see the Dear Sons of her Womb bleeding about these Apples
of Strife? (Speaking of some things in the Common Prayers, Ceremonies
especially.) Ye, Men, Brethren, and Fathers help, for Gods sake put to your
hands for the quenching of these Common Flames: The one side by Humility and
Obedience, the other by Compassion ( i. e. to the weak and unsatisfied) both by
Prayers and Tears, that so that Passage in His Majesty's Declaration may take
Effect for Establishing such Laws, as should make a good Agreement between the
Church of England, and Protestant Dissenters. May that Agreement be in the
Worship of God. The Great God of Heaven, and every True-hearted Protestant say
Amen to it.

Arguments for Concessions and Alterations in the Common Prayer, and in the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, in order to the desired Union in
Worship.
CErtainly that man is no friend to Church and State, who is an enemy to their
Peace and Union in matters of Religion: For, as the Eminent Mr. Le Moyn of
Holland says, in his Letter to his Lordship, the present Bishop of London, at
the end of Unreasonableness of Separation. In England the good of Church and
State depends absolutely upon Union of the People in point of Religion, and one
cannot there press an Union too much: For there is never like to be an
effectual Reformation of Peoples unreformed Lives without an Union, when
Conforming and Nonconforming Ministers may join together, encourage, and assist
each other in that blessed work. And as to an Union, Mr. Baxter in his Life and
Death of Sir Matthew Hale, says, p. 19, 20. that the said Judge told him, the
only means to heal us was a new Act of Uniformity. Therefore I shall apply my
self to the Governors of the Church that are Lawfully called, and have
Authority to appoint and alter matters of this nature, respecting the Service
and Worship of God. I shall in all Humility recommend to the Governors
Consideration some Arguments for Concessions and Alterations in the Common
Prayer; and then in the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England: And to
show that I am not alone, and that it is not a project of my own, which has no
countenance or encouragement from others, I shall mention greater Names in
favor of the same Argument, and urge their concurrence; and that shall be my
first Plea.

First Plea, For some Concessions and Alterations in this Worship, because
there are some things which, in the judgment of several eminent Conformists,
may be altered without any detriment or dishonor to the Church. Diverse
Reverend Bishops and Doctors, in a Paper in Print, before the unhappy Wars in
King Charles I. Reign, yielded to the laying aside of the Cross, and the making
many material Alterations; as the Archbishop of Armagh, the Bishop of Lincoln,
Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Ward, Dr. Brownrigg, Dr. Featly, met together by Order of the
Lords, at the Bishop of Lincolns in Westminster, (besides some Innovations in
Discipline given in) hinted their desire of the Alteration of many things in
the Book of Common Prayer, as the Reading of the Psalms according to the New
Translations; Lessons of Canonical Scripture instead of the Apocrypha; leaving
out the Hymn of Benedicite, and the saying Gloria Patri after every Psalm;
changing with my Body I thee Worship, into these, I give thee Power over my
Body; I Absolve thee in the Visitation of the Sick into these, I pronounce thee
Absolved, etc. Grand Debate, p. 31.

Again, the Bishop of Armagh, p. 130, 131. from Dr. Barnard, to this effect;
That for the healing of those distractions and divisions among Ministers, and
others, and the moderating of each extreme, in relation to the use of the
Liturgy, whereby there might be a return of that wished for Peace and Unity,
which of late years we have been strangers to, he conceived some prudent and
moderate accommodation might be thought of by wise men, in order to the
continuance of the substantial part, each side yielding somewhat after the
example of St. Paul, Romans 14. Idem, Directions about the Liturgy; After his
Vindication of the Liturgy, yet it cannot be denied but that there are naevi in
pulchro corpore; and as it were to be wished that these were altered, so it
were to be done without much noise.

(...). Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer, Sect. 4. Our public
Liturgy, or Forms of constant Prayers, must be abolished and not amended in
what upon free and public advice might seem to sober men inconvenient for
matter or manner, to which I should easily consent. Idem, To the Prince of
Wales; In this Church I charge you to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods
Word, with some little amendment, etc.

King Charles the Seconds Declaration from Breda, 1660. Since we find some
exceptions made against several things in the Liturgy, we will appoint an equal
number of Divines, of both persuasions, to review the same, and to make such
alterations as shall be thought most necessary, and some additional Forms; and
it shall be left to the Minister to choose one or other. In the mean time we
desire that Ministers would read those parts, against which there lie no
exceptions; yet in compassion to those that scruple it, our will and pleasure
is, that none be punished or troubled for not using it, until it be effectually
Reformed, as aforesaid.

The Bishop of Corks Protestant Peacemaker, p. 29. What most of the Dissenters
would be at, (no Liturgy, no Episcopacy,) may not be, cannot be without Schism;
we are ready to sacrifice all we can otherwise to the public peace and safety.
Idem p. 33. But notwithstanding what I have said of the excellency, both of the
Common Prayers, and of Cathedral Performances, I do not conceive the alteration
of an Expression, or here and there of a whole Prayer or two by Law, or
dispensing with some Ceremonies; I do not conceive, such relaxation as this
would break the Harmony and Beauty of our Worship, or disturb the Union and
Peace of our Church. There are some Collects, and perhaps Rubricks too, which
with all duty and submission, I humbly conceive might be altered for the
better. Page 118, 119.

Mr. Hales in his Tract of Schism, p. 215. Propounds it as a remedy to prevent
Schism, to have all Liturgies, and public Forms of Service so framed, as that
they admit not of particular and private fancies, but contain only such things
in which all Christians do agree: Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of
Scriptures in the most plain and simple manner, were matter enough to furnish
out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of private Opinion, or of
Church Pomp, of Garments, or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, or Music, of
matter concerning the Dead, of many superfluities which creep into the Church
under the names of Order and Decency, did interpose it self.

The great Dean of St. Paul's in the Unreasonableness of Separation, Pref. About
the Book of Common Prayer, it ought to be considered, whether for satisfaction
of the scrupulous, some more doubtful and obscure passages may not yet be
explained, or amended? Whether the new Translation of the Psalms were not
fitter to be used, especially in Parochial Churches? Whether portions of
Canonical Scripture were not better put instead of Apocrypha Lessons? Whether
the Rubric about the Salvation of Infants might not be restored to its former
place, in the Office of Confirmation, and so the present exceptions against it
be removed? Whether those Expressions which suppose the strict exercise of
Discipline in Burying the Dead were not better left at Liberty in our present
case? Such a review made by Wise and Peaceable Men, not given to wrath and
disputing, may be so far from being a dishonor to this Church, that it may add
to the glory of it. -- And whether using the Liturgy, and Approbation and
Promise of the use of it, may not be sufficient instead of the late Form of
declaring their Assent and Consent, which has been so much scrupled by our
Brethren?

True state of the Primitive Church, p. 23. Now in Christ I humbly beseech the
Governors of the Church, calmly to consider, were it not better to have such a
Form of Service as would satisfy most. The Fathers of our Church when they
Reformed this Nation from Popery, were desirous to fetch off as many as they
could, retaining for this cause all the Ceremonies and Forms of Prayer they
could, with a good rectified Conscience. Some other things I could mention in
the Book of Common Prayer (though not ill in themselves) yet fit to be altered,
and would obviously appear to every wise man, once resolved to compose such a
Form as to take in most of this Nation; which I humbly conceive Governors
should in Conscience endeavor, becoming all things to all men to gain some,
though not all, yet happily gain all in process of time.

Principles and Practices of Moderate Divines, etc. They would be very glad, if
some things that most offend were taken out of the way, particularly, that
there might be no expressions in our Forms of Prayer, that contain disputable
and uncertain Doctrines, p. 335. Vid. Mr. Wakes Sermon on Romans 15.5, 6, 7. p.
23. And that no such weight be laid on lesser things, as that they should be
inlisted on to the endangering those of an higher nature, and hazarding the
Churches Prosperity and Peace.

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the causes etc. That it will be no
Hypocritical tergiversation, no wrong either to our Religion, or our
Consciences, if when the case so requires it, we change any phrase of Speech,
how fit soever in our apprehension, for one less fit, but more acceptable and
current; or any Rite or Ceremony that we have great kindness for, for one that
is more grateful unto others, and that according to the saying of the Lord
Bacon, we learn of the elder times what is lawful, and of the present what is
fittest.

Mr. De L' Angles Letter to his Lordship, the present B. of London; I am sure,
that if there were nothing wanting to cure your Divisions but the abstaining
from some Expressions, the quitting some Ceremonies, and the changing of the
color of some Habits, you would resolve to do that, and something more
difficult than that with great pleasure.

Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, Part 3. Pref. It is clear there must
be a Liturgy; and very many, even to Dr. Sherlock, mention some Alterations in
the several parts of it, as desirable and advisable: Without any positive
arrogance in a matter of this nature, I do offer my observation. Some that
expect much profit by Preaching, do think first and second Service too long and
tiresome: Others that care less for Preaching, are very busy in the
Interlocutory parts of the Service, grow careless, and too often prate (and
stare about and whisper) in the Lessons, and sleep under our Sermons; both are
too long for them also. All that I will suggest in the last case is; First,
That the second Service or Communion-Service, may be then only read, when there
is a Communion, or when there is no Sermon [upon Holy-days]. Secondly, That
only one of the three Creeds be used at one time, in the same Service. Thirdly,
That the so often Repetitions of the Lords Prayer in the same Service may be
limited. All cannot, most do not keep Curats: The work of Reading the ordinary
first and second Service, besides incidental Offices, as Baptism, Churchings,
etc. make it very expensive to most men's Strength and Spirits, and wearisome to
the People; and the constant necessary work of Preaching and Catechizing is
hardly endured by the young and healthful, but impossible to be performed by
the infirm and aged. [And therefore in King Edward VI. days, some Ministers
were dispensed with in not Reading the whole, as Grand Debate mentions, p. 5.]
It is true indeed if a man's Conscience will bear it, a Minister may be both
short and seldom in the Pulpit; but then it is with two great hazards: First,
Of losing his Auditory, or of his Auditories great loss to their Souls. This
humble Proposal for omitting the second Service, has a fair Countenance from
the Rubricks; Rubric the last, immediately before the Lords Prayer has a
supposition that the Communion is Celebrated every Lords day, etc.

I mean to conclude with an excellent Citation from Bishop Tailor, Duct. Dubit.
p. 375. In Rituals and Ceremonies, and little circumstances of Ecclesiastical
Offices, and Forms of Worship, in the punctualities of Rubricks, in the order
of Collects, in the number of Prayers, and fullness of the Office upon a
reasonable cause, or inducement to the omission or alteration; these things are
so little, and fit to be entrusted to the conduct of those sober, obedient, and
grave persons, who are thought fit to be entrusted with the Cure of Souls: And
things of such little concernment are so apt to yield to any wise man's reasons,
and sudden occasions, and accidents, and little and great Causes, that these
were the fittest instances of this Rule ( i. e. of Latitude) if Superiors
would not make too much of little things. All just Governments give the largest
interpretation to Churches Orders in these things, to persons of a peaceable
Mind and obedient Spirit, that such circumstances may not pass into a solemn
Religion; and the Zeal of good Men, their Caution and Curiosity may not be
spent in that which does not profit. In many cases a Latitude according to
Equity may be presumed; but if it be expressly denied it may not be used: Which
is the case of our Conformists as to those things, wherein a Latitude might be
taken according to the Law of Equity, when they carry some considerable
inconvenience along with them, and reason for the contrary; yet we being
strictly bound up by the Church, it must bring a guilt upon the persons,
disturb their peace of Conscience, and prove vexatious and troublesome to them
that way, if they often offend in these matters. And this I presume to be the
case of those, who in their common practice do not come up to the strictness of
their bounden and promised Conformity, though in some cases, when extra casum
scandali and contemptus, they may do otherwise than the express Letter of the
Law requires, and be guiltless, as our Casuists affirm.

I beg the favor with all Humility, and with Submission to the Will and Wisdom
of our Governors, to offer to their Consideration; whether it were not
desirable to have a Prayer for particular Graces in the Evening Service, (the
Petitioning part being less perfect then) and at such times when the Letany is
not used. We have such a Prayer in the Whole Duty of Man, called a Prayer for
Grace, comprehensive of particular Graces. And then no doubt the use of it
would be more acceptable in Families than it is now, when it runs out so much
in Intercessions, and so little in Petition.

Again I offer to their Consideration; whether the Hymns and Offices of Praise
after the Lessons, (especially in the Evening Service) are not become less
edifying in their present use, where those Spiritual Songs are barely Read, (as
in Parish Churches) and not Sung; there being one way of Singing, or an
Harmonious Reading of them useful and edifying, though another way not so much
to Edification, because but few understand it in the way of an Anthem. There
are some things of particular respect to the Virgin Mary, and good Old Symeon,
not so suitable to the Congregation. Whither the Wisdom of our Governors may
not see reason to forbear those Anthems wholly in Parish Churches, or to leave
the use of them indifferent, or limit them pro hic and nunc, according as times
of Joy and Victory require our Praise, or other times of Humiliation to forbear
them.

One thing more I beg leave to offer; If our Governors see reason to alter any
thing in the Baptismal Office, about the sign of the Cross, Sureties, or
elsewhere; whether it were not desirable to have some such Scriptures inserted,
as Job 25.4.14.4. How can he be clean that is born of a Woman: Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean; that Parents may see their Childrens Condition
since the fall, defiled with Sin, polluted and unclean; and so their great need
of the Grace of Baptism, to be washed and cleansed through the Blood of Christ
from their Natural pollution and defilement by Sin. If this were but clearly
expressed, and well understood, as it would be one of the strongest Arguments
for Infant Baptism from their Childrens need of the Baptismal Grace, so it
would be a good preservative against Anabaptism.

And as to the General Thanksgiving, perhaps it were to be desired, that to the
Redemption by Jesus Christ, and the Means of Grace, were added, and for the
Spirit of Grace sanctifying an Holy Catholic Church, and for the Forgiveness
of Sins which we believe and hope for, and the Resurrection of the Body unto
Eternal Life. Some have thought our Thanksgiving too general, in that there is
no mention made in it of Sanctification. If any of these things approve it self
unto our Governors, my Labor is not lost. Out of this variety I doubt not,
but that their Wisdom knows what to choose, as shall be most for God's Glory,
and the Churches Edification.

II. Arg. For Concessions and Alterations in the Common Prayer, because that
Worship according to the Acts for Uniformity, or the exceeding strictness of
the Enjoined Conformity to it, has been occasionally, or at least eventually
Evil.

First, In respect of our Unchristian Divisions and Separation. Those that
dislike this Worship, (as there have been such from the Divisions in Queen
Mary's days at Frankford) and refuse to join in it, whether do they usually
betake themselves but to separating, and setting up another Worship? Even those
that will join with the Minister in his own Prayers, and his Sermon, yet
separate from the Common Prayers above any other Worship. Hence are so many
Sects and Opinions among us, that our Nation is scandalous upon that account
among other Protestants, who have a common saying, Half England is not of the
Church of England. Good God! What would become of Peace and Union, Love and
Charity, if the next Age should be as fruitful of Sects and Parties, and differ
in their Modes of Worship, as much, as the present has done, wherein thy
Church has been so miserably divided? How long, O Lord, the Author of Peace,
and Lover of Concord, will it thou suffer such Confusion in the Churches of the
Saints.

2. This Worship, with the Penal Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, that enforced
the Act for Uniformity, has been occasionally, or at least eventually evil, by
bringing hard suffering upon the contrary-minded. Many formerly chose rather to
leave their Native Country, and shelter themselves in New England, than endure
the Severities then, and Conventions before the High Commission Court. And if I
should speak of the Presentiments and Excommunications, the Fining, Imprisoning,
and Confinement from Corporations in latter years, it would be no more pleasing
to some to hear of them, than it was to others to suffer them. Ah how harsh did
these things sound in the Ears of Merciful Men, and the Reformed Churches
abroad, that Protestants should be worrying one another, biting and devouring
one another, and doing the Enemies work for him, who scornfully rejoiced at it,
and used to say, Give the Heretics Rope enough, and they would hang
themselves. But Blessed be God who has taken away the occasion of these Evils,
and done that effectually by the present Parliament which the Preceding would
have done, as we are informed in the Memorial from the English Protestants to
His Highness the Prince of Orange, p. 28. Four of our Succeeding Parliaments
perceived the abuse of these Penal Laws, and the mischief thereby to Conscious
Christians; and declared their intention of relieving them, if the King would
have permitted them, yet they endeavored to stop the Execution of them, and
desired a Settlement of Liberty of Conscience as is due to Christians. Adieu
now to these Presentiments, Fines, Imprisonments, Excommunications, Troubling
the Peace of our Neighbors; and too often it has been our peaceable
Neighbors; though I am apt to think but few have suffered comparatively with
the many that escaped, yet those that suffered, were too many, and to be
pitied; several of them as honest, well-meaning Persons, though mislead through
weakness of Judgment, and scruples of Conscience.

3. This Worship considered with the Acts for Uniformity, has been
occasionally, or at least eventually Evil, in respect of the War and Miseries
in King Charles the First his days, occasioned much, if not beginning by the
Imposition of the Liturgy on Scotland, for an Union of both Nations in Worship.
That Nation was so much incensed that they drove, or were ready to drive the
Ministers out of their Churches at the reading of it; and broke out into a
Rebellion, which infected England with their Covenant to down with the Liturgy,
and Bishops.

4. This Worship by the exceeding strictness of the Acts for Uniformity,
Subscriptions, Assent and Consent, etc. has been an occasion why so many
Dissenting Ministers of considerable Gifts and Graces have been rendered in a
great measure unserviceable to the Church by Suspension, or Deprivation.

Some in Queen Elizabeth's time, when (as the Reverend Dean of St. Paul 's says
in his Vnreas. of Separation,) they could very ill be spared, not to speak of
those in King James the First his Reign, and King Charles the First; of later
years, at the return of King Charles the Second, a great Number of Ministers,
Good and Worthy Men in the main, and for the generality of them, were deprived
for their Nonconformity.

5. This Worship has been eventually Evil, by weakening the hands of
Discipline, while the scandalous open evil Livers have escaped the Censures of
the Church, together with the more peaceable, and innocently-minded
Separatists. Thus Dr. Cumber on the Communation Service, Discipline withheld
(says he) in favor of Dissenters, lest by imposing of it there, this Holy
Means of Reformation should be despised, rather than obeyed. And should Men
have gone about to suppress and reform Debauchery and Profaneness by a strict
Presentation of them, the Court, which has more hotly pursued the Dissenters,
than the Scandalous and Vicious, would like enough have put them upon
Presentment of Dissenters, without any favor or difference between the weak
and the wilful; which because of the ill Consequence (which too often followed)
Excommunication and Imprisonment, many Ministers and Churchwardens were more
backward and averse unto. Their Consciences would not suffer them to work such
ill and trouble to their Christian Brethren, Fellow Protestants, Loving
Neighbors, for some small difference in lesser matters not destructive of
their Salvation. And no doubt but the Wisdom of our Governors saw the Evil and
Inconvenience of those severities. When they took away the Penal Laws that made
the Common Prayer, and Act for Uniformity so terrible to the contrary-minded.

Arg. 3. For Proof that the Common Prayer, according to the Acts for
Uniformity, is inconvenient in some respect, and may admit of Alteration,
because of the great disgusts, and almost invincible prejudices of People,
(especially in the Country) against this Worship, or at least some things
therein. Cars Peaceable Moderator, or Plain Considerations for satisfaction to
the disaffected to our Common Prayers. In the Preface, many stumble much at our
Book of Common Prayers; and some of them, I take to be good Christians, honest,
moderate, well-meaning People, and have found by experience much of their
disaffection to it does lie upon their mistake through Ignorance, not peevish
wilfulness. After all our Preaching and instruction, and Exhortations in behalf
of the Common Prayer, we do not find that success which we use to have in other
matters, and which we might expect, if their prejudice were not so deeply
rooted in them, and too mighty for us. The difficulty is great, because the
guilt of People is great. Where People have often sinned any Sin, the harder it
is to repent: And how often have may been present at these Prayers? Yet, I
fear, scarce ever prayed heartily and acceptably. Again, Sins descending from
Parents to their Children, are harder to be worked out of them; but prejudices
against this Worship have been transmitted down from Parents, and as it were
entailed upon some Families: So that there is as little hopes of gaining them
over, as for bringing Men off from the Religion of their Ancestors; which
commonly proves unsuccessful.

Again the Commonness of this Guilt, were it but two or three in a Congregation
that were prejudiced against it, there were the more hopes, that by the
Examples of others they might be recovered: But when it is a great, (if not the
greater) part of the Congregation, that is not heartily reconciled to this
Worship (as I fear it is in too many Parishes.) It is the greater difficulty,
when the Disease is so general, when the Infection has spread it self so much,
to cure it effectually.

There is too much proof of Peoples prejudices, in that the number is so small,
so few that come to the Prayers upon the Holy Days; and yet the Church is so
exceedingly full at a Funeral Sermon, (or any other preaching time,) when
People are not much longer at Church than on some Holy Days And on the Lord's
Day there are few that will come to the Prayers, to be present at the whole
Service, many hard Speeches against them, some reviling them, as the Mass Book,
Popish, Superstitious will Worship, Prayers of course a cold dead piece of
Formality. There are so many Objections, Scruples, and Cavils against it, as
dull and tedious for the length of it; as a Form of others making, and not the
Ministers own; as Book-Prayers slighted by the vulgar upon that account, who
say they can read the Common Prayer as well as the Parson,; against the
Responses, though used among the Jews and Primitive Christians; against the
short Prayers, and Hymns read (and not sung,) disused both in our other
Devotions, more commonly but one continued Prayer without any intermixture;
against some things censured as vain Repetitions; and against the Ceremonies
used in the Worship. As to particular exceptions you may find enough, if not
more than enough in the Grand Debate between the Conformists and
Nonconformists: How these prejudices may be in a great measure abated and taken
away, I shall show as the benefit of Union, That a Comprehension of the more
sober and moderate Dissenters might do it in time.

Evils of this Prejudice.

First, It is the cause of the scandalous abuse and profanation of Holy Days.
If People were unprejudiced, an Hour spent in devout Prayer and Praises, due
Attention unto the Word of God, and sometime in good instruction of Youth, and
Explication upon the Church-Catechisme, or Exposition of the Epistle and Gospel
of the Day, would turn to some good account; and the Evening Service used to,
as appointed on Holy Days; but prejudice mars and hinders all this from taking
effect, and makes our Holy Days useless in many Parishes, a loss and hindrance
rather than advantage to Religion.

Secondly, It has occasioned much dishonor to God on the Lord's Day. First,
By a great neglect of this Worship, several absenting from it, and staying till
the Prayers are over before they come, and losing the benefit of this Worship
wholly; which is commonly the bigger half of God's Worship on the Forenoons,
and the whole Service of God in many Parishes in the Afternoon, there being no
Sermon, nor Catechizing, nor at least no Explication of Catechism. And is it
nothing for so many People in many Parishes to lose the benefit of half God's
solemn Worship? No doubt but they are highly guilty before God, and will be
found so at that day, when Sins which the World counts light of, shall appear
in their just weight of Guilt according to the Word of God. Again Secondly, It
occasions much dishonor to God on his own day, by reason of Peoples great
unprofitableness in this Duty; many present at it, manifesting such a careless
Spirit, as if they were not worshipping God; doing any thing rather than that:
Some waiting with great impatience, until the Prayers be at an end, as if there
were no good to be gotten by them. How is it to be expected, that it should be
done to edifying, until Peoples prejudices be removed? That their Hearts should
be right and devout in a Worship, which their minds are not reconciled unto?
They must be brought to some good liking of it, as a true and sound Worship of
God, such as God will own, before they will serve God with the Internal Acts of
Devotion, be Spiritual and acceptable with him in his Worship. And if it be
little to you to neglect this Worship, or lose the benefit of it when you do
perform it heartlesly, praying as if you prayed not, and so you may expect that
God should hear as if he heard not, and give you a cold Answer to such cold and
faint Requests: And it is to be feared, that the lukewarmness and indiffe rency
of many (not the worst of Christians) in this Worship will hardly consist with
their Everlasting Welfare, much less attain the ends of Devotion. Thirdly,
Consider further, That this great abuse of God's Worship, and unprofitable
performance of it, is like to be an hindrance to you, as to God's Blessing on
the remaining Duties: And will that do no hurt, if the Prayers (as some think)
will do no good? We are forbid to quench the Spirit and his Grace: Imagine we
Men to be warmed and fervent in Spirit, and in frame for Holy things at their
first coming to Church, this Heavenly warmth and zeal must needs be quenched
and cooled by their dull and dead-hearted formality in this Worship.

You know, one Sin grieves the Holy Spirit, and makes him withdraw further from
us: One Duty carelessly and negligently performed makes him the more unwilling
to assist in other duties. They that regard not the Word read, God will regard
them the less in the Word preached. They that give not God the Honor in his
Praises due to his Name, God will regard their Prayers the less: And if your
first praying in the public Prayers be turned into Sin, shall not their latter
Service be less acceptable with him, than if every Duty and every Service were
performed in a Spiritual manner to Edifying?

Again Thirdly, The Peoples Prejudice and ill Opinion of some things in this
Worship does work in them an ill Opinion of the Governors in Church and State,
who enjoin them. They are ready to think, that the Governors have little care
and concern for the good of their Souls, little regard to their Edification,
who continue those things which in their Judgments are no edifying, and their
continuance notwithstanding all the Objections and Exceptions against them.

Again Fourthly, Their prejudice hinders them from discerning what is good,
or useful, and excellent, in the Common Prayer, and disposes them on the
contrary to cavil, and find fault with it, in what is inconvenient, to gather
the doubtful and obscure passages, and to stretch every thing to the worst
sense, even beyond the intention and design of them, when a good liking and
approbation of it would dispose them to judge Charitably; and Charity, you
know, covers a multitude of lesser faults.

Cure of these Prejudices. I doubt not, but that (by the Blessing of God) such
Concessions and Alterations in the Common Prayers, as to take in our Dissenting
Brethren (as certainly the more sober and moderate Ministers of the
Presbyterian Persuasion would come in upon some Concessions) would weaken much
Peoples Scruples and Objections against the Prayers. For we know, non minus
exempla trahunt quam praecepta docent, the People are lead by the Example of
their Teachers, as much, as by their Doctrines: When they shall find the ablest
Ministers among the Dissenters to read, and conform to it in their Practice,
and in their Preaching to defend and vindicate it, exhort and persuade others
to conform thereunto, (as even the Old Nonconformists, not to the Prayers, but
to the Ceremonies, and the subscription by Canon, used to do) the People (at
least in some considerable measure) may come to be convinced of their Error in
the disesteem of these Prayers; Besides, that their Prejudices, Opinionative
Conceits, and Scruples will fall of themselves, when the things that offend
them are taken out of the way. Then People will profit more, when prejudice is
abated, and be ashamed to carry themselves so negligently, and contemptuously,
as before; and the whole Worship of God, the Prayers and Office of the Desk as
well as of the Pulpit be done to Edifying, not clashing one against another,
nor contending for the Pre-eminence; Holy Days of the Churches appointment by
that means will be more improved, as Peoples prejudices against the Service
shall cease or decay; and we may hope to see the Lord worshipped in the Beauty
of Holiness, and somewhat like the Zeal and Devotion, Grace and Spirit which
the Primitive Christians manifested in their Forms of Prayer: Whereas now we
bear only or chiefly a Conformity to them in the External Modes of our Worship,
while we have lost the inward Life, and keep the Form of their Godly Prayers
without that Power and Spiritual Affection which they had; as Tertullian tells
us, Besieging God with their Prayers, as it were piercing the Heavens to the
Throne of Grace, doing Violence unto it, to take Heaven, or Heavenly and
Spiritual Blessings by force. We are told too, how forward the Primitive
Christians used to be, and earnest to be present at the beginning of their
Worship, with Sighs and Tears in their Eyes, manifesting their Internal and
unfeigned Devotion. And if Peoples prejudices should once be overcome, and they
come to any good Appetite to this Spiritual Food, they would be as sure to come
to the beginning of God's Worship, as commonly they do to the beginning of a
Feast, or at least few that will stay until that is over before they come; and
few that would lose the benefit of so much of God's Worship, as they do by
coming late, and worshipping God in an outward lifeless way, without an inward
Conformity; which is the unhappiness of our times, and is never like to be
remedied while Peoples prejudices continue, and the things that they disgust,
as the length of the Prayers, the often use of the Lord's Prayer, the Sign of
the Cross, Reading the Second Service at the Communion Table, or Altar, with
bowing toward it, Godfathers, etc.

Arg. 3. For Alteration in the Prayers is from the difference of the present
Case, from that at the Reformation.

First, This Worship, considered with the several Forms, Orders, etc. was more
necessary then, when the Ministers were very ignorant, (many of them) and more
fit to read others Sermons, (as they did the Homilies with profit) and to use
others Prayers, than either to make Sermons or Prayers of their own. They were
so ignorant, that it was complained, some of them could scarce Read, and many
of them did not understand Latin; and then a Form of another making, sound in
Doctrine and Worship, was profitable, if not necessary, least they should have
put in Errors or Heresies into their own Prayers: For they would have made very
pitiful stuff, sorry matter of it, if they were to have made any long Prayer of
their own, though a Form. But now there is more Light and Knowledge in these
days, (to give that Argument a just weight) insomuch, that if Ministers be not
very idle and negligent, so many good Books of Devotion, and excellent pieces
of Divinity, as the Church of Christ abounds with, they may be able to make
such Prayers, as may be sound and comprehensive, suitable and edifying: Nay,
they may attain to some ability to express their desires to God without an
exact Form, if they are such persons as are much in the practice of this Duty,
as it is fit Ministers should be, after the example of the Apostles, Acts 6.4.
But we will give our selves continually to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word.

Secondly, It was more seasonable at the Reformation than another Worship;
because it receded least from their former Worship, leaving that only in what
was plainly and undoubtedly evil; and so was it more safe upon the same
account. For it is a common Rule in all Changes in Bodies Natural and
Political, that the Change be no more then needs must, it being dangerous to
run from one extreme into another: And that Change which they did make in the
Worship, was not without its danger; for in Devonshire and Cornwall there was a
Rebellion upon the account of changing their Worship: But there would be no
danger of Rebellion now upon some just alterations. It caused one indeed in
Scotland (as before) which infected England.

Thirdly, It was more satisfactory and acceptable to the generality of the
Nation, at the time of the Reformation, than any other. So that we do not read
of any that separated from it in Edward VI. days. And though, when they were at
liberty in Germany, some were for another Worship at Frankford, yet we do not
read, but they Conformed to it in England, until near the Spanish Invasion,
when a party of Jesuits and Roman Priests were found crying up a sort of Free
Prayer, drawing some off from the Common Prayer, though not men of note. And in
the Act, Primo Elizabethae, you may find the esteem they had for this Worship:
It says, to the great decay of the due Honor of God, and discomfort to the
Professors of the Truth of Christ's Religion, the Common Prayer Book, and the
Act for it was repealed and taken away in Queen Mary's days. But now the
generality of Dissenters, and many that follow the Parish Ministers are
dissatisfied in it; and have little or no liking to it; and whatever is the
matter, the genius of the people will not bear it, or some things in it; or at
least not otherwise then as a Burden and a Grievance.

Arg. IV. For proof that the Common Prayer, according to the Acts for
Uniformity, is inconvenient in some respects; because of the confinement of
Ministers to the use of it, not only in the public, but in their Families, in
a manner wholly excluding all other manner of Prayer, even the most sober and
discreet use of the Gift, as (...). Upon the Ordinance against the
Common Prayer Book, Sect. 4. I am not against a grave, modest, discreet, and
humble use of Ministers gifts, even in public, the better to excite their own,
and the peoples affections to the present occasions. Again, upon denying him
his Chaplains, Sect. 16. Which gift as I do not wholly exclude from public
occasions, so I allow it its just liberty, and use in private and devout
retirements.

And the Act for Uniformity, in the beginning of King Edwards Reign, did give
Liberty to use any other Prayers and Psalms, taken out of the Bible, at any due
time, not letting or omitting thereby the Service, or any part thereof. More
may be spoken to enforce this part, that Ministers should labor after some
measure of the gift and ability to utter their minds to God in Prayer, without
keeping strictly to a Form.

First, Ejaculatory Prayer calls for some measure of this gift, as when we lift
up our Hearts to God upon any present occasion in some short Prayer; as in time
of Temptation, upon sudden Danger, or news of the Sickness or Death of a
Friend, or Judgment or Mercy befalling the Nation, or Parish in which we live;
or according to the Discourse and Company which we are in, or matter which we
read. Bishop Tailor in his Rules to his Clergy; That they should teach their
People to be much in this Ejaculatory Prayer.

Secondly, For some gift and ability to Pray without a Form is, because that
Examination of our Hearts and Lives upon set days of Fasting and Humiliation
before a Sacrament, and in times of Affliction and Sickness, or any Calamity;
the daily Examination also according to many sober Heathens practice,
Pythagoras his Advice to his Scholars to that purpose; and which is the
practice of good men, and serves only to find out our sins, that we may beg
pardon of them, and power against them, or be thankful to God for his Grace,
keeping us from sin, or enabling us to do good, and this cannot be done in one
set Form.

Thirdly, Ministers Sermons should be begun, continued, and ended with Prayer.
Prayer for Direction to a suitable Subject, such as the necessities of the
people call for Method, Matter, Language, that all may be done to edifying: And
when it is finished, it is fitting to recommend it unto God, for his Blessing
upon it. The more Prayer, the more power working with our Sermons. You will
find such Sermons take most effect, they will be weak without it. And after
Preaching, that the Word Preached may be put in practice. Some Ministers in the
Country having a short Prayer after Sermon, respecting the principal matter of
the Sermon, as the Duties, Graces, Truths of our Christian Religion, or Sins;
as 2 Timothy 3.16. The Word being profitable for Doctrine, Reproof, to convince
Gainsayers; for Correction and Amendment of evil Manners, and for Instruction
in Righteousness or Holiness; by an exercise of the Graces, performance of the
Duties of our Religion: Now Prayer must accompany all the Ordinances of God to
sanctify, and get Gods Blessing on them.

Fourthly, It is fit that all should vary in their Prayers, so much as
occasions serves, our Sins, our Wants, our Mercies: Neither those of the
Nation, nor a particular Congregation, are the same always, not altogether,
though much the same. Therefore it is fit our Petitions, Intercessions, and
Thanksgivings should admit of some alteration.

Arg. V. For some ability to pray without an exact Form is, that in Phil. 4.6.
In every thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving let your Requests
be made known unto God: In every thing of great concernment and importance in
our Lives, be it Worldly or Spiritual matters. Besides, in the two first
Centuries this sort of Prayer prevailed in all probability, and a mixed Worship
in the third, partly by Form, and part otherwise.

It Is too apparent to be denied, and has been the observation of too many, and
their complaint too, that Ministers take occasion from the use of the
Common Prayers to neglect the sober use of free and conceived Prayer, being
insufficient to pray upon an emergent occasion, to the scandal of their
Function, and derision of Dissenters. If one unexpectedly light upon a sick
person, and be desired to pray for him, it is a pitiful excuse for him to say
he has not his Book with him. In case of any Calamity befalling a Parish;
Fire, any Infections Disease, or much Sickness, etc. Or any National Judgment,
as upon poor Ireland, or Mercy, as the Miracle of Mercy and Deliverance wrought
for us of this Nation, it will be expected, or at least it is fit that
Ministers should put in Occasional Expressions for such matters; else it will
be looked upon as a weakness, and uncomfortable failing in them, not to be able
to say a Word, or put in an Expression in things of such Importance and
Concernment to the Congregation, which remain many times unprovided for by the
Common Prayers.

First, The length of the Common Prayers allows little room for the exercise of
the gift in public, though it be with Sobriety and Moderation. So much of the
time passes in the use of this Worship, that there is little remaining, when
the Sermon takes up so much besides.

Secondly, Many in Cathedrals, Visitations, and often in their Parish Churches
use only the Lords Prayer in the Pulpit, considering the length of their
Common Prayers: And indeed a long Prayer in the Pulpit, after the long Prayers
of the Desk, seems to me to be highly inconvenient for the Common Prayer,
casting a disrespect upon that; whereas if the Ministers own Prayer were placed
after the Sermon, to pray for a Blessing upon the practical matter of the
Sermon among other things, it would much further Ministers Gift and Ability in
Prayer, and promote Gods Blessing upon the Word. In Duties preached to pray for
Grace to perform them; Graces, that they may be wrought in us; Truths, (such as
are without Controversy) for Grace to know and believe them Spiritually; and
Grace to repent of sins, or keep from them, with a Confession and Thanksgiving
for Mercies Spiritual or Temporal.

Thirdly, The Canon bidding Prayer, taken in a strict sense, seems utterly to
forbid and disallow of all use of the gift in public. Therefore by some
Conformists it is condemned, and held utterly unlawful for them, to use any
other than an exact Form in generals according to that Canon.

Fourthly, Some look upon themselves bound to use the Common Prayers, and no
others in their Families, according to that Order; All Priests and Deacons are
to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer, either privately or openly, not
being let by Sickness, or some other urgent cause. And the Curate, not being
reasonably hindered, should say the same in the Parish Church: So that if it be
not said openly in the Parish Church, if Sickness or some other urgent cause do
not hinder, it is to be said privately in their Families, or personally by a
man's self.

Fifthly, Some Conformists so addicted to this Form in their Families, and in
public, are so set against all other manner of Prayer, as to call it ex
tempore Effusion, Confusion, vain Bablings, Nonsense, running beyond the very
height of Conformity. Far be it from me to plead for, or to excuse and
countenance the wild extravagancies of some fanciful Spirits, who place their
Devotion more in their various modes of speaking to God, and expressing the
matter of their Prayers rather than in the Truth and Piety of the Heart: Yet I
think we ought, with Bishop Wilkins, to endeavor after the Gift of Prayer;
accordingly to exercise it in those cases abovementioned: And perhaps some
more liberty in public were desirable, or at least the exercise of that
liberty, which some suppose given us already; as Cars Plain Considerations for
satisfaction to the disaffected to our Book of Common Prayer, p. 8. Our
Ministers have liberty, not only in private, but in public, both before and
after their Sermons, to exercise their Gift of Prayer, and to enlarge
themselves upon any emergent occasion or opportunity afforded, as God shall
enable them, and they themselves shall judge any way expedient or needful.
Cases of Conscience of the Lawfulness of joining with Forms of public Prayer,
Part 1. p. 28. The Clergy of the Church of England are not restrained from
exercising their own abilities in public Prayer; in which is allowed them the
liberty the Dissenting Ministers can claim or pretend to, to express in their
own words all the matter of public Prayer, with all the sobriety, affection
and seriousness they are able. And this permission being of long continuance,
and hitherto uncontrouled by our Church Governors amounts to an allowance.
etc. Such a liberty as this, and such a practice concurrent with it were
desirable: But all are not agreed herein, nor satisfied in point of this
liberty.

Arg. 6. For Concessions and Alterations in the Common Prayer, because of the
frequent commands of bearing with the infirmities of the weak, ( i. e.
indulging the weak and scrupulous with some favor and liberty to forbear those
things they scruple;) of becoming all things to all men to gain some, and
pleasing our Brother for his good to edification; and that all things be done
in Charity, etc. these call for some Concessions; as my Lord Hales in his
Discourse of Religion, tells us: Some allowance is to be made in the case of a
weak Brother, who on that account refuses, and cannot, though he would, obey.
Either all the Commands of bearing with the infirmities of the weak, signify
thus much, (says he) or nothing at all. And though the common Answer is, Is it
not fitter that he should submit to the Church then the Church submit to him?
Yet that Answer, I presume, is not sufficient in this case; though there be a
Duty that the Child owes to the Father, yet that will not excuse the Father
from the Duty which he owes to his Child, especially when it is from a
Conscientious account that he refuses to obey.

Mr. Tulli 's Sermon of Moderation, p. 22. St. Paul made himself all things to
all men, etc. And how was he all things to all, Bishop Hall.
as a Learned Prelate of our own, asks the Question, if he did not sometime
remit of his right to some.

Bishop Saunderson ad Aulam, Sermon. 8. Sect. 38. We deal not like Christians,
no, nor like reasonable Creatures, if we expect, all men should come to our
bent in every thing, and we our selves relent not our own stiffness in the
least matter for their sakes. And even Dr. Sherlock of Religious Assemblies, p.
22. Speaks of making all reasonable condescensions to the weakness or ignorance
of some doubting and scrupulous Consciences; and of giving ease to them, and
relaxing the terms of Communion.

1. But the experience of many years shows that our Brethren remain unsatisfied
in their Consciences.

2. They offer to give it in upon their Oaths, that they are not satisfied in
Conscience, (as some to my knowledge would); and Dr. More tells us so on their
behalf, I think in his Mystery of Iniquity, and Answer touching Liberty in
Religion, a place cited by a Nonconformist in our Discourse together.

3. They seem to be in earnest that it is really scruple and dissatisfaction in
Conscience, when they would part with their Benefices and People most dear unto
them, and suffer Fines and Imprisonments rather then Conform.

4. Again, Their Lives prove the same. Men whose Lives are all of a piece and
uniform; such as make Conscience to keep from other sins; why should they not
be believed in this wherein they plead Conscience? Can their Integrity be
disproved that they are men of no Conscience in other things. But I do verily
believe our Nonconforming Brethren, especially the moderate men of the
Presbyterian Opinion (not disowning Episcopacy) to be of as unblameable Lives,
as any sort of men among us: And these are the men that we plead for to be
taken into our Church again.

I shall cite some Conformists in Testimony of their Weakness and not
Wilfulness in their Dissent from us, and pleading for favor to the Weak.

Queen Elizabeth, as Sir Francis Walsingham tells us in his Letter to Monsieur
Critoy of France, made a differeence between the Papists and Puritans in
Conscience, and Papists and Puritans of Faction and Sedition.

It was not so judged by our Governors in that Age, when the Act of Uniformity
was first Established; as if all Separatists must separate from wilfulness and
obstinacy; but a more Charitable interpretation there was of men's scrupling
Obedience [in Conformity]; as is evident by the relief given to such by Queen
Elizabeth, who with the Advice of her Council put forth a Book of Articles to
be Enquired of at their Visitation, and Presentation to be made accordingly:
And of Fifty Six in number there was not among them One that was judged
offensive on purpose, against the Rites and Ceremonies then Established, which
showed they were not all wilful and obstinate that could not Conform: And some
Bishops formed the Articles of Enquiry with more moderation. Nyes Suprem. p 40.

In the Reasons given in the Common Prayer for Kneeling at the Communion. Least
the same Kneeling should by any persons out of Ignorance and Infirmity [ i. e.
through Weakness] or out of Malice and Obstinacy, be misconstrued and depraved,
etc.

Bishop Jewels Answer to Mr. Hardings Preface in his Reply. Some of these that
now be about you, being I trust, not frowardly carried away with wilful Malice,
but having the fear of God and reverent Zeal to do the best; though perhaps not
knowledge sufficient to judge what is best. Was his Charity such toward
Papists? No doubt but it was as great to Dissenting Protestants.

Lloyds State Worthies, in the Life of Sir William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, in his
Letter to Archbishop Whitgift, for some scruplous Ministers: My Lord, I fear no
sensual or wilful Recusant [among those he pleaded for]. I sharply admonished
them, that if they will be disturbers in their Churches, they must be
corrected. After follows the Lord Burleighs Character: He was not rigid; he
would help the good natured, yet punish the stubborn; which shows those were
not such (at least not in his judgment) for whom he interceded.

King Charles II. Declaration, Dec. 26. 1662. His Majesty being therefore
persuaded that multitudes have suffered, being ensnared in their Consciences,
and not from wilfulness.

True State of the Primitive Church; Truly I think him very defective in
Charity, however he abounds in Faith, who thinks all Papists, or Lutherans, or
Calvinists maliciously or wilfully blind.

Dr. Barrow on Ephesians. 5.2. toward the end; If Christ and his Glory, if the
Service and Salvation of his People be our end; if we mind the same common
Salvation, as the Apostle calls it, the differences which after remain
amongst us, arise purely from a narrowness and defect of Judgment, and not from
any other root of Malignancy, or Hostility.

How such are to be dealt with we are told also, and what favor is to be shown
them in respect of that their weakness, King Charles the First's (...). Upon
His Majesty's Retirement from Westminster, Sect. 10. Sure that Man cannot be
blamable to God or Man, who seriously endeavors to see the best reason of
things, and faithfully follows what he takes for reason; the uprightness of his
intentions will excuse the possible fallings of his Understanding.

Lord Faulkland's Speech to the House of Commons, 1641. If it be feared, that
they will employ some of our Laws with a severity beyond their intention,
against some of their weaker Brethren, that we may be sure to take away that
Power, let us take away those Laws.

Dr. Pullor's Moderation of the Church of England, p. 26. Benignity [ i. e.
favour] is to be showed to the humble and peaceable, but it can in no wise be
challenged by the proud and froward. Item. p. 24. The Execution of the
Ecclesiastical Laws remitted only in consideration of the weakness of the
People. Item p. 35. According to Equity (which is using as we say a Conscience,
p. 18.) Our Church desires all her Laws may be interpreted. Benignius Leges
Angliae sunt interpretandae, quo voluntas earum conservetur. Capienda est
occasio quae praebet benignius responsum.

Bishop Saunderson on Romans 14.3. Sect. 25. We are bound not to despise our
Nonconforming Brethren, so far forth, as may probably appear to us, they are
weak, and not wilful; and declares there are some such, Sect. 29.

Doctor Barrow on Ephesians. ^5.2. toward the end: As we deal with Children,
allowing to the infirmities of their Age, their Ignorance, Frowardness, and
Untoward Humor, without distracting them, so should we with our Brethren, who
labor under any weakness of Mind or Humor.

Doctor Tillotson's Second Volume of Sermons, p. 195. It Is great Charity to
consider the inveterate prejudices of Men, especially which are rooted in
Education, and which Men are confirmed in by the Reverence they bear to those
that have been their Teachers; and great Allowances are to be given Men in this
case.

Bishop Tailor 's Rules to his Clergy: Think no Man considerable upon the
pretense of a tender Consolence, unless he live a good Life; but if he be an
humble Person, Modest, apt to Learn, and desirous of Information, if he seeks
for it in all ways reasonable and pious, and is obedient to Laws, then take
care of him, use him tenderly, persuade him meekly, reprove him gently, and
deal mercifully with him, till God shall reveal that also unto him, in which
his unavoidable trouble and temptation lies.

Principles and Practices, etc. p. 333. They ( i. e. the Moderate Men of the
Church of England) Believe that those who differ from the Established way of
Religion, ought not to be esteemed, or dealt with, as Men of tender
Consciences, [ i. e. weak ones] who are not quiet, and peaceable, modest and
charitable in their behavior toward others, that are not of their way and
mind, but must needs be confronting of Authority.

Judge Hale 's Discourse of Religion, p. 21. Some perchance transported too far
in scrupling or opposing some Ceremonies or Forms, not from frowardness, and
peevishness, or a Spirit of opposition, but in the sincerity and simplicity of
their hearts; those though mistaken, yet certainly deserve Compassion,
Tenderness, yea, and Love also, much rather than severity and contempt.

Doctor Hascard, Dean of Windsor on Ephesians. 4.32. To allow no Grace for Common
Errors and Frailties; this is severity and unmercifulness.

Doctor Good 's Firmianus and Dubit. p. 164. Those to be among them that are of
a quiet and peaceable Spirit, agreeing with us in the most necessary points of
Religion: He gives us Reasons, why Debauchery and Profaneness ought to be more
severely punished, than Negative Separation, and Simple Nonconformity. [His
Second Reason] The Sins of Profaneness and Debauchery being wilful, (for
Drunkards and profane Persons do not plead Ignorance and Weakness,) are of a
more malignant Nature than sins of Ignorance, though such as was not altogether
invincible.

Doctor Burnet, the Bishop of Salisbury 's Exhortation to Peace and Union, p.
34. Let us also consider one another, as Brethren, let us bear with one
another infirmities, let us give some allowances to the weakness of those that
are mislead by the force of Education, and the byas of Vulgar prejudices.

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, p. 204. He that pleads for Compassion upon
the account of his weakness, must first willingly submit himself to
Instruction. Secondly, Be uniformly Conscientiious. Thirdly, He will do all
that he can, if he cannot do all that is commanded. Fourthly, He may forbear
judging and censuring them that do all that the Law commands. Fifthly, Will
freely part with Money and Worldly Matters to preserve his own Innocence and
Peace. Again, If after all my Endeavors of satisfying my self to obey the
Humane Law, the thing commanded seem unlawful; I say this case is pityable.
Disobedience then will be only a Sin of Infirmity, which is pityable among Men
upon consideration of common Humanity, and is pardonable with God, as other
Errors are on a general Repentance.

Mr. Dodwel 's Letters about Holy Orders; When you have reduced them [i. e. the
Minister, the Persons in his Parish] to this Excellent Temper (as p. 19.) to
practice the common Duties of Christianity, if you could not persuade them to
assent to what you say through the weakness of their understandings, or your
unskilfulness to plead for a good Cause, ( i. e. Conformity) with Advantage,
you must needs conclude them invincibly Ignorant, and therefore! Excusable
before God in this regard, as well as positively acceptable in others; and
therefore must be as Charitable in your Judgment, as you believe God will prove
favorable in his Final Sentence.

Mr. Smithies Spirit of Meekness, p. 68. As the Galathians were overtaken in a
fault, Gal 6.1. So we must account them likewise, who have dissented from us.
When Men are guilty of Errors of Practice, they are wilful and obstinate, for
they know they are wrong, etc. But no Man runs wilfully into an Error of
Judgment, but it is through the weakness of Judgment, and instability of mind,
for which he is to be pitied; Idem p. 70. I mention these instances, because
some Men will not be persuaded, that there is any thing but wilfulness, and
obstinacy, that is the cause of Men's Dissenting, and therefore they ought not
to be treated with the Spirit of Meekness, p. 71. If we consider what Education
many have had, we may well conclude that they were overtaken in the fault of
Separation, not that it was a wilful choice.

Mr. Kettlewel 's Measure of Christian Obedience, Edit. 2. p. 494. Some
prejudices get into Men's Minds, not through any thing of an evil and
disobedient Heart, but only through weakness of the Understanding; they are not
of an understanding sufficient to examine things exactly, when they embrace
their prejudice; for their reason is dim and short sighted, weak and
unexperienced, unable thoroughly to search into the Nature of things, and to
judge of the various weight, and just force of Reasons, to sift and ransack,
separate and distinguish between Solidity and Show, Truth and Falsehood: p. 496
Idem p. 117. Love to others produces in us, if they have honest Hearts, but yet
are weak in Judgment and Knowledge, a Compassionate sense of their weakness,
and endeavors to relieve them.

Argument for Tol and Indulg. in difference not of Faith, but of Opinions,
Print. 81. It pleasing God in Infinite Goodness to respect the Will, the
Intention, the sincere Endeavor of his Servants, and for the rest to put upon
Humane Weakness and Infirmity, that Weakness and Infirmity, which he will
pardon; and if God himself have so much Tenderness and Compassion for Humane
Weakness and Imperfection, shall Men themselves have none for one another? p.
5. Item 13. And certainly it would much import to healing our breaches, and to
lay the Heats and Animosities that Reign among us, if we more regarded the
Conscience, they who do dissent from us, do make, and the good Designs and Ends
they aim at, than the very Opinions and Practices themselves, in which they
dissent: For in the former all good Christians agree, and in the latter will
ever differ. We ought highly to honor Tenderness of Conscience, and Intentions
directed to the Glory of God, and the Common Good of the Church, and of the
World, wherever we find them.

Mr. Hoffman 's Consider. of present use, on Romans 15.6, 7. That the strong
ought to bear with the weak, etc. p. 18. By the weak, I mean those which are
really so, and not such as use it for an obstinate and ungovernable pretense:
When we hear a Man sincerely from the bottom of his Heart, saying, That he
cannot think that indifferent which others do; that he cannot admit things that
are really lawful in others Opinions, to appear so in his. A Man that is strong
ought to pity such a ones weakness, Item p. 21. They seem to be in earnest,
when their blindness will enable them to part with that which is dear to them,
rather than obey.

Mr. Allen, late of Henfield in Sussex, Pref. to his Sermon, We desire the
trouble of none that are peaceable.

Thus you have seen how the Conformists plead for favor to them in the
general; and sure it might be as useful and beneficial to the Church in this
particular (Condescension to their weakness) as any other.

Besides all this, I could show out of the Works of Eminent Conformists, that
it is acknowledged by them, that there are Good and Worthy Men among the
Dissenters from the Church of England. And why should not some consideration be
had of them, and somewhat to be done for their sakes, who are prized by
Conformists as Men of Worth and Goodness. And surely, it will be no loss to our
Church to lose a few things that may be spared well enough, if She shall gain
her Brethren by that means; especially when the loss is of such things as have
need of an Alteration or Abrogation for the common good of Protestants. And I
hope, says Mr. Claud to the Bishop of London, you will not be wanting in the
Duties of Charity, and the Spirit of Peace; and that when the Dispute shall be
only of some Temperaments, or of some Ceremonies that are a stumbling block,
and which in themselves are nothing in comparison with an entire reunion, you
will make it seen, that you love the Spouse of your Master more than your
selves. This indeed would manifest in the Fathers of the Church a true Fatherly
Affection, great Humility and Condescension, if they shall at length yield
somewhat to the Infirmity and Importunity of Protestant Brethren. And it is
highly probable, that such Concessions and Alterations, as to take in our
Dissenting Brethren, would take away most of those Evils that have troubled the
Church. It were the best way and means to put a stop to the Course of
Separation. For when the most eminent and considerable Men of the
Nonconformists were taken in (as certainly they would come in) the rest would
be discouraged and discountenanced in their Separation, and we might hope that
they would fall off by degrees, and in time be wholly recovered to the Church
again. Hereby a great many Ministers considerable for Gifts and Grace, might do
service in the Church, who must otherwise be silent, or exercise their Ministry
in a way of Separation. As the Separation will cease much by a Comprehension,
so will the Envy, Hatred, Malice, and Uncharitableness that accompanies a
divided Church State cease in the same measure. And it is to be hoped this
would strengthen the hands of Discipline, and turn the Censures of the Church
and their force against the scandalous open Evil-livers, instead of vexing of
Dissenters. And perhaps in order to this Accommodation, it might be desirable
to consider of the Nonconformists Motion, page 61. We confess that some Forms
have their laudible use to cure that Error and Vice, that lies on the other
extreme: And might we but sometimes have the liberty to interpose such words, as
are needful to call home, and quicken Attention and Affection, we should think
that a convenient Conjunction of both might be a well-tempered means to the
Common Constitutions of most. By a mixed Worship, partly by a Form, and in some
part (be it but little) otherwise, not as of necessity for all, but allowance
to some who may be habitually apt for it, as Ministers will increase their
Gifts, attaining more Holy Skill, and Wisdom, and Ability in Prayer by this
means, and be more fitted and ready for Ejaculatory Prayer, and other sort of
Occasional Prayer after the Examination of their Hearts and Lives, whether
daily, or upon set times of Fasting and Humiliation; or to follow the Word
(read or Preached) with Prayer for a Blessing on that, and the Sacraments,
which with all the Ordinances of God are Sanctified, or Blessed by Prayer.
Ministers besides by this means being more frequent in the performance of this
so great and necessary a Duty, will be more ready and inclinable to it at all
times, with much ease and freedom, sweetness and delight, which Naturally, much
more Spiritually proceed from Use and Custom. And the People will be encouraged
by the Examples of their Ministers to do the like, and follow them. And this
would mightily promote Religion, all our Religion being like to rise or fall,
as we rise or fall in this Duty.

7. To continue our Common Prayer in all and every thing the same, it is to be
feared will continue, if not perpetuate Schism. While the things scrupled and
excepted against continue, we have little or no hopes of gaining our Brethren.
They are never like to be so well satisfied in Conscience as to the Assent and
Consent to all and every thing, and the undoubted certainty of Baptized Infants
Salvation (which Bishop Usher in his Body of Divinity, of Baptism doubted of,
and so do some Conformists now, Curates, and others, who can use the Baptismal
Office) and as to the Sign of the Cross, etc. as to come up to a full
Conformity to the present established Worship. There are but four means of
curing Schism, either by Instruction or Toleration, Reprehension, or
Comprehension. They have had Instruction long enough; one Conformist after
another writing for Conformity, some in the Spirit of Meekness, some with
another manner of Spirit; and still they have been answered, and the
Nonconformists remained unconvinced, unsatisfied. And as to Toleration of their
different Assemblies, there were no cure of Schism that way; though I think, it
is of the better sort, like Mr. Greenham's Answer to the Bishop of Ely, who
told him there was a Schism in the Church, and asked him where the fault lay?
On either side said he, if they violated the Laws of Love, on neither part (as
to culpable Schism) if they lived lovingly together, as they should do
notwithstanding the difference of their Judgments.

Further, Mischief of Separation, page 18. Men may please themselves in talking
of preserving Love and Peace under separate Congregations; but our own sad
Experience shows the contrary. For as nothing tends more to unite Men's hearts,
than joining together in the same Prayers and Sacraments; so nothing does more
alienate Men's Affections, than withdrawing from each other into separate
Communions. Therefore as large a Comprehension as may be is desirable; and no
more Toleration of other Worship than necessity requires, because Toleration
without a Comprehension will weaken any Established Church. As to Reprehension
(severity I mean by that word) it may make Men Hypocrites, and drive many to
Church, who will fall off again, as soon as the severities cease. Men are
reasonable Creatures, and what they do, it should be a reasonable service, from
an enlightened mind, and well-satisfied Conscience, not by force and violence
done to their Consciences, dissembling with God and the World. For neither is
God served by such, nor their Souls edified, nor the Communion of Saints
increased by such an Hypocritical Union and Communion with our Church. And
though it is not to be denied, but that some may, by such severities, be put
upon a more Impartial search and enquiry into the Terms of Communion with us,
and so be satisfied really, yet these are but few, the far greater part
forsaking us, when once the lash is taken away, and they come to have their
liberty. The last and the best means is Comprehension; and that must be by
yielding somewhat for Peace sake on either side. And surely, there is no such
wide breach, but that there might be a closing, an healing, if we would set our
selves in good earnest to it, and would not be too stiff and self-willed. And
to this end perhaps it were desirable, that, as the Dutch did us the Honor of
having some of our Divines at their Synod for composing differences among them;
so that we might take in the Assistance of some of their Divines, either by
their Personal Presence, or Advice by Letter, as Mr. Le Moyne, and the others
of France, Mr. De L' Angle, and Mr. Claud, worthy Persons, made some Essay
toward an Union in their Letters to his Lordship the Bishop of London. This
would add a greater Authority unto what should be so established. And the more
Protestant Churches that assisted therein, the better and more forcible bond of
Union.

But it will be objected (or has been) nothing will satisfy; The Dissenters
will never come in.

I Answer, At King Charles the Seconds Return, though they did desire many
Alterations in the Worship, as to Words and Sentences, Ceremonies, etc. Yet
they drew up the principal matters in a short Letter to the most Reverend
Archbishop and Bishops, etc. mentioned p. 30, 31, 32. of the Grand Debate.

2. It may justly be supposed, that among those Objections and Exceptions
against several things therein, (when his Majesty's Commission gave them that
liberty to make such Reasonable and necessary Alterations, Corrections, and
Amendments, as should be agreed upon at that Conference, to be needful and
expedient,) there were some things, which were judged by them to be
inconvenient, other things to be unlawful. If they had been put to it to
declare, what they held to be sinful and unlawful to be submitted to, I doubt
not but they would have cut off many things, as only inconvenient, and not
necessarily or unavoidably evil, and so have been satisfied as to the matter of
Conformity with less.

Another Answer. Judge Hales with the Lord Keeper Bridgeman, and Bishop Wilkins
drew up a Model of Abatements and Condescentions for a Comprehension of the
more moderate Dissenters, and a limited Indulgence toward such as could not be
brought within the Comprehension; and when after several Conferences with two
of the Eminentest Presbyterian Divines, heads were agreed on, and some
abatements to be made, and some explanations were to be accepted of, they put
them into the form of a Bill to be Presented to the next Session of Parliament.
In the Life of Sir Matthew Hale by Dr. Burnet Bishop of Salisbury, p. 41, 42.
He gives us the Reasons that prevailed at that time against it, p. 70, 71, 72,
73. The Councils and Reasons against it being more acceptable to some concealed
Papists then in power, as has since appeared too evidently, the whole project
for Comprehension was let fall, and those who had set it a foot, came to be
looked on with an evil eye, as secret favorers of Dissenters, underminers of
the Church, and every thing else that jealousy and distaste could cast on them.

A fourth Answer shall be given you out of the Conformists Plea for the
Nonconformists, Part 4. p. 26, 27. In Answer to that Objection, should we yield
to any one of these we are far from gaining the rest.

1. Gain any of them, and we shall be the more and stronger by that addition.

2. Except the Presbyterians, the most of the other Dissenters agree in their
Modes of Government: So that what you grant to one Party, is granted to more.

3. Is it Reason and Charity, that those who would unite shall not, because all
will not upon some abatements.

4. Gain some, and they will help to draw in others.

5. The more are United, the fewer remain to be Tolerated; by which Toleration
I mean no more, but a forbearing one another in Love, with the use of Gospel
means to convince and gain them, if possible, and by the Civil Sword to
restrain and suppress them, when it shall be necessary, and dangerous to the
State, and not before. Thus that Excellent Person has given a most solid
Answer, with a most Christian Spirit: I shall add what I had from one of his
Majesty's Chaplains by way of Answer to the same Objection: If there be but
room or way made for them the fault will be their own if they will not come in.
If the Mother will receive her Children, and entertertain them as her own in
love, they must bear the blame if they will not return home. I might add that
they will show themselves unworthy of that favor given them in the Act of
Toleration, if they grow more obstinate and averse, and utter enemies to an
accommodation, and may provoke Authority to take it away.

Another Objection, Why should there be any Concessions or Alterations, when
the present terms of Conformity are Lawful?

I Answer, They may be unlawful to them, (for to him that esteems any thing
to be unlawful, to him it is unlawful; according to that, Romans 14.14.) but not
ex natura rerum, per se, and so they may be Lawful to us, and our Consciences;
or may be Lawful to one and not another, in point of Practice and Conformity;
so that yielding to their Consciences and their Scruples may consist with the
uprightness and integrity of our own, and a Conformity upon just grounds of
conviction and satisfaction.

A second Answer: The yielding to the Dissenters may be such, as not utterly to
take away any thing, but to leave some things at liberty, as the Ceremonies;
especially the Sign of the Cross. And as the great Dean of St. Paul's motioned,
whether those expressions, which suppose the strict exercise of Discipline in
Burying the Dead, were not better left at liberty in our present case; [there
being a confessed want and neglect of Discipline]: And whether requiring only
an use of the Liturgy, and approbation of that use, and subscription to it,
leaving the subscription according to the Canon, and the Assent and Consent, to
all and every thing contained and prescribed, according as persons Consciences
are satisfied or unsatisfied therein: It is certain that the Uniformity in
Worship, and the end of that Act for Uniformity is answered by an use of the
Prayers, as by Law Established. No doubt but many would Conform upon such a
Liberty granted, who cannot satisfy their Consciences in the present terms of
Conformity: But the leaving things thus at Liberty, were no Argument that they
are Unlawful.

Further; Such yielding as this would make no such Alteration but that our
present Common Prayer Books would serve; which they might do, if several
Repetitions were left out, as of the Lords Prayer, which we used so often at
first, (and continued since because received at first,) that the people might
learn it in their English Tongue; even those many that could not read, and used
before to say it in Latin, Pater noster, etc.

Other Repetitions, as of the Gloria Patri after every Psalm, (yielded to be
left out by those who met at the Bishop of Lincolns House, in King Charles I.
time) and the one of the Creeds, using the Nicene Creed upon some certain days
only: Which were the better way of lessening the length of the Prayers, by
taking away some Repetitions, which our Dissenting Brethren do not pretend to
be unlawful, but only to be inconvenient, as some Conformists acknowledge also.

Third Answer: Further, The Preface to the Common Prayer acknowledges, that
the particular Forms of Worship, and the Ceremonies appointed to be used, being
things in their own nature indifferent and alterable; it is but reasonable,
such changes and alterations should be made therein, etc.

It says further, That in the Reigns of several Princes of Blessed Memory
since the Reformation, the Church upon just and weighty Considerations has
yielded to make such Alterations, as in their respective times were thought
convenient. But when the Church did yield in those matters, she did not yield
them up as utterly unlawful, but inconvenient, or less suitable to those times;
and pro condition temporum. some things are more, some less convenient, and
fit for continuance or alteration accordingly.

Fourth Answer: The present terms of Conformity will be the same as to their
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness, whether there be any condescensions for Dissenters,
or none at all. As I am a Conformist both in judgment and practice, so I could
offer Arguments in defense of my present Conformity, as well as for Concessions
to the Nonconformists. Yet the Learned Bishop Cosins declared in his last
Testament, that it was the great duty of us all to Unite, and I am sure it is
so, and that it is no duty of any at all, to censure or condemn the present
terms of Conformity as Unlawful, upon the account of any concessions or
recessions from them, for so good an end as an happy Reunion and
Comprehension. I need not remind you in how many Precepts this Duty is
enjoined, how tenderly and compassionately the Apostles of our Lord dealt with
weak ones, how earnestly they charged us to receive them, to bear with them, to
become all things to them to gain the weak, to please them to their
edification, etc. Arguments enough to convince us that it is our duty, whatever
the World say, or think of us, to yield somewhat to the weakness of our
Brethren, and to relax, as the Author of the Serious and Compassionate Enquiry
has it, p. 102. Making the terms of Communion more free and easy; this is
highly recommended by some good men, as the most proper expedient for a
Protestant Church in our condition.

Another Objection. It would be a dishonor (say some) to our first Reformers,
to take away those things which they Established.

To which I Answer; as True state of the Primitive Church. The Fathers of this
Church, when they Reformed this Nation from Popery, were desirous to fetch off
as many as they could, retaining for this cause all the Ceremonies, etc.
Certainly we cannot do our Forefathers a greater honor, than to observe their
Rule of Reason, to conform to the times; and therefore they are grossly
mistaken, who think it a dishonor to them, for us to take away what they have
Established, when we keep close to the reason wherefore they did Establish it.

Iren. p. 225. This Temper was used by our Reformers, in composing our Liturgy
in reference to the Papists, to whom they had then an especial eye, as being
the only party then appearing whom they desired to draw into their Communion,
by coming as near them, as they well and safely could; I say the same reason
which at that time made them yield so far to them, would now have persuaded
them to alter and lay aside those things which yield matter of offense to any
of the same persuasion with themselves. For surely none will be so uncharitable
toward those of his own Profession, as to think there is not as much reason to
yield in compliance with them as with the Papists. Further, Lloyds State
Worthies in Quarto, p. 998. in the Life of Archbishop Laud, he brings in that
Bishop, disliking Mr. Calvin's words of Censure, Tolerabiles ineptias, who knew
not said the Bishop the temper of the Nation, requiring then not what was
absolutely best, but most conveniently good. And thus our Reformers did what
was best in their days, or most conveniently good: Even as Aristotle's Organon
might be best in the days of old, but now the case is altered, and the reading
Lectures out of that Book is commonly with less profit, than other Logicks
would be; the case may be applicable to some things at least in the
Common Prayers, if not the Worship it self, as not done so much to edifying,
etc. And the Reformers reason for their Imposition cease, which was the
enlargement of the Church, by gaining and winning as many as could be, to our
Communion: The Papists came to this Worship till the 10th or 12th year of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign: But now it hinders and shuts some of our Reformed Protestant
Brethren out of our Church; and so the reason which made at first for the
imposition, makes as much now for the abrogation of some things therein.

I say again, not a dishonor to our first Reformers; because a due
acknowledgment may be made of their worth, and the work of Reformation in their
days, that it was the best, the fittest, or at least praiseworthy. Our
Forefathers, who knew what Popery and a Mass Book was by sad Experience,
rejoiced, that they had Prayers sound for the substance, and purged from the
Corruptions of the Mass book, and looked upon it as a wonderful Blessing from
Heaven, and were thankful. And if somewhat be inconvenient, and less suitable
to the genius of the people in these days, not sinful and unlawful, or unmeet
for good Christians to join in; I presume no dishonor will be done to our
first Reformers; who, as several are apt to imagine, if they had lived in these
days, would have taken at least some few things away for the enlargement of our
Communion.

Thirdly, Gods Honor is greater than that of our first Reformers; but God is
highly dishonored by this Worship, as it is at present performed, carelessly,
negligently, under contempt by many, and by most, I am afraid, little regarded,
as to the devout use of it. And the Question must end in this; whether God will
be more Honored by the continuance of the Common Prayers, as at present; or
whether (with Submission to the Wisdom of our Governors) it may not admit of
an alteration in some things for the better? Whether it is like to do most good
to Souls, and best attain the ends of Worship, in its present use, or any
Amendments or Concessions for a Comprehension: So be it, Gods Worship be done
to edifying by the greater part of our Congregations, in the City and Country
both, God will have the Glory, and all good Christians will be satisfied.

Another Objection. What need of a Comprehension? Are we not as well without
it? What shall we be the better for it?

To which I Answer; There are no doubt a Thousand Blessings of Heaven and Earth
accompanying that Church state, which like the Heavenly Society is at Unity in
it self. If there were any Community here upon Earth that enjoyed a perfection
of Love and Peace, how ambitious would Mortals be to enter into that Peaceful
Society. But the nearest approach that we can make unto it is by a
Philadelphian state. An Heavenly thing is Unity, as Nazianzen well observed,
Pugnas and dissidia nescire Deum and Angelos; No broyls, no jars in Heaven,
nothing but Peace there, and it is a kind of Heaven upon Earth, when Brethren
dwell together in Unity, Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it
is, etc. Pleasant to behold, a lovely sight to see an Army marching in an exact
order; and as amiable and acceptable to hear people of the same Parish, Town,
City, and Kingdom pouring out their joint requests, with one Mouth, and one
Heart praying for the Peace and Prosperity of Zion. O the Benefits of Union are
unspeakably great! I profess my self to stand admiring the vanity of this
contentious World that values such a state no more. Hear what men of the most
serene temper, men that aspired after it, if it were possible to attain to some
good degree of it, or somewhat like it, by living Peaceably with all men, and
by being Peacemakers.

Benefits of Peace and Unity.
LOrd Bacons Essays, p. 13. Speaking of Peace in the Church: It contains
infinite Blessings, it establishes Faith, it kindles Charity, and it turns
the Labors of Writing and Reading of Controversies, into Treatises of
Mortification and Devotion.

Bishop Andrews Sermons, p. 672. The Spirit dwells not but where Unity and Love
is. -- Think of this seriously, and set it down, that at Salem is his
Tabernacle; and Salem is Peace; and so the Fathers read it, in pace factus est
locus ejus, make that place for him, and he will say, here is my Rest, here
will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

Mr. Virtues Plea for Peace. Christ has said, Blessed are the Peacemakers,
they shall be called the Children of God. Matthew. 5.9. As we would share in this
Blessedness, let it be our study. Item, p. 51. Would we see good, and enjoy
long days, would we be sure that we have that Wisdom which is from above, be
peaceable, wrangle not for trifles, contend not about uncertainties.

Dr. Goods Firmianus and Dubitantius, p 165. It is not to be doubted, but that
Peace and Unity, and Love among our selves, would much dishearten those
restless enemies of our Church and State, etc. and cause Religion and Primitive
Christianity to flourish in our miserable divided Nation; while that time,
which is now spent in vain Wranglings and unchristian Contentions, would be
better employed in devout Prayer, Holy Meditation, and Mortification of our
Corruptions, in Duties of Piety toward Almighty God, and of Love, Mercy and
Charity one toward another.

Mr. Jekyls Sermons on Jer. 5.29. p. 30. Next to Peace with God, without which
all other security will prove deceitful, Unity amongst our selves is certainly
the most effectual thing to the making of us an happy people; and till that be
attained, we may possibly be quiet, but we shall never be safe.

I shall conclude this with an excellent Speech of that Pious and Peaceable
Prelate, Dr. Reynolds, in his Sermon of Self-denial, toward the end; It were
worth not only our Fasting and Prayer; but our Studying, our Sweating, our
Bleeding, our Dying, to recover Peace to the Church, and Unity amongst Brethren
again.

I could argue also from the mischievous effects and consequences of our
Divisions, that the case of our Church must be very sad and deplorable while
our Divisions and Confusions in matters of Religion continue. Malorum ilias, a
multitude of evils throng in upon a Church through its unchristian Divisions. A
divided state is an unhappy state; it is a state of Separation from God as well
as from their Brethren.

Bishop Andrews Sermons, p. 672. And what is there would sooner grieve him,
(the Holy Spirit) and make him to quit us, than discord or disunion? Among
divided men or minds he will not dwell; not but where Unity and Love is. They
may talk of the Spirit without these in vain. To say Truth, who would be hired
to dwell in Mesheck, Psalm. 120.5. where nothing is but continual jars and
jangles? Such places, such men are even as Torida Zona, not habitable by the
Spirit, by this Spirit: But for the Spirit of Division, ut habitet inter eos
Demon, a fit place for the Devil to dwell among such. And surely he that has
an heart affected with any sense of the miserable case of our divided Church
(though blessed be God not in so lamentable a case now as in former years) he
that has any concern for it must needs be convinced that we are not well,
cannot be well in our multiplicity of Divisions.

The Lord Chancellor Hides Speech to the Parliament, 1660, He calls it a sad
Consideration, that must make every Religious Heart to bleed, to see Religion,
which should be the strongest of Obligations, and cement of Affection, and
Brotherly kindness and Compassion, made by the perverse wranglings of
passionate and froward Men, the Ground of all Animosity, Hatred, Malice, and
Revenge. My Lords and Gentlemen, says he, this Disquisition has cost the King
many a sigh, many a sad hour, when he has considered the almost irreparable
Reproach the Protestant Religion has undergone from the Divisions and
Distractions, which have been so notorious in this Kingdom.

Bishop Saunderson 's Sermons, ad Aulam, Sermon. 9. Sect. 30; Odious to God, and
grievous to every Godly Man it is, when such Voices as these are heard in the
Church, I am of Paul, and I am of Cephas, and I of Apollo.

Mr. Baxter in the Life of Sir Matthew Hale says, that he much lamented that
so many Ministers were silenced, the Church weakened, Papists strengthened, the
cause of Love and Piety greatly wronged and hindered by the present differences
about Conformity.

Doctor Good 's Firmianus and Dubitantius, etc. p. 152; It Is indeed much to be
lamented that we should quarrel about Mint and Cummin, to the prejudice of the
more weighty and material duties, and scandal of our Religion.

Causes of the decay of Christian Piety, p. 424. Amidst all our importunate
pretenses to Piety, if there be indeed any such thing amongst us, methinks, it
should give us some relentings, make us sadly consider, what a deplorable
Condition we have brought that very Religion into by our Divisions.

Bishop of Salisbury 's Exhortation to Peace and Unity, p. 30. There have
arisen among us such heats, so much bitterness, so violent an aversion to one
another, that it must needs beget great Grief, and sad Apprehensions in all
that look on, and judge impartially.

Principles and Practices of some Mod. etc. p. 4. It pains me to the Heart when
I consider, to what a prodigious height about matters in Religion our feuds
are grown, and how utterly averse the too many Sects and Parties we are
crumbled into, are, to entertain thoughts of Peace and Accommodation.

Unity of the Catholic Church, p. 1. Whosoever with an Impartial Eye, and a
truly Religious concern for the Honor of God, the Credit of the Gospel, and
the Salvation of Men, looks into the State of Christendom, he will scarce find
any greater cause of sorrowful Reflections, than from the many Divisions and
Animosities which have distracted and separated its Parts.

Mr. Wakes Sermon. on Romans 15.5, 6, 7. I do not believe there is any good
Christian so little affected with those unhappy Divisions, under which the
Church at this day labors, as not both heartily to deplore them, and to think
that nothing could be too much, that might innocently be done on all hands for
the redressing of them. And to show that these Worthy Men had cause to
complain, and bewail our Divisions, I shall Exemplify the Evils.

The Mischief of our Divisions.
THE First Mischief promoting Atheism. Archbishop Grindal in his Fair
Warning, Part 2. Edit. 1663, expressed his great fear of two things, Atheism
and Popery; and both arising out of our needless differences. By these the
Enemies of our Religion gain this, that nothing can be established by Law in
the Protestant Religion, whose every part is not opposed by some or other of
her own Professors; so that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists
have their Opportunity to urge their way, which is attended with Order and
Government: And our Religion continuing thus distracted and divided, some vile
Wretches lay hold on the Arguments on one side to confute the other, and so
hope at last to destroy all.

Judge Hales 's Discourse of Religion p. 49. When Men see so much Heat and
Passion, so much Fervor and Contention, such Reproaches and Revilings, such
Exasperations of Authority on either Party, such mutual Prosecutions one of
another, that more could not possibly be done between Dissenters in those
points, which both agree to be Fundamental; Atheistical Spirits are apt to
conclude, that probably those points that both sides supposed to be of greater
moment, are Ejusdem Farinae, as those in Contest, which all Men take to be
small and inconsiderable.

Mr. Hooker 's Ecclesiastical Polity, p. 18. Speaking of Atheistical persons,
by our Contentions their Irreligious Humor is much strengthened: Also by the
hot persuit of lower Controversies among Men professing Religion, and agreeing
in the principal Foundation thereof, they conceive hope, that about the higher
Principles themselves, time will cause Alteration to grow.

Abner 's Plea for Accommodation, p. 41. It will cast a scandal on Religion, it
will open the Mouths of the Adversaries of the Truth: The Name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, says the Apostle, Romans 2.24. The
worst sort among them scoff at it, it is meat and drink to them: And the better
sort are staggered by it, discouraged from coming within the pale of the
Church, when they observe Christians, as Contentious, as Pagans; Believers as
quarrelsome, as Infidels.

Unity of Catholic Christians: The many Divisions and Animosities, which have
distracted and separated the parts of Christendom, these have opened the
Mouths, and whet the Tongues of its professed Enemies to Reviling and Railings,
and Profane Scoffs against our Blessed Lord and Savior, and his Holy
Religion, and stifled the first thoughts of admitting the most Convincing
Truths to a debate among Jews, Turks, or Pagans, and stopped their Ears against
the wisest Charms: To no one cause can we more reasonably impute the small
progress which Christianity has made in the World for a Thousand years past.
The same contents have a pernicious influence at home upon the Faith and
Manners of those within the Pale of the Church: Men are hereby too soon tempted
into some degree of Sceptiscism about very material points of Christian
Doctrine, in which they observe so many to differ among themselves.

Bishop Hacket on Acts 15.39. Where many Sects spring up, it calls the Truth
more into question; and the fewer Proselytes will be gained.

Secondly, By bringing Men to a Lukewarmness and Indifferency in the great
things of Religion.

Bishop Whitgift 's Letter to the Council, in Fullers Hist. L. 9. That in King
Edwards Time, and in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's before the heat of these
Contentions, the Gospel mightily prevailed. But since this Schism and Division
the contrary Effects have happened.

Design of Christian. p. 236. It is too visibly apparent to be denied, that
those who have such a scalding hot Zeal, [or contend so earnestly] either for,
or against things of no certainty, and no necessity, are many of them, as their
Predecessors the Pharisees were, in the very other Extreme, as to not a few of
the weightiest matters of Religion.

Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, Part 4. page 17; It renders the
Labors of the Worthiest suspected and despised [by the contrary-minded.] The
most useful, profitable, searching Books which the World has most need of, are
not as much as looked into by many, but rejected, because the Books of F -- s
(as they are called;) Yea, more, if a Conformist have the Name of F -- some of
our Church-P -- will not come nigh the door-posts of Wisdom.

Mr. Kidder 's Sermons, 1 Pet 3.11. We quarrel for Trifles, and neglect our
unquestionable Duty to God and Man.

Doctor Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, Matthew. 12.25. p. 5. The ill Effects of
this Zeal [or Contentiousness] upon our selves will be, That as this Temper
grows upon us, all our inward seriousness will in a great measure abate, and
turn merely to a Form: And with that, many other Sins will creep in upon us; we
will bear with many ill things in others, because they are of our Party, whom
otherwise we would detest for their ill Lives, and by Conversing much with
them, we will contract at least a Familiarity with their Vices, and perhaps
imagine, That by our rage and heat we offer up some acceptable Sacrifice to
God, to compensate for our other Disorders.

Causes of Decay of Piety, p. 251. When bitter Zeal was once fermented, the
Orthodoxy or Heresy of Lives became soon Terms out-dated, and Men were
measured only by Opinions: Item p. 301. They are not much discomposed, to see
Men of no Religion, it is only the having one different from their own that
makes their Indignation.

Mr. Cook 's Sermons on Romans 12.18. p. 24; What a siding is there with this and
the other Zealous and Conscientious Sect, even by those that have neither Zeal,
nor Conscience, but are Deriders of both, and of strict Holiness in all sorts
of Professors.

Appendix to the third part of the Friendly Debate, p. 143; Doctor Jackson
tells us the first ground of his dislike to the chief Solicitors of Reformation
in our Church, was the deformity of their Zeal, not moving them to redress
known Enormities of the Commonwealth, much more material, and much more nearly
concerning the Advancement of the Gospel, than those doubtful Controversies of
Formality, about which they strove.

Bishop Wilkins on Romans 14.17, 18; Let a Man but indifferently look round about
him, amongst all the kinds of Parties in our times, even those who in his own
judgment he esteems the best, and then say; Whether both our Common Peace, and
the Power of Religion has not suffered exceedingly upon the account of our
Zeal in lesser matters.

Another Mischief, it destroys Charity.
Doctor Steward 's Englands Case, p. 26: In such Divisions as these, Men are
extremely apt to forget all Bonds of Peace, and for possession sometimes of a
little supposed Truth, quit indeed their whole state of Charity.

Mr. Kidder 's Sermons, 1 Pet. 3.11. We do indeed fiercely contend with each
other, but it is because we want Charity; We neglect that plain Duty, whilst
we are fond of some Opinion of our own, which is often false, and at best but
doubtful.

Pref. to Usher 's Body of Divinity. Men falling into Sects and Schisms, break
the Bond of Love, and fall off from the Communion of Saints, as though it were
no Article of their Creed; and being in Love with their own New Tenets, they
contend more for them, than any Fundamental Truths, and hate, Malign most
bitterly and Uncharitably all those that differ from them in their Opinions,
though never so Conscientious and Religious, as though they professed not the
same Faith, yea, served not the same God, nor believed in the same Christ.

Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety, p. 284. It is apparent in too many,
That they are apt to confine even the Common Offices of Humanity to their own
Sect; and others who do not so, yet show so great partiality in dispensing
them, as discovers that the Name of Christian is not half so charming as that
of their own particular Faction.

Mr. Cook 's Sermon. Romans 12.18. How dreadful is it to consider what we may
plainly observe, that Dissension, Hatred, and Rancour is not so Violent and
Irreconcilable betwixt Extreme Opposites, who dissent utterly (as Pagans and
Christians for Example) as it commonly is betwixt subordinate Professors, who
agree upon Generals, and in the main Substance, but dissent in Particulars.
Those of the Church of Rome this day rather Tolerate, do not so extremely hate,
a Turk, a Jew, a Pagan, as they do a Protestant, and some Protestants to be
quit with them, do in affection and kind usage too plainly prefer a Heathen or
Mohammedan before them.

Judge Hales 's Discourses of Relig. p. 37. It often comes to pass that not
only the Common Bond of Charity, and of Christian Love is broken between the
Professors of the same Substantials in Christianity, but there is most
ordinarily much more Severity, and Persecution and Implacableness, and
Irreconcileableness, more Endeavors to undermine, and supplant, and disgrace
Dissenters, more Scorns, and vilifying, and reproach, and Insolence one toward
another in their vicissitudes of Advantage, than there is between Men of the
most loose and profane Lives, and Professors of Christianity; between Orthodox
and Heretics; nay, between Christians, and Turks, or Infidels many times.

Bishop of Salisburies Exhortation to Peace, p. 11. Luther and Zuinglius
difference about the Sacrament has raised such an alienation, that in many
places the Lutherans are no less, and in some more fierce against the
Calvinists, than against Papists.

Bishop Reynold 's Brotherly Agreement, p. 8. Through the prevalency of
Corruption, the Affections of good Men so dissenting are often Alienated and
Estranged one from another.

Glanvil 's Catholic Charity, p. 8. Though I see never so much eagerness for
an Opinion, or heat for an Indifferent Circumstance, out the Conscience of
Christian Love, I shall never call that forwardness for those little things,
Zeal or Religion; yea, though those warm Men should sacrifice their Lives to
their beloved Trifles, I should not think them Martyrs, but fear rather, that
they went from one fire to another, and a worse, as 1 Cor. 13.3.

Mr. Cook 's Sermons on Romans 12.18. p. 3. Though some divided Parties may in
their several ways exercise many Acts of true and substantial Worship, yet
whilst the Members thereof retain in their hearts any unpeaceable Disposition,
or bitter Envy (though they call it Zeal) against another Party, all the
Effects of their Religion must necessarily be null and void; because in our
Religion we can find no sort of dispensation for an Uncharitable Temper.

Glanvil's Catholic Char. p. 55, 56. If therefore we are Friends to Christian
Love, let us avoid, and oppose this its most fatal Enemy; and consider that we
should exercise our Zeal about the necessary, certain things, and our Charity
about the rest.

That Divisions are Ruinous of a Church.
Bucer; I see, with what Art Satan does resist, [ i. e. the Reformation;] While
he goes about to stir up so many pernicious Contentions, as well in Doctrine,
as Rites. For surely, except we remove so manifest dishonourings of God,
whereby the whole Kingdom of God may be renewed. Oh how intolerable Wrath of
God shall be kindled against this Rhealm! In another place, With this crafty
slight has that Ancient Enemy driven miserable Germany unto these present
Calamities, wherewith they be now oppressed, (in King Edward the VI. days) God
forbid, Christ Jesus, I say, our only Savior, forbid, that he prevail against
England with this crafty subtilty.

Bishop Andrew 's Sermon, p. 913. Let us begin with the motion for Fire from
Heaven upon the Samaritans, Luke 9.55. Let us begin with that which was the
beginning of all this quarrel, dissent in Religion between the Samaritan and
the Jew. We see the fruit of it here, and what Spirit it makes Men of, mutual
and mortal hatred breaking forth upon every occasion. And these two the
Samaritans and the Jews made not an end of it, till it made an end of them. In
Josephus you shall see in the days of Claudius (Cumanus then Deputy) the very
like quarrel to this here, upon the very same occasion, taken up wholly by the
Zelotae, and pursued hard, opened the way to the Jews War, which never ended
till the utter rooting out, and desolation of them both.

Injunct. of K. James I. to the Bishops, 1626. One thing there is, which proves
a great hinderance of this State, and not continued amongst the people without
great offense against God, detriment both to Church and State, and our great
disservice in this and all other business: It is the breach of Unity which is
grown too great and common amongst all sorts of men: The danger of this goes
far; for in all States it has made way for enemies to enter.

Mr. Hookers Answer to Mr. Travers Supplicat. p. 30. There can come nothing of
Contention, but the natural waste of the parties contending, till a common
Enemy dance in the ashes of them both.

Halls Works, Bishop of Norwich, p. 413. If we desire the grief of our common
Mother, the languishing of the Gospel, the extirpation of Religion, the loss of
Posterity, the advantage of our Adversaries, which way could these be effected
more, than by our Divisions?

Mr. Virtues Plea for Peace, p. 25. Falling out among our selves we stand aloof
off one from another, suffering our selves to be devoured by the common Foe,
while we look on: Yea happily we shall be ready to act one against another, and
so to save the Enemy a labor; as Moab against Ammon, and Ammon against Moab,
and Edom against both, sheathing their Swords each in other; so that Jehosaphat
and his Jews needed not to strike a stroke, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Isa. 9.21. Gal.
5.15. It is a Dutch device, and a good one, to this purpose, of two earthen
pots swimming on the water, frangimur fi collidimur, we are broken all to
pieces if we clash one against another. Idem, p. 31. Besides that God does
often punish breaches and divisions in the Church among Christians, by raising
up some storm against them, which may teach them better to agree; we being in
this too like to Sheep, which on a fair Sunshine day are scattered each from
other upon the Mountains; but a storm brings them together: So does Eusebius
relate, that the Church enjoyed much peace and freedom immediately before the
Persecution raised against it by Dioclesian; and making no better use of it
than to fall asunder into Divisions and Factious Contentions, instantly God
took a course by way of punishment to cover the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud
in his Anger, and to cast down from Heaven to Earth the beauty of Israel, and
not to remember his footstool in the day of his Anger, setting up the Righthand
of his Churches enemies, and making their adversaries to rejoice. Lam. 2.1.
Psalm. 39.42.

Mr. Ward of Ipswich 's Sermons, p. 253. Charity, Charity is the builder of
Churches: Strife about trifles has wasted many famous ones, and placed the
Temple of Mahomet where the Golden Candlestick was wont to stand. We pity the
former Ages contending about leavened and unleavened Bread, keeping of Easter,
Fasting on Sundays, the future Ages will do the like by us.

Pygots Abners Plea for Accommodation in 43. p. 33. Take heed, your private
dissentions do not expose you as a prey to the common adversary. I remember the
dying Fathers admonition to his Sons: Having called them all together, he
caused a Faggot to be brought into the Room, and commanded the stoutest of them
to break it; they tried one after another, but none of them could do it, then
he bade them undo the band, and take them stick by stick, and so they snapped
them asunder like a twined thread: Thus shall it be with you, my Sons, (says
the Old Man) when I am dead, if you continue united and knit together in the
bond of Peace and Love, no Enemies shall be able to hurt you; but if you once
break the bond, and fall into differences among your selves, you will presently be
broken to pieces, and come to nothing. Item, p. 42. The wild Boar of the
Forest, I mean the Turk, had never made such inrodes into Christendom, had it
not been for the dissension of Christian Brethren.

(...). Upon the Rebellion in Ireland, Ejac. 3. Because we have not more loved
thy Truth, and practiced in Charity, thou have suffered a Spirit of error and
bitterness, of mutual and mortal hatred to arise among us.

Bishop Reynolds Broth. Agreement, p. 18. Cites holy Cyprian, who in his time
looked upon it as one great cause of that fore Persecution, which God sent upon
the Church: Had Unanimity and Peace, said he, been amongst the Brethren, we had
long ago obtained our Petitions from Divine Mercy, neither had we been thus
long tossed with those Tempests, which endanger our Faith and Salvation: Imo
vero nec venissent Fratribus haec mala, si in unum fraternitas fuisset animata.

Bishop Hacket on Acts 15.39. p. 8, 9. The passage is well known about
Constantine the Great, how he removed from his Palace in the East, because
every corner of the Imperial City was filled with adverse disputations about
Religion; much more you may presume that God will depart from that Church,
where the flames of notorious discords are.

Causes of decay of Christian Piety, p. 304. As to the extirpation of the
Eastern Churches, he that shall examine the Records of those Times will have
cause to say, their janglings and divisions were not only in a Moral and
Divine, but even in a proper natural sense the Instruments of it, the Turk only
coming in at those breaches which themselves have made.

Glanvells Cath. Charity, p. 17. The greatest evils that have, or can happen to
the Church, have been the effects of the decay of Charity, and of those
intestine divisions that have grown up in it: From these she has always
suffered more, than from external Persecutions. The flames within have consumed
her, when those from without have only singed her garments.

Bishop of Salisbury 's Exhort. to Peace and Union, on Matthew. 12.25. p. 3.
There is nothing that defeats the end of Religion more, and does more naturally
lead to all manner of sin and impieties, which must end in Temporal as well as
Eternal ruin, then our Divisions. Page 9. In Divisions either party will be so
intent on their little designs, that the whole may perish; and they will bite
and devour one another, till they are either consumed one of another, or made
an easy Conquest to those that both see and improve all their advantages.

Item, Exhort. p. 10, 11. The Africans continued quarrelling about Cecilian and
his ordainers, till the Vandals came and destroyed both the one and the other.
Item, p. 11. And can we think without astonishment, that the difference of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost could ever have rent the Greek and Latin Churches
so violently one from another, that the Latins rather than assist the other,
looked on till they were destroyed by the Ottoman Family, which has ever since
been so terrible a Neighbor to the rest of Europe.

Mr. Hesketh on Lam 3.20, 21. p. 25. It were seasonable to have made some
reflections upon the unchristian heats and unreasonable differences that are
among us, things that render us not only sinners, but great fools, and plain
contrivers for our own Ruin. For these are evils, that will destroy us alone,
and by their own weight sink us into destruction. Divided Societies last not
long, the experience of all Ages confirms it for a Truth; and I do not see what
reason we have to expect an exemption from the common fate.

Dr. Mores Mystery of Iniquity, p. 554. What harm is it to presage so well of
the Reformation, as that after the decursion of the years of their Childhood,
God will ripen them into a more Manly sense of the great and indispensable
Duties of the Gospel; that he will not tolerate nor connive any longer at their
Childish squabling about Nut-shells, Counters and Cherry-stones; and menace
them even with destruction, if they leave not off their animosities and
asperities of mind about toys and trifles, and hold fast to the Royal Law of
Love? If ye bite and worry one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another. Gal. 5.15.

Mr. Hancocks Sermon on Luke 19.42. If the judgments of God, which we have
already groaned under, cannot; sure the dangers that threaten us and our
Religion, might help to abate our heats, and suppress our differences: Did not
Christianity decay in the Church of Corinth as their Schisms and Factions
increased? Page 31. Were not the former Conquests of these Nations, the effects
of our own Divisions? God grant that saying may never be applied to us, which
was used of our Forefathers, that whilst they severally quarreled among
themselves, they were all overcome by the common Enemy. Item, They are
convinced, that a number of petty Sects and divided Interests cannot long
maintain their ground against the Roman Forces.

Mr. Cooks Sermon on Romans 12.18. p. 4. Were it not for that security, the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it, (that is the Church) the unhappy
contentions about it, the worst of Devils would soon hasten its destruction.

Mr. Jekylls Sermon on Jer. 5.29. p. 21. But there is one thing, which if not
speedily prevented, will before we are aware let in that which we so much fear,
and cry out against; ( viz. Popery) and which perhaps too too many of us, more
or less, may be accessory to; I mean those unnatural heats and divisions
amongst our selves, amidst which, though we are not altogether swerved from the
Form, yet we are strangely degenerated from the true Spirit and Power of
Godliness and Christianity. -- How sad the effect and consequence of these
heart-burnings and animosities, unchristian strifes and debates will be, I am
afraid to think of! Item, p. 25. We are distracting our own Devotions, yea and
provoking (I had almost said devouring) one another, whilst our Adversaries in
the day they look for (which God grant may never come) will make no difference,
but swallow us up together.

Principles and Practices, p. 10. of Ep. It is high time to be reconciled to
Moderation and Sobriety, to lay aside our uncharitable, and therefore
unchristian heats against each other, and to throw water upon those flames,
that threaten our destruction, (and but for Gods infinite Mercy, would have
effected it before now) instead of adding more fuel unto it.

Mr. Kidder on 1 Pet. 3.11. p. 29. The several Sects and Quarrels of the Jews
among themselves, and the fury of their Zealots, were but a prologue to their
miserable destruction.

Bishop Tailors Coll. of Discourses, Ep. before Liberty of Proph. For my own
particular, I cannot but expect that God in his Justice should enlarge the
bounds of the Turkish Empire, or some other way punish Christians, by reason of
their pertinacious disputings about things unnecessary, undeterminable and
unprofitable.

Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety, p. 427. It is the usual Economy of
Divine Justice to make our Crimes our Punishment, and to give us up to those
ills, which were at first our own depraved choice: And God knows, we have too
much reason to fear this may be our case; that we who have so perversely
violated all the bonds of Unity, wantonly wrangled our selves out of all
inclinations to Peace, should never be able to resume them. Item, p. 428. This,
alas! as it is the fearfullest, so is it the probablest issue of our wild
contentions, such as nothing but the miraculous effluxes of Divine Clemency can
avert.

To conclude, as well we may, with this as an undoubted Truth, from Mr. Kidders
Sermon on 1 Pet. 3.11. p. 22. These Contentions have done more mischief than
all the Persecutions put together; more have fallen, and more dangerously this
way, than by the Swords of Tyrants, and avowed Enemies of our Religion.

Arguments for taking the Ceremonies away, or leaving the Use of them
indifferent; especially the Sign of the Cross.
HEre is the most proper place to premise somewhat concerning the Lawfulness of
Ceremonies, least I should in any thing which follows be thought to condemn my
own practice, in point of Conformity to these Ceremonies.

As to Kneeling at the Sacrament, I think the Rubric should satisfy Persons;
it speaks very plainly: It is hereby declared, that no Adoration is intended,
or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine, there Bodily
received, or unto any Corporeal Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood.
For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very Natural
Substances, and therefore may not be Adored, (for that were Idolatry to be
abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the Natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ are in Heaven, etc.

Mr. Bayns Christian Letters, p. 201. Kneeling is neither an occasion, nor by
participation Idolatry. Kneeling never bred Bread-Worship, and our Doctrine of
the Sacrament known to all the World, does free us from suspicion of Adoration
in it. Thus he though a Nonconformist.

Mr. Tombs Theodulia, p. 168. That whatsoever Gesture our Savior used it does
not oblige us, because the Gesture seems not to have been of choice used by
Christ. 2. Because St. Paul omits the Gesture, which he would not have done, if
it had been binding. 3. He mentions the Night, and calls it the Lords Supper;
and if the Time be not necessary, much less the Gesture. 4. If the Gesture does
oblige, then Christians must use the self-same that Christ used, i. e. Lying
down or Leaning, etc. Mr. Baxter in his Christian Directory (I think speaking
of the Sacrament) tells us, he thinks Mr. Paybodies Book in defense of Kneeling
to be unanswerable.

As to the Surplice; Platina mentions it to be brought in very early into the
Church, in the days of the good Bishops of Rome, Anno Domini 250, by Stephen a
Martyr under Decius the Emperor; And none can deny but that in the Apostles
days, after Baptism (the Baptized in those hot Countries of the East, being
commonly at least dipped or plunged in the Water with their naked Bodies) the
persons Baptized put on new white Vestments to show the Purity of a Christian:
Whence the Lords day after Easter (which Easter was their chief time of
Baptizing) was called Dominica in Albis, the Lords day in White. Mr. Leighs
Annotations on the New Testament tell you those expressions of putting on the
Lord Jesus, and putting off the Old Man have allusion to the Garments. Peter
Martyr speaks in his Answer to Bishop Hoopers Letter: The Defenders of this
Ceremony may pretend some honest and just signification, and Zepperus himself,
(though no Friend to the Sign of the Cross in the Baptismal Office, as Mr.
Sprint tells us in his Cassander Anglicanus) speaking of the Papists, says
thus; We read nothing of the Superstitious Habits in the Monuments of
Antiquity, except only of the White Vesture; Qua usi sunt sine superstitione in
signum and Commone factionem honestatis vitae. So that if it were a
significative Ceremony (as it is not in the Church of Englands use of it) yet
in their judgments the use of it might be innocent.

Bishop Tailors Ductor Dubitantium, p. 668. Great Reason have we to honor the
Wisdom of the Church of England, which has in all her Offices retained but one
Ritual or Ceremony that is not of Divine Ordinance, or Apostolical Practice,
and that is the Cross at Baptism: Which, though it be a significant Ceremony,
and of no other use, yet as it is a compliance with the Ancient Church, so is
it very innocent in it self, and being one alone is not troublesome [or
burthensome]. Archbishop Whitgift said, the Surplice was not enjoined as a
significant Ceremony. The Canon about the Surplice mentions nothing of using
it for signification of purity or unspotted innocence. We do not wear it as
monitory or instructive to keep the inner man pure and clean, but as a Garment
of use in the Ancient Church, and transmitted down from them to us, and
retained at our Reformation: And some urge it to be decent, and no ways
unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel, who may wear certainly White as lawfully
as Black, without placing Holiness or Unholyness in any Garment. If we see not
so great reason for the imposition or continuance, yet we may see sufficient
reason for the submission. It is not used by us as by the Papists, who must
have it hallowed or consecrated by Praying over it, that it may defend him that
wears it from the Devil. They use it indeed with a Superstitious opinion of
Holiness, but we have no Consecrating Surplices, nor any such opinion that it
is a fence against the Devil, or preservative from his assaults and temptations.

Several Nonconformists have said, they would be content to Preach the Gospel
in a Fools coat rather than be silent; as the Famous Mr. Daille of France being
asked his judgment by some Nonconformists of England, said (as I am told by a
French Minister, and that he had seen it mentioned in a Book wrote by one of
our Bishops) That our Ceremonies were good, and before he would make a rent in
the Church for such things as the Surplice, etc. If the King of France would
give him leave to Preach at Paris, (which the King forbid him) he would Preach,
though it were in a Fools coat.

As to the Lawfulness of the Sign of the Cross at Baptism, It is, I Baptize, I
Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. which is all that is Essential to
Baptism, or the Substance of that Ordinance: Then it follows, We receive this
[Baptized] Child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, as the Privilege.
Baptism makes him a Member of the Catholic Church, and particularly of that
Church into which he is Baptized: But the owning and receiving into Communion
is the Churches Act. Then follows, and sign him with the Sign of the Cross in
token, etc. as significative, and with the words declarative of that Duty,
which he is obliged and bound unto by Baptism, to own the Faith of Christ
Crucified, etc. And though the Words are, In token that he shall not be ashamed
to own, etc. It is only in the Judgment of Charity, what the Church hops and
expects from him hereafter, when he is come to years to know Good and Evil,
his Faith, Profession, and Obedience to the Trinity, according to his Baptism.
And thus Dr. Bourges in his Subscription with Explication of his meaning,
allowed by King James the First, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
declared to be the sense of the Church of England: Where the Book says, And do
sign him with the Sign of the Cross, in token, etc. I understand, says he,
that Book not to mean, That the Sign of the Cross has any Virtue in it to
effect or further this Duty, but only to intimate and express by that Ceremony
(by which the Ancients did avow their profession of Christ Crucified) what the
Congregation hops and expects hereafter from that Infant: And therefore
also when the Twentieth Canon says, That the Infant is by that Sign Dedicated
unto the Service of Christ, I understand that Dedication to import, not a real
Consecration of the Child, which was done in Baptism it self; but only a
Ceremonial Declaration of that Dedication, like as the Priest is said to make
clean the Leper, whose being clean he only declared.

There was undoubtedly a lawful use of the Cross in some Primitive Christians,
while they lived among professed Jews and Heathens, Enemies of the Cross of
Christ, as Phil. 3.18. upbraiding the Christians that their God dyed upon a
Cross. It began at his Crucifixion, Matthew. 27.41, 42; The Chief Priests mocking
him with the Scribes and Elders said, If he be the King of Israel, let him now
come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. The more others scoffed at
the Christians for their Crucified Savior, with the greater Courage,
Resolution, and Constancy did the Christians own and make profession of him.
And this was a sign professing Christ, which at the sight of Jews and Infidels,
in the Markets, and any where else was of common use among the Christians, used
at their Meals many times, and Translated to Baptism. When the Empire became
Christian, Constantine used it, and others in their Ensigns of War, to
signify, Christ Crucified was the God they owned, and expected Victory in
Battle from him. In their Coats of Arms, in their Coins at this day, it is
used as of Old, to show the Religion of the Persons, or the Countries, that
they were Christians. If any Object that was a Civil use of it, and not
Religious, I say it was of Religious signification there. Yet indeed with Peter
Martyr, for mine own part, I wish that all things may be done simplicissime,
most free from Humane mixtures in the Worship of God; Again, Its signification
and use is, ad hominem, and not ad Deum. For first, If it were permanent, and
imprinted on the Forhead (which in Scripture is used to signify boldness and
confidence, in a good, and in all ill sense, as Ezekiel. 3.8. Jer. 3.3. And so the
sign of the Cross made there signifies of the Child boldness, Christian
Courage and Confidence, that he shall not be ashamed, etc.) it would signify
to Men, and not to God; unto Christians, that he was one of their number.
Secondly, The use of it among the Primitive Christians was to signify to
Christians among themselves, or more especially to Jews and Heathens their
Christian Profession. Thirdly, The Dissenters call them significant teaching
signs, and bring that as an Argument against them, but do we teach God or Man,
surely Man is fit for Instruction. And as to Addition, the Curse is equally
against diminishing, as adding: But the Love-kiss, Signaculum reconciliationis;
Washing the Disciples Feet a token of Humility; The Feasts of Charity mentioned
at the Sacrament by St. Jude; the Community of Goods, the Deaconesses, etc.
Things of this Nature are not of the substance of the Word, or the Ordinances,
but are Circumstantials, and may be changed, added, or taken away safely. I
could cite too an Eminent Nonconformist, where he says, it cannot be called an
Addition in Scripture sense, unless the Governors stamp Holiness upon it, or
Necessity, as a necessary Duty, Doctrinal Necessity he means: Or unless by
adding they mean, giving the same Efficacy to Humane Institutions as God does
to his, by making them to confer Grace upon the rightly disposed; and by
diminishing that the Service is not complete without it. I shall conclude with
a saying of Mr. Calvin, Let not any think me so austere or bound up, as to
forbid a Christian to accommodate himself to the Papists, in any Ceremony or
Observance: For it is not my purpose to condemn any thing, but what is clearly
Evil, and openly Vicious. I have said thus much, lest some that are
uncharitable to our Church should think, I wrote, Because I was pinched, and
could not tell how to satisfy my Conscience in Conformity.

Doctor More 's Mystery of Godliness, Pref. Sect. 10. The Cross, so seasonable
at the first Institution of it, while professed Pagans, were mingled among
Christians, and so significant always, that if the Church cannot make such an
Additional as this (in his Judgment) she can make none at all.

True State of Prim. Christ. p. 18; I will name another Ceremony, which gives
great offense with greater reason; the bowing toward the Altar, which in my
own Judgment I allow, and practice in some measure, when I come into such
Congregations as generally use it, avoiding still to give offense to any, as
far as I may with safe Conscience. I affirm it is a very fitting thing to show
Reverence in the House of God, and to show it by bowing as well as any other
means, and to bow that way, to the East as well as any other way: Bowing
toward the Altar is grown into abuse, by the Papists supposing Christ to be
Corporally present there. With us the Minister bows to show some particular
Reverence in that place, where the Blessed Sacrament is Consecrated. Let this
pass for good, though something also may be said against it.

Ceremonies not to be Innovated or Multiplied.
BIshop Tailor 's Ductor Dubit. L. 3. Chapter 4. Rule 4. Sect. 19, 20. That this
Rule of Order and Decency is not to be extended to such Decencies as are only
Ornament, but is to be limited to such as only rescue from Confusion; the
reason is, because the Prelates and Spiritual Guides cannot do their Duty,
unless things be so orderly, as that there be no Confusion, but if it can go
beyond this Limit, then it can have no Natural Limit, but may extend to
Sumptuousness, to Ornament for Churches, to rich Utensils, etc. But because
this is too subject to abuse, and gives a Secular Power over Men's Estates, and
is not any part of Spiritual Government, it is more than Christ gave to
Ministers. Id. Rules to his Clergy. 39. R. Let no Minister of a Parish
introduce any Beremony, Rites or Gestures, though with some seeming Piety and
Devotion, but what are commanded by the Church, and Established by Law, and let
these also be wisely and usefully Explicated to the People, that they may
understand the Reasons and Measures of Obedience, but let there be no more
introduced, lest the people be burdened unnecessarily, and tempted, or divided.

Idem, And though significant Ceremonies may be for Edification, yet it is to
be considered, whether the introducing of such things does not destroy the
Church, not only in her Christian Liberty, but in the Simplicity and Purity,
and Spirituality of her Religion, by insensibly changing it into a Ceremonial
and External Service.

True State of the Primitive Church, p. 18. With us the Minister bows at the
Altar, to show some particular Reverence in that place, where the Blessed
Sacrament is Consecrated; though something may be said against that: Yet I pray
tell me, Why the Reader passing from one side of the Church to the other, and
the Minister passing from one end of the Altar to the other, bows again. I
verily believe it is merely a causeless Custom taken up one from another, (the
common beginning of all Superstitions) having no reason for it, but much
against it, giving thereby great scandal to weak ones, and ground of slander
to malicious ones, who lay hold on any occasions to accuse them of Papistry.
For certainly it is done with little or no Reason, or with a great deal of
Superstition.

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, etc. To do all that I may without danger to
my self, and not at all to regard what others can comply with; or to use my own
Liberty to the offense of others, is to be Unchristian and Uncharitable And in
this sense only are we to understand all the Discourses of the Apostle about
Scandal and Offense, where there is Materia libera. For he that will provoke
his Brother to sin, by doing that which he may omit without sin, is guilty of
sin in so doing. It. p. 245. To the end that we may prevail with them to deny
themselves in somethings for the Public Good, we should do well to give them
Examples of our own Self-denial, and abridging our own Liberty, in
Condescension to them in such things as are not the matter of the Law; and that
we will not outrun the Laws, to contradict and vex them, in what we may
forbear without sin.

Doctor Barrow 's Sermons of Love, p. 181. An Act of Charity to abstain from
any thing, which either may occasion him to commit Sin, or disaffect him to
Religion, or discourage him in the practice of Duty, or which any wise may
discompose, vex, or grieve him, (the Apostle having said) That if thy Brother
be (...) grieved with thy Meat, now walk thou not Charitably, Romans 14.15.

Having premised somewhat in Defense of the Ceremonies, and against Innovations
etc. I shall proceed to those Arguments for leaving the Use of the Ceremonies
Indifferent.
ARGUMENT I.

COnsider first, That by leaving the Ceremonies Indifferent, Conformists have
their Liberty allowed them to use them. Where Ministers scruple the use of that
sign of the Cross, but the Parents are for it, they may get any Neighboring
Minister that is of the same Opinion to Baptize their Child after their manner.
If their Parents be against it, the Minister holding it but a thing
indifferent, why may he not forbear the use of it for satisfaction of the
Parents?

II. I do not read of any that lived and dyed Nonconformists, but scrupled the
Sign of the Cross, which shows they are not satisfied in Conscience about it:
But our Consciences will bear the yielding of it up for Peace, because we hold
Ceremonies to be (...), things Indifferent, in themselves neither good nor
evil. If indifferent, let us not contend so earnestly for their use, as for
necessary things, and matters of Faith, but manifest an indifferency for their
Continuance, or Abrogation.

III. The Ceremonies are inutilia Coelo, of little or no use for the winning of
Souls; and I see not but that Prelates Speech was truly Christian, who said we
had rather lose a Ceremony than a Soul. As it was said of some Meats, neither
if we eat them, are we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse; so we
are nothing bettered by these Ceremonies. Indifferent things have no Spiritual
Virtue or Efficacy in them. We do not hold with the Papists that Surplices,
being hallowed defend him that wears them from the Devil. And Canon Thirty,
says, that the Sign of the Cross does neither add any thing to the Virtue and
Perfection of Baptism: Nor being omitted, does detract any thing from the
Effect and Substance of it.

IV. The Reason for the first use of the Ceremonies cease much. They were
kept, partly out of Compliance with the Papists, to gain upon them, because the
People could not be so wholly drawn off from the use of the Sign of the Cross;
and somewhat too out of Compliance with the Primitive Christians, who used the
Sign of the Cross often, and very early after the Apostles days, as Justin
Martyr says, in foro, in agris. And thus the Church of England showed she left
the Church of Rome only in her Innovations, and would go along with her in what
the Ancient Church practiced, that she might be the more inexcusable, and
justly condemned, if she rejected Communion with us. But now the case is
altered, the Papists are hardened by it, and encouraged, upbraiding us (as
Bishop Usher said of them) If our Flesh be not good, why do you drink of our
Broth? But our Protestant Brethren stumble at it, and it is disused by other
Reformed Churches; and therefore in condescension to the weakness of the one,
and Uniformity with the other Reformed Churches, perhaps it were to be wished
that how the use of it were forborne.

V. Against the Imposition of the Ceremonies is because of the many Objections
against them, especially against the Cross, as a significant Ceremony, not
instituted by Christ; as a Dedicating Covenanting Sign, as a Sacramental Sign,
or as having the semblance of a Sacrament, or against the use of it in that
place immediately after Baptism, and the Duties of the Baptized more expressly
assixed to that Sign, than to the Sacrament it self; as a medium cultus. Again,
as Superstitious and Scandalous, because of the Popish abuse of it; as a cursed
Addition to the Word of God, and the Sacrament of Baptism; as imposed on
Ministers and Children of those Parents that scruple, and are not satisfied in
Conscience about the use of it, as well as those that are; as the Likeness and
Image of Christ Crucified; forbidden say they in the Second Commandment; as
will Worship, as disused in other Protestant Churches; as against Christian
Liberty, as unsuitable to the simplicity of the Gospel, as needless,
unprofitable, and causing Divisions in the Church. Although none of the
Objections, or Arguments that I can find against it, convince me that the
submission to it, and the use of it is utterly unlawful, yet it should seem
inconvenient to continue a thing which has so plausible and numerous
Objections against it.

VI. For making some allowances in respect of the Ceremonies; God himself
dispenses with his own Commands about Rituals, or smaller matters in case of
necessity, or when great good or hurt stands on the other side to outweigh
them. 1 Samuel 21.6. David in his hunger eats the Shewbread, which only the
Priests were to eat, and Christ on the same account lets the Disciples pluck
and rub the ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day, 1 Kings 8.64. Solomon hallows the
middle of the Court for an Altar, because the Brazen Altar of the Lord was too
little for the Offerings. A multitude did eat the Passover otherwise than
appointed, 2 Chronicles 30.18. on the Second Month; for they could not keep it at
the time appointed, as the Second and Third Verses. An Ox or an Ass is to be
watered, or pulled out of a Pit on the Sabbath day: Periculum vitae dissolvit
Sabbatum, (as the Proverb says) though by many good Men, a matter of
Controversy, or thought to be Moral and not Ceremonial. Surely then lesser
matters upon great and weighty Occasions, when Spiritually necessary for the
Churches Good and Peace, and for the Labors of able Men in the Work of the
Ministry, may very well be dispensed with. For Humane Ceremonies cannot pretend
to a like Authority, or Necessity, much less a greater than those of Divine
appointment.

That Ceremonies must yield to substance.
(...), Or, King James I. Instructions to his Son, p. 15. Learn wisely to
discern between points of Salvation and indifferent things, betwixt Substance
and Ceremonies: As for the latter spare not to use, or alter them, as the
necessity of the Times shall require.

Bishop Halls Works, p. 1092. Our Savior justifies the act of Abimelechs
giving David Holy Bread and the Sword: Ceremonies must give place to Substance;
God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice: Charity is the sum and the end of the
Law; that must be aimed at in all our actions.

Bishop Tailors Duct. Dubit. p. 735. Thus if a Church commands such Ceremonies
to be used, such Orders, such Prayers, they are to be observed when they may;
but if I fall into the hands of an enemy to that manner of Worship, who will
kill, or afflict me greatly for using it, I am in that case disobliged, [even
as Periculum vitae dissolvit Sabbatum].

Serious and Compassionate Enquiry, p. 159. On David's eating the Shewbread; It
is sufficiently intimated, that God does not only prefer Moral acts before
Ceremonial, but also does make great allowances, limitations and exceptions in
the one case and not in the other: For it is as if our Savior had said; Had
you censorious Pharisees understood either God or Religion, you would have
known that so long as there is not Contumacy and Contempt in the neglect of
those Rituals, but the excuse of a just necessity, or the Rational
Consideration of a greater good to preponderate the omission, God does not
impute it for a sin.

Bishop Saunderson on Romans 3.8. Sect. 31. Affirmative Duties do not obligare ad
semper (as being many it is impossible they should.) And many times Duties
otherwise necessary, in case of Superior Reason and Duties, do cease to be
necessary pro hic and nunc; and then to omit them is not to do evil.

Bishop Wilkins, p. 413, 414. Now Divine Laws themselves are capable of
relaxation, which is the meaning of that Proverbial saying so frequent in
Scripture, That God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice; and therefore much more
will Humane Laws admit it.

True state of the Primitive Church. As to Ceremonies, I wonder men of any
tolerable discretion should be so eager either for or against them, our
Salvation no ways depending on them, but much hazarded by our contentions about
them, breaking Peace, the principal thing recommended to us by the Gospel of
Peace.

VIII. Another Argument for Concessions in the Ceremonies; several of our
Eminent Men in Queen Elizabeth's Reign were for the taking of them away, as
their Letters to Bullinger inform us, mentioned by the Bishop of Salisbury in
his Travels; Letters of things remarkable in Switzerland, etc. by Dr. Burnet
Bishop of Salisbury, tell us, that there is a vast Collection of Letters at
Zurich, written either to Bullinger or by him. Bishop Jewel in a Letter, Feb.
8. 1566. wishes that the Vestments together with all the other Remnants of
Popery, might be thrown both out of their Churches, and out of the minds of the
People, and laments the Queens fixedness to them: So that she would suffer no
change to be made. And in January the same year, Sands Archbishop of York
writes, Contenditur de Vestibus Papisticis utendis vel non utendis, dabit Deus
his quoque finem.

Horn Bishop of Winchester, in a Letter, July 16. 1565. He writes of the Act
concerning the Habits with great regret, and expresses some hopes that it might
be Repealed next Session of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it,
and he seems to stand in doubt, whether he should Conform himself to it or not,
upon which he desires Bullingers advice. And in many Letters writ on that
Subject, it is asserted, that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an
Act for abolishing the Habits, and that they only defended their Lawfulness,
but not their fitness, and therefore they blamed private persons that refused
to obey the Laws.

Bishop Grindal in a Letter, Aug. 27. 1556. writes, that all the Bishops, who
had been beyond Sea, had at their return dealt with the Queen to let the matter
of the Habits fall; but she continued inflexible. He laments the ill effects of
the opposition that some had made to them, which had extremely irritated the
Queens Spirit. Cox Bishop of Ely laments the aversion that they found in the
Parliament to all the Propositions that were made for the Reformation of abuses.

Peter Martyr to Bishop Hooper; At first I conceived no small joy of your
singular and earnest study, in that you put your endeavor that Christ his
Religion may be brought again unto a chaste and simple Purity. For what should
be more desired of all Godly hearts, then that all things by little and little
should be clean taken away, and cut off, which have very little or nothing in
them that can be referred wholly to Edification, but rather be judged of the
Godly to be superfluous.

Homily of Fasting, Part 1. p. 172, 173. Edit. 1673. Gods Church ought not,
neither may it be so tied to that, ( i. e. Fasting) or any other Order now
made, or hereafter to be made and devised by the Authority of Man, but that it
may Lawfully for just causes, alter, change or mitigate those Ecclesiastical
Decrees and Orders; yea, recede wholly from them, and break them, when they
tend either to Superstition and Impiety, when they draw people from God, rather
than work any edification in them. This Authority to mitigate Laws and Decrees
Ecclesiastical the Apostles practiced, signifying Acts 15. they would not lay
any other burden upon them than these necessaries.

King Charles I. in his Declaration, with the Advice of his Privy Council, Jan.
164^. As for differences among our selves for matters indifferent in their own
nature, we shall in tenderness to any number of our Loving Subjects very
willingly comply with the Advice of our Parliament, that some Law may be made
for the exemption of tender Consciences from Punishment or Prosecution for such
Ceremonies (in such cases) which in the judgment of most men are held to be
matters indifferent, and of some to be absolutely unlawful.

Bishop of Cork and Ross 's Protestant Peacemaker. Some Circumstantials may be
on our side abated, and had been doubtless long ago, if men of eager and
inflexible Spirits had not hindered.

Du. Goods Firmianus and Dubi^. p. 153. Some Wife and Peaceable Men have
desired that the use of certain Ceremonies might be forborne at least for a
time, which notwithstanding they are still continued. These Peaceable Men do
abhor the great sin of Separation, and do continue their Conformity.

Dr. Stillingfleet also in Preface to Unreasonableness of Separation. Mr. Claud
of France, Mr. De L' Angle. etc.

Ceremonies to be left free.
The Canons made 1640. Can. 7. In the Practice or Omission of this Rite bowing
toward the Altar] we desire that the Rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle
may be observed, which is, that they which use this Rite, despise not them who
use it not, and that they who use it not, condemn not those that use it.

Bishop Bilson of Subjection, Part 4 p. 15 Strangers are suffered in their
Churches to retain their own Ceremonies, as be neither against Faith and good
Manners; and therefore may be born in Christian Unity, without offense or
confusion.

Letter to Johannes a Lasco concerning the use of such Signs: It is surely the
part of Brotherly Charity commanded us by God, to leave the use of those Signs
free to the Judgment and Conscience of the Congregation, except we see an open
abuse either of Superstition, or of Contention, (as if they displeased the
greater and better part of the Church). It was evident at St. Paul's time by the
most clear Scriptures of God, that the use of days, meats, and all other
external things, was made free, and it was a sure token of infirmity of Faith
to doubt thereof.

Lord Bacon in his Considera^. Dedicat. to K. James I. For the Cap and
Surplice, since there be things in their nature indifferent, and yet by some
held Superstitious; and that the Question is between Science and Conscience, it
seems to fall within the compass of the Apostles Rule, which is that the
stronger descend and yield to the weaker, only the difference is, that it will
be materially said, that the Rule holds between a private man and a private
man, and not between the Conscience of a private man and the order of a Church.
But yet since the Question at this time is of a Toleration, not by connivance,
which may encourage disobedience, but by Law which may give a Liberty; it is
good again to be advised, whether it fall not within the equity of the former
Rule? And for subscription it seems to be in the nature of a Confession, and
therefore proper to bind in the unity of Faith, and to be urged rather for
Articles of Doctrine, than for Rites and Ceremonies, and points of outward
concernment. For howsoever Politic Considerations and Reasons of State may
require Uniformity, yet Christian and Divine grounds look chiefly upon Unity.

Dr. Edw. Bulkleys Apol. for the Religion Established, Edit. 1608. p. 112.
Touching the use of Surplices, Organs, etc. in Divine Service; I say that men
may differ in Opinions of these things, and agree in unity of Faith and
Knowledge of the Son of God.

Doctor Fuller in his Appeal of injured Innocence, in defense of his Church
History; Multiformity in things merely indifferent with mutual Charity, does
more promote Gods Glory then Uniformity it self.

Doctor Mores Mystery of Godliness, Sect. 10. Pref. About the Communion; I
confess an Uniformity would look better in outward show, but is not worth the
least stir and violence in diversities of actions, or rather circumstances
interpretable to so good a meaning, as either Kneeling or Sitting at the
Communion is; and the real exercise of Charity in leaving every one free is
every whit as suitable to this solemn performance, as the most exquisite
Uniformity, if devoid of the Spirit of Meekness, and mutual forbearance. Item,
To the same purpose about the Cross: Unity of Hearts being better than
Uniformity in Actions indifferent, there ought to be no breach nor quarrel
about these things: By an high value of the indispensables of Christianity, and
of the tender regard to the Consciences of men, the Minister will conciliate
more authority to himself, than if he drew too hard to an uniform compliance in
things where Christ has left us free.

True state of the Primitive Church, p 20. Let us be men of understanding, men
in Devotion, be zealous, and hold fast the substantial parts of Religion, and
let us leave it to Women and Children to contend about Ceremonies. Let it be
indifferent to us, whether this or that, or no Ceremony, whether Kneel or not
Kneel, Bow or not Bow, Surplice or no Surplice, Cross or no Cross, Ring or no
Ring. Let us give Glory to God in all, and no offense to our Brethren in any
thing.

Doctor Stillingfleets Irenicum, p. 65. He must be a great stranger in the
Primitive Church, that takes not notice of the great diversity of Rites and
Customs used in particular Churches, without censuring of those that differed
from them; or if any by inconsiderate Zeal did proceed so far, how ill it was
represented by other Christians. And he concludes with that Divine Aphorism of
St. Austin; Indignum est ut propter ea quae nos Deo neque digniores, etc. It is
an unworthy thing for Christians to condemn and judge one another for those
things which do not commend us unto God. To the same purpose in
Unreasonableness of Separation, That the Cross be left at liberty, as the
Parents desire it, or wholly taken away, Pref. p. 83. Edit. 3.

King Charles II. Declaration at Breda: Agreed to leave the Ceremonies at
liberty.

Dr. Rudde Bishop of St. David's Speech in the Convocation, 1604. In the life
time of the late Archbishop (then Whitgift) these things were not so extremely
urged, but that many Learned Preachers enjoyed their Liberty therein
conditionally, that they did not by word nor deed disgrace or disturb the State
established. --

King Charles II. Declaration from Breda. None shall be denied the Lords Supper
for not Kneeling; none compelled to use the Cross; it shall be Lawful to him
that desires to use the Cross, to have such Ministers as will use it; and if
the proper Minister refuse, to get another. None compelled to bow at the name
of Jesus. The Surplice left to liberty, except in the Royal Chapel,
Cathedrals, and Universities.

Another Argument. The mischief to the Church has been very great from these
Ceremonies, especially from the Cross.

First as to the Imposition; though the present Fathers of the Church have
signified their consent unto a due liberty to Dissenters, and some Indulgence
to them beyond their Predecessors, yet several Ministers in Queen Elizabeth's,
and King James I. Reign, and that of King Charles I. and at King Charles II.
Return, have been turned out of their Benefices, and silenced for Nonconformity
to these Ceremonies, although the Church of England confesses them to be but
things indifferent. And it were hard, for refusing upon a Conscientious account
to submit to things indifferent, to have one of the greatest punishments
inflicted on a man, Suspension and Deprivation; even as Conformists would (many
of them) think it hard to be Silenced for not assenting to the Perseverance of
the Saints, or any other of the five points, according to the common sense or
notion of our Dissenting Brethren.

Secondly, These Ceremonies have been as it were a bone of Contention, thrown
in between Conformists and Nonconformists. Zanchies Letter to Queen Elizabeth
1571. tells her; This Counsel about strict Imposition of Ceremonies will
trouble the public Peace of the Church, by causing contentions among men, and
cause them to write Books one against another about things indifferent, which
are the Golden Apples of Contention. Many an hot Dispute and Conference there
has been, and Books wrote for and against them with bitterness of Spirit; some
contending as earnestly about these indifferent things, as about matters of
Faith; as if the very Life and Soul of Religion lay in them, and as if the
cause of Christ and our Protestant Reformation were to stand or fall with them.
The Ceremony of the Cross has been as vexatious to our Church, as ever the
difference about the Jewish Ceremonies of Days and Meats was in the time of the
Apostles, which occasioned a Council at Jerusalem, Acts. 15. so many Chapters
in St. Paul's Epistle, and such contention among them.

Thirdly, Much time has been spent to little purpose or profit in Reading or
Studying these matters. Oh the many that have wrote for and against! No little
time does it cost men in Writing, as Bishop Mourton, Dr. Bourges for; Dr. Ames
against them and others; nay, every Book for or against Conformity, (as God
knows there are abundance of them upon these fruitless Controversies) makes the
Ceremonies materiam contentionis matter of the Controversy, and it calls for
a part and a considerable share in the Book. Time also spent in Reading and
Studying the point; and there must be Prayer to be led by the Spirit to find
out the Truth for satisfaction. The time also which is spent in Preaching on
this point, for it is commanded in the Canons: I say this time would be much
better spent in reading the Bible, with Comments or Treatises of Divinity, and
so be Redeemed for Eternity, which now men are necessitated to spend for
satisfaction herein. All this, a great deal, or a considerable portion of time
may be better improved, if this Ceremony be taken away. And then as my Lord
Bacons Essays, p. 13. Speaking of Peace in the Church; It turns the labors
of Writing and Reading Controversies into Treatises of Mortification and
Devotion.

Again, The strict exaction of these Ceremonies has occasioned some to cry
them up, as if a considerable part of Ministers Conformity to the Laws of God
and Man lay therein, when in truth it is a very inconsiderable part. And some
have sought to get into favor with greater Persons, and attain Preferment by a
niceness and strict observance of every Punctilio about the Ceremonies,
exacting perhaps a more strict Obedience to these than to the Laws of God. And
he shall pass for an obedient and very good Son of the Church with some, that
is a zealous stickler for these, though he be loose in his Life, formal in his
Religion, and uncharitable to those that differ from him.

Again, Some have declared that they cannot join with us in Baptism, suffering
their Children to be Baptized by Conforming Ministers, because of the Sign of
the Cross which they in their Consciences cannot allow of; nor join in the
Lords Supper because of Kneeling, which seems to them (though through great
weakness, and a more unreasonable prejudice, when the Rubric is so expressly
against the Idolatry and Adoration of the Sacramental Bread) a symbolizing with
Idolaters, which things have bred no small perplexity of mind and outward
trouble to some Godly Persons, said Mr. Sprint in his days, Cass. Anglic.

I shall conclude this with Dr. Preston on the Lords Prayer, p. 89. Thy Kingdom
come: We entreat the Lord that he would curse and cross all Antichristian Plots
and Practices; and we are to Pray against all lets and stumbling blocks that
would hinder the proceedings of the Gospel; that he would abandon all things
that do offend, even all Remnants and Relics of Superstition, and such
Ceremonies as do but ensnare the Consciences of men, and draw a great many into
Persecution and Trouble.

A Second Mischief to the Church has been great in respect of Conformists
blind submission to this Ceremony. One not long before I entered into the
Ministry, and who lived in the same Parish where Providence placed me
afterward, when Dying lay under great troubles of his Conscience for his
Conformity, being bred up a Nonconformist. I have read in Mr. Sprints Cassander
Anglicanus of one or two more, not mentioned by name, as Conforming against
their Consciences without sufficient satisfaction, have lamented it at last; as
also of others, who have dyed very peaceably and comfortably, satisfied in
their Conformity. Some Conformists have certainly run into a wrong defense of
this Ceremony, as Dedicating the Child unto the Service of him who dyed upon
the Cross, which is done in Baptism: And others have thought it above the
peoples capacity. However, they may understand somewhat of what was said
before, and that Signing with the Cross is none of their act and deed: Not
they, but the Minister that is to wear the Surplice, and to Baptize, and Sign
with the Cross. The Minister is concerned to look to that, the Lawfulness of
these. And Mr. Baxter (as also Mr. Croftons Reformation no Separation, p. 24.
Mr. Nyes Case of great use, p. 10. Mr. Balls Trial of the grounds of
Separation, p. 308. And the Author of a Discourse of Scandal,) in his Christian
Directory among his Cases of Conscience has resolved it, that Parents
dissenting from it may suffer their children to be Signed with the Cross after
Baptism, declaring to the Minister in private, or their Neighbors, that it was
Baptism only that they desired, and that they disowned the Sign of the Cross,
which they held to be unlawful. So that Parents are neither bound to the
personal practice of it, nor to the profession of its Lawfulness.

And this appears to have been the Judgment and concurrent Practice of the
Nonconformists of former times, who constantly joined in the Prayers and other
Acts of Worship, although they scrupled some Particular Ceremonies. All that we
desire is to have the Liberty of our Consciences allowed us in that which is
not theirs, but ours to practice. And if there be offense given, it is not from
us, (said Dr. Saunderson in his Treatise of Scandal;) or at least not so much
(in the present case of the Church) there being a necessity laid upon us as to
the use of it, if our Consciences be satisfied therein: So that whatever we
would do, if it were left to our Liberty to use or forbear it, since we are not
allowed to exercise our Ministry otherwise than upon Conformity to it, it is
Prudentially good, and Spiritually necessary for us to Conform to it, even in
the Judgment of the Reformed Churches abroad, Geneva, as Beza, Colladonus,
Goulartius, Franciscus Port, Henricus Stephanus declared in a Letter sent to
the Brethren in England, that were unsatisfied in their Conformity to this
Ceremony, and desired to know their Judgment. And so have the late Ministers in
France, as Mr. Daille, Mr. Claud, Mr. De L' Angle tells us in his Letter; My
Opinion in this matter is the same that is held by our Churches. Mr. Calvin
seemed to look upon it as tolerable, and to be born with, Zancy and others,
though they did not fully approve of the Imposition.

III. Mischief, In respect of the censoriousness of some Separatists,
inveighing against these Ceremonies as Limbs of Antichrist, relics of Popery,
Additions, Superstitious, will Worship, etc. as before in the Objections
against them, condemning (as my Lord Hales in his Discourse of Religion calls
them) these blameless Ceremonies as confidently, as if they were infallibly
assured of their unlawfulness, reviling and censuring the Men that use them, as
if he could not be a good Man that submits to the Ceremonies, but must needs
conform to them against his Conscience out of Compliance with the Government,
and for his Preferment sake. It is hard for Ministers who submit to these
things according to their Consciences, though it be with great Charity and
Moderation to those that differ from them, to be termed Time-servers,
Formalists, Lukewarm, Men wanting the Power of Codliness, as some conceited
Persons, who have more Heat than Light, more Zeal than Knowledge, do not stick
to affirm. Sure this becomes not Christian Charity, in 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up (with a conceit of its own Judgment, as
if it were infallible, and they must needs be in the right.) Again Charity
thinks no Evil, and does not behave it self unseemly. But surely if we judge
of their thinking by their evil speaking, and unseemly deportment toward their
Governors, and others, there must be an abundance of censoriousness in the
Heart; For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. In 2 Pet.
2.12. You there read of those that speak evil of things they understand not,
applicable to these Men. Mr. Baxter says thus in his Book of
Church Government; Of all our Ceremonies there is none that I have suspected
more to be simply unlawful than the Cross, yet dare not I peremptorily say,
that it is unlawful; nor will I condemn either Ancients or Moderns that use it;
nor will I make any disturbance in the Church about it, any farther than my own
forbearance of it. And those Grave Men at the Grand Debate; it being doubtful
whether God has given Men power to institute such Mystical Teaching Signs, as
being not necessary in general, fall not under the particular Rules, etc. They
are by some held sinful and unlawful in themselves, [by some not as of another
Judgment it seems] by others very inconvenient, and unsuitable to the
simplicity of the Gospel Worship, etc. p. 9. Of the Grand Debate. But the new
Generation of Dissenters are grown wiser than the Grave, Aged, and Judicious
(that speak more modestly, leaving the lawfulness of it as doubtful and sub
Judice) and seem to wonder at those before them, that they should see no
farther, not to the utter unlawfulness of these Ceremonies, and some of the
Prayers too, which they say, they see as clear as the Light to be Popish and
Antichristian, and against Scripture. I profess that the Objections are so
many, and the ill Circumstances that attend its use at present, that after all
I dare not be positive and peremptory that it is lawful; nor will I be
over-confident, charitably allowing my Brethren their Liberty to dissent, and
desiring the like Charity from them, as to my own Conformity upon prevailing
probable Arguments; leaving it to God who only is Infallible, to decide the
Case at the day of Judgment: Where I trust his Mercy will pardon me if I have
erred, as having sought for the Spirit to guide me into Truth, and as having
also the Ancient Church, and the Modern Reformed Foreign Divines approbation
of Conformity thereunto.

It is from the strict and severe Imposition, the blind submission of others,
not being able to give any tolerable account of it to their People, nor Answer
Objections against it: And from the censoriousness, and ill Names that have
been given this Ceremony of the Cross, that they have brought such an Odium
upon it, and wrought such an ill Opinion in our Conforming People against it.
Further they hate Popery, and Papists use this so much, and abuse it to
Idolatry and Superstition, that they hate and disgust the use of it upon that
account. I know our Governors never intended to make us Odious in the Eyes of
the People, but I am sure there could scarce be a more effectual way and means
to do it, than by enjoining these things so strictly, the which People are so
much set against, that they disaffect those that use them, and the Governors
that impose them even against the gust of the Congregation. If there had not
been a little of the old grudge in some at the Grand Debate, sure they had been
yielded up then, and not have remained unto this day troubling the peace of the
Church.

I shall conclude with the common Assertion of the Reformed Churches, That all
Churches should labor as much as possible may be, after Apostolical
simplicity, and fewness of Ceremonies, which they judge the safest, the purest,
and the best, as Peter Martyr, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, and indeed almost
all good Men affirm.

FINIS.

