A Modest CENSURE OF THE Immodest Letter TO A DISSENTER, Upon occasion of His
Majesty's late Gracious DECLARATION FOR Liberty of Conscience.

By T. N. a true Member of the Church of England.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor. 1687.

A Modest Censure of the Immodest Letter to a Dissenter, etc.
SIR,
THE Letter to a Dissenter by T.W. which you sent me the last Week, I have
perused, and find it very spitefully endeavoring to persuade the Dissenters, 1.
To suspect the Kindness of His Majesty's late Gracious Declaration; And 2. To
use their Interest against the Establishment of that Liberty by Law, which he
therein Graciously Indulges to all His Subjects.

The Letter it self is like a Pleasure-Boat, richer in the Trimming than in the
Lading. The Language of it, I confess, is very smooth and Gentile, but his
Suggestions are too sour and severe, and his Style too sharp when it touches
upon the Government; nor could any Man speak so Evil of Dignities (as he does)
without Scandal, even though it could be said with truth.

The Character T. W. gives of himself in the first Page, is, That he is a
Protestant at large, who will not let his thoughts for the Public be so tied or
confined to any Subdivision of them, as to stifle his Charity, which is become
so necessary at this time for their mutual Preservation; and yet one would
think by his Letter, that his tender Conscience had caught the Cramp with his
too much stretching, and that he was insensible of what dropped from his Pen; for
after he had charged the King with the worst of Crimes, One that would not only
falsify his Word with them at first, but give them no Quarter at last, and
drawn his Picture like one of the Squint-eyed Italian Pieces, which present us
with a Saint on the one side, and a Monster on the other, and the Church of
England with haughtiness, and the rigidness of her Prelates toward Dissenters,
and the Spirit of Persecution, he would make us believe, page 4. that no
sharpness was in his Style, nor any Gaul mingled with his Ink, because Healing
was the only thing he intended, and that he would not expose any particular
Men, how strong soever the Temptation might be, and how clear the Proofs to
make it out, whereas in truth, for what appears to me by his Lower, his Skill
seems Chiefly to lie in a quick Hand for Lancing and Cutting; and page 3. he is
the worst at Healing of any Writer that ever pretended to it; Never any
State-Mountebank offered more improper Plasters for Tender Consciences, and
should he ever set up his Protestant Bills, I should rather send the Dissenters
to his Friend Burnet or Ferguson, than to him, for a Cure of their Distempers,
neither of which ever Preached up more Vengeance against the Church of England,
page 5. than he has done, at which, he must forgive me, if I am both surprised
and provoked, and startled to have an Eye upon him; for when a Man comes so
quick from the one Extreme to the other in such an unnatural Motion, he has
taught me how much it concerns me to be upon my guard, page 3. I can as little
guess at the Author's Religion, as at his Name; he seems to me to be some
degraded Courtier, who having been outed of his Employment, begins to Harangue
upon what he has lost, and to satisfy, not his Reason, but his Revenge,
resolves to plume his towering Fancy over the King's and Churches Interest, and
doubts not but to make a Prey of both in the end, if by his Seditious Methods
he can hinder a good Correspodence between the King and his two Houses of
Parliament, when he shall think sit to call them, or at least to make himself
more considerable than now is he, by being troublesome; whatsoever he be, I dare
say he is no legitimate Son of the Church of England, nor will she ever give
him her Blessing, till he beg the King's and her Pardon for the Disloyalty of
this Letter.

Now, though I am not at all accountable for the Dissenters, whose Separation
from the Church of England I have always lamented and condemned; yet my just
zeal for that Church, makes me impatient to find one who pretends to be of her
Communion, by his sly Insinuations Libelling both the Government and Her too.
The Father's danger makes Craesus's dumb Son to speak; and on what better
occasion can I (hitherto a silent Spectator) begin to speak, than for the
Vindication of the Father of my Country, and my dear Mother, which will, I
hope, Apologize for all my other Weaknesses, whilst I represent to you, how ill
it becomes a Member of the Church of England, to persuade any Subjects into an
ill Opinion of their Prince, and to represent Her as an Enemy to his Clemency
to any of his Subjects, of what Persuasions soever in Religion.

I begin with the First Design of this Letter, which is to persuade the
Dissenters into a suspicion of his Majesty's Kindness. This is the first thing
he offers to their Consideration, page 2. What reason they have to suspect
their new Friends. Now by the sequel of the Discourse it is manifest, that by
their new Friends he means those whom the Declaration represents for their
Friends, and that being the King's Declaration, it is the King and his Council,
whom he must needs mean by their New Friends, and consequently it is the King's
Expression of Kindness to them in his Declaration, that he would have them to
suspect. But how ill such a Design becomes a Member of the Church of England is
very apparent. For she has always taught her Children not only, not to Resist,
but to Honor the King, and consequently never allows them to speak evil of,
much less (upon weak Surmises) to charge him with the basest Disingenuity, viz.
a Design to cheat all that trust him. At his Majesty's first approach to the
Throne, we all unanimously concluded it our Duty to believe and trust to his
Royal Promise, and seemed with a becoming Zeal to suspect the Loyalty of all
such as distrusted in the least the sincerity thereof. And what reason can we
have to be weary of well doing?

There was a time when we thought any, the least diffidence in the King's
repeated Promises to be the most disobliging thing in the World, and such as
would be resented accordingly; we had then Courage and Conscience enough to
stick to our Principles, and shall we now be so easily frighted out of our Wits
and Loyalty, as some Neuter-passive-Royalists are, whom we see driven from
their old Principles, as some silly Birds are from their Food by Men of Clouts,
an empty windy Noise, or a senseless Scarecrow dressed up by any Pamphleter, who
envies their Happiness. O foolish Galatians, you did run well at first, who has
hindered you of late from holding on in the same good old way of Duty to God and
the King, who has been Indulgent to you beyond a President, and done nothing to
disoblige you, but in keeping you from biting and devouring one another you
know not why? And who will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good?
I am one of those, who am so valiant as to have none of those Fears and
Jealousies about me which our Author speaks of, nor do I think, that he himself
who acts this timorous Part before the Dissenter, does believe himself, but
only pretends it, in pursuance of some other dark Designs, for which his Letter
(as black as it is) would blush if they should be brought to light. The King
has done all things that in him lies, to create a Confidence in him, and all
things conspire to give us Ease, Satisfaction and Security, if we are not
wanting to our selves; and therefore we have great reason to be extremely
pleased and obliged, and to show the Nation (that part of it which is without,
as well as that within the Pale of the Church) that we are so; for this is such
a piece of Good Manners as will be a ^^^^^ian Duty, and not a Court Complement;
and the Virtue of it is the gloater, because it is now become necessary for the
preservation o^ the Church of England, and the justification of her avowed
Principles of Loyalty. We have hitherto been taught absolute and uncondition'd
Obedience for Conscience sake, and practiced it in opposing the black Bill of
Exclusion, for which our Divinity as well as our Policy was arraigned by some
such Protestants at large, as the Author of this Letter, at least our want of
Foresight and palpable Inadvertency. And shall we not now retain the same
Integrity and Wisdom, and the same Consciences void of offense toward God and
Man? Wherein has our Gracious Sovereign been worse than his Word to us? Ours
is the National Religion still, our Revenues and Privileges are as great as
ever, our Churches are as well filled, our Sacraments as much frequented, our
Ministers as much respected, at least, as they were in the late King's time,
the present State of the Church of England is as flourishing as ever we knew
it, and so Exemplary is the King's Self-denial in the Exercise of his own
Religion, that he has not taken any one Church or Chapel throughout the
Kingdom for himself, or those of his own Communion, which was ever dedicated or
appropriated to ours by Law, so little cause does he give us of Repining, and
so much of Rejoicing and Gratitude.

The first Reformers in Germany (as whoever peruseth Sleidan's Commentaries may
observe) repeated their Addresses of Thanks to the Emperor, as often as he
renewed his Promise of Protection: and when something had been done in the
Chamber of the Empire, that seemed to them an infringement of former Grants,
Sleid. Comment. l. 10. Edit. Argentor. 8. p. 292.
and some suggested his Design to oppose them by a War, upon his Gracious
Declaration, in a Letter to them, of his Resolution still to Protect them, they
made a new Address of Thanks for delivering them from their new Fears, by
renewing his Promise. And though in like Circumstances some of the Church of
England, who had put such Bounds to their good Breeding, as our Author cautions
others to do, proved resty, and refused to repeat their grateful
Acknowledgments for his Majesty's late Gracious Declaration to Protect them in
the first place, lest such an innocent and usual piece of Good Manners should
be interpreted to be the Approbation of the King's whole Declaration; yet
others acted more agreeable to the forecited President, by renewed Addresses on
that occasion: whereby they declared, that they still believed him sincere in,
and faithful to his Promise, notwithstanding all the Suspicions, that by
Malcontents were whispered to the contrary. And let the World judge, whether
(...) have not acted more agreeable to the Loyal Principles of the Church o^
England, than this Author, who not only suspects the Ingenuity of his
Sovereign's Promise, but writes on purpose to propagate his Suspicions among
the rest of his Fellow Subjects. They cannot by Words or Writing treat the King
worse, who have an opinion of his Idolatry, than he does; nor can the Church of
Rome her self be worse at Healing than he is, who pretends so much to it; and
therefore 'twill be fit for Dissenters to pause upon his Methods, before they
believe them, or have so good an opinion of them or him, as not to be upon
their guard when he accosts them, like one fully resolved that his over-merits
of the Crown should never do him prejudice. And if it be Moral Parricide to
wound the Reputation of him whom these three Kingdoms deservedly Honor for
their Common Parent, and Father of their Country (except his licencious Pen can
give us a Dispensation for that too, and secure us by a Non obstante to the
Divine Law, that God will not think the worse of us for it) the true Sons of
the Church of England will not take his Judgment to be any intellectual
Standard, nor be seduced into so crying a Sin by his subtle Devices. His whole
Letter betrays such groundless Fears and Jealousies of the King, and drives on
an Interest so very destructive to the Crown and Church of England (of which I
profess my self to be a Member) and declaims with so deep a Resentment against
her Persecuting Humor, that how sincere soever his Address may seem to them,
who judge of his Sincerity by the clearness of his Style, more than by the
weight of his Reasons, and have Minds prepared to be deceived by his malicious
Insinuations, because he tells them; that they come from a friendly Hand; yet I
am one of those who have neither Faith nor Charity enough to believe Him to be
either a good Subject, or a true Son of the Church of England. And I must beg
his pardon, if I am both surprised and provoked, to see that in the Condition
we are now put into by the Laws, and the ill Circumstances we lie under, by
having the Persecution of Dissenters, and the want of Loyalty to the King laid
to our charge; We who pretend to be true Sons of the Church of England, should
endeavor to make our selves and others more uneasy, and obnoxious to the
Present Authority which God has set over us. And methinks he seems to be sore
put to it, when out of a desire of revenge he teaches Dissenters to run to
their old Methods of Embroyling the Kingdom, with too much haste to consider
all the Consequences, and hopes to instigate us of the Church of England to run
along with them to the same excess of riot. They must be unreasonably valiant
who dare follow such Advice, and such an extraordinary Courage at this
unseasonable time, to say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended by
any good Christian or good Subject He had need to go upon certain Evidence, who
charges his Neighbor, much more his Prince, with sinister Intentions and
Treachery in his Kindnesses; otherwise he violates the natural Obligations of
Justice and Charity, as well as the Loyal Principles of the Church of England.
What then may we judge of T. W. who in the Name of the Church of England takes
such pains to persuade the Dissenters that their New Friend, their Gracious
King, is a treacherous Man; especially considering the weakness of those
Reasons wherein he grounds his Suspicion, and which come now to be Examined?

The First I find page 2. That the Dissenters are not the King's Choice, but
his Refuge, after the Church of England has refused his Courtships.

That he might the better teach Dissenters to cast off their new Lovers, he
persuades them that they had before made their ineffectual Courtships to the
Church of England, and been scornfully rejected by them, and must either drive
a Contract with them, or despair of good Fortune for ever; and that if their
sudden Passion have not blinded them, they must needs see, they Court them not
for Love but Interest. Which to me seems (to speak as softly as may be) a very
rude Insinuation, such as T.W. would never have used, had he not wanted the
Bounds to his Ill Breeding, which he would have others put to their Good
Breeding. An Insinuation that equally wrongs the King and the Church of
England, who would no more be guilty of putting her King to his Shifts, than
such a King as ours would stoop to such mean ones. Did not his innate Clemency
and Compassion to his Subjects (perhaps to an Excess) prompt him to it, I see
no necessity of his Circumstances that could drive him to Court the more
despicable part of them, as the Dissenters are reputed to be.

What Courtships of the King, or from Men of his Communion, the Church of
England has rejected, I know not; and what Applications soever shall be made
to her in the first or second place, I doubt not but she will receive with that
Respect and Duty which becomes her.

But the next Insinuation is more considerable;

That there is no Alliance between Infallibility and Liberty, page 4. That it
is the bringing together the two most contrary things in the World; and that
their Absolution for the mortal Sin of promising it, is to be had upon no other
Terms than their Promise to destroy them; which they will be the easier tempted
to do, because in truth they have no Inclination, no not so much as to give
them any Quarter, but to Usher in Liberty for themselves under that Shelter;
for which he refers them to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and the Journals of
Parliament, where they may be convinced, if they can be so mistaken as to
doubt; And that they cannot forbear, even in the height of their Courtship, to
let fall hard words of them, because their cruel Nature is not to be restrained
from starting out, as disdaining to submit to the Usurpation of Art or
Interest. Now to show the weakness of all he suggests on this Head, I shall
offer these Two Considerations.

1. Whether there be not some difference between the Church of Rome offering
Liberty to Heretics, and a Gracious King of that Communion, promising Ease to
his Subjects? For however cruel toward Dissenters, the Principles of the Church
of Rome can be supposed to be, the Sweetness of his Nature may correct them, or
the Generosity of his Courage over-bear them. A Papist may be a Friend to
Liberty, and a known Enemy to Persecution, and our present King, upon whom you
squint, was always so, and ever will be. There is no Religion so bad, but there
may be very good Men among the Professors of it; however inexorable to those it
calls Heretics, Popery can be thought to be, there are many Papists (we know)
merciful Men. And who more worthy of that Character than this Prince, whose
Clemency has hitherto so flatly given the Lie to all former Characters of a
Popish Successor? Were it not then more fair, and just, to believe this
Declaration sincere, because made by so good a Prince, than to suspect it of
Treachery, because we have a bad opinion of his Religion? And that the
Obligations of Natural Religion will prevail more with him to be still merciful
in his Proceedings, and faithful to his Promises, than the supposed Principles
of Popery, to betray those that rely on his Royal Word, which is as current as
his Coin?

Our Confidence in our Prince's Word, which is as sacred as his Person, will be
our greatest Prudence. We can never trust our Lives and Fortunes in safer Hands
than his, to whom by our Addresses we have so unanimously tendered them, at
which his Enemies and ours are not a little netled. If we are any of us afraid
of his Power, it is not his Fault but our own; take not mine, but St. Paul's
word for it, Do that which is good, and you shall have praise of the same; but
if you do that which is evil, you may well be afraid your selves, and make us
so too, for he bears not the Sword in vain, but is the Minister of God for
revenge, to execute wrath upon them that do evil. He has obliged us ever since
he came to his Throne in such a Princely manner, as to puzzle our
Understandings, as well as our Gratitude, we are as safe and secure as we can
desire to be, whilst he lives, and he is content we should be as true to our
God as to our King.

2. And yet it is no such Paradox as he pretends, page 4. that Popery should be
a Friend to Liberty, or the Pretenders to Infallibility tolerate Dissenters,
and live peaceably with them. That there have been great Cruelties acted by Men
of that Communion, is out of question; and this Author acknowledges ( p. 10. l.
16.) that there have been Prelates of our Church too rigid: And as these are
now convinced of their Error, in being severe to Dissenters, (as he says p.
16. l. 1.) is it not possible that those may see their Mistake too? especially
since they pretend to Infallibility only in Matters of Faith, not in Fact, or
the Conduct of their Practice. However, what has been practiced in other
Places, is not altogether unfeazable among us. For besides the Toleration of
the Three Religions in Germany by the Treaty of Munster, Dr. Burnet (whom he
will not deny to be an authentic Historian) in a late Account he gives of his
Travels ( page 289.) acquaints us, That Charles Lewis, late Prince Palatine,
seeing of what advantage Liberty of Conscience is to the Peopling of a Country,
not only allowed the Three Religions (the Calvinist, Lutheran, and the Roman)
to be Professed there, but built a Church for them all Three, which he called
The Church of the Concord; in which they all had (in the Order above set down)
the Exercise of their Religion; and yet he maintained the Peace of his
Principality so entire, that there was not the least Disorder occasioned by
this Toleration. The like Toleration, without the least Disorder, the same
Person tells us ( p. 286.) is maintained at Francfort. And who is so great a
Stranger abroad, as not to know, that the Cantons of Switzerland are made up of
Protestants and Papists, all united by their common Interest, notwithstanding
their Differences in Religion. And in two of those Cantons (as the forecited
Author assures us, page 27.) Apenzel and Glaris, both Religions are tolerated,
and capable of equal Privileges. And in some Bailiages, conquered in common by
the Cantons of Bern and Friburg in the Wars with Savoy, the two Cantons name
Bailiffs by turns, and both Religions are so equally tolerated, that in the
same Church they have both Mass and a Sermon, and that with such equality, that
on one Sunday the Mass begins and the Sermon follows, and on the next Sunday
the Sermon begins and the Mass comes after it, without any disorder or
murmuring.

These Instances are undeniable Evidences of the consistency of Popery with
Liberty of Conscience, so that whatsoever Arguments can be produced to prove
the contrary, are like Zeno's Reasonings against the possibility of Motion,
confuted by the noise of Diogenes's Tramplings, that disturbed his Lectures.
It Is in vain to argue that Papists cannot live peaceably where they are
tolerated, or that they cannot tolerate others, where they have Power, since we
can produce such plain Matter of Fact both for the one and for the other. And
since some Papists live peaceably with Protestants, and allow them to enjoy
equal Freedom with themselves, in the Exercise of Religion, a Pretense to
Infallibility may be consistent with Liberty, without building upon a
Foundation of Paradoxes, which he says is so dangerous; And this Suggestion is
no concluding Argument, that the King intends to deceive the Dissenters, and
oppress all other Parties but his own.

You have seen plainly, that the Papists do allow Living and Liberty to
Protestants under them in Germany, by the Treaties of Munster and Osnaburgh,
that they have alternative Election of Magistrates, and that neither Party
does, or is allowed to disturb other in the Exercise of their Religion in
Public, and that all others with a free Conscience, without Disturbance or
Inquisition, shall Exercise their Religion in their own Houses privately, and
in the Neighborhood, where, and as often as they please; and therefore we have
less ground to suspect their doing it sincerely here in England, where it is
more their Interest, because the King is so great a Lover of his Country, that
he will never give the Power into those few Hands of the Catholics, against the
more numerous Party of his Protestant Subjects, and consequently more able to
Serve him against his potent watchful Neighbors, who would catch at such an
opportunity to stir up. Wars against him both Abroad and at Home. The King
knows that he is sure of the Hearts and Hands of all the true Sons of the
Church of England, and he will never oppress them to make them Hypocrites, or
to lose their Services.

His next Suggestion of Suspicion is from the Instruments of this new
Friendship, page 4. whom for Arguments sake (designing to make them out of love
with them, and to question their Integrity) he supposes to be suspicious
Persons. And are not all such Hypothetical Arguments as easily blown away by
supposing the contrary? I will easily grant him, that they are bad men, who
Preach up Anger and Vengeance against the Church of England, page 5. But as the
King discourages all such kind of Discourses in his own Chaplains, so we may
charitably suppose, that whoever use them, are none of his Instruments, who
designs Ease to Dissenters without Vengeance against the Church of England. And
therefore they who act that choleric Part, are, I am sure, none of the King's
Instruments. You maliciously suggest, that the Mediators of this new Alliance
have been formerly Employed in Treaties of the same kind, and there detected to
have acted by Order, (by whose you do not tell us, but leave us to our guess,
nor by whom so detected) and to have been empowered to have given
Encouragements and Rewards, and that this is an Argument to suspect them. Nay,
you come farther home, and insinuate that the King has given them a
Commission, and not improbably a Dispensation in the Case of Truth, when it may
prejudice his Service that Employs them, (Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit)
and would have the Dissenters look upon them as Ambassadors sent to lie Leiger,
i. e. Ad mentiendum Reipublicae causa. You suppose there are some Men Employed
by him who have Means and Authority to persuade by Secular Arguments, and that
they in pursuance of that Power, have sprinkled Money among the Dissenting
Ministers, and that this is an Evidence of the Deceit intended; and that many
unfortunate Men (whose Names you will not be tempted to discover) have fallen
under this Temptation, who for fear their Frailty should be discovered and
exposed, will continue it, whose Arguments, though never so specious, are to be
suspected, because they came from them who have Morgag'd themselves to severe
Creditors, who expect a rigorous observation of the Contract, let it be never
so unwarrantable; and these are the Dog-Stars of all the malignant Influence
against which you declaim: But how came you to be privy to all this, unless you
were once One of the same Cabal, and one who hired them to Preach up Anger and
Vengeance against the Church of England? If there be any such inflaming
Eloquence in the Conventicles, I will easily grant it to be as unseasonable as
your Pamphlet, and they who act this choleric Part, upon what Forfeiture
soever they are obliged to it, are very corrupt Men, no doubt, (almost as bad
as your self) and their Wages in the next World, without Repentance, will be
Death, and that Eternal, whatsoever they hope to get by it in this.

The last of his Insinuations, is from the great Endeavors that are used to
Court Addresses, it being improper for the Benefactor to press Men to be
Thankful, and an Argument that he intends to Snare them by their own
Acknowledgments, as he suggests page 7. But to allude to his own Comparison (a
little after,) our Great Sovereign is not of so mean a Spirit, as to solicit
for Love Letters; He entertains the Grateful with Respect, but when did he ever
Court the Ungrateful to give him Thanks? I have heard of Instances, wherein he
forbad the moving of some to Address that needed Courting, but never the
contrary, except from this Author. It may be some Persons, ashamed of the
Ingratitude of some of their own Party, were active to remind them of their
Duty, but it is an incredible Calumny, that the King should Court, much less
Threaten, or cause to be Courted or Threatened (as this Man affirms, page 7.)
any to Thank him for those Favors, which not the expectation of Applause, hut
his own innate Goodness has produced. No, it is the more Glorious to be
Thankful to him, because such is his Clemency, that with safety to our Temporal
Interest we may be Ungrateful.

I have heard indeed, that as many Bishops as were then in London, did meet
together, upon the sense of their Duty to draw up an Address of Thanks to the
King; which having done, they sent down Copies of it to some of their Brethren,
one of which, and he as good a Casuist, and as far from the Court as any of his
Bench, having seriously perused and considered it, gave this Judgment of it,
That he highly approved it, as prudently Penned, and such an Acknowledgment of
his Majesty's Signal Favors to the Church of England, and all her Members, as
their Gratitude and Duty indispensably obliged them to pay. And he not only
Subscribed it cheerfully himself, but used his best Diligence to procure
Subscriptions of the Clergy to it in his Diocese, and having received some
nameless Letters (like this of T. W.) to dissuade him from Addreses, and among
the rest those called the Oxon. Reasons, he answered them all, to the
satisfaction of all thinking Men, who saw them, and concluded, That he saw
nothing in them that looked like a Reason against it, only some groundless
Fears and insignificant Jealousies; and that if the Clergy at this time, and in
these Circumstances we now are, should general and obstinately deny in an
humble Address to give his Majesty Thanks for so Gracious a Promise of
preserving that ALTAR from being overthrown, at which yet he did not worship,
he feared it would give him too much cause to say, That he had little Reason to
protect them, who so peremptorily refused, as the Motion of their own Bishop,
to Thank him for it. And others wished, that the niceness of particular Men,
where in truth no need was, did not at last hazard the whole; and so indeed it
must have done, had not his Majesty, in imitation of HIM whom he Represents
among us, of his great and undeserved Mercy been Kind to the Unthankful, and
according to his accustomed Goodness spared the Church for the sake of the
smaller visible number that were in it; so great Grace may, if they are not
past cure, heal their Infidelity and Revolt from their Duty, especially when
they are thus invited to believe, and adhere to a Prince, of whom we have had
sufficient Experience, that he will no more recede from his Promise, than he
would fly from his Enemy in the Day of Battle. If the nature of Thanks be so
unavoidable a Consequence of being pleased or obliged, (as our Author
confesses) and they will presently show themselves in Looks, Speeches, Writing
and Actions; then they from whom Thanks do not naturally flow, upon so just and
great an Occasion, are to be reckoned among the (...), those unholy and
unthankful Men, whom the Apostle foretells us will arise in the latter days,
who not only will give no Thanks, but have none to give, If our Obligations
were less, and our Sense of the Religion of Gratitude, as little as our
Authors; yet I wonder he should be offended at such an innocent and usual piece
of Good Manners. He would make us suspect him for one of the Members of Forty
Eight, who Voted no more Addresses to be made to the King; for he is so
mightily netled at these weekly Addresses of Loyal Men, from all Parts of the
Kingdom, that he would make us believe, if we consulted the Bills of Mortality,
we should find some numbers murdered by them. He tells us that the Priests (who
are not proper Secretaries for the Protestant Religion) made the first Draughts
of them; A Scotchman would take the liberty to tell him, that he were very good
Company, and an Englishman would wonder how he came to be so privy to this
Secret, unless he were at their Elbows when the Priests Indicted them. These
extravagant Acknowledgments (as he calls them, extravagantly enough) which he
pretends all the Posthorses are tired with carrying Circular Letters to
solicit, give us a Copy of his Countenance; And that where Persuasions cannot
delude, Threatenings are employed to fright Men into a Compliance (but where, or
by whom, he knows not); And that the manner of getting them did extremely
lessen their value; And that the Thanks which filled the Gazetts, were either
Trifles or Snares, which either signified nothing, or a great deal more than
was intended by them who gave them. By all which he proves himself a greater
Master of his Pen than his Passions, that his Wit is more than his Manners, and
that his Republican Zeal has, like a Cormorant, devoured his Charity to his
Fellow Subjects, and his Loyalty to his Prince. Do not his Objections to his
Majesty's Belief now hinder him from seeing his Virtues, whilst he instigates
others to discredit and disobey him? One would think he himself, who pretends
to be a Son of the Church of England, made but a Jest of the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, whilst he is so fearful of the Submission of his Fellow
Subjects, to the King's so just and reasonable Expectation from them. Is not
our Peace at Home, and our Prince's Reputation abroad, of more value than to be
hazarded for want of a Complement, as he calls it? If I did not think it a Task
too hard for me, to persuade a Man so bewitched with a turbulent Spirit as he
is, to grow more peaceable; and thought he were not so far gone in his new
Passion, but that he would hear still; I would not be discouraged from
dissuading him to rely on a Deathbed Repentance. If he have not engaged
himself in the Ways of Faction, in an Association beyond Retreat, and be not
hurried on by his first Heat, I would request him to look back upon what he has
written, before it be too late, and not sacrifice the true public Interest of
the Nation to his private Revenge; which will speak him a Man of good Morality
and Understanding, as well as a great Wit: But I fear, that as he has betrayed
too much Weakness, in entertaining and propagating these groundless Fears and
Jealousies, by which he speaks his Spleen, and not his Conscience; so he will
show too much Obstinacy to forsake and recant them, being none of those who
thinks himself obliged to obey for Conscience sake.

And now I leave T. W. to review his own Reasons, and consider, whether they be
not too weak to acquit him from Uncharity and Disloyalty, in charging his
Sovereign with Treachery in the Declaration of his Mercy to Dissenters, or
(which is much the same) in persuading Dissenters to suspect him: And the worst
I wish him is, that the sense of his Guilt may make him a true Penitent. I
proceed to the Second Part of his Design, which is

To excite the Dissenters to use their Interest against the Establishment of
that Liberty by Law, which his Majesty's Clemency has Indulged to them.

If he can persuade the Dissenters to throw the King's Declaration of
Indulgence at his Head, which is within the Bounds: he has set to his Good
Breeding, and to throw away their present Advantages, and to stay for the
Liberty of the public Exercise of their Religion till the Parliament allow it
them, and to satisfy themselves with those imaginary Advantages of which they
can hardly fail in the next probable Revolution, if by an unseasonable Activity
they lose not the Influence of their good Star, which promises them every thing
that is prosperous, for that all things seem to conspire to their Ease and
Satisfaction, if by too much haste to anticipate their good Fortune, they do
not destroy it; Such a prevailing Eloquence as this, would speak him an Orator
beyond compare, and would give us cause to conclude by the Effect it had upon
them, that the Dissenters had not yet been so long restrained from their
Liberty, as to have any strong Appetite to enjoy it again: but the Indians, I
believe, may as soon catch Monkies with a Mousetrap, as he can draw in the
Dissenters with such a dull Device as this, to destroy themselves by using
their Interest against the Establishment of that Happiness by a Law, which his
Majesty's Clemency has already Indulged them. For this purpose, page 8. he
insinuates the Irregularity of the Declaration in point of Law, which whether
it be so or no, is certainly not so fit to be determined in a Pamphlet, as in
Westminster Hall, which already has given its Opinion in favor of the
Prerogative. And after that, it is (methinks) no small Presumption to Censure
the King's Actions as irregularly done, which proceed upon such special Verdict
for their Legality.

As the King does not need the Dissenters Thanks to justify his Declaration in
point of Law, so neither do the Papists doubt of the Legality of his Power of
Dispensing with them for his Time, but they desire to have the Royal Favor made
more lasting to them by a Law.

Besides, is it not very strange, that Men should generally acknowledge the
King a Right to Dispense with Penal Laws against Theft and Murder, which are
founded upon a Divine Sanction, yet question his Right to Dispense with those
against a Conventicle, which can make no such Pretenses? Or that this should
lay a Foundation for the breach of all Laws (so says this Writer, page 9.) and
that should not? Or that Dissenters should look like Council Retained against
Magna Charta, for thankfully receiving the Benefit of this, and Felons never be
so Censured for that? But if (as he presumes to affirm) the Declaration be
irregular, it is not a little difficult to comprehend, how this becomes an
Argument against Endeavoring to have the Liberty granted by it, Confirmed by a
Law; since the Invalidity of their present Grant should in all reason make them
more sollicitous for such a Confirmation, as may preserve the Liberty they are
so desirous to enjoy.

His Arguments to me seem very weak against this mighty Power of Dispensing,
which needs not the Justification of a Parliament, though the Penal Laws and Test
want their Repeal, which I hope they may have in good time, without endangering
or destroying our Religion, or Properties. But our Author thinks this a proper
time to put the Prerogative in Pickle, for some other Generation that can
better digest it than the present; and in pursuance of his Designs, he makes
the Laws spurn against their Maker; which is not the way to secure our
Religion, but to make our Church the more odious, by practicing that which she
professes to abhor: She has taught her Sons to believe, that no Power on Earth
can give License for the doing of that which is Malum in se, an Offense in its
own nature, and so declared by the Divine Law; but that Malum prohibitum, which
in its own nature is indifferent, and becomes an Offense only because some Law
of the Land makes it so, she thinks may be dispensed with, according to the
King's Discretion, whom she allows to be the proper Judge of Public Necessity.
It Is impossible for Human Lawmakers, who have no pretense to Infallibility, or
a perpetual Divine Assistance, to foresee all particular Accidents, Mischiefs,
and Inconveniences which may happen in particular Circumstances by or from the
making of any particular Law; And therefore there must be some Power always
visible and in being, to Suspend or Dispense with such Laws, as the Public Good
and Safety of the People, or an emergent Necessity requires, which is by Law in
the King, who is the Head of the Public Good, and the Fountain of Justice and
Mercy; which Power is so united to his Royal Person, that he cannot transfer,
give away, or separate the same from himself, as all the Judges of England
resolved, ( Lord Coke lib. 7. fol. 36.) nor can he bar himself from that which
is so inherent in him, and inseparably annexed to his Royal Person, no not by
an Act of Parliament; for by so doing he would cease to be King, ( Coke lib. 7.
page 14.) the most he can do, is only to agree, that he will not use that Right
but in extraordinary Cases and Occasions, when in his Princely Wisdom he shall
find it necessary for the Public Good: Nor is his reassuming to Exercise such a
Right, any Breach of his Promise or Oath at his Coronation, but a making use of
that Condition implied in his Agreement, as to such particular Cases, and such
present Circumstances. The King cannot Repeal, and totally make void the Law by
his own single Power without a Parliament, but Relax, Suspend, and Control it
for a time, with respect to the Advantages or Necessities of his People he may,
which is a temporary Repeal, or the laying the Law down to sleep for a time in
a legal way, which is a sufficient Discharge to them who are Commissioned under
him, and by his Authority, to put them in Execution. Our Author knows, that the
strict keeping of Lent is enforced by great Penalties in our Laws, viz. 2 and 3
Ed. 6. cap. 19. and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 33. 5 Eliz. 5. and yet that the King was
never questioned the Power of Dispensing with them all, either by Judges,
Bishops, or Parliament, but his Power in these Points has had an universal
Admittance, with a Nemine contradicente; and why then should it be arraigned
only in Dispensing with those Penal Laws relating to Religion against
Conventicles or Recusants?

In his next Attempt he seems to imitate the last and desperate Shift of the
King of Moab, when he took his eldest Son that should have Reigned in his
stead, and offered him a Burnt-offering upon the Wall, to move the Israelites,
by that Instance of his Misery and Desperation, to pity him, 2 Kings 3.27. For,
to move the Dissenters Compassion, he sacrifices the Reputation of his own
Mother the Church of England, confessing, page 10. that she out of revenge, for
the rough usage she met with from the Dissenters in the time of their Reign,
upon the late King's Restoration made the Penal Laws against them; and lest
they should imitate her Faults, he cautions them against seeking to be
revenged, by attempting the Repeal of them. Whether this Instance of his
Desperation will be as successful as the King of Moab's, and prevail with his
Adversaries to quit their Advantage, I know not; but if it do, they are
certainly very good-natured Adversaries in both the Acceptations of the Phrase,
whether it denote the excess of their Kindness, or the defect of their
Understandings. Some Men are so Spiderspirited, as to suck Poison out of the
sweetest Flowers: For my part, I cannot think so ill of those Great Men, who
suffered with so much Christian Patience for their Loyalty, as that they came
from under the Rod breathing nothing but Revenge against their Persecutors. It
is a more just Account, and suitable to the Character of their Piety and
Loyalty, that what they then did in Severity against the Dissenters, was not
from private Revenge, but from the Necessities of the Kingly Government, to
which the Dissenters had been very pernicious, and which they thought could not
be safe, at that time, without the suppressing of them.

But if his Suggestion were true, that the Penal Laws against Dissenters were
made out of Revenge, what Argument is this against their endeavoring the Repeal
of them? Unless it were Criminal to seek for a Release from the Injuries that
Revenge has laid upon them, or a Sin to flee from the Avenger of Blood into
the City of Refuge. To Retaliate Injuries is a Crime, but to seek for
Protection and Ease from them is not. And I see not but that the Dissenters, if
they be (according to his Character of them, page 10.) Men of good Morality and
Understanding, may thus argue, The Church of England, after the late King's
Restoration, sacrificed its Interest to Revenge, in making the Penal Laws
against us, and therefore we may lawfully, for our own Ease, endeavor the
Repeal of them, and not lose the present Opportunity to rescue our selves out
of her avenging Hand.

But to mend the matter, he tells us, page 10. that the Common Danger had now
so laid open the Mistake, that all former Haughtiness of the Church of England
toward them, is for ever extinguished, and has turned the Spirit of
Persecution into a Spirit of Peace, Charity and Condescension. A fit Argument
to infer this Conclusion, Therefore the Dissenters ought not to endeavor their
own Ease. Whereas this seems the more natural Inference, That therefore the
Church of England will now join her Endeavors with them for the Repealing of
those Laws, the Enacting and Execution of which he imputes to a Spirit of
Persecution.

But to do the Church of England right against these malicious Suggestions, I
am sure her Principles are against Persecution, or any thing of Violence and
Cruelty toward any for Religion; And whatever may have been the Practices of
some rigid and violent Persons of her Communion, the most Wise, Pious and
Learned of them, have still declared it unlawful to make any Sufferers for
their Conscience, unless where it interferes with the Peace and Safety of the
State: They would have no Man's invincible Persuasion in Religion be made High
Treason, as it was in Sir Tho. More's and the Bishop of Rochester's Cases. The
Opinions in Religion that are inauspicious to the Government, they think ought
to be punished, not because they are Errors in Religion, but because they are
Seditious and dangerous to the Government. Now when they are, and when they are
not so (as the change of Circumstances in the State may alter their Prospect on
it) the Government is more proper to judge than the Church, and when that
thinks its Safety not endangered by the toleration of them, she is not for
punishing them. According to which Principle, by the same Reason that she was
for making the Penal Laws formerly, she may now be for their Repeal, because
the Government thinks it self safe without them. And this (I think) is almost
the only thing wherein T. W. does not Misrepresent her, That now she is really
for the Ease of Tender Consciences; not (as he brings in her Enemies
suggesting, p. 12.) because she wants Power to Oppress, but because the change
of Circumstances in the Government, makes the Opinions of Dissenters, whether
Protestant or Popish, not so dangerous to the Peace of the State, or the
Authority of the Civil Powers, as formerly they have been. And this she may
modestly conclude, because the King and his Council have thought fit to Indulge
them, whose Interest obliges them to be most Impartial, and whose Experience in
State Affairs makes them most able to judge of such things.

The State was then in such real or imaginary Dangers as it is not now; The
Succession of the King to the Crown is not now in Dispute, nor is Dominion
believed to be founded in Grace, if such Times should come again, the old
Severities might be soon reinforced: Whilst we are in no danger of them, let us
put them into a Condition of Ease and Safety frankly, that they may have no
just Prejudice against us or our Religion, and that the King, who is entitled
to the Service of every Subject of his, of what Persuasion soever, by the Law
of Nature, and the Common Law of the Land (of which no Act or Parliament can,
or ought to bar him) may make use of their Persons and Services, according to
his own Discretion. Why should not his Catholic Subjects be equally capacitated
to render him Service, and be united with us in the same Bonds of Duty and
Allegiance, though they cannot accord with us in Matters of Religion? Why should
we show so much Violence in those Points of Faith, of which, perhaps, we can
show no certain Evidence? The decrepit World, in the twilight of its declining
Age, may be easily mistaken in the Colors of Good and Evil, true or false.
Their Merits have been great of the Crown, and their Sufferings more than Ours,
and why then should we repine, to see the long deserved, and deferred Rewards
of their Loyalty conferred upon them at last? Let our only Emulation be who
shall serve him best. Princes are not to be Catechis'd in bestowing their
Honors or Offices, nor could we think he had any true Zeal for his Religion, if
he should not countenance and preserve them, at least caeteris paribus, with
others, if not before them. Suppose our repining should provoke him to turn the
Tables upon us, and to employ no Officers or Servants about him but
Roman-Catholics, whom could we reasonably blame but our selves. Let the King
unite them and us in one Camp and Court in God's Name, and let there always be
a Religious Correspondence between them and us in the Service of so great and
so good a Master. To dispute his Power in this Case, were to deny him the
choice of his Servants, which we should think a Wrong to the meanest of us to
be deprived of; and also to rob him of the Militia of the Nation, to diminish
his Regal Authority, and to deprive him of the Services of a great part of his
Subjects, from which no Act of Parliament can restrain him, because the Law of
Nature gives it him.

As to the Men of Taunton and Tiverton, who were formerly Stigmatized for their
Rebellion, they are now the more eminent for returning to their Loyalty, from
which they made so notorious a Defection, and should be embraced by us
accordingly with great joy, as returning Prodigals. And some of the Quakers,
who were formerly known to be accomplished Men, of good Parts and Breeding, are
with a Non obstante to their Religion, taken into his Majesty's Protection, for
which they give him Thanks with a Grace that very well becomes them; which, as
new a thing as it is, and as much as our Author is surprised at it, is not a
thing utterly incredible. It is far from a Miracle to see so Gracious a Prince
as King James the Second is, to cherish and reward the Loyalty of his Subjects
Hearts in spite of their Hats, or their more shameful Mistakes in Matters of
Religion. The Princes Power is not limited to his morose Humor; He can, as often
as he is so disposed, be Gracious to them, who have been undutiful to him,
Reprieve and Pardon whom he has justly Condemned, without acquainting him or
the Confessor with the Reasons of so sudden and effectual a Change, he may
alter his own Mind without altering the Nature of other Things. If a Man repent
of his Crimes and the King Pardon him, and he amend his Life in order to obtain
God's Pardon too, our envious Author laments his entire Resignation, and looks
upon his Endeavors, now he is Converted himself, to strengthen his Brethren, as
an unwelcom Task, and looks upon them as squeezed out of him by the weight of
his being so obnoxious; by which he squints at a Person who has Honor and
Courage enough to call him to an account for it, if he knew where his humble
Servant T.W. were to be found, whom he believes to be better at his Pen, than
any other Weapon.

What he says of the Church of Englands Provocations, p. 12. may be subscribed
to by all, as an Instance of her excellent Temper, if his Letter, which is an
Exception against it, do not hinder, if yet there be any reason to blame her
for the Rashness and Indiscretion of one of her Members, when the rest bare the
Reproaches of so many malicious Pamphlets, without quarrelling eithere the
Government or the Dissenters: These Provocations like a Storm of Hail upon a
strong House, cause more Noise than Prejudice. She is ready (he says page 13.)
rather to suffer, than to receive all the Advantages that can be gained by a
criminal Compliance, And if she refuse only criminal Compliances, I am
persuaded she will never suffer under this merciful Prince, who requires no Man
to play the Hypocrite, or act against his Conscience.

The Reflection, page 13. savors much of T. W's Spirit, who cannot forbear
Libelling the Government; for what ground has he but his own Fancy to
insinuate, that the next Parliament will not be Elected freely, but by Conge
d'Eslire, and the Men Returned whom the King nominates, whether Elected or no?
And that when Returned, they will not be allowed the liberty to Debate freely
in Parliament, but obliged, without Examination, to do whatever they are
desired. For does not he in his very next Paragraph contradict himself? wherein
he says, that the Papists themselves do not rely upon the Legality of the
Declaration, and therefore are so very earnest to get it Established by Law.
For they are not so blind, but that they can see there will be no more Security
in a Law made by a Parliament illegally chosen, and under restraint in their
Votes, than in a bare Declaration; and that the next Turn of Government would
regard that less than this. So that if it be their Interest to have a
Parliament to secure their Liberty by Law, it is equally their Interest to have
one freely chosen, and free in their Votes. And what reason is there to suspect
Men will act contrary to what they know to be their Interest.

Our Author knows who they were who were Returned out of every Borough, by
virtue of the Letters Missive from the Faction in the City, and instead of
Election were satisfied if they could get but a double Return, when the Power
of the Committees of Election was more significant, and to worse Purposes, than
the King's Conge d'Eslire; And whereas he farther suggests, that our Methods of
Enacting Laws in England will be reduced to those of Scotland, and that the
Papists shall be made Lords of the Articles over us, and yet endeavors to
wheedle the Dissenters into a fond Persuasion that the Parliament will offer
them an Indulgence without including the Papists: To give him a Cooler for his
Conceit, they have told him already, that this Way of his will catch none but
Woodcocks, and that they can see and break through it at pleasure, and so his
Road is quite spoiled: And for our parts, the Church of England has taught us
to value the Merit of Obedience above the Liberty of Debate, which such Men as
he would turn into Licenciousness, and Liberty of Aspersing, if not Altering
the Government.

What he insinuates, page 15. of the danger, lest if the King, and those of his
Communion, be gratified by the legal Establishment of their Liberty, they will
at the next Step attempt theirs that helped them, and after the Dissenters
squeaziness in starting at a Surplice, force them to swallow
Transubstantiation, is another of those malicious Suggestions, which have been
sufficiently Answered at the beginning of this Discourse, it looks like a Plot
to pelt out the Protestant Religion with Sugar-plums, so ridiculous is it and
unreasonable. The sum of all is, that T.W. pretends to be an Ambassador from
the Church of England, to invite the Dissenters to join with her in a League
against the Roman-Catholics, promising every one Liberty when the Parliament
meets, except only the King and those of his Religion: which makes me to
question his Credentials, and suspect him for a Cheat, since all the genuine
Sons of the Church of England have their Good Breeding better bounded, than to
be civil and obliging to all Men but their Prince.

He is like a Man in a Trance, rapt into the Religious Cause of the Church of
England none knows how; he blames her Sons for going too far in compliance with
the Romanists, and yet complains, that they are not only deserted, but
prosecuted, but when and how he leaves us to guess; nor do we know what Weight
of Power it is they lie under to avoid the Burden of being Criminal; which
whilst he maliciously suggests, he speaks like Council Retained by his old
Friends the Republicans in Forty Eight, against the Prerogative, which has done
nothing yet in this King's Reign or his Predecessor's, to fall thus under his
Displeasure. Our Gracious Sovereign has already done more for our Church, than
the most sanguine of her Sons ever looked for, which gives us reason to believe
that he will never be sorry for doing what we desired. Liberty of Conscience is
more than pretended to be given by him, and yet there is no Freedom or Property
to be sacrificed for it neither, as far as yet appears, or we believe is ever
like to do. The King intends not to unhinge the Establishment of the Church of
England, for that he can no more do, than he can be unfaithful; He only desires
Safety, and the Protection of the Laws for those of his own Communion, and
other Dissenters too, which (however peevish Men may be, at the first motion)
will appear so reasonable upon second and more sedate Thoughts, that however (
p. 17.) the odds be Two hundred to one in the number of us and them, yet there
will be no such odds in the Votes for and against their Indulgence.

I am as loath as he is, that we should throw away all Human Means of preserving
our Religion ( p. 17.) and I doubt not but that the Wisdom of the Nation may
find Human Expedients to secure it to us, without Infringing the natural
Liberty of Subjects by severe Tests, or tyrannizing over their Consciences by
Penal Laws. Sure I am, a peevish provocation of a Prince, whose Spirit and
Power are equally great, is no Human Means of its Preservation.

Our Author's great fear is, that the Thankers of the King will be Repealers of
the Test in the next Parliament, which would bring them under such a Scandal as
would make them odious to all Mankind; from which that he may the better deter
them, he tells them, that by rescuing themselves from the severity of one Law,
they will necessarily give a blow to all the rest, and that the Price of their
Liberty will be no less than the giving up their Right in all the Laws, which
were a losing Bargain indeed, to draw such a Mischief as this upon themselves.
But whether those Methods which he proposes to them, will not more infallibly
destroy them, I hope the Dissenters and the Church of England men will consider
well, before they follow them, It concerns us all to take heed, that in acting
for the preservation of our Religion, we do not expose it to more imminent and
apparent danger.

Tanti non est ut placeam Tibi perire. Martial. If nothing will gratify our
Author but what will displease and disserve the King, let his Pretexts be never
so specious, he shall not entice us into a sinful Compliance, we will follow
the Golden Rule, to do to others as we would have them do to us in like
Circumstances.

Arma tenenti, omnia dat qui justa negat. Our obstinate and unseasonable
stiffness has made some Alterations already in Public Affairs and
Administrations, and may provoke his Majesty to do those things in his
Displeasure, which may be more prejudicial to our Religion than the Repealing
of the Test can be, the making whereof she abhorred and opposed as much as she
could, and cannot remember the Author or Occasion of it without Detestation.
And I hope the King's Old Friends will not put the King to such shameful
Shifts, as to fly to his New for any Justice they can do him in this or any
other kind. If they should fail of their Duty in this kind, their Mother Church
will not bless them, nor be displeased to see the Father of the Country correct
such ill-nurtur'd Children as are too big for her Discipline. I question not
but that the next Parliament will do what the King and all good Subjects expect
from them. The King is assured of the Affections of his People in gross, they
have already Presented him with their Lives and Fortunes in their repeated
weekly Addresses, and therefore he will be sure to find it by their Loyal
Representatives, who will never sail to give him that Satisfaction in a
Parliamentary way, which they have already done in a Popular one; for they
would wrong us as well as him, if they should not give him that Satisfaction in
Formalities of Law, which our Devotion has already designed and dedicated to
him. All true Sons of the Church of England rejoice, and are pleased in his
Majesty's Government, and doubt not but a good Correspondence between him and
his two next Houses of Parliament will put the Balance of Europe into his
Hands; but if once a Spirit of Jealousy should be raised between him and us,
to fright us from the Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws, what Disadvantages
may accrue to our Nation or our Religion, I tremble to think. We had need do
something more than ordinary, to atone for the innocent Blood that has been
shed upon the Testimony of a few perjured Villains.

Thus, Sir, I have given you my Opinion of the Pamphlet you sent me, which was
certainly writ with a very ill Design against the King, and no good Intention
for the Church of England, whom it represents (as it would persuade her to be)
obstinately engaged, not only against the Religion, but against the Interest of
her Prince too, attempting to draw Men to suspect his Mercy for Treachery, and
inviting Dissenters to Combine against his Gracious Designs for the Ease of all
his Subjects; which I am persuaded the Church of England by her Compliances
without obstinacy, as far as without deserting her Religion she may, will in
the Event demonstrate to be black-mouthed Calumnies.

FINIS.

