A New NARRATIVE OF A Gent. of Grays Inn, Relating to Mr. Turbervill's Last
NARRATIVE Concerning the Horrid Popish-Plot,
Parce PUER Stimulis, and fortius utere Loris: Ovid.
It Is a piece of Jesuitism to do evil that good may come thereof, but it is the
duty of every good Christian to do good for evil: To tell a Lie politickly to
clear a man's self, is an evil of the Church of Rome, and a ready way to prove
a man a Jesuit; But if that falsehood is designed for the ruin of our
Neighbor, it carries a more ugly aspect, and is a positive contradiction to
the purity of that Doctrine which commands us, To render good for evil, and to
love our Neighbors as our selves.

I cannot therefore, when I see a Lord beheaded, or a Traitor hanged, refrain
from pity, or withold my Prayers, and I am not of the humor of the rabble,
to insult and glory in another misery, I know that it is an argument of a
villainous disposition to tyrannize and abuse those wretched ruins, which are
under the mercy of the Law, whose severity is bitter enough without
aggravation: A noble mind; does (out of native goodness) show a kind of
sweetness in the disposition, which, if not the man, does pity his misfortune,
but never does increase his sorrow, by baser usage than does become his Justice.

In the Title Page of a late Narrative, which bears the Name of Mr. Turbervill,
here are these words; An Account of the Gentleman of Gray's Inn, who appeared in
Court before the Lord High-Steward to invalidate Mr. Turbervill 's Evidence,
which words are the Prologue to an after lying, malicious, imperti^^nt and
unchristian-like Tragedy, of the said Gentleman's Reputation, and might much
rather have been termed, An horrid Account of a barbarous and bloody Design to
bury a man alive.

What is spoken of me in the Title Page is false, and the first Scene a Lie; So
that what concerns me in that Narrative, is like the Devil, a Liar from the
beginni^g: And thus I prove (...), I did appear barely in obedience to an Order
of the Honorable House of Peers, dated 27 November, 1680; And I was no
voluntary Witness, as may appear by the Lord Stafford's Trial, p. 121, 122. I
take it, there is some difference betwixt summoning upon a Design to
invalidate, and appearing upon a Design to invalidate, which if Mr. Turbervill
had well considered, I verily believe he would never have showed his Teeth so
much against me.

Yet notwithstanding, I was no voluntary Witn^ss, I do here profess, and stand
upon it, as a Principle of my Religion, That, had I known any matters certainly
true, which would have preserved the Lord Stafford's Life, (though I were in
all li^^^^^hood to be murdered by the Papists, or (...) being exposed, as now I
am to popular fury) I would and ought to have declared them.

Cruelty is no sign of Courage, in a martial humor, and rashness is a grand
impeachment of a man's discretion* I and my Family are quite undone, should the
World believe what Mr. Turbervill so cruelly, rashly and impertinently (to his
purpose) reports of me.

Let him remember the saying of Valence to Edward II. In heat of Blood to kill,
may taste of valor, which yet on co^ler terms may touch of murder: Your
victorious sword is imbrewed with honor, let it not ravage where is no
resistance: To spill where you may save obscures your Glory, to save where you
may spill proclaims your Goodness.

If due thoughts of this shall not excite his pity, then ^^serere (...) Deus!

I thank God I have read something, and I do both remember and abhor the
damnable Principles of the Papists, death and destruction are the Jesuits
M^^hinatius; And Mr. Turbervill himself left his Cloister, because amongst
those Brethren (instead of seraphick Piety and Purity of Religion) he could
observe nothing but Malice, Envy, Backbyting and Detraction of one another: How
his proceedings against me (in his last Narrative) with such violent scandals
agrees with this so pious an^ chri^ian-like Resolve, I cannot de^ermine, but
this I know, that I am abused.

It Is not the least of our happiness, as Englishmen, that every man is allowed
(by the wholesome Laws of this Kingdom) the liberty of being heard, before he can
be legally condemned: I therefore, as my Birthright, claim that Freedom, and
humbly beg of all the World, especially all good Protestants, not to wrest or
enforce, the plain meaning of this my just and absolutely necessary vindication
of my self, to deviate from its true Design, to the service of Malice or Popery.

And I do sincerely profess, That I do not here intend to detract from the
credit of Mr. Turbervill's Testimony; but if any thing herein shall efface the
monstrous ugliness of that Character he is pleased to give me, and falsify
what he says in my particular, I humbly beg that it may not be construed to
invalidtae his Evidenc; What his Narratiue speaks in relation to the truth of
that, does not concern me further, than that I am a Protestant, and highly
obliged to himself and all the rest of those worthy Gentlemen, who (by their
timely Discoveries) have been blessed Instruments in the preservation of our
Lives, Religion and Government.

Mr. Turbervill is pleased to say, That without doubt I had large promises from
the Popish party, which I thought would be prevalent: It Is beyond a Petitio
principii, and some sort of Presumption in him, to determine what I thought,
Heaven has reserved that as the peculiar business of his own Omniscience: And
whether it happens to be right guessed, or not, I must leave to the judgments
of such as know me better, however, it is an uncharitable stabbing censure. The
Evidence I gave was about a Discourse that had happened betwixt Mr. Turbervill
and me, which you may see in the Lord Stafford's Trial, page 121. I am not here
about to vindicate the Truth of my Testimony, I leave that to the World, to
believe as they please. It Is strange to me that Mr. Turbervill should imagine
that I was bribed to give that Evidence, which I must needs know (being a
Barrister at Law) would be improper for the Prisoner's purpose: Or that if I
had been bribed, I presume no man will believe but that the Roman party would
have made a better bargain, than for me to declare an impertinent Evidence.

But yet I do say, That if what I spoke had greater weight than I believe it
had, and was received by every Body as an undoubted Truth, even that could not
abate the due credit of Mr. Turbervill's Evidence; for if he was (as I believe)
a Papist at that time, when he spoke to me, it was then his Principle to
conceal any thing that might tend to a Discovery of their Hellish Plot: And
now, good Mr. Turbervill, why so angry?

Impetit animum, nec potest cernere verum.

I would faign know how my Wifes Fortune concerns his Credit? What he now means
by small or great? And why he seems to summon me to an account, by saying that
the same is now almost spent? O impertinent insulting Tyranny! 'twill be good
to remember,

Altius evexit quam te Fortuna, Ruinam
Majorem timeas. --
Juven Too great a care improperly expressed, does often lose the cause it
strives to advantage.

But that Mr: Turbervill should know, (and make it as part of an undoubted
Truth, in his Narrative,) that I was first called to the Bar, and then
afterward, upon the credit of that, married a Wife, seems wonderful to me; and
in that, I may say* he is more than Omniscient; for he knows that, and declares
it as a positive Truth, which really never was, (as I believe, for I dare not
be positive, since he affirms the contrary.) I take it chst I was first married
in April, and afterward called to the Bar in Trinity-Term 1679. Perhaps
Trinity-Tirm might be before April! who can tell? No, no, there is something in
this more than I understaud, it is a kind of a charm upon my intellects, and (I
may say) that I am almost brwitched not to believe my own senses, and yet I do
not hold the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

But suppose I had been married upon the credit of my being called to the Bar,
what is that to his purpose? or how does it strengthen his or weaken my
Evidence? The Long Robe is no mean Foundation to build a good Fortune on.

Had my condition ever been as calamitous as Mr. Turbervill would make the
world believe it once was, his charitable endeavors are not now wanting to
render the same much worse, by exposing me to the hatred and fury of mankind:
And I need not fear (the more's my sorrow) of finding some to cut my throat, if
he should be so cruel at any time, as to show me daw^'d after his manner to the
rabble. Temptations are the Works of the Devil; And if at any time he assaulted
me, so as to draw me in to be guilty of my own murder, I heartily thank
Almighty God for his Grace, that I am still living, and do defy thee Satan.

I was never yet guilty of any sort of TREASONS, Murders, Felonies, Perjuries,
Forgeries, etc. So that if I was once poor, I kept my self honest. Dr. Oats
says, That a man's poverty is no objection against his honesty: L. Stafford 's
Trial, p. 130.
And when, not very long ago, I saw Mr. Turbervill in a low condition (as I
thought) I pityed him, and would now fain know how he comes to dash Poverty in
the Teeth of Evidence? If a man (as he says) would do much to gratify a person
that had preserved him from starving, I do verily believe he would do much more
to keep himself from starving: But that a man ought to perjure himself, on a
point of Gratitude, or upon any other account whatsoever, I thank God is none
of my principle, nor indeed had I ever any temptation that way; which I protest
to be true upon my hopes of Salvation.

What Mr. Turbervill designs to do with me I cannot tell, he renders me a man
unprincipled, and in that a Beast; (as far as in him lies) yet when I think on
God's providence, in my preservation, against the hatred of froward men, I have
no reason to renounce, my humanity, bu^ much rather to admire his divine
goo^^^ss. I will now give Mr. Turbervill a taste of my principles, which I have
most r^^son to use in these lamentable ti^es of distraction.

True Piety binds the Subject to deliver a good Sovereign, to (...) with a
bad, and to take up the burden of Princes with a bended knee, hoping rather in
time to merit abatement, (...).

The King in his Throne, is like the Sun in the Firmament, whose in^^uence
animates all sublunary Beings: So the Authority of a Prince gives life and
vigor to every particular Member of the Body politic; And he is not only
Caput, but also Anim^ Relpublicae; And no Member ought to move against that
Soul which is the Life of its being, or presume to accede too near this
resplendent Head, (by intermeddling with the scorching influences of the State
Ar^^^) lest the brightness thereof should dazzle the Adventurers into Blindness
and Faction, and the heat thereof scorch them into (...) and Destruction.

But suppose a Magistrate really tyrannical; it is no contemptible Question,
Whether the evils of the redress may not be equivalent to the mischiefs
imposed? I remember Livy 's Nec morbum far pos^^^^^ nec remedium: And Tacitus
's ^erend, a Regum ingenia, neque (...) effe crebras mutati^^^, (...) (...)
don^^ homines; sed neque haec continua Et meliorum interrantu pensantur: And
Seneca 's Infaeliciter aegrotat, cui plus pericull a Medico quam Morbo. Poise
the miseries of a Civil-war with the grievances of an unjust Magistrate, and
the Balance seems to me so unequal, that (if my Christianity fail) the
apprehension of the inevitable miseries by the sword, is sufficient to deter
from such a damnable Practice; For though the fury of incensed Tyranny may fall
heavy upon many particulars, yet the bloody consequences of an intestine Sword
are more epidemical and lasting: But if there be such Distempers in a State, as
shall require amendment, let it be left to the course of providence, and not
(against the disposition of Heaven) be attempted by the sword of violence, For
I never read that Illegal or Tumultuous, or Rebellious were proper Epithets for
Reformation.

And the learned Bodin says, Albeit by the sufferance of the King of England,
controversies between the King and his people are determined by the High-Court
of Parliament, and sometimes by the Lord Chief Justice of England: Yet all the
Estates remain in full subjection to the King, who is no ways bound to follow
their advice, neither consent to their requests. And yet, as to the right of
the Subject, I held with Fortescue, That Rex Anglia neque per se, aut ministros
suos, subsidia, aut alia quae vis oners, imponit Ligeis suis, sine assensu
totius regni sui, in parliamento suo expresso.

So much for a taste, but should I proceed instead of a compendious Narrative I
might make a large Volumn; wherefore I will conclude with a few Negative Votes,
viz. That Dominion is not founded in Grace, as the Jesuits and some others
hold: That passive Obedience is fit for Fools, and those that know no better:
Or that it is lawful to bear Arms against the King, and resist him in mattess
of Religion and Conscience, I utterly deny and abhor: And from such as hold the
contrary, I will conclude upon our present Distractions. Novi ego hoc saeculum
quibus moribus sit; Malus bonum, malum esse vult, ut sit sui simil^^^ turbant,
miscent mores mali; Ralpa^, Avarus, Invi^us, sacrum profanum, publicum privatum
habebit; Hiulca gens, etc.

From the Lords in the Tower, and SOME that are out,
From stabbing the King with Dagger or Vote,
From Ruin point blank, or nine miles about,
Good Lord deliver us.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1680.


