SOME REMARKS On Mr. Bois Book In Defense of Osborn. And upon some PASSAGES in
Mr. Williams SERMON on the 23d. of October last.
Sent in a Letter to satisfy his Friend, a Dissenter in the Country. By N. N.
SIR,
I do not design by this Paper to throw any more Dirt upon the Worthy and Pious
Divine, Mr. Osborn; and I am very well pleased to hear any thing that may
Justify him, or any man that lies under Aspersion; but where the Author, under
the pretense of defending Mr. Osborn, brings in his Insinuation against the
Church, and some Members of it: If Mr. Osborn were as Pious and Worthy a Divine
as Mr. Bois himself, I must beg his Pardon, and cannot but Affirm, That Mr.
Osbor^s coming into the North, was understood generally to persuade people to
lay down their Arms: That they did lay down their Arms upon it, is most
notorious, and it prevailed so far, that some of the Subscribers to Mr. O's
Certificate fled upon it, and left all their Plate and Jewels, and Sweet meats,
behind, and took nothing away of Value, but their Race-horses. The Subscribers,
I think, have now left themselves without Excuse; for their running was excused
upon this very Account, that the people were persuaded to lay down their Arms,
and their Leaders were to shift for themselves; but now their running away will
want a new Apology: Nay, farther I have heard it affirmed, that this Management
of Mr. Osborn, prevailed in the North to this very day, so that they did not
join with our Forces: And a Gentleman lately Examined before the Parliament,
gives the same Reason for it still, that Mr. Osborns Brethren do persuade and
command their People by no means to join with the present Government; which if
true, Mr. Bois, etc. would do well to go and Preach another Doctrine in those
Parts, and to take Mr. O. along with him, rather than to hazard the Credit of
his Friends, for the sake of that Worthy and Pious Divine. This might be a
better Service to the Government than preaching, writing, or talking in
Coffee-houses against the C. of England. I am sorry there is occasion to
reflect upon these things, it is certainly our great Misfortune, and to be
lamented, that such men that bear the Name of Christians and Protestants, will
not learn what is the true Interest of their Profession, but will always be
picking at those that are the great defenders of it; the Great Laud and
Stillingfleet, etc. have done more for the Protestant Religion than all the
worthy and pious Divines of our Author's Communion, and how they have been used
by them, is too remarkable; in Ireland Bishop Bramhal has been alike
unfortunate; I do not know whence this is derived, but it is still pursued: Mr.
Bois must write against Dr. King in Dublin, and rather than have nothing to
write, he transcribes almost a whole Book (Answered a hundred times over) of
Baxters, when the Dr. was engaged with that base Apostate, D. Mamby; but that
Mr. Bois would get another Certificate from the aforesaid Subscribers, I could
tell him what Mischief that Book did the Protestants, and what use the Papists
made of it against the Church at that time. But we have a further Instance, Mr.
Bois against Mr. Walker, whom the World must allow has done very good Service
to the Protestant Religion in general, and deserves to be treated after another
manner by Mr. Bois himself, than that he should be in print against him, and so
maliciously and falsely insinuate he was only a Store-keeper and Dispenser of
Provisions; as if that were all he did, when thousands could give Mr. Bois the
Lie, but that Mr. Bois has already done it under his Hand, in his modest
Letter, as he calls it, or Admonishment to Mr. Walker, wherein he acknowledges
Mr. W's. Services, and which would have a civil Answer, had not Mr. Bois talked
the Substance of it in Coffee-houses so often over before Mr. W. read it in a
Letter and as for the Modesty or i^ ^ow well i^ deserves that Character, let
any man ^dge when he desired Mr. W to retract what he had said.

Though Mr. Walker (as does now appear) no doubt, intended them Credit, by
naming only those two as contributing to their Mischiefs, when others were
fasly accused; and he would upon all occasions be as ready to assist those Mr.
Bois calls Brethren, in all Honest and Christian Services, as Mr. Bois himself.

Another Mistake of Mr. Bois is, that he says that Mr. Osborn writ to none but
Members of the Consult, which is evidently false, by several Copies now in Town
from Mr. Osborn, writ to his Brethren, and other Gentlemen twenty and thirty
miles distant; and though Mr. Bois says it was writ with no other design, but to
make them prepare against the Enemy, and that danger; pray ask a Lieutenant
Colonel of Derry, now in Town, who was present when Mr. Osborn and his
Secretary were so busy; and whether his Sentiments were the same with Mr. Bois.
-- If any other Use was made of this Letter, it was oweing to their Fears and
Cowardice. This is not said with that just Respect Mr. Bois should pay the
Subscribers, they are concerned to answer for themselves; I am sure Sir A.
Boyden can, and write for himself too, though I question whether he did so to the
Certificate. Now for the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, Mr. Bois must show his
Parts, and I have been told, has done it before on that Subject, I think it
very impertinent, he should upon so little Ground enlarge on it so much in his
Book; that Matter has been pretty well explained in twenty Books, (to which I
refer the Author) and I never heard any one, that either understood that
Doctrine, or the Church of England, make it a Reproach to her; so far as she
has been concerned, it is easy enough to justify her: And since Mr. Bois, etc.
expects to reap the Benefit of her mistake, (if such) I wonder he should speak
against it. And now in comes the Bishop of Derry, what a Stir the Apologist
kept about him, and his Patron Mr. Bois does in his Paper, only because the
Bishop did not run with Mr. Kerns, and the Boys, to shut up the Gates, which at
that time was a mad undertaking, but that the Compliance of one that came with
the Enemy, and that Providence ordered, it otherwise, it was as foolish a
thing as ever was done, and as dangerous; and Mr. Bois if he had been there, or
would now consider, must allow, not only the Bishop, but all the sober People
were against it; though they were afterward glad to see it done, when not by
themselves, because it might by great chance turn to good Account, and if not,
it might be excused.

As for what is said of Mr. W's. Regiment, being my Lord Charlemont, Colonel
Chichester, etc. Mr. Walker raised it himself, and perhaps did not think of
being a Colonel then, or Governor of Derry, no more than Mr. Bois; but if
afterward, Mr. Walker headed it, and did all the business of a Colonel, that
does not lessen him, though Mr. Bois throws it in no doubt with that design.

Some Pages the Author spends about the Dialogue between Osborn and Tyrconnel
and the following, about some good intentions of Friends; but since they never
came to Effect, and Mr. Bois sees whom to blame for it, he may keep that to
himself.

Now comes the Certificate which indeed is to purpose; the Subscribers being
extreme kind in it, and taking the whole blame upon themselves, and there let
it lie for me; for since the dispersing of Letters was accounted the great
occasion of the Peoples laying down their Arms, and that was done at the Order
of the Subscribers, they are to be blamed, and not Mr. Osborn, and indeed since
they have so long enjoyed the benefit of a good excuse for their own haste out
of that Country, it is but just at last, to put the Saddle on the right Horse;
and since they have Reason to understand this matter, we ought to submit to it,
and to think Mr. Osborn a very innocent Person. I think Mr. Bois by the
management of these Subscribers, has done true service to his Friend Mr.
Osborn; and had he Printed this Certificate (without his other needless
Reflections, and left Sir A's name out) I am confident no body would have
quarrelled with him, for that Argument is unanswerable, and I wish the rest had
been so too.

Mr. Bois complains he had not this Testimony sooner, for indeed, it cost many
meetings and consultations in the Pall Mall before it appeared, and Mr. Bois
can give another reason, the labor of getting hands to it, of those, to
gratify whom, so many Parenthesis are put in. As for Mr. Hewson, Mr. W. may not
so exactly understand, as Mr. Bois and his Friends, how they have used him; but
I hear a great many say, he has as great a party in the North, as Mr. Osborn,
or Mr. Bois. And notwithstanding Mr. Bois his insinuation against the
Government, for not employing more of his Friends; he has no reason to say they
are rejected: But as many of that sort, are employed in all places, as any
other; though I hear none but them complain, as if nothing could please such
People; though he says, none had access to Military Employment, but Church of
England Men, and so he would excuse the being so many Officers of that Church
in Derry, when he knows, since the taking up Arms, no such distinction was
observed; if so many of them stayed by it, it is so much the more for their
Credit Mr. Bois is a pin lower as to the number in Derry, than I find Mr.
William in his last Sermon; he says they were ten to one; Mr. Bois, five to
one. I have heard as modest men as either of them, contradict them both, and by
their own experience, though I think it not much worth the while to contend it;
and if they had not set up themselves, without any provocation, it had never
been spoken of: And if they interpret Mr. Walkers Preface to their own
disadvantage, they may; though I believe his meaning went further than the Walls
of Derry; and so far, that I wonder at their confidence not to allow it.

And now for Colonel Baker, How basely does Mr. Bois prevaricate? It Is well
known, neither Mr. Walker no^ he, were unkind to the Dissenters; but it is as
well known Mr. W. Engaged him in the Service, and not the contrary, after Mr.
B's coming out of the Boat, so little persuasion, obtained his Assistance, that
it could not be to his disparagement; he ever wanted it, nor do I mention it on
that Account; but to induce Mr. Bois i^ possible, to consider his own Forehead
in asserting such mistakes, as also his Remarks about the Cathedral and
Meetings; it shows Mr. Bois was not there himself, and takes things at random,
when they please him.

I believe Mr. W. in his Reflection on Brethren in England, never meant other,
but those that come from Ireland; and more shame for them to deserve it; and if
Mr. Bois take that to himself, he may; his discourse as well as writing, shows
him not the most peaceable or modest man, that he cannot quietly suffer himself
to enjoy his Liberty, without kicking at that Government and Church that gives
him it.

And as for the omitting the Names, that it was not voluntary, nor designed;
Mr. W. has said enough to convince any reasonable man; and it is a shame Mr.
Bois should still complain.

Mr. Bois ends all, with showing his concern for the failures of Mr. W's
Apologist; he will not say he was the Author, but would have as believe he
knows him, it is so worthy a piece; the Reader must know he had a hand in it,
and therefore we must be satisfied with Mr. Bois's concessions on his behalf,
and excuse the poor Gentleman for telling so many false Stories to no purpose,
but to do mischief, and to possess his own party of wrong done them, no body
knows by whom, nor how.

I hope that party is wiser and better disposed, than to be warmed, or to
Interest themselves on the account of such cavillers: their Friends in England,
do not give them any Examples of writing or speaking much against us, only
those of them that have their protection and bread among us, are the most
troublesome and noisy; it is a very ill use they make of these Favors they
meet, that they should dispose them to anger, and cunning Reflection against
the Government they have them from. I do not say this only with Relation to Mr.
Bois, but to another Worthy and Pious Divine, that Preached a Sermon the 23d.
of October last, not so much against Papists as Protestants; poor King Charles
the First, and the Duke of Ormond cannot escape him; and, but that he has more
Sense and Piety than his Lordship, a Right Reverend Bishop (I suppose for
putting that Rebellion on Papists) as he calls him, had been answered by him,
and sure he would do it most effectually out of the Councels, Fathers, and
Hebrew Text that he is so well acquainted with, and that has furnished his
Margin with Quotations, to amuse his simple Reader; an Art in which he is
singular. In his 19th. page, see what People he chooses for Popish designs, the
only opposers of them, that if they could have kept their places, would have
served those Interests; so that all the Champions for the Protestant Religion
in the Late Reign, were only Dissemblers and Sicophants. In the 24th. page, he
tells of some Friends, Papists have among us, under a Protestant Name; so that
the old Juggle in Masquerade must come up again. I am much troubled to see some
few indeed of that name so stubborn under this Government, but I am very
confident they will never fight for Popery, no more than Mr. Osborn of Mr.
Bois; but their Consciences have been a long time troublesome, and why should
they envy others the same pretense?

25. page You have a Remark upon the Haranges of Clergymen that were to set up
Arbitrary Power, (which if it were not for such fellows as our Authors, it
could never be pretended to) what ever they say to the contrary) and then he is
a little too severe upon their bad Husbandry and Poverty: But alas! that is
adding affliction to affliction; and it is no Argument, and I am sure, no good
practice; Mr. Williams knows it more Christian-like to Relieve the distressed,
than to reproach them with their necessities; but sowerness and ill nature
produces contrary effects. Then for D^rry, it is his sore place, you must not
touch him there; he knows who preserved it, and they were ten to one: Come,
this is not the spirit of meekness and humility; and I am confident Mr.
Williams Auditors came from that Sermon more prejudiced by it against the
Church of England, than against Papists; I am sure I met some of them that were
so, and I am sorry that under the pretense of Peace to be promoted among
Protestants, and a just resent against Papists, such malicious and mischievous
insinuations should appear in a Sermon on such an occasion; such men cannot but
know it a disservice to the public at this time, to warm their People against
us; when there are such endeavors on foot for a lasting Peace and Union among
us; and when all People should contribute their utmost to the effecting of it;
and it would more especially become Mr. Bois and Mr. Williams to add their mite
to so good a design, for it would be some reflection on such to perplex that
Government, where they have their Shelter and Protection, and to return
Scorpions to beget dissension for the Bread is given them, and the Charity that
feeds them. I have run these things over hastily, if any thing be wanting, I
will make it up in discourse the next time we meet: I am,

Sir, Yours, N. N.

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by Randle Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1689.


