Vox Clamantis; OR, A CRY TO Protestant Dissenters, Calling them from some
unwarrantable Ways, with which they are vulgarly, and perhaps too truly
charged, viz.

From all unnecessary meddling in matters of State.

From too deep engagement of themselves in this present World, and too great
Conformity to it.

From thinking too highly of themselves for their Separation-sake only.

From Fanaticism, properly so called, in their Prayers, Sermons, Books, etc.

And seriously exhorting them to the minding of the great concerns of Heaven.

To Fruitfulness in Well-doing.

To Sobriety, and the use of Reason in all Religious matters.

By N. N. A Protestant, and declared Dissenter from the Church of England, as
far as that Church, dissents from Christian Liberty, Holiness and Charity, and
no further.

Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this World. Romans 18. If it be possible live in
peace with all men. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and to mind your
Business. London, Printed for W. H. and are to be Sold by Richard Janaway, Anno
Dom. 1683.

VOX CLAMANTIS, OR, A Cry to the Professors and Dissenters of this Age, in
England, London, etc.
SECT. I.
Christian Friends and Brethren,
I Have heard, and you cannot but know; that many serious minded Christians,
much lament the great decay of Godliness and serious Piety, among the
Professors of this Age; and those that are called Dissenters, herein England,
and in this City in special: And enquiring into the Causes of it, they seem to
be diverse, besides that common and general one of a careless Spirit, which all
are too apt to fall into, even in the most weighty things, and the things of
God, and of their everlasting concern: which being matters invisible and future
(though most real) we consider not, but are taken up too much with the present
things of sense and outward appearance, because nearest to us, and so most
affecting of us: I say, besides this in the general; there are some present
special causes, reasons and occasions, that are bad, and at best scandalous,
which it is the intent of this present call and advice to remind you of, and to
admonish you, that they are detrimental, and hinder your progress and
perseverance, in well-doing, in order to your eternal well-being. And if we do
but look into the state of this Age, and the Land we live in, as to the
profession practice of Religion, and the Christian Religion, it is sad, and to
be lamented by all, who have any sense of the maine concerns of Christianity;
or of mankind.

The world of professing Christians in this Nation, (to look no further) are
found to be of two general sorts: The

First, Are the ungodly, openly profane; who notwithstanding they have been
born and educated in this most Holy Religion of Christ Jesus, yet carry nothing
but the name of it; and who, because they have not had the hap to now another,
must needs be called Christians; yet live in all manner of open sin, committing
all sin with greediness, (viz.) Whoredom, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Acts of
Violence, Oppression, and all manner of Debauchery; and these things not only
in secret, but openly; yea, and that which I think few Ages have seen, (since
Christianity) openly owning and avowing the vilest abominations, fleshly,
carnal lusts and wickedness; and that sometimes in the most public manner:
This is, and has too much been the guise and practice of evil men, of great
men in place and power; and such evil examples propagate wonderfully, and beget
in their own nature and likeness daily, even to admiration. These seem as if
they would, or had a mind industriously to propagate sin and wickedness, and to
declare themselves to be the open and sworn servants of sin and the Devil. If
it were in their power, and they should accordingly make Laws to promote and
advance the most wicked abominations and filthy lusts, they could not that way
do half so much toward it, as now by giving such public and open examples. It
is the most effectual way to promote Vice, and that with the greatest
advantage, as to the debauching and eternally ruining of others; when persons
great in power and place, give such examples. As our Lord teaches us, that the
most effectual way to glorify God, is not so much to Preach and Profess, or
tell the virtues of our Heavenly Father, as to imitate and follow them; and
that the light of our good and excellent works, shining before men, will tend
infinitely more to the glory of God, and is a better proof of the truth of our
Christianity, and of our good Conscience Godward, than any assent or
subscription whatsoever, to the best System of Divinity, Articles of Faith, or
Modells of Worship, which the evil and hypocrite may do, as well as the best,
and most sincere. To be holy, upright, just, sober, and to mortify and subdue
the lusts and pollutions of the flesh, that fight against the Soul and Spirit,
this is the hard work, that few engage in, though it be all in all, as to the
life and salvation of a Christian man. But we are now speaking of a generation
of men, into whose hearts such things do not enter, or once come into their
thoughts; or if they do, they soon shake them out, and get rid of them, being
resolved rudely and madly to put all to a desperate adventure, and never to try
nor make enquiry into things of this nature, into the truth of Christianity;
till they feel it in their own damnation. But enough of these.

Secondly, There are another sort, professing Christianity, that are better
than those, (at least not so apparently bad) that seem to have escaped the
gross pollutions of the World through lusts, and cannot be charged with such
open abominations, but in general are Sober, Religious, and in many things
Zealous; great hearers of Sermons, frequenters of Churches and Meetings: Yet it
is too apparent, that they sometimes pride themselves exceedingly in those
things, and are highly conceited of themselves, because they are not so bad as
the worst, and will confidently speak against, and reprove those that are
openly wicked, and glory that they are not like other men; and so comparing
themselves with the worst, think themselves wondrous good; but in this they
take wrong measures, the right way is to look up to the best, to see how they
come short of them, i. e. of the most commended and approved Servants of God
and Christ Jesus, the holy Apostles, the Prophets, and the life and example of
Jesus himself; and not to mind how much better they are than the worst, or the
most. Notwithstanding this, that yet such the Professors and Dissenters of this
Age are much wanting, and in many things out of the way, is too plain to be
hid; and all take some notice of it, their enemies do it to their reproach,
thereby to represent them both false and hypocritical, and also ridiculous.
That they do well, that do so, I am far from thinking; but that you should not
mind, and take warning by it, and upon this occasion look well to your selves,
and into your ways, search your own hearts and works, examine your principles
and practices; this I think argues great carelessness, and neglect, and shows
that you have not that fear nor care, which you should have, nor a mind truly
set within you, to design the honor and glory of God, nor the credit of
Religion.

I have diverse times upon occasion told (and others have done the like) some of
the Professors of this Age, what things and matters, those public Scurrilous
Libels and Pamphlets, that fly about the Streets daily (with some other of more
sober language and treatment, but as venomous) what these I say do still
object, and cast in the teeth of the present Dissenters; being things and
faults that they will needs have to be Characteristical of them all. But when
we have told some of the Professors of this Age of those matters, to warn and
admonish them, and to let them know what the things are, that they proclaim as
most culpable in them, they still reply; that such are enemies, a sort of
loose, ungodly, and profane men, scoffers at Religion, turning all into
ridicule, and so not to be heeded or regarded in what they say. Be it so; what
then? Though you will not mind it for their sake, yet you should for your own,
and for the Name of God, the credit of Religion and of your own Party (for
unhappily we are distinguished into Parties, etc. God forgive those who in any
kind are the causers of it.)

But do you not remember the old saying (Ab host fas est doceri) It is lawful,
yea very good and prudent to learn from an enemy. And if it were for my Life
and Soul, I would in the first place hearken to my enemies when they reprove or
find fault. It Is true, they are like to over-do, yet most like to do that which
our nearest and best Friends may be loath to do for us, i. e. speak those things
to us, and of us, that the Laws of Friendship and Civility, and love of our
Friends and Party, will not suffer them to do.

I do acknowledge that one benefit I have received in the reading such Papers,
has been; that though I saw they were extremely out, and writ neither with a
Spirit of Piety nor Charity, nor the least compassion to those whom they so
severely blame, but do it only to render them odious and ridiculous, and to
make the looser sort of men merry, and indeed to bring them out of the way of
the love of serious Piety; yet I learn much in them, which otherwise I might
not so well have understood. As matters in the world now are, we better see
others than our selves; and as no man can see his own face, so neither are a
man's own works and actions so near unto him, at least not so open before him,
as other men's: Therefore if I cannot see my self so well, I am beholding to
those, that shall in good will tell me, and ought to acknowledge it with
gratitude. But if they tell it to me or others, not out of love, but ill will,
and to expose me; however I have the same or a greater benefit, and the worst I
will do and return to them, is, to pray God, that seeing they have spoken
against me evil, or what they think is so, they may also see their own, and
hate all sin and evil; and this cannot hurt them, neither can they for it be
angry with me.

SECT. II.
I Will at present instance in one thing, because it comes now into my mind;
which they do commonly object, and thereby endeavor to expose you to scorn,
especially the Ministers and Preachers of the Nonconforming Party; and them
the rather, because the People have had, an honorable esteem of them for their
pains and labor in Preaching, and with reference to many of them, for their
great Faithfulness, and doing much good by their Ministry. Now to lessen the
Peoples love toward them, by means whereof they are drawn from, and make less
esteem of the Conformists way; therefore have those men industriously
inspected, and culled out of the Books and Sermons Preached and written by
them, all they could think of, or find absurd, or seeming so; that they might
thereby render them odious, or at least less esteemed: E. G. too vulgar and
over familiar Sayings to God in their Prayers, and the like in their Sermons
and Books of Practical Divinity, all their course Phrases, their unfit, uncouth
similitudes; all, as they call them, Phanatical Notions and Expressions, with
such things which they will needs have tend to Sedition and Rebellion. Many
things of this nature, they cull out, publish and expose to the World, to be
seen in their blackest colors: They have raked together many Books and
Pamphlets of late, and of latter days they seem to ply this work more than
ordinary, and to set and employ witty men, both of the Clergy and Laity
therein. I could tell you of many Persons and Pieces, to this purpose designed
and bent; one of the most sober of them, is the Author of the Friendly Debate:
And one of the most often employed this way, whose profession and business it
is, is Mr. R. L. with his Associates: I wish that witty Gentleman, would use
his Parts and Wits some other, and some better way: For my part, had I the
Ability he has, that quick, smart and pleasant way of Expression, that plenty
of free utterance; In short, if I had such excellent rare Endowments as that
Gentleman and some others have, and are owners of, I think, I durst not use
them, in such a Profane way, and in such uncharitable work, as they and he do.
But he must give account to God; let him but a little seriously consider, with
what Spirit he does this; whether it be like to the Christian Spirit, or Spirit
of Christ Jesus: And if indeed he really owns the truth of that Religion and
Revelation of God by Christ, I cannot think but that a little reflection upon
himself, and of this work, will do him good.

Well, but to you my Friends, and the more so, because I know many of you to be
Holy Christian men, designing Godliness: To you I say this they do, and would
it be now any hurt to you to consider, whether there may not indeed be some of
those Errors and Misdemeanors in some of your Books and Sermons; whether there
may not be many things obnoxious in those kinds now named, and others which
they will sufficiently inform you of: Consider of it, with free minds, do not
think.

First, That because they are enemies, and it may be profane wits that find
fault; that therefore you may conclude nothing is amiss; but hearken to them
(to choose) that find great faults, whether real or supposed, or any likeness
or appearance of such matters in your discourses or practices: You would surely
have them learn from you, I am sure you would take it well if they would be
taught by you, and so should you not disdain to hearken to them.

Secondly, This would show you to be of honest, ingenuous minds, and of those
that love the Truth, and would much convince the insulting adversary of your
uprightness and sincerity. What hurt or disgrace is it, to retract, or to let
them know that in some things, you may not have been so wise and wary, but that
you may and will amend?

Look over seriously and see, whether some particular notions of yours may not
betray you, and make you to speak, write, and preach, not so manly, rationally
and demonstratively, as you might and ought; but things looking too like
Phanaticism, as they think, and would be glad to find.

Certainly the Christian Religion does not unman men, but makes them more
perfect; it makes good Christians, to be the wisest as well as the best of men.

You are not to think, that because your own Hearers, who out of a good opinion
of your worth and Piety, may be somewhat too credulous, and take all at the
best, that therefore others will do so too. They that Preach and Write about
Religion and Divinity, should regard those that are contrary, and that may be
perhaps wicked, but witty, of Parts, but little Piety, of Learning and liberal
Education, but not much Charity, and so not like to take every thing by the
right handle; not to take the best meaning and interpretation, the thing
willbear. And though men profanely and scurrilously call you Phanaticks; yet
give them neither just cause nor occasion for it, in speaking and preacking of
the word of God and Religion. All should mind to do as the Apostle advises
Timothy in 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved to God, a workman that
needs not to be ashamed, (i. e.) Not ashamed that men, any men, should hear him
(rightly dividing the word of Truth.) For my part I should, and I think you
ought, above all things, to dread Popularity, and to be most afraid, when you
see men, many men, your People and Hearers, to take and drink all down,
examining nothing; and all this only out of the good opinion they have of you
their Teachers, though others in the mean time, and for the same matter deride
and scorn you. Oh! how happy would it be if men, Christian men, would once come
to this excellent Spirit (i. e.) To consider and judge of things, of all
things, even things of Religion, as they are in themselves, in their own
nature; and so receive and embrace them, and be able, either to receive or
reject, out of a free judgment: And neither to accept things for the sake of
men, and that good opinion they have of them, nor to reject any thing, because
they like not the men, that write or speak it, or because they are not of their
Party or Opinion: Till this be, Christians will never excel, nor be wise unto
Salvation, nor credit Religion. I confess the men that object this against you,
to your reproach, are most unfit to do it; partly

First, For that ill temper of Spirit in which they do it; it seems to be
neither out of Piety, nor Charity, nor out of an intent to do you any good, or
in any thing to amend you; besides many of them are (I say not all) plainly men
of an ungodly spirit, so far from taking that way of Charity, Meekness,
Simplicity, which the Gospel of our Lord requires, that they put all their
trust, of overcoming their adversaries, in their profane Jesting, Joaking,
turning Religion into ridicule, Deriding, Jeering, Scoffing at all men of a
contrary Party, without making a difference, handling the matter in difference,
in a Profane, Poetical, Comical strain and drollery, and not after that
serious manner, and with that deep sense, nor with that Charity, which those
things require; so that their writing and talk of this kind, suites more to the
Playhouse, than to the Church, not caring what they say, so they can either
find, or create matters to disgrace their Adversaries with.

This Jocular strain of theirs, with a pleasure in handling matters, and
answers in the like kind, seems to have taken too much hold on some of you, in
the imitation of them, to the no little disgrace and discredit of the most
holy, and pure Truth, and simplicity of Jesus.

Some of you, also delight too much to please the People, and tickle their Ears
with such like stuff, with Jesting and Joaking at your opposites, with girds
and sarcastical hints against them, telling your familiars, with too much
delight their faults, and not seriously, nor charitably pitying them, nor
wishing their good and betterment. Thus if we may believe them; you encourage
and maintain others, to draw the Saw of contention, and to carry on the Cause
in difference at such a rate; which if you better consider of it, appears not
to be Christian, nor will you find peace in it at last; it no way agreeing with
the gravity and seriousness of a Christian, nor with the dread and weighty
concerns of Religion and men's Salvation.

Secondly, Another account upon which I judge them very unfit to object
against, or retort upon you: Is first, because I find some of the main matters,
they make faulty, and draw particular absurdities from, in your Prayers and
Preaching, in some opinions, are common to themselves with you: Such I find to
be the opinions and differences about the five controverted points, concerning
Election and Reprobation: What they will needs call Calvinism, you call the
contrary Arminianism. The consequence and matters drawn from those, they still
make matters of scorn, and wherewith to expose you, as is plain and manifest,
in most of their late Writings and Books, especially those made by their
Divines.

They take in the worst, and most obnoxious parts and consequences, of your
opinions (though there be both Godly and Learned men on both sides) on purpose,
thinking thereby to disgrace the Nonconforming Brethren, which is a most
disingenuous way of proceeding.

Secondly, Because those notions and opinions, (called Calvinianism and
Contra-Remonstrant,) are the plain sense of the Articles of the Church of
England, (or else we have lost all our senses, and all men else as well as we)
till some few of late will needs fancy otherwise.

Thirdly, Because there are still many, and have been more in times past, of
the most Learned, if not the most Pious and Zealous of the Church of England,
that have embraced, held, and strenuously defended those opinions: Now to screw
absurdities out of these notions and opinions, to take hold on these ungrateful
things, and the consequences of them, that are most obnoxious to cavil and
censure; when in the mean time the best and ablest of their own Party, are of
the same mind, and have spoken the same things, and full as absurd (if they
will have it so) as any; as it were easy to point to Books, and Authors of
this kind: I say, to do this upon these terms, is most disingenuous, and
unworthy men and Christians.

Finally, They are most disingenuous and unworthy in this their procedure, in
their Cavils, and Accusations of Absurdities, and Phanaticisms in Preaching and
Praying, charged upon the Nonconformists; seeing it were an easy work to do
the same by them, if any were so minded, and could not better spend their time,
or could adventure to wast their Conscience, and expose Religion to scorn upon
such a score. There are those that think they could do it, and some in times
past that have done it, and find matters enough, and too much for it; but
enough of this, etc.

Therefore, seeing they are so troublesome and offensive to you in this kind, I
trust you will not be Imitators of them in the same way of working; deriding,
scoffing and exposing them, for their faults, errors and miscarriages.
Notwithstanding some will plead on both sides, that instance of Elias in
mocking Baal's Priests, to countenance all the Mockery, Drollery and Scoffing,
made use of in Religion, and about Religious matters, and Religious men. To
which I say,

First, Let not us Christians look upon the single practice of any, no not of
the best men in Scripture Records; but according as they agree with and savor
of, the Spirit of Holiness, Peace and Charity, acting in the Gospel of Christ,
and will consist with the promotion of the high and holy end and design of it;
that is, according to the Life and example of our Lord Jesus, who has taught
us the most excellent things, and given us the worthiest examples of them, in
all peace, patience, meekness, goodness, charity.

Secondly, Again, if a wise man should for once be found in such a way, or do
such a thing, i. e. deride, mock, etc. it would be enough to do it once, but to
continue in it, and still to answer the adversary, as fast as he does it; is
not only unworthy of a good Christian, but of a sober wise man.

Solomon has an excellent saying to this purpose, Answer a fool, (says he)
according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit, i. e. For once
perhaps thou may sometime do so, and but once, as the following words imply,
Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like unto him, i. e. By
continuing to answer him still according to his folly, as long as he shall
persist therein, thou shall be like unto him, a fool also.

Thirdly, As it is not fit for Christians to return Railing for Railing, so
neither Scoffing nor Joaking, for any thing of the same kind.

Yet this has been done, if they say true, not without the Knowledge, Agency,
Encouragement of some of your way, who have sat too much in the seat of
scorners, (viz.) in smart Sarcasms, profane Poetry, and in Pictures, Draughts,
etc. to render the contrary party ridiculous and absurd as much as they can,
all which falls under the divine prohibition against profane jesting,
scoffing, reproaching, and villifying, and breeds very ill consequents and
effects, (viz.) anger, malice, hatred, revenge, making of Parties, divisions,
destroying of Christian Peace and Charity.

We should consider, every man has some honor and veneration for himself, for
his Friend, and for his Party; and few can bear to have this Crown spoiled, to
be degraded from their honor, or have their name and reputation laid wast; but
will above all things, be stirred and provoked by such dealing and detraction.
Consider with your selves, if it be not so with you; Sure I am, this way of
proceeding is most Unchristian, and agrees not at all with that good Spirit
which is peaceable, full of love, tenderness, fear, humility, and which becomes
and recommends the Christian Gospel of our Lord and Savior: Neither is it
agreeable to the Royal Rule, of doing to others, as we would be done unto our
selves.

Finally, some good and godly men, I have known, that have somewhat
transgressed this way; and though upon the greatest provocation given, and that
repeated and public; yet those humble and holy men have repented of it, and
publicly, and in Print, retracted it. In a word, you as Christians ought not
to follow any in this kind, but to give examples to the contrary.

SECT. III.
FUrther, There is one thing, and the principal thing, you are charged with,
(which I doubt is to too true, at least has more of truth than I could wish)
and that is a too much busying your selves about public and State-matters, and
things relating to Government; and consequently too much, and too great a
busying your selves, in hearing and telling News, spending much time about it
in Publick-houses and elsewhere; and that too much of your Hearts and Spirits
are drunk up about such matters, etc. This is offensive and hateful to the
contrary Party, scandalous to your Profession; and doubtless a great hindrance,
to other more serious and necessary work; and in some even to the forgetting
and neglecting the weighty concerns of their own Souls, and eternal happiness;
if not to the neglect of their Places and Callings, their Time, the order of
their Families, and duties in their Relations; I condemn none in particular,
but in the general. A cry and noise there is abroad of spending time this way,
and good Christians have observed, that they have never known any overmuch
given to hear, or take up and tell News and Stories of all kinds, and about
State-matters in special; but they have observed a great decay in their
Spirits, and found them growing to a great degree unsavory, losing much of
that good savor and vigor, that they had in time past. And so becoming much
the worse in the temper of their Spirits, and it is to be feared in their
usefulness in their Places.

Object. But you will say; What may we not concern our selves in the affairs
and passages of the Times we live in? Must we not serve our Generation the best
we can? And if so, how can this be without observing and speaking about the
matters and transactions herein? Besides, are we not Parts and Members of the
Nation and Kingdom we are born in; and have a right, yea a Birthright to all
the legal Rights and Privileges of it; and when we see these invaded, may we
not mind it and speak of it? Must we see Popery, Arbitrary Government, coming
on apace upon us; and not take notice of it, nor observe and speak of it? Are
not our Lives, Liberties and Posterities concerned in these things? and have
not there been Hellish Popish Plots set on foot, and continued against us? To
be sure we shall suffer with the first and the deepest, and sure all this is
enough to stir us and concern us, etc.

I Answer, (First) No doubt but Christians may concern themselves in the State,
and Affairs of the places where they live; but this is to be done in fitting
ways, without scandal, or being over-busie, or justly suspected of any undue
design and practice.

(And I who know something of the Dissenting Party) do believe they have none
to carry on: Nay, I find them every day more and more, (so far as I know them)
inclining to Peace, Patient, ready to bear all that comes, or is threatened to
be laid upon them: Though it has not been without cause of jealousy, that some
were willing enough to provoke, and would have been glad to see them provoked,
to some undue courses and disturbances; that so they might have had occasion to
have perfected and crowned their Plot! But thanks be to God they were deceived!

But I was saying, that doubtless you and all Christians may concern themselves
in ways Christian, and proper to them in the Afairs of Government and State, in
the place where they live. And that,

First, In their Prayers, for the good of it, directing them to God, suitable
to the occasions or workings of the designs on foot, in the present State, and
Kingdom, and Government they live under.

We are commanded to make Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, giving of
Thanks for all men; for Kings, and for all men in Authority; for this end, that
under them we may live a quiet, peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty,
etc.

And of old the People of God were commanded to seek and to Pray for the good
and peace of the place where they lived, though it were in Captivity: For in it
they should have Peace, Jerem. 29.7, 8.

And so we may and should observe, what motions and matters are carrying on in
the Land and Government; that we may direct our Prayers accordingly, with fit
and suitable arguments unto God, for the good and the peace of it: That is the
first thing, they may and ought to do.

Secondly, If need be, and matters go against us, and contrary to our minds,
(and as we think) not as they should; we may certainly with humility, petition
and pray unto men and those in Power; and express our sense and fears about
things, pray for what we desire in a peaceable way. None sure can be against
this.

Thirdly, But if the motions and designs we fear, and like not, be not our
concern, as we are of such a Party, distinct from the rest; but do concern the
whole body of the Nation as well as us. There is no reason we should seem more
afraid, than the rest; but be able (surely) to bear as long as the rest of the
Nation does, so long as such designs are not evidently destructive to the
whole: Neighbors fare here, if it be not the best; yet it may at present
satisfy us, to take our share in common. If they will bear it, or not mind it,
shall we only, or first, or most, concern our selves more than others.

Fourthly, Much less should we be the forwardest in matters of this nature; and
it is worst of all, and altogether unexcusable to be querulous, still thinking
and censuring the worst of things; to be discontented and find fault, to be
found more forward to take exceptions, etc. We ought, having observed how
things are, let them appear never so ill; yet to do in this, as in other
things, we are commanded; in nothing to be careful, but to commit our selves
and requests to God by supplication, and to receive the good we have with
Thanksgiving; and the God of peace, and the peace of God, will keep and guard
your minds in peace.

Fifthly, For you to meddle and concern your selves overbusily, will be worst
taken of any; it will be scandalous, and of ill resentment above all others.
You are at some difference with them on the account of Religion, and are
Dissenters from the National established Worship, and therefore should meddle
the less, and the least of any, in public State-matters and differences,
unless called to it.

I wonder, but cannot tell how it came to pass, that in our late Differences
and Controversies, in State and Civil matters, you should then be, or how now
you come to be reckoned as a Party in the present Difference as well as the
other; sure I am it should not be so. What! because we are Dissenters in some
matters relating to Religion and Worship; must we needs be so too in other
matters of State and Government? As I said before, we should be so much the
less in these, and indeed scarce seen in them: It is most unhappy to be thus
involved; and if it be the ill design of any to have it so, or to represent you
as such, we should still so much the more decline it.

You should remember how apt the World has been in all Ages to cast the crime
or suspicion, at least of Sedition and Rebellion upon the Dissenting Party; so
it was objected against the Christians, when the world was Pagan, etc. So when
it was Popish; and so it has always been, and is like to be. And at this
present, common Fame, the common Pamphlets, and Prints will needs proclaim;
that ye are Dissenters from, and opposite to the Civil as well as Religious
establishment. Though it may not be uncharitably suspected and conjectured,
that they which charge you most with Sedition and Rebellion, would be most
glad, if they could have the opportunity to see you so, and find you actually
engaged therein; and that it would both please them, and advance their design
for the total suppression of you; but I trust that they shall for ever lose
their longing. However, still the reason and argument of persuasion to take you
off, from minding and meddling too much in those concerns, is so much the more
forceable and persuasive upon this supposition.

Sixthly, When ever any have (through the force and provocation of violence,
persecution, hard and cruel usage) been forced out of their patience, into
passion and discontent, and so into Insurrection, Rebellion, etc. for their
defense: The adversary has improved this, either to the utter destruction and
extirpation of them in those places where it has been, or at least to make
their States and Cases, much worse than they were before.

Seventhly, Indeed it has seldom, or scarce ever been seen, that God has
blessed this way of Christians going about to better and amend themselves, i.
e. The way of force, etc. Neither could it be expected, it being quite out of
Gods way, contrary to the Spirit and way of Christ Jesus; and to that patience,
meekness, bearing of Injuries, Oppressions, Persecution, with a patient
continuance in well doing and well-suffering, according to the example of our
dear Lord: Trusting in the living God, committing our ways unto him, waiting
patiently upon him, till he in his own due time (which is the best time) help
and deliver; which if he should not do in this World, is not the hope of that
to come, sufficient to enable Christian men to bear and suffer here for a
little season? Certainly if Christianity be true, and truly believed; it is
enough that it promises so great a good to those, who continue in so good and
approved a way.

However, upon the whole you may see it is not safe meddling, yea scarce safe
speaking of State and public matters and differences, except ye speak on the
prevailing side, which if you cannot do, it is best, most prudent, and safest,
not to speak at all, others may do it better than you; and you should be the
last, if at all concerned in those matters; especially as you are private men,
and Christians, not called to any place of Council, or advice in these matters.
And if it be not, scarce at any time safe, and seldom Christian, and right to
meddle in public affairs in a way of opposition; how ill then and
unjustifiable are they that make such things the matter of, or at least bring
them into their Prayers, Sermons, etc. and by that means both sin against God,
their Neighbors, their Rulers, and expose themselves, and all that are
reckoned of the Dissenting Party to hatred, if not to destruction.

Secondly, Further consider, that as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
World, so neither are you, that are his subjects, to be much concerned about
it; nor to reckon, or account, of any great matter for your selves in it. The
Saints of God of old did, as we are now commanded to do, and have greater
reason for it than they, (viz.) To be as strangers and pilgrims in this present
World: And to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear.

We have work enough to do, and time little enough to do it in; to work out our
salvation, to discharge the work and duty we have to do as men and Christians,
in our Places, Standings and Relations, to give a good account to God of our
coming in, and continuing for a while in this World; to mind the great design
and purpose of Christ, and his coming into the World, which all that would be
accounted his Servants and Subjects in his Kingdom, are bound to mind, i. e.
How to save our selves and others, and by all good example and otherwise, to
draw men from off their sins, unto God, unto righteousness, and holy living,
that they may escape the condemnation, that is hasting apace against all
sinners unrepentant; and to endeavor this way to increase the number of
Christ's subjects and followers; this blessed design will find us and you all
work enough. I wonder much, that among all your talking about News and Stories,
Matters and Affairs that are working; that you do not mind those things more,
and why they are not the subject matter of your Discourse, as often as you can,
that all may see to whom you do belong, and according to whose Spirit and
Principle you are led; and may see, that indeed you have been with Jesus, and
learned somewhat of his Spirit.

I know no concerns we have to busy our selves merely as Christians, and meddle
in matters of State Affairs now, more than the Christians of old had, that
lived under the Heathen Emperors, or they who now live under other Princes,
that are of a different Religion; the Ancient Christians were right glad if
they could be but quiet in their Religion and Profession, being in that
Dissenters from the State they lived in; and could they enjoy peace and liberty
this way, they seemed to be pleased well enough. For indeed surely the
Christian Religion was never much favored, where it was professed in the
purity, simplicity, and excellent liberty of it; nor for ought we can know,
ever will be by the power and greatness of this World; and when ever they have
gone about to help it, by the addition of their Power and Authority, and with
the assistance of State Interest and Policy, it has scarce ever, or seldom
thrived, or been increased thereby.

We know, and it is upon record, how excellently this holy Religion and
Profession of Christ Jesus did thrive and grow, when the greatness and powers
of this World; yea, of all the World, were against it, when it stood upon its
own Legs; went forth conquering and to conquer, in its own power, and having no
carnal, but spiritual weapons, to assist it and fight for it, even such as it
had in it self, and in its own nature: The Divine power, (secretly) but most
effectually wrought in it. Oh! the excellency of the Divine Power of this
excellent Religion, called Christian, if it were left to its self, and to the
conduct of the great Author of it, by his Spirit that is promised to attend it,
both in its progress in the World, and in the hearts of men. Since the Powers
of this World, would needs extend their favors to it, and exert their force in
behalf of it, and not letting it proceed, upon its own Principles, but adding
to it the Interest and Policy of State: Oh! how feeble is it grown, it can make
no such progress in the World as it did; but has lost much ground, of what it
had, as is plain in many, and especially in the Eastern Parts of the World and
elsewhere.

So my Christian Friends and Brethren, should it be as to your way or
profession; if it be of God, and of the same Spirit with the Doctrine of
Christ, to which it pretends, it will be enough to live of it self, without any
dependence on the State where you live, and make profession of it; and it would
increase and enlarge too, if men lived up to it, and managed it according to
that Spirit of holiness and heavenly virtue, that it teaches; so that you need
not concern your selves, lest you should lose your Liberty, your Religion, your
Posterity be overrun with Popery and Tyranny; and great fears in this kind are
sometimes more than there is cause for. How many have sadly and foolishly
troubled themselves, lived in fear of Popery, Plots, Massacres all their days,
spoiled their own peace, and have died a thousand deaths, before they needed?
It is sufficient to die once, and not to live in a constant fear of it, which
is worse than death.

(In a word) If you and all such had minded their own business, been earnest to
work out their salvations, had let their light shine before men, in all peace
and patience, goodness and beneficialness to all doing all good, and bearing
all evil, ye would have found, that your own, and the public good and welfare,
had been better provided for, and you had done more to promote the Kingdom and
Glory of Christ in the World, and better secured the peace, liberty and quiet,
both of your selves and posterity, than now by all your strivings, motions and
concerns in State Affairs and matters relating thereunto. This is the wisdom
that is from above, that is first pure, then peaceable; that by patient
continuing in well doing, obtains all good, overcomes all evil, secures the
main of all unto us, both in this World and in the World to come, (Godliness
has the promise of both.) To which the Lord Jesus conduct us all in safety,
granting to us to walk in this way unto happiness, and in no other, to think to
find it. O Lord let thy Kingdom thus come, etc.

Fourthly, Whereas it is confidently pleaded that you have a right, and
Birthright to all Privileges of the Nation, and the Kingdom you live in, and
in which you were born; and that therefore you should concern your selves as
you do. I Answer,

First, And Pray you, however (as has been said) that if you do it, it may be
according to your Places and Callings, peaceably without scandal, so as not to
be justly accounted busy or pragmatical, nor to contradict any of those holy
Christian Rules, that are superior to all Civil rights whatsoever.

Secondly, I Answer, If the Laws be hard against you, how can that be helped,
or how can you struggle against it, seeing it is your own principle; that the
English Laws do secure the English Rights: And that the people are to be both
governed and judged, according to the declared Laws of the Land. So that still
ye ought to be quiet and silent.

But you say your Civil Rights are invaded; whether you say true in this, or
whether they on the contrary, must be left to be judged of by the general
judgment of the Nation in the great Council of it; but for private persons to
contend much about these things, seems to make matters but the worse, and to
prejudice others the more, because you do so much, and speak so much about them.

Thirdly, (And lastly) you are to consider, that according to the Christian
Doctrine and Principles, you are sometimes to forego, and not reckon of, nor
regard, neither your Natural nor Civil Rights and Privileges; you may insist
upon, and plead them when they may do you good and service, as Paul did his
Roman Freedom: But to make matter of needless quarrel and contest, and great
concern, and so to cause disturbance, or unquietness, or scandal about them, I
know no warrant you have; but that for the Gospel-sake, and for peace-sake, and
the healing of prejudice, you ought to let them alone, as if they were not.

For consider, are not the peace and enjoyment of our Lives, Goods, Estates
your Natural and Civil Rights? yet are Christians upon occasion to part with
all of them? to loose and say down their Lives, to suffer joyfully the spoiling
of their Goods, where they cannot save them without sin, and scandal, or breach
of their Faith as it is in Jesus?

Again, it is so far from being a Truth at all times, and justifiable, that
Christian men should stand so stiff upon their Rights, Birthrights, etc. or
whatever else is due to them, that not only to avoid scandal they are to wave
and suspend them.

But further, (though there be no reason from without forcing them) They should
and must sometimes voluntarily forego their Rights, and lay all aside for the
Truths sake, and other good Christian purposes, when they can by so doing
promote peace and godliness in the World, and increase the honor and credit of
the Gospel thereby. Thus the Apostle, though it was his right to take Money, or
reward for his Preaching, and he proved it by many Arguments so to be; yet he
wholly waved it when he saw that the taking of it would prejudice, and the
waving of it would promote the Truth, etc.

Some will conceit, that to forego these things for Christ sake, i. e. for his
Honor and Interest in the World, is not suffering for Christ, except we bear a
Testimony to his Truth in the way of Martyrdom, or suffer Persecution for the
Profession of the Truth. But they should consider, that there is a suffering
for Christ and the Gospel, though it be not in the way of Persecution nor under
trials of that kind; when for his sake and Interest, and carrying on the
Affairs of his Kingdom in the World, we deny our selves of any of our profits,
rights and privileges, and do not insist upon them, nor stand to maintain
them, when and though they are due unto us E. G. all just debts are our right
and property, and so may we seek and sue for them (as it is generally supposed
and presumed) in a legal way; yet when this by some intervening circumstance,
may become scandalous, or not falling in with the main design; we may not in
such a way, seek our own, and so in many other things, and in this thing now in
question.

Finally, some will plead, that though we may give away our own Right, yet we
cannot another, nor the Right of our Posterity. But to this I say,

First, That I am not about to persuade you to give them away, but not always
to insist upon them, at least not so much, and before things of greater moment
to you than they.

Secondly, You need not to forego the Right of them, nor yet be so busy, and
concern your selves so much about them. A man's Estate, and Life is and may be
his Posterities, yet may he lawfully if need be, sell the one, and lay down the
other, and part with both for the Gospels sake.

More might be said, but I wish that those things were better minded and
understood, that we might have just knowledge, and true notions of the true
Gospel Principles, and the excellencies of them.

SECT. IV.
Thirdly, ANother matter, many of you are much suspected of by your Friends,
and sometimes possibly charged with by your Enemies, is a formal profession in
Religion; boasting, or at least judging your selves Saints, the special
peculiar People of God, his elect and chosen, over-valuing your selves, and
over-looking and despising others (especially if not of your own way and Party)
and this only for your profession and separation-sake: And that though you
pretend more in this kind, and greater purity than others; yet you show forth
no more of real virtue, nor of the unquestionable fruits of well-doing than
others, that pretend not so much; and they think, because they cannot see more,
that there is no more goodness or betterness in you, than in others; but only
that you pretend to be more separate, and worship after another manner, than
they do: All which they think is but humor, and fancy, and that as every one
will have their way, so you will have yours. They think that it is now, as it
was in Christ's time, and that this generation is but like that, (viz.) That one
sort or part of the Nation (which you call profane, carnal and wicked) are as
the Publicans, open sinners and harlots. The other, as the Scribes and
Pharisees, who being Hypocrites, though they pretended more, and seemed better,
indeed were worse and harder to be convinced and amended than the others.

Now consider Christian Friends and Brethren, whether you or some of you, if
not many of you, have not given too much occasion for this judgment and sense
of you, (among the vulgar) by your manner of walking, and the temper of your
Spirits; whilst as to real goodness, and righteousness, and betterness, above
and beyond others, they can see no difference, or but little: This you should
consider, and mind to convince you what you ought to be, whatsoever they think
of you.

Consider first, That the Christian Religion according to the mind of the great
Author of it, and his intent and design in it, has this main and principal
purpose to be carried on.

First, The amendment, and betterment of men, in their Souls and Spirits, that
they may be regenerate, inwardly and really changed from evil, or a state and
condition of evil unto good; have the Divine Nature wrought in them, which is
diversely described and set forth in the Scriptures of the New Testament. You
may take it in Paul's Commission, in which he gives account of what he was to
do, by virtue of it, Acts 26. v. 18. i. e. To turn men from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins;
and Inheritance among them that are sanctified, by the Faith of Christ.

Or we may take it in short, as our Lord expresses it, (viz.) To make the tree
good, i. e. The man, the Christian man, to have a Divine living principle of
goodness in himself.

The next part of this blessed design follows upon the other, i. e. the
bringing forth good fruits, that the goodness or soundness of the Tree, (or
Christian man signified by it) may be known to himself and others, by his
fruits. Now the fruits by which alone, we or others, can rightly judge, are not
of that sort of duties that consist in outward profession, and performance of
outward Ordinances, Praying, Hearing, Preaching, or doing such kind of works,
but in the doing of others, better than those, and demonstrating our true Faith
in Christ. So Christ our great Prophet teaches, Mat. 7. v. 21. Not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, i. e. That calls on the Name of Christ, and makes
Profession of him; yea, that does this with great zeal, for that is the meaning,
as appears in the doubling of his Title, (Lord, Lord.) All that do thus, seem
they, or be they never so zealous in it, shall not therefore enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. But says our Lord, He that does the will of my Father which
is in Heaven, i. e. He that actually and really does it, in the most
substantial parts of it; which is not done by only calling upon his Name, but
in other more excellent works and fruits, beyond this, of a Profession of, and
calling upon him.

And in the 22. v. To enforce this, he tells us of a sort of men owning this
way and Religion, and doing many great and wonderful works, upon the account of
it, who were confident in themselves of being right and accepted. Yea, it
seems, they lived and died, and rose again in this confidence, because they had
Prayed, Prophesied, Preached, in the Name of Christ, were great doers in, and
frequenters of Religious exercises; and moreover wrought great works, cast out
Devils in Christ's Name, etc.

Yet all this would not do. In the 29. v. They must depart into everlasting
fire. Mat: 25. Christ knows them not, they were workers of Iniquity, and it is
not likely that they were open sinners, openly profane, or like the Publicans,
etc. For then they could not have had such confidence.

But thus it was, they either had reserved to themselves some secret sin,
indulged themselves in some corruption or particular evil; or else they had not
done that good, nor brought forth those fruits, which they ought to have done
for the glory of God, and to answer those great obligations of holiness,
righteousness and Divine purity and rectitude which the Gospel and blessed
Religion of Christ Jesus had laid upon them. And now this matter being weighty
and considerable, and seeing men are like to deceive themselves by a zealous
Profession, without real goodness and good fruits, to demonstrate it; Therefore
our Lord further presses and enforces this matter, from v. 24. to the end, by
a Parable of two men that built Houses upon different foundations; one upon the
Rock and the other upon the Sand; the one was wise, the other foolish: The
application shows, that let men pretend what they will, nothing else but the
doing of the real indisputable will of God will stand them in stead, and make
them able to stand and weather it out to the last. Read the place and consider
it well.

Now according to this blessed design of the holy Gospel of Christ Jesus, which
is we see to make men good. And next to manifest this by good works, and
abounding in them, in such good works and fruits, that both good and bad men
can judge of, which they cannot do by all your great professions, and outward
Religious performances.

According to this, I say, consider and judge of your selves.

First, As to the temper of your Spirits, to see if the Tree be good. You
separate from common sins, and corrupt worship; then ye ought in all things
else to be uniform in your Lives and Spirits.

First, Are ye more patient, meek, humble than others?

Secondly, Are ye more mortified to this present World, or do ye make it
evident that ye are more moderate in the things of it than others; and does
your moderation in this appear unto all men, etc.

Thirdly, Have you mortified your corruptions and inordinate affections, such
as anger, wrath, pride, hatred, malice, evil-speaking?

Fourthly, Are ye more courteous, condescentious, kind, affable, gentle, etc.
Read that of the Apostle, Gal. 5. ver. 22. what the true fruits of the Spirit
are, you shall find them there specified, (viz.) Long-suffering, goodness,
gentleness, faith, meekness, temperance. And if you mind the place, you shall
find the fruits, called the fruits of the Spirit, here mentioned, to be such
that are showed toward, and made manifest to others, And for the good and
benefit of others E. G. the Love, there spoken of, is not love to our selves,
but to others, or the loving of others: So Joy there mentioned, is joy or
rejoicing in the good of others; for it is no great virtue to joy in our
selves, or to rejoice because of our own happiness, etc. So Peace, another
fruit, is to be peaceable with all men, long-suffering, i. e. suffering long,
or bearing with other men, though never so great enemies to us; or
long-suffering, in bearing all the injuries men can heap upon us: And also
long-suffering, in bearing with, and waiting long upon men, with much patience,
for their good, and to do them good, and to take them off from their evil ways.

To this is added Gentlenenss; and to all Goodness, i. e. Beneficialness, or a
being beneficial, and profitable to men. The Apostle Romans 5. will give us a
full account of a good man, what he is, and how distinguished from a righteous
or a just man, by which we may know, what goodness is here, and what he means
there.

Another fruit is Faith, i. e. Fidelity or faithfulness, for so sometimes the
word is used, and must be here so taken: We are to be true and trusty in all
things, faithful to our words and promises, and in things committed to our
charge, etc. Then follows, meekness, temperance and virtues of that kind,
against which there is no Law, nor exception, but they are approved, commended
by all, both good and bad. These fruits thus expressed, are the most proper
fruits of the Spirit, and are of the true Spirit, and temper of our Lord Jesus
who showed himself thus toward all men. These will make us most like our
Heavenly Father, and are most evidently demonstrative of the truth and reality
of our faith in Christ, by these we glorify God; such a temper of Spirit as
this we must design, and must be growing in it; for we are not like to be
complete at first. And so it is v. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified,
or mortified, the Deeds of the flesh, with the affections, lusts, or passions,
of it, i. e. They have done it, or at least, must be in a way of doing it,
growing in it and getting the victory over those lusts: This is to be so done
and proceeded in, that the power of Christ's death may be seen in the death of
our sins and carnal affections: And the power and force of his resurrection in
our rising daily to newness of life, and works suitable.

And ver. 25. If we live, i. e. If we profess and pretend to live in the
Spirit, or according to the power of the Divine life. Then let us also walk in,
or according to the Spirit, as it is here described in the fruits of it: And
let us judge our selves, and let others judge of us, no otherwise, but
according as they see us thus walk, etc.

But on the contrary; are ye not often charged, and do ye not give too much
occasion for it, with diverse things contrary to this E. G. with anger and
wrath, with being subject too much to humor and fancy, rather then led by the
sober principles of Reason and Religion, etc. according to the most excellent,
calm, and meek Spirit of Christ Jesus?

Secondly, With being too much guilty of Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness, and
of too much following of this present World; and so not showing forth such
freeness, such a liberal Spirit as the Christian Gospel teaches, and gives
example of: This being in the nature of it, most opposite to a narrow
contracted stingy mind and spirit; this teaches to be free, liberal, bountiful,
all which much grace Religion, and the profession of it. Consider how greatly
this excellent spirit and bountiful temper, in all ways of Charitable dealing
and Hospitality credits all Religion, even a false one: And it is so natural to
the Spirit and Principles of the Christian Religion, that if the practice of it
were more, it would infinitely promote and propogate it.

Thirdly, You are suspected and charged with being too much conformed to this
World; and some of you, as much as any, (viz.) In pride, vanity, gallantry, in
your Selves, Clothes, Habits, and in the Education and bringing up of your
Children in scandalous ways and breeding, according to the Pride, Pomps and
Vanities of this World. Some that have looked into your Ways and Garbs, yea
into your Meetings, Congregations, have seen as much of this as any where else.
And if they have a mind to see more, they may go from thence to the Dancing
Schools, to the most pompous and vicious parts of them, your Balls, Masks,
etc. By occasion of all which, some scoff, others take offense, others are
grieved, and some take occasion to go into the contrary extremes, seeing so
much pride and vanity, in and among Professors.

Fourthly, That you are often found Oppressors, Hard, if not sometimes Cruel;
will take the utmost advantage you can, will not relieve when need and equity
requires; but will (like other men, or the worst of men) tie up all to their
Bargains, Contracts, though there be never so great reason to consider them:
You as well as others, have been cried out upon, on this account; one instance
was in the Letting of Houses and Leases, at, and since the late Dreadful Fire,
and Rebuilding of the City. Some have wrought upon men's Necessities, taken
advantage of their weakness, want of skill and cunning to look well to
themselves; and when any have found it, and complained of it, not the least
help and relief in it. This dealing has been charged upon some great
Professors, and pretenders to Religion, and seemingly devout. You would do well
to mind and consider, how far you may have been guilty of this, and take the
judgment of others, and of indifferent persons in the Case. Some are complained
of, as being of an Oppressive Spirit, in Trading, Dealings, Bargains, Payments,
especially by the poor Tradesmen, and the Laborers that Work and Sell to you,
and perhaps dare not complain to you, nor contradict you, for fear of offending
you; you never learned this of Christianity, nor of Christ Jesus the Author of
it.

Fifthly, That when you are Injured and Angered, you cannot freely forgive, nor
bear much; but are too apt to envy, hate, take the rigor of the Law; these and
such like matters are objected against you, or diverse of you, and none can
deny, but many have given too much occasion for it. The truth is, that an
excellent Bountiful, Charitable Religion, together with the great work of Self
denial, and of Patience, Humility, and the Mortifying of the lusts, passions,
and evil affections of the flesh, is a Religion quite out of fashion, and by
many disgraced and disparaged, as only a piece of dull morality: Christian men
make no work, nor design, to excel in these Virtues, though it be the only
excellent way, to glorify God our Heavenly Father, as our Lord teaches, Let
your Light (says he) i. e. your good works, so shine before men, that they may
see them, and thereby glorify God, your Heavenly Father. No other way without
this, no other way but this, will do it. Nothing but the doing and abounding in
such works, and in such an excellent temper of Spirit, as we learn from Christ
Jesus; and a principle in our selves from which such works flow. Such fruits
and works by which we can glorify God, are those, and of that kind, which the
most Loose, Carnal, Atheistical men can judge of, as well as others; they can
tell, as well as any, who is most Meek, Humble, Patient, Innocent, Harmless;
who is most Charitable, Bountiful, Beneficial; who most Courteous, Affable,
Gentle, Condescentious; who is most Faithful, Careful, Diligent, useful in the
Places, Callings, Relations, God has set them in: They can tell, who most
abounds in Pity, Mercy, Compassion and Clemency, and who are most free from
Pride, and Passion; who are Ill-natured, Ill-humour'd; who most Sweet and
Obliging: In word, who it is that carries on a design of Religion and
Godliness. These things, they are (at least, to some good degree) capable to
discern, distinguish and judge of. But for men's Opinions, Sects and Parties,
differences in Religion, and things of that kind; these they understand not,
neither do they value nor esteem them, nor think any great matter, of the zeal
of men, of different Parties, about such things. They understand them not, and
think that all is but Humor, Fancy, Superstition or Hypocrisy; and that as all
men will have their way, and humor in some things or other, so in Religion
too. But they can tell who does the most good, and who can, and will bear the
most and the greatest evil, with patience, without seeking Revenge, or
returning like for like. It is this and these unquestionable, undisputable
works of righteousness and goodness, that will draw men to the love of God, and
Religion, and the ways of God, when they shall see men show forth the virtues
of God. These works will put to silence the ignorance of foolish men; these
alone will (if any thing will) work upon men, for to bring them, to the love,
and obedience of the Gospel of Christ. The Scriptures of the New Teflament, and
that lately cited Mat. the 5th. and others do teach us, that this way of well
doing, is the last and the most powerful Argument, and of greatest force, to
win men over to Christ Jesus. So that a great trust is left and committed to
all the owners and professors of Christianity, that they see to the propogating
of the Gospel, and the completing of the will and purpose of God in it by well
doing. The design and purpose of this holy Religion, is the salvation of a
sinful World; the Word of God, is indeed, open and plain before the evil World;
they may look into it, their conscience cannot but sometimes smite them, for the
neglect of their duty: But this they search not into, it is not so open and
plain to them, does not make such impressions upon them, as when a draught of
Religion is drawn, in the holy Lives and ways of Christian men, and so
presented unto them: 'Till this be done, no great matter will be done in the
World, etc.

Let the 5th. of Matt. especially from verse the 38. to the end, be heedfully
and carefully read and considered to this purpose. And add to this the 6th. of
Luke from the 7th. to the 36 verse.

SECT. V.
THere are some other things, taken notice of in you, though not so much as in
some others; yet too much, and too much cause there is for it; one instance,
and the main one is in a matter which it is confessed many others are guilty of
besides you: And that is, that you (many of you) make the condition of your
Christian and Church Communion, so narrow, that none can be admitted into it
but just your selves, and those of your own Party, or particular Opinion, who
in every thing are just of your mind to a tittle; so that if other Christians
differ never so little from you, either in Doctrine or way of Worship, nay
perhaps sometimes but in a Ceremony, (though otherwise good Christians and Holy
men, giving good proof, showing forth good fruits, of the truth of their Faith
in Christ Jesus) yet are, notwithstanding, for the want of, or defect in, some
small matter, ipso facto, rejected as much as the veriest Heathens and
Publicans; ye will have no fellowship or communion with them.

First, To instance in (a thing that concerns some of you) the subject of
Baptism (which though of all things least deserving) has made more noise and
trouble in the Christian World, than a thousand more weighty matters: There are
also many other things of like nature, or not much differing, that are made as
much a bar and partition Wall, as the Jewish Ceremonies were of old; what they
were between Jews and Heathens, these are made to be between Christians and
Christians, which is a matter most sad and deplorable.

Secondly, I confess, you have had examples and presidents, without number, for
this uncharitable practice; but it has been from such, ye have no cause to
boast of, that they were your teachers and exemplars, in that you have rejected
and separated from them upon this account; I mean the Romish Church, to go no
further. They indeed, in all Ages since they began to be triumphant in the
World, have not only excluded all other Christians in the World, from their
Communion, because of some differences and dissentings from them, but as much
as lay in their power used them worse than Pagans, accusing them for Heretics,
and denying the possibility of Salvation unto them. And those that through
imposition and cruel usage, they had thrust out of their Communion, and forced
to separate, because enjoined to believe and practice, as the condition of
their Communion, things which were plainly against their Light and Conscience,
and which they judged most contrary to the Word of God; they then followed with
all manner of uncharitableness, and cruelty, and persecutions, as the vilest
and worst of men, branding them, as Heretics and Schismatics; which if indeed
they had been, yet they had no warrant, or a justifiable cause, to prosecute
and persecute them as they did; seeing neither they nor any else have more
power, right or authority, over others to compel them to their way, than others
have to compel them, if they had power in their hands, etc.

Thirdly, Now those are the men, this is the Church that you have separated
from, for those kind of practices; as you and a great many imitate and follow
too much. Some of you, were you in a condition, and had power, would destroy
all those that differ from you; for if you exclude and shut out all from your
Communion, because of some difference in judgment, or opinion and some
practices, etc. it is no great uncharitableness, to think you would do more, if
you had more power in your hands; and we not only suspect it, but many of the
more rigid sort do not deny it, etc. But not to charge you too deep, nor all
for some, I do believe that many, and great numbers of you, mean no such thing,
as to hurt any dissenting or differing Christian, farther than to exclude and
deny him your Church Communion, and so to let him shift as he can. But

First, What warrant have you to reject any that professes Faith in Jesus
Christ, and lives at least as good and sober a Life as those that are actually
of your Communion (his differing or dissenting in some matters only excepted?)
Either he must be rejected by you for every difference, or any dissent
whatsoever, which I think none will say, except Papists: And they, though they
say it, yet do not, cannot practice it; it is well known that they do tolerate
great differences among themselves, and that considerable Parties, and potent
Orders of men, among them are at variance one with another in the same Church,
E. G. about Predestination, the Immaculate Conception, and other things; nay,
they are not well agreed about stating of their great Fundamental of the
Churches Infallibility: The union that is among them, is rather politic than
real; so that I may presume some difference will be, some must be allowed, in
the same Church.

Secondly, Therefore when Communion will not be allowed upon the account of
different apprehensions in opinion and practices, it must be for some opinions
and practices in special, such as some men will call great and fundamental
Errors, or as others call them, intolerable (for it seems they will make a
difference between tolerable and intolerable) but it is manifest every Party of
men, be there never so many, will have something they call fundamental, proper
to themselves, and to their Party; and any that hold any thing in opposition to
them therein, must be accounted intolerable, not to be born and suffered in the
Church; though otherwise never so good and useful. E. G. The Papists will
account the Churches Infallibility, and some peculiar Doctrines, as
Transubstantiation, etc. Fundamentals. And so again among the Protestants, some
called Lutherans will (it is probable) account their Consubstantiation a
Fundamental: And those called Calvinists will account the decree of absolute
Election and Reprobation, a Fundamental; And on the contrary part, some
Remonstrants or Arminians of the more rigid persuasion, may make their Opinion
so fundamental, that they will not have Communion, nor such Charity to those
differing from them, as Christian men should have one to another, though
erring, and perhaps sometimes greatly, but yet as is to be hoped, meaning well.
The rigid Northern Presbyters will reckon their Model of Classical Church
Government, by Presbytery, as good as a Fundamental, and all that will not
submit to it, are by them accounted persons intolerable; nay, perhaps they will
(for some such like thing has been) rise in Arms, kill and destroy, for the
sake and maintenance of their Model of Government, presuming it of Divine
right, and therefore not suffering any other Form or Model, to stand with it or
by it.

Once more, Those called Anabaptists, have not much come short of making the
Baptism they practice a Fundamental. For, First, They have asserted and
maintained it as of necessity to Church Communion; and to be sure whoever were
not Baptized according to their way and mode, were not accounted capable of
Christian and Church Communion; and so by a near-hand inference, not of
salvation; which some of the more rigid sort have not been afraid to assert.
All those, and a thousand more, may thuspretend, to make fundamentals, and the
errors contrary to them intolerable: And surely many of them, have absolutely
denied Christian Communion to all that could not come up to their way. But
thanks be to God, many of those are commendably enlarged, as to this matter,
and will now allow a Latitude, that before they would not; I pray God to
enlarge them, and all good Christians besides, still more and more.

But you see here are many fundamentals; and none knows how many more men may
make, according to the humor ignorance or Interest of their Party; and what
one sort calls fundamental Verities, another will be as forward to call
fundamental Errors, Heresies and Wickednesses. What course can we now take, but
to love and receive all Christians as such, as Christians that believe in, and
love Christ Jesus, and do not contradict this by any wicked works, or ill
living, contrary to it?

But you will say, What is there nothing fundamental, in the Christian
Religion; no rule to proceed by in judging who is fit, for Christian and Church
Communion, and who not? must any one that calls himself a Christian be allowed
to be so, and admitted to all Christian Communion and Church Privileges, etc.
I answer:

First, There is no Sect or Party of Christians, can assign a rule to judge by,
as they are such a Sect and Party; nor can tell us of any Fundamental which
another Party or Sect, will not contradict, and assign some other perhaps
contrary to it, and hold that for fundamental, or a matter of necessity;
according to which only, they will take and receive men into their Communion.
So in the first place, we must not look to any one Sect, or Party, for a
Fundamental, or fundamental rule to judge, of the capacity of persons, for
Christian and Church Communion.

Secondly, There is a Fundamental, proper to Christianity as such, that all
Christians do acknowledge: And what is this? but the owning and professing of
this one thing (which is both a fundamental and first principle in
Christianity) that Jesus is the Christ, or the Christ of God; take it in the
words of the Apostle, Romans 10. where he faith, The word is nigh thee verse the
8th. what word? even this; That Jesus, is the Christ, owned of God, approved by
him, and that in special manner testified by the Resurrection from the Dead;
whom God would never have raised, if he had not been the Lord Christ; the place
runs thus, The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, i. e.
The word which we preach, which is, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved.

In short, the confession and open owning of Christ Jesus is a Fundamental, and
necessary to salvation; and whoever does this, shall be saved; and therefore
should be received and accepted as a Disciple of Christ, being thereby made
capable of Church Communion, and Privileges of that kind. This is the
Fundamental, no other foundation can any man lay, or make, but this, 1 Cor.
3.11. ver. And as it is a great fundamental verity, that whosoever believes
shall be saved; so that he that confesses or professes this, ought to be by all
accepted and received as a Christian, and treated accordingly; is so plainly
laid down in the Scriptures, that it is a wonder, that either Ignorance,
Interest, Partiality, or Uncharitableness, should ever have the confidence to
rise up against it.

Thirdly, The Scriptures are many, and so plain, and perspicuous, that they are
every where to be found; so many that it is a tedious labor to cite them all;
see but a few.

First, When Christ himself and his Apostles first Preached, there was no more
required to make a Disciple than this Faith; when the Apostles Preached, after
his resurrection, it was the same, and no more was required but to believe, and
profess or confess, that Jesus was the Christ; and then, in those first times,
as a present sign that this was their Faith; and to oblige themselves to this
Jesus, and his Doctrine and Laws, they were Baptized, and so admitted into the
nearest and closest fellowship, Acts 2.38. and verse 41, 42. Then they that
gladly received his word, were Baptized. And the same day there were added,
about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. Nothing more
was required of them, to instate them into all the Christian Rights and
Privileges; and being admitted into the Church, they were to be further
educated and instructed by the converse and society they had there; that they
might grow up to perfect men in Christ Jesus, and be made fit for every good
work.

Secondly, Those three thousand converted to Christ, in so short a time, could
know little of Christianity, or the Laws and designs thereof; they did only
acknowledge that Jesus was the Christ, whom they received and accepted of, for
their Lord and Savior. Yet this was a sure way, to put all, (not only) into a
savable state, but into all the rights and privileges, belonging thereunto. So
moreover, when Peter, Mat. 16. made such a frank Confession of his Faith, this
very Faith we speak of, That Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God;
Immediately a blessing, or a blessed privilege was conferred upon him; (as it
follows there) and accordingly all Christians are endued with the same, upon
their believing, and open confession, and profession of the Name of Jesus.
Therefore, all those little conditions, and qualifications, that men now make,
and require of Christians before they will admit them, into the Christian
Church, and Fellowship or Communion of Saints; are Conditions and Orders their
of own devising, and serve only to form a Party for their own purpose, (as all
Sects have commonly somewhat peculiar;) more than to advance Religion or
Godliness; and of this kind are all other Impositions laid upon men, as the
condition of their admission into the Church. Some have of late days devised,
and practiced, that men must make a confession of their Faith, in a great many
Articles, or according to such and such Creeds, that be in fashion among them,
and must believe just as they do; which a man may do, or however, may profess
to do, and yet be as bad, as unregenerate, carnal, and hypocritical as the
worst. Some others, before they will admit any into their Church and Communion,
will exact a Formal Narration, or Declaration, not only of their Faith, but of
their Conversion, and the work of Grace upon them, with the manner of their
Conversion and Conviction, at their first turning from their sins to God; but
there is no certainty in this.

First, For oftentimes, those that are most consident, and bold, can do this,
when others of better Spirits, and better in the main, cannot; nay, it is to be
feared, many may strain here to say more than is true, or more than they have
had the experience of.

Secondly, Others, sometimes have related such passages, and circumstances in
reference to this matter, which were but trivial, absurd, if not ridiculous.

Thirdly, Suppose some to have had real Convictions, and trouble of mind at
such a time: Have not many had Convictions, that yet have not proceeded to a
real and through Conversion, and a change of heart, and spirit? And have not
some been changed or converted, rather from one sin to another, from sins more
carnal, to sins more spiritual, than from sin it self, wholly unto
righteousness? I say not of any, that they are so, but it is possible in such a
way, men may deceive themselves and others, so no certainty of knowledge, by
such a Confession.

Fourthly, But however it is, they to whom this Confession, or Declaration is
made, are as wise as they were before; and can pass but little better judgment,
than they could at first; because proceeding by no certain rules, but those of
fancy and conceit, and the opinion they have of the present capacity, and
honesty of the person, speaking or declaring; if he be either ignorant,
strongly conceited or hypocritical, he may deceive them all.

Much more might be said against this new way, and these new devised conditions
and qualifications; and to show that all are to be received, who profess Faith
in Christ, and promise to walk holily and obediently, according to his Laws, to
the best of their knowledge and ability; if afterward they appear to be, or
walk otherwise, they are to be looked unto, watched over, admonished, reproved,
and in case of non-repentance, or not amendment, to be separated, cut off, and
withdrawn from.

Fifthly, And finally, (as to this) to add this word more. The case may be,
that many that are of upright hearts, and truly fearing God, who have from the
heart turned unto him, and hate all sin, as such, and are truly humbled for it;
yet are able to tell neither time, nor circumstances in particular, when or how
this change was made and wrought in them.

Such a work may grow by degrees by virtuous Education or otherwise: The
beginning of the power of the Kingdom of God in the heart, may be like that (as
to its progress) which our Lord speaks of, of the Kingdom of God. The good seed
of the word, (according to the similitude of the Corn sown in the earth) the
blade first appears, then the ear, then the full Corn in the ear: no man
presently perceives himself, much less another, to grow; yet he may see that he
has grown, and is growing in the power of the Divine Life, and in good time,
it may become manifest in him, by the fruits of it, both within and without: He
may be born of the Spirit, that knows not the time, nor particular way how this
did operate in him. But to conclude, what if it be real, that such persons do
declare and acknowledge, and that they were really changed from evil to good;
yet there is no reason, necessarily to conclude, that therefore they must be so
still.

Secondly, Another Argument as to this, is taken from the nature of the
Christian Religion, which being the last, and so the most liberal and extensive
of all the revelations and dispensations of the counsels of God, unto the
World, for the better progress, and propogation of it; it is in the nature of
it made fit for the whole World, and the state of all mankind. And therefore,
according to the nature of it, and intendment of God in it, must needs allow a
great Latitude, to the several ways, customs, usages, of men in their several
Nations, and States: Every Nation and People, has somewhat peculiar, and
particular, and differing one from another, according to which the Christian
Law and Gospel of Christ Jesus, will suit, in a good degree; so they be not
sinful in themselves, nor contrary to the main holy end and purposes of this
Religion; yea so free and large is this Christian dispensation, in the nature
and intent of it, that as it will yield much to the several ways, so to the
weaknesses, radicated opinions, customs, humors of several particular persons,
at least for a time, until they have learned, or grown to better knowledge and
maturity: Thus it is in its self, and thus it was at first, when first preached
to men, and propagated, etc. Insomuch that, that excellent generous spirited
person, the Apostle Paul, in conformity to the free nature of the Gospel, did
become all things to all men, in the 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 23. verses, Unto the
Jews, says he, I became as a Jew, i. e. In many things complied with the Jews,
in their Laws, Customs, Ceremonies, the better to win them off from those
things; again, As without Law to them that are without the Law, i. e. Without
the Mosaical Law, (or perhaps any positive Law) for he speaks of the converted
Gentiles, who though under the Law of Christ, did yet retain many of those Ways
and Customs, unto which they had been accustomed, whilst Gentiles; that he
might gain them that were without the Law, i. e. gain them by degrees quite
over to the complete true Gospel, Liberty and Sanctity, which at first, and all
at once could not be done; so ver. 22. He complied with the weaknesses and
humors of some men, not yet well grown, i. e. (as himself says) He became all
things to all men, that by all means (such means of compliance) he might gain
some, which he could not possibly, nor lawfully do, if the Gospel, or Christian
Religion, were not of so large and liberal a nature, as to allow it: Therefore
it is, that this Gospel is much celebrated for its great liberty, and men are
warned and cautioned they should not abuse it.

Secondly, Thus it was not under the Law, that would not bow, nor bend it self,
no not in little things; they were strictly enjoined according to the letter of
them, and so it might better be then, considering that, that Dispensation and
Law, in the nature of it, was suited, fitted, and mostly limited to that People
(Isra l) and the state of things, as then they were: The Worship was limited to
one place, the Priesthood to one Family; all that were admitted to officiate in
Sacred things, to one Tribe; with many other Restrictionis, Limitations,
Commands, Promises, Threatenings, which made it peculiar to them, and to that
time, for it was but for a time being so confined, and made so narrow in the
Laws and Terms of its Union and Communion, that Proselytes could never be
admitted to the full of the Rights and Privileges of it, with the natural
Israelites.

But this Law was removed, for the comparative unusefulness and
unprofitableness of it, seeing it would not fit all mankind, or men as such;
Therefore seeing God intends to reveal his Name, and Mind, unto all, and to
bring all into one common fellowship, both Jews and Gentiles; this former
Dispensation and Law must needs be removed, and another more liberal yielding,
and extensive, come in the room of it; especially as to things, that some call
indifferent, things not evil in themselves, but less necessary; that way might
be made to come at all, if they agreed in the Main, i. e. in the Belief, and
Acknowledgment of Jesus the Christ of God.

Thirdly, It is not here to be understood, that the Christian Gospel does yield
in any of its essential Principles, or that it does prostitute it self to any
of the sinful ways and lusts of men, or comply with them in the lea^^: But only
that it does not command nor enjoin any thing, as necessary in its self, or
unto Salvation, but what in its own nature is so; and if men be made holy, and
are sanctified in their spirits and inward man, fruitful in their Lives in all
well-doing to the glory of God; especially if abounding in Love and Charity
unto men, it will make them allowance otherwise, as to the ways and customs of
Men and Nations. This then being the Nature and divine Constitution thereof,
nothing is more unreasonable, and more contrary to it, to the design and spirit
of it; than imposition of the Customs and Ceremonies of one Nation, or of one
Church upon another, or of any number of Christians upon other Christians; and
(that which is the main Matter I now mind) the denial of Christian fellowship
and Communion in the Church, or in any the Ecclesiastical Privileges of it,
upon any account of difference in Opinion and Practice on this side the
Foundation. Nothing that I know can debar any, except the Name of Jesus and
Christianity be denied, or not acknowledged; or that they live unworthy of
their Profession. They that hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, Ungodliness,
Uncharitableness, though they do not deny Christ and his Gospel in words, yet
in works they do, which is worse, and a great disgrace unto it; from such we
are bid to separate our selves. Tit. 1.16. 2 Timothy 2. v 5. but we must not
separate for things, wherein good and sober Christians may differ; as some
particular Opinions, and Practices, or Modes of Worship; unless those things be
imposed, as necessary to Salvation, or made the Condition of Communion; or that
we are not suffered to enter our dissent, in matters wherein we do dissent;
which liberty ought always to be allowed, that it being known how far we do
agree, we may so far walk together. And for Differences in particular points,
and some Ordinances, and Practices, if in these we be otherwise minded, as we
may be, God in the way of Peace, and of a sincere Enquiry, will in due time
reveal it unto us, Phil. 3. v. 15.

Fourthly, For further Proof, at least, for our further serious Consideration
of the Divine Nature, and liberty of this blessed Religion, called Christian,
that it does give such a Latitude, supposing we hold to the Main: See a few
Scriptures to this purpose, from that blessed and industrious Apostle, who best
knew and understood, the nature and extent of this gracious Dispensation of God
in Christ, for the uniting and bringing all together in one. i. e. in Christ
Jesus, notwithstanding many and various differences otherwise. Romans chap. 2. he
disputes at large against those that trusted and had confidence they should be
accepted, and please God, because they were strict in the observation of the
Law, as to Ceremonies, and the ritual parts of it, though failing in more
weighty things; and proves, That God will not accept any, but upon the account
of that real inherent Righteousness, which consists in the real fruits of
welldoing, v. 25. For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but
if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision, or
nothing. He tells them, that there may be some profit in Circumcision
(Circumcision is here put (as part for the whole) for the Law-service) this may
profit you if ye keep the Law.

The Law is taken here emphatically, for the most substantial part, or great
things of the Law, which the Scripture and right Reason still distinguish, by
way of dignity and excellency from the Ceremonious part, and Church
Privileges, and performance of outward Ordinances.

The Apostle here speaks of real Godliness, Mercy, Charity, and Purity, etc.
which being in us, there may be some profit in the other to us, but not without
these.

Therefore verse 26. If the Uncircumcision, i. e. an uncircumcised Person, keep
the righteousness of the Law, i. e. in the essential and necessary parts of it,
Shall not his Uncircumcision, be accounted for Circumcision? i. e. he shall be
as well accepted of, as if he were actually circumcised, or had really kept the
whole Law, in the ritual and Ceremonious parts of it, i. e. the Law of
Ordinances, etc. Though he have kept and observed none of these at all, yet
keeping the other which is the Main, he shall be accounted of, as well as the
Circumcised.

See more to the same purpose in verse 27. he roundly concludes: And shall not
the Uncircumcision, i. e. the Person uncircumcised; if it fulfill the Law, judge
thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? And verse 28,
29. But he is a Jew. So we may say (upon the same principle of reasoning) he is
a Christian, not which is one outwardly, or is baptized only outwardly, but he
is a Christian indeed, that is one inwardly, and Baptism, is that of the Heart,
in the Spirit, and not so much in the Letter, or in literal Baptism, whose
praise on this account, is not of men, but of God. So the conclusion, for our
purpose is fair, (viz) that though a man should not be baptized at all, with
outward, or water Baptism, but should scruple that, or the time of it, or the
subject of it, yet if he be, and can be judged to be, a true Christian by his
acknowledgment of Christ, and purposing, or promising, to walk in his way, it
is enough, as to God's acceptance; (and it is strange it should not be so to
men) and consequently, the Christian Religion does allow a free Communion to
all, differing in all such like things. I would have all that read this, to
mind it, and to look upon the Scriptures before them, to see what a little
matter they make of those differences about Ordinances and Ceremonies, which
may, or may not be used and practiced, without scruple or trouble among
Christians; and learn to estimate men, not for such things as these, but for
their real worth and usefulness.

To this add chap. 14. of this Epistle, where we find Christians differing
about keeping of Days, and about Meats; some making Conscience of keeping some
Days more than others, so of Meats, making a difference and Conscience of
eating some, not others. verse 2, 5. One esteems one day above another, another
esteems every day alike. What does the Apostle now? does he persuade the one
to come over to the other? No such matter, but what does he do to end the
Controversy? Even this, exhorts that one should bear with, and not judge and
censure another. See the whole Chap. for this, and consider it well, with the
Apostles manner of reasoning in it; he accounts that every one of them may mean
well, and serve God in his way.

Verse 6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord. He that regards
not a day, to the Lord he does not regard it, i. e. it is for the Lord's sake,
he has no regard to it. He that eats, eats to the Lord, and he gives God
thanks. And he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and he gives God
thanks; both give God thanks, both think they serve and please him, and
therefore in the mean time, should live at peace one with another, and all
others with them.

But further, What are now the common Principles, whereupon they should agree,
and keep and maintain Love, and Charity, and Christian Communion together? Not
at all these things in Question among them, but the Apostle lays them down in
verse 17. For the Kingdom of God is not, stands not in meats and drinks, days
and times, or in the observation of things of this nature, wherein men are at
liberty; but it consists in Righteousness; we are to understand, that
Righteousness before described, that is distinguished from those things in
difference, Righteousness in the most excellent sense, etc.

He adds, and in peace, i. e. peace and quietness one with another,
notwithstanding such differences; and joy in the Holy Ghost, or joy in the Holy
Spirit, i. e. rejoicing in that common Interest, and Spirit they all have that
are in Christ Jesus, being made like unto him, of the same Spirit and heavenly
Nature with him, which is wrought in them, by the holy Spirit; they should
rejoice and love one another, because they all partake of the same blessed
divine Nature and Spirit; And upon this account also, (and upon no other) have
their Names written in the Book of Life.

It follows, verse 18. For he that in these things serves Christ, i. e. (to
make the Apostles Argument complete and pertinent) though he wants or differs
in other things: yet is acceptable to God, and approved of men, i. e. He ought
to be approved of men, and is approved by all wise men, and understanding
Christians, as to all Christian purposes and services otherwise. He proceeds in
his Argument, and the use of it, ver. 19. Let us therefore follow after the
things, which make for peace, i. e. better things than those, about which you
contend, and which may edify, or things wherewith one builds (as the word
signifies) another in all Christian Faith and Virtue.

In 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing; (what
then?) but the keeping the Commandments of God, etc. But were not Circumcision,
and other Ordinances which are signified, under, or by this, the Commandments
of God? They were so; but in comparison of, and coming in competition with the
great things of the Law, they were in such comparison no Commandments, etc. and
as to the occasion of this saying and assertion; Christian men are here by the
Apostle commanded to keep their Places, fulfill their Covenants and Contracts,
doing service to them, with whom they have covenanted, to be Servants; all
which was of greater use and necessity, and of more honor to the Gospel, than
to stand upon such kind of things, as Circumcision, etc. his drift may be seen
from the 17th, to the 24th, verse.

Another Scripture is Col. 2. v. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised, with the
Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
Flesh, etc. The Apostle here to take them off from admiring and making too much
of outward Circumcision, (and there is the same Reason of outward Baptism)
tells them, there was no great need of it, so they had the inward Circumcision,
the inward Baptism. v. 12. They are buried with him in Baptism, i. e.
Spiritually, but really baptized into his death, according to the sense and
meaning of Romans 6. v. 4. Therefore we are buried with him, in, or by Baptism,
into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of Life.

The burying here, is of the same nature and kind with the rising again, as is
more plain, v. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and Uncircumcision of your
Flesh, has he quickened together with him, etc. And though this place, and
some others are not brought absolutely to exclude a Literal, or Water Baptism
to them that think themselves under the Obligation of it; yet it is the
Spiritual and Mystical Baptism, that is principally meant, and does
principally, if not only, suit and accommodate the Apostles Intent and Argument
here, which is to take men off from putting too much trust in, and laying too
much stress upon the outward Circumcision or Baptism, or other things of like
nature. Gal. 5, 6. For in Christ Jesus, i. e. in the Religion and way of Christ
Jesus, or of the Gospel of Jesus, etc. Neither Circumcision avails any thing,
i. e. no outward performance or Ordinances of the Law; for Circumcision, as was
noted, is put for the whole of the service of that kind, neither
Uncircumcision, that avails not neither, i. e. either to be circumcised, or
to observe the literal Ordinances of Christianity, avails not much; what then
does? but, says he, Faith, Faith in Christ Jesus, that works, operates by
Love, or Charity, Christian Charity.

Add to this once more, chap. 6. v. 15. For in Christ Jesus, neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but, (what does avail?) a
new Creature, a new regenerate state, of which we may see more in 2 Cor. chap.
5. from v. 14. to v. 18. So that nothing avails according to the Apostle here,
and to right Reason it self, but that which is substantially good; a real
change of the Heart and the Soul of a Christian, from sin unto God. And at v.
16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, or if any man walk according to
this Rule, i. e. stand not much upon such outward Rites and Ceremonies, but
mind the Main, the new Creature-state, the divine Nature, and estimate and
value themselves, and others only, upon this account, Peace be on them, and
Mercy, and upon the Israel of God, i. e. For or because, such are indeed the
true Israel of God, and none else, and are to be treated accordingly, Romans 2.
the last the whole verse stands thus, And as many as walk according to this
Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

5. And take notice, that the Apostles purpose here, upon the occasion there
given, was to convince the Judaizing Christians, of the no necessity of their
strict adherence to those Ritual and Ceremonious things; and that it was a
fault so to do, and upon the same Reason; and to make his Argument concluding,
we must take in the Christian Rites and Ordinances, that are of an external and
ritual nature, such as Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc. not that the doing or
performing of those things is to be condemned; no, they may be used, and
according to the practice of almost all Christians are used, and some special
Reasons may be given for their use, but we ought to estimate, perform, and use
them with Subordination and Subserviency to Peace, Charity, Edification,
Godliness, and not otherwise; and if these should (as it is possible they may)
interfere with, and lie cross to those great and undisputable things, they are
rather to be left undone, than to make a breach upon those other. The Apostles
argument is built upon this general Principle, that things of an inferior
nature, as all external Ordinances are, should give way to greater things when
they come in competition; such as Christian Charity, Peace, Edification, Growth
and Increase in Christian Virtue. His Argument reaches the one, as well as the
other, and it is rational, so to understand it, and to make such a difference
between things and things of this Nature.

6. Finally, once more consider, That the whole Epistle of this Apostle to the
Ephisians, is written to this purpose, to praise, admire, and magnify the grace
of God, in procuring, and bringing about by Jesus Christ, that there should be
a Coalition, or gathering together into one, of all People, Tongues, and
Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, into one, i. e. into Christ Jesus, into the
interest and way of Christ Jesus; see chap. 1. v. 9, 10. Having made known to
us the Mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he had
purposed in himself, that in the Dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one, all things in Christ; both which are in Heaven, and
which are on Earth, even in him. And after he had magnified and admired this
blessed divine Projection and Design, in that Chap. and prayed heartily, that
they might understand it, and their Interest in it, being themselves Gentiles
to whom he wrote; thankful he is for this high grace of God, in Christ at
large; and in special, minds them of the benefit by it, the exceeding good
received by means of it, considering what they had been; in chap. 2. v. 11.
Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles, at v. 12. That at that
time ye were without Christ, being Aliens and Strangers, having no hope without
God in the World. So at v. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes
far of, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, and so he proceeds to the end;
and further amplyfies this great grace, and their great honor in it, at v. 16.
(viz.) That he might reconcile both unto God. i. e. Jews and Gentiles, all
mankind, which the Law could never do. This was the design. (Which though not
known in other ages) yet now was manifest, as he thus expresses it, chap. 3.
v. 6. That the Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs, and of the same Body, partakers
of his Promise in Christ by the Gospel. And further, he shows, that it was a
great Honor to himself, that he was made a Minister, and Preacher of this
Grace. v. 7.8. Whereof I was made a Minister, according to the gift of the
grace of God. v. 8. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints is this
grace given, that I should preach unto the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, with much more to the same purpose, in v. 9. To make all men see, what
is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the World, has
been hid in God. And chap. 2. He in particular describes the way, how Christ
did this, to bring them all into one Fellowship and Communion, v. 13, 14, 15.
verse 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes far of, are made nigh,
by the Blood of Christ. v. 14. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and
has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in
his Flesh, the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances,
for to make in himself of twain, one new man; so making peace, and that he
might reconcile both to God in one body by the Cross, having slain the enmity
thereby.

Here we plainly see, all this was done, this Reconciliation between men and
men was made, by the breaking down the partition Wall, that stood between Jews
and Gentiles, which was the Law of Commandments, consisting in diverse Rites and
Ordinances, which whilst they stood in force, this general peace and good will
among men could not be. The same matter does this Apostle teach in 2 Col. 14.
compared with the 16th, and 17th, verses, to which we refer you.

Why now shall we our selves make partition Walls, between Christians and
Christians, to keep them asunder, and make them too of Rites and Ordinances,
which Christ pulled down, took out of the way? Do we not see, that according to
the design and intent of God, this blessed Gospel is so constituted, that it
might accommodate all, let them differ never so much, at least, in those kind
of things, yea, and greater than those, etc. Our business then is, to unite in
Love, in Good Will, in Charity, in common Edification, and growth in Grace, and
every Divine Virtue, and to take the joint help and assistance of all, to carry
on the great Gospel work in the World.

For want of this, these excellent purposes are spoiled, and we are in bad
case, and the insisting too much upon these little things (for so they are even
the best of them in comparison) will naturally create a narrow contracted
Spirit, and cause us to love and like none but our selves, and our own Party,
not to take the help or benefit of any, but of our own Way and Opinion, and so
every Party will stand for, and by themselves; and mind only their own
particular Sect or Church, not the common good of the whole, or the Church
Catholic.

O! Our God, amend this, and bring us all back from that Spirit, which is the
Spirit of Antichrist, and most opposite unto the Spirit and Way of Jesus
Christ. To conclude,

1. Consider, That the Gospel is so conditioned, as to take in all, without the
exclusion of any, upon any account, except that of denying the Christian Name,
either in words, or manifestly in works, as has been said.

And this the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. v. 10, 11. Gal. 3.26, 27, 28. For ye are
all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus, for as many of you as have
been baptized, have put on Christ, There is neither Jew nor Greek, neither Bond
nor Free; there is neither Male not Female, for you are all one in Christ
Jesus, etc. The Gospel takes in all states and conditions, into equal
Privilege, which the Law did not, and according to its Constitution, could not
do. And touching differences in Judgment and Opinion, and some Practices, when
all the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren were gathered together, in the 15th. of
Acts. Did they force or compel any? No, not so much as persuade, one side to
come over to the other, but only at present to agree, leaving every one to
their way, till time and growth in Knowledge, should draw them nearer. And in
the mean time, they were to keep peace and charity, and not be troublesome one
to another, etc.

And it is worth the while, to see the ground and reason, upon which they built
that Union; none were to be compelled, or imposed upon, though, or
notwithstanding, they did differ, but all be taken, and received into the bond
of Charity and Communion, as Christians on this account, v. 8. That they had
the Holy Ghost. i. e. many of them had, as well as the Apostles, and the elder
Christians at Jerusalem, v. 9. v. 8. And God which knows the Hearts, bare
them Witness, meaning, that they were accepted of him, and that he had
testified it, by giving the Holy ghost unto them, even as he did unto the
Apostles, and other Christians. And v. 9. That is given for the principle
Reason, upon which they were to be received, and nothing to be imposed upon
them (viz.) because God had done the same for them; as he had for the rest;
which was, had purified their Hearts by Faith, and so no difference was to be
put between the one and the other. This pleased all, reconciled all, nothing
else would do it but this, and this will always do it, when Testimony may be
had, that any are Christians in good earnest, embracing the Name of Christ,
walking according to the Law of Christ, in all the undisputable ways of
Holiness and Righteousness, against which there is no Law, and about which
there can be no Dispute, whether they be good works, yea or no. To conclude,

The sum and substance of that Epistle sent by the Apostles, and Elders, and
the Brethren, set down, v. 29. that they, i. e. the new converted Gentiles,
should abstain from some things there mentioned, was not imposed or forced upon
them; but those things were recommended to them, and were things, not necessary
(to be sure) not all of them in themselves, but for the present occasion; and
finally, if against all reason, it should be supposed, that the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren, did here impose or command those things, yet can no
other, now or since, upon any reasonable account, claim any such Power, as is
supposed, they made use of; and to be sure, all the former Scriptures lately
argued, are plain and preguant against any such claim, etc.

SECT. VI.
THere are some other things, that I will but lightly touch, though others of
contrary sentiment to you, will lay on load. One is, (at which I am not a
little abashed, as being unable to defend, or so much as to excuse it;
notwithstanding, I have heard what is commonly pleaded;) that though you,
according to your declared Principles and ordinary Practice, are
Non-conformists, and Dissenters; yet upon occasion, and to get into Place and
Office of Honor or Profit, you will, and can Swear, Renounce, take all or any
manner of Oaths, and Tests, that have of late been enjoined and imposed; also,
that you can, on such occasions, take the Sacrament according to the form and
way of the Church of England, though you never did before, nor (perhaps) will
ever do the same again; except on the like occasion; and although the making
and first forming of these Oaths and Tests, and the taking of the Sacrament,
were intended, and done on purpose to keep you, and such as you, out of Office
and Place, (whch how well done, and how according to Christian Charity, I will
not now dispute) yet by these ways, they have not been able to exclude you, and
they think, and sometimes some of them will not forbear to swear, that they
believe nothing, though never so contrary unto you, and to your Principles, can
be devised and made to keep you out, and consequently, cannot hold you in, but
that you will break all Bounds, leap over all Hedges, so that they are at a
loss what to do with you, etc.

2. But, O! The horrible scandal that comes from hence, upon Religion in
general, and to the Party you would seem to own, and especially to your selves.
This opens the Mouths, fills many Books and Pulpits, with matter against you;
they stick not flatly to say, that you are as bad, and make use of the same
Artifices as the Jesuits do in such cases; and though it may vex them, to see
you thus too hard for them, yet it again relieves them by administering to them,
and occasion of venting their anger, and disgusts against you; and withal,
sometimes it makes them merry and pleasant, to see that they can find as bad
(so they think) and as deceitful doings and practices among you, as among those
of the illest Name and Character: Persons of those Principles, which your
selves use most to exclaim against, that is, the Jesuits, and men of their
Spirits and Designs.

I protest, I cannot tell how to answer them, as to this matter, i. e. To do it
with truth and honesty; I know what is pleaded and pretended to justify it;
who knows not? Let things be never so foul when men have done them, and stand
declared for them, they will say something; and in this case they pretend it is
lawful, and they will prove it so, etc. But at present not to enter into that
Controversy, whether it be lawful yea or nay; but suppose it, and that this
thing could be said with some color, or some satisfaction to themselves yet.

First, I always thought that Christians should and ought to have regard to
others, how they take and resent things, ways and actions, and how far a thing
may be of use, to the honor of the Christian Religion and Gospel, and how far
otherwise dishonorable to it; and that this had been a most excellent
rational, (as well as a most Evangelical) Rule in it self, etc.

And that every man should not look altogether on things as they appear to
himself, but also, how his ways and actions appear to other men, what aspect
they have upon them, and how they stand in their eye; otherwise I do not see
how men can intend to adorn the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus,
which every man stands bound to do.

Secondly, Suppose you could prove, what you have done in this matter to be
Lawful (which I cannot yet see, and therefore not believe:) What is this to the
purpose among Christians, or wise and good men? Though this Principle reigns
much in the World, and among the men of the World, yet I think the matter is
plain among Christians, that it ought not to be so; yea, I am sure they are to
be led by Principles of a more excellent kind, than to do things merely because
Lawful; or to think to justify themselves, when they have done them, because
they can prove them merely Lawful. One would think, the Apostles Rule were near
at hand, and to be heeded, not only because Apostolical, but for the
reasonableness, goodness, and worthiness of the Principle it self. In 1 Cor.
chap. 6. v. 12: All things are Lawful, i. e. many or most things are so, few
things in comparison are absolutely in their own Nature Unlawful. But all
things, though Lawful, are not expedient, or profitable, or useful, and
(besides Lawful) conducing to some good end and purpose, for the promotion of
Goodness, of Peace, of Piety, and the Gospel designs in general; and chap. 10.
v. 23. He says, All things are Lawful for me, but all things are not expedient
or convenient, again, All things are Lawful for me, but all things edify not,
and I am sure, scandalous things, and of ill Fame and Report cannot edify, i.
e. cannot build up men in Holiness, in Purity, in the Love of the Truth; but on
the contrary, stumble them, and cast them down. Now it is the edification of
others, and not the stumbling or scandalizing of them, thereby to hinder them
in their love and belief of, and commuance in the truth, which is here pressed,
as is manifest in the whole scope of the Chapter, and the Apostles
Argumentation in it; and is without dispute, the meaning of the next words
immediately following, v. 24. Let no man seek his own, i. e. Only his own, or
his own, apart from others good; but so do, and so mind his own ways, as to
prevent Counsel, why has not the Christian World, and men that will be called
Christians learned this? Christ the great Lord of Christianity taught it, and
was himself, both in Life and Spirit, most exemplary in it.

Thirdly, Besides, it is common among your selves, to condemn it in others,
that they impose things upon you, merely because they are, or may be, in their
own Nature Lawful. The truth is, there are a thousand things. Lawful, that
world be most absurd, under some Circumstances, to do, or put them in practice,
and many things, or most things are Lawful in the general Nature of them, and
as divested of Circumstances, that yet when they come to be done, or put in
practice, will be so inconvenient and unfit, that it may be as bad, and as
absurd to do them, as if they were utterly unlawful.

The conclusion is, in short, that a good Christian neither will, nor should do
any thing in it self unlawful, nor any thing, merely and only because it is
Lawful: but will mind still, the fitness, the profit, the usefulness of them,
as to those Circumstances they fall under, when reduced to practice.

Fourthly, I do not speak all this, because I think such Swearing and
Communicating, for a present advantage is Lawful; but supposing that it were
so, yet is that alone no good Reason nor Argument for the doing of it. Neither
again do I meddle or concern my self with the Law and Authority, that injoyns
these things, nor with those Persons, that ordinarily hold and practice them,
being in the Communion of that Church, for whose sake and interest they are
enjoined and imposed; but I speak to them who pretending Nonconformity as their
ordinary way, and choice to walk in, that look upon the Oaths and
Renunciations, either as unlawful, or oppressive, and uncharitable; and yet on
the occasion, and merely on the account, of a place of Honor and Profit for
once, and to serve a turn, will swear, renounce, take the Sacrament, do any
thing rather than miss it, or for fear of loseing it, or that they may save
themselves, or Party by it. If this be not scandalous, offensive, and to
Religion and true Piety destructive, I know nothing that is so. I know nothing
that will more render you in the eyes of all, as men of flexible and profligate
Consciences, that can do any thing, and make you seem more like to such, that
are justly esteemed the worst of men. It occasions men to hate both you, and
all Religon, at least that which you profess, for your sakes; however, you and
men in your Circumstances, may turn and wind, move every stone, break their
Brains, and their Wits, to find out distinctions and evasions to salve their
Consciences and Reputations, yet the vulgar running sense, will judge otherwise
of you and them.

Fifthly, But the common Plea for thus doing and grand Objection against what
is here said, will be this. O! but if we should not do thus; then no honest men
would be in Place, none but loose, profane, wicked, Atheistical, Popish, or
Torish men, would get in; and so we should, or might lose our Rights, our
Liberties, our All; yea, perhaps our Lives too: But to this I answer.

First, Suppose this, yea, and the worst that can be supposed, yet must we
needs do evil, that good may come of it? If it be not evil to do so in it self,
nor occasions any evil, nor scandal, for you to swear, renounce, receive, why
do you then not ordinarily practice it, and so make no breach nor division on
that account? Yea, why do you do it so secretly, clandestinely, that it should
not be publicly known, if it be well and lawfully done? But if you think it
evil, and so evil, that you cannot well, and upon other accounts join with it,
nor with them with whom you differ in these things, it is to be wondered at,
how you can do it, on the account you now do. Certainly, I see not, but upon
this account you may comply with any thing.

Secondly, Why cannot you trust God, the Living God, in his own way, but take
such unhallowed Courses and Practices as these, to the great danger and
disgrace of Religion, and of your selves? Sure I am, if you have not Faith to
trust in God, going in plain honest ways, ye have no reason to expect his
Favor in dishonest and suspicious ways and doings.

Thirdly, If this Procedure be according to Law, and the Law made to keep you
out, why cannot ye be quiet, and submit to it, seeing there is no penalty for
refusing to serve or swear! And for being shut out of Offices and Places (as to
some of them) a man would think it should be a convenience to be excluded and
rendered incapable. And it is apparent enough, that many, if not the most of
you, would in some such way exclude others, if the Power were in your hands, as
Papists, and perhaps some other, whose Opinion and Practices in some things you
like not. They do not compel you to take Office or Place, and then make you
Swear and take the Test, but put those Bars and Blocks in your way, that ye
might not come into them, supposing that when they made them, they had laid
them so directly contrary to your former declared Principles and Practices,
that they should certainly exclude and keep you out.

Fourthly, There is great Cause and Reason to believe, that God will sooner
help and vindicate you, if there be damage and dishonor in being shut out.

I say, there is according to the Divine Procedure abundant more reason to
believe, and ye may rather expect, that God will do for you in this plain
honest way of proceeding without sin and scandal, and in the declining of all
sinful and suspicious ways, etc. Then think to find his help and blessing in
ways of your own devising, not so plain and honest as they should be, but at
best doubtful and suspicious; and therefore dangerous.

And God sometimes will have men to trust him with all, and he tryes them in
some way or other, whether they will trust him, yea or no, and whether they
will walk in the plain path of Truth and Sincerity, or whether for advantage
they will step out of this Path, and leap over the Hedge: He does this to prove
them, and when they are proved, and found faithful, he sooner helps and
vindicates them in a way of patient suffering, and constant continuing in well
doing, than in any other way, wherein they think to amend themselves, in
Methods and proceedings scandalous and dangerous. Surely, a good honest tender
Mind and Conscience that fears Sin and Offenses, would not thus adventure to
walk so near the Pits brink, but be rather studious, how he may walk farthest
from it, etc.

Fifthly, Moreover I cannot see, but that as it appears to be scandalous, and
of ill Fame and Report, and very hurtful to Religion and Godliness, for men to
enter into Places of Profit upon these Terms: So they also, who are active in
the choosing such men, who they know beforehand, must thus debauch their
Consciences, and do that, which at other times they would by no means do; I
say, such Choosers or Electors must in some kind and degree, at least, be
guilty of the same evils or scandals with the other. For how can I put another
upon the doing that, which I know is his standing Judgment and Practice not to
do? Or why should I be any ways accessory or assistant to any man, to put him
upon the doing that, which I my self would not do, and think that he should
not? And certainly, upon the whole, all the good that is pretended to be aimed
at, in seeking thus unwarrantably to come into Place and Power, is much
overballanc'd with the evil attending it.

To Conclude, I say, as before, men will stingle, and wriggle, make use of all
their Wits and Strength, appear with all their Evasions and Distinctions, to
salve up such a Practice; but if they would take half so much pains to consider
the Matter on the other side, and lay aside themselves, and their own Interest,
and follow that which is common, open, and plain, and appears so to all, to the
vulgar, and to impartial men, and to enemies too, they whould do better, and
appear honester, than now they do, and honor Religion, and the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus our Savior, better than they do: in 1 Cor. 10. chap. 31. verse 32.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God, give none Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God.

SECT. VII.
I Note only one thing more, wherewith you are not only charged, but
stigmatized, and publicly disgraced, (viz.) with Folly and Phanaticism; as if
you were a sort of People above all others, of crazy Minds, Phanatick, and
irrational Principles and Practices, as to matters of Religion; particularly,
in the Matter of your Dissent and Separation from the Established Church,
Government, Laws and Worship. Doubtless, Folly, Enthusiasm, and Phanaticism in
Religion, are as dishonorable and prejudicial to it on the one hand, as
Profaneness and Immorality on the other: And meeting with some witty wicked
Minds and Persons, unacquainted with the Principles of Religion, and Power of
Godliness, does more scandalize them than the other, and occasion them to
think, that no man can be seriously Religious, but Fools; and that to be
devout, is a sign of ignorance. I do believe, that you are much wronged in this
Matter, by such who care not what they say, or may say, what they list, having
all the public Favor and Countenance; and their public approved Teachers, do
not seem at all to discountenance, but rather themselves use and encourage
those that do use such opprobrious Names and Characters; (how they will answer
it to God, and how they can make it agree to that Christian Love, Meekness,
Charity, and Moderation, they as Christians would pretend unto, I know not by
ill Names worse than Racha) to revile, rail upon, expose, to the most ignorant
and profane, not only some few, but so great a Number and Party of men, and
their Fellow Christians, and doubtless a Party; to say no more than plain
truth, not inferior to themselves, either for Number, Piety, Learning or useful
Living in their Place and Generation: I say, to do this does too certainly show
a Spirit not at all agreeing with a Christian Spirit, and makes them look too
like men unacquainted with the Divine Nature and Temper of our Lord Christ,
whose Example, they and we should always set before us, be imitators of, that
so being in this, and in all Virtue, as we ought like unto him, when he
appears, we may appear with him, because we are like him.

Secondly, Therefore my only business and request is, that you would do nothing
that may occasion this, but cut off Occasion from them that seek it, and would
be glad to find any thing whereby they might disgrace and disparage you, either
in Principle or Practice.

Thridly, I know, and am aware, That in all Ages from the beginning of the
World, and more from the beginning of Christianity to this day, beside diverse
other ways of Envy, Vexation, and Persecution, used against the better part of
mankind, evil men have still devised, and given them Names of Reproach, Scorn,
and Derision, cruel Mockings, as the Author to the Hebrems calls them, Heb. 11.
John Baptist was esteemed, as one having a Devil, Mad, or Phanatick; our Lord
went not without this Livery; and the first Christians were called by way of
Contempt, Galileans, and quite through all the Ages of the first ten
Persecutions, there were still devised some hideous or ridiculous Names and
Characters, to note them by, and render them odious; and so all along through
the Reign of Popery, and the Romish Church, they were called Heretics,
Lollards, etc. to make them both odious and ridiculous; the same Spirit has
not failed in our days, since the Reformation, one while calling them Puritans,
Precisians, and now at last Phanaticks or Madmen. But I say, I would not you
should give any Cause or Occasion for it: Neither do I know any thing, on
account whereof they should so esteem you, but that upon the same, were we to
retaliate and render evil for evil, we might stigmatize them in the same kind;
yet if any do follow or imitate them in this, their Way and Practice however
provoked to it, they shall not be justified by me, nor, I believe, by him, who
is appointed the great Judge of us all, etc.

Considering with my self, what it may be, that may give any color to them,
thus to style you Phauaticks, Fools, or Mad men, or how you come to be reputed
either Phanaticks, or Enthusiasticks; as far as I can conjecture, the occasions
are such as these, etc.

First, That some of you are taken notice of, to deny the use of Reason, in
matters of Religion; or to deny that we should judge of the ways and procedures
of God, about our Salvation, and in matters of Divine Revelation, by our
Reasons and Understanding, or according to them, or according to such
Principles, that men, as men, are capable to judge by, etc.

First, To this, I say, that I find none or very few, that thus speak, and
hold; and if any have been so inconsiderate, or let fall in the heat of
Discourse and Argument, such inconsiderate sayings in their Books or Sermons,
etc. against the use of Reason, in matters of Religion, such are but few, and I
judge fewer than have been, and I hope fewer will be, etc.

But on the contrary, diverse of the Nonformists have writ, and spoken, and
preached rationally on the behalf, and in the defense of the use of Reason in
Religion, many might be mentioned. I have seen one piece entitled, the
Interest of Reason in Religion; and that most pious (whatever Enemies may say)
and most industrious, indefatigable Servant of Christ Mr. R. B. has complained
of some, for this very thing that they have done much wrong to Religion, to
make men think that no Protestants speak Reason, but Socinians, etc. And if any
be found so weak, thus to declaim against Reason, they may possibly be betrayed
thereunto through their adherence to some particular Opinions that they take
for Truth, and conceive they cannot be maintained upon common rational
Principles, and so extravagantly exclaim against Reason it self. But of this
sort of men, whether they be few or many, I am sure they are as well
Conformists, as Non conformists. The truth is, you shall hardly see any Party
of men, that hold together upon the account of any particular Opinion, Interest
or Practice in Religion, and not uniting upon Christian Principles, as such,
but that they will in some one kind or other, be somewhat Phanatick, and for
the sake of their Party, Way, and Interest, deny men the free use of their
Reason, as to the things they make the Principle Marks and Characters of their
Party or Sect. (E. G.) The Popish Religion if you will be of it, you must in
many things deny your Reason and Senses too (E. G.) in the infallibility of
their Church, and in the great and senceless Heresy of Transubstantiation,
with many others: so to be admitted into some other Churches, you must in some
kind believe, as the Church believes, practice as they do, say as they say,
though it be never so plain against your own Reason and Understanding (E. G.)
You must submit to the Church or Ecclesiastic Power and Authority to such Laws
and Ceremonies, because, or for the sake of the Authority commanding them,
though the things in themselves seem never so contrary to your own
understanding, and to the best Judgment you can make of things; this I say, you
must submit to, though never so unsatisfied; which seems contrary to all
reason, to the Gospel of Christ, and in it self is most uncharitable and
injurious to Christian men. Take almost any other Sect, Party or Division of
men, that separate from these, they will have a Noli me tangere, something that
must not be touched, that must not be thoroughly Anatomized and Dissected, nor
put upon the trial of free Reason, and rational manly Principles, but must be
taken for granted, as an unquestionable Principle in their way, as being the
uniting Principle and Character of their Sect and Party.

Secondly, But because I would come as near as I can, to the true meaning of
those that deny the use of Reason in Religion, etc.

I do grant, That there are some things, yea, many things, that through the
infinite Grace of God, are revealed in the Scriptures and Gospel of Christ:
Indeed the whole Frame of it is such, with the most excellent Methods and
Counsels of it, that all the Wit of men, and Reason in the World, and all the
Wisdom, Sagacity of men and Angels could never have found out, or thought of;
but now being revealed and made known to us, we can by our Reasons and
understandings conceive of them, are able to understand and judge of them, and
though they were once, yet now they are no longer Mysteries, save so far as all
things are Mysteries, till men will be at the pains to know and understand
them, when all that Study, Care, and Prayer, which ought to be used, and to
which the Promises are made, that according to such endeavors, the Counsels of
God in the Gospel of Christ, shall be understood have been used; and
especially, if we live holily, close with God, and walk up to that which we
already know, God will in due time reveal all the rest unto us, so far as we
need know; and this not against, nor without the use of our Reasons, but
through the humble Exercise and Improvement of them.

If any shall still object, That there are yet some things, that cannot with
all our Reason and improved Understandings be known, etc. I grant it may be so,
especially, to some, and at some times: But then as I cannot understand them,
so it is no part of my Faith to believe them, but, I am to leave them as they
are. I am not obliged to speak about them, nor to practice them; and that which
otherwise might be a Duty for me to do, did I know it, not knowing of it, now
is not; and indeed, it is a piece of honesty and ingenuity in a man, not to
pretend to be knowing in more than he is, but to hold things for certain, that
are so to him, and to live and practice them accordingly; and things that are
but probable, so to hold and profess them, and for no other, and things
doubtful, to profess them as such, that we do bout of, and to suspend the
Practice of them till better assurance and information be had. If this were
done, men would be, and appear more honest and peaceable, and Disputes and
Contests about such Points and Opinions, would be fewer and more moderate, and
so need not hurt Peace, and hinder Charity, as now they too much do.

In a word, happy were it, if men would be so free and ingenuous, and the
dogmatical and interrested part of mankind would bear it, that every man would
walk openly and honestly, declare and profess, what he is, and what he thinks
and believes, let it be something or nothing, good or bad, he would the sooner
come to Information, and so be rectified, and in the mean time, would do less
hurt, whereas while men keep such things secret, they become hot and burning in
their minds, they make more of them than they are, and when they have an
opportunity to vent them, they are the more earnest in it, do the more hurt by
them if they be not good. etc.

3. Whatever men think, and talk against the use of reason in matters of
Religion, and of Salvation, yet certainly it is of so necessary a use, that
they which talk against it, must use the best they have and can against it. It
is said of Justice, it is so necessary a virtue in humane life and affairs,
that Thieves themselves that live by injustice, Rapine and Wrong, yet are
forced to make use of it, if it be but in distribution of what they have
unjustly gotten: so men make use of their Reason whilst they dispute against it.

I have heard of a witty Poem made against Wit and Reason, and in the praise of
Folly; indeed the use of Reason can no ways be disparaged and disputed against,
but by such a Poetical liberty, or in the way of stark folly, if that could be
supposed to do it.

Again, Surely that must needs be most necessary, which a man, as such, has,
and is essential to him, and without which he could not be a man, but some
other Creature. Why a man should be praised because he is wise and rational,
making use of his reason and understanding in all things else, only laying it
aside in matters of Religion, which are his greatest concern, and wherein above
all things he had need use the most and the best of it, is wonderful strange,
etc.

And further, most certain it is, that the ever blessed gracious God, when he
gives his Laws, and makes known his Counsels unto men, that he does fit and
suit them to the reasonable minds and souls of men; that so men, as men, may
conceive and judge of them, and understand them. As he has made all Creatures
in their diverse kinds, with several faculties of sensation and perception
answerable to his dealings with them, and drawings of them; and his methods and
instruments must be suited to them, that they be stirred and moved to their
several works and ends; so Man above all other Creatures being made most free
in his actions, and enabled to know and understand what is said to him, being
also accountable to God his Creator for what he does, and why he does, musts
needs in his way and in a manner, proper to his kind, understand and conceive
of divine things, which can be in no other way, than by his reason, whereby he
is able to judge of the ways of God when made known to him, as well as other
things; and therefore it is that God does often appeal to men, and to their
Reason and Judgment even, whether his ways be not equal, and their ways
unequal; he makes them the Judges, which certainly he would not do, if they as
men (only unbiassed and impartial) were not competent for it.

4. Whereas some, to strengthen themselves in this conceit against the use of
reason in Religion and divine things, do plead with all the reason they can
allow themselves some Scripture passages; and in especial that place in 1 Cor.
2.14. But the Natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are
foolishness to him. The reason is given, because they are spiritually to be
discerned, etc.

I would not make any stay to open the Scripture at large, it needs not if men
would be impartial, and it has been done by others fully; and I would only
desire all such that plead it, to mind these things, in the place, and about
it, etc.

1. That what is spoken here of the natural, is meant not of the unregenerate
man, but of the weak Christian and undergrown, or Babe in Christ, chap. 3.
verse. 1. And called carnal, that is, too much so.

2. That the things of God here spoken of, which these could not receive, were
not the common and most necessary things that were of absolute necessity to
salvation, but the high or deep things of God, which only the spiritual man or
well-grown Christian could well understand and comprehend: and by spiritual,
according to the Apostles phrase, is still meant, such as are well grown in
Christian knowledge, in opposition to weak men, and narrow-spirited Christians:
See these places in this Chapter, ver. 15. Chap. 3. v. 1. Chap. 14. v. 37. Gal.
6. v. 1.

3. That it is not here denied, that such a man could never know or understand
these things, or that he was in an utter incapacity to understand them, but
only this, that at present he was so; but this denies not, but that afterward
in a continuance of diligent endeavors he may know. As we say of one. That at
present is not Book learned, he cannot read, nor understand Greek nor Latin, i.
e. is in no present capacity for it; yet this hinders not, but that he may by
diligence and study, applying himself to it; and by suitable instruction for
it, learn and understand to do, what he cannot now do. These things are plain
in this Scripture, and in the Context about it; and if men will impartially
consider, and lay aside all prejudice and prepossessions, they will find it to
be so; and if not, they will never find any thing, nor the truth at all.

5. It is, and will be pleaded (viz.) That it is the Spirit of God that
enlightens and gives instruction in Divine things, and that man cannot do, or
know any thing without his assistance and illumination, etc.

To which I answer (1.) It is true, he does so, and as the Apostle says, No
man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God. But (2.) besides that he
has made known these already in that Revelation which he has made of the mind
of Christ at the beginning, so now he makes men to know and understand the
things of God, and helps every man that is willing to understand, and in
sincerity desires it: but still this is done not without (much less against)
the use of their reasons and understandings, but through them, and by them, he
deals with men, as men, as reasonable; so that they may understand and conceive
of these in the same way they do of other things, though these be the most
excellent.

Again, it appears more plainly, to be thus, in that men are commanded and
enjoined to seek, to try, to study, enquire, and labor after, the knowledge of
Divine things, as well as, yea more than after other things, the which cannot
be done but by the use of their reasonable faculties as they are men, and thus
they are helped, strengthened, remembered, and every way assisted by the Spirit
of God, and more than they are in other things. And they want and stand in
great need of this, partly because of the excellent and invisible nature, the
dignity and sovereign concern of these things to men; partly also because of
that backwardness, darkness, and weakness that cleaves to us, by means whereof
we stand in greater need of care, diligence, and humble Prayer to God, the
Father of Lights, and the giver of such good and perfect gifts. (3.) It is
manifest, that the more we do in this kind, the more we receive; to him that
thus improves, more shall be given; and the more careless, or idle, or
otherwise diverted by the things of this present World, etc. the less we
receive at the hand of God, according as we find by experience. In agreement to
this, there are many precepts, injoyning us to labor, to seek, in order to the
receiving this Grace; and many Promises and Encouragements thereunto, and
consequently our not doing of it, not thus applying of our selves to the work
with all humble supplication, in all sincerity, is the reason why we want it,
and want the Divine Grace, which else would be more plentiful in it.

6. If we do not thus employ our reasons and understandings, in enquiring into
the things of God, we are like to be deceived, and some other Spirit will get
into us, that is not of God; and and so we are like to be misled, turned indeed
into the way of Enthusiasm and Phanaticism, as we see daily it is with some.
Yea, so clear and manifest it is, that what we receive of God, and the Gospel
of Christ, must be by and through the use of our rational faculties, that by
them we are bid to try the Spirits, whether they be of God or of men, or of a
worse inspiration, by which those are generally misled, that think to find the
Truth otherwise than in this most proper and necessary way. So that take the
matter, and consider it, how we will, it is manifest; the ordinary work and
operation of God, and the Spirit of God upon us in the making his will known,
making of us to understand, and to be impressed with the knowledge and sense of
Divine things, or things of God, must be by and through the use and exercise of
our reason judgments and understandings.

7. And finally, if any plead and contend that according to these proceedings,
men may and do deceive themselves; we daily see them run into great errors,
heresies, mistakes, notwithstanding otherwise Rational and Learned, and
pleading much for the use of Reason too. Suppose that those be errors and
heresies, that you think are so, (for you may be mistaken) but I say, supposing
it to be so, is it any Argument because men may abuse and wrong employ their
noble Faculties of reason and understanding, that therefore there is no use of
them in any case? surely then we must all unman our selves. But that men may
use and employ all the powers of their Souls, and members of their Bodies to
sin and ungodly purposes, is no doubt, as neither is it, but that they may use
them to good and useful purposes, ends and designs; which if they do not,
seeing they may do it, they shall give a most severe account to God in this
matter above all other. And the Truth is, the principal reason and account, of
the just and severe judgment and condemnation of God against men, that will be
condemned at last, will be resolved into this; that they have not improved nor
made a right and honest use of those natural and most excellent Faculties,
which they have as men (viz.) that reason and understanding which God has
given them; and consequently on the account of those Talents, and Seasons, and
Opportunities of Grace, which they having received from God, for the doing good
to themselves and others, have neglected.

Some against all reason object, that we are not to compare Heavenly things
with Earthly, and Divine things with Carnal, which men will and are like to do,
if they judge of the one by the other, according to their reasons, and humane
understandings, etc.

But, to this I say in short, that it is a wonder, that men can say and object
this, when they see the constant way and reasoning of our blessed Lord himself
in his Parables and comparisons; and how he does still compare Heavenly things
to Earthly, and illustrate them by these; still saying, the Kingdom of Heaven,
or the Kingdom of God, (which is the Kingdom of the Gospel) is like unto this,
or like unto that, according to the way, reason, method, comparison, and
procedure of men, in earthly and natural things, and in the things of this
life, as in the Parable of the Sower, and many other, which are too many here
to set down, and plainer than that there should be need to argue them.

Only this, the Heavenly and Spiritual, or Divine things, differ by way of
excellency, and of their sovereign use to men; but this hinders not, but that
in their general nature and method of proceeding, they hold a proportion with
them in the reason, evidence, proof, and demonstration of them.

To conclude, when I speak so much (because there is so much need) of the use
and exercise of men's judgments and understandings in matters of God and of
Religion, as well as in other things: I hope none will think, that I suppose
men Infallible, or that they may not either willingly, or ignorantly err, and
do amiss, and use them otherwise than they ought, etc. But only thus,

1. That an honest exercise and use of them, is the way wherein we are most
certain to find, and may expect a blessing from God, in our enquiry and study,
and good success in the matter, and things enquired after; and this though it
be not infallible, is the nearest to Infallibility, and (we may be sure) of the
greatest certainty, whereby to come to a right understanding; and be surely led
in the things of God, and of our everlasting concerns.

2. That men may be dishonest, and suffer their hearts and minds to be biased
and wrong influenced, and darkened; they may not love the Truth, for Truths
sake, they may have their Interest and their Lust to gratify, and so they may
err and do ill, and the Spirit of God may be grieved and kept at a distance,
and not help them, nor ioyn with them: But if they are of honest sincere minds,
which all may and must have, even the weakest as well as the strongest, they
will find they may be surely led; and no other but such, have the promise for
it, and so far they are kept out of the way of the evil Spirit as well as from
the perversion of their own Spirits, and from the subtilty and deceiving of
Evil and Interessed men.

2. Some of you are charged with Phanaticism, sometimes in your Prayers and
Sermons, i. e. with diverse odd, and too course, blunt, and over-familiar, and
unbecoming words and Phraises, Comparisons and Similitudes, which seem nauseous
to some, Ridiculous to others; and however passable among the People, out of
their respects to you, yet offensive and grating to the Ears of the more
Judicious, and give occasion more than you think for (but ought to consider) to
others to scoff, deride, and thereby countenance and confirm themselves in what
they are willing enough to believe. (viz.) That you are, as they call you
Phanatical, and men of absurd Speeches, and sometimes of Behaviors in your
Religious Exercises: And though this may as well be charged upon others, and
some of your Accusers as well as any; yet they having the advantage of you in
State-Favour, and being otherwise more in the Fashion than you are, they can
make that use of it against you, which you cannot against them, neither ought
if you could; and this should make you the more careful, with the greater Piety
and Prudence, to manage all things of a Religious nature, with such a
comeliness and decorum, that you may disparage neither Religion, nor your
selves. And though such kind of runnings out may not displease, but sometimes
rather please, delight, some of the more Raw and Ignorant sort of People, yet
to the Judicious, even among your selves, they are offensive, troublesome, and
make them somewhat abashed: Certainly men may speak so as to avoid all
affectation, quaintness, pedantique Jingling on the one hand; and also all
absurd, unhandsome, uncomely utterance and expressions on the other; and what
is spoken on such occasions, may be sober, serious, rational, and manly. But of
this I shall take no further notice, having done it before.

Only I cannot choose but wonder, that you having heard and seen so much of
this nature objected against you, both in Speeches, Discourse, and in Printed
Books (which will inform, and word it to you, better than I can) should not now
be more careful in it, etc.

3. Something of this nature is noted of you in and about the performance of
Religious Duties, and about the taking up some private Opinions, Notions and
Practices in Religion, upon the account of a new pretended Revelation, or new
impulse, strong and extraordinary motions upon your Spirits.

For the first, as to Religious Duties and Services, This is charged on you
(and by some, too much occasion is given for it:) That you will not pray, (to
give that as an instance for the whole) or go about any such Religious Service,
till you are first strongly and inwardly moved to it, or as some speak, have an
impulse upon their minds, or be moved by the Spirit; and when such a forcible
touch or strong motion is upon their minds, right or wrong, they account it a
moving of the Spirit of God, merely, because they are strongly moved and
persuaded. And if such a Motion be not, they reckon and do account, they are
not obliged at all to the performance of any Duty; in answer to this, consider,

First, I grant, That Christians may at sometimes be stirred and moved in their
Spirits, to some religious Work and Service, more than at another time, and
that he that is so, does well, to take and not to omit such an Opportunity,
etc. But

That he should not set upon the performance of Prayer, or any Christian
Service till he is so stirred and inwardly and strongly moved; this is a
Doctrine and Persuasion, than which nothing is more foolish, and pernicious, or
Phanatick (if you will have it so:) very dangerous to the Souls of men, and
nothing more contrary to sound Reason, nor the holy Scriptures. And this is so
plain, that it is a wonder any considering man should be persuaded to it, or
led by it. For in how many places does the Holy Ghost, speaking in the
Scriptures, call upon men to stir up themselves to their Duties, to gird up the
Loins of their Minds, to be sober, to consider, and to watch and pray, etc.
yea, to provoke themselves, and to provoke one another unto good Works, as they
see Cause and Reason for it; how often are we called upon, to strive, to run,
to wrestle, and that against our selves? how often, and how vehemently are we
called upon to pray? (to speak to that Duty; particularly, as an instance of
all the rest,) abundance of Arguments are used, to provoke and enforce men to
be constant, diligent in it, etc.

What need all this; and abundance more that is said, to engage us to bestir our
selves if this need not be done, till we are inwardly stirred and moved, and
must wait for some impulse and inflation of a mighty Spirit, to raise our minds
unto it; nay further, do not these earnest Charges and Exhortations plainly
suppose and prove, that men may by the serious thoughts of their Duties, the
Reasons, and Necessity thereof, stir and raise in themselves such a strong
Motion, to the Duty they speak of? Again,

Thirdly, Do not the Scriptures speak much, and give men to understand, and
make them aware of their own dullness, and backwardness to this, and all good
Works and Duties? and does it not admonish them, and put them in fear, lest a
cold, flat, indisposed Spirit grow upon them; so that at last they may come to
be hardened and deceived, that in seeing, they may think they see, but not
indeed perceive? In hearing, they may think they hear, but not understand, and
that their eyes may come to be closed, that they cannot see. And is not this a
most dangerous and dreadful state, which men come unto by neglect, and by not
being diligent, earnest, constant and servent, in stirring up themselves in,
and to all holy Ways and Services? And it matters not, as to the danger and
dreadful effects coming thereby, whether these come by minding other things,
and by their being engaged in this present World, or whether they come through
a vain Phanatick, Enthusiastic persuasion, that they are not to act in
religious Duties, except extraordinarily moved to it; for still a neglect there
is, from what cause soever it comes, the danger and ill effects are the same.
That this ill and insensible Spirit, is the effect of such Enthusiastic
Notions or Apprehensions, is most manifest in our days; and to that pass, by
these means some come, that they neither pray by themselves, nor pray or
worship God in their Families; they neither pray with them, nor for them, nor
for any, except some extraordinary motion puts them upon it, and so at last
they Worship, not God at all, neither in public, nor as far as any can
understand in private; and in fine, do hardly profess, or give any account of
their belief in Christ Jesus, nor whether they be of the Christian Religion, or
of any Religion, or whether they be only Civil Pagans; you shall seldom hear
them mention the Name of Christ Jesus, with any reverence or expressions of any
tolerable Love and Affections to him.

Fourthly, Because these kind of men, before they come to be so bad, do seem to
rest much upon the motions of the Spirit of God, as they pretend. (For indeed)
to speak the truth, there are extremes on both sides; for as these will do
nothing without such motions and impulses, others, on the other hand rest too
much in their forms of Devotions, or in their natural Parts and Abilities, and
so do not look for, nor seriously attend unto, nor pray for the Divine
Illumination, and Communication of the holy Spirit, who certainly, to humble
sincere minds, waiting on him, and asking his help, will never be wanting.

But I say, seeing such extremes and mistakes there are, let us see, what the
Scriptures teach us, and what we may reasonably expect of Grace and Assistance
in this kind, to help us in all holy Christian Works and Services; and we find
the Holy Ghost is often spoken of in the Scripture, especially in the New
Testament, as an helper and assistant to us, in the things of God, and of
Christ Jesus, as, E. G. for the understanding of them, and our Illumination in
them, for the remembrance and bringing of them, and all fit things unto our
minds, for the helping of us in the performance of them; and because our
weakness, ignorance, and indisposedness is great, and our infirmities many,
still accompanying us in all Religious Services, and especially, in the Work
and Duty of Prayer (which is that we gave for an instance for all the rest,) I
say, it is plain and manifest enough, that the Holy Spirit of God is promised
to us, and does concern himself in us about these things, but we are no where
taught, that ordinarily his Motions are of such a hot and strong Nature, that
we cannot resist them; but on the contrary, that men do resist him, and that
his Operations may be resisted, and as to the Effect frustrated; he may be
grieved and depart from us, not being entertained by us as he ought: And that
his Motions are ordinarily soft and still, not coming in a Storm, not in
Thunder, or with a Torrent, but such, that by men, careless, earthly, lovers
of, and busy in this present World, or otherwise indisposed, or illdisposed,
may not be felt or understood, because not attended unto, etc.

Fifthly, That his Motions and Workings in us, are, and always must be, in and
by our Reasons and Understandings, as we are men; because, by the faculties, we
as men, are endued with, and according to them, we must judge, whether such
Motions are good or not, whether the things and works we are put upon, and
moved to, are good, fit, seasonable, and presently useful, orderly and comely,
whether for edification to our selves, or profit to others; we are to know,
consider, and judge of the quality of those Motions, and to understand our
selves, lest we follow an ill Spirit, as well as the good and holy Spirit of
God. Finally, consider, we serve the infinitely Wise God, that takes no
pleasure in Fools, nor in inconsiderate Works, Ways, and Worships, unless we
know what we do and why. A mere Motion, therefore or Impulse, or strong
Inflation and Work upon the mind, is not to be followed without further Trial
and Judgment pass upon it.

Sixthly, And in particular, when we speak of the help and quickening of the
Spirit of God, especially, in our Prayers, it is not needful, nor have we any
good Reason, to expect that he should dictate to us, the very words and
expressions we are to use in them; but the things and matters we are to pray
for, with necessary and fit Arguments, by which our Prayers are pressed and
enforced, etc. So when we come to consider our state and condition, and what
things we have to pray for, it is then proper for the holy Spirit to bring
those fit and apt things to our minds, especially, to do this upon great and
weighty occasions, and in times of great necessity and troubles, which that
place, Romans 8. seems to have a special respect unto. And again, we have great
need of this Divine help, to raise and to bear up our hearts, and to maintain a
Spirit in us, both constant and fervent, and to keep us from deadness, and
formality, and to mind us what we have prayed for, and what we have in design,
that we may pursue it to the utmost, till we have obtained what we desire; and
further, by his blessed Motions and Assistance, to help us against the flatness
and dullness of our hearts, and to stir us up, to a continuance and
incessantness in it, with many other needful helps, as occasion is and
requires, both in this of prayer, and in all other things respecting the
perseverance and safe conduct of a Christian Life, in order to Eternal Life.

Seventhly, It is not to be denied, but that at some times, there may be
occasion, (but very rarely) to work upon, to move and act some men at a more
than ordinary rate, as the Prophets and Apostles were at some times, when they
had some extraordinary Work to do; but this, I say, if it be at all, must needs
be rare, extraordinary, and seldom done. Considering,

First, That there needs now no new Revelation of the mind and will of God,
what he would have us to do, and to believe, seeing that all this is fully made
known by Christ Jesus in his Gospel, who was sent on purpose to make known the
most perfect will of God, and did at the first in a most plentiful manner, send
down his Gifts and Endowments upon men, to fitthem for the same Work which
himself had laid the Foundation of. So that there can be no frequent need and
occasion for extraordinary Revelations and Motions. If there be any thing yet
remaining of an extraordinary Nature, there may be expected extraordinary
Assistance, but for our ordinary Duties, belonging to a Christian Life, and to
the keeping of the Commands of God, to the glorifying of God our Heavenly
Father, and for the walking worthy of such a Calling, as we are called unto; we
are to learn from the Scripture, and to give our selves to the study of them,
with understanding and judgment, learning and drawing our duty from them,
together with the Spiritual Nature, Excellency, and Dignity of the things we
are to understand, the things of God, and of Eternal happiness, and herein we
have the Promise, and may expect to receive the help of the Divine Spirit, in
and by the means of our Study and Enquiry, only it is necessary we be sincere,
sober, and considerate about such matters.

Lastly, Supposing that which is not, (viz.) that such strong motions and
impulses should be vouchsafed and allowed, for the stirring of us up to our
ordinary daily Works and Duties, such as Prayer, Meditation, Devotion, etc.
Suppose, I say, that we needed not go about them, till such motions were strong
upon us; though this were true, as it is not, yet this were not the best, nor
the most excellent way of Obedience, nor of the performance of any Duties, or
good Works, but a kind of weak, low, and childish Obedience, in them that would
not, could not stir until they were forcibly led, and that could not upon the
appearance of the reason, necessity, and occasion of the Duty, set themselves
about it, or know when to do it. Out of doubt it must be judged the most free,
most generous, and excellent kind of Obedience, to do and set about our Duty
that we know to be so, though we feel no such powerful motions, nor strong
inclinations to it, as long as our Reasons and Consciences are convinced of it
that it is to be done. Knowing our Duty in the general, we should (according to
that common light and wisdom, and the ordinary vouchsafement of God unto us) be
willing sometimes to stir up, and to compel our selves to our Duty, or any good
work we have to do, and what in our knowledge and Conscience we ought to do,
though we should find our selves unwilling, or, as we say, going against the
hair, i. e. the present disposition, inclination, and temper of our spirits.

But if we must still wait for extraordinary Motions, and not many times go
against our Minds, when they are contrarily bent and indisposed, as too often
they are, what mean, (besides our own experience) all those great Charges and
Injunctions-prest upon us, to stir up our selves, to gird up the loins of our
Minds, to shake off sloth, or not to be slothful, but vigorous Followers of
them, and of that which is good; to be intent and earnest in it, though we have
aversation and indisposition to it, etc. Now may not all see, that this is the
most free, the most excellent, generous, reasonable, and consequently the most
acceptable, and well-pleasing way of obedience, in which not following our
natural, or ill dispositions, or indispositions, we pursue, what, according to
the Divine Law, and our Duty, we are bound to do, whether it go with us, or
against us. And the more we deny our selves, and go against our selves, the
more we show of Reason, and of Resolution, and of entire Devotion, Resignation
of our selves unto God, and to his service: Is not this, I say, the most
excellent, and therefore the most acceptable way of obedience and performance
of all Religious, and Holy Services?

I might add to what has been said, something about the spirit of Phanaticism,
as to Opinions and Tenets in Religion and matters of Faith and Doctrine. Some
sometimes take up new and strange Doctrines, merely upon the account of some
present strong motion and persuasion that is upon their minds. They think they
are Divinely inspired, because a thing is set home upon their hearts; and this
conceit as wild as it is, has produced many strange Notions and Opinions that
have been born and brought forth into the world by it. The Heat of the Brain,
and the Strength of Fancy have been the Parents: and though upon no better a
foundation many Disciples have been made, and the Authors have had many
followers.

Such was the beginning of many Sects among us, such was the first rise and
beginning of several of the Orders of the Romish Church; for the same Spirit
works both in them, and sometimes in those that would seem most opposite to
them; and whosoever will be at the pains to read Histories both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, may find not a few of this kind; and if you will but be at the
labor to read some pieces written purposely on this Subject; as Dr. Merrick,
Causabon of Enthusiasm; and Dr. Stillingfleet of the Phanaticism of the Church
of Rome, and others of this Nature, you may have enough, etc. This wild Spirit
has seemed to show it self most at the beginning, or soon after the
Reformation, or some change in Religion, as it was when Men began, in great
Numbers, to fall off from the Church of Rome, and Popery, and at some other
time since amongst Protestants, etc.

When Men are newly come out of Darkness and Ignorance, and begin to see the
Light, which not having been used unto, they seem to be for a while in a maze,
not well knowing where they are, nor how to six themselves, and so run out into
extravagancies of Opinions and Fancies, without Reason, without End; or else,
when they new come out of their former Bondage and Slavery, wherein they have
been tied as to Religion, and their Consciences, and begin to taste Liberty,
and the sweet of it, they often grow wild and extravagant, so that no sober
bounds of Reason and Religion can hold them. And feeling the Reins now upon
their Necks, with which they have been pinched, and too straightly held in, they
now run on, while they are quite out of breath: They devise new Opinions, and
spawn new Sects at no Aim.

Which thing considered, might be a good Caution and Admonition to them who
have, or pretend to have the Reins of Ecclesiastic Power in their hands; and
such who take upon them to guide and rule others in matters of Religion and
Conscience. This, I say, might be an Admonition to them, while they are in
Power, to deal gently with those under them, to draw them and drive them, as
they are able and willing to go: For though some through Fear and Force, and
sometimes for Interest, will go on, and swim with the stream, and go in the
Crowd, yet secretly in their minds, they hate and distaste, if not detest it.
And though for their present either Ease or Interest, they comply and submit to
the yoke of their hard Masters; yet this somewhat galling their Necks, perhaps
their Consciences, as soon as ever they can get loose, and be at liberty from
under this Bondage, remembering their late forced Compliance, they commonly
become the greatest Enemies to their old Masters, and above all others, are
most fierce against them. Yea, those who never complied, but were clear
Dissenters from them, commonly are not so great Haters, fierce and implacable
Opposers as these: For they having not only stoopt against their Wills, but
against their Consciences too, in some kind, they now know not how sufficiently
to revenge themselves against their Drivers. The experience of our former
Troubles, besides the reason of the thing it self, is a sufficient Proof of
this: But from what Cause soever it is, this is certain, when Men break loose
from under the hands of tyrannous and superstitious Men, few of them can keep
in temperate Bounds; for being rid of the common Enemy to them all, every one
of them are ready to set up for themselves, some into one way, some into
another; some devise new Opinions, whereby to make a new Sect or Party, etc.

And among the many Occasions and Temptations this way, this is frequently
found to be one, they either are persuaded themselves, or pretend to it, and
endeavor to make other Men believe, that they have some new Revelation, and
what they do is by Divine Inspiration; which thing, for the supposed
excellency, honor and singularity of it, invites and tempts great Numbers
after them, to which this does not a little contribute, in that they now see,
what little or no reason their old Masters had to claim such a Power and
Authority as they used and exercised over them. And they cannot also, but
easily and quickly see this, that they have full as much Authority to guide and
govern themselves to take their own course, in choosing of their own Religion,
Sect, or Opinion; yea, and more than their former Lords could justly pretend,
and lay claim unto, for the Rule and direction of those they had under their
Power. Therefore certainly it would well become all that are in Place and Power
either in Church or State, when they intermeddle, and concern themselves in
Religion, and go about to direct and guide Consciences in it, that they would
make this most evident to them, that the Power they exercise, and the Things
they command and enjoin, are most clear and evident, upon the most undoubted
Principles of Reason and Religion, such as are either really, or upon the
matter self evident, etc.

Finally, This still seems to have been the Method and Policy of the Devil and
evil Angels, proceeding from that great malice and envy they have unto Men,
because of the great mercy of God showed unto them, viz. That in the first
place they endeavor to debauch the Souls and Consciences of Men, and to turn
them quite off from God, and to draw them (if possible) through the vile Sinks
and Channels of all Filthiness, Pollution, and Profaneness; unto all
abominable Sin and Wickedness, both of flesh and spirit, etc.

But if this be not so feasible always, but that some Men will be sober,
serious, and perhaps Religiously inclined, yea, devout and zealous, then they
lay the train of their Temptations another way, and in another vein, more
suitable to their Nature and Tempers, and find out for them, and fill them with
some fine Notions, and curious Speculations, with strange Doctrines, and some
new devised, or new revived Opinions and Heresies, and make them believe that
these matters newly revealed, and brought to their minds, set home upon their
spirits, are from and by the Spirit of God, and that God has in a special
manner revealed and honored them to be the Authors or Preachers of them, and
so they increase and propagate, and being carried on with great heat and
confidence, and in the Name of God, and being Novelties, which the Vulgar are
not acquainted with, they are much affected therewith; they take them up both
eagerly and hastily, and will by no means have the patience, nor the prudence,
to have any thing seriously tried by plain Scripture and Reason; or however
will not hearken with calmness, and without prejudice, what may be said to it,
and against it, but run away with it, being loath to lose the honor of a
new-discovery, and of being the first promoters of it, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
THus Christian Friends I have taken a liberty (but no other than the common
concern of every Christian will allow) to mind you of some things wherein you
may be blameworthy, or thought so to be: I neither have, nor dare take upon me
so much Authority or Confidence to reprove, judge or condemn you for the
matters here taxed; but only I take my observations from others, and from not
so much private as public reproofs, nay from the scorn and derision some make
at those things they think reprovable in you, publicly exposing you on those
accounts: Your Friends being in the mean time heartily sorry that you take no
more notice thereof, but because they are your reputed enemies, and such you
account loose and profane (though you cannot think they are all so) that have
publicly, and in Print thus exposed you; you have not endeavored seriously to
look into your ways, and to consider whether something thus noted, may not
stick to you. Remember that we all considered, both as men, and as particular
Sects and Parties, are better seen by others than by our selves, and should not
hastily and out of prejudice and ill opinion reject the reproofs and
admonitions, no not those that are done out of malice and hatred, and perhaps
with scorn, contempt and revenge, knowing that though such may overdo, yet are
like enough to light upon what is true as well as false, because they will take
all that is to be found or suspected: But I assure you, some of your Friends,
and such who agree with you in the same cause of Nonconformity, have with grief
and regret observed some of these faults and defects, especially those about
too much Formality amongst Professors and Dissenters, thinking so well of
themselves for, if not glorifying in their Party, and way of Dissent and
Separation, without those real Fruits, holy Dispositions, and such Christian
temper of Spirit, in all Peace, Meekness, Humility and Sanctity, and such good
works that should grace the Christian Profession, and cannot be reproved, but
may be understood and approved of all, even the worst of men: And they are not
a little troubled at the folly, Fanaticism and Enthusiasm of some of you,
(though others of all Parties may be guilty as well as you) and the lack of
that manly wisdom in managing your Christian Profession, and those rational
both Principles and Practices that might adorn it, the want whereof disgraces
it altogether.

It has been before noted, that folly or Fanaticism is as disgraceful (and in
some respects worse) to the Honor and Beauty of the Christian Profession, as
Profaneness and Irreligion; both of them and in the same point, have the same
ill effects upon the Profane and Negligent part of mankind, especially men
that are Wittily wicked; the Scriptures, especially of the New Testament,
caution as well against the one as the other, and against the Former of Folly
and Fancy, in all those places where we are cautioned not to be Fools, but to
be wise; not weak, nor Children in understanding; so not in practice, but to be
wise and walk wisely, to be knowing and understanding, what that good, most
perfect, most acceptable will of God is, that we may do it; and we are bid to
have Salt in our selves, and to be sober and serious, wise and prudent, with
abundance of this kind, and especially to take care of this in our public
Worship, and Behavior of a Religious nature. You would do well to look
setiously into your Principles and Opinions, and the conceptions you have of
God, and of the things of Religion, that there be not any error or mistake
about them, that may betray you into these ways of Fancy and Enthusiasm.

2. I confess it is sometime since these Papers, and the Address to you was
first drawn up, that there may have been some Alterations in some Matters and
Affairs relating to you (as every day will alter somewhat;) and that you may
think some Severities have been used toward you since; but I hope this shall
not make you to lose any part of your Patience, Prudence, or Charity, but by
such exercise to improve in them, and to let patience have her perfect work,
James 1. v. 4. that you may be entire, wanting nothing; and if any want either
wisdom or patience, let him ask of God who gives liberally to all; but be well
and thoroughly resolved that what you ask you are resolved to follow and
practice, and not wavering, nor unresolved whether you had best have it or not,
for then you shall receive nothing, ver. 6, 7, 8, etc. Further, it is my desire
that you would be more compassionate to them you think hurt and molest you,
then concerned for your selves; not to be angry or offended with them, but to
learn what Spirit you are to be of toward your enemies, and to learn of him
who is the great pattern and exemplar in this and all Divine virtues, even our
dear and to be adored Lord and Savior in his Precepts commanding us to love
our enemies, and to pray for them that despightfully use us and persecute us;
not to return evil for evil, no not in words reviling for reviling; with
abundance more to this purpose: And himself was the excellent example in this,
yea when he was upon the Cross in the midst of his Torments, and surrounded
with his Tormentors, with scornful revilings, cruel mockings, and the highest
provocations (and I think under the most cruel hard circumstances, all things
considered that ever any was) yet in the midst of all did not so much mind
himself as them, his Charity and Compassion was greater for them than himself,
and most heartily praying for forgiveness of them: And that we may not think
this only proper for him, and that no other could do the like, or imitate him
in it, consider that besides his Example, that we are to follow his Command
(and surely he would not command it if we were not by his Grace in a capacity
to do it.) We have also an instance of one of his Servants, a man with like
passions with our selves, Stephen the first Martyr, who when he was in the
throng of his violent Executioners actually stoning of him, yet then was most
mindful of them, and prayed heartily for them, having well learned of his Lord
and Master. You have not yet suffered much; it is good for Christians, and their
duty, to be prepared for the worst, which the Christian spirit will most
excellently fit them for: And be sure in all your Prayers to God, there be not
the least tincture of hatred against your enemies, or uncharitableness or ill
will against any, for this will spoil all, and the good success of them.

Secondly, Neither is it well done, (though too many are faulty in it) to
trouble your selves with fears and jealousies, of what Evils will come, what
Alterations, Changes, and Revolutions may be in the World, or amongst our
selves, the fears of Popery, and the great Troubles that must needs follow
thereupon. Not to be ever careful in any of these things, but in these, and in
all, to commit your care, and the care of all, and the public, as well as your
own private, unto God by Prayer and Supplication, and leave it with him, trust
him with it, and the peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus. Hinder not your selves in the enjoyment of your present peace,
nor by a diversion of your mind, and troubling your selves about these supposed
and feared Events. Your present great work and care of working out your
Salvation, requires the greatest care and fear above all, and in this, as well
as other things, let your moderation be known unto all men, and whatever may by
the Providence of God, or evil of men, fall out, that may displease and trouble
you in matter of Statechanges, be you not disturbed nor provoked to any
Displeasure, Discontent, much less, Tumultuousness, and Violent Motions: but be
as Christ Jesus, whose Kingdom not being of this World, was not, would not be
concerned in the Affairs of it, much less, to disturb the Public, and State
Affairs in it; so should his Servants, they have other work to mind, and enough
to do, to carry on the Affairs of his Spiritual Kingdom in their own hearts,
and to promote it in the World, in all his ways of Goodness and Charity, in
Meekness and Piety, in Perseverance, in Well-doing, and patient Forbearance and
Suffering. Finally, what I have writ here, and said, I have done it in the Fear
of God, and in Love and Charity to all, being desirous to do what I can to
honor the Gospel of our Lord and Savior, and to my Power to warn you against
the things that are dishonorable to it: And I consider, that the design of
God in the Gospel of Christ, is, that after the Revealing, Preaching, and
Publishing of it, it should be next carried on, by the holy Lives, and worthy
Walking of those that profess it, and commended to the World that way, and that
the Light of your good Works and holy Living should shine before men, that you
should so manage your Christian Profession, both in your private Capacities,
and as Members of the Christian Church; and that by this means you may prevail,
and do more good than with all Professions, Preaching, or any other Services
otherwise you can do; yea, so powerful is holy Living, that they that will not
be persuaded by the World, may be won by the excellent Conversation of
Christian Men and Women. I might here cite abundance to this Purpose, even the
whole new Testament-writings, but this is plain, and well known: Happy are we
if we do it: To conclude, all should look more at godliness and worthy walking,
and for the promotion of Piety in the World, than to any particular part of
Religion, Opinion, or Party of their own; but this is not yet well learnt nor
taught as is too evident among the several Sects, Parties, and divisions of
Christians among our selves, and elsewhere; for most are more intent upon their
own way, than upon the main desire of the Christian Religion, and so are still
looking about for such particular Passages, and Texts of Scripture, some
particular Precept, Command, or Example, that may favor their own Way,
Opinion, or Party, and hack and hew at these, cutting them off from their main
body, and grand design of Religion, whereas being taken, as they are, and
ought to be, in Conjunction with it, and interpreted according to, the main
principle Duties of Godliness, Peace and Charity, and the advancement of real
Righteousness and Goodness, the sense and meaning of all such particular Parts
and Passages, would become easy, and be better understood, and that aspect and
influence they have upon the whole, would be better perceived, and the minding
the great Intent and purpose of Religion, would enlighten them, and so
Contentions about them would cease; Love, Charity, and Goodness, would be
jointly promoted and carried on by all, and the common good and Salvation of
men, furthered for the most part, the contests in Religion are but about the
lesser things, viz. outward Ordinances and Rites, some smaller and less
considerable Opinions and Practices, all which would be soon ended, if
Christians of all Sects and Divisions, would but mind the main; if their
Passions. Lusts; and evil Affections were mortified, and their Love and Charity
to all were more warm, and if they would still mind what is best to be done,
and wherein they may best approve themselves to God, and to men; herein also
would they find the greatest Peace and Satisfaction in themselves, and
acceptance with God, and the righteous Judge of all, Jesus Christ our Lord at
the last. I end all with the excellent Rule, laid down in General,
comprehensive, Terms, Phil. 4.8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest (decent or seemly,) whatsoever things are just (or
Righteous,) whatsoever things are pare, whatsoever things are lovely, (or
Friendly,) whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any Virtue, if
there be any Praise, think upon these things.

FINIS.

