A NEW SYSTEME OF THE APOCALYPSE, OR Plain and Methodical ILLUSTRATIONS Of all
the VISIONS in the Revelation of St. JOHN.

Written by a French Minister in the year 1685. and Finished but two days before
the Dragoons plunderd him of all, except this Treatise.

To which is added, This Author's Defense of his Illustrations, concerning the
NON-EFFUSION of the VIALS; In answer to Mr. JURIEU.

Faithfully Englished.

London Printed in the Year 1688.

THE TRANSLATOR To the READER.
AS the knowledge of things to come, not visible in their Causes, is the alone
privilege of God, and which he so peculiarly challenges, as to distinguish
himself thereby from all those Beings, to whom through the fallacy of the Devil,
and their own ignorance, the sottish and deluded part of Mankind had ascribed a
Divinity; so the predicting those things before their accomplishment, and the
Events coming afterward to correspond with the Prophecy, is an infallible
evidence of the Divine Original of that Book wherein they are foretold and
recorded. In which respect, as the Scripture only can lay claim unto and boast
of God as its Author, so upon that account as well as many other, it ought to
be received, and submitted unto, with a humility, veneration, and faith due
unto writings that proceed from divine Inspiration But tho many other Books of
the Sacred Scripture, do sufficiently proclaim whose Oracles they are, by this
divine and infallible Signature; yet there is not one, all whose parts and
every line, do so eminently carry this heavenly character and impression upon
them, as the Apocalypse of St. John does. For God being to shut up the
Declaration which he thought fit to Vouchsafe unto mankind, for the Regulation
of their Faith, Worship, and Obedience, and for encouraging them unto
self-denial, patience*, and hope; has been pleased by these Prophesies, not
only to affix his Seal to all the other parts of the Scripture, so as to
acknowledge himself for the Author of them: but to compensate for denying the
Spirit of Prophecy any more unto men in order to their guidance, and conduct of
the Church, he has left us in this Divine Book an unerring account of all
things, that were either eminently to befall the Empires of the World, or to be
the lot and portion of the Church, till the time of the consummation of all
things And tho it be no extenuation of the neglect of those, with whom our Lord
Jesus Christ had entrusted with the care and instruction of Believers, and to
whom he had committed the Pastoral office, that these Prophetical Visions were
not anciently more studied and efforts made to explain and enlighten them; yet
the Wisdom of God display's and magnifies it self in the sloth and omission of
men, and his tender compassion toward his people manifests it self in th
neglect of their overseers; seeing had the many tragical things here predicted,
with which the Saints were so long to conflict and wrestle, been clearly known
and understood before they were hastening toward their period; these blessed
Oracles, which administer comfort to us, might have disanimated and discouraged
those, whose lot was cast in the first and more early times. And among other
evidences, that the persecutions with which the Church has been so long
exercised, are drawing toward an End, we have this considerable proof of it,
that so many persons of Eminent learning and singular piety, have of late
applied themselves to the Explication of these Prophesies, and who have not
only with so much pains and industry, but with so much success inquired into
the sense and meaning of them. In which list, this Author deserves not the
last place, who as he has given us a complete Systeme of the Revelation; so he
has done it with wonderful succinctness, coherence, and perspicuity. Nor do I
know any, who seems to have more happily guessed at the meaning of the
Visions which are still to be accomplished, or who enforces his conjectures
with more probable reasons, and all accompanied with such a modesty as became
an Inquirer into things, not only future but extremely Mysterious. The
presenting my countrymen with it in their own language, cannot be ungrateful
unto them: it being the glory of the English, that their piety, as well as
Genius, have disposed them to researches of this natute, of whom some have had
the happiness of affording that light into these Mysteries, that Forraigners
are not ashamed to acknowledge the having kindled their Torches at their Lamps.
It Is true, there are some things wherein our Author differs from the Eminent
Mr. Jurieu, who has so well merited of the Churches of Christ, by his many
accurate and learned writings, particularly by his late Treatise of the
Accomplishment of Prophesies. But as their harmonising in so many and material
things, is much more to be admired, than their differing in that particular
about the Effusion of the Vials; so their managing the difference with that
Christian meekness, with that deference to one another learning and worth, is
a singular commendation to themselves, and ought to be a pattern for all others
to Imitate. The present posture of affairs in great Britain as well as
elsewhere, render this discourse and others of the like complexion exceeding
seasonable. For while the Factors for Rome, are endeavoring to put such a
varnish upon the Papal Church, as may serve to allure and delude the silly into
her communion; behold she is here represented in lines and colors originally
drawn by the H. Spirit, that are fit to excite and kindle all men's loathing and
abhorrency of her. And while the Popish Missionaries flatter themselves with
hopes, and fright others with menaces, of their bringing the world into slavery
and bondage again to the Triple Crown; lo! we have not only the approaching
downfall of Babylon here demonstrated unto us, but an account both of the ruin
of all that would support her, and of the speedy and triumphant resurrection of
the Witnesses that lie slain for the Testimony of Jesus and the word of his
patience. To whose glorious revival in other parts, I do not doubt but that the
stedfastness, courage, and victory of the Witnesses in England and Scotland
over the Beast, will be found not only conduceable but instrumental. Which I
pray God to grant. Farewell.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
It Is reported of a great person, that being reading Persius, and not able to
comprehend what he meant, by reason of the obscurity which that Poet seems to
have studiously affected, he thereupon threw away the book in anger and
disdain: saying, that it was not worth his pains to employ himself about an
Author, who had writ in so dark a style, as if he had a mind not to be
understood: non vis intelligi, debes negligi.

There are many and even good men, who treat the Revelation of St. John much
after the same manner. They complain, that this Divine Book is full of
unintelligible Mysteries, and of Ridles darker than that of Samson. That is
resembles the Tabernacle, into which the cloud not only hindered men from
entering, but which made that they who went in, could discern nothing save
darkness. In a word, they say it is in vain to study Prophesies, which it is
impossible to know the meaning of, unless illuminated by the same Spirit which
Revealed them, or without attending till we see their completion, which is that
alone whereby they come to be infallibly interpreted.

Nor ought we to wonder, that a person of parts and abilities, and who can
spend his time about something else, should decline to wast his Spirits in
searching out the sense of a Book, to whose composition there concurred nothing
save human wit and Industry; and which eontained only picquant Satyrs upon the
brutal Vices of Nero, and the profligacies of other depraved Monsters of that
unhappy Reign; and wherein the best that was to be met with, were only some
Moral Instructions, and a little diverting Railery upon Fools and Villains.

But the Revelation contains in it the great Mysteries of Divine Providence;
the Destiny of the Roman Empire; the Fate of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; and
gives us not only a Description of the Romish Church, which is the Mystical
Babylon, and the Spouse of Antichrist; but Vouchsafes us a Representation of
the True Church, which is the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Spouse of the Son of
God. All which are matters so Holy, and of so great importance to the
Consolation of every Believer, that knows how to read, that none ought to be
discouraged from studying it, by the darkness wherewith it is envelop'd.

The Holy Spirit foreseeing the dislike, which the obscurity of the Apocalypse
might occasion, took care to Invite Christians to the reading of it by a most
alluring promise, registered at the beginning of this Book; Blessed is he who
reads, and hears the words of this Prophecy.

It Is a matter worthy to be remarked, that though the Revelation be not the alone
Book, which is dark and hardly to be understood, there being diverse parts of
the ancient Prophets incircled with no less obscurity; yet this is the only
portion of the Divine Writings, which the Holy Spirit has tanqa particular
care to recommend unto our perusal and study. Which does unquestionably
intimate two things. (1) That of all Divine Revelations, there are none of more
Importance, than those which are the subject matter of the Apocalypse. (2) That
whosoever shall read this Book with all due regard and application, and in
order thereby to be rendered holy and wise, he shall not find the study of it
useless and unprofitable, nor miss the being in some measure and degree guided
into an understanding of it. For were it otherways, the Holy Spirit would not
have been guilty of so unaccountable a thing, as to tempt and oblige our
searching into it by so signal a promise.

Moreover, the Apocalypse, like the Cloudy Pillar that conducted the
Israelites, tho it be dark on the one side, yet it is luminous on the other.
Where the Spirit of God has given no Explanation of the Prophetic Schem's,
and where the Event has not illustrated them, there we are still upon the dark
and cloudy side of it. But where either the Holy Spirit has expounded any of
the Visions, or where the accomplishment has interpreted them, we are there
furnished with such a light, that it is impossible to miss the understanding
those portions of this Divine Book without a wilful shutting of our eyes, and a
chosen muffling of our Intellects.

When we are to learn crabbed and abstruse Sciences, we begin with Common
Notions, and with principles which are the most evident: and so we proceed by
degrees till we have advanced unto, and have conquered that which is more
sublime and difficult.

This Method is natural and good. By obs^rving of it, the greatest Doctors, and
the most celebrated Philosophers, have arrived both at their knowledge and their
renown. And if we take the same course in our search into the Apocalyptick
Mysteries, there will remain little but what we may master and unravel. There
are some Visions, which the Angel who revealed them to St. John, Vouchsafed
also to explain. There are others, which the Event has expounded. And there
are a third sort, in the sense of which all men are agreed. So that being first
assured of the Scope and meaning of those which are explained; and then of the
signification of such as there is no contest among Authors about; we may
afterward proceed to the rest. By this method we shall enter upon the darker
places with a Torch in our hand, and thereby come to discover all the Mysteries
of this Book, as far as is either necessary or profitable.

It Is evident, that there are but three principal Visions in the Revelation, in
which are contained both all that was to befall the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
which is the True Church; and all that has relation to the Papal Empire, which
is the false. These Visions, are those of the Seals, those of the Trumpets, and
those of the Vials The rest are only Tablets and Draughts, wherein what had
been represented in those of the Seals, Trumpets and Vials, is reassumed,
enlarged, and more particularly deduced and explained.

The number Seven being Mystical, and marking perfection, serves to inform us,
that these three Visions do comprehend all. For it is found in the Seals, in
the Trumpets, in the Vials, and in the Thunders, which are the Forerunners of
the Vials. Moreover these three Visions are so linked one to another, that the
Second, which is that of the Trumpets, begins under the seventh Seal; and the
third, which is that of the Vials, commence under the seventh Trumpet. Finally,
it is upon the Effusion of the Vials, that the Mystery of God is to be finished,
whereof there is mention chap. 10. which consists in the deliverance of the
Christian Church from all that She suffered by and under the Roman Empire, and
in the reduction of all the Kingdoms of the World to Jesus Christ, which will
usher in the Millennian peace of the Church.

Being fully persuaded, that this Division which I have laid down, is the true
Key of the Apocalypse; I shall therefore distribute this Work into two parts.
The first shall explain the Visions of Chapters 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21. The second shall illustrate those of Chapters 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 16.

By this means there will be found here an entire Systeme of the whole
Apocalypse, where one may see the Disposition of all the Visions, and the Order
of the several Events therein foretold; and all this in so compendious a
manner, as is not to be met with elsewhere. For whether they be Commentaries,
or other Tracts, in which all these Visions are explained, they are either of a
length sufficient to weary and discourage the Reader; or if they be so short as
by reason of their brevity to invite one to peruse them, they do at most but
expound a part of these Visions, and afford a very imperfect account of this
Divine Book, and leave the Reader under great deficiency as to the knowledge of
it.

There are diverse of the Refugies, who had the sight of this Discourse while
they were in France. For the Author had finished it near the end of August
1685. about two day's before the arrival of the new Missionaries the Dragoons,
who plundered him of all he had. So that this was the whole that he was able to
save out of that doleful Ship-wreck; which since his arrival at a place of
security, he has reviewed and corrected in several places. And having met with
the Accomplishment of Prophecies, written by the famous Monsr. Jurieu; the
Author was exceedingly pleased to find that he had explained the 11th Chap. as
promissory of there establishment of the Reformed in France, according as that
great Man has done.

And whereas it may be feared, lest this conformity in their opinions, seconded
with a general hope, should make the Protestants, who remain still in France,
the more inclinable to abide there, tho they may find opportunities of making
their escape; he thinks fit to admonish them as from God, to obey immediately
that Heavenly voice, Come out of Babylon, my people, lest pertaking of her
sins, ye rereive also of her plagues. And to let them know, that they cannot go
to Mass, without either worshipping the Beast, or worshipping his Image; or
without either having his Name, or the Number of his Name, and without
receiving his Mark, either in their Foreheads, or in their Hands. And by
becoming enrolled in that list, they cease to be of the Number of the 144000.
that are sealed, and of those who are to Reign with Jesus Christ. And as they
cannot worship the Host, which is but a Creature, without being Idolaters; so
they cannot plead, that in their hearts they do it not, without the being
Hypocrites; and through being either Idolaters or Hypocrites, they derive upon
themselves the Judgments of God. Neither are they to make the Accomplishment of
Prophecies, nor these Illustrations upon the Apocalypse, the Rule of their
conduct; but they are to govern themselves by the alone Word of God, which
requires them to beware of Idols, to withdraw from Idolaters, and to fly from
one place to another in time of Persecution, and that not only to the hazarding
their Estates and their Liberties, but their very lives, as thousands of Exiles
of all qualities, Sexes and Ages have done.

The infinite mercy of God, his ineffable and immense Wisdom, his Titles of
mighty in Power, wonderful in Counsel, the strong God, who can do both above
our thoughts and our desires, his being a God to whom vengeance belongs; a
jealous God, who works all things for the glory of his Name; together with
the Intercession of Jesus, which is the retreat of an innumerable company of
Souls, that pray to God day and night for the turning his anger away from his
people: These I say, are Considerations which afford infinitely more solid
foundations for the support of our hopes, in reference to the re-establishment
of the Reformed in France, than all human conjectures and reasonings can
administer. But how firm soever the foundation is, that this hope is built
upon; yet it ought not to hinder those who know the Idolatry of the Romish
Church, either from withdrawing immediately out of the Kingdom, provided they
can find a door open to escape; or from repairing the injury which through
their sacrilegious Abjuration, they have done to Religion, by a public and
constant Confession of the Truth for the time to come.

Finally, the Author made use of no Books toward the composure of this
Discourse, save of Launay's Commentary, published under the name of Jonas le
Buy, Sr. de la Perie, and of the Synopsis Criticorum. He chiefly follows
Launay, as having a great esteem for his judgment as well as his Learning; and
as thinking that so good a Guide, could not conduct him amiss. He owes to the
Synopsis Criticorum among diverse other things, the Exposition of the Number of
the Beast, which he hopes to have so much farther enlightened, that Mr. Potters
Opinion shall be accounted as solid', as it appears subtle and profound.

But this Preface is too long, for an Author that would equally avoid length as
well as obscurity. And he hopes, there will be no cause of fastening upon him
that Reproach.

Dum brevis esse laborus, obscurus fis.
A TABLE Of all the ILLUSTRATIONS On the APOCALYPSE.
The FIRST Part.
1 WHat we are to understand by the term Beast. Page 1 2 What is intended by
the Seven Heads of the Beast. 5 3 What the ten Horns of the Beast do denote and
signify. 8 4 What it is that the Holy Ghost represents by Great Babylon. 10 5
What the Beast is with the two Horns. 14 6 Of the Eighth King. 33 7 Who the
false Prophet is. 37 8 Of the Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns. 49 9 Of
the Woman clothed with the Sun. 52 10 Of the Combat between Michael and the
Dragon. 55 11 Of the Flight of the Woman. 58 12 Of the Flood which the Serpent
cast out of his mouth, and of the help which the Earth gave unto the Woman. 62
13 Of the War which the Dragon, being full of Wrath, made against the remant of
the seed of the Woman. Page 66 14 Of Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots,
that sits upon many Waters, carrying upon her Forehead the name Mystery, and
having a golden Cup in her hand. 70 15 Of Babylon making all Nations drunk with
the Wine of her Fornication, and of her being drunk with the Blood of the
Saints. 77 16 Of the Lamb on Mount Sion, and with him the 144000. having the
Fathers Name written in their Foreheads. 80 17 Of the Three Angels of the
Everlasting Gospel, and of the Denunciation against Babylon and her followers.
84 18 Of the Harvest and the Vintage. 90 19 Of the Sea of Glass, mingled with
Fire. 94 20 Of the Opening of the Temple, and of the Smoke wherewith it was
fiiled. 96 21 Of the Fail of Babylon, and the time when. 98 22 Of the binding
of Satan for a thousand* years, and of the Millennary Reign. 105 23 Of the
Marriage of the Lamb. 123 24 Of the Holy Jerusalem. 126
The SECOND Part.
1 OF the Throne, the twenty four Elders, the Sea of Glass, and the four living
Creatures. Page 129 2 Of the sealed Book, which no Creature could open, save
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 134 3 Of the Lamb with seven Horns and seven
Eyes, and of his being worshipped. 136 4 Of the opening of the first six Seals.
page 140 5 Of the four Angels that withheld the four Winds, and of the Angel
that had the Seal of the living God. 153 6 Of the Hundred forty and four
thousand which were sealed of the Tribes of Israel. 156 7 Of the Multitude
which no man could number, that stood before the Lamb; with Palms of their
Felicity, and whence they same. 159 8 Of the Silence in Heaven for half an
hour. 162 9 Of the seven Angels with the seven Trumpets, and of the Angel who
cast the Censer into the Earth. 163 10 Of the first Trumpet, and of the Hail,
Fire and Blood. 165 11 Of the second Trumpet, a Mountain burning cast in the
Sea, and a third part of it became Blood. 167 12 Of the third Trumpet, A great
Star fall from Heaven. 169 13 Of the fourth Trumpet; the third part of the Sun,
and of the Moon, and of the Stars smitten. 172 14 Of the fifth Trumpet, the Key
of the bottomless Pit given to the Star that fell from Heaven. 174 15 Of the
Locusts. 179 16 Of the sixth Trumpet; the loosing of the four Angels in the
River Euphrates. 194 17 Of the Angel with the Book open. 201 18 Of the Voice of
the Angel, that had his right Foot upon the Sea, and his left upon the Earth,
and of the seven Thunders. 203 19 Of the Angels Oath, and of the finishing the
Mystery of God. 205 20 Of the Angels giving the Book to S. John to be eaten,
and of the effects which ensue thereupon. Page 207 21 Of the measuring of the
Temple, and of the outward Court to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles. 209
22 Of the two Witnesses, their Sackcloth State, the time of their Prophesying,
and their Dignity. 212 23 Of the Witnesses being overcome and slain, and left
unburied. 216 24 Of the rising of the Witnesses, their Ascending into Heaven,
and of what follows upon their triumph. 227 25 Of the seventh Trumpet: The Ark
opened in Heaven; the Kingdoms of this world become the Lords. 240 26 Of the
pouring out of the Vials. 245 27 Of the time that the Beasts Reign is to
continue. 265 28 Of the time when the Beasts Reign, or the Papal Empire began.
269 29 Of the Destruction of Gog and Magog. 278 30 Of S. John's Offense, in
falling at the Angels feet to worship him. 280 31 Of Christ's directing his
Epistles and his Revelation to the seven Churches, and why. 284 ^ Defense of
the Illustrations upon the Apocalypse, concerning the Effusion of the Vials.
Page 1 Reasons for the Non-Effusion of the Vials. 27
A NEW SYSTEME OF THE APOCALYPSE, OR A Plain and Methodical Explanation of all
the Visions of the REVELATION of St. JOHN.
The FIRST Part.
I. ILLUSTRATION. What we are to understand by the BEAST.
SAint John having in the 17. Chapter v. 1, 2, 3. told us, how he was carried
into the Wilderness, by one of the Seven Angels, that had the seven Viols, and
how he there saw a Woman sitting upon a Scarlet Beast, full of Names of
Blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns; and having in the Vision, related
in the 13. Chapter, described this Beast unto us; we are therefore in the first
place to inquire, what is meant by this Beast with Seven Heads and Ten Horns,
that we may be able thereby to know with the more certainty, and with the
greater plainness, who this Woman is that is called Babylon the Great, whom the
Beast carries.

Nor will it be difficult to understand the meaning and import of this Term
Beast, it having been explained in the Visions of Daniel. For that Prophet
having in the 7th Chap. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. declared, how that he beheld Four
Beasts rising out of the Sea, the first whereof resembled a Lion, the second a
Bear, the third a Leopard, and the fourth different from the three former: He
adds, that having asked one of the Angels, that stood before the Ancient of
Day's, what the meaning of that Vision might be? it was answered him v. 17.
that these four Beasts were four Kings, which should arise upon the Earth. So
that this Explication vouchsav'd by the Angel unto Daniel concerning the Vision
of the four Beasts, does fully inform us, that this Term Beast in the
Revelations of St. John, signifies a Power, an Empire, a Succession of Kings
and Rulers; as the four in Daniel's Visions represented the four Empires, the
Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman, with which the Church of God was
concerned; and which four Empires had been before represented by the Image that
appeared to Nebuchadnezzar in his Dream, Dan. 2.* 31, etc.

The word Beast being then used in the Visions of Daniel, to denote an Empire,
or a Succession of Sovereign Rulers; it can have no other signification affixed
unto it in the Visions of St. John, forasmuch as one Spirit inspired both the
Apostle, and the Prophet. And this is the more evident, in that Daniel's fourth
Beast, is the same with that in St. John's Visions, as does plainly appear by
the universal and perfect Agreement that is between the one and the other.

1. Whereas Daniel tells us, c. 7. v. 7. that the Fourth Beast, which is the
Roman Empire, and to which he gave no Name, was different from the three
former, from the Lion, the Bear, and the Leopard; so St. John represents the
Beast upon which the Woman sits, not only as diverse from those three; but
as that which there is none that bears any resemblance unto; and which (as he
says) Rev. 13. 2. had the Body of a Leopard, and whose Feet were as the Feet of
a Bear, and his Mouth as the Mouth of a Lion.

2. Whereas Daniel, Chap. 7. 7. says of the fourth Beast, that he had ten
Horns. St. John says the same of the Beast, that carried the Woman, Rev. 17. 12.

3. And as Daniel informs us, Chap. 7. 24. that the ten Horns of the fourth
Beast were ten Kings, that should arise out of that Kingdom; St. John likewise
assures us, Rev. 17. 12 that the ten Horns of the Beast, upon which the Woman
sits, are ten Kings, which had not then received any Kingdom.

4. Whereas Daniel says, Chap. 7. v. 8. 25. that the little Horn of the fourth
Beast, had a Mouth, speaking great things; and uttering words against the Most
High. St. John also says of the Beast, that carried the Woman, Rev. 13. 5, 6.
that there was given unto him a Mouth speaking great things, and that he opened
his Mouth in Blasphemies against God.

5. Forasmuch as Daniel tells us, Chap. 7. v. 21. concerning the little Horn of
the fourth Beast, that he made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them.
St. John says the same of the fourth Beast, upon which the Woman sits, Rev.
13. 7. namely, that it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them.

6. And whereas Daniel declares, Chap. 7. v. 25. that the Saints shall be given
into the hands of the fourth Beast a time, times, and the dividing of time; St.
John declares also of the Beast upon which the Woman sits, Rev. 13. 7. that
Power was given unto him, to continue forty and two months, which make just
three Prophetical years and a half.

7. Lastly, Forasmuch as Daniel says of the fourth Beast, chap. 7. v. 11. that
he was stain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame. St. John
declares the same of the Beast that carried the Woman, Rev. 19. v. 20. how that
he was taken, and cast into a Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone.

So that after the agreement of the one Beast, with the other, in so many
particulars, there is no room left for suspicion, but that Daniel's fourth
Beast, is the same with the Beast described by St. John, upon whom the Woman
styled Babylon the Great sits; and that all the Revelations of St. John, are
nothing else but a continuation of the Prophetical History, which Daniel had
begun of the Roman Empire, and of the Church of God.

II. ILLUSTRATION. What is intended by the Seven Heads of the Beast. REV. CHAP.
17. v. 20.
THe Seven Heads ascribed to the Beast in the Vision of St. John, serve to
explain the Vision in Daniel, and do make it clearly appear, that the fourth
Beast, which the Prophet Daniel describes, and which is the same with that
described by St. John, can represent nothing save the Roman Empire. For proof
of this, we are only to observe the Explication which the Angel gave of that
Vision to Saint John, Rev. 17. v. 9. Here is the mind, (says he) that has
wisdom; the seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman sits. And
they are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet
come.

These seven Hills, do so plainly point out and characterise the City of Rome,
that the Angel could not have more evidently declared it, if he had directly
mentioned it; the Terms wherein he represents it, being so agreeable to the
Character of the City buils upon seven Hills, which is the style whereby their
own Poets, Ovid, Propertius, Horace and Virgil, do describe it. Septemque una
sibi muro circumdedit Arces.
Virg. Dis, quibus septcm placuere colles, dicere carmen.
Horat. Septem urbs alta jugis, toti qui praesidet Orbi.
Propert. Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit Orbem
Montibus, Imperii Roma Deumque locus. Ovid.


Accordingly that learned Roman Varro, being speaking of a Festival, called
Septimentium, that was dedicated to the Honor of Rome, of which they had made a
Goddess; says, that this Feast took its name from the seven Mountains on which
Rome was built. Nor are there any, but who do know these Hills to have been,
the Palatine, the Capitoline, the Aventine, the Celian, the Esquiline, the
Viminal, and the Quirenal.

So that from and by means of these Mountains, we come to be assured, that the
Beast with seven Heads, according to the exposition given by the Angel, can be
nothing but the Roman Empire.

And this is made further evident by the seven Kings, which as the Angel tells
us, are also signified by the seven Heads, Rev. 17. v. 10. And there are seven
Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come.

Which seven Kings do most infallibly denote the seven Forms of Government,
under which Rome has been, and through which it has passed since its
Foundation. For it is the Scripture method of expression, to signify by Kings
all sorts of Supreme Governors. As appears both from the 36. of Genesis v. 31.
where Moses having reckoned up the Kings that reigned in Edom, before there
reigned any King over the Children of Israel, means no more, than before there
was any Sovereign Magistrate in Israel; and from Deuteronomy. 33. v. 5. where Moses is
said to have been King in Ieshurun.

Now the seven kinds of Supreme Magistrates, by which Rome has been governed,
are Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Military Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, and
Popes. Five whereof the Angel says, were fallen, and that the sixth, which was
that of Emperors, now is, namely, in the time of St. John; but that the seventh
was not yet come, forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome was not at that time, what he
is since grown up unto by his Usurpations, of being as well the Sovereign
Master over Kings and Emperors, as Monarch over the Church.

But we are not yet come to prove the Pope to be meant by the seventh Head, it
being necessary before we advance to that, to explain diverse other particulars;
so that it is enough for the present, to have shown, that the Beast with the
seven Heads can represent nothing else save the Roman Empire.

III. ILLUSTRATION. What the Ten Horns of the Beast do denote and signify. REV.
CHAP. 17. v. 12.
THE Lamb, by which our Savior is represented, is said to have Horns, as well
as the Beast; but the signification of the Horns of the one, is somewhat
different from the meaning of the Horns of the other. Those of the Lamb do
denote the Power of Jesus Christ, and the number seven intimates the perfection
of it, Rev. 5. v. ^. So that the Lamb's being represented with seven Horns, is
to signify the Fullness of his Power, or, as it is in the language of St. Paul,
Phil. 2. 9, 10. His having a Name given him above every name, that at the Name
of Jesus every Knee should bow.

But the Horns of the Beast do signify Kingdoms and Dominions, as appears by
their being applied to such a sense in the Visions of Daniel. Thus the Ram, by
which was signified the King of Persia, Dan. 8. 3. is represented with two high
Horns, and whereof the one was higher than the other, because the Kingdom of
Persia was more powerful than that of the Medes. And accordingly the Angel
tells St. John, that the Ten Horns of the Beast, are Ten Kings.

Nor is it of any great moment, whether the number Ten do signify punctually so
many, it being sufficient to take the word indefinitely, for the intimating a
considerable number, it being so used elsewhere. And thus it both signifies the
great Extent of the Roman Empire, and serves to demonstrate that it is only
this Empire, which we have represented in the Revelation; there being no other
in St. John's time that could answer the vast importance of this Phrase, or at
least none that was known, and with which the Church of God had any
concernment. And it is by reason of its greatness, that the Sacred Writers call
it by the style of all the World, and of the whole habitable Earth, Luc. 2. 1.
Rev. 13. 3, 8. Rev. 17. 18. As if all Nations had been under the jurisdiction
of the Roman Emperors.

But whereas there seems to be a contradiction in the Explication given by the
Angel, in that after he had said, that the Ten Horns of the Beast are Ten
Kings, he adds, Rev. 17. 12. that these ten Kings had received no Kingdom as
yet, but were to receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. Seeing if he
intend by the Beast, the Roman Empire, as it flourished in St. John's time; how
can he say, that these Kings had received no Kingdom as yet, and that they were
only to receive their power at the same season with the Beast. I say, this
seeming contradiction in the Explanation given by the Angel, will easily vanish
when we shall have expounded the Vision of the Beast with Two Horns. Which
before we proceed unto, it is necessary that we explicate that of Babylon the
Great.

IV. ILLUSTRATION. What it is that the Holy Ghost represents by Great Babylon.
REV. CHAP. 17.
IT IS not a matter any longer disputed, whether Rome be intended by Great
Babylon, it being acknowledged both by Bellarmin, and by the most famous
Jesuits that have commented upon the Revelation. And Cardinal Perron as well
as several others, conclude Peter's having been at Rome, from his having dated
his Epistle from Babylon, 1 Pet. 5. 13. Which confession confirms all that we
have said concerning the Beast with seven Heads and Ten Horns.

So that there remain only two Questions to be decided, whereof one is, whether
we are to understand by Babylon, Rome as it was Heathen, or Rome as it is
Christian? And after we shall have demonstrated, that it is Rome Christian that
is intended by Babylon; the second Question will be, whether by Babylon, we are
to understand Rome as it now is, or as it is to be under the Reign of a certain
pretended Antichrist, whom the Advocates for the Pope will have yet to come?

As to the first Question, namely, that by Babylon, as St. John describes ^t,
we are to understand Rome Christian, and not Rome Heathen; the following
Arguments will be sufficient to demonstrate it.

1. It Is certain, that the Holy Ghost, in describing the Apocalyptick Babylon,
does allude to Babylon of the Chaldees, where the People of Israel were held
captive seventy years. Babylon of the Chaldees was a Type of this whereof St.
John speaks. And it being of the nature of Types to be of a different
constitution and frame, from those things which they typify, and whereof they
are Emblems; it does necessarily follow, that the Chaldean Babylon being
Heathen, this whereof St. John speaks, must be of a Religion differing from
that, and consequently Christian. And withal, that as the Bondage of the
Israelites in Babylon of the Chaldees was Corporal, so that of Christians in
the Apocalyptick Babylon must be Spiritual.

2. St. John describes Rome, not as it was under the Emperors, which were the
sixth Head, but as it was to be under the seventh Hoad, and under the eighth
King, which must necessarly be the Succession of the Popes.

3. The Babylon which St. John describes, Rev. 17. 8. is one that ascended out
of the Bottomless Pit, and which is an infernal Power, and contrary to the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to his Word: which cannot be affirmed of the
Sovereignty of Rome as it was Pagan, in that all the several Governments of
this World were ordained by God, Romans 13. 1. but may very well be said of Rome
as it is Antichristian.

4. St. John describes Rome, as it was to be after the destruction of the
Empire, and its division among Ten Kings, who were to receive their pomer at
the same with the Beast, Rev. 17. 12. which as it can no ways agree to Rome as
Heathen, so the event has showed that the Popes grew up to their Domination,
at the same time, when through the subversion of the Roman Empire by the Northern
Nations, many Kingdoms were formed out of it.

5. St. John, Rev. 18. 13. describes Babylon as a Merchant, that bought the
Souls of men; which is not applicable to Rome as Pagan, it being certain that
it never used that abominable Traffic. It bought Slaves, to serve it self of
their Bodies; but it never bought Souls, nor sought to purchase men by money to
be of the Heathen Religion; that was never practiced but by Rome Christian. It
is notoriously known, that the Clergy of France, have for diverse years advanced
a Fond, for the buying the Souls of Protestants, and have drove that Traffic
and made Purchases of them in all the Provinces of the Kingdom. So that from
this Topic also, it must be Rome Christian that is the Babylon here meant.

6. St. John foretells, Rev. 18. 2. that Babylon shall be destroyed, and become
the Habitation of Devils: But it did not befall Rome Heathen to be destroyed;
and when it was taken by the Goths, it was Christian. So that the Babylon here
meant, must be Rome Christian, and which for becoming Antichristian, and the
Habitation of Devils, is to be utterly destroyed.

7. St. John says, Rev. 19. 3. of the Babylon that he intends, that after its
subversion it shall never be built again, but that it shall be a perpetual
desolation. Which forasmuch as it did not befall Rome Pagan, it must therefore
be Rome Christian, that is the Babylon threatened to be so thrown down, as that
She shall be found no more at all, Rev. 18. 21.

8. St. John upon his beholding Babylon Idolatrous, and drunken with the Blood
of Saints and Martyrs, he was surprised and astonished: when I saw, says he,
Rev. 17. 5, 6. that Babylon was become a Harlot, and an Idolatress, and that
She was drunken with the Blood of the Martyrs, I wondered with great admiration.
Now he must be under more than a natural blindness, who does not perceive that
St. John would not have been astonished, to see Rome Pagan, and as She was in
his time, an Idolatress and a Murtheress, seeing he had never known her
otherwise than with these two Qualities: whereas he had reason to be amassed,
that the Vision should represent unto him what was to be afterward, and how
that Rome as Christian was to be immerged in Idolatry, and to persecute
Christians, for not being Idolatrous as She was. So that there cannot be a more
foolish imagination, than by Babylon to understand Rome as it was Heathen.

9. Lastly, The Beast and Babylon are one and the same power; so that St. John,
Rev. 19. 21. joins the Beast with the false Prophet, which proves beyond all
possibility of rational Contradiction, that Babylon, which is nothing else save
the Beast, is in truth a Temporal Power, but founded upon a specious pretense
of Religion, and upon the Vicarship of Jesus Christ, and upon St. Peter; so
that thereby also it appears, that it is She, in whom the Mystery of Iniquity
is fulfilled, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Rev. 17. 5.

As for the other Question, whether that seeing Babylon signifies Rome
Christian, we are therefore to understand thereby Rome Christian as She is now,
and has been for many Ages past; or as She is to be under the Reign of a
certain Antichrist, whom the Partisans for the Pope will not have to be yet
come: I say, that Question will be fully resolved, when we have made it appear,
that the Beast with the Two Horns, is the Papal Empire, the Pope, the Eighth
King, the false Prophet and Antichrist.

V. ILLUSTRATION. What the Beast is with the Two Horns. REV. CHAP. 13. v. 11.
THE Beast, whereof we have hitherto discoursed, and which, as we have proved,
signifies the Roman Empire, may be considered two ways. First, more grossly and
in the bulk, as it comprehends all the Seven Heads; and in that sense, it is
nothing but a Regency under the seven Forms of Government, which Rome has
passed throw since its Foundation, and so it indefinitely and at large designs
the Roman Empire. Secondly, As it is used precisely or strictly to denote the
Beast under the seventh Head, which is the Pope, or Papal Power, and so it is
represented by the Beast with Two Horns.

It Is most evident, that it is Rome under the seventh Head, which is the Pope,
that is here spoken of; in that it is the Healing of the Wound, which the Beast
had received under the sixth Head. For he both speaks of this Wound in the
third Verse, and then of the Healing of it by the Beast with two Horns, which
is the Papacy, in the 12. Verse.

Now that the Papal Empire is the Seventh Head, or the Beast with Two Horns,
will be demonstratively proved, by observing the conformity which is between
that Beast and the Papal Kingdom.

1. For whereas the Term Beast, does signify a Domination and an Empire; it
cannot be denied, but that the Romish Church is an Empire, and that it may be
styled the Papal Kingdom, and the Roman Empire.

2. Forasmuch as Horns, according as we have proved, do denote Jurisdictions
and Powers; so the Papal Authority comprehends a twofold Power, and two kinds
of Domination; one over that which is Temporal, and another over that which is
Spiritual. One over this Life, and another over that which is to come. So that
the Papal Kingdom must be that which is meant by the Beast with Two Horns.

3. Whereas it is said, Rev. 13. 11. that the Two Horns of the Beast, were like
the Two Horns of the Lamb. All do know that Jesus Christ has a twofold
Authority, or two kinds of Sovereignty. One over the Soul, and another over the
Body. One over that which is Temporal, and another over that which is
Spiritual. And seeing the Pope boasts of this twofold Authority, under pretense
of being the Vicar of Jesus Christ; it does therefore follow, that he is the
Beast with the Two Horns.

4. And whereas it is said, Rev. 13. 11. that the Beast with two Horns spoke as
a Dragon; it is undeniable, that the Pope speaks in the same manner, and not
only like the Devil, Matthew. 4. 9. assumeth to himself a Right of Disposing of
all the Kingdoms of the World, and of forbidding men to obey the Commandments
of God; but as the calumniating Spirit, he reproacheth Gods Word, both by
accusing it of falsehood, and by robbing it of its perspicuity, integrity,
perfection, sufficiency, and of its Authority, which he challenges to himself.

5. It being said, Rev. 13. 12. that the Beast with two Horns exercises all
the power of the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. This does
perfectly agree to the Papal Power. For the Roman Empire, that flourished in
St. John's time, having received a Deadly Wound, it became healed through the
application of the Papal Authority, as a Plaster unto it. Now that Wound
consisted in two things; in the Subversion of the Pagan Idolatry, and in the
Abatement of the Glory of Rome. And the Heathens were wont to observe in their
Disputations against the Christians, that as the ancient Religion fell from its
splendour, so the Glory of Rome did proportionably decay. And as the Pagan
Idolatry became in effect destroyed, by the conversion of Constantine, and the
care of his Successors; so Rome as to its Glory, being first much darkened, and
almost extinguished, and then being destroyed by the Goths; tho it came
afterward to be restored, yet it was never honored to be the Residence of the
Emperors, in that they fixed their abode at Ravenna and Millan. These two
Wounds seemed to be incurable; but the Papal Sovereignty did perfectly heal
them both. For in the room of the God's Worshipped under Paganism; there was
set up the Adoration of Angels, Saints, the Consecrated Bread, and of Relics.
So that by this new Idolatry, Panagism became again restored. And withal Rome
has recovered a Glory not only equal unto its former, but greater than what it
had; seeing the Pope through having made it the Seat of his Empire, appears there
as the true Successor of the Heathen Emperors, as the Commander of Kings, and
as the Supreme Pontife, as well as Chief Caesar, who has united the Priesthood
to the Imperial Dignity. In a word, the Pope is the Head of a Senate attired in
Purple, and challenges a Right of Deposing Kings, and of disposing Crowns, and
who receives Tribute from all People, and makes himself to be adored, not only
with a Civil, but with a Religious Adoration, as the Emperors of old used to be.

Both Blondus and Steuchus, Bishop of Egubium, do ingenuously describe, without
being aware of it, how the Wound which Rome had received, is again healed through
means of the Sovereignty, that is come to be vested in the Pope. The first
says, That the Majesty of Rome is now greater than ever it was, because the
Princes of the Earth, do now worship the Successor of St. Peter as perpetual
Dictator, that is, as Sovereign Pontife, and as Vicar of the High Priest Jesus
Christ. And the other tells us, That if after the Subversion of the Roman
Empire, God had not raised up the Papacy, in which the ancient Majesty of Rome
is revived, that City had been a Habitation of Brute Beasts; whereas by the
establishment of the Papacy, it has recovered a grandeur very little different
from that which it had in the time of the old Empire; seeing all Nations do now
no less Reverence the Bishop of Rome, than heretofore they obeyed the Roman
Emperors. So that by this it appears, that the Beast with Two Horns, is nothing
but the Papacy; forasmuch as the Papal Power has healed Rome of the Wound she
had received under the Emperors, and rendered her again both Idolatrous, and
Mistress of the World, as she was heretofore.

6. Whereas it is said of the Beast with Two Horns, Rev. 13. 12. That he causes
the Earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast; this agrees
also to the Papacy, which causes that Rome being healed of its Wound, is as
much, if not more reverenced, than ever it had been, upon an alleged pretense
of having been the Chair and Seat of St. Peter. As the Pagans made a Goddess of
Rome Heathen, by consecrating a Temple, and dedicating a Feast unto her, which
they called Septimontium: so Christians do no less make a Goddess of Rome
Christian, both by stiling her the Mistress of the World, and through attributing
to her the Privilege of Infallibility, that does belong to none save unto God.

7. It Is further said, Rev. 13. 13. That the Beast with two Horns, does great
Signs and Wonders, so that he makes Fire come down from Heaven. Now all men do
not only know, that the Romish Legends are full of the Miracles pretended to be
done in the Papal Kingdoms, but that the Excommunications which flow from the
Papal Jurisdiction are as much dreaded by Princes, who stand in aw' of that
Authority, as Fire and Lightning from Heaven. History affords us many Examples
of Princes, who have been ruined by Papal Excommunications. To this day they
forbear not to proclaim the Miracles which are constantly wrought in the Papal
Kingdom, and the Partisans for the Pope vaunt themselves upon them, as marks of
the true Church. But this is peculiar to those Miracles, that they are no where
done but in the Papal Empire, and that out of the view of Heretics. Nor are
they profitable unto any, save unto those who do esteem them. Neither is there
any of their Wonder-mongers, that have Raised the Dead. They are such Miracles,
as do become the Beast with two Horns, that speaks as a Dragon.

8. It Is said, Rev. 13. 14, 15. That the Beast with two Horns, commands them
that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image unto the Beast which
had the Wound; and that it was granted to the Beast, to give Life unto this
Image, that it should speak.

Now this Image of the Beast, is nothing but the Sovereign Power of the Pope,
as appears from the 14. Chapter v. 9, and 11. where the Description of the
Beast is the same with this of his Image. Which would not be, if the Beast with
two Horns were other than the Pope. And the being an Image that speaks, shows
plainly that it does not differ from the Original, or from that whose Image it
is. We use to say of a Picture that is done naturally, and to the life, that it
wants nothing but that it cannot speak, and that if it could speak, it would be
another Original. None to whom the Papal Authority is known, can be ignorant
that the Pope has the same Power, which the Emperors had; the same Throne; the
same Sovereign Pontifical Dignity; and that he is worshipped with the same
Adoration, and has as stately a Senate, and as magnificent a Court. Now the
Pope is styled an Image, and not the thing it self; both because he is arisen
to his greatness under a pretense of Religion, and under the Title of being the
Vicar of Jesus Christ, and of St. Peter; and because he is also the Vicar of
the Emperor, and the Successor of Caesar. And as he is in that Quality an Image
of Caesar; so being an Image that speaks, he is clothed with all the Majesty of
the Emperors, and possessed of their whole Authority. Accordingly he will have
his Feet kissed as the Feet of the Emperors were; and will have Kings kneel
before him, as they did before the Cesars. For as the Historian notes of the
Emperor Caligula, that he had his Feet kissed, so the Poet Horace speaking in
one of his Epistles of a Prince that kneeled before Augustus, says, that he
appeared before him Genibus minor.

9. It Is said, Rev. 13. 15. The Beast with two Horns causes, that as many as
will not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed. And this is what we
have seen for above these 600. years fulfilled in the Papal Church, through her
delivering those over to the Secular Power to be destroyed, that would not obey
her Commands, and in her causing extirpate them by Croisados.

10. It Is said, Rev. 13. 17. That no man might Buy or Sell, save he that had
the Mark of the Beast. As Dtocletian debarred those from all sort of Commerce,
who would not Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods; so we have the like Prohibition in
that Bull, which Pope Martin the fifth published against Wicklif. And at this
day they will suffer none to live in France, who does not bring a Note under
the Curat's hand, of his going to Mess. So that the Romish Church, is this
second Beast with two Horns, the speaking Image of the first Beast, in that she
lays the same Prohibitions upon men, that the Roman Emperor did.

11. Whereas it is said, Rev. 13. 17. That the Beast with two Horns has three
sorts of Subjects or Followers. One that bears his Mark; another that carry's
his Name; and a third, that has the Number of his Name. The Pope has also
three sorts of Adherents: one that bears his Mark, which is the
Ecclesiastics, that are tied to him by an Oath, and who boast of an indelible
Character. Another that carries his Name, which is those that do style
themselves Papists, and who do glory in it, as Bellarmin did. The Third sort
bear the Number of his Name, and these are they who are ashamed to be called
Papists, and account it for an Injury to be so styled, as the most part do in
France. But they call themselves Catholics, which is a word that has
reference to number, Catholic signifying Universal, and this causes that the
Pope does acknowledge them for his.

12. There remains the Number of the Beast, which is 666. and in order to our
being convinced, that this is the Number of the Papacy, we are to observe, that
he treats not of the Number of the Beast alone, Rev. 13* 18. but also of the
Number of his Name; because it comes to be spoken of those who have the Number
of the Name of the Beast.

The Holy Ghost does acquaint those who shall read, that this Name is not kept
so hidden in reference to where it is to be found, but that they who have
wisdom, may be able to discover it. For by telling us, that it is the Number of
a Man, we are to count according to the manner that men use to do. Here is
Wisdom, says the Text, let him that has understanding, count the number of
the Beast; for it is the Number of a Man, and his Number is six hundred
threescore and six.

In order then to find in the Papacy the number 666. we are after the manner of
computation among men, to extract the Cubical Root of that number. For as 144.
is in the Book of the Apocalypse the Number of the Heavenly Jerusalem; so 666.
is made there the Number of the Beast. And as 12. is the Cubical Root of 144.
so if we can but find in the Papacy a number that is the Cubical Root of 666.
we need not in the least doubt but that 666. is the Number of the Papal Church.

They call that in Arithmetic the Cubical Root of any specified number, which
being multiplied by it self, does constitute that Number, whether it be with a
Fraction remaining, or without one. Thus 10. is the Cubical Root of a 100.
because 10* being multiplied by it self, makes a 100. But if we would seek for
the Cubical Root of 55. we can assign no other than 7. and because 7.
multiplied by it self, makes but 49, there must to the making up 55. be 6.
added, which Arithmeticians style a Fraction.

And it is worthy of Observation, that the Holy Ghost does not require us to
count the Number of the Heavenly Jerusalem; forasmuch as he has done it
himself, both in declaring that it is 144. and in discovering 12. to be the
Cubical Root of it. For not being satisfied to tells us, Rev. 7. 5, etc. that
there were 12000. sealed out of every Tribe, he gives us further to understand,
that all things relating to the Heavenly Jerusalem, are to be counted by
twelve. Thus there are ascribed unto it 12* Foundations, 12. Gates, 12 Angels,
12. Tribes, 12000. Furlongs, Rev. 21. 12, etc. and 12. manner of Fruits of the
Tree of life, Rev. 22. 2. And because 12. times 12. make 144. he therefore
expressly tells us, that the Wall of the Mystical Jerusalem was 144. Cubits.

This the Holy Ghost has not done in reference to the Beast; for contenting
himself with the having revealed his Number, he does not discover the Cubical
Root of it, but requires us to search it out. Let him that has understanding,
says he, count the Number of the Beast.

Let us then obey this command, and search out the Cubical Root of 666. and we
shall find it to be 25. Because 25. multiplied by it self, makes 625. to which
the Fraction of 41. being added, there results the number of 666.

Now it is most evident, that the number 25. is Sacred in the Romish Church,
being to be found every where, both in her Hierarchy, and in her Doctrine.

According to Onuphrius, Rome, which is the Seat and Throne of the Papacy, has
25. Material Gates, and as many Mystical Ones, or 25. Churches wherein they do
baptize.

According to Baronius, Ciaconius, Pot. Virgil. Onuphrius, and Platina, Rome
had at first but 25. Cardinals, 25. Curates, and 25. Parishes.

According to Onuphrius and Lipsius, the Compass and Circumference of Rome is
25. Furlongs.

According to Bzovius, She has 25. Penitentiaries.

There are in St. Peter's Church at Rome, 25. Altars, and the great Altar has
according to Aug. Rocca a Cross upon it, that is 25. Span high. And if we may
believe Baronius and Onuphrius, each side of that Altar is 25. Foot large.

There is also upon all their Altars the number of 25. imprinted, in that the
five Wounds Christ are graven upon them in five several places.

There are usually 25. Monks in their Cloisters. And for some Ages they have
held their Jubilee every 25. years.

There are 25. Articles of the Papal Faith; for so many the Bull of Pope Pius
the fourth contains.

And the Council of Trent, which gave us the last Summary and account of their
Doctrine, was both finished in 25. Sessions, and signed by 25. Archbishops.

So that 25. being the Cubical Root of 666. and this number being found in the
Popish Church, running through all that is Sacred and August, both in their
Hierarchy, Doctrine, and Ceremonies; it does undeniably follow, that 666. is
the Number of the Papacy, and by consequence that the Romish Church is the
Beast with two Horns.

And as the Number 12. through being the Cubical Root, and the Foundation of 144.
which is the Number of the true Church, gives us to understand, that the
Church of God is founded alone upon the Doctrine of the 12. Apostles: so the
Number 25* which exceeds twelve by above a half, being the Cubical Root and
foundation of 666. which is the Number of the Beast, serves to teach us, that
the vast multitude of Traditions, which are the Basis of the Papacy, should not
make us take her for the true Church as the Papists groundlesly pretend; but to
look upon her as the Beast with two Horns, and as great Babylon.

If the Reader should now demand, why the Holy Ghost gave the Number 666. for
the Mark of the Beast, rather than the Number 625. seeing 25. makes the just
Square Root of 625. without a Fraction, whereas to raise 666. from a
multiplication of 25. there must be added a Fraction of 41.

I answer, that if the Holy Spirit had intended to mark out unto us only the
Number of the Beast, he would have satisfied himself with the Number 625. but
designing to point out unto us also the Number of his Name; it became his
Wisdom to give us the Number 666. that so by these two delineations he might
the better paint him out unto us, it being evident that the Letters of the
Beasts Name, do contain and produce that Number.

And here likewise we are to attend unto, and serve our selves of the advice of
the Spirit, who says, Let him that has understanding, count the Number of the
Name of the Beast, for it is the Number of a Man. Now every one knows, that
they were men who at first invented the use of the Letters of the Alphabet in
numbering and computing, and who gave to every Letter its value. It Is true, the
Apocalypse is the only Scripture Book, where the Letters are applied to this
use; but that custom had obtained among the Grecians before St. John wrote. The
Holy Ghost himself declares, that it is the Number of a Man, and by employing
three Letters of the Greek Alphabet to express the Number 666. he does by his
own example teach us to search for this Number in the Name of the Beast. Now
the Name of the Beast, as we have already showed, is the Roman Church and Papal
Empire; and in the Greek, which is the Language wherein the Revelation was
written, the Name of the Roman Church is Lateinos.

For the Roman Church is called, the Latin Church, to distinguish it from the
Greek, and its Religious Service is through the whole Papal Dominion performed in
the Latin Tongue. Nor does the Pope emit his Bulls, nor Briefs, nor
Dispensations, nor Excommunications in any Language save the Latin. Now if we
take the Letters in the Name Lateinos according to their value in the Greek
Alphabet, we shall therein precisely find the Number 666.

A 30 A 1 T 300 E 5 I 10 N 50 O 70 S 200 666

What can be said against this computation? Was it not Ireneus, one of the
Holiest, as well as one of the most Ancient of all the Fathers, that made it?
One that had been the Disciple of Polycarp, who had conversed with St. John.
There may indeed be found some other Greek Names, whose Letters make that
Number; but then the other Features of the Image of the Beast, which do all
agree to the Papal Church and Kingdom, are not found in any of those other
subjects. So that we must necessarily conclude, that the Papal Empire is the
only thing which the Holy Spirit had a mind to represent in this description.

Besides, the Holy Ghost has afforded us more Representations of the Papacy
than one, that he might both make it the more discernable, and render those
inexcusable that will not know it. In the 13. Chapter he describes it both
under the Image of a Beast i. e. of a Power and Empire; and of a Beast with two
Horns, i. e. that has a twofold Jurisdiction, a Spiritual and a Temporal. Of
which twofold Authority all men know that the Papal Kingdom does consist. Tho
there be some Popish Princes that cannot bring themselves to confess it,
because their Ambition will not suffer them to acknowledge a Master.

But in the 17. chap. he sets it before us under the Portraiture of a Woman; to
give us to understand, that this Kingdom represented by the Beast, is a Church,
and a Religious Society. For it is the style of the Prophets, as well as of the
Apostles, to speak of the Church as of a Spouse. Nor does the Holy Spirit
describe it only to us as a Woman, but as a Harlot, and an Adultress; to
intimate her Spiritual Adultery, which is Idolatry, and by which she has
violated her Covenant with God. Which is enough to convince the most obstinate
Papists, that St. John neither speaks in the 17. Chapter, nor in the 13. of a
Heathen Society; God having never honored any such with the taking it into
Covenant with him. But upon the whole, it appears to be a Christian Society,
which through its Idolatry is become Antichristian.

Nor does this Portraiture represent her only as a Woman that is an Adulteress,
but as a Woman, that is the Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17. 5. to declare thereby
the more plainly unto us, that it is the Roman Church which is meant, who calls
her self as well the Mother as the Mistress of all those Christian Churches,
that are become Idolatrous as She is.

Moreover, the Holy Ghost represents this Woman, that is the Mother of Harlots,
sitting upon many Waters, Rev. 17. 1, 15. to point out as it were with the
finger unto us, the Church of Rome, which extends and exercises her
Domination both Spiritual and Temporal, over multitudes of People and Nations.

Finally, he describes this Woman, sitting upon a Beast with seven Heads and
ten Horns, Rev. 17. 3. that he may tell us thereby plainly, and without shift
or evasion, that it is the Papacy and the Papal Kingdom, which is meant, which
is risen up in the room, and has taken the place of the ancient Roman Empire;
According as has been already demonstrated.

That we may yet better know this Papal Empire, let us take a view of the Image
of Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, which the King of Babylon beheld in his
Dream, and which Daniel expounded unto him. These are the words of the Prophet,
Chap. 2. v. 20. The fourth Kingdom shall be strong as Iron; for as Iron
breaks in pieces all things, so shall the fourth Kingdom break in pieces and
subdue all. That fourth Kingdom is the Roman Empire under Consuls and Heathen
Emperors. But Daniel adds, Whereas thou saw the Feet and Toes, part of
potters Clay, and part of Iron: the Kingdom shall be divided, but there shall
be in it the strength of the Iron. This Division arrived after the Death of
Theodosius. For then the Empire became divided, into the Eastern Empire, and
the Western Empire. Now as the Feet are united with Legs; so the Papal Kingdom
is united with the Western Empire. For it has both succeeded to it, and is
possessed of all the Sovereign Rights and Majesty of it. The ten Toes of the
Feet, answer to the ten Horns, and to the ten Kingdoms, over which the Papal
Empire is established, and extends its Domination.

This Empire, says Daniel, shall be strong as Iron, and weak as Potters Clay.
Which agrees fully to the Papal Kingdom. Upon the one hand there was never an
Empire more formidable, as it has proved toward Kings and Emperors, who have
suffered themselves to be robbed and derived of their Estates and Dominions, by
the mere Force of Papal Excommunications. And upon the other hand, there was
never an Empire more feeble in that there needs no more to destroy it, but not
acknowledge it. Its great weakness appeared in the loss and disaster which the
bare Writings of Luther brought upon it. The Kings who now depend upon it, need
do no more to be delivered from its yoke, but to disclaim its Headship.

There is one considerable thing more which Daniel adds in reference to the
Feet of the Image, and which no Expositors have rightly understood. The Prophet
says, Chap. 2. v. 43* that as Iron cannot cleave to clay, so they shall not
cleave to one another, but they shall mingle themselves with (or by means of)
the seed of men.

Those whom Daniel intends by saying, they shall not join together, are either
the two Empires, the Eastern and the Western; or the ten Toes, the ten Horns,
and the ten Kingdoms, which belong to the Western Empire. It Is probable that
the Spirit of God designed both, but more especially and principally the
latter. And the event has made it certain, that the Division of the Roman
Empire could never be accommodated and repaired. For even while it was
Christian, it had two Heads, one in the East at Constantinople, and another in
the West at Rome. The difference that arose in their Creeds, caused that the
Greek Church could not unite with the Latin. Yet these two Empires did
sometimes mingle by the seed of men, in that they mutually assisted each other
with Forces. When the Eastern Empire became Mohammedan, it was then impossible
to unite that Empire with the Empire of the West, which is the Papal.
Nevertheless they have mingled by the seed of men, i. e. by the Greeks educated
in the Roman Church, with whom the Pope fills the Greek Church, under the
Dominion of the Turks. For to this purpose there are Seminaries maintained at
Rome, from whence there are Missionaries sent every year into the Turkish
Empire.

As to the ten Kingdoms represented by the ten Toes; it is certain, that if
they minded their interest, they would never unite with the Pope, seeing he
hinders them from being Sovereigns, through challenging to be above them; and
yet even they mingle and unite by the Seed of men. Which Seed of men is nothing
but the unwritten Word, Humane Doctrines and Traditions, called by the Prophet
the Seed of Men, in opposition to the Divine Seed, the Seed of which we are
born again, which is the Word of God, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Nor is it any thing save
Bigotry in reference to human Traditions, that makes Kings to mingle and unite
with the Pope, as Children with their Father, and causes them to court him,
for obtaining his Favor and Pontifical Benediction.

VI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Eighth King. REV. CHAP. 17. v. 11.
AFter that we have explained the Vision of the Beast with seven Heads and ten
Horns, and that of Babylon the Great, and that of the Beast with two Horns,
which is the seventh Head, to wit, the Pope* it will be easy to know, who this
Eighth King is, of whom there is mention made Chap. 17. v. 11. To this purpose
let us first hearken to the Exposition of the Angel, Rev. 17. v. 9, 10, 11. The
seven Heads, says he, are seven Mountains and seven Kings Five are fallen, one
is, and the other is not yet come. And when he comes, he must continue a short
space. And the Beast that was, and is not; even he is the Eighth King, and is
of the seven, and goes into Perdition.

He of whom the Angel says, one is, was the Roman Emperor, who was Master of
the Empire in St. John's time. He of whom it is said, the other is not yet
come, is the Pope, who was not in the time of St. John, but has been since the
fifth Century. The Angel predicteth concerning the Elevation of this Bishop to
his Grandeur, when he comes, i. e. when he shall usurp the Sovereignty and
Domination, that he must continue a short space.

The Pope became Master of Rome, and Temporal Lord over it, when Gregory the
second excommunicated Leo the Emperor. Then says Sigonius, Rome past from the
Greeks by reason of their Heresy about Images, into the hands of the Pope. And
for seventy years it remained in the same condition under the Popes, that it
had been formerly under the Emperors; and was the subject and Slave of these
new Lords. But that Form of Government continued not above seventy years; for
so says the Angel, it must continue for a short space.

Afterward the Sovereignty became divided betwixt the Pope and the City of
Rome. For if the Pope was Temporal Lord and Master, Rome was also Lady and
Mistress. And this is exactly what the Angel says to St. John, and the Beast
that was, and is not, even he is the eight King. This bears no difficulty,
because he adds, he is of the Seven. For seeing the Pope is the seventh Head,
and the seventh King, and that the Angel says, that the Eighth King is of the
seven, it cannot otherways be, but that he understands the Pope as exercising
his Domination after two different manners. The first alone, in the quality of
Temporal Lord of Rome, and after the manner of the Emperors, whose Seat with
all their Rights and Sovereignty he had usurped. The other in conjunction with
Rome, which continues to this day, and has from the time of Pope Leo the
third, in whom the first sort of Domination ended.

It Is in virtue of this union between the Pope and the City of Rome in their
Government, that upon the one hand, Rome is reverenced as the Chair of St.
Peter, as the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; the Guardian of Faith,
having her Senate made up of Cardinals qualified with the Title of Cardinals of
the Roman Church, and by whose Counsel as Affairs are managed, so it is by
their votes that the Pope is chosen: and it is from this upon the other hand,
that the Pope is worshipped as Successor of St. Peter, as Vicar General of
Jesus Christ, the Husband of the Church, as God on Earth, and as Sovereign
Judge of all, and who can be judged by none.

This is what we have represented in the 13. Chapter v. 12. where it is said,
That the second Beast excrciseth all the power of the first Beast, and that he
causes them that dwell on the Earth to worship the first Beast. For upon the
one side, Rome and her Senate do all they can to maintain the Sovereign
Authority of the Pope; and upon the other side, the Pope uses his utmost
endeavor to make all men Reverence the Church of Rome, as the Mother of the
Christian Faith, and the Mistress of all Churches. Thence it comes also to
pass, that as the Pope is not styled the Christian Bishop, but the Roman
Bishop; so Rome is not called by the name of Christian Church, but by the name
of Roman and Apostolic, which is as much as Papal Church. For according to the
style of the Court of Rome, Apostolic signifies the same that Papal does; so
that the Popes Miter, his Slipper, his Mule, his Habit, his Bulls, his
Notaries, and in a word, all that relates to the Popes Person, are called
Apostolic. There is not one, from the highest to the lowest, that belongs to
him, even to the Buffoons that accompany his Nuncio's and Legates but affects to
be so styled. He that attended the last Legate into France, said to the
Dorekeeper of the Playhouse, Io sono il Bouffono Apostolico.

Moreover these two kinds* of Government, that of the Pope alone, and that of
the Pope in conjunction with Rome, are clearly marqued and recorded in History.
It was Gregory the second, says Sigonius, that took away the Dominion of Rome
from the Greeks. Gregory the second, says Onuphrius, being more courageous
than his Predecessor Constantine, took from Leo the Emperor, all that he had
left of the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy: which was done in the year 729.
And this Domination of the Pope alone, lasted to the year 798. But then, says
Vignier, certain Citizens being incensed against Pope Leo the third, they did
under pretense of restoring Rome to its ancient Freedom, flirr up the people,
who seizing upon the Pope at a procession put out one of his Eyes, and threw
him into prison, whence being delivered by the Duke of Spoletto, and brought to
Charlemain, that Prince carried him back to Rome the year following, and
reconciled him with the Romans.

This reconciliation being made, the Popes traveled so well for the
re-establishment of their lost Sovereignty, that they recovered it, but in
conjunction with Rome; having to this purpose settled there before hand the
Primacy and Chair of St. Peter; so that if the Pope was from thenceforth
respected as the Sovereign Bishop, the Head and Royal Judge of the Christian
Church: Rome also was honored as the Mother of the Faith, and Mistress of all
Churches.

So that this point cannot be rendered clearer, seeing both the seventh and the
eighth King appear so plainly in History, and particularly in the Popish
Historians. Sigonius, Vignier, and Onuphrius do exactly marque the two ways
wherein the Popes have exercised their Domination. The first from Gregory the
second, till Leo the third, who was so ill handled upon that account, and the
second from the re-establishment of that Pope by Charlemain, upon the condition
that Rome should Reign in conjunction with him.

VII. ILLUSTRATION. Who the False Prophet is.
THE False Prophet is spoken of in two places of the Revelation. First, in the
pouring out of the sixth Vial, Rev. 16. 13. Three unclean Spirits like Frogs,
came out of the Mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out
of the Mouth of the False Prophet. And then in the 19. Chapter, where it is
said, that the Beast was taken, and with him the False Prophet, and they were
cast alive into a Lake of Fire burning with Brimstone. Now this False Prophet
is nothing else but the Beast with two Horns, mentioned in the 13. Chapter, but
the seventh Head of the Beast with ten Horns, and the eighth King, that are
spoken of in the 17. Chap. v. 11.

The Beast with two Horns, is the Pope with his twofold power, the one over
that which is Spiritual, the other over that which is Temporal. The seventh
head of the beast with ten Horns, is the Pope, as Successor of the Emperors.
The Eight King, is also the Pope as he is the Husband of the Roman church,
which Rules in conjunction with him over all Churches of the Papal Communion.

And the False Prophet; is likewise the Pope, as he is a false Teacher, one who
seduceth the world by his false Doctrines, and who has established the most
Despotical Empire that ever was in the World, upon the pretense of being the
Supreme Teacher of the Church. It Is true that the word Prophet signifies
usually one that Fore-telleth things to come; but it is also evident, that in
the Scripture it does sometimes signify only a Teacher. Accordingly St. Paul in
his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 14. uses the Term Prophet to
signify merely a Teacher, or one that Explaineth a Doctrine. And it is in this
sense, that the Pope is styled a False Prophet, which is as much as to say a
False Teacher, one that teaches false Doctrines; because that as they are not
Revealed, so they are contrary to all Revelation.

We have already proved in the foregoing Illustrations, that the Pope is the
Seventh Head of the Beast with ten Horns; that he is the Beast with two Horns;
and that he is the eighth King; so that he is therefore the False Prophet, and
consequently Antichrist Now if it do upon the other side appear, that the Pope
is Antichrist, it will from thence follow, that he is the False Prophet, the
eighth King, the Seventh Head of the Beast with ten Horns, and the Beast with
two Horns. And we will endeavor to give that light to these two Truths, that
all who have eyes to see may easily discern them.

That the Pope is Antichrist, appears from this, that there is nothing said
in the sacred Scriptures concerning Antichrist, but what perfectly agrees to
the Pope (1) St. John tells us in the 4th Chapt. of his 1st Epistle, v. 3. that
he is Antichrist, who denies that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Now the
Papal Doctrine of the Real presence, answers this Character, in that Jesus
Christ comes not in Flesh upon their Altars, being he is there (according to
the doctrine of the Romish Church) after the manner of a Spirit, which has
neither flesh nor bones. There is nothing so August and sacred in the Papal
Religion, as their Eucharist, their Host, which they call God, and Christ's
Body; but a Christ that is not like unto his Brethren, and a God that is not
manifested in the Flesh.

(2) St. Paul speaking of the Son of Perdition, who is the Antichrist, tells
us in the 2d Epist. to the Thessalonians chap. 2d v. 4. that he exalts
himself above all that is called God. Now Rulers are called Gods in Scripture,
Psa. 82. v. 6. I have said ye are Gods. And the Pope does exalt himself over
Kings and Emperors, not only in the quality of Spiritual Father, but in that of
Lord of Lords, and of an absolute Sovereign, who disposes of their Crowns, and
gives them to whom he pleases. Of which and acious and lofty attempt, History
does furnish many examples.

(3) St. Paul says, that the Son of perdition, exalts himself above all that
is worshipped. Now the Sacrament is worshipped in the Church of Rome; and to
this end it is elevated by the Priest; Exposed upon their Altars; born about in
procession; carried to such as are sick by the Priest, with a Bell rung before
it, whereby to give notice to all that are in the streets and in their Houses,
that they worship the Sacrament. But yet the Pope does Exalt himself above this
grand object of the Churches Adoration; in that he Travelleth no where, without
the having it carried before him as the chief of his Guard, and with less state
than he is born himself. Therefore Cardinal Perron styles the Sacrament the
Popes Guard of Defense, so that the March of the Son of God, who is concealed
under the vail of the Sacrament, is accomodated unto and Governed by the Popes
necessities and occasions, and Christ's Steps are ordered according to those of
his Holiness. When the Pope stops, the holy Sacrament must stop also; which is
to say, that Christ whom the Angels adore, must wait upon the pleasure, and
depend upon the caprices and humors of the Pope. And thus, as belongs unto
the Son of Perdition to do, the Pope exalts himself above all that is
worshipped.

(4) St. Paul tell us, that the Son of Perdition sits in the Temple of God:
which cannot be meant of the Temple of Jerusalem, because there has been no
such thing for these sixteen hundred years. And if that Temple were, yet it
would not be the Temple of God, seeing ever since the rejection of the Jews, it
is called simply the Temple, and never the Temple of God. Tho it were to be now
again rebuilt, and made every way what it was before the time of Vespasian, yet
there would be no reason why it should becalled the Temple of God, forasmuch as
since the abolishment of the Levitical Service, God dwells no more in Temples
made with hands, Act. 7. 48. So that the Temple here meant is the Christian
Church, which by the holy Apostles is called the Temple of God. There it is
that the Pope sits, as is here very well expressed. And there he is showed
as if he were a God. For they speak of nothing, but of the Holy Chair, the
Chair of St. Peter, and of the Roman Chair. They use to say, that such a one
does now sit, or that such a one possesses the Holy Chair. And indeed the Pope
sits there as a Judge, giving out Decrees and Oracles, as an Infallible Judge,
and as the Sovereign Judge of Coutroversies. So that the Pope, as the Son of
Perdition; sits in the Temple of God.

(5) St. Paul says further of the Son of Perdition, that he shows himself
that he is (or as if he were) God. Now the Pope behaveth himself as God, not
only because he dispenses with the Law of God, and as if he were God,
requires obedience to his own Laws under pain of damnation; and because he
boasts as a God to have the Keys of Hell and Paradise; but because upon the
day of his Election he is carried into the great Church, and there placed upon
the great Altar with the Bible under his feet, and worshipped both by all the
Cardinals, and by all the people, with an Adoration that is more than a Civil
one.

(6) St. Paul says moreover of the Son of Perdition, that his coming is with
all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders. Which Character of Antichrist is
also as discernable in the Pope as the former are; in that his Authority as
well as his Doctrine is founded upon Miracles. Nor is there amy thing else to
be met with in their Legends, and in the Lives of those Saints whom the Popes
have Canonised. But they are Lying Wonders, and whose falsity is so evident as
to stare us in the face. Forasmuch as the tendency of them, is not to support
the Truth of the Gospel, and to bring Glory to God; but to uphold Error, and to
give Glory to Creatures. Nor has St. Paul pronounced any thing concerning the
Son of Perdition, which more fully agrees to the Pope than this does. Who can
then doubt but that the Pope is the Son of Perdition, and Antichrist. The Jews
being dazzled and confounded with the Miracles of our Savior, they cried out
in the 7. of St. John v. 31. when Christ comes, will he do more Miracles than
these which this man has done. So I cannot but say, that when I consider the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which robs the Son of God of that Flesh, which
he assumed in order to our Salvation; and when I behold the pride of the Pope,
not only in exalting himself above Kings and Emperors, but above the very
Sacrament which they adore, making himself equal to God* and causing that they
worship him as God; I say that I cannot but declare, that I am ready to cry out
with a just astonishment, when the Son of perdition comes, can he carry
Heresy* Pride, Impiety, and Sacriledg, to a greater height, than the Pope has
done.

Finally, the most lofty as well as the most usual Title of the Pope, is that
of Vicar of Jesus Christ; and this is what the word Antichrist exactly
signifies. In the 13. chap. of the Acts v. 7. Paulus Sergius is styled in the
Greek (...), which signifies Proconsul, or the Vicar of the Consul; the Term
(...), Antichrist, is a word of the same form, so that if one would say in
Greek the Vicar of Jesus Christ, he can use no other term, if he would speak
roundly, than that of Antichrist^s. And therefore the Church of Rome, by
calling the Pope the Vicar of Christ, does thereby declare him to be
Antichrist. And she is herein like Balaams Ass, which spoke against, and to the
reproach of his Master. It Is true, that St. John does understand by Antichrist,
one that is an Adversary of Jesus Christ; but it is withal true, that the Pope
cannot style himself the Vicar of Jesus Christ, without declaring himself to be
his mortal Enemy, whatsoever profession he makes to the contrary. No more than
he that is a married man's Rival, can style himself his Vicar, without being
his deadly Enemy, and without doing him a most bloody Wrong. So that the Pope,
by calling himself the Husband of the Church, and by taking to him under that
Notion the Title of Vicar of Jesus Christ, is the true Antichrist, the Enemy
and Rival of Iesut Christ.

That the Pope is a False Prophet, and a false Teacher, as well as Antichrist,
which we have proved, we need only to observe two Prophesies, one of St. Paul,
and another of Jesus Christ, for the clearing of it. St. Paul in his first
Epist. to Timothy, 4. chap. v. 1. says thus, The Spirit speaks expressly,
that in the latter times, some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils; speaking Lies in Hypocrisy,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to Abstain from Meats, which God created to
be received with thanksgiving. Now the Pope does forbid Bishops and Priests to
marry; and tho she allows both the one and the other to have Concubines, yet
he will not suffer either a Bishop or a Priest to be joined to a Wife by lawful
Matrimony. He also prohibiteth, and that upon pain of Damnation, the eating of
Flesh in Lent and upon Friday. So that from hence, he is a seducing Spirit, a
Teacher of Lies, and a False Prophet.

Jesus Christ likewise says in the 24* Chapter of St. Matthew, v. 24, 25, 26.
that there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
Signs and Wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the
very Elect. Behold I have told you before, wherefore if they shall say unto
you, behold he is in the Desert, go not forth: behold he is in the secret
Chamber, believe it not. He must be under a supernatural blindness, who does
not in this Prophecy of the Son of God, see the Doctrine of the Real Presence,
as the Pope teaches it by his Emissaries. It Is in vain that the Papists seek
to relieve themselves from this Exposition by flying to the Testimony of the
Fathers, because none of them have taken notice of the Real Presence in this
passage, as we pretend to do. For how should the Ancient Fathers observe a
thing, of which there had then nothing appeared in the Doctrine of the Church?
It being in the beginning of the ninth Age, that Paschasius first brought it
upon the stage, and it not being received and authorized by the Pope till in
the eleventh. How could the Fathers then, that lived in the first 800. years,
divine of an event, for which they had no foundation toward the bottoming a
Conjecture; seeing from Adam down to this day, there was never any thing seen
like it? In a word, the Fathers were not Prophets, and their knowledge was
bounded as well as that of other men.

It being so, we are not to wonder, that the Fathers did not understand the
meaning of this Prediction of our Savior, before it came to be cleared by the
Accomplishment, which is the only sure Interpreter of Prophesies. But if we do
not understand it, after the help of having seen its completion, we shall have
no excuse to alledg for our selves. For all the Characters of the Real Presence
of Christ's Body, do evidently appear in this Prediction. This Presence as it
is taught by the Pope, is invisible; begets Adoration; and places Christ in
a Box (or Cupboard) which the Papists style the Pix; yea in many Boxes; and is
founded upon Miracles. And if all these Characters be found in the Prophecy of
our Savior, what can we desire more toward our being convinced, that Jesus
Christ foretold it as a false Doctrine, that should be advanced by a False
Prophet? Now it is apparent, that all these Characters are found in the
Doctrine here predicted by our Savior. (1.) The Presence here spoken of is
Invisible; because Jesus Christ tells us, that the false Prophets shall say,
Lo, here is Christ; lo, he is there. To what End would he say of the Presence
of a true Human' Body, Behold it is here, behold it is there; if it were not to
instruct us that this Presence shall be invisible, and according to the manner
of a Spirit. For if it were visibly present, there would be no need to be
advertised of its presence. Nor would Jesus Christ have said, Believe it not.
For how would he forbid to believe a presence of his Body, that should visibly
appear? Would he have us to contradict the Testimony of our own Eyes? (2.) The
Advertisement, Behold, he is here, lo, he is there, can be given upon no other
design, but to intimate the Adoration that all men should be laid under an
obligation unto. (3.) The Body of Christ is according to the Papal Doctrine,
shut up in a Ciborium or Cupboard. And this the Greek word here used does
signify. (4.) Nor is the Body of Christ according to the Doctrine of the Romish
Church, shut up merely in one Cupboard, which they call a Pix, but in many;
which the Term here being in the plural number does also denote. (5.) The Real
Presence is built upon Miracles. This every one knows by the many stories which
we have of the Hosts having appeared in the Form of an Infant, and that it has
been seen all Bloody. Which our Savior also foretold, in saying, that they who
should teach this Real Presence, should show great Signs and Wonders, insomuch
that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. Moreover our
Savior forbids us to believe this invisible Presence of his Body; Behold, says
he, I have told you before, believe it not. And withal he declares, that the
Presence of the Son of man shall be like unto Lightning, which shines from one
end of Heaven unto the other. And forasmuch as he declares, that they shall be
false Prophets, who shall teach this Doctrine, it does necessarily follow, that
tho the Pope through putting it into the Romish Creed, and entorcing it by
Anathema's, is that very same False Prophet of whom St. John speaks in the
Apocalypse.

Nor is the Real Presence of Christ's Body upon their Altars, and that singular
Adoration which they give unto the Sacrament, the only false Doctrine in the
Papacy, whereby to prove the Pope to be this false Prophet. But there are many
more which serve to give evidence unto it. And particularly that of the
Worshipping of Images, than which there cannot be a Doctrine more notoriously
false. It Is most certain, that God had forbid three things in his Law; the
making Images of things that are in Heaven, or things that are in the Earth;
the bowing down before them, and the serving them; see Exodus, 20* 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 5.
8, 9. All which the Church of Rome not only practices, but persecutes all
those as Heretics and wicked persons, who do in reference to this matter, both
obey the Injunctions of the Law, and imitate the Example of the Jews since the
time they returned from the Babylonish Captivity.

Is it not a false and an Heretical Doctrine, to apply to the Virgin Mary in
order to our being saved, and to invocate her, as the Gate of Paradise, the
Fountain of Grace, and the Mother of Mercy? If that Doctrine which overthrows
the Foundation be a Heresy? Then it cannot be denied but that this is a gross
one; in that the Foundation of all Salvation is Jesus Christ alone. Other
Foundation says St. Paul, can no man lay, than that that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And St. Peter says, that there is not Salvation in
any other, nor any other Name given among men, save that of Jesus Christ,
whereby we may he saved, Act. 4. 12.

Beside, can there be a Doctrine more evidently false, than that of Popery,
which affirms the Mass to be a proper Sacrifice, wherein our Redeemer is
every day sacrificed. Seeing the Apostle tells us expressly in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, chap. 10. v. 10. that we are sanctified through the offering of
the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. And he makes this difference between
the Sacrifices of the Law, and that of our Savior; that they by reason of
their imperfection were daily offered; whereas that of our Savior, because of
its being infinitely perfect, was offered but once. And he adds further in
the same place, v. 18. that there being under the Gospel Remission of Sins,
there is no more offering for Sin. So that here is enough to make it appear,
that the Pope who teaches Doctrines so notoriously false and Heretical, as
these are, can be no other than that False Prophet, whom the Revelation of St.
John threatens the World with.

VIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Dragon with Seven Heads and ten Horns. REV. CHAP.
12. v. 3.
IF we should take up with Appearances; we should presently believe, that this
Dragon is the Devil; and the rather, seeing he is in the ninth verse called,
the Old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, who deceives the World. But yet the
seven Heads and ten Horns, which the Dragon is here said to have, will not
suffer us to doubt, its being the same Roman Empire which is spoken of in the
13. Chap. because they are the same Heads, and the same Horns of the Beast upon
which the Woman sits in the 17. Chapter. There is this only difference, that
the Horns of the Beast upon which the Woman sits, are adorned with Crowns,
i. e. are Kings; whereas the Horns of the Dragon have not these Marks of
Sovereignty. Which does not prove them to be two different Beasts, and two
different Powers; but only that the same Beast and the same Power, is
represented in relation to two different Times, and two different Estates.

The ten Horns of the Beast upon which the Woman sits, are according to the
Explication given by the Angel, ten Kings, i. e. many Dominions formed out of
the Ruins of the Roman Empire. Which serves to prove that Beast to be Rome and
its Empire under the seventh Head, and making profession of the Christian
Religion. Whereas the ten Horns of the Dragon are not adorned with Crowns,
because they were nothing save bare Provinces of Heathen Rome under the
Emperors. From whence it does appear, that the Dragon with his seven Heads, and
his ten Horns, must necessarily represent the old Roman Empire, and exactly
denote Rome under the Emperors, who are the sixth Head.

It Is called by the name of a Dragon, which is a Beast, because it is a
Dominion and an Empire. It Is styled Satan and the Devil; by reason of the
Devil's being there worshipped under the name of Mars. And from hence we see
upon what ground Rome was called Martia, and the City of Mars; namely, because
the Devil was there as the Soul which acted that vast Body. Even as he is
called the Serpent in the seduction of the first Woman, because he was as the
Soul of the Serpent, and that it was he that spoke to Eva, and who seduced her.
But the question is, what is meant by the Tail of the Dragon drawing the third
part of the stars of Heaven, and casting them to the Earth? They who understand
the Scripture-stile of speaking, cannot be detained a moment by this
difficulty. Seeing it appears in Isaiah, chap. 9. v. 14, 15. and chap. 19. v.
15. that whenever the Scripture speaks of Head and Tail, it does by Head
intend a person of Rule and Authority; and by Tail means a False Prophet.
Therefore as the seven Heads signify the seven sorts of Rulers that have
Governed Rome; so the Tail signifies the Lies, False Doctrines, Frauds and
Impostures, upon which the Papal Empire is erected. This Kingdom is constituted
of Errors, False Worship, and Tyranny. And according to the Language of Isaiah,
Tyranny is denoted by the Head, and Errors and False Worship are figured out to
us by the Tail. And this is that, which makes up the Mystery Iniquity.

Dionysius Carthusianus tells us in his Commentaries, that the Tail of the
Dragon is Antichrist; which is a notion as solid as it is ingenious. For as the
Tail is the End of the Dragon's Body; so Antichrist is the End and Tail of the
Roman Power. And after that the Viols come to be poured out, there shall be no
more mention, neither of Pope, nor of Roman Empire; neither of Roman Religion,
nor of Rome.

As to that which is intended by the third part of the Stars, which the Tail of
the Dragon cast to the Earth; we are to know, that the Roman Empire contained
about the third part of the World; and therefore that this third part of the
Stars do signify all the Rulers and Doctors of that part of the world, that
have been drawn away and ensnared by the Papal Superstitions.

IX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Woman clothed with the Sun. REV. CHAP. 12. v. 1.
THIS Woman whom St. John saw clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her
Feet, and upon her Head a Crown of twelve Stars, can be nothing but the true
Church; forasmuch as this Sun is Jesus Christ, who is called by Malachy, chap.
4. 2. the Sun of Righteousness, and whom St. Paul in the 13. chapt. to the
Romans v. 14. requires Believers to put on. The Moon is the Pedagogy of the
Law, which as it was changeable, so the Church has trampled it under her Feet.
This St. Paul plainly intimates, in the second chapt. of the Epist. to the
Coloss. For as most of the Legal Feasts, such as the Passover, Pentecost, and
the Feast of Tabernacles, depended upon the motion of the Moon; so the whole
Legal Pedagogy is very well represented by the Moon, as well as all the
changeable things of this world, which Believers through being Citizens of Heaven
do despise. The Twelve Stars, with which this Woman is crowned, must signify
the Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles, which the true Church makes her Glory and
her Crown. And this in Opposition to the Antichristian Church, which may be
said to have the Moon upon her Head, and to be crowned with her. Forasmuch as
by the establishment of Priests, Sacrifices, Altars, Purifications, and
Moveable Feasts, she may be said to have revived the Synagogue, rebuilt the
Tabernacle of Moses, and set up again the whole Legal Economy. And she may
also be said to have the Sun and the Twelve Stars under her Feet; both through
her subjecting Jesus Christ to her Priests, who do Sacrifice him, and the
Doctrine of the Apostles, to her unscriptural and invented Traditions.

The Churches being with Child, and crying, and being in pain to be delivered;
represents the Persecutions that She suffered during the first three Centuries.
The Man Child, which She brought forth, is not Jesus Christ, as might seem at
the first view; because in that sense She must have been the Judaick Church,
and not the Christian; whereas this alone is the Subject of the Revelation. But
it is Christ Mystical, the Church formed of those that were Gentiles; which St.
Paul in the first to the Cor. chap. 12. v. 12. styles Christ. And this is the
more evident, because this Man Child is distinguished from Michael, v. 7. from
the Lamb, v. 11. from Jesus, v. 17. and is said to overcome by the Blood of the
Lamb, and to have the Testimony of Jesus.

And whereas it is said, that the Dragon stood before the Woman, to devour her
Child as soon as it was born. That is by way of Allusion to the Birth of our
Savior, and the Persecution he suffered from Herod, who endeavored to destroy
him. So that this Woman is properly the Christian Church, which being made up
at first of Jews, travailed, and was in pain to bring forth a Church composed
of Gentiles.

And forasmuch as it is said of this Man Child, that he was to Rule all Nations
with a rod of Iron; the same is promised to all Believers, in the Epistle
directed to the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 26, 27.

And whereas it is said of this Male Child, that he was caught up unto God, and
to his Throne; this does not hinder us from understanding it of the Christian
Church composed of Gentiles. Since as such it was exalted to the Throne of the
Empire in the person of Constantine and his Successors; and was delivered from
the Persecutions of Pagan Rome. It is an Allusion to the Ascension of Jesus
Christ; for the Holy Spirit puts that Honor upon the Church, when he is
speaking of her Combats and Victories, as to borrow Expressions which refer to
the Combats and Victories of her Divine Husband.

X. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Combat between Michael and the Dragon. REV. CHAP. 12.
INterpreters are divided about who this Michael should be, who fought with the
Dragon. Some will have it to be Michael the Archangel, who disputed with Satan
about the Body of Moses, and who durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, as St. Jude tells us, v. 9. The same Michael being called by Dan.
chap. 10. v. 13. one of the Chief Princes of the People of God. But others will
have it to be Christ himself, who in his own person fights against the Dragon.

And this opinion seems to be the truest, because the Victory obtained in this
Battle is above the power of a created Angel. The defeat given to Satan and his
Angels, in casting them out of Heaven unto the Earth; is a work that belongs
properly to none save to Jesus Christ; who as he is here styled by the name of
Angel, because he is the Angel of the covenant, the Angel of the Great Council;
so he is called Michael, that is, one who is like unto God, because he is the
true God, the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the lively and express Image
of his Person. And of whom the Michael spoken of in Daniel was a Type.

We have already showed in the foregoing Explanations, that the Dragon is the
ancient Roman Empire, or Rome under the sixth Head, which was the Emperors; but
called the old Serpent, the Devil, and Satan, because the Devil was as the Soul
that enlivened that Empire, and was worshipped in it as a Deity under the name
of Mars; so that Rome was surnamed Martia, the City of the Idol-God Mars.

This being laid down, there is no difficulty in the Vision. It being nothing
but a Description of the Persecutions which lasted under the Emperors for about
the space of three hundred years. It was then that Satan had justly the name of
the Accuser of the Brethren, according as he is called v. 10. For the
Christians during the time of 300 years, could not assemble openly, but were
forced to keep their Mettings in Dens, or in Woods, or in Holes of Rocks; and
were accused of committing there execrable Crimes, and Murders, and of being
guilty of Conspiracies against the Government, and of Uncleanness and
incestuous Converses; as does appear by the Apologies of Tertullian, and other
Writers of that time.

And whereas it is said, that the Dragon was cast out of Heaven unto the Earth,
and that* there was no place found any more for him in Heaven, nor for his
Angels: this was verified by the conversion of Rome and her Emperors; because
Paganism being then destroyed, both in Rome, and through the whole Empire, and
the Devil being neither any more Worshipped under the name of Mars, nor his
Angels, which are they that were his persecuting Emissaries, respected and
dreaded as they had been before; there was no place found any more for him in
heaven. `For in Rome he had no more a Temple, where he was worshipped, nor were
there throughout the whole Roman Empire any more Pagans, who did adore him; so
that he is thenceforth accounted of as fallen from Heaven to Earth, according
to the Prediction of the Son of God, Luc. 10. 18. I beheld Satan as lightning
fall from Heaven.

And forasmuch as St. John farther says, I heard a loud voice saying in heaven,
now is come salvation, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ;
for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down. This is a description of the joy
that was among believers, when they saw Jesus Christ victorious and triumphant
over the Dragon; the subversion of Idols; the down fall of paganism; and the
Church come out of Caves, Woods, and the Holes of Rocks, and to assemble openly
in the very Temples, where the Dragon had been worshipped, and there to worship
the true God, Creator and Redeemer.

So that if it be asked, who those Angels of the Dragon are that fought for
him; I answer, that they are the Philosophers, the Orators, the Priests of the
Idols Gods, and Magistrates, who made use of all sort of Tricks, Frauds,
Outrages of blind Zeal, Violence, Fines, Banishments, Imprisonments, and
Executions. As upon the other hand, Michaels Angels, are the Pastors and
Teachers, who made use of no other Weapons, nor Defense, but that of the Sword
of the Word of God, of Faith, of a holy Life, and of Patience. As it is said v.
11. that they overcame the Dragon, by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.

XI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Flight of the Woman. REV. CHAP. 12. v. 14.
THis Flight of the Woman had been mentioned v. 6. where it is said, that after
the Man child was caught up unto God, and to his Throne, the Woman fled into
the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that they should feed
her there a thousand two hundred and threescore Days.

But it appears by the 14 verse, that this was spoken there by way of
Anticipation, and that the Flight of the Woman fell out after the fall of the
Dragon, that is, after the destruction of Heathenism, and the conversion of the
Emperors. Which gives us to understand, that the Birth of Atichristianism,
followed soon after the deliverance from the Persecutions of the Pagan
Emperors. For ever since the Church decayed in her Purity, the prosperity which
She enjoyed under the Christian Emperors having suddenly and insensibly
corrupted her. And Platina tells us, that a voice was then heard, Hodie venenum
funditur in Ecclesiam; i. e. Poison is now poured forth upon the Church.

Nevertheless, this Flight of the Church did not lie in a change of Place, but
in a change of her external State. In a word, it was an Eclipse, rather than a
proper Flight; a Darkness, rather than a Retreat; and discovered it in the
pride, Covetousness, Luxury, and Dissoluteness of the Churches Guides; and in
the Doctrines, Worship, and Ceremonies, which She borrowed from the Pagans.

The Place which God had prepared for her, was a little Corner of that Temple,
which is spoken of Rev. 11. 1. when the outward Court was trodden under foot by
the Gentiles, that is, by those who had adopted and brought in Human
Traditions, and Heathenish Rites and Ceremonies, into the Christian Religion.

The Two Wings given unto the Woman, to forward her Flight, and to render it
the more expeditious and safe; do denote the same thing, that the measuring of
the Temple does in the eleventh chap. For he speaks here of the same persons,
to wit, the Church; and of the same Time, namely, that which succeeded soon
after the End of the Churches Persecution by the Heathen Emperors; and of the
same Design, which is the Preservation of Believers, against the Calamities
threatened by the Trumpets.

The Wilderness into which She fled, Intimates unto us the Churches Obscurity,
Poverty, and Distress; of which there were different degrees. For at some
seasons the Church was not so much as visible, no more than the seven thousand
of the ten Tribes were under Ahab and Iesabel, that were unknown to the Prophet
Elias.

She fled into the Wilderness with the Wings of an Eagle, as the Church of
Israel is said to have been carried upon Eagles Wings, Exodus 19. 4 which both
shows the speediness and the safety of her Flight, and that She should remain
and be entertained within the Bounds of the Roman Empire. And as the Eagle's
being the Arms of the Roman Empire, puts this out of all doubt; so the Two
Wings of the Eagle, do denote the Empire of the East and that of the West,
where the Church of God has been kept hidden, and had been fed, during the
time of her Poverty and great Distress.

And She has been Fed, not with the unsavory and poisonous Food of Human
Traditions, and Ceremonies or Doctrines, drawn from the Pagan Religion; but
with the sound and wholesome Food of the Word of God. Nor can She be fed with any
other Nourishment; so that this is the same thing with that which is said in
the 11. chap. v. 2, 3. viz. that while the Holy City should be trodden under
foot by the Gentiles, the Lord should cause his two Witnesses to prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in Sackcloth. For this
Prophecy of the two Witnesses, is nothing else, save the Bread and Food of the
Church, which he speaks of here. From which it necessarily follows, that
this Flight of the Woman into the Wilderness, is of the same Date with the
treading down of the City by the Gentiles, which is mentioned chap. 11. v. 2.

The Time that the Church was to be nourished in the Wilderness, is expressed
by Time, Times, and half a Time. Which amounts to the 1260. days of the sixth
verse. Nor can this be gainsaid, in that no man can deny but that the Flight
spoken of v. 6 is the same with the Flight that is discoursed of v. 14. Now we
shall see elsewhere what is meant both by the 1260. Days, and by the 42.
Months, mentioned chap. 13 when we come to examine how long Antichristianism is
to continue.

In the mean while, that which is spoken v. 13. is worth the serious
considering. When she Dragon (says St. John) saw that he was cast unto the
Earth, he persecuted the Woman. There had been another Persecution of the
Church; for during the time of three hundred years, She had been persecuted by
the Pagans* but this is a Persecution begun by Christians, or by such who
called themselves so. The Devil being through the conversion of Rome and her
Emperors, dethroned, and cast from Heaven unto the Earth, he left the Church in
Peace. But it was only for a very short time; for he suddenly bethought himself
of assaulting her by Error and Superstition. The first Persecution, which was
that by Pagans, was open and avowed; but this, which is by the Antichristian
Followers of the Beast, is carried on more darkly.

XII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Flood which the Serpent cast out of his Mouth; and
of the Help which the Earth gave unto the Woman. REV. CHAP. XII. v. 15.
V. 15. And the Serpent cast out of his Mouth Waters as a Flood after the
Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the Flood. V. 16. And the
Earth helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the
Flood which the Dragon cast out of his Mouth. V. 17. And the Dragon was wroth
with the Woman, and went to make War with the remnant of her Seed, which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.
NOW Doctrine being called, Prove. 18. 4. Waters of the Mouth; this Flood must
be a Hellish and Mortal Doctrine, because it is the Serpent who casts it out of
his Mouth, to carry away the Woman, and to destroy the Church beyond recovery.

Yet this Doctrine can be none of the Heresies, with which the Church was
exercised during the first three hundred years, because the Church is here
treated of after the time of the casting down of the Dragon from Heaven unto
the Earth: that is, after the conversion of Rome and her Emperors. So that it
must needs be some Heresy started after the Flight of the Woman; forasmuch as
it is here said, that the Serpent cast this Flood after the Woman, as being in
the pursuance of her upon her Retreat into the Wilderness. Now the Woman (as we
have showed) withdrew into the Wilderness, after the Emperors were turned
Christian, in that the Church begun then to decay in her purity.

It must therefore refer to those Errors, which were condemned by the first
four Councils, and especially to that of Arius, who denied the Eternal Godhead
of Christ, and taught that he was merely a Creature made before all other
things. It Is true, there had arisen some Heretics before, who had vented the
same Heresy in the main; but it is likewise true, that they never made such a
considerable Body, as to bring the Church into an extreme danger.

Whereas the Arian Heresy, by seizing and infecting almost the whole Church,
had near brought it to pass, that there should be no more a Christian Church,
and that there should be no more hope of Salvation. For if Jesus Christ be not
a Divine Person, his Death can have no more virtue, than that of Martyrs. It
could neither have expiated Sin, nor, that I may say all in one word, have been
any ways meritorious; seeing common sense tells us, that a mere Creature cannot
merit at the hands of the Creator, who is of infinite Majesty.

This Heresy prevailed over the whole Eastern Church; forasmuch as it was
approved by five Councils, by that of Tire, that of Syrmium, that of Ariminium,
that of Seleucia, and that of Antioch. But at length it was condemned and
extinguished by the last Council that was held in reference to that matter,
which was that of Constantinople under Theodosius the great. After which the
Church has enjoyed rest on that side, and Jesus Christ has been adored as
co-essential with the Father. For since then, there have been no Heretics
owning this Heresy, that have appeared in any Body For the Socinians are no
more a Body, than the Atheists and Deists are.

The Earth then that helped the Woman, and which opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the Flood; were all those Councils that condemned the Arian
Heresy. They are styled the Earth, because they are purely a humane Mean, and
one which God has not ordained. For Jesus Christ has promised an
infallibility to no Assembly of men, or if he have, it is to two or three who
shall assemble in his Name, and not to all who come together.

If we consider the Heresy of Arius merely upon that foot; and if we put it
into the list of Heresies, merely upon the account of its being condemned by
several Councils; and if we believe that Jesus Christ is in all things equal to
God, only because Councils have so determined; this Faith of ours will be but a
Humane Faith, and not a Divine. For it is not Divine, but as it has a Divine
foundation; and a Divine foundation is no other thing, save the Sovereign
Authority of God, speaking in the Scriptures. I do believe that Jesus Christ is
every way equal to his Father, not because Councils have so decreed, but
because the whole Scripture does declare it, even from Moses to St. John, and
from Genesis down to the Revelation. The Councils did undoubtedly determine
well, when they condemned the Heresy of Arius, and in that they asserted the
Godhead of our Savior: but in the mean time their Decree was only so far just
and true, as it was conformable to the Word of God. The Councils are therefore
no other but a humane Mean, because Infallibility does not reside in them; but
in the alone Word of God, that is the Rule by which they do judge. And forasmuch
as they are a human mean, they are the Earth that helped the Woman, and that
swallowed up the Flood.

XIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the War, which the Dragon, being full of Wrath, made
against the Remnant of the Seed of the Woman. REV. CHAP. 12. v. 17.
THE Serpent (says St. John) was wroth with the Woman; and this was upon the
finding himself disappointed of that effect which he expected from the Flood
which he had cast out of his Mouth, and upon his seeing that the Earth had
opened her mouth, and swallowed it up. And being enraged with wrath, he went to
make War with the remnant of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and
have the Testimony of Jesus Christ But what? was not the Dragon wroth with the
Woman, before the Earth had swallowed up the Flood, and before the condemnation
of the Arian Heresy? Has he not alway's made War with those that are of the
Seed of the Woman? It is so, nor is the contrary intended here, but it is the
Scripture way of speaking, to express the increase of a thing, as if it were
the beginning of it. Thus it is said 1 Samuel 23. 18. that David and Jonathan made
a Covenant, that is, they renewed it, for they had made it before. So St. John
tells us in his first Epist. chap, 5. v. 13. that he wrote to those who
believed, that they might believe, i. e. that they might increase in Faith. So
that, that which the Spirit of God would plainly say, is that the wrath of the
Dragon became inflamed, and that he went to make a more dangerous war, than he
had made before.

But who are this Remnant of the Seed of the Woman, which keep the Commandments
of God, and have the Testimony of Christ? Is there any difference betwixt them,
and the Church? Is not the Church made up of such, as keep the Commandments of
God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ? There is the same difference
between the Woman, and those who are her Seed, as there is betwixt a Mother and
a Daughter. The Oriental or Greek Church, that had been distressed for about
200 years by the Heresy of Arius, is the Mother: and the Western, or Latin
Church, is the Daughter, and the Remnant of the Seed of the Woman. The Bishop
of Bitonto used this Distinction in a Sermon which he made before the Council
of Trent. The Greek Church, says he, is our Mother, to whom the Latin is
indebted for all that She has. And in truth, the Terms, Church, Bishop,
Priest, Deacon, Baptism, Eucharist, and Christian it self, are all Greek Terms,
and plainly show, that our Religion is derived from them, from whom we have
borrowed the Terms.

They then who are said to be the Seed of the Woman, against whom the Serpent
went to make War, is the Latin or Western Church, where the Dragon all along
since that time, has been laboring to accompish the Mystery of Iniquity,
which was at work in St. Paul's days, 2 These. 2. 7. And this is nothing else,
save Antichristianism or the Papacy.

But since the time that a Church of God Separated it self, from that, which
had received the Mystery of iniquity; the Church that so withdrew, is the
remnant of the Seed of the Woman. And particularly the Waldenses are this Seed;
and whose Separation is acknowledged both by Historians and Inquisitors of the
Church of Rome; who speak of the Waldenses as of Christians, who have been
Separated from the Roman Church, from the time of Sylvester and of Constantine
the great.

Claudius Sesselius, Archbishop of Turin, tells us in a Book which he writ
against the Waldenses, that the Sect of the Waldenses took its rise from a most
religious person called Leo, that lived in the time of Constantine the great,
and who detesting the covetousness of Pope Sylvester, and the immoderate bounty
of Constantine, chose rather to embrace poverty, with the simplicity of the
Christian Faith, than with Sylvester to be defiled with a Fat and rich
benefice; and that all they who were seriously Religious joined themselves to
him.

The famous Inquisitor Reynerus Sacco, as he is quoted by the Jesuit Cretzer
in his Bibliotheck of the Fathers, speaks much to the same purpose. Amongst all
the sects, says he, that either are, or have hitherto been, there is none that
has been so pernicious to the Church of Rome, as that of the Leonists, and
that for three Reasons. (1) Because it is she most ancient, and has continued
longest. For some affirm, that it begun in the time of Sylvester, and others in
the time of the Apostles. (2) Because it has spread it self farthest, there
being no place where it is not to be found. (3) Because they who are of it,
have a great show of piety, live virtuously before men, believe rightly of the
Deity, and observe all the Articles of the Creed.

The Friar Belvedoras in his Relation al consilio de propaganda fide, and de
Extir pandis Hereticis, printed at Turin anno 1636. page 37 being excusing
himself and those Missionaries that were his companions, why they could not
convert so much as one of the Waldenses, does assign this reason for it,
namely, that that Heresy is too firmly rooted there, for any to be able to do
good among them, in that says he, le Valli d'Angrogna sempre ad in omni tempo,
hanno havuto Heretici. i. e. they of the Valleys of Angrogna, have been alway's
and through all times accounted Heretics.

So that this Woman is exactly the Church of the Valdenses; which as Claudius
Seysellius tells us, did in the person of the forementioned Leo, separate from
the Church of Rome in the time of Pope Sylvester and of the Emperor
Constantine. There being two Wings of an Eagle given unto her, to assist her in
her flight into the Valleys of Piedmont, which lie at the foot of the Alp's.
And from thence they were styled Valdenses long before the time of Peter Valdo,
as John Ledger has sufficiently proved in his History. These then are the
Remnant of the Seed of the Woman; who as in France they have been styled
Vaudois from the word Vaux that signifies a Valley; so in the Low Countries
they have been called Valons, which is to say, those of the Valleys.

XIV. ILLUSTRATION. Of Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, that Sits
upon many Waters; carrying upon her forehead the name Mystery; and having a
Golden Cup in her hand. REV. CHAP. 17. v. 1, 4, 5.
HAving proved in our Fourth Illustration, that Babylon can be nothing else but
Rome as professing her self Christian; we are now to consider the Description
which the Holy Spirit has given of Babylon, and to see how that Picture of her
does agree to Rome.

There is such an affinity and so many exact Resemblances, between Rome and
Babylon of the Chaldees, that we are not to think it strange, that the Holy
Spirit has given unto Rome the name of Babylon. They were both founded by
persons that were Captains over Robbers, and who were great Shedders of blood.
Babylon by Nimrod, who is said to have been a mighty hunter before the Lord,
Genesis 10. 9. And Rome by Romulus, who as another Cain, murdered his Brother.
They were both of them, the Seats of great Empires. The one, as well as the
other, have had Monarchs, who have styled themselves Kings of Kings. For this
Title the Pope does no less claim, than Nebuchadnezzar did. Both the one and
the other have been the Subject of the Visions in the Prophet Daniel. As the
Babylonish Empire was the first Beast, and the Head of the Image; so the Roman
was the Fourth Beast, and the Feet of the Image, that were part of Clay and
part Iron. The one as well as the other, has kept the people of God in
Bondage; Babylon the Israelites, and Rome the Christians. The one and to other
have Killed and burnt such as would not worship their Gods. The one as well as
the other have been overthrown, and after their subversion have past from one
Religion to another; Babylon being become Mohammedan, and Rome Popish and
Antichristian. Each of them had its Vicar; Babylon her Caliph, who calls
himself the Vicar of God, and of Mahomet; and Rome her Pope, who styles himself
the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and of St. Peter. Finally, Heathen Babylon was a
Type of Rome Papal and Antichristian; as the Redemption of the Jews from the
Babylonish Captivity, was a figure of the Departure of the Reformed from the
Communion of Rome. So that we are not to be surprised, that the Holy Ghost
should under the name of Babylon, intend Rome. But we must examine all the
Lineaments of this Portraiture, that so if it thereby appear that all of them
do agree to Rome, we may no longer doubt but that it is Rome which is here
signified by Babylon.

In the first place, St. John says, that he saw a Woman. Now as the Church of
God is represented under the Idea of a Woman, being the Spouse and Wife of the
Lamb; so Rome is also a Church, but* She is the Spouse of the Pope, whom we
have proved to be Antichrist.

(2.) The Woman which St. John saw, sat upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of
the Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns, Rev. 17. 3. And we
have already proved, that this Beast is the Roman Empire, Which as it is
represented under a Scarlet Color, because both its Senators and Emperors
chose to wear that color; so the Beast is said to be full of Names of
Blasphemy, because the Empire was styled Eternal, Rome a Goddess, and the
Emperors Gods. The Church of Rome sits also upon this Beast, because she
has succeeded unto, and is possessed of the Majesty of the Roman Empire, and
has revived all its Blasphemies, through calling her self Eternal and
Infallible.

(3.) St. John styles Babylon a Harlot, and the mother of Harlots; which is as
much as Idolatrous and the Mother of Idolaters. Now Rome calls her self the
Mother of all Churches; and as she stands convicted of being Idolatrous, by the
adoration that she gives to Bread and the accidents of it in the Eucharist,
and the Worship which she renders to the Cross, to the holy Virgin, to Images,
and to the Pope himself; so all Churches within her Communion, are Idolatrous
as she is. Which proves her to be the Harlot, and the Mother of Harlots, which
St. John describes.

(4.) He further adds, that this Woman sits upon many Waters. Which Waters
the Angel explaineth to be Nations; the Waters, says he, which thou saw,
where the Whore sits, are peoples, Nations, and Tongues, Rev. 17. 15. Now
all do know, that Rome pretends to have a Right of jurisdiction over the
whole World; and in truth She was heretofore reverenced by all Europe, as the
Seat of the everlasting Kingdom of the Son of God.

(5.) Babylon carries in her forehead a Name Written; MYSTERY. Nor can any
deny but that this agrees to the Church of Rome. For the Pope carried
heretofore the Name Mystery upon the Brim of his Myter, which exactly answered
to the forehead. Julius the second was he who took it away out of his, and
since then it has been no more used nor seen. And King James the first of
great Britain, having affirmed, that persons who were worthy of credit, had
seen the Name Mystery upon the Miter of the Popes that were before Julius the
second; the Jesuit Lessius contenteth himself with bare answering, that we are
not to seek for a Mystery in a Mystery. Which is an acknowledgment of the
matter of Fact, and a confession that it used to be there. In a word, there is
no one thing in the Papal Church, but what is Mysterious. The Habit's of the
Popes, of the Cardinals, of the Archbishops, of the Bishops, of the Priests,
and of the Monks, are all full of Mysteries, that are wholly unintelligible to
the people. Nor does the Priest use the least Gesture, nor the least Motion at
the Altar, or in any part of their Divine Service, which is not Mysterious, and
hid from the understanding of the Vulgar.

(6.) Of what other but of Rome can that be understood which is said of
Babylon, namely, that she has a Golden Cup in her hand, full of Abominations
and Filthiness of her Fornication? The Scripture does elsewhere compare
Doctrines to Drink, or to diet, that is fit to nourish; so that these
Abominations which are in the Golden Cup, are abominable Doctrines; such as the
Forbidding Priests to Marry, and the commanding to abstain from meat^. The
Church of Rome finds it to be more to her purpose, that a Priest should keep
a Harlot, rather than that he should have a lawful Wife; which is an
Abomination. She imposes a greater Punishment on them that shall eat Flesh in
Lent; and upon Friday, than upon those who commit Adultery and Murder; which
is an Abomination. She takes away the Cup in the Sacrament, both against the
express command of the Son of God, who says, drink ye all of it, Matthew. 26.
27. and contrary to the practice of the Apostles, and of the whole Church, for
the first five Centuries, as themselves do aknowledg: Which is an Abomination.
She teaches that Christ is not really present in the Eucharist, unless it be
the Priests pleasure to have it so; and keth the Presence of the Son of God, to
depend upon the Intention of a wretched creature: which is an Abominable
Doctrine. She every day Sacrifices the Lord of Glory, and offers him up to
the Honor of Saints; which is an Abomination. In brief, all the Doctrines of
the Papacy, and all their Worship, are an Abomination, because they all tend to
the Worship of the Creature. But the Golden Cup, by means of which she makes
the people receive and swallow them, is her Infallibility. It is with this that
She Guilds over her false Doctrines and her Superstitious Worship. They do
ingenuously acknowledge, that neither Transubstantiation, nor the Sacrifice of
the Mass, nor the Adoration of the Host, nor the Worship of Images, nor any of
their other Doctrines and Errors, are founded on the Scripture, but the Church
of Rome having decreed and enjoined them, and She being Infallible, we are to
receive them implicitly, and without examination, or otherway's we are to be
eternally damned. By means of this glistering Cup all is submissively received
by the deluded people. This serves to make them swallow down the greatest
Abominations; such as the prohibition of reading the Scripture, and of serving
God in a language which they understand; and the doctrines of Worshipping the
Host, the Cross, the Pope, the withholding the Cup, and a thousand other
Superstitions.

(7)* Moreover, it is said of Babylon, chap. 18. v. 7. that She says in her
heart I sit a Queen, am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. Which is the very
language of the Church of Rome. She styles her self the Sovereign Lady and
Mistress of all Christians; not only of inferior people, but of Princes, Kings
and Emperors. And indeed She is an Empire; having for her Monarch, the Pope;
for her Council the College of Cardinals; for her Castles, Convents; for her
Armies, Monks; for her Governors of Provinces, Bishops and Archbishops; for
her Ambassadors, Nuucio's and Legat's; for her Merchants, Priests; for her
Merchandises, Dispensations; and for her Revenues, Annates and Benefices. So
that it was with good reason, that Gregorius Le^i begun his pleasant History of
Pope Sixtus the fifth after this manner. That the Popedom is the most
considerable Monarchy, that has been established from the Creation of the
World to this day; and that no Princes, whether Idolatrous or Christians, have
reigned more absolutely than the Roman Bishops do; at whose Feet the greatest
Potentates have laid down their Scepters and Crowns. So that it may be said,
this sodering together of Temporal and Spiritual power, this mingling of things
Secular and Religious, this conjunction of the Cross with the Sword, this Union
of Body and Soul, and in brief, this Authority over Earth and Heaven, which
meet and center in the Popes; have raised and established a Sovereignty, which
almost all the People and Princes of the World do reverence.

Withal the Church of Rome says, I am no Widow: in that She boasts of having a
visible Head and spouse, which is the Pope. And She says, I shall see no
sorrow; for pretending to be the only Spouse of the Son of God, how can she
miscarry; Or how should She be so forsaken as to be able to fall; seeing it is
to her alone that Jesus Christ has made that promise; the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against my Church, Matthew. 16. 18.

XV. ILLUSTRATION. Of Babylon's making all Nations Drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, and of her being Drunk with the Blood of Saints. REV. CHAP. 14. v.
8.
THese two Actions of Babylon, charactarise and mark out the Roman Church.
Seeing it is Idolatry that is spoken of, which is Spiritual Adultery, and
dissolveth Gods Covenant, as Adultery does the Covenant of Marriage. Now the
Roman Church is guilty of too gross Idolatry, to be any ways able to justify
her self. She worshippeth not only the Holy Virgin, in giving her the Titles of
the Gate of Paradise, the Queen of Heaven, and the Fountain of Grace; but in
advancing her above Jesus Christ, through begging of her in one of their
prayers, that she would jure matris imperare, i. e. use the authority of a
Mother in Commanding her Son. Nor does she only Adore Images according to the
Decree of the second Council of Nice, which is confirmed by the Council of
Trent: but she also Adores the Sacrament, which Jesus Christ instituted to be a
memorial of his death, and which therefore must be something else than Christ
himself. Nor can she according to her own Doctrine have any assurance either
divine or human, that the Bread is the Body of Christ; forasmuch as she cannot
be assured of the Intention of the Priest, upon which the whole Consecration
does depend. To which may be added, her Worshipping the Cross, and that with
the highest kind of worship called Latria, having to this purpose set apart and
assigned Good Friday.

The Doctrine of the Roman Church that leads men to Idolatry, may be justly
compared to Wine, and not to water; and to Wine of Wrath, i. e. furious Wine;
because they who drink it become intoxicated, and deprived of their senses. So
that they not only furiously pursue the Objects of their Superstition, as so
many mad men, whom none can hinder or withdraw from it; but they are
transported with hatred and rage against all those who do not approve their
false and abominable devotion. And it is worth our observing what the
difference is, between true Doctrine and false. Wholesome and true Doctrine, is
usually compared to Water, because it renders such as embrace it, meek,
gentle, patient under injuries, ready to teach those who are otherwise minded
with mildness; and filled rather with Pity and Compassion toward them, than
transported with hatred. But in reference to the effects of false Doctrine, all
is otherwise. For it makes such as entertain it, violent, cruel, quarrelsom,
outrageous, ready to assault, and fall upon those that contradict them, and who
refuse to follow their example. And therefore it is resembled to Wine, and to
Wine of wrath, i. e. heady Wine, that inflameth and distracteth men, and in a
word, renders them that are possessed with it persecutors to the outmost.

Nor can the Church of Rome deny, but that she does after this manner persecute
all those whom she calls Heretics; and for this only reason, because they will
not own her to be the Empress of the world, and the Mother and Mistress of
Faith, and acknowledge her Bishop to be the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the
Center of Christian Unity. The Croisado's against the Valdenses and Albigenses,
of whose success Bellarmin triumphs to that degree as to say. that in one
only Croisado there were a hundred thousand killed; the Massacres committed in
England, France and the Low Countries, in the forego'ing Age; those perpetrated
in Poland, the Valleys of Piedmont, and in Ireland within these forty or fifty
years. I say, all these do make it but too evidently appear, that the Church of
Rome is this Woman, whom St. John saw drunk with the Blood of Saints, Rev. 17.
6.

The Holy Scripture puts this honor upon all those that follow sound
Doctrine, and of whose Faith the Gospel is the only Rule, as to give them the
glorious Title of Saints. Nor can it be gainsaid, but that Rome is drunk with
the Blood of Saints; forasmuch as all the barbarous Croisado's against the
Albigenses, and all the Butcheries perpetrated upon Protestants, have been for
no other reason, but for their making the Gospel the alone Rule of their Faith.
Neither were they persecuted and destroyed, but because of their disclaiming
Human Traditions, which are the mischievous Fountain of all Errors.

XVI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Lamb on Mount Sion, and with him the 144000. having
the Fathers Name written in their Foreheads. REV. CHAP. XIV. v. 1.
HERE we have a Description of the State of the True Church, and that during
the time in which Babylon was drunk with the Blood of the Martyrs. For whereas
one might have questioned, whether the Church was not wholly lost, seeing all
the world not only wondered after the Beast, but that they who refused to
receive his mark, and to worship his Image, were killed: therefore the Holy
Spirit represents a Vision to St. John, in which he might clearly see, that the
Church did subsist, in despite both of the Victories of the Beast, of the
extent of his Empire, and of the Violence of his Persecutions.

I looked, says St. John, and lo, a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him
144000. having his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads; and I heard a voice
from Heaven, as the voice of many Waters, and as the voice of a great Thunder.
And I heard the voice of Harpers harping with their Harps; and they sung as it
were a new Song before the Throne, and before the four living Creatures, and
the 24. Elders, and no man could learn that Song, but the 144000. There is
nothing difficult in this Vision. The Lamb is Jesus Christ. Sion is a Mountain
separated from Jerusalem, and is a Figure of the True Church. The 144000. who
have the Fathers Name written in their Foreheads, are Believers, who compose
the True Church, and who by keeping themselves separated from the Romish
Church, have this comfort, that they do enjoy the gracious presence of their
Savior, as Sacrificed for them, and they will hearken to no other Savior but
him.

He then who would know the True Church, in order to join himself into
Communion with it, needs no more, but to consider this Portraiture, which the
Holy Spirit has vouchsav'd us, and wherein he has given us six Characters of
her, that so we may not be deceived.

First, it is said, that they were redeemed from among them, or from among those
of the Earth. Now it had been said in the 13. Chap. that all the Earth went or
wondered after the Beast. It Is then from this Earth, that is from among the
Followers of the Beast, that they who constitute the True Church are redeemed
and separated.

In the second place, they are those who are not defiled with Women; for they
are Virgins. Which words cannot be understood of the Romish Ecclesiastics,
without a manifest injury to the Text. Forasmuch as the term Virgin agrees
only to Females; nor is the word in the Original used of any but of those of
that Sex. We are not then to take the Phrase in a Literal sense, but in a
Mystical; for he speaks of a Chastity and of a Virginity that is Mystical, of
a purity of Soul, that abhors Idolatry as spiritual Adultery. For they who
are Virgins, and who are not defiled with women, are set in opposition to those
whom the Woman has made drunk with the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication,
that is, with Idolatry, whereof the Papal Church is manifestly guilty.

(3.) It Is said, that they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Which is as
much, as that the Members of the True Church are united to Jesus Christ by
indissoluble Bonds, and that they follow him on Mount Calvary, as well as Mount
Tabor; in a Wilderness, as well as in a Land that flows with Milk and Honey; on
the raging Sea, as well as upon firm ground; and as S. Paul says, through honor
and dishonor; through evil report and good report, 2 Cor. 6. 8.

(4) They are those in whose mouth there is found no Guile, for they are
without fault before the Throne of God. Which is the language wherein St. Paul
speaks of the Church, Ephesians. Chap. 5. v. 25, 26, 27. Christ, says he, loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of Water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be
holy and without blemish. So that it is not true, that worldly and wicked
persons do constitute the true Church.

(5.) They are those who could learn the new Song, that is sung by the 24.
Elders, and by the four living Creatures. What Song can this be, which they of
the Earth could not learn? Forasmuch as that we do not learn Songs, but in
order to sing them; there must be some Mystery contained under this new Song.
We learn not but in order to practice: and they who do not practice, do not
know, nor have they learned. So that in a word, this new Song, is the Mystery
of denying our selves, and or resolving to bear the Cross. Worldlings might
learn the Mysteries of Religion, if they would. The Theory does not exceed
their capacity. But to be obliged to deny themselves, and to take up the Cross,
is unintelligible to them, or at least that which they will not submit unto and
practice.

Finally, they are those who are built upon the Doctrine of the twelve
Apostles. Therefore they are said to be of the number of the hundred and forty
four thousand, because twelve thousand multiplied twelve times, makes up the
number of 144000. Besides, it is a definite number, put for an indefinite; to
show both that God knows all those who are his, and that they cannot be
diminished* notwithstanding all the attempts that the Dragon makes against them.

XVII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the three Angels of the Everlasting Gospel; and of the
Denunciation against Babylon and her Followers. REV. CHAP. 14. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.
GOD has not only alway's preserved a number of true Believers, who (as we
have already showed) never worshipped the Beast nor his Image; but he has
moreover raised up Teachers, who have both openly condemned the Idolatry of the
Romish Church, and have exhorted the People to withdraw from her Communion.

And that is this which is here represented in the Vision of the three Angels.
Forasmuch as the Pastors of the seven Churches, are in the second and third
Chapters of the Revelation styled by the name of Angels.

These Angels are represented in the person of him, who appeared the first of
the three, with the Everlasting Gospel; because there is no other Rule, whereby
to Reform the Church when she is corrupted, nor to restore the purity of Gods
Worship, when it is degenerated into Superstition. So that the Eternal Gospel
is the same with the Reed wherewith the Temple was measured, in the 11. Chap.
The Followers of the Beast have alway's used to accuse those of Novelty, that
have condemned their Errors. But the Gospel which they preach in its purity,
does fully vindicate them against this accusation; because it is the same
Gospel which was written and preached by the Apostles, and which shall be
preached to the consummation of all Ages; and is therefore called the
Everlasting Gospel.

There are Three Angels spoken of, to intimate Three different Times, wherein
God raised up Teachers, who declared against the Errors and Idolatries of the
Romish Church. Now these three different Times were the twelfth, the 14th, and
the 16th Centuries.

In the twelfth Age, about the year 1126. there arose Peter du Bruit, and soon
after him in the year 1147. there appeared one Henry of Tholoss, whose
Disciples, were cried down for Heretics under the name of Petrobrusians and
Henricians. Though they taught nothing but the Everlasting Gospel, through preaching
against the Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Prayers and Offerings
for the Dead, Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of Images, the Celibate of
Priests, and against other Errors and Superstitions of the Roman Church. In the
same Age there arose also Arnoldus de Bress, who upon going into Italy to
preach against those Errors, was by the command of the Emperor Frederick
Barberossa apprehended, and to gratify the Pope, whose Friendship he sought,
burnt in the year 1155. In which year Valdo appeared, who was had in so great
esteem, that they who before had been called Arnoldians, Henricians, and
Petrobrusians, are supposed to have gotten from him the name of Valdenses. Tho
that is a mistake, forasmuch as long before the time of Valdo, they who made
profession of the true Doctrine, had been so styled from the name of the
Valleys of Angrogna and Piedmont, where the Church of God had been harbored
from the day's of Constantin, as has been already observed.

These Teachers are represented crying with a loud voice, Fear God; because at
that season Babylon alone was dreaded; it being the common language of every
one at that day, Who is like unto the Beast? who is able to make war with him?
as the Holy Ghost has marked, Rev. chap. 13. v. 4.

They are farther represented crying, Give Glory to God; because then the Honor
due to God, was transferred to Creatures, which according to St. Paul, is a
withholding or a notgiving Glory to God. For that Apostle being speaking of
the Pagans, he accuses them of not having glorified God, by reason of their
giving that honor to the Creature, which belonged to none save to the Creator,
Romans 1. 21, 23. Moreover, they are here introduced, threatening the men of that
Age with the Judgments of God; The hour, say they, of his judgment is come.
Which Denunciation was fulfilled in the same Century. For the Quarrels between
the Emperor Frederick and the Pope, filled all Christendom with Civil Wars, and
overwhelmed it with Desolation Besides, the Voyage of Louis the seventh into
the Holy Land, proved most unhappy; and then Saladin toward the end of that
Age conquered the Kingdom of Jerusalem, so that all the Christians became
defeated and droven out of Palestine.

They are further introduced, preaching the Gospel to every Nation, and
kindred, and Tongue, and People, that is through all parts of the Papal
Kingdom, which in these Visions is signified by the Kingdom of the Beast. Of
whom it is said, Chap. 13. v 7. that power was given unto him, over all
kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, and that all who dwelt upon the Earth
worshipped him. Which can be meant of nothing else, but of the Roman Papal
Empire.

In the fourteenth Age about the year 1360. John Wicklif assaulted the Pope,
and both called him Archheretick, Antichrist, the Impostore of the Church; and
proved him to be so, by Scripture, History, and his own Actions. He preached
likewise against the Sacrifice of the Mass, against Indulgences, and against
the Worship of Images, Relics, and Saints. The voice of this Angel was so
powerful and efficacious, that Edward the third King of England, ordained in
Parliament, that from thence forward Bishops should not go to Rome for
confirmation, but be confirmed at home by their own Metropolitans. This Wicklif
upon his withdrawing into Bohemia, had John Hus for his Disciple. Which Hus by
the alone power of his Doctrine, drew the Kingdom of Bohemia off from obedience
to Rome. And thence it is, that this Angel is introduced crying, Babylon is
falling, is falling. Because that was a presage of the falling away of Nations
from her, which should ensue in the next Age. John Hus was burnt by the Council
of Constance, contrary to the public Faith, and the safe Conduct, that had
been given him by the Emperor Sigismond. And History reports of him, that he
should say to his Judges, ye are putting a Goose to death (for so Hus in the
Bohemian Language signifies) but a hundred years hence God will raise up a
Swan, whom tho ye would never so fain destroy, ye shall not be able. Which
Prophecy was exactly fulfilled at the time. For as John Hus was burnt anno
1415. so Luther begun the work of the Reformation by writing against
Indulgences, in the year 1515. And tho the Court of Rome did all they could,
both to stop his mouth, and to destroy him, yet they could never effect it.

It was therefore in the 16. Century, that the voice of the third Angel was
heard, saying loudly, If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive
his mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand; the same shall drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of God, etc. This Angel is Luther, who writ with that strength, and
preached with that efficacy, and with such success, against the Errors,
Idolatry, and Tyranny of the Church of Rome, that near one half of the Nations
and People, who reverenced her as their Mother, and feared her as their Queen,
withdrew from her Communion, and looked upon her with detestation, as the
Mother of uncleanness and Abominations.

And as Rome could not behold the success of the voice of the third Angel, but
with despite and rage; so Believers could not escape suffering a great deal
from a power, which saw it self so dangerously weakened by their Separation.
This is what the H. Spirit declares was to be, when he says, Here is the
patience of the Saints; here are they that ke^p the Commaudments of God, and
the Faith of Jesus.

But the Holy Spirit in the message directed thereupon to St. John, does
likeway's animate and fortify them against all those evils that Babylon should
be able to do unto them. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me,
write, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them. There being no where else and express command given unto St. John to
write, except in* the first Chap. v. 19. It serves to show the great importance
of this Doctrine, both in discovering the falsehood of the Romish Doctrine
about the State of Dead; about the Worship given unto them; about Purgatory, to
which they are adjudged, and about the Mass, which is made use of for fetching
them thence; and also for the comfort and encouragement of those who assert the
dignity of the Everlasting Gospel, and who are persecuted by the Beast for
defending of it.

XVIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Harvest and the Vintage. REV. CHAP. 14. v. 14, 15,
etc.
THese two Visions, do without doubt signify the Judgments of God, against his
Enemies and the Persecutors of his Church. Accordingly Jeremiah uses the
similitudes of Vintage and Harvest against Babylon of the Chaldees, Chap. 51.
v. 33. The Daughter of Babylon, says he, is like a threshing floor, it is time
to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her Harvest shall come. Joel
also makes use of them both, Chap. 13. 3. Put in the Sicle, says he, for the
Harvest is ripe: come get you down, for the Press is full, the fats overflow,
for their wickedness is great. There are some who do think, that the Harvest
respects and threatens the Mohammedan Empire; but all are agreed that the
Vintage refers unto, and threatens the Papal Kingdom.

As for me, I think it most probable, that both these Judgments do threaten the
Papal Empire. And that the Harvest signifies an Initial Judgment, or a Decision
as to some one or more particulars; and that this Judgment was executed by
means of the Reformation which begun in the last Age, through the Ministry of
Luther and Zuinglius. But that the Vintage signifies a definitive Judgment,
which shall ruin the Papal Empire beyond recovery, through a general Reformation,
that shall take place in the beginning of the next Age, when the 42. Months and
1260. days will be accomplished.

These two Reformations seem to be promised by that repetition of the voice
from Heaven; Bayblon is fallen, is fallen. However they may be solidly
established upon the History of the ancient People of God, the Jews. The
Children of Israel had a twofold coming out of Babylon of the Chaldees. One in
virtue of the Edict of Cyrus, under Zerubbabel and Iehosuah; a second in the
virtu of the Edict of Artaxerxes and Nehemiah and Ezra. Now that the Antitype
may correspond with the Type, there must be two remarkable Reformations of the
Christian Church, to answer the two deliverances out of the Captivity of old
Babylon. The one was about 160. years ago, and was effected by the Ministry of
Zwinglius and Luther. The other is to be when God comes to execute his decree
against Rome, and to make her drink the Cup of his fury. Upon the first return
of the Israelites out of Captivity, all they did was to erect the Altar and
rebuild the temple: but upon that which was the second, they built the Walls of
Jerusalem, which made the re-establishment of the Church of Israel entire and
perfect. It Is to be much after the same manner in the two Reformations. In the
first, the worship of God was restored: which was like the building of the
Altar, and the rearing up of the Temple. But the walls of Jerusalem are not yet
restored, that is, the Church of God is not settled in peace and safety. Nor
will that be, till the next coming out of Babylon, through a general and second
Reformation.

In a word, the Reformation of the Church, is at present very imperfect. It
has neither the extent, nor that perfection, which it ought to have. Not the
Extent; in that it reaches only toward the west and toward the North. Not
the perfection, because the Reformed are much divided, and there are many Sects
which disfigure the Reformation. But the last Reformation shall be perfect,
both in its Latitude and in its purity. In its extension, in that it shall
reach into the South and into the East, and to all parts. In its purity,
because there shall be no more Sects, no more fondness for parties, no more
Quarrels, no more disputes. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Lion and
the Ox shall feed together, and a little Child shall lead them. They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain of the Lord. For the Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11. 6, 7,
8, 9. Then shall this prophecy of Isaiah be fulfilled, when the Vials of Gods
wrath are fully poured out, and when the Lord shall have executed his last
judgment against Babylon, which is here expressed by the Vintage.

This judg'ment is denounced in Terms that are certainly Hyperbolical. But yet
we have a hyperbole parallel to it, both in the 8 chap. of Isaiah v. 7. and in
the 30. chap. v. 27, 28. The words of St. John are these; and blood came out of
the Wine Press, even unto the horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs. The meaning of which is this, that there has not hitherto
been so terrible a judgment, as God will bring upon Rome, the Seat of the Papal
Empire. And if the Observation of a certain Learned English man be true, that
the Ecclesiastical State which is called Romania, and which extends it self
from Rome to Ancona, and to the Ponds of Verona, be in length two hundred
Italian miles; we need not doubt but that this is the place here intended,
seeing 200 Italian Miles, make just 1600 furlongs.

He who is said here to appear, like unto the Son of Man, sitting upon a white
Clowd, and having on his head a Golden Crown; is Jesus Christ; as is evident by
comparing the 14. v. of this chap. with v. 13. of the 1. Chap. and with v. 2.
of the 19 chapter The Angel that is represented coming out of the Temple, and
saying to him that sat upon the Cloud, thrust in thy sickle; is the Church
calling for vengeance. As in Luke chap. 18. v. 7. where it is said, shall not
God avenge his own Elect, which cry night and day unto him. Now the delaying to
thrust in the sickle, till called upon and commanded; contains an allusion to
the custom of the Jews, who were not to put the Sickle into the corn, till the
High Priest who was in the Temple had given order for it.

Moreover, this is the very same judgment, with that which is described chap.
19. where the Wine Press of Gods wrath is also spoken of. And the same likewise
with that denounced in the Effusion of the Vials; only with this difference,
that what the Vintage expresses in general, the Vials declare in particular.

XIX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Sea of Glass mingled with Fire. REV. CHAP. 15. v. 2.
IT being the Scripture Style of speaking, to compare people to waters, and a
great multitude of people to the Sea; we need not doubt but that it is the
Church of God, that is intended by the Sea here spoken of.

Now the Church of God is styled a Sea, because she is an Assembly of people.
And she is called a Sea of Glass, in opposition to other Societies of the
world, which are tempestuous and muddy: whereas the Society of Belivers is
clean and peaceable, being justified through the blood of Jesus Christ, and
Sanctified by the Spirit of Regeneration.

Fire is mingled with this Sea, because of the afflictions and persecutions,
which the Church has suffered from Babylon.

As for those who had gotten the Victory over the Beast and over his Image, and
over his mark, and over the number of his Name, and who stand upon this Sea of
Glass, with the harps of God in their hands, and who sing the song of Moses,
and of the Lamb. They can be no other than the Confessors, and Martyr's, who
died in the faith of the Lord, victorious over all the persecutions of Babylon.
And who are here compared to the Israelites, that sung a song to the honor of
God, upon their having passed through the red Sea, and seen the entire
destruction of their Enemies. And whereas it is said, of these conquerors over
the Beast, that they stood upon a Sea of Glass; he means no more than their
being upon the shore. For it is certain that this phrase upon the Sea, does
else where signify the being merely upon the Seashore; 1 Kings 4. 20. where the
sand by the Sea shore, is spoken of as being upon the Sea. For these blessed
Martyrs may be said to be of the Militant Church, forasmuch as the Church
Militant and Triumphant are but one and the same Mystical Body. Tho in the mean
time they be not in the Church Militant; but retired and withdrawn. For they
are not any more upon the Sea, but they are gotten upon the Shore.

XX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the opening of the Temple, and of the Smoke wherewith it
was filled. REV. CHAP. 15. v. 5, 10.
THe whole House built upon Mount Moriah is called the Temple; and yet only
that Appartment called the Holy of Holies where the Ark stood, was properly the
Temple, and which is otherway's styled the Tabernacle of Witness.

The opening of the Temple, which is here spoken of, is an allusion to the
Church of the Jews. For under the Reign and Idolatry of Ahaz, the Temple was
shut up; but under Hezeki^ the Reformer, it was again opened. So that this is,
as if St. John should say, I saw the time of the Reformation, when the Idolatry
and Superstition of Rome, were condemned; and the Truth of the Gospel was
publicly preached.

From thence these three things are to be gathered. (1) That the Vials which
are mentioned in this 15 chapter, and poured out in the following, do belong to
this state of the Church, wherein Antichrist is made manifest, and wherein
there shines a measure of light in the Church. (2) That the Vials are all
contained under the seventh Trompet, seeing we have the same fact that is here
mentioned repeated under that, Rev. chap. 11. v. 19. And (3) the Temple is not
here Represented open in order to give a passage to the seven Angels that pour
out the Vials; but to give way for all Nations to enter in, according as it is
said v. 4. that all Nation shall come and worship before God. And this may be
collected from v. 8. where it is said, that no man could enter into the Temple,
till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. Which plainly shows,
that the Temple is therefore opened, that there may be a way made for men to
enter into it, against whom it had been so long shut.

The Smoke that filled the Temple, answers to the Cloud that covered the
Tabernacle of Moses, and to the Divine Glory which so filled the Tent of the
Congregation, that Moses himself was not able to enter into it. Exodus chap. 40.
v. 34. which thing is also reported of the Temple of Solomon, 1 Kings chap. 8.
v. 10; 11* Now as the Cloud was a Symbol' of Gods gracious presence in the
midst of Israel; so the Smoke here spoken of, is a presage of the Lords Return
again into his Temple, which he had for so song time abandoned to the Gentiles,
i. e. to the followers of the Beast, and to the Citizens of Babylon. chap. 11.
v. 2.

It Is added, that this Smoke caused that no man was able to enter into the
Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. Which
intimates, that tho the time of the destruction of the Churches Enemies
draws near, and the time wherein the Gospel shall shine bright in the world;
yet that the Gospel will not be universally received and followed of all
Nations, till after the Subversion of Babylon, which will not be until the
Vials have been poured out.

XXI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the fall of Babylon; and the Time when. REV. CHAP. 18.
THe Destruction of Babylon is described at length in the 18th Chapter. But
whereas Babylon may be taken either for the City of Rome; or for her Empire,
which is the Papacy or Popery: the Destruction described in the 18th chap. does
respect her only in the first sense, to wit as She is the Seat of the Beast.
According as She is intended in the effusion of the fifth Vial, that is, as She
is the Seat of the Papal Kingdom.

For after that the Angel had said, that her plagues shall come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine, and that she shall be utterly burnt with fire,
because strong is the Lord God who judges her; he then adds, that the Kings
of the Earth, who have committed fornication, and lived diliciously with her,
shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her
burning; and that the merchants also shall mourn over her* because none buyeth
her Merchandise any more; and that every Ship-master, and all Sailers in Ships,
shall cast dust on their heads, when they shall see the smoke of her burning.

Now who are these Kings, these Merchants, these Shipmasters and these Sailors,
that do thus mourn and lament, upon the seeing the subversion of Rome, and the
total ruin of her that was both the mother of their Faith, and of all Churches?
The Kings, are partly the Cardinals, who do esteem themselves, equal to
Princes; and partly Kings themselves and Sovereign's that are Secular. The
Masters of Ships, are Archbishops and Bishops. The Sailers, are the inferior
Clergy. The Merchants, are the Friars that sell the dispensations, the
Indulgences, the Relics, the Agnus Dei's, etc. and who do vend those Triffles
as the most precious of all commodities; making people believe, that the peace
of their consciences and the salvation of their Soul's pend upon them. So that
there shall be papists and Roman Catholics subsisting after that Rome is
destroyed, and who shall worship that Idol, tho reduced into ashes.

Thus it is said in the 16th chap. v. 10. that the fifth Angel poured out his
Vial upon the Seat of the Beast, and his Kingdom became full of darkness. The
Seat of the Beast is the City Rome, which is now the Seat of the Papal Kingdom,
as it was heretofore of the Roman Empire. But this Kingdom shall subsist for a
while, after that Rome it self is destroyed. Forasmuch as it is said, that
after the pouring out of the fifth Vial, the Kingdom of the Beast became full
of darkness; i. e. sorrowful, dejected, full of affliction and mourning;
without that pomp and splendour, which it had enjoyed before the effusion of
that Vial.

Yea, St. John tells us in the 19. chap. v. 19. that he saw the Beast, and the
Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together, to make war against him
that sat upon the white Horse, and against his Army: And that the Beast was
taken, and with him, the false Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with
which be deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that
worshipped his Image; and that these two were cast alive into a Lake of fire
burning with brimstone.

So that it shall be after the destruction of the City of Rome, ere the Papal
Hierarchy and the Pope come to be entirely abolished. The Time that is to run
out between the one and the other, is not expressly marked by the H. Spirit; no
more than the Time wherein Rome is to be destroyed. But in all probability this
destruction can not be far off. For of the two signs which are to precede it,
we do already see one of them. One of the signs, is the increase and thickning
of darkness. Nor is it without a Mystery, that Babylon is threatened with
plagues, in the plural number, Rev. 18. 4. It being evident, that the Holy
Ghost does therein allude to the Plagues of Egypt. For it is said of Babylon;
chap. 11. v. 8. that she is Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. Now as she is
styled Sodom, both because she has committed the crime of Sodom, and is to be
destroyed by fire as Sodom was, Rev. 18. 8. So she is called Egypt, both from
her having afflicted the people of God, as Egypt did; and because she is to be
punished as Egypt was. And as the last plague wherewith the Lord smote Egypt
was that of the death of their firstborn, so the last save one was that of
darkness. Of which it is said, Exodus chapter 10. v. 22, 23. that it was so thick,
that they could not see one another.

It Is a long time since the darkness of ignorance and impiety, had overspread
the whole Romish Church. Baronius and a hundred other Popish writers, do
acknowledge the thickness of it in the tenth age, to a measure and degree that
is astonishing. But it was never so gross and palpable as it is at present, nor
is it possible that it should be greater. What ignorance can be more infamous,
or what Impiety can be more enormous, than that which appears in the whole
conduct of the Roman Clergy against the Reformed in France? They compel them to
go to Mass; they compel them to confess; they compel them to Communicate; they
compel them to adore the Host, and to eat what they have worshipped, tho they
know that the Protestants do not adore it. All which is as much as to say, that
Rome will have her God served by hypocrites, and that she does believe such a
service to be acceptable to him. Yea it imports Romes obliging her pretended
Converts, to profane the most august and Sacred thing in their Religion; which
is the height of impiety, and which can proceed from nothing but an ignorance
as gross and palpable as the Egyptian darkness was. For tho the Gentiles have
profaned the Mysteries of the Jews, and tho the Pagans have Profaned the
Mysteries of the Christians; and tho the Mahometans and the Protestants have
Profaned the Mysteries of the Papists; yet nothing of all this is to be
wondered at, seeing every one acts therein according to his principles, and
sutably to that hatred which all men bear to a Religion that they believe to be
false. But for either Christians, or Jews, or Mahometans, or Pagans, and
especially the public Ministers of those Religions to compel their Enemies to
profane the Mysteries of their own Religion, and to expose the object of their
Adoration to the contempt of their Adversaries, is a thing that was never
heretofore done. It Is possible that it might be done by some particular men
that were Libertines, and had no Religion; but that Ministers themselves should
do it, is a fact whereof we have no example in History. But on the contrary, we
find all men to have punished the contempt offered to the Mysteries of their
Religion in the most terrible manner that they could. It Is only the Popish
teachers and the Emissaries, Bishops, Priests, and Friars of Rome, that are
sunk into this excess of impiety, and become guilty of this prodigious
profanation, as to make people through force to worship and eat that, which
they know in their hearts that they do not worship, but despise and abhor. And
as it is only the Roman Clergy that is sunk into this excess of wickedness; so
it is but of late, and this may be said to be the first time, that they have
been given up to so horrid a profanation. They were wont alway's heretofore to
murder those whom they styled Heretics, and they counted it both honorable
and meritorious to kill them. It Is but within these few years that they have
altered the method of their procedure; and that they have cast their pearls
before those whom they themselves esteem for swine, in order to make converts
at the cost of what is most sacred and holy in their Religion. This Impiety
must undoubtedly flow from a Darkness answerable to that of Egypt, which
hinders Rome from discerning and distinguishing between its own Mysteries, and
those of its Enemies. And by consequence the last plague, which is that of the
death of the firstborn, must suddenly follow.

Now the death of the firstborn with respect to Rome, will be the loss which
she will sustain by the falling off of Kings and Princes, who are the
firstborn of the Earth. Rome will then lose Kings, when they come to throw off
her yoke. It Is said Rev. chap. 17. v. 16. that Kings shall hate the whore, and
eat her flesh. The Flesh of Babylon, is the vast riches of Rome, the Treasures
which she sucks out of Kingdoms as a kind of Tribute, the Revenues and
Benefices of her Clergy; which Kings shall seize into their own hands, and grow
weary of being any longer Tributaries to her. All know that the King of France,
is distinguished from all other Monarchs, by the Title of Eldest Son of the
Church; and it is probable that he will not be the last in throwing off the
yoke. And it belongs to the most Christian King, to set such an example, rather
than to follow it.

Having said that Rome shall perish, after the manner of Sodom and Egypt; I do
further add, that she shall also perish after the manner of Babylon; and that
this is one of the reasons why she is called by that name. When she comes to
see herself stripped by Kings, she will endeavor to reduce them to her
obedience, by the thunders of the Vatican, and by Papal Excommunications. But
they upon the being thus treated, shall make war against her, to punish her
insolence. And shall so besiege and shut her up, that she shall come to feel
all the scourages of divine vengeance.

If it shall be objected, that this is contrary to what St. John says of
Kings, namely, that upon the beholding the smoke of her burning, they shall
mourn over her. I answer, that when Rome comes to be besieged, fire from heaven
will fall upon her, as it did upon Sodom: and that the Kings who had besieged
her, will lament and mourn, to find that the immediate hand of God should
ravish them of so fine a prey, and so rich a spoil, as that would have been.

XXII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the binding of Satan for a thousand Years; and of the
Millenary Reign. REV. CHAP. 20.
I Do ingenuously confess, that I have been as much prejudiced against the
modern Millenarians, as against the ancient. Tho there seems to me to be as
great difference between the Ancient and the Modern, as between those who carry
a matter too far, and who observe no bounds; and those who are extremely
moderate and sober, and who use all the discretion and softnings imaginable.
But in truth* after that I had thoroughly examined the vision of St. John, and
the juncture of time where the Holy Spirit places the Reign of a thousand
years, to wit between the destruction of Babylon and all the Enemies of the
Church upon the one side, and the War of Gog and Magog, as a fruit of the
loosing of Satan, after he had been imprisoned for a thousand years, upon the
other side. I must declare, that I find my self conquered, and that I am forced
to believe that the Church of God is to enjoy for some Ages an entire and
uninterrupted peace here on the Earth. I am confirmed in this opinion, by a
vast number of Prophesies, both of the Old and New Testament, which cannot be
expounded without violence offered to them, and are, if I may so speak, so many
inexplicable riddles, unless the Church of God be to enjoy that peace in this
world, of which those promises give us assurance. And finding not the least
danger in embracing that opinion, I have closed with it without any further
hesitation. For what danger can it be, to believe that the Church of God shall
enjoy a thousand years Tranquillity here on the Earth. I do see none, unless it
be that the believing so will give offense to the Orthodox, who are of another
mind, and who affirm that the Cross is to be the Banner and Livery of the
Church of God through all Ages. But these very Gentlemen do acknowledge, that the
Church had rest and peace during the Reign of Constantine. And there are some
who place the thousand years here spoken of, under the Reign of that Emperor.
And do understand by them the Tranquillity that the Church enjoyed from the
conversion of Constantine, till the time that She became disturbed and
persecuted by the Arrians. So that the Orthodox* Antimillenarians do confess,
that the Church had at least a twenty years calmness and serenity. Why then
should they be offended, that others who are Orthodox, make the peace which the
Church is to enjoy, to be of a greater length and duration? And they cannot but
own, that the Cross is not essential to the Church of God. It is an accident,
without which the Church may very well subsist. God can as well sanctify the
Church in prosperity as in adversity, in a calm as well as in a tempest. Job
was righteous and rich in good works, in the time of his affluence, as well as
in the time of his misery. And why may it not be so in reference to the Church
of God? If the world be to last seven, or it may be eight thousand years, what
danger will there be, in allowing the Church of God, one thousand years peace,
for the six or seven thousand that She is be in trouble and sufferings?

But let us without prejudice, hearken unto what God says to us upon this
subject, both by the Ministry of St. John, and that of the ancient Prophets.
Lo, what St. John tells us, Rev 20.

V. 1. I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless
Pit, and a great Chain in his hand.

V. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

V. 3. And cast him into the bottomless Pit, and shut him up, and set a Seal
upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.

V. 4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them: and I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the Testimony of
Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his Image, neither had received his mark upon their Foreheads, or in their
right hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

V. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first Resurrection.

V. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such
the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

V. 7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison.

V. 8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four Quarters
of the Earth, Gog and Magog, etc.

The Church of Jesus Christ has a right to say as Job did, I know that my
Redeemer Lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth,
Chap. 19. v. 25. And that not only to raise and gather together my Bones, which
are scattered about the Graves mouth, when he comes from Heaven with his
Glorious Angels, to judge the quick and the Dead, at the general Resurrection:
but also to deliver me from the misery wherein I have been in this world, and
to cause me to enjoy an entire peace after the destruction of all my Enemies*
For Job was as well a Type of the Church of Christ, as of Jesus Christ himself,
who is her adorable Head. This is that peace of the Church, which St. John does
here represent, after that he had described her sufferings. For he saw her
Rising after the ruin of Babylon, and enjoying the gracious presence of her
Redeemer, after the imprisonment of Satan, and the conversion of the
unbelieving and Idolatrous Nations.

If we will give credit to some Divines, this is the most obscure passage in
the Revelation; but this obscurity does arise from themselves, and from three
prejudices wherewith they are possessed. (1.) That the world is not to last any
long time, because St. Peter says, that the end of all things is at hand, 1
Epist. chap. 4. v. 7. (2.) Thar the opinion of the Millenarians, who conceived
that Jesus Christ should come from Heaven down here upon the Earth, to converse
visibly with his people, and to cause them enjoy all sorts of pleasures for a
thousand years, has been condemned as a carnal opinion tending to sensuality.
(3.) That the Cross is to be the Livery of Christ's Disciples through all Ages;
because Jesus Christ has said, if any man will come after me, let him take up
his Cross, Matthew. 16. 24. and because the Apostles have declared, that through
many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22.

But we deceive our selves, if we do believe the World to be fo near its end;
seeing before that the Jews are to be converted; the Kingdoms of the world are
to be brought in to Jesus Christ; Babylon is to be destroyed; and who knows
how long time there is to be, between the destruction of Babylon, and the ruin
of her King, and of her Religion; without reckoning what time there may be to
run out from the end of the thousand years Reign to the end of the War of Gog
and Magog; and from thence to the consummation of all Ages.

They have reason to disclaim the opinion of the ancient Millenarians, as
carnal and absurd: But there is no cause of counting it a carnal opinion, to
believe that the Church shall enjoy Tranquillity and Peace for a thousand
years, during which time she shall have no visible Enemies, by whom to be
oppressed, Antichrist being totally destroyed, and all the Nations of the world
enlightened with the knowledge of the Truth. In a word, to believe as is the
common opinion now, that the thousand years Reign shall be spiritual, and that
it will consist in this, that the number of true Christians shall be greater
than ever it has been, their knowledge more large, their Assemblies more holy,
their Love more strong, their Zeal more ardent, and that there shall be a most
perfect peace both inward and outward.

Neither has Jesus Christ, nor have his Apostles said, that the Cross and
Tribulations shall be the Livery of Christians, and the path to Paradise, to
the end of the world; nor have they any where declared, that the Church is
never to enjoy any long peace here on the Earth. For both St. John and the
Prophets, give us ground to hope for such a calm and Tranquillity.

As for St. John, it was not possible for him, to speak of it in a more express
manner, than he has here done. For after he had foretold the destruction of
Babylon, of the Beast, and of the false Prophet, whose rage had wearied the
Church with so many persecutions, and for so many Ages; he does now represent
Satan's being cast into prison, that he might not deceive the Nations for the
space of a thousand years. How can the Church be persecuted, during this whole
time, wherein Satan shall be bound, and the Nations no more deceived, the
Papacy being either wholly abolished, or so weakened, that it cannot lift up its
head. This peace of the Church is then a natural and an infallible* consequence
of Satan's being cast into Prison.

St. John further added: I saws, says he, the Souls of them that were beheaded
for the witness of Jesus, and which had not worshipped the Beast, and they
reigned with Christ a thousand years: this is the first Resurrection. This
Reign can be nothing, but a State of Tranquillity, and of a profound Peace of
the Church; because it is set in opposition to her state of Bondage, Trouble,
and Oppression, during the cruel and bloody Reign of Antichrist.

As to this first Resurrection; it cannot be meant of that from the Grave of
Sin, which is the Souls Conversion and Sanctification. For St. John designs it
by the Relative This, because of its reference to what he had said. Now he had
not spoken one word of the Resurrection from Sin; but had discoursed only of
living and Reigning with Christ a thousand years; and of Thrones that were
given whereon to judge, i. e. to reign; which expresses a flourishing condition
of the Christian Church, and that she is to have sway and Authority over all
the world for a thousand years. But it can no way's agree to that Resurrection,
which consists in Sanctification.

Is it then to be thus, that the Martyrs are to be raised, and to live on the
Earth a thousand years with Jesus Christ? It is certain, that this opinion
contains nothing that interferes either with Reason, or with Faith. For this
being the only place of the Bible, wherein this particular Resurrection of the
Martyrs is spoken of, and that in all other places the general Resurrection is
mentioned; it is most safe, and most agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, as well
as most conformable to the Style of the Prophets, to understand by this
Resurrection, the deliverance of the Church from all her Enemies, and her State
of peace and Tranquillity. For Afflictions being called a Death, Ezekiel. 37. 2,
3. Isaiah 26. 14, 19. and 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. by consequence Deliverance from
Afflictions, may be called both a Resurrection, and a first Resurrection, not
only because it goes before the general, but because it is a pledge and a
forerunner of it. They whom Babylon had condemned to death as Heretics, were
esteemed by her Followers to be damned, and to undergo the second Death. But
when the Church shall come to be delivered from her Enemies, her Martyrs shall
then be fully justified. And when she comes to Reign a thousand years, her
Martyrs shall then be acknowledged to be happy, and to be Reigning with Christ.
Thus it is clear, that they shall be blessed who have part in this first
Resurrection. And herein the Martyrs will have a part, because their Honor
shall be established, and their Memory universally blessed.

But it may be said, that this seems to import, that all who shall live in the
Communion of the Christian Church during the time of the 1000. years Reign,
shall be saved, and that all they who have part in this first Resurrection,
shall be delivered from the power of the second Death?

If one should believe so, it would be no Heresy, nor can the will of God
concerning this be known by any, nor how far he will extend the effusion of his
Grace. It may be that he will then pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and that
all Christians then shall be really and in truth, a willing People, in the
beauties of Holiness, a Holy Nation, and a Royal Priesthood. And it would seem
as if St. John favored this opinion, in that he says not merely, blessed is
he, but Blessed and Holy is he who has part in the first Resurrection. At the
least, we may truly say, that whereas hitherto Worldlings and Hypocrites have
exceeded the number of sincere Christians; the thousand years Reign will show
us the contrary, and that more than a third part of the seed of the word shall
then fall into good and honest Hearts, and shall bring forth eighty and a
hundred for one. Nor is there any thing carnal in this Millenarian opinion; but
all does become the magnificency of the Prophecies, and all is suitable to the
wisdom of God, and to the infinite riches of his Grace.

Nor is it St. John alone, who has promised this Reign of a thousand years;
but Daniel and Isaiah have also promised it, though less clearly than this
Apostle, as there was reason.

Daniel says in his second Chap. v. 35, 44, 45. that the Image which appeared
to the King of Babylon in his Dream, was broken in pieces by a little stone cut
out of a Mountain, and that this little Stone cut out without a hand, became a
great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth. This little Stone is the Christian
Church, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which is to outlive the destruction and
ruin of the Papal Roman Empire, represented by the Feet of the Image; and that
after the subversion of all Empires, which are contrary to this of the Son of
God, it is to spread it self throw all Nations. This is not yet fulfilled; but
it must be before the last day. So that it is the same that St. John means by
the first Resurrection, and by Reigning with Jesus Christ a thousand years.

The same Daniel says in the seventh Chap. v. 27. that after the destruction of
the Roman Empire, represented by the fourth Beast, that the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, were given
unto the people of the Saints of the most High, and that all Dominions shall
serve and obey him. This cannot be after the general Resurrection, because then
there will be no Dominions; nor has it hitherto been accomplished; so that it
must refer to the 1000 years, whereof St. John does here speak.

But what can we desire more plain, than that Prophecy of Isaiah chap. 65. v.
17. etc. where God speaks in these Terms. Behold I create new Heavens and a
new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be
you glad and rejoice forever in that which I create. For behold I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing; and her people a joy. And the voice of weeping shall be
no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an
Infant of day's, nor an old man that has not fulfilled his day's; for the
Child shall die a hundred year old. And they shall build houses, and inhabit
them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not
labor in vain, nor bring forth Children for trouble. For they are the seed of
the blessed of the Lord, and their offsprings with them. And it shall come to
pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I
will hear.

There are many things in this passage of Isaiah, that there can be no room for
in the life to come, yea not in an allegorical sense. Nor have they been
fulfilled from the time of the Prophet till our day's; so that they are to be
accomplished after the first Resurrection; i. e. after the deliverance of the
Church from all her Enemies, and during the thousand years in which she shall
enjoy a perfect peace. We can give no sense to these words, whereby to adjust
them to the state of the glorified. There will not be from thence an Infant of
day's, nor an old man that has not accomplished his day's. Shall it be in
Heaven, that these words are to be fulfilled, the Child shall die an hundred
years old? Or are the following words to receive their completion in the state
of Glory; They shall build houses, and inhabit them; they shall plant vine
yards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble: for they are the blessed of the Lord, and their off spring
with them. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer. If
we take these words in a literal sense, as they may without any difficulty; it
is then certain, that they are not hitherto accomplished, nor has any thing
like unto this been ever seen on the earth. Nor can we affix unto them such a
Mystical sense, whereby to show that they have been fulfilled in a state of
grace from the establishment of the Gospel till this time, and much less can
such a sense be proved in reference to a state of Glory.

Nor can we avoid the fastening the like Exposition upon that other Prophecy of
Isaiah, chap. 11. v. 1, etc. And there shall come forth a rod out of the Stem
of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. And the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him. In righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove the
meek with equity. He shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with
the breath of his lips shall be stay the wicked. The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, the Cow and the Bear shall feed
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox, and a little Child shall
lead them. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Seas.
I dare maintain against the warmest Antimillenarians, that this Prophecy is
not yet fulfilled, and that it shall be accomplished on the Earth, after the
destruction of Antichrist. The fourth verse does plainly guide to this sense;
he shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked. And it evident, that St. Paul had these words of
Isaiah in his thoughts when he wrote the 2d. chap of the 2d. Ep. to the
Thessalonians. For after that he had described Antichrist by his principal
Characters, he adds, v. 8. the Lord shall destroy this wicked one by the breath
of his mouth, and shall destroy him by the brightness of his coming. Of what
coming of the Lord does St. Paul speak? It cannot be of the last. It must be a
coming, that may accord what is said by the Apostle, with what is predicted by
Isaiah. And whenever the Jews come to be brought home, and all Nations
converted; it will then appear so clearly, that Jesus Christ is come into the
world, that if he should descend from heaven unto the Earth, we could not be
more convinced. This coming of the Lord will be magnificent and glorious,
forasmuch as it will make the Church from that time forward to appear as an
Army glorious in holiness, and victorious over all her Enemies.

There are three things promised in this Oracle. The first is, a perfect union
of the Jews with all Nations. This is promised under the Emblem of wild
beasts, dwelling and feeding peaceably with the Lamb and with the Ox. When was
it, that this was seen? In the times of the Apostles, when the Jews and
Gentiles were converted by. St. Peter and his fellow Apostles? I do affirm,
that there was nothing then seen, save a small pattern of the accomplishment of
this prophecy. Nor was that the time of the conversion of the Jews, but rather
of their rejection. And the peace which appeared then in the Church made up of
Jews and Gentiles, was of too short a continuance, to express all the Force and
the whole extent of this Union, and of this harmony of agreement, which the
Prophecy before us of Isaiah, gives ground to hope for.

The 2d is, an abundance and large diffusion of the knowledge of the true God.
This is expressly promised in these words; the whole Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. From the time of the
Apostles till our day's, there has been nothing seen, that may answer the
greatness of this promise. The darkness of Paganism prevailed in the Roman
Empire, till Constantine. That of Arianism-followed soon after that of
Heathenism. And that of Antichristianism has reigned for above these twelve
hundred years, and is not yet dissipated. Not to speak of the darkness of
Mahometanism, which has spread it self very far. But what? Is this plentiful
effusion of the Knowledge of God, designed only for the Roman Empire? Is not all
the Earth the Lords? Are not all Nations to have their share in it? This great
Event will come to be seen, during the time of the Millennian Reign.

The third is a great Innocence and a great Harmlesness. This is promised in
these words, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain; And a
little Child shall lead both Jews and Gentiles, expressed here by the Wolf and
the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Cow and the Bear, the Lion and the Ox.
When was there ever that Innocence and Harmlesness seen among people, that
there needed only an Infant to conduct them? Nor can one without being
strangely prepossessed, confine it to the time of the Apostles; seeing it is
but to take a view of those times, and we shall find them filled with Traitors,
Apostates, and profligate persons, as all Ages have been since. So that the
fulfilling of this Prophecy is to be expected under the thousand years Reign.
When Christians shall be universally regenerated, delivered from those passions
that cause divisions, and redeemed from the vices that disturb Societies. Not
because there will not be then any wicked person, nor by reason that there will
not be any vice; for that is not to be hoped for but in a State of Glory; but
because good men and the fear of God, shall have the same advantage during that
happy Reign, that vice and wicked men have had hitherto, over Religion, and
over those that have been virtuous. The more I think upon these words, a little
Insant shall lead them, I grow the more into a persuasion, that there shall
then be no Tyrants, to govern people with a Scepter of Iron, by the false and
villainous Maxim's, either of a Heathenish Policy, as that of Tiberius; or of a
Divelish, as that of the Pope; but by the lively and pure Measures of the Word
of God. For God will then abundantly pour out his Spirit upon Young, and upon
Old; upon Children, and upon Fathers; upon Masters, and upon Servants,
according to the Prophecy of Joel, chap. 2. v. 28, 29. And all the people of
the Messiah shall be then a willing people, according to the promise of the
Prophet David, Psalm. 110. v. 3. Finally, it is not more evident, that the
calling of the Gentiles is promised by the Prophets, than it is certain that
the same Prophets have promised to the Christian Church, a plentiful Knowledge,
a great Holiness, a profound Peace, and a long prosperity. These two Articles
go generally together in the ancient Prophesies. And both the one and the other
of them, is in the New Testament called a Mystery and a Secret. That of the
Conversion of the Gentiles is usually so styled in the writings of Saint Paul:
and that of the pure and quiet State of the Christian Church, is called so by
St. John, Rev. chap. 10. v. 7. where it is promised, that in the days of the
voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God
shall be finished, as he had declared so his Servants the Prophets. What
Mystery? The Antimillenarians understand that whereof St. Paul speaks 1 Cor.
15. 51. behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changad. But this Notion is only an effect of their prejudice, forasmuch as
St. John does so characterise the Mystery which he speaks of, that it can no
way's be the same with that whereof St. Paul speaks. For whereas St. John
says, that it is a Mystery, which God had declared unto his Servants the
Prophets; there was not one of the Prophets that has a word of the Change that
shall be made in the Bodies of the living at the last day. But all the Prophets
have promised, that the Christian Church shall come to be rich in knowledge and
holiness, and to enjoy a grand peace on the Earth.

Seeing therefore that these two Articles have usually accompanied one another
in the ancient Prophesies; and that they are called Mysteries by the holy
Apostles; we are not to marvel that one and the same accident has befallen
them both. And that seeing the Vocation of the Gentiles being a Mystery, was a
thing which the Apostles themselves could not comprehend, even after the
descent of the Holy Ghost; that therefore the State of Purity, Peace, and
Prosperity, which is promised to the Christian Church, should be a matter now
so incomprehensible to the most enlightened and learned Divines. And as there
were extraordinary Revelations vouchsav'd to the Apostles, to bring them to
like and approve the Mystery of the calling of the Gentiles; so it is to be
hoped that God will make use of some extraordinary revolution, to cause his
servants that are most prepossessed with prejudice, to relish the Mystery of
the Churches Temporal felicity. And this Revolution will doubtless be the
downfall of Babylon, the destruction of Mahumetanism, and the conversion of the
Jews; which as they make a part of this Mystery, so they are a forerunner of,
and an entrance into, this Reign of the thousand years.

It is much at one, whether we are to take these thousand years indefinitely,
for a very long time, without determining how long; tho it be a received Maxim,
that Times of a broken number are to be taken indefinitely, and those of an
Entire number are to be taken definitely. The thousand years is an entire
Number, and that of a thousand two hundred and sixty day's is a broken number;
so that whereas this last seems to be indefinite, the former would seem to be
definite. But whether we take the thousand years, as signifying more, or as
signifying less; both the one, and the other, may be concluded from the quality
of the number. But I had rather choose to say, that the 1000 years do plainly
signify a great deal more time, than a man according to the ordinary course of
Nature, can live, and more than the Patriarchs lived before the Law, yea more
than Methuselah, who tho he lived longest of any that were before the Flood,
yet he reached not to a thousand years.

XXIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Marriage of the Lamb. REV. CHAP. XIX. v. 7, etc.
AS there are three Resurrections spoken of in the Scripture (1) That wrought
by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 14. (2) That which is to be at the end of the world; and
(3) that which shall be the recalling of the Jews, Romans 11. 15. So there are
three Marriages of the Church to Jesus Christ. The first caused by the Gospel,
1 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a
chaste virgin to Christ. The third, which is to be solemnised at the End of the
world. The second, which shall be celebrated, when the Jews come to be reunited
with the Gentiles, and when Jesus Christ shall Reign after an eminent manner
upon the Earth for a thousand years.

It Is this second Marriage which is spoken of here in the 19. chap. Which
Chapter may be called an Epithalamium or a Wedding Song, because St. John
says, that he heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunders, saying, Alleluja;
for the Lord God omnipotent Reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her
self ready; and to her was granted that they should be arrayed in fine linen,
which is the Righteousness of the Saints.

The Spouse of this Marriage, is the Christian Church, being filled up with the
fullness of Jews and Gentiles. The Jews refused to come to the Marriage of the
Son of God, Matthew. 22. 2. etc. but they are here represented coming with joy.
And that is doubtless the reason, why the Term Allelujah is four times used in
this chapter, as a Term familiar unto the Jews, and ordinarily used by them in
their Synagogues.

This Marriage is styled a Supper: blessed are they who are called unto the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb, v. 9. Because it is to be celebrated, in the
evening of the worlds duration. The Marriage to which the Jews were first
invited by their Lord, is called a Dinner, Matthew. chap. 22. v. 4. but here at
this second Marriage; they are called to a Supper, as being the last Invitation.

The Jews rejected the first Invitation, because Christ left the Roman Empire
in the state he found it; whereas the Jews had strongly hoped that the Messiah
would have delivered them from its domination. And now the same Roman Empire
become Papal, does as much and more keep them off from Christianity, because
they cannot imagine that Idolaters can be the people of the Messiah; and they
have reason for it. But when the Papal Empire, shall come to be destroyed, as
it assuredly shall upon the Effusion of the Vials, and when the Beast and the
False Prophet shall be cast into the bottomless pit; in a word, when the Papacy
shall be abolished with all its Idols; then the Jews will be no longer deaf to
Gods call, but will come to the Supper of the Marriage of the Lamb, shall unite
with Christians to worship together the God of Abraham, and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The Church of Rome boasts herself to be the Church of God, but her vanity
therein does appear after such a manner, that she might blush, if she were
capable; being so vastly different from the Church which Jesus Christ
acknowledges for his Spouse, and which is called here the Spouse of the Lamb.
There is as great a difference between the Church of Rome and the Church of
Jesus Christ, as there is between Babylon and Jerusalem, between a Harlot and
the Spouse of the Lamb. She discovers herself by her gaud'ries and costly
habit's, which serve for nothing but to gratify the sight and please the
senses. The Church of Christ manifests her self by another kind of Dress,
which is nothing but Righteousness and holiness. For to her was granted, that
she should be arrayed, not in purpl' and scarlet, as Babylon, but in fine
linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints.

XXIV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the holy Jerusalem. REV. CHAP. 21. v. 10.
ALL Interpreters do agree that this Jerusalem, described Chap. 21, is the
Church of God; but they differ in this, that some do believe it to be the
Church of God glorified in Heaven, whereas others do take it to be the Church
Militant on Earth, but victorious over all her Enemies, and enjoying an
universal peace during the 1000 years, which have been spoken of.

This last opinion is the truest. (1) Because the Angel enters upon this
description of the Church of God, as he had entered upon the description of
Babylon, chap. 17. It Is there said v. 1. One of the seven Angels, which had the
seven Vials, talked with me saying; I will show thee the whore and her
judgment. The same is said here, One of the seven Angels, which had the seven
Vials, talked with me, saying, come hither, and I will show thee the Bride, the
Lambs Wife. After the same manner that the glory of Babylon is represented
there, is the glory of the Church of God described here; but such as she shall
have afier the destruction of her Enemy. It Is in the prospect and hope of this,
that the Church does rejoice, Mica 7, 8. etc. Rejoice not against me, O mine
Enemy; tho I be fallen, I shall arise; tho I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be
a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause; then she that is my Enemy, shall be
covered with shame, and mine eyes shall behold her trodden down as the mire of
the streets.

(2) The Church of God is here called the great City, a Title which had been
given to Babylon, in the 16, 17, and 18, Chapters. Because the whole Earth went
after Babylon, while the Church of God did hardly appear, being brought into a
narrow compass, and to a small number: but now Babylon has abandoned the
field, and appears no more; and now the Jews are brought again in, and the
fullness of the Gentiles is entered into the Tents of Jerusalem, which being
forced to stretch out her curtains by reason of the conversion of all nations,
is therefore called that great City. This is exactly the little Stone in the
Prophecy of Daniel, which was to become a great Mountain. And this Prophecy is
to be fulfilled on the Earth before the day of judgment.

(3) It Is said in the 24th verse, that the Nations of them which are saved,
shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory
and their honor into it. Which can no way's be applied to the Church triumphant
in heaven; but agrees unto her as she is victorious on the Earth over the fury
of the Beast, and as she is in the enjoyment of her Millennian tranquillity. It
will be then, that the Prophecy of Isaiah will be fulfilled, chap. 49. v. 22,
23. Behold I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to
the people; And they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy Daughters
shall be carried upon their shoulders. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and their Queens thy nursing Mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their
face toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.

Moreover, the Church of God, as she shall be glorified in heaven, having been
described in the beginning of the Chapter, as well as the frightful state of
the damned is in the 8th verse, it is evident that in the 9. verse and forward,
the Angel describes a glory of the Church different from that of heaven, which
can be no other save that of the Reign of the 1000 years.

Nor is there any doubt, but that this Jerusalem which St. John describes, is
the very same with that whereof the Prophet Ezekiel has given a description
together with that of the Temple, and that there are very many things in that
description, which cannot be perfectly understood, till after the conversion of
the Jews.

A NEW SYSTEME OF THE APOCALYPSE, OR An Explanation of all the Visions Of the
REVELATION of St. JOHN.
The SECOND Part.
I. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Throne, the 24. Elders, the Sea of Glass, and the 4
living Creatures. REV. CHAP. 4.
THe most difficult part would be yet to do, if the ten last Chapters of the
Revelation, were not, as I have supposed, an explanation of the Visions
contained in the eleven first. So that we must have recourse to the
Explications given in the first part of this work, if we would clearly see into
the meaning of the Visions, that remain to be explained in the second.

v. 2. Behold I saw a Throne set in heaven, and one sat on the Throne.

v. 3. And he that sat, was to look upon, like a Jasper, and a Sardine stone,
and there was a Rainbow about the throne.

This is a lofty description of the Majesty of God. And his not being named, is
an advancement of his Glory. For God said to Manoah, Judge chap. 13. v. 18. why
ask thou after my name, seeing it is secret, or wonderful. The Jasper Stone,
represents the unchangeablness and eternity of his Essence. The fiery Sardine,
represents his inaccessible Majesty. And the Rainbow in heaven, signifies the
unalterableness of his Covenant.

v. 4. And round about the Throne were 24 Seats, and upon the Seats I saw 24
Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and they had on their heads Crowns
of gold.

These are the Pastors and Guides of the Church militant, under the name of the
twelve Patriarchs of the Church of Israel, and of the twelve Apostles of the
Christian Church; because it was in favor of the Church Militant that God
revealed his Glory and Majesty to St. John. The Title of Elder is a Title of
dignity, whereof also the whiteness of their Garments, and their Crowns of
Gold, are marks and indications. And this gives us ground to hope, that they
who are Israelites after the Spirit, and who through a true faith follow the
doctrine of the Apostles, shall one day come to be advanced to a glory like
unto this.

v. 5. And out of the throne proceeded lightnings, and thundrings, and voices,
and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the
seven spirits of God.

This is a terrible threatening against the Enemies of Gods Church. The Seven
Spirits are the Spirit himself, expressed by the number seven, which is a
Mystical number, and which represents the variety, the unexpressible number and
the perfection of his Graces.

v. 6. And before the throne there was a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal.

In the Scripture Waters signify people. And the Sea is a heap of waters. So
that this is the Church composed of multitudes of people. But to distinguish
her from other Societies of the world that are Muddy and filthy, she is
compared to Crystal, which is as well pure, as it is Solid and transparent. She
is said to be before the throne, because She is ever under the eye and care of
her Creator, who carries her, as the Scripture elsewhere speaks, engraven
upon the palms of his hands, Isa. 49. 16.

And round about the throne, were four living Creatures, full of eyes before
and behind.

v. 7. And the first living creature was like a Lion, and the 2d like a Calf,
and the 3d had the face of a wan, and the 4th was like a flying Eagle.

v. 8. And the four living Creatures had each of them six wings, and they were
full of eyes within, and they rest not day nor night, saying, holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

These four living Creatures, are beyond all exception the same with those in
the Vision of the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 1. For that Prophet styles them in his
10 chap. v. 5. Cherubims, which signify Angels. These are then four chief
Angels, as they are called in the 10 chap. of Daniel, v. 13. and they are
elsewhere called Archangels, as having Angels under them. And thence it is
said, Rev. 15. 7. that one of the four living Creatures, gave unto the seven
Angels, seven Vials full of the wrath of God who lives for ever and ever.
Which cannot agree but to Archangels. These Archangels are represented by the
number four, either with respect to the four parts of the world, according to
which the four gates of the new Jerusalem are disposed, which was represented
by the Mystical Temple of Ezekiel: or else with respect to the four Empires,
under which the Church of God has been in subjection and afflicted.

In Ezekiel these living Creatures are represented each of them having the four
resemblances of a Lion, of an Ox, of a Man, and of an Eagle; but here each is
represented as having but one; because St. John saw them in a posture of
standing, whereas Ezekiel saw them in a posture of motion, together with their
wheels.

The Lion is an Emblem of invincible courage. The Ox is a Symbol of strenth
and patience. The Man of meekness. And the Eagle of promptitude and swiftness.
All which serve to declare the qualities of these Angels in their Execution of
divine Orders. As their being full of eyes expresses the knowledge and wisdom
wherewith they execute them.

V. 9. And when these four living Creatures give glory, and honor, and thanks
to him that sat on the throne, who lives for ever and ever.

V. 10. The four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne, saying;

V. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

Here we have the exact form of true Religion, and of lawful worship. The
Mystical living Creatures do adore none but God; the 24 Elders do worship none
besides the Lord; it is before him that they do alone bow; and it is only at
his feet that they cast down their Crowns. It Is to him alone that they ascribe
honor and glory, and they themselves assign the reason of it. For, say they,
thou have created all things. Whence is it that the Holy Virgin is not here
named, if She be also the object of Religion and of worship? And why ought we
not to be content with that form of Adoration, which the Angels of Heaven
practice; especially seeing we every day say, thy will be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven?

Moreover, the Scope of this Vision, is to assure Christians, that God will be
alway's in the midst of his Church, whatsoever Eclipse does befall her, whether
by Heresies or by persecutions: And that there shall alway's be Belivers in the
Earth, who shall worship the one only true God, in Spirit and truth, even as
the Angels and the blessed do adore him in Heaven.

II. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Sealed Book, which no Creature could open, save the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. REV. CHAP. 5.
v. 1. And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne, a Book
written within and without, sealed with seven seals. v. 2. And I saw a strong
Angel proclaiming with a loud voice, who is worthy to open the Book, and to
loose the Seals thereof. v. 3. And no man in Heaven, nor in Earth, neither
under the Earth, was able to open the Book* neither to look thereon.
THis Book can be nothing else but the Apocalypse, which contains every thing
remarkable, that was to befall either the Roman Empire, or the Church of God.
It is written within and without, for the same reason because within it
contains the destiny of the Church, and without the fate of the Roman Empire.
The form of this Book consists in seven leaves rolled after such a fashion,
that the second was shut up within the first, and so of the rest. The Seals
denote the importance, the Authority, the stability, and the obscurity of the
Visions

This darkness is such, that no Creature how honorable soever, could either
open the Book or look into it. That is to say, who could so much as imagine the
Events which it contains.

v. 5. And one of the Elders says unto me, weep not, behold the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; the root of David, has prevailed to open the Book, and to
loose the Seals thereof.

But what no creature could do, Jesus Christ has done. So St. John tells us at
the very entrance, in that he begun by these terms chap. 1. v. 1. The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him to show unto his servants
things which must shortly come to pass. Jesus Christ is here called a Lion
because of his Resurrection, as he is a little afterward called a Lamb by
reason of the sacrifice of his death. And a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, because
he sprung from that Tribe according to the flesh. The Root of David, because
tho he be tru'ly David's son according to his humane Nature, he is nevertheless
David's Father as well as his Lord, according to his Divinity.

III. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Lamb with seven Horns, and Seven Eyes; and of his
being worshipped. REV. CHAP. 5. v. 6, etc.
V. 6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the Throne, and of the four living
Creatures, and in the midst of the Elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain,
having seven Horns, and seven Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent
forth into all the earth.
THis Lamb is Jesus Christ, who tho risen, is here represented as dead before
the Throne, to give us to understand, that the merit of his death, is alway's
present before God, and that his sacrifice is of an eternal vertu'.

Horns, according to the prophetic style, signify glory and power, Psa. 75.
10. The Lamb is represented having Seven, which is a Mystic number, to signify
that nothing can be added to his glory, and that his power has no limits. The
seven Eyes and seven Spirits, are of the same importance. And do denote an
omniscient knowledge, and an immense wisdom, by which he is every where present,
and conducteth all events, as the sovereign Arbiter and Disposer.

V. 8. And when he had taken the Book, the four living Creatures, and four and
twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harps, and
golden Vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints.

V. 9. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and
to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation.

V. 10. And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc.

Here is the same worship given to Jesus Christ, by the four living Creatures,
and by the four and twenty Elders, that in the preceding Chapter had been
rendered to Him who created all things for his pleasure; which shows Christ's
being acknowledged for the true God by the four living Creatures and by the 24.
Elders.

The Harps which they have in their hands, are for the singing the praises of
God; and the Vials full of odours, are for the invocating of him, which are the
two Acts of Adoration.

These Odours are called the prayers of the Saints, because the Incense offered
by the Priests of old, were a Symbol of prayers, as appears in the 141. Ps.
v. 2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as Incense.

Some may possibly infer from hence, that the Saints who are in Heaven, do pray
for those on Earth, and that they do present unto God the prayers of such as
are here in the world.

But this is to suppose, that the four and twenty Elders are in Heaven, and
that the Saints spoken of in this passage, are to be understood of Souls
received into Paradise, or, as men are used to speak in the world, of the
Saints that are in Heaven: which is a supposition without any ground or
foundation. For those believers that are in Heaven, are not in any part of the
Bible called Saints, but only styled Blessed. Nor is it said here, that these
24. Elders are Blessed. The Vision is so far from saying this, that it
declares the contrary; because the very same persons having Vials full of
Odours, do say, v. 10. Thou have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we
shall reign on Earth. Which shows that they who offer up the prayers of the
Saints that are on the Earth, are themselves likewise upon the Earth, and where
they hope to Reign. So that the four and twenty Elders, do represent the
Pastors and Guides of the Militant Church, who are said to offer up Odours, by
reason of their praying publicly for all the Congregations of Believers. And
these Pastors are represented under the number of 24. by an allusion to the
twelve Patriarchs of the Old Testament, and the twelve Apostles of the New, as
they were in the Vision of the foregoing Chap.

These 24. Elders, and the 4. living Creatures sing a new Song, saying, Thou
art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou have
redeemed us, etc. Which words seem to give light to that saying of Jesus Christ
in the 13. Chap. of Mark v. 32. But of that day and hour of Judgment knows no
man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son of man, but the
Father. Then the Son as man knew it not, because he had not offered the
Sacrifice of his death, for the satisfying Divine Justice; but now he knows
both the day and the hour, and every thing that shall befall either the Church
or the World, because he has been sacrificed. Which is the reason of the four
and twenty Elders saying unto him, Thou art worthy to open the Book, and to
loose the Seals thereof; for thou have redeemed us.

It ought here to be carefully observed, that this New Song contains the
whole Mystery of Gospel worship. For here we have the death of Christ, which is
the foundation of all; we have them whom his death has redeemed; we have the
fruits which believers receive by his Death, namely, the dignity of being Kings
and Priests; and we have the Glory which accrueth to Jesus Christ himself. For
he is thought worthy to know all the Secrets of providence, and to receive the
Adoration of all Creatures, low, middle, and high. Which Adoration is here set
before us in a form that is most perfect, and which alone is that where with
God is pleased, that which all the Angels with the four and twenty Elders
publish aloud, that worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. This is
moreover what every Creature in Heaven, and on Earth, and under the earth, and
such as are in the Sea, say likewise in their turn: Blessing, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. And the four living Creatures said, Amen, and the twenty
four Elders fell down, and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever.

It is repeated again, because it can never be said enough. All worship that is
not conformable to this pattern, is unlawful and displeases God. Nor can we
give the least worship to a Creature, whatsoever degree of glory it has
arrived at, without a departing from this divine model and falling into
Idolatry. Here we have a Sentence that condemns the worship of the Roman
Church, in their addressing their Hymn's and their Prayers to Angels and to
Saints.

IV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Opening of the first six Seals. REV. CHAP. 6.
AS to the Six Seals, of the opening whereof the sixth Chapter treats, the
four first differ from the two other in two things. One is, that at the opening
of the four first there appear four Horsemen, and four living Creatures. The
other is, that at the opening of these, St. John is called upon, to consider
the things which are there declared to be hereafter to come.

There is doubtless some reason for this difference, and this reason is in all
probability nothing but this, namely, that every one of these four Seals,
contains things which respect the whole course of the prophetic History,
both of the Roman Empire and of the Church; which the two following do not.

This reason appears to be true, in that in the first Vision of Zechariah,
chap. 1. v 8. it is said, that the men which the Prophet saw riding upon red,
bay, and white Horses, were those, whom the Lord sent to and fro through the
Earth. And in that the four living Creatures signify (as we have proved) the
four Archangels set over the four parts of the world, which marketh
Universality. And by consequence that the four first Seals, at the opening
whereof they do appear, contain the things that respect the whole series of the
History of the Roman Empire and of the Church. Which observation, if we duly
attend unto, we shall the more clearly understand the opening of these Seals.

V. 1. And when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, i. e. the first; I heard one
of the four living Creatures, (that is, the first) saying, as if it had been
the voice of Thunder, Come and see.

V. 2. And I saw, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat on him had a Bow,
and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

This first living Creature is the Lion, whose Roaring is the most terrible
voice of all the noises of Brutes. If the Lion does Roar, shall we not tremble,
says one of the Prophets. It is compared also to the noise of Thunder, which
is the thing of the world that is most frightful to men.

This is exactly the preaching of the Gospel. They who preach it are Boanerges,
Sons of Thunder; they carry dread along with them, wheresoever they are heard:
Jews and Gentiles were equally frighted at the beginning, and the Papal Kingdom
does dread nothing so much at this day. Which is the reason that the Pope and
his Clergy use all the power and industry that they are able, to stiffle this
voice in all places; but it is in vain. The Gospel has been victorious over
Jews and Gentiles, and will be so over the Papal Empire.

This is what is promised to the man upon the white Horse, going forth
conquering and to conquer. For this Man is Jesus Christ, the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, who has overcome. He established his Gospel through the whole Pagan
Roman Empire. The worshippers of false Gods, being pierced by the Arrows of our
Savior, became converted to the Faith. And he will do the same to the Papal
Roman Empire.

V. 3. And when he had opened the second Seal, I heard the second living
Creature say, come, and see.

V. 4. And there went out another Horse that was red, and power was given unto
him that sat thereon, to take peace from the Earth, and that they should kill
one another: and there was given unto him a great Sword.

This second living Creature, is the Ox, the Symbol of patience, and of being
designed for slaughter; which denotes the persecutions, which believers, who
are the Mystical Sheep of Jesus Christ, were to suffer.

And he that sat upon this red Horse, is no other than Satan, the red Dragon,
that Murderer from the beginning; who is armed with a Sword, to presage the
Blood, which for the sake of the Gospel, and to hinder the victories of Jesus
Christ, he should shed through the whole extent both of the Pagan and Papal
Empire.

V. 5. And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third living Creature
say, come, and see; and I beheld, and lo, a black Horse, and by that sat on him
had a pair of Balances in his hand. The word in the Original signifies a Yoke,
as well as a Balance. And that it ought to be here translated a Yoke, the
sequel does demonstrate.

V. 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the four living Creatures, say, a
measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and see
thou hurt not the Oil and the Wine. This undoubtedly denotes a great plenty of
all things necessary to the comfort of life. Which shows that this Horseman
carries a Yoke, not a Balance.

Here is indeed a change from white to black. The first Horseman, who sat upon
the white Horse, to wit Jesus Christ, spread the light of his Gospel, in order
to establish a spiritual Religion, which consists in worshipping God in
Spirit and in Truth; as he told the Woman of Samaria, that the time would
suddenly come, that there should be a Religion free from the Yoke of the
Ceremonies of the ancient Law, Ioh. 4. 23. But he who appears sitting upon the
black Horse, to wit Satan, has spread darkness of Errors, and has founded a
carnal Religion, that consists in bodily service, in Jewish and Heathenish
Ceremonies, in Altars* external Services, Washings, Abstinences, Fastings,
Images, and Relics, etc. which has made a Yoke a thousand fold heavier than
all the Ceremonial Observances of the Law, which St. Paul called a Yoke of
Bondage, Gal. 5. 1. and which St. Peter says, were a Yoke that neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10.

This is what fell out under the Christian Emperors. For the Devil seeing that
persecutions could not stop the conquests of him that sat on the white Horse,
nor hinder the course of the Gospels victories; he took another way, and
bethought himself of a new Stratagem. And brought into the Church the Customs
and Ceremonies of the Heathen, under the plausible pretense of drawing the
Pagans over to the Christian Religion, by means of the conformity of the
Ceremonies of the one with the other. To which the prosperity of the Church at
that time did wonderfully contribute, plenty and wealth having so lulled the
Pastors into sleep, that while they slumber'd, the Enemy sowed his tares in the
Field of the Lord.

It Is the property of great prosperity to corrupt Souls. Ease and plenty have
been always fatal to godliness. Whereas on the contrary, affliction and
poverty, have been at all times sure and faithful guards of Religion. St.
Augustine, who lived in the fifth Age, complains that in his time, they despised
many of the Commands of the Sacred Scriptures, and that Superstition had
universally so prevailed, that if any one had touched the ground with his bare
foot during the week wherein he was baptized, he was more severely rebuked,
than if he had been drunk; and that the Christian Religion, which God in his
mercy would have to be free, and to consist of a very few Ceremonies, was
become so loaded with servile burdens, that the condition of the Jews of old,
was much more tolerable than that of Christians. Because the Jews had been
subjected to a bondage of the Law of God, but that in the place of this the
Christians were brought under bondage to humane Inventions. This is the
complaint which that Doctor makes in the 19* Chapt. of his 119. Epistle to
Ianuarius. And this complaint does most clearly explain that sense which we
have given of the Yoke, which he on the black Horse had in his hand.

It Is the plenty which the Roman Prelates do at this day enjoy, of Wheat, of
Wine, of Barley, and of Oil, which causes that every thing in their Religion
is carnal, and that it is a greater sin to transgress the commands of the
Church, than to break the commands of God; and that they who do work on a holy
day, or who eat Flesh in Lent, or on Friday, are accounted more guilty, than
they who commit adultery, theft, or murder. Before the time of this abundance
and prosperity, and before the Reign of Constantin, there was nothing of this
Yoke known. In adversity they hearkened to the voice of God; but in prosperity
they hearken only to the voice of man. Because it is easier to obey man, than
God. It is much easier to abstain from some sort of meats, than to forbear the
pleasures of luxury; to bow before an Image, and to repeat a prayer by rote,
and without minding what they say, than to worship God in Spirit, etc.

And therefore the living Creature who said to St. John at the opening of the
Third Seal, come and see, appeared under the resemblance of a man; because it
is certain, that they are humane Inventions and Traditions, which are the
matter, whereof under the Prosperity of the Church, this Yoke is composed.

V. 7. And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
living Creature, say, come and see.

V. 8. And I looked, and behold a pale Horse, and his name that sat on him, was
Death, and Hell followed with him, and power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the Earth, to kill with Sword, and with Hunger, and with death,
and with the Beasts of the Earth.

This fallow or pale Horse, upon which Death and Hell, or the Grave sat (for
the word in the original signifies most usually the Grave in Scripture) does
very justly follow the red Horse with his persecutions, and the black Horse
with his Yoke of Humane Traditions. It being righteous with God to afflict and
overwhelm those who persecute his Gospel; and to pour out the plagues of his
vengeance upon them, who prefer men's commands, to his sacred Laws.

The History both of the Church and of the Empire, give so many examples of
this vengeance of God, partly by the Sword, partly by Famine, partly by
Pestilence, and partly by the inundation of Barbarous* Nations, designed here
by the Beasts of the Earth; that we need seek for no other Commentary, in order
to the understanding of this fourth Seal.

The Eagle, which is the fourth living Creature, and which appears at the
opening of this Seal, is a presage of this divine vengeance, forasmuch as it is
a Scripture maxim, that the Eagles do gather thither where the Carcass is,
Matthew. 24. 28.

And if the plagues of God overtake only a fourth part of the Earth, it is an
effect of his goodness to spare the greatest part, and thereby to invite them
to repentance.

V. 9. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the Souls
of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they
hold.

V. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, how long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

V. 11. And white Robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow
Servants also, and their Brethren that should be killed as they were, should
be fulfilled.

At the opening of this Seal, there appears neither Horse, nor living
Creature, as there did at the opening of the former; because there is nothing
new here, this Seal being only an Explication of the Second, of that of the red
Horse, which presaged the persecutions of the Church. So that this Vision
stands in no need of an Interpreter, because it only represents the sufferings
of those, who had been killed for the Word of God, and the Glory wherewith they
are crowned in Heaven, together with the efficacy of the voice of their Blood,
which cries as Abels's did.

It is nevertheless true, that the same Seal does foretell the sufferings that
were to come, as it had expressed the sufferings that were past. For the
Martyrs having demanded, how long Lord ere thou avenge our Blood? It was
answered unto them, that they should yet rest for a little season, until their
fellow Servants also, and their Brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled. So that as the complaint of the Martyrs, expresses the
persecutions of the Church under the Pagan Emperors; the answer is a prediction
of the sufferings, which the Church was to undergo, under the Papal
Antichristian Kingdom.

Moreover, we may here observe, who it is that is a true Martyr, They are those
who are slain for the Word of God. So that this Title cannot be denied to
Protestants; because it is only out of hatred to their Religion, that they are
killed. Nor are they put to death for any other cause, but for the Word of God,
and for the holding that their Religion is certain, supported by a Sovereign
and Divine Authority, and full and sufficient for Salvation. And is not the
maintaining the rights and perfections of Gods Word, a maintaining of Gods
cause? Is it not to die for Jesus Christ, to suffer death because they will not
consent to the injuries which the Papists do to his Gospel?

V. 12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a
great Earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of Hair, and the Moon
became as Blood.

V. 13. And the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth, even as a Fig tree casts
her untimely Figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.

V. 14. And the Heaven departed as a Scrowl when it is rolled together, and
every Mountain and Island were moved out of their places.

V. 15. And the Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every Bondsman, and every Freeman
hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the Mountains.

V. 16. And said to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

V. 17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

There appears not here any Horseman, nor any living Creature, no more than
there did at the opening of the fifth Seal; and the reason is, because what is
concealed under this Seal, extends not through the whole course of the
History of the Roman Empire, and of the Church of God. Seeing that which is
comprehended under this Seal, is only one of the Revolutions that was to befall
the Roman Empire. There were three changes to overtake it. By the first, it was
to pass from Paganism to pure and uncorrupted Christianity. By the second, it
was to pass from pure and simple Christianity, to a Christianity mixed and
corrupted; which is no other thing but Antichristianism or Popery. And by the
third, it is to pass and return from Christianity corrupted, and from Popery,
to a Christianity that is pure, and freed from all the Errors and Superstitions
of Antichrist. This last change will be under and upon the effusion of the
Vials; and the Reformation that was made the last Age, is a sample and earnest
of it. The Second was to appear under the Trumpets. And the first was that
which came to pass under this sixth Seal.

In all the changes, there is spoken of the Heaven, of the Sun, of the Moon, of
the Stars, of the Sea, of Earthquakes, of the removing of Mountains; because it
is the style of the Prophets, to express Revolutions which fall out in the
world with reference to Religion, in terms that agree to a change in the whole
Universe. Thus the Apostle St. Peter, Act. 2. 14. etc. applies the Prophecy of
Joel, to the establishment which God begun to give unto the Christian Religion
by the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost. In that day I will pour out of my
Spirit upon all Flesh, and on my Servants, and on my Handmaidens, and they
shall prophesy; and I will show wonders in Heaven above, and signs in the Earth
beneath, Blood and Fire, and Vapors of Smoke; the Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into Blood.

It Is not probable, that the Holy Spirit should omit that memorable change,
which befell the Empire when the Emperors were no more Heathen Persecutors, but
Christian Favorers of the Gospel, which if it be not comprehended under this
Seal, there is not the Footstep or mention of it in the whole Revelation.

And withal, that Event does accord the best of the World with this Vision. For
if the Enemies of Christ's name appear here astonished, desperate, hiding
themselves in the Mountains, and crying to the Rocks, fall on us, and hide us
from the Wrath of the Lamb; all this accords admirably with the Event. For
History recounts unto us, how the Judgments of God, fell after a terrible
manner upon the five last Heathen Emperors, who had persecuted the Christians
with an unbridled rage. Diocletian and Maximian voluntarily laid down the
Imperial Dignity, being pressed to it by the sole remorse of their Consciences,
which gave them no quiet. Maxentius was thrown headlong from the Milvian Bridge
into the Tyber, and in that very place where he had laid an Ambush for
Constantin. Maximin, who had pulled out the Eyes of Christians, lost his own
Eyes by a disease that was as loathsome as it was painful, and Lieinius was
murdered by the Garrison of Thessalonica. After that Constantin was arrived at
the Empire, all the Edicts against the Christians were repealed; the Christian
Religion was established by public Authority; the Idolatrous Temples were
either pulled down, or consecrated to the service of the true God; their Altars
were overthrown; and the Heathens being stripped of all Honors, were sent into
the Villages, from whence they came to be styled Pagans, that is, Inhabitants
of the Villages, a Title by which the Christians had been denominated before.

V. ILLUSTRATION. Of the four Angels, that withheld the four Winds; and of the
Angel that had the Seal of the living God. REV. CHAP. 7.
V. 1. After these things, I saw four Angels standing on the four corners of
the Earth, holding the four Winds of the Earth, that the Wind should not blow
on the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any Tree. V. 2. And I saw another Angel
ascending from the East, having the Seal of the living God: and he cried with a
loud voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the Earth and the
Sea. V. 3. Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees, till we have
sealed the Servants of our God in their foreheads.
IF those four Angels be good Angels, then the withholding the four Winds, must
be something likewise that is good. And that they are good Angels, appears
from thence, because the Angel that had the Seal of the living God, spoke unto
them as Angels of God. Hurt not, says he, the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the
Trees, until we have sealed the Servants of our God in their Foreheads. For he
does not simply call them the Servants of God, as he would have done, had he
been speaking to Angels of Satan, but he calls them the Angels of Our God;
thereby acknowledging them for Angels, who together with himself could say, Our
God, which the evil Angels do not say, neither can they.

We must therefore inquire, what good thing this is, that the withholding of
the Winds does signify. And without doubt it signifies Peace and Tranquillity,
forasmuch as the Wind is that which troubles the Sea, and agitateth the Air.
The holding of the four Winds, does then signify an universal Peace in the
Empire, and in the Church; nor can it be denied, but that there was such a
Tranquillity, during the Reign of Constantin. For neither was the Church
persecuted during his Reign, nor was the Empire molested with any War, either
intestine or foreign, after the tragical death of Licinius.

But what damage could an entire and universal Peace bring to the Church? It is
certain, that such a blessing could not directly and of it self, do any hurt;
but it produced a great deal of mischief, by accident, and through the abuse
that was made of it. The calm, which the Conversion of Constantin procured to
the Church, corrupted her. For the Christian Emperors having heapt riches and
honors upon the Church, She became carnal, She opened a gate to Heresies, to
Superstitions, to Idolatry, and to Tyranny; so that at last She is become that
Babylon, upon which the Vials of Gods wrath are to be poured forth.

This corruption will be seen, both in its Birth, in its Growth, and in its
Fullness under the Trumpets. But yet so that this general corruption of the
Christian Church could not hinder, but that God preserved a certain number of
true Worshippers, as a Remnant of his Grace. And this is the Remnant, which the
Angel that had the Seal of God, declares unto the other Angels, that he was
going to mark, in order to their being preserved from the general corruption,
as so many Lots in Sedom, and as so many Daniels in Babylon.

And that this was not a created Angel, but the Angel who was the Creator, to
wit, Jesus Christ, there is no cause to question. For he could be no other,
than he who is called the Angel of Gods Council, Isa. 63. 9. the Angel of his
Covenant, Malach. 3. 1. and He who is called the Eternal, Genesis 18. 31. It is He
indeed who has the Seal of God, whereby to mark the Elect: and this Seal is
the Holy Spirit, which he gives unto us, 1 John 3. 24. 1 John 4. 13. that
whereby, as St. Paul says, we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians 3.
30. So that this Angel can be none else but the Son of God, because it is he
alone who sends the Spirit, Joh. 16. 7. and who knows all the Sheep whom
the Father had given unto him, Joh. 10. 14.

VI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the hundred forty and four thousand, which were sealed of
the Tribes of Israel. REV. CHAP. 7.
V. 4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed
144000. of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel. V. 5. Of the Tribe of
Judah were sealed twelve thousand; of the Tribe of Ruben, etc.
WE have in the 16. Illustration of the first Part, assigned the Reason why the
Elect are designed by the number of 144000. so that all which remains to be
done here, is to enquire why there are twelve thousand said to be sealed out of
every Tribe. And this is first, because the Church of Israel is the Stock, and
the Christian Church, made up of Gentiles, is the Graft, inoculated into that
of Israel. Whence it is that Christians are called by St. Paul, the Israel of
God, and Israel after the Spirit. Israel is the Father, and Christians are the
Children, who bear their Fathers Name. Secondly, it is to show, that however
implacable the wrath of God against the Jews may seem to be, even after it has
been avenging it self upon them (as I may say) for these sixteen hundred years;
yet he has not forgotten them, but will one day call them, will take away the
Vail of Moses that is upon their heart, and which hinders them for
acknowledging Jesus Christ, and he will convert them Joseph did not reveal
himself to his Brethren the first time that he appeared to them. Jesus Christ
carried it after the same manner, the first time that he came to the Jews. He
came to his own, but his own received him not. But Joseph discovered himself to
his Brethren at the second time, when he came among them; and that interview
was full of endearedness; his Brethren continued with him, and had the best
part of the Land of Egypt assigned them to dwell in. It will be after the same
manner, when Christ shall manifest himself the second time to the Jews; he will
enrich them with the light of his Grace, and heap upon them his blessings. For
as St. Paul speaks after one of the Prophets, There shall come out of Sion
the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and so all Israel
shall be saved, Romans 11. 26. The honor which God does the Children of Israel,
in designing the Elect of God by the names of their Tribes, is a confirmation
of this prediction of St. Paul and of the Prophet.

These sealed ones, are the same with those spoken of Chap. 14. v. 1. with this
difference notwithstanding, that they are mentioned there, in order to be
praised for having been faithful to the Lamb, while all the inhabitants of the
world went after the Beast; but they are here spoken of before hand, in token
that they were to be preserved from the general corruption that was foretold,
and which was threatened by the Trumpets.

They weary themselves in vain, who go about to seek for a reason, why there is
no mention here of the Tribe of Dan. Seeing tho it be not mentioned in this
place, yet it is both mentioned, and that first in the 48. of Ezekiel, where he
treats of the new division of the Land of Canaan; and in the enumeration which
the Prophet makes of the Gates of the new Jerusalem, which is at the bottom the
same which St. John describes Chap. 21. where there is one Gate for the Tribe
of Dan. This observation serves to overthrow all the reasons, which are
alleged for this omission. Nor are we to seek for any other reason of it, but
this, that the Holy Spirit would retain the number of twelve, because of a
reference to the twelve Apostles, as has been already suggested in the
forementioned Illustration.

And whereas it is said, that the 144000. are sealed in their Foreheads; that
implies, that the Elect shall make an open profession of the Doctrine of the
twelve Apostles, who are the twelve Patriarchs of the Christian Church. They
are in their Hearts sealed of the Spirit, but outwardly they have no other
Mark, save that of the profession of the pure Doctrine of the Apostles. By the
Mark that is in their Hearts, they are known of God; and by that in their
Foreheads, they are known of men.

VII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Multitude, which no man could number, that Stood
before the Lamb with Palms; of their felicity; and whence they came. REV. CHAP.
7.
V. 9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their
hands. V. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God
which sits upon the Throne and unto the Lamb. V. 11. And all the Angels etc.
V. 12. Saying, Amen: Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving and
Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God for Ever and Ever. Amen. V. 13. And
one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, what are these which are arrayed in
white Robes? and whence are they? V. 14. And I said unto him, Sir, thou
know. And he said to me, these are they which came out of great Tribulation,
and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. V.
15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in
his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them. V. 16.
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light
on them, nor any heat. V. 17. For the Lamb, which is in the midst of the
Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters:
and God shall wipe away all tears from their Eyes.
THis multitude that could not be numbered, are the companions of those Souls,
who cried under the fifth Seal, How long O Lord, before thou avenge our blood?
and white Robes were given unto them; and it was said unto them, that they
should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also, and
their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled, chap.
6. v. 10, 11.

These Martyrs are represented innumerable, and there are two reasons intimated
for it. First, because they were of all Nations, kindreds, people, and Tongues.
2ly, because they were come out of great Tribulation. And this great
Tribulation, is so called from the long duration of it. Nor could it be
otherway's, for that it was to continue as long as the Papal Kingdom, namely
two and forty months, or a 1260 day's, which are 1260 years, as we shall
afterward see.

They are represented clothed in white Robes, as they under the fifth Seal
were; to intimate both their dignity and their Joy. But besides this, they are
represented standing before the Throne and before the Lamb, with Palms in their
hands; whereas they under the fifth Seal were represented under the Altar, and
without Palms. The reason of that difference is this, because under the fifth
Seal, the Enemies of the Martyrs had the upper hand of them, and persecuted
their memories to that degree, as to dig their bodies out of the ground, and to
throw their ashes into the wind, as accounting them an abominable crew; whereas
in the place of that, these here, (their great Tribulation's being finished,
and the 1260 years expired, and the Beast and the false Prophet being cast into
the bottomless pit;) are represented standing before the Throne of God, and
with Palms in their hands, as conquerors over all their Enemies. They shall be
acknowledged blessed in Heaven; and such who after the End of this Tribulation
shall be found on the Earth, walking in their faith, shall Reign with Christ a
thousand years.

So that the Holy Spirit does by way of Anticipation describe here the felicity
of the Church of God on the Earth, (whereof we have spoken upon the Subject of
the first Resurrection) that the terrible calamity which is to be represented
under the Trumpets, might not discourage believers, being strengthened and
fortified before hand by a promise of the victory, which the Church shall at
last obtain over her Enemies.

The Prophet Isaiah has promised the same happiness to the Church of Israel.
For he has said, chap. 25. v. 8. that God will wipe away tears from off all
faces. And he has said chap. 41. v. 10. that they shall not hunger, not
thirst, neither shall the heat nor Sun smite them.

It Is likewise to the Church made up of Jews and Gentiles, that the Holy Spirit
does here promise the same felicity. The Terms used by Isaiah, do equally agree
with the happiness in Heaven for the Souls of the Martyr's; and with the
happiness on Earth, for those who shall have part in the first Resurrection,
and who shall Reign a thousand years.

VIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Silence in Heaven for half an hour. REV. CHAP. 8.
V. 1. And when he had opened the Seventh Seal, there was silence in Heaven
about the space of half an hour. V. 2. And I saw the Seven Angels which stood
before God, and to them were given seven Trumpets.
AFter that the Idolatry of the Roman Empire was overthrown, and after that the
Christian Religion was established by public Authority, and that an end was
put to persecution; St. John saw heresies and superstitions breaking in upon
the Church. But this did not come to pass immediately; there was a space
before, that had the face of a peace or truce. In a word, there was a a short
intervall: That is it, which had been already represented by the holding back
of the four winds, whereof we have spoken in the fifth Illustration; And it is
the same which is represented by the silence, mentioned here at the opening of
the 7th Seal. For when no wind blows, there is a general calm: And a great
silence in the Air, which is called Heaven in Scripture. But in this place,
Heaven signifies the Church; and Silence denotes the peace that was
established under the Reign of Constantin. Called a Silence for half an hour,
because that peace continued only for a few years. So that if the holding the
winds from blowing, signifies a general peace; the Silence for half an hour,
marks the short while that it lasted.

IX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the seven Angels with the seven Trumpets; and of the
Angel who cast the Censer into the Earth. REV. CHAP. 8.
V. 2. And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were
given seven Trumpets. V. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar,
having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was
before the Throne. V. 4. And the Smoke of the Incense, which came with the
prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. V. 5. And
the Angel took the Censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and cast it
into the Earth; and there were voices, and thundrings, and lighnings, and an
Earthquake.
TRumpets were used under the Law for two uses! One was for War, and to
encourage the people to fight. The other was for peace, and to stir up the
people to a holy rejoicing. Those spoken of here are of the first sort.

The Seven Angels, are the denouncers of those Evils, which God was to pour out
upon the Church, to punish her decay in zeal and Charity.

The other Angel, who stood before the Golden Altar with a Golden Censer, is
Jesus Christ, that appeared in the 7. Chap. with the Seal of God, and appears
now as a Priest with a Censer, that is to say, as an Intercessor. And his
Intercession appears here with two different effects, one for his people, in
obtaining their prayers to be accepted, and his giving value to them is figured
by incense. The other, against false Christians, upon whom he scatters fire
from off the Altar. This is the fire of division, whereof Christ speaks Luke
12. 49, 51. I am come to send fire on the earth. Suppose ye that I am come to
give peace on Earth? I tell you nay; but rather division.

It Is said, that this fire was taken off the Altar: because it was to be
kindled in a Church destitute of zeal and charity; and because this fire of
division was to be about Religion, as the subject of it, and by reason that
Jesus Christ was to be the cause of it, or at least the pretense.

The voices, thundrings, lightnings, and Earthquake, that ensued upon the
Scattering of this fire, do plainly represent the strifes, quarrels, and
troubles, which under the Reign of Constantin and his Successors, broke out
among the Bishops and Pastors. Who being given up to covetousness, luxury and
ambition, raised such troubles, as shook the Christian Religion, and opened a
door to Antichristianism, which did appear under the Trumpets.

X. ILLUSTRATION. Of the first Trumpet; and of the Hail, Fire, and Blood. REV.
CHAP. 8.
V. 1. And the seven Angels which had the Seven Trumpets, prepared themselves
to sound. V. 7. And the first Angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire
mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the Earth, and the third part of
the Trees was burnt up, and all green Grass was burnt up.
WE find not in History any change that befell the Church, so near to the
withholding the winds, and to the Silence for half an hour, i. e. so near to
the peaceable Reign of Constantin, which either more opened a door to
Antichristianism, or which better correspondeth to this Hail, to this fire, and
to this blood, caused by this first Trumpet, than that so much noted Heresy of
Arius.

(1) Arianism begun to lift up its head under the Reign of Constantin. The
Church had no sooner peace, than the Devil let loose this Heretic to trouble
her.

(2) This Heresy infected the whole Empire. The world, says St. Ierom,
trembles and is amassed to see it self become Arian. It lasted near three
hundred years. Many Councils were assembled to stop its course. And it was in
these Councils, that the Bishop of Rome laid the foundation of that Supremacy,
which made him afterward to be considered and feared, as the Head, the judge,
and the absolute Monarch both of the world and of the Church.

(3) The hail, the fire, and the blood, do admirably agree to that Heresy.
It Is called Hail, by reason both of its violence and of the noise which it
made, and, because of the barrenness and coldness which it begot in men's
hearts, out of which it drove away godliness and charity. It Is styled Fire,
because of the contentions which it kindled, And it is called Blood, by reason
of the bloody persecutions which it raised. And whereas she third part of the
Trees and every green Herb, are said to have been burnt up; it is because more
than one half of the Pastors, who are designed by Trees, and the generality of
the people, signified by all green Grass, were infected with it.

XI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the second Trumpet. A Mountain Burning cast into the Sea,
and a third part of it became Blood. REV. CHAP. 8.
V. 8. And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great Mountain burning
with fire, was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became blood.
V. 9. And the third part of the Creatures which were in the Sea and had life,
died, and the third part of the Ships were destroyed.
It Is certain, that Mountains do in the language of the Prophets signify the
Kingdoms of the Earth. Thus Mount Sion signifies the Church, which is the
Kingdom of God. And thus it is said Isaiah chap. 2. v. 14. that the day of the
Lord shall be against all the high Mountains; that is, against all Nations though
never so fierce, and against all Kingdoms how powerful soever.

So that this burning Mountain thrown into the Sea, cannot be better explained;
than of the Nations of the Goths, Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Vandal's, and Gepid's,
that under the Reign of Valens about the year 378. broke in like an inundation
upon the Roman Empire, destroyed Rome; and who abolished the very Name of the
Roman Empire in the West, about the year 547.

These Nations are styled a burning Mountain, because of their violence, and of
their swiftness.

This Mountain was cast into the Sea, because it was an effect of the wrath of
God, that these Nations broke in upon the Roman Empire, which was a great Sea,
a heap of many peoples, which the Scripture uses to express by waters.

Now this burning Mountain is not said to dry up the Sea, tho that be the
proper effect of fire; but it is said to have caused the third part of the Sea
to become blood; the H. Spirit having a respect to what is here signified by
this Mountain, namely, the fierce and bloody humor of these Nations, who
drowned a part of the Roman Empire in blood, infected the people of this Empire
with Errors, and destroyed a part of its Cities, designed here by Ships.

XII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the third Trumpet. A great Star fell from Heaven. REV.
CHAP. VIII.
V. 10. And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from heaven,
burning as it were a Lamp; and it fell upon the third part of the Rivers, and
upon the Fountains of Waters. V. II. And the Name of the Star is called
Wormwood; and the third part of the waters became Wormwood; and many men died
of the waters, because they were made bitter.
SEeing Jesus Christ has in the first chap. v. 20. expounded the seven Stars
which he had in his right hand, to represent Pastors; it must necessarily be,
that by the Star spoken of here, some Bishop or Pastor should be intended. And
forasmuch as it is a great Star, it must be a great Bishop that is designed,
and the Pastor of some Church which men esteemed to be the most eminent. So
that this Bishop, is without doubt he of Rome; who from the very beginning was
looked upon as above others, by reason of the City which was the Seat of the
Empire, and consequently the Lady and Mistress of all other Cities. This was
the ground of the precedence granted to that Bishop, as appears both by the
Council of Calcedon, and by the second Council of Constantinople.

Among the Bishops of Rome, Gregory the first is particularly here represented
by this great Star. And that not only because he was styled great, but because
he truly fell from Heaven, through abandoning the care of heavenly things, to
pursue and cleave to those of the Earth. This we may the rather believe,
because he gives this account of himself in the fifth Epistle of his first
Book, writing to Theotista, the Emperors Sister. Under the Color, says he, of
a Bishopric, I am sunk into the world; and am become more enslaved to the
cares of the Earth, than ever I was when but a Laick person. Since I was
outwardly advanced, I am inwardly fallen. And I bewail my own state, as being
thus driven from the presence of my Creator. He writ the same to Anastasius
Bishop of Antioch; namely, that he was so depressed by the load of multiplicity
of affairs, that he could not raise his mind to heavenly things.

The fall of this Gregory the Great does yet more appear, in that it was he who
changed the Service of the Church, into that which from his name is called to
this day the Gregorian. 'T was he likewise who most blasphemously equalled the
four first Councils to the four Gospels; and who in his four Books of Dialogues
brought the belief of Purgatory into the Church.

But we are to take care, that we do not restrain our selves only to one
Bishop. This great Star is to be taken as representing collectively all the
Bishops of Rome, since they first begun to depart from the Truth, and from
Christian Humility. And indeed before Gregory the Great; Mark, who was elected
Pope anno 335. did so highly exalt the Rights of the Sea of Rome, that he had
the confidence to write to the Bishops of Egypt, in these profane words, that
follow. The Roman Church has forever been without a Spot, and through the
Grace of God and the protection of St. Peter, forever shall be so. For, says
he, the Lord spoke thus to the Prince of the Apostles; Peter, I have prayed for
thee, that thy Faith do not fail. Julius I. took upon him by his own mere
Authority, to re-establish several Oriental Bishops that had been justly
deposed. Liberius by subscribing to the condemnation of St. Athanasius,
subscribed to Arianism, which drew upon him the curses of St. Hilary. After the
death of Liberius, Damasius, and Ursicinus, caused such an effusion of blood by
their struglings for the Roman Chair, that Ammianus Marcellinus, a Heathen
Author reports, that in the Temple where the Election of Damasus was held,
there were 137. slain at one time. The greatest persons among the Heathen
coveted the grandeur of the Popes; so that the Pagan Pretextatus being designed
Consul, offered to Damasus to turn Christian upon condition that he might be
made Pope. Siricius who succeeded to Damasus forbid Ecclesiastical Persons to
marry, shamefully perverting to that purpose the words of St. Paul, Romans 8. 8.
they who are in the flesh, connot please God. After Gregory I. Boniface III.
assumed the Title of Universal Bishop. Boniface IV, who succeeded to him,
consecrated the Pantheon to the blessed Virgin, and to all the Saints; having
been before a Temple dedicated to Cybele and to all the Heathen Gods. And the
Monastic life became so highly valued and advanced under all these Popes, that
they taught it to be the true Evangelick way of living, and the most sure means
of salvation. These Doctrines together with others added by the Bishops of
Rome, and which they either themselves invented, or else authorized and
decreed; made them to be this Wormwood, that has corrupted the saving
Doctrine, and which has rendered all the Waters of Grace, and the Fountains of
Salvation, bitter.

XIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the fourth Trumpet. The third part of the Sun, and of
the Moon, and of the Stars smitten. REV. CHAP. VIII.
V. 12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun was
smitten, and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so as
the third part of them was darkened; and the day shone not for a third part of
it, and the night likewise.
THE woe denounced by this fourth Trumpet, has two Characters. The one is Error
and Superstition; in that the Fountains of light are so strangely changed. The
other is Violence and Force, because these Sources of light are smitten. For
the Term of Smiting is often used in the Scripture to signify killing and
destroying. As in Deuteronomy. chap. 4. v. 46. Ios. chap. 8. v. 22. 1 Kings chap. 15.
v. 29. and elsewhere.

These two characters do perfectly agree to the Religion of the Mahometans. The
Error in it is most palpable, in that it denies both Christ's Divinity, and the
merit of his death, and in that it promises such a felicity in the life to
come, as can be pleasing to none, save unto Souls sunk into sensuality.

And its Violence is so well known, that all who have heard of Mahomet, do know
that that Impostor boasted the being sent by God with a Sword, to force the
belief of his Religion. And the event was according, for within the space of
40. years after Mahomets death; his four Successors, Ebubeker, O^hmar, Osman,
and Haly, whom they style Gods, four sharp Swords, planted that abominable
Religion by force of Arms, in Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia,
Africa, Barbary, and Numidia.

It was in the year 622. that Mahomet published his damnable Errors, which is
another character, whereby to adjust it with the Woe or this fourth Trumpet. For
the Bishop of Rome was already fallen under the third. These are the two
Enemies of the Christian Religion; the one a hidden Enemy, and the other an
avowed. The one established himself as a Fox, the other as a Lion. The one
assaulted Religion in the West; the other in the East. The Bishop of Rome begun
to fall away in the fourth Age; Mahomet appeared in the seventh. His abominable
Religion followed the fall of the Roman Bishop; as the Woe of the fourth Trumpet
follows the Woe of the third.

XIV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the fifth Trumpet. The Key of the bottomless Pit, given
to the Star that fell from Heaven. REV. CHAP. IX.
V. 1. And the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the
Earth; and to him was given the Key of the bottomless Pit. V. 2. And he opened
the bottomless Pit, and there arose a Smoke out of the Pit, as the smoke of a
great Furnace; and the Sun and the Air were darkened, by reason of the smoke of
the Pit.
WE have seen the Fall of the Bishop of Rome under the third Trumpet. The fifth
discovers unto us the growth and the accomplishment of the Mystery of
Iniquity. For this is the same Star which St. John had called great, and of
which he had said, that it was already fallen from Heaven.

The Key is a Symbol of Power and Authority. When the Nations were to be
brought out of Idolatry into which they were plunged as into a bottomless pit,
and to be introduced into the Kingdom of Heaven; Jesus Christ gave to St. Peter
the Keys of that Kingdom. And it was that Apostle, who first made use of those
Keys, when he preached the Gospel to Cornelius, who was a Gentile. But now when
the same Nations are to return to Idolatry, the Key of the bottomless Pit is
given to the pretended Successor of St. Peter by the Dragon, Rev. chap. 13. v.
2, 4.

The Bottomless Pit being opened with this Key, which the Bishop of Rome
received from the Dragon; there came forth a smoke out of the Pit, as out of a
great Furnace, and the Sun and Air were darkened.

The Sun is Jesus Christ. The Air is Religion. For Jesus Christ is the Sun of
Righteousness; and Religion, which consists in Doctrines, Worship and
Ceremonies, is with respect to Salvation, what the Air is with respect to the
Animal life, which no longer endures than while we suck in and breath out the
Air.

Nor can it be denied, but that the Bishop of Rome has darkened the Sun of
Righteousness, in that he has assumed to himself all the Offi^es of our
Savior, his Kingship, his Priesthood, and his dignity of Supreme and
infallible Teacher. And in that he has added the Sacrifice of the Mass to the
Sacrifice of the Cross; and humane Satisfaction to the merit of Christ's Blood,
which is the price of our Redemption.

Neither can it be gainsaid, but that he has darkened the Air of Religion, by a
mixture of Heathen Ceremonies, with those which Jesus Christ had ordained. Such
as Altars, the different Habits of Priests, Agnus Dei's, Chappelets,
Scapularies, Holy Water, Abstinences, and Fastings.

Finally, he has corrupted the Discipline and Government, which fence and
preserve Religion, by changing it into a Monarchy, like unto that of Earthly
Princes, contrary to the express Declaration of our Savior to his Apostles;
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship, but ye shall not be so, Luks 22.
25. And also contrary to the advice of St. Peter, whose Vicar and Successor he
vainly boasts himself to be. For he enjoins Ministers to feed the Flock of God,
and not to carry it as being Lords over God's Heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.

This Change was not all made at once, but by little and little. The Smokt came
not all out of the bottomless Pit at one and the same time, but successively
and by degrees, answerable to the nature of the Mystery of Iniquity, which has
established it self by fraud and subtility.

Before Gregory I. about the end of the second Century, Victor, upon the
subject of what day Easter should be kept, was so rash as to excommunicate all
the Churches of Asia, as if he had been the Sovereign Master of all Churches.
Upon which account, St. Ireneus rebuked him according as he deserved. Siricius
condemned the Marriage of Priests, abusing to that end the words of St. Paul,
They that are in the Flesh, cannot please God; as if by being in the Flesh, the
Apostle had understood the state of Marriage. Boniface III. Successor of
Gregory I. challenged the Title of Universal Bishop, which Gregory had
condemned in John Bishop of Constantinople, as the Title of the Forerunner of
Antichrist. Boniface IV. consecrated the Pantheon to the Holy Virgin, and to
all the Saints, which the Pagans had dedicated before to Cibele the Mother of
the Gods. And the Controversy about the Worship of Images grew so hot in the
eighth Age, that Pope Gregory the second excommunicated the Emperor Leo for
opposing it. In the ninth Age, Paschasius the Monk of Corby was the first that
taught the Corporal Presence; but Rathramu writting against it by the command
of Charles the Bold, the question remained undetermined. But the Truth becoming
darkened by the Smoke that arose out of the bottomless Pit in the tenth Age,
which Baronius styles an Age of Iron and Lead, and which all Writers acknowledge
to have been an Age of Ignorance and Darkness, it came to be decided in the
eleventh Age by Nicolas the second. Who made it be prescribed to Berenger in
his Retractation, that believers did not only eat Christ Sacramentally, but
that he was really broken by their teeth. In the same Age, Gregory the seventh
made come out of the bottomless Pit, these propositions mentioned by Baronius,
Anno 1076. number. 31. namely, that the Pope of Rome alone has Right to be called
Universal. That all Princes ought to kiss the Popes Feet. That his name only
should be mentioned to the Churches. That he has an Authority to depose
Emperors. That without his command no Council ought to be called General. That
no Book, nor Chapter, ought to be held for Canonical, without his Authorisy.
That he may discharge Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance. And many other
such as these, which Baronius calls Dictata Papae Out of the same Pit came
forth the Adoration of the Holy Sacrament, under Pope Houorius the second. The
Feast of God, or of Corpus Christi, under Pope Eugenius the second. Auricular
Confession, under Pope Innocent the third. The first Crusado, with promise of
forgiveness of all their sins, under Urban the second, Anno 1095 The first
Jubilee, with a promise annexed to it, of universal pardon to all that should
go to Rome, and visit the Churches there, was instituted by Boniface the eighth
Anno 1295. Finally Eugenius the third, about the year 1149. did ordain that the
Decretals collected by Gratian, should be read and explained in the Schools
Which Decretals treat of nothing, save of the Power of St. Peter, and of the
Pope; of the excellency of a Monastic life; of Celibate; of
Transubstantiation; of the Mass, and of such like Doctrines, which are this
Smoke arisen out of the bottomless Pit, by which the Sun and the Air have been
darkened.

XV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Locusts. REV. CHAP. 9.
V. 3. And there came out of the Smoke Locusts upon the Earth, and unto them
was given power, as the Scorpions of the Earth have power. V. 4. And it was
commanded them, that they should not hurt the Grass of the Earth, neither any
Green thing, neither any Tree, but only those men which have not the Seal of
God in their Foreheads. V. 5. And to them it was given that they should not
kill them, but that they should torment them five months: and their Torment
was as the Torment of a Scorpion, when he strikes a man. V. 6. And in those
days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and
death shall flee from them. V. 7. And the Shapes of the Locusts were like unto
Horses prepared unto battle, and on their Heads were as it were crowns like
gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. V. 8. And they had hair as the
hair of women, and their Teeth were as the Teeth of Lions. V. 9. And they had
breast-plates, as it were breast-plates of Iron, and the sound of their wings
was the sound of Charots of many Horses running together. V. 10. And they had
Tails like unto Scorpions, and there were stings in their Tails, and their
power was to hurt men five montht. V. 11. And they had a King over them, which
is the Angel of the bottomlese Pit, which name in the Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon,
but in the Greek Tongue has his name Appollyon.
THE Locusts which St. John describes in this Chapter, do represent in general
all Monks, Friars, and that both for their number, and for their uselesness.
For we observe at the first sight these two qualities in Locusts; first, that
they are in great number; secondly, that they are unprofitable, and do more
hurt than good. Which agrees perfectly to all the Orders of Monks and Friars.
But the Holy Spirit had principally in his view the Society of Jesuits, as the
most exquisite and the most powerful, and that which makes greatest noise in
the world.

Naturalists do observe, that Locusts contain in them the properties, or at
least the figure and something of the shape of ten chief Animals. (1) The Face
of a Horse. (2.) The Eyes of an Elephant. (3.) The neck of a Bull. (4.) The
Horns of a Heart. (5.) The Breast of a Lion. (6.) The Belly of a Scorpion. (7.)
The Wings of an Eagle. (8.) The Thighs of a Camel. (9.) The Feet of an Ostridg.
(10.) The Tail of a Serpent.

The like may be said of the Jesuits, that they comprehend in their Order all
the qualities of other Fraternities. (1.) They take the vow of Chastity. (2.)
The vow of Poverty. (3.) The vow of Obedience. (4.) The vow of going to the
Turks and Indians in the nature of Apostles. (5.) They are Doctors. (6.) They
are Preachers. (7.) They are Confessors. (8.) They are Priests. (9) They are
Missionaries. (10.) They are Casuists.

It Is true, that they do not oblige themselves to any particular abstinence, as
other Orders do; but in recompense for this, whatsoever there is among other
Orders, it is found in the Society of Jesuits in a more eminent degree, which
makes them to be distinguished from all others. For example, they do so take
the vow of poverty, that there is scarcely any Prince in Europe who has so
much money as they. Which makes them so powerful in the Councils of all
Potentates, not only Papists, but also Protestants. They do so vow Chastity,
that there are many of them married in England and elsewhere, in order the
better to compass their Ends. They do so vow Obedience, that they may forsake
the Society after the first Vow; and this Right they have by the funadmental
Law of their Order.

Whosoever considers the great privileges of the Jesuits, will not question
but that it is their Society which is the principal Scope of this Vision. For
by the Bulls of Pope Pius V. and of Gregory XIII. they enjoy all the
privileges granted to the four Mendicant Orders. By another Bull of Gregory
XIII. they do enjoy all the Rights and grants wouchsav'd to all other Religious
Orders. By a Bull of Paul III. they have power to give Absolution from all
sins, even without excepting those that are reserved to the holy See. By
another Bull of Gregory XIII. they have power to sing Mass both before day and
after it is noon. By another Bull of Paul III, it is allowed them to have
portative Altars when they travel, that they may celebrate Mass in all places,
even in such as are interdicted by the holy See. By another Bull of Paul III.
they have Authority to pardon all Sins, to such as shall one whole day in a
year pay their devotions in the Churches of the Society, tho they say but one
Pater Noster and one Ave Mary. By another Bull of Gregory XIII, they are
permitted to practice physic. And which is much more singular, the General of
the Jesuits is another Pope; being styled by the Society the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, as well as the Pope himself. And upon the day of his Election he is
Adored as well as the Pope, both by all the Jesuits who are present at the
Election, and by all other persons who are there assisting, to whom he
Vouchsaveth his hand to be kised. So that all this shows, that if the H.
Spirit has by the Locusts represented the Monks, as is extremely probable, yet
he more especially intended the Jesuits, as being the Order that is most
privileged of all, and which has furthest advanced the Monastic power.

But we must exactly consider all that St. John has said of these Locusts of
the bottomless Pit, that we may thereby see whether it may be reasonably
applied to the Jesuits For if that can be, there will be no room to doubt, but
that the Iejuites are the Locusts here designed.

(1) It Is said of the Locusts, that they came out of the bottomless pit, that
is to say, from Hell: and this does immediately raise in our minds thoughts of
the Society, whose Theology can have no other Author, save him who reigns in
the infernal Pit. It appears by their licentious Morality, that the Name of
Jesuit is a profanation of that Jesus. For they have given the world
sufficiently to understand, that there are these abominable Maxims taught in
their Society and in their Schools, whereby it is rendered lawful to commit the
most horrid crimes. Besides, they maintain a more particular devotion for the
holy Virgin, than others do; and are the most zealous defenders of the
Idolatrous worship that is given her in the Romish Church. The Monks in general
are great avouchers of this false devotion; but the Jesuits distinguish
themselves from all others, by the excesses which they practice in this
unlawful Worship; they have for their Mother Jesus Maria, which is a solemn
declaration of their making that holy and blessed Creature, copartner with the
eternal Son of God in divine honors. And when it was thought needful a few
years ago' to check the Superstition of the people by-a Book Entitled,
wholesome Advices to the Indiscreet Worshippers of the Holy Virgin; it was a
Jesuit that immediately stepped up to rebuke those who would have reformed that
abuse. Father Cresset of the Society, has signalised the Devotion of the Order
by his Book written upon that occasion.

(2) It Is said of these infernal Locusts, that they were like unto horses
prepared for battle. The Horse is a warlick Creature. And the Jesuit
Orlandinus who has written the History of the Society, tells us, that it is
composed of Hero's, of such as are the flower of Chivalry, the braves of war,
and who are born with casks upon their heads. It nigrum campis agmen.


(3) It Is said of the Locusts of the bottomless pit, that they have on their
heads as it were Crowns of Gold. All Priests wear a Crown, which the Canonists
prefer as much above those of Kings, as Gold is above lead. But that of the
Jesuits is esteemed by them, far beyond that of all others. Thence it is that
they despise all Episcopacies, only they will put that honor upon the Cardinals
Hat as not to refuse it.

(4) It Is said of these Infernal Locusts, that their faces were as the faces of
men. And are there any in the world, who are more courteous, more meek, more
kind, than the Jesuits are in show and appearance? What sweetness, what
humanity, what love appears in their Countenances, in their manner and in
their language?

(5) But it is said, of the Locusts of the bottomless pit, that they had
breast-plates of iron. All who have had to do with the Jesuits, know that
their hearts are covered with Corslets. They find by experience that they are
as hard and inflexibl' as Iron; and that when their interest is concerned, they
have neither pity upon Widow nor Orphan.

(6) It Is said of these Locusts, that they had hair as the hair of Women. Which
signifies the flatteries and carresses, by which they cajole those that are
young and such as are wealthy. In a word, their adulations are like unto those
of women. But in this there is something monstrous, that after the H. Spirit
had given unto the Locusts the faces of men and of men of war, he should also
give them the hair of a woman. Thus these Locusts are of an Ambiguous Sex. And
there is the like ambignity in the Society of the Jesuits. It Is not known,
whether they be Monks, or whether they be not. Pasquier reports, that upon
their being asked by the Parliament of Paris what they were; they answered,
they were tales quales, i. e. they were something between both, they were
either the one or the other. So that according to their own Answer, they are a
kind of Herm^phrodites like unto these Locusts, partly men, partly women; Men
by their faces, women by their Hair. In their profession they are of the number
of the Religious; but in their Practice they are Secular; being Bankers,
Merchants, States men, Soldiers, Presbyterians, Prelatists, Quakers, and in
truth all that men can say, and every thing that it is possible to be.

(7) It Is said of these infernal Locusts, that they had Teeth as the Teeth of
Lions. And the Jesuits have something resembling this, and equivalent to it.
For you may sooner pull the prey out of the Lions Teeth, and from between his
Paws, than recover that out of the Jesuits hands whereof they are once
possessed.

(8) It Is said of these Loeusts of the bottomless pit, that they make a noise
with their wings, as if it were the noise of Chariots of many horses running to
Battle. Sabellicus reports, that the General of the Cordeliers offered Pope
Pius II. that provided he would make war against the Turk, to furnish him with
thirty thousand Soldiers out of that order, and this without any hindrance to
the Service which they are bound to perform in their Convents. Judge then
Reader, what the General of the Jesuits is able to do, their Houses being so
full and numerous. And what the Pope may expect from a Society, who both know
so well the Art of Ingeniers as they made appear in the beginning of this Age,
by the mine which they laid under the Parliament House in England, whereby to
have blown up the whole Royal Family and the Senate of the Kingdom: and who
have insinuated and wrought themselves into all Princes Councils, are vastly
rich, have those in all places who are Pensionaries to them, and who by the
Maxims of their Morality, can Inspire the Barriers, the Chastells, and the
Ravailac's, to rid them of Kings, when they find that their designs are
inconsistent with theirs.

(9) It Is said of these Infernal Locusts, that they had Tails like unto
Scorpions. Tail in Scripture signifies a Teacher, one that teaches false
Doctrine, Isaiah chap. 9. v. 15. The Jesuits indeed are Teachers, but whose
doctrine is false, and a manifest subversion of the whole Morality of Jesus
Christ. There is no pollution, nor Crime, which they have not warranted by
their famous Rules of the Doctrine of probability, and of directing the
Intention. Do but observe some of the Maxims of the Iesuitick Morality: Such
as, that to ly with a married Woman, is not adultery, provided the Husband do
consent unto it. That bare Fornication is no Sin. That a woman is not guilty of
murder, in forcing her self to miscarry. That a Son may lawfully kill his
Father, in order to enjoy his Estate, etc. The Doctrine taught by the Jesuits,
resembles very well the Tails of Scorpions, whose sting is mortal.

(10) It Is said of the Locusts of the bottomless pit, that in those days, i. e.
while they Reign, men shall seek for death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them. Which is as much as to say, that
these Locusts shall be insupportable; and that the Evils which they cause,
shall be beyond all remedy; and that they shall force the people over whom they
have power, to curse the day of their birth, as Job did when his patience was
put upon the utmost trial. And it may be said in general, that the Jesuits
have imposed such a yoke both upon the public and upon particular persons,
that life is become very disagreeable and uneasy. They who know that Famons
Society, will find nothing that is hyperbolical in this description; but that
every thing is literally true. The Jesuits do by their carriage strangely
provoke and enrage men; for while they are officious and adulatory beyond what
one can say, they are in the mean time mischievous and wicked to the highest
degree. They are the plague of Families and Estates, and yet none can secure
their Families and Estates from them: men dread them, and flee from them, as
much as they can; but notwithstanding all endeavors to avoid them, they are
found every where. They insinuate and intrude into all places, and mingle
themselves in all companies and affairs. Woe to them that trust them. They are a
pot of iron, and in comparison of whom all others being but earthen pitchers,
who cannot avoid being broken into shivers, if they rub against and justle with
them. But we may ascribe to the Jesuits, the art of giving a home blow,
witness the invention of the new persecution, whereby all France is rendered
Catholic in three months time, and the Protestants are reduced to a condition
of desiring death. In all former persecutions, they inflicted death, and men
sought to avoid it: but in this death is desired, and they refuse to grant it.
In those they made Martyrs; but in this they make Hypocrites. An Invention
worthy of the Jesuits, who are justly esteemed for great Masters in hypocrisy.

(11) It Is said of these infernal Locusts, that they had a King over them,
which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew is Abaddon,
but in the Greek Appollyon. The Jesuits have also a King, whom they vow to
obey implicitly in all things. This King is the Pope. The Holy Spirit clearly
expresses him by the Term Abaddon. For this Abba signifies Father, as well as
that of Pope does. But the Holy Spirit makes him an Abaddon, an Appollyon,
which signifies destroyer. This King of the Locusts, is an Idol, who will
destroy all that worship him. And this is to worship him; to believe him
Infallible, and to render him a blind obedience, and which knows no limits.

(12) Finally, it is said of these Locusts of the bottomless pit, that their
power was to hurt men five months. If the Holy Ghost had mentioned this only
once, we might have thought that it was only a bare allusion to natural
Locusts, which do neither make a noise nor do appear save from May till
September. But the Holy Spirit not being satisfied with the mentioning of it at
the beginning of this description of the Locusts, v. 5. but repeating it again
at the end, v. 10. he does thereby inform us, that he intends more than a
bare Allusion, and that he would hereby mark out unto us, the time allotted and
prescribed to the Jesuits, for them to exercise their power in, and in which
they are to be so formidable every where in the world.

This Time is designed by five Months; which are without doubt of the same
nature with the forty and two mon'ths, which make up the duration of the
Beasts Kingdom, and which shall be proved to be prophetic mon'ths, whereof
each amounts to thirty years. According to which exposition, five mon'ths
signisie one hundred and fifty years; forasmuch as five times thirty make 150.
It Is already more than 150 years since the Jesuits have been in the world. But
it is not the duration of that Society from its first Institution to its End,
that is here treated of. That alone which is here intended, is the Time that
their power should continue. And if you ask what power? I say, that to torment
men. Now they received this power but from the Pope; The Pope did not give it
unto them, otherway's than by the Bull by which he confirmed their Society. Nor
was this Bull granted till the year 1540, that Pope Paul III. Emitted it in the
mon'th of October. It Is in the vertu' of this Bull, that the Jesuits have had
esteem, and that they have authority to do all the mischief, that they have
done within the bounds of the Papal Kingdom. From whence it may follow, that
they shall not be in a condition to torment men for above three years from this
time For being now in the year 1687. there are 147 years run out, since the
date of the Bull of Pope Paul III; So that there seem to remain but three years
until their having accomplished their five prophetical Mon'ths, and until their
having exercised their power of Tormenting men for 150 years.

But if any in order to lessen the probability which is in this conjecture,
shall object, that there have been at least 23. Bulls. published in favor of
the Jesuits, from the year 1540 until the year 1598, and that by five Popes,
namely Paul III. Julius III. Pius IV. Pius V. and Gregory XIII. and that the
power to Torment was not given unto the Jesuits at once, but successively and
by degrees, each Bull advancing their privileges; And that therefore we cannot
define the precise time, when this power begun, so as to be able to determine
from thence when it shall end. I answer, that none of the following Bulls,
having derogated in any one privilege from the first Bull, it is but reasonable
that we should fix and take up at the first which was granted in the mon'th of
October 1540; forasmnch as it was that which established the Society, and which
is the foundation of all the other Bulls.

It seems impossible, either to destroy, or to weaken the power of these
Locusts; in that they have so strongly established themselves in the Courts of
all Princes. Nor is there any appearance, that Monarchs should attempt it,
seeing they employ them in their affairs of State, as well as in those which
relate to their Consciences. But nothing is impossible to God, who is the
Protector of Kings, and who holds their hearts in his hand. He has marked out
unto the Jesuits the duration of their power. And it shall not exceed five
mon'ths continuance, which is the same with that of 150 years. It is withal
extremely probable, that God will make use of Kings for destroying the power of
the Locusts, as he will serve himself of them for the subverting of Babylon,
and as he had employed them for the ruin of the Templers; who were not near so
much hated, as the Jesuits are; and whose vast Revenues was the greatest
reason that Princes had, to rid themselves of them, and to seize their Estates.
The Crimes whereof they were accused, were but in truth a pretense.

It may yet be objected against this exposition, that the Locusts arose out of
the bottomless pit under the fifth Trumpet, and that it is more than five
prophetical Mon'ths, more than 150 years from the sounding of the fifth Trumpet
to the Sounding of the sixth under which we now are. And by consequence, that
the Jesuits are not the Locusts, seeing they did not appear till under the
sixth Trumpet. So that the five Mon'ths of the duration of the power of the
Locusts, must be ill apprehended and ill explained.

I answer, that if the two and forty Mon'ths of the continuance of the Beasts
Kingdom, amount each of them to thirty years, as shall be demonstrated in its
place; we are not to question but that these five prophetic Mon'ths, being
indisputably such as they are, must constitute 150 years.

It Is true, that there is a great deal more than an hundred and fifty years to
be allowed for the course of the fifth Trumpet, to the sixth, under which we
live, and under which the Jesuits came into the world. But we laid this down
as a foundation at first, that all Monks and Friars are represented by the
Locusts, as there is no part of the Character of the Locusts, but which agrees
to them all. And though the Jesuits be risen above 300. years after the
Cordeliers and the Iacobins; yet it does not follow, that they ought not to be
ranked with those Orders that sprung up before; seeing they all make but one
Body of Regulars, and are all equally both the Creatures, and the Supporters of
the Pope. And the reason why the Holy Spirit had the Jesuits chiefly in his
aim, is because they are the accomplishment of this new Pharisaism, the top of
the Mystery of Iniquity, and the last as well as most powerful Buttress of the
Papal Empire. Luther called them in this sense, ultimus Diaboli crepitus.
Besides, seeing of all the Fraternities, that of the Jesuits has had the
greatest power to do hurt, and have done the greatest damage to the Christian
Religion: we are not to doubt, but that they are principally intended in this
Prophecy concerning the Locusts.

Which nevertheless is so to be understood, that the ruin of the Jesuits, will
draw along with it that of all the other Monks and Friars. For that measure of
Evil which the whole Body of the Monks and Friars has done, being consummated
by those mischiefs, which the Jesuits have added thereunto; partly as
Politicans in States, whose councils they have animated; partly in the Church,
under the quality of Doctors and Directors, through corrupting the Consciences
of men, and infecting the Air of Religion, by their damnable Morality; it must
needs be that the whole Monastic Body perish at one and the same time in
respect of their power.

XVI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the sixth Trumpet. The loosing of the four Angels in the
River Euphrates. REV. CHAP. 9.
V. 13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of
the golden Altar, which is before God. V. 14. Saying to the sixth Angel which
had the Trumpet, loose the four Angels, which are bound in the great River
Euphrates. V. 15. And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to stay the third part of men. V.
16. And the number of the Army of the Horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them. V. 17. And thus I saw the Horses in
the Vision, and them that sat on them, having Breast-plates of fire, and of
^acinct, and brimstone; and the heads of the Horses were as the heads of Lions,
and out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone. V. 18. By these
three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by
the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths. V. 19. For their power is in
their mouth, and in their Tails, for their Tails were like unto Serpents, and
had heads, and with them they do hurt. V. 20. And the rest of the men which
were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass,
and Stone, and of Wood; which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. V. 21.
Neither repented they of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornication, nor of their Thefis.
WE do here see the growth and progress of the Mohammedan Religion, which begun
under the fourth Trumpet; as we have seen under the fifth Trumpet the growth of
Popery, that begun under the third.

The River Euphrates, the four Angels that are loosed, the dreadful number of
Horsemen, the Breast-plates, the Fire, the Smoke, the Brimstone, the Heads, the
Tails, the Progress, the Murders, and in a word, all the particularities which
appear under this sixth Trumpet, do evidently show, that it is the Mohammedan
Religion, and the Eastern Empire, invaded by the Turks, that are here intended.
And the reason also, which is here assigned, why that Empire fell into the
hands of the Turks, does further confirm it.

(1.) The Turks being settled in Persia, they must cross Euphrates, before they
could make any conquests on this side, or render themselves Masters of that of
the Roman Empire, whereof Constantinople was the Seat.

(2.) Their Armies appear here to be made up of none, but of Horse. Thus the
name Perse signifies a Horse. To which the Holy Spirit did doubtless allude. As
in the Visions of Daniel the King of Grecia is styled a Goat, because the
Grecians were called Aegiades, which is to say Wild Goats. It Is certain that
the Holy Spirit does often make allusions to the names of persons and of
people. And in truth, the Turks have often come into the Field, with Armies of
two or three hundred thousand Horse.

(3) The number of four is Mystical in the Mohammedan Religion, as the number
seven is in the Revelation. When the Turks had past Euphrates, they established
four Sultanies. That of Cesarea in Cappadocia; that of Aleppo; that of
Damascus; and that of Antioch. Mahomet boasted that he had four Counselors;
two from Heaven, viz. Michael and Gabriel; and two from the Earth, namely
Ebubeker and Othmar. There were four false Teachers concurred to the making of
the Alkoran; John of Antioch, an Arian; Barra of Persia, a Iacobite; Sergius a
Nestorian Monk; and Solam a Jew, who was an Astroleger. Mahomet left behind him
four Successors, whom he called the four cutting Swords of God, to wit
Ebubeker, otherways called Abdalla, Osman, Othmar, and Haly. Which four
Successors, begot four Sects in the Mohammedan Religion. There are four
Religious Orders among the followers of that false Prophet; the Gemaliers, the
Dervis, the Calenders, and the Torlaquis. In a word, the number four is to be
found in their Fasts, in their Ceremonies, in their Testaments, in their
Marriages, and almost in every thing. Which so plainly answering to the four
Angels loosed in the Euphrates, leaves us no room to doubt but that the Holy
Spirit had a design in this place to represent the Mohammedan Religion, and the
Turkish Empire, as possessing the place of the Oriental Roman Empire. And
forasmuch as both the name of fourth, and that of Mahomet, meet in the present
Grand Seignior; I do not know but that this Mystical number of his Religion,
may presage his Empire to be near an end, and that he shall be the last Turkish
Emperor.

The Breast-plates of Fire, of Jacinct, and of Brimstone; denote the gross
darkness, and the loathsome silthiness of the Turkish Religion. A Religion that
can relish with none, save such as are sunk into all sensuality, and which
could be invented by none, but by those that were profane and wicked.

The Tails like unto Serpents which had heads, represent the Mohammedan
Teachers, clothed with the power of being Judges. In the 9. Chap. of Isaiah, v.
15. the Head signifies a man of Authority, and the Tail signifies a false
Treacher. Now the Turkish Doctors or Priests, are the Supreme Judges in all
causes, as well civil as Religious. It Is said, Their power is in their mouth,
the better to discover these to be the Mahometans, in that their power, when
they have to do with carnal and sensual Christians, consists in the seducing
virtue of their carnal Doctrine.

The Fire, the Brimstone, and the Smoke, do questionless relate to Powder used
in guns; which the Turks made both use of sooner and after a more terrible
manner, than Christians generally did. For a German Monk having invented it
(and it was an invention becoming the Cloister) he discovered it to the
Venetians, and they communicated it to the Turks. And the Turks being greedy to
extend their Conquests, made have to put it into practice, which succeeded to
them according to their desires. Calcondyla reports, that Mahomet II. being
besieging Constantinople, caused Canon to be cast of so extraordinary a
bigness, that there needed seventy couple of Oxen, and two thousand men to draw
one of them.

(7.) The Third part of men killed, intimates the Progress and Spreading both
of the Turkish Empire, and of their Religion; which reunited all their
different principalities in the person of Tangrolipix. To him succeeded Asan in
the year 1059. just about the time that Pope Gregory VII. raised the Papacy to
the highest top of grandeur. And it was this Asan that rendered himself Master
of all the Countries from the City of Laodicea in Syria, even to the
Hellespont, of Antiochia, of Cappadocia, of Bithynia, of Lycia, of Pesidia, of
Lycaonia, of Paphlagonia, of Galatia, of both the Celicia's, of Pontus, and of
Anatolia. And from that time the Sultans have alway's advanced their conquests,
and have destroyed the Roman Empire in the East, having made Constantinople,
which was formerly the Imperial Seat of it, to be that of the Turkish and
Mohammedan Empire.

(8.) It was upon the Christians that the Turks made all their Conquests; and
of this the Holy Spirit gives such a reason, as might serve to open the eyes of
the Papists, because it convinces them of being guilty of Idolatry. This
accusation the Papists do account the most sensible injury that can be done
them; but it is a condemnation that they must bear. For says the Holy Spirit,
The rest of the men that were not killed by these plagues, repented not of the
works of their hands, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold,
and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see, nor hear,
nor walk. At whose cost was it, that the Mahometans erected their Empire?
Against whom were they the Scourges of God, for the punishment of their
Idolatry? It was not against the Heathens; for there were none such within the
whole extent of the Eastern Roman Empire. It was at the expense of Christians,
that the Turks extended both their Empire and their Religion. And therefore
seeing the Holy Ghost declares, that the punishing the Idolatry of Christians,
was the reason of loosing of the four Angels in the River Euphrates to commit
so many Murders; it is from thence evident that the Christians, who were
subdued, were Idolaters; and also apparent wherein their Idolatry consisted.
Namely, in this, that they worshipped Devils, and Idols of Gold, of Silver, of
Brass, of Stone, and of Wood. Nor can it be denied but that the Roman Church is
guilty of the same crime.

If it shall be said, that the Roman Church does not worship Devils, as those
mentioned in the Text are said to have done. I answer, first, that the word in
the Original is Demons, which signifies properly inferior and lower Gods; Gods
who are Mediators between men and the Supreme God: which is a Title liberally
given to the Saints in the Church of Rome. And in which sense the Word used in
this place, ought necessarily to be expounded, seeing there were never any
Christians that made profession of worshipping Devils; neither could the very
Heathens be said to do that, forasmuch as Devils were wholly unknown among
Pagans. I answer secondly, that all Religious worship given to a Creature, is
judged by the Scripture to be rendered to Devils. This appears fully Ps. 106.
v. 37. where it is said, that they sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto
Devils. The Roman Church does believe that She worshippeth God, in worshipping
Images of Gold, of Silver, of Brass, of Stone, and of Wood; but the Prophets do
instruct us by the example of the Israelites, that this Worship is given to
Devils. They sottishly flatter and deceive themselves, in distinguishing
betwixt an Idol and an Image; fora^ much as the Greek Term Idol, signifies the
same, that the word Image does in our vulgar languages. Moreover, they who were
killed by the Turks, worshipped not Devils. They only did, as the Roman Church
does toward her Images of Gold and Silver, etc. Yea She does worse, than those
Oriental Idolatrous Christians did. For she worshippeth as God the Sacrament;
which must therefore necessarily be a Creature, because it is a Sacrament; and
which cannot be Jesus Christ, because it is Instituted by him. For that which
is Instituted, must necessarily be something different from him that Ordains it.

XVII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Angel, with the Book Open. REV. CHAP. 10.
V. 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from Heaven, clothed with a
Clowd, and a Rainbow was upon his Head, and his Face was as it were the Sun,
and his Feet as Pillars of Fire. V. 2. And he had in his hand a Little Book
Open, and he set his right foot upon the Sea, and his left foot on the Earth.
THe Rainbow which appeared upon the Angels Head, does place Him out of the
rank of created Angels, and gives us to understand that this is the Angel of
the Covenant, the Angel who is the Creator, of whom there is mention at the
opening of the Seventh Seal, namely, Jesus Christ. And whereas it is added,
that his Face was as the Sun, and his Feet as Pillars of Brass; that is a
demonstration that he is the same with him, who revealed himself to St. John in
the first Chap. to wit, the Son of God.

He appears having in his hand a Book open. Which Book is not that of the
Apocalypse; but that of the Holy Scripture in general. For the Six Trompets
having represented the spoil, which popery had done in the Western Church, and
Mahometanism in the Eastern; this Vision does foretell, how this ravage shall
be repaired by the preaching of the Gospel. For this is an open Book, to all
such as do in sincerity seek to be instructed in what it reveals, and who
seek for nothing besides what is there: If our Gospel be hid, says St. Paul,
it is hid to them that are lost, whom the God of this world has blinded, 2
Cor. 4. 3, 4. Mahometanism, and Popery, have shut this Book, by exacting a
blind Obedience, by forbidding the examination of their Doctrine, and by
interdicting people from reading of the word of God. But the time will come,
that this divine Book shall be opened, and when all men shall be allowed to
read it, in order to the Reforming those abuses, which through the impudence of
Mahometanism in the East, and the craft of the Papacy in the West, have
abounded in the Church.

XVIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Voice of the Angel, that had his Right Foot upon
the Sea, and his left upon the Earth: and of the seven Thunders. REV. CHAP. 10.
V. 2. And he set his right Foot upon the Sea, and his left foot upon the
Earth. V. 3. And cried with a loud Voice, as when a Lion roareth: and when he
had cried, Seven Thunders uttered their voices. V. 4. And when the Seven
thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write; and I heard a voices
from heaven, saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven Thunders
uttered, and write them not.
ACcording to the Style that the Scripture uses to speak in, the Earth
signifies the East, and the Sea signifies the West; that is, the Isles and
countries that ly near unto the Sea. The Roman Empire was divided, into that of
the East, and into that of the West. So that when it is said, that Jesus Christ
being come down from heaven, Set his feet, the one upon the Sea, and the other
upon the Earth; the meaning is, that he took hold of these two Empires, in
order to make the light of his word shine there, and to establish in them the
purity of his worship.

Moreover, according to the Scripture style, whenever the Earth and Sea are
spoken of, the Earth is named before the Sea; but here the style is changed;
and the Sea is both mentioned first, and Jesus Christ sets his right foot upon
the Sea. Which is as if he would assuredly tell us, that he will make the light
of the Gospel break out in the West, sooner than in the East; and that he will
begin the work of Reformation in reference to Popery, sooner than in reference
to Mahometanism. This the Event will clear. And what we shall see fall out in
the West, in relation to Popery, will be an Earnest of what we may expect will
come to pass in the East, in relation to Mahometanism.

The great Cry of the Angel, as when a Lion roareth, does threaten all the
Enemies of the Gospel alike; and the seven Thunders, do presage their total
ruin. The great cry was heard in the work of the Reformation; but the entire
destruction of the Enemies of the Gospel, is put off till another time, namely,
until under the Effusion of the Vials. And this is the reason, why St. John is
forbid to write the things declared by the seven Thunders, because there was a
considerable space of time to elapse, between the cry of the Angel that was
heard at the Reformation, and the time of pouring out of the Vials. For that
the Seven Thunders are the same with the seven Vials of the 16th Chap.
appears evidently from this, in that the Thunders do necessarily signify the
Judgments of God by which his Enemies are to be overwhelmed; and in that the
seven Vials do denote the same thing. According as it is said chap. 15. v. 1.
that the seven Vials are the seven last plagues, by which the wrath of God is
consummated.

XIX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Angels Oath, and of the finishing the Mystery of
God. REV. CHAP. 10.
V. 5. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted
up his hand to heaven. V. 6. And swear by him that lives forever and ever, who
created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the Earth and the things
that therein are, and the Sea and the things which are therein, that there
should be Time no longer. V. 7. But in the day's of the voice of the seventh
Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the Mystery of God shall be finished, as
he has declares to his Servants the Prophets.
IT must needs be, that what is treated of under the 7th Trumpet, is both
great, against all appearances to the contrary, and a thing hard to be
believed; because it is nor only called a Mystery and a Secret, but because to
render it credible, the Lord would give assurance of it by an Oath.

But this withal does give us to understand, that it is not the last
Resurrection, nor that Trumpet of the Archangel, which is here spoken of (to
be done under the sound of the Seventh Trumpet) is to be understood. It must
then be the 1000 years Reign, as has been already shown, and that which
consists in the destruction of Babylon, in the calling of the Jews, in the
reuniting of Jews and Gentiles, and in that renowned State on Earth, which the
Prophet Isaiah has promised to the Church in his 62 Chap. that these great
things, and which seem to be above all Belief and above all Imagination, are
here meant and intended. For indeed, who of the Papists, can imagine, that Rome
and her Religion are to be destroyed; and how few Protestants, can believe,
that the Jews are to be united with the Gentiles, and that the Church of God
shall have an entire peace on the Earth for many ages? Nevertheless, this is
that Mystery which the Angel has promised with an Oath, shall be fulfilled
soon after the sounding of the seventh Trumpet. And this is the Reason why he
declared, that there shall be time no longer; that is, there shall be no more a
deferring and a delay, but that the seventh Angel shall have no sooner finished
to sound the seventh Trumpet, than that we shall see the consummation of the
Mystery of God.

XX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Angel's giving the Book to St. John to be Eaten; and
of the Effects which Ensue thereupon. REV. CHAP. 10.
V. 8. And the voice which I heard from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said,
Go, and take the little Book which is open in the hand of the Angel which
stands upon the Sea, and upon the Earth. V. 9. And I went unto the Angel, and
said unto him, Give me the little Book. And he said unto me, Take it and eat it
up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy Mouth Sweet as
honey. V. 10. And I took the little Book out of the Angels hand, and ate it up,
and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly
was bitter. V. 11. And he said unto me, thou must prophecy again before many
people, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings.
ST. John's taking the little Book from the Angel, represents those whom the
Lord shall raise up to re-establish the purity of divine worship through
preaching of the Gospel. It Is for this, that St. John took the Book out of the
hand of the Lord; because it is the Lord who gives Ministers their Mission, nor
are they to go, till they have received it from him; according as he himself
told the Apostles, go, teach all Nations, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.

It was also for this, that he not only took the Book, but that he eat it up;
because no one is properly a holy Minister, if he be not full of the Word of
God, and if he be not possessed of all Truths through having well meditated
upon them.

This Book meditated upon and well understood, produces necessarily two
effects. One is a consolation, that ravisheth the Soul, through the knowledge of
the Mysteries of salvation, and the hope of an happy eternal life. The other
is, the mortification of the flesh by that Law which God has prescribed, of
denying our selves, and of daily taking up the cross. St. John expresses these
two effects, when he says, that he found the Book sweet in his mouth as honey,
and that it made his belly bitter.

Therefore Luther, and all those others, who have traveled in the work of the
Reformation, have executed the order which the Angel gave here to St. John;
Thou must Prophecy again before many peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, and
Kings. The Term to prophecy, signifies not only the foretelling things to
come, as if this order had respected only St. John; but it signifies likewise
to Instruct, to teach, to preach the Gospel; in which sense the word to
prophecy is applied in the 1 Cor. chap. 14. v. 24. etc.

XXI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Measuring of the Temple; and of the Outward Court,
to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles. REV. CHAP. II.
V. 1. And there was given me a Reed like unto a Rod, and the Angel stood,
saying, Rise, and measure the Tewple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein. V. 2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out,
and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles; and the Holy City shall
they tread under foot forty and two Months.
HEre we have represented unto us the Reformation of the Church. For this is
the execution of the Order, which St. John had received: Thou must prophecy,
i. e. thou must preach the Gospel afresh to many peoples, Nations, Tongues, and
Kings. And St. John, as has been observed, represents therein all those whom
God was to employ in that great work.

For the Execution of this commission, there is given unto St. John a Reed like
unto a Rod, and there is an Angel saying unto him. Rise, and measure the Temple
of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. This Reed, is the Word of
God, called a Rod or a Scepter, Ps. 45. v. 6. and a Rule, Gal. 6. 16. Because
neither errors nor manners can be otherway's reformed, than by the application
of the word of God; which condemns both Errors and vices, and lay's before us
what we ought to believe, and what we ought to practice. As often as the Church
of Israel was Reformed, it was done by the application of no other Rule. Josiah
and Hezekiah made use of no other, no more did Ezra and Nehemiah.

There is here an Allusion to the 40. chap. of Ezekiel v. 5. etc. where the
prophet received Order to measure the Temple, to assure him of the deliverance
from the Babylonish Captivity. And Jews as well as Christians are agreed, that
the Temple described by Ezekiel, is not the Material Temple of Jerusalem, but
that of the Messiah, which neither is, nor can be any other, than his Church,
which St. Paul calls the Temple of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 16. And consequently
this is the Temple, which is to be reestablished, by the destruction of
Antichristian Babylon; that so there may be a correspondence between St. John
and Ezekiel.

He is commanded to measure both the Temple and the Altar, because there is
nothing in the Church, but what stands in need of being Reformed. Since all
Nations have been made drunk with the Wine of Babylon; both Religion and
manners; Faith and Worship, Head and Members; in a word, every thing ought to
be measured; every thing stands in need of Reformation.

The Court without the Temple trodden under foot by the Gentiles is the
Christian Church, but become Antichristian by its Idolatry. The Gentiles, that
is to say, the Pagans, are represented treading, that is frequenting the
outward Court of the Temple; because almost all the Ceremonies of the Roman
Church are borrowed from the Heathen. And for this cause also, it is called the
Court without, which was no part of the Temple. For the Roman Church is not
properly the Temple and Church of our Lord; it is but the outward Court, where
the Gentiles have liberty to come. Whereas it is given in command to leave the
outward Court out, it is as much as the enjoining all those who are measured
and Ruled by the Word of God, and who are elsewhere called the Sealed of God,
to withdraw and actually separate from the Church of Rome, and to make a
Society apart, in order to their worshipping God according to his word. So that
is the very same command, with that given Rev. 18. 4. Come out of Babylon my
People.

Babylon ought to subsist 42. Months, after that the outward Court of the
Temple is given to the Gentiles, that they may tread the holy City under foot
so long; but of that time we shall speak in another place.

XXII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the two Witnesses; their Sackcloth State; the Time of
their Prophesying; and their Dignity. REV. CHAP. 11.
V. 3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses and they shall prophecy
1260 day's, clothed in sackcloth. V. 4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the
two Candlesticks standing before the God of all the Earth. V. 5. And if any man
will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their Mouth and devoureth their Enemies;
and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. V. 6. These
have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their Prophecy: and
have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the Earth with all
plagues as often as they will.
THEY who by the two Witnesses do understand the old Testament and the New,
have not hit the meaning of this place. They have not come home to the sense;
but they have touched a little on the side of it. The word of God is the
Testimony; for it is frequently so called Psa. 119. So St. Paul styles also the
Gospel 1 Cor. chap. 2. v. 1. But they who profess the Truth, and are the
defenders of it, are properly the Witnesses here spoken of. They who since the
birth of Antichristianism, have cried against its Errors and Idolatry. And we
must observe, that these Witnesses are styled also Candlesticks, which is the
Title given by Jesus Christ to the seven Churches is the Epistle which he writ
to them Rev. 1 20. Nor is it strange that he speaks only of two Witnesses,
although he be speaking of a numerous Society, seeing in all language both divine
and humane great Bodies of men do make but one Mystical person. Thus the
Israelites are considered in Hosea as one Woman. Thus likewise all sincere
Christians are styled in the Revelation the Lambs Wife, and all false
Christians are called the great Harlot. And the Historian Florus represents the
whole Roman people as a man that had past through the different Stages of human
life.

These Witnesses are precisely two, neither more nor less. They are not fewer,
that their Testimony may be sufficient; they are not more, through an Allusion
to the History of the ancient people of God, whose conduct had been committed
two, to Moses and Aaron, to Iosuah and Caleb, to Elijah and Elisha, to
Zerobabel and Jehashua, to Ezra and Nehemiah, to Haggai and Zechariah. And they
are withal said to be two, in Allusion to their Testimony; the old Testament,
which bears witness of Christ to come; and the new Testament, which
testisieth of Christ as come. They are moreover styled two, because the
Christian Church, which had subsisted in the Valleys of Angrogna and Piedmont
from the time of Sylvester and Constantin, became at last divided into two
Branches that are called Protestants, as if you would say Attestants and
Witnesses against the usurpation of the Church of Rome; and these two are the
Calvinists and Lutherans, who together make up one and the same Body with those
that were styled the Waldenses and the Albigenses.

The Sackcloth in which these two Witnesses prophesied for 1260 days, which is
the same time with that designed by 42 Months; signifies the contempt and
persecution, which the Defenders of the Truth underwent all that time, from and
by the Antichristian party. Nor was there any kind of injuries and vexations,
which was not put in practice, to weary them and to stop their Mouths. They
were called Berengarians, Stercorists, Waldenses, Albigenses, Leonists,
Petrobrusians, Henricians, Wicliffists, Lollards, etc. as they are now styled
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Calvinists, Sacramentarians, Hugonots, Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. And to these reproaches, there were added Fines,
Confiscations, Imprisonments, Banishments, and Condemnations to death. But if
they were treated with that contempt and rage by the Antichristian Church; the
Angel of the Covenant, who has given them in command to Measure the Temple,
and to leave the outward Court of the Temple out; will both advance their
honor, and avenge the outrages that they have suffered, when he comes to pour
forth the plagues of his wrath upon their persecutors.

The Holy Spirit does ascribe unto these two Witnesses, the virtue and power of
Moses and Elijab, of turning waters into bliod, and of shutting heaven. The
Heathens used to accuse the primitive Christians, of being the Cause of all the
Calamities that befell the Empire. And in one sense they had reason for it,
seeing the motive to Gods inflicting Civil wars, Famine, and Pestilence upon
them; was to punish the Empire, for the miseries that they made the Church to
suffer. The case is the same in reference to these two Witnesses, to whom God
says as he did to Jeremiah, chap. 5. v. 14. I will make my words in thy mouth
fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

Finally, whereas these two Witnesses are called two Olive Trees, and two
Candlesticks standing before the God of the Earth; it is an Allusion to the 4th
Chapter of Zechariah, where it is said, that he saw a golden Candlestick
standing between two Olive Trees, which distilled down oil into the
Candlesticks. The Candlestick there, represents the Church; and the two Olive
Trees, represent Zerobabel and Iehoshua, by whom the Church of Israel was then
conducted. So that Ministers who Teach the pure word of God, are the Olive
Trees of Zechariah; and the Flocks that hearken unto and obey them, are the
Candlesticks.

XXIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Witnesses being overcome, and Slain, and left
unburied. REV. CHAP. XI.
V. 7. And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them. V. 8. And their dead Bodies shall lie in the
street of the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where
also our Lord was crucified. V. 9. And they of the People, and Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations, shall see their dead Bodies three day's and an half, and
shall not suffer their dead Bodies to be put in graves. V. 10. And they that
dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send
gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on
the Earth.
THis Beast is the same with that which arose out of the bottomless pit, having
two horns, described Rev. chap. 13. v. 11. etc. It is said also of the first
Beast that arose out of the Sea, and which is described Rev. chap. 13. v. 1.
that he should make war with the Saints and overcome them; but not that he
should kill them* as it is of the Beast mentioned here, of whom it is said,
that he shall slay the Witnesses.

But whereas it is said, that the Beast shall kill the Witnesses, when they have
finished their Testimony* this is not to be understood absolutely, as if they
were not to be overcome and slain, till after the 42 Months, or the 1260 days,
which the Reign of the Beast is to continue. But when they are about to finish
their Sachcloath Testimony; and when the Beast, begins to fall, and when the
Witnesses appear in some degree of honor, through the Reformation's being
supported by public Authority; then the Beast growing enraged and transported
with fury, shall make war with them, overcome them, and kill them.

So that this War, is different from that which had been during the time of the
Witnesses prophesying clothed in Sackcloth That is said to have been made
against them as clothed in sackcloth, because there was no Sovereign Prince
who did then protect them, or gave them liberty to bear their Testimony. But
this War is made against them after they have put off their Sackcloth, and
while they are countenanced in their Profession of the Gospel by the Edicts of
Sovereign Rulers. In that their Enemies made use of Massacres and Gibbets, and
put the Witnesses actually to death; in this they neither use Massacres nor
Gibbets, but suffer them to live; only they put them to a civil and Spiritual
death, as has been done to the Protestant Churches in France, Savoy, etc.

I call that a Civil Death in those Churches, that they have no more Pastors;
that they can no more assemble neither publicly nor privately, neither in
secret nor apart; that they can no more sing Psalms, nor read the Word of God;
that they dare neither style themselves Protestants, nor Reformed, nor
Hugenots. For when a witnesses mouth is shut, that he can no more plead for the
Truth, that is such a kind of death as may be termed a Civil Death.

I call that a Spiritual Death in those Churches, to be forced by the violence
of armed Troops, and by Dragoons, sent forth as Missionaries by the great
Dragon, compelled to abjure the Reformed Religion, to enter into the communion
of the Roman Church, and to practice their Worship. The present State of the
Churches in France, etc. is then a Captivity which the Holy Spirit represents
to us, under the Image and Emblem of a Death. So the Prophet Hosea styled the
Babylonish Captivity, in that he says, chap. 6. v. 1, 2. Come, let us return
unto the Lord; he will revive us, and we shall live in his sight. And the
Church being in that Captivity, is introduced speaking in the same manner,
Psalm. 85. 6. Will thou not, O Lord, revive us again; that thy people may
rejoice in thee? In a word, the Valley which Ezekiel saw chap. 37. v. 1, etc.
covered with bones, was nothing save an Image of the Jews being captive in
Babylon.

And in truth, the death of the Churches in France, etc. is of a nature
answerable to the Resurrection, that is here promised to the Witnesses, and
which signifies no other thing but their re-establishment. Which is the reason
why it is said, that their Bodies lie unburied. For that is as much as to say,
that the Beast was not able to put them into Graves, because the Favorers of
the Reformation hindered it, and that they remain unburied, that they may the
more readily be restored. The change of the Expression in the Text, does both
favor and strongly support this Exposition. For when the Holy Ghost is
speaking of their Enemies, he says, that the Inhabitants of the Earth shall
rejoice over the Witnesses that are overcome and slain; but when he speaks of
those that favor and uphold them, he says, that they of the people, kindreds,
and tongues, and Nations, who shall see their dead bodies, shall not suffer
them to be put into Graves.

But what is that to say? will not suffer them to be put into Graves? For the
better understanding of it, we are to observe all that the Beast was to do
against the Witnesses. (1.) It is said, that the Beast shall make war with
them. That is, the Church of Rome, or the Papacy, shall make war against the
Protestants. This the Event has made evident. It Is five or six and twenty
years since this war begun. As soon as the peace of the Pyrenees was concluded,
the Romish Clergy, and the Jesuits took the field, and begun with the Church
of Montauban, whose College and Senate they put down. In a few years after, all
the Churches in the Kingdom, saw themselves besieged, and threatened to be
destroyed by a terrible battery of Edicts and Declarations. But that they might
not make too much noise, they fell upon them by degrees, and attacked them one
after another. The first assault was against Ministers Habits; the next against
Annexes; after that against the Bells in their Temples; then against their
Buryings; next against Children that had attained to the age of seven years;
then against Midwives. It would make a large Volumn to recount all the Edicts
and Declarations. But their main Engine was the matter of Summons, by which they
compelled them to produce the Titles by virtue of which they enjoyed the public
exercise of their Religion in their respective places. This was a proclaimed
War. The Table of Commissioners for execution of the Edict of Nantes, the
Magistrates of Justice, the Parliaments, and the Council, were the Field of
Battle, where the Beast appeared fighting against the Witnesses.

(2.) It Is said, that the Beast overcame the Witnesses. This has been seen
literally accomplished, when the Churches were deprived of the Liberty of
their Worship, either by the Judgment of the Commissioners; or by the Sentence
of the Magistrates, or by Arrests of Parliament, if so be that any fled to the
Council; at last, all without exception were condemned by the Edict of
Fontainbleau, which repealed that of Nantes.

(3.) It Is said, that the Beast shall kill the Witnesses. We have declared
already that the death here intended, is a Civil and Spiritual death. Which
consists in this, that the Reformed Congregations are suffered no more to
assemble, neither publicly, nor privately; and that they are not permitted to
read the Word of God, nor any Book of the Reformed Religion. And in this, that
all they of that Religion, are compelled by the Violence of Soldiers to abjure
their belief, and to promise to enter into fellowship with the Church of Rome,
except it be such that were able to make their escape out of the Kingdom, and
some Prisoners who hitherto stand it out.

(4) Whereas it is said, that the dead bodies of the Witnesses were not buried,
because the kindreds, Tongues, People, and Nations would not suffer it; this
must be some mercy and blessing that is promised unto them, in order to comfort
them under their state of death.

There is not one thing, which they who are dead, would more desire, provided
they could speak, than to be put into graves, as esteeming it a favor and an
honor. And thence it is that by the Laws of Nations, Traitors and horrid
Malefactors, are deprived of the honor of burial, and of rest in a grave. The
Spirit of God threatened one of the Kings of Israel, that he should be buried
with the burial of an Ass, Ierem. 22. 19. which is as much as to say, that he
should not have the honor of a grave. And if the Holy Spirit had said, that
they who had slain the Witnesses, would not suffer them to be buried; there
would have been no cause to doubt, but that the denial of Sepulture by those
murderers, were to be expounded as a continuance of their fury, and to be
interpreted for an addition of punishment, and for something accounted worse
than death. But seeing they are not those who had killed them, and who are
designed by Inhabitants of the Earth, that would not suffer their bodies to be
buried; but they are the Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples, and Nations; it is
evident, that it must be some great benefit, that is procured for them by these
Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples, and Nations, which is obtained in despite, and to
the great regret of those Inhabitants of the Earth who had killed them.

But how is this, that the not being buried, is a benefit and advantage to the
Witnesses, whom the Beast had killed, and for the Protestant Flocks, whom the
Romish Church has scattered? I dare say, that before the Publication of the
Edict of Fontainbleau, for Repealing the Edict of Nantes, we could not have
conceived, nor have in the least comprehended this State of the Witnesses lying
dead without being put into Graves. But that Transaction which has astonished
all Europe, has reflected so much light upon this Article; that I am
persuaded, that as the death of the Witnesses is fulfilled in the extinction of
all the Protestant Churches in France, etc. so the State wherein these
extinguished Churches do now continue, gives us to see the accomplishement of
this that is here said, concerning the Bodies of the Witnesses, lying in the
street of the great City, without being put into Graves.

There are three sorts of Catholics among the new Converts. Some go willingly
to the Mass. These are such as have not tasted the good Word of God; Children
of this world; Lovers of Earthly things; Ready to become Turks, by the same way
that they are become Papists. There are others who go not at all to Mass, but
abhor it as a profanation of the holy Supper of our Lord. There are a third
sort who do indeed go, but at the same time they testify that they do it
through being forced, and pray heartily to God, being resolved to depart the
Kingdom if they can find way of escape, which they uncessantly seek for. And
the number of these being doubtless the greatest, it may be said, that the
Reformed are not buried, because the greatest part practice that which they do,
with regret; and have the Mass, and all which does attend upon it, in the same
abhorrency that they had them heretofore. For I do account those who willingly
go to Mass, to be dead and buried altogether; nor is there any hope of their
return. But for those who go with repugnancy and sorrow, tho they be dead, yet
they are not buried, and there is cause to hope that they shall suddenly rise.
They are dead in the esteem of those who have compelled them, and who reckon
upon them as good Catholics, whom they shall in time bring to what they would
have them. But they are not put into Graves; they are not yet infected; there
is some hidden spark of life in them, which will speedily manifest it self.
This spark of life consists in the sorrow they are under, for what they are
forced to do, in a more ardent love to their Pastors than heretofore, and in
those prayers which without ceasing they make unto God for their restoration.

And to say all that I think on this subject. So long as there remain of those
seeming Converted, and forced Catholics in France; it cannot reasonably be
said, that the pretended Heresy of Calvin is extinguished, or that the
Witnesses are burried. The Witnesses do yet appear, as Bodies not interred, and
exposed to be seen; and are looked upon by the Papists themselves as dead; of
some they are looked upon with pity, of others with horror, and of all with
mistrust. If the Popish Clergy had been hearkened unto, who are animated by that
murdering as well as lying Spirit; we should have seen the revival of St.
Bartholomew's day for the burying of those Witnesses, whom they have killed,
and for the final extirpating of the pretended Heresy. For they do see, that
there is no other way to compass their End. Their inclination to Massacre
appears in the cruel treatment which they use toward those seeming Converts,
who to repair the injury they have done, when they come to die, refuse to
partake of the Popish Sacraments, whose dead bodies the Priests cause to be
dragged along the streets, and thrown on the Dunghils. We may very well say,
that the rage of Papacy has no bounds; seeing after they have murdered the
Consciences of these new Converts, they persecute their very Carcasses, not
only without shame, but without fear of being reproached for their inhumanity.
This murdering Spirit which animates the Clergy, induces them to demand of the
King, or of his Council, a general Massacre, that they may thereby hinder the
Heresy, which they have extinguished, from recovering life and strength again.
But the Kindreds, Tongues, Peoples, and Nations, will not suffer, that the King
should consent to a general Massacre; for either the seeing the prejudice which
that violent Counsel would do to his State, and the advantage which that
effusion of Blood would give his Enemies; or the fearing to provoke his
Neighbors against him; makes that his Majesty will not hearken to those
Sanguinary Sollicitors for the burying of the Witnesses.

We are carefully to observe the place, where the Witnesses are to be overcome,
killed, and left without burial. It is, says the Text, in the Street of the
great City. This observation obviates an Objection, that may be made against
what we have alleged in our affirming the Extinction of the Protestant
Churches in France, to be the putting the Witnesses to death. For some may say,
are the two Witnesses no other save the Reformed Churches in France. The Church
of England, the Churches of the United Provinces, those of Piedmont, those of
Switzerland, those of Germany, etc. are not all these Churches of the number of
the Witnesses, as well as those of France? Yes, without doubt? But neither the
United Provinces, nor the Cantons, nor Swedland, nor Denmark, nor Hess, nor
Saxony, nor Brandenburgh, are Streets of the great City. The Pope receives no
Tribute from thence, nor has he any power in any of them. Neither is there any
place, except Piedmont, where the Papists have begun to make the like War, as
they have done in France. As for England, I know not if it may be said, that it
is become a Street of the great City, because that Popery's being reestablished
on the Throne in the Person of the King, who declared himself a Roman Catholic
upon his coming to the Crown. Nor do I know whether we are not to expect the
effect of that secret Plot of which there has been a rumor in that Kingdom for
these twenty years, before we can tell whether the prophecy about the death of
the Witnesses be fulfilled; and before we can particularly determine the time of
their Resurrection. But the word used here in the Greek does deliver us from
that Entanglement. For the Text not speaking of places, but of one place; does
thereby seem to inform us, that the Witnesses are not to be killed any where
else, save in that place or Street which the Text does design. Which seems
beyond all contradiction to be France, in that we see the Witnesses Killed
there, and not put into Graves.

XXIV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Rising of the Witnesses; their ascending into
Heaven; and of what follows upon their Triumph. REV. CHAP. XI.
V. 11. And after three day's and an half, the Spirit of Life from God entered
into them; and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which
saw them. V. 12. And they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying unto them,
come up hither, and they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies
beheld them. V. 13. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, and the
tenth part of the City fell; and in the Earthquake were slain of men seven
thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.
IF the 1260 Days signify 1260 Years, as shall be proved in another place; then
there is no reason for the understanding the three days and an half wherein the
Witnesses lie dead for three Natural day's. So that it is three years and a
half, that the Witnesses are to continue dead, and without being put into
Graves. After which time they shall rise, and shall ascend into Heaven.

This Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses does import two things.
First, That the Reformed Churches shall be reestablished, and that in such a
manner, that the hand of God shall signally appear in it, because there is none
besides God who can raise the Dead. 2ly, That they shall be settled in a more
Advantageous State, than they were before; even as the life which Christ had
after his Resurrection, surpassed that in glory which he laid down on the
Cross. That is the meaning of the Allusion, which the Holy Spirit makes here
to the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, while he is speaking of the
reestablishment of the Church. Because their death was in this like unto that
of Jesus Christ, that they were killed and extinguished by Roman Soldiers,
even as our Lord was. For this is a Fact as remarkable as it is notorious, that
they are the Prelates who have let loose the Kings Troops against the Reformed
Churches; and that they are the Curates who have removed them from such of the
Reformed as have come to beg it under promise of abjuring their Religion. So
that the Death of the Witnesses bearing so great a resemblance to the death of
Jesus Christ, their Resurrection shall also resemble his.

All that is here said concerning the reestablishment of the Protestant
Churches, is to be considered with attention. (1) It Is said, that the Spirit of
life from God entered into the Witnesses. This Spirit of Life, is certainly set
in opposition to that Spirit of Death, which killed them. Now what was that
which killed them? It was the fear of men, the dread of misery; apprehension
that they should never see an End of their torments, and the Violence they were
under from the Soldiers. It was that fallacious and ensnaring Reasoning, which
they every day heard from the Mouths of their persecutors. Stand out as long as
you please; When we have devoured you to the bone, you must at last obey.
Flatter not your selves with hope of any ease; the King will not suffer himself
to be contradicted. He who could take Cambray and Luxemburgh, will he be
withstood by a Hugonot Dog? Nor shall ye be suffered to depart the Kingdom.
What fools are ye to suffer your selves to be devoured? ye may be eased of the
Dragoons, by the bare saying of one word. Say only, I do obey the King, and for
the rest you may believe as you will. Do you think, that the King would have
you damned? He purposes to reform the Church of France, as soon as he has
reduced and united all his Subjects. Do ye not know what he has done already
against the Court of Rome? You will suddenly see other matters. Will you be
they after all, who shall alone make head against the King; and rob him of the
Title of Conqueror and of Victorious. Do you not see that all do submit; that
young and old, poor and rich, Noble and Ignoble, Learned and Ignorant,
throughout the whole Kingdom do comply? This was that Spirit of Death that
entered into the Witnesses. It was this blast or tempestuous Wind, that has
scattered and overthrown all the Protestant Churches of France.

And in probability, the Spirit of life from God that shall enter into the
Witnesses, will be a way of Reasoning that is contrary to this. For example;
what have we done, unhappy creatures that we are? How great is our crime? We
are gone over to a Religion that cannot be good; forasmuch as its Ministers,
Bishops, and Priests have let loose the Kings Troops upon us, and that it is
they who are the Authors of all the robberies, violences, blasphemies, and
impieties, which the Soldiers have committed in order to pervert us. And
seeing the Bishops and Priests will have forced Consciences, they cannot be the
Ministers of God, who requires the heart, and a willing people. Nor can they
be the Ministers of Christ, because they have taken from us the only means of
Instruction by depriving us of the Holy Scriptures, together with all Books
tending to piety. What can that Religion be worth, which reduces the whole of
Religion to the Mass, where we understand nothing, and where our Eyes are
filled with certain ceremonies, of which we comprehend nothing, save that they
worship an object in which we see nothing that is Adorable; and where they
commit that affront against the Son of God, as to hale him from his throne of
glory, to put him into the hands of wicked persons, and into the Mouths of
blasphemers. Can that Religion be good where we hear not a Sermon, wherein they
do not demand the assistance of the Holy Spirit but by the intercession of the
blessed Virgin; which is both a plain Idolatry, and expressly condemned by those
words of our Savior; I will pray the Father, and he shall send you the
comforter; and no man comes to the Father, save by me. Besides, they do
perform nothing of what they promised us. We are not suffered to believe as we
would. They have not Reformed one abuse. They give us no rest, neither as to
our bodies, nor as to our Consciences. They joined fraud to violence, which are
the two Characters of Antichrist, whereby to seduce us. Come, let us give glory
to God. Let us depart out of Babylon. God will bless our Endeavors, and either
deliver us out of our captivity, or give us strength to glorify him by our
sufferings. This in all likelihood, is the Spirit of life from God, that after
three years and a half will enter into the Witnesses.

(2) It Is said, that the Witnesses stood upon their feet. This is as much as to
say, that they shall come to acknowledge their crime; shall forbear to go to the
Mass; that they shall take courage; that their zeal shall revive; that they
shall Serve God according to his Word; that they shall assemble first in
secret, then publicly, without fearing any more either the Bishops, or the
Curates, or the Soldiers, or the Dragoons, or Misery, or death.

(3) It Is said, that great fear fell upon them which saw them. We are not to
doubt, but that the Holy Spirit does by them that saw them understand, the
Authors and Executioners of the persecution. For the other Papists have scarce
meddled in it. It has been only the Clergy, and the Bigots of the Court and of
the Parliaments, who interested themselves in persecuting the Churches while
they stood, and who do now make merry upon their dissipation. And they are the
persons, upon whom fear will fall, when they shall come to see the scattered
congregations gather again. Nor shall they recover from that dread, because the
Court will be no more inclined to hearken to them; but on the contrary, all
that will be done there, shall tend to the mortifying of them, and to the
re-establishing the Churches.

(4) It Is said, that the Witnesses heard a great voice from heaven, saying,
come up hither; and that they ascended in a cloud. I am much deceived, if this
does not signify, that God, who is the Master of hearts, shall change the heart
of the King and of his Council, and that we shall see a Revolution in France,
of a contrary nature to what has been seen in England. As in the year 1685* we
saw Popery mount into the Throne of great Britain; so after the three years
and a half of the Witnesses lying dead, we shall see the Reformed Religion get
upon the Throne in France. We have not been much surprised to see the
re-establishment of Popery in England, because it is long since it was known
what judgment the Duke of York was of; but we shall be extremely surprised at
the re-establishment of the Reformed Churches in France, because we know the
King to be of opposite Sentiments to them. But as it is the King of France who
contributeth most to the Glory of the Papacy; So it shall be the King of
France, that shall contribute most to its ruin. It was a Louis XII who in the
last age threatened to destroy the Romish Church, perdam Babylonis nomen. And it
shall be a Louis who will execute the threatening of that generous King. The God
of heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, who has the hearts of Kings and of
people in his hand, raises in us this hope, because it is further added in the
Prophecy:

(5) That the same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell. It may be doubted whether this Earthquake may come to pass according
to the letter. But it is most certain, that Earthquakes in scripture, signify
great alterations that fall out in States. And to bring no other example save
one that relates nearly to this matter. Whosoever remembers that Earthquake
which was in France, when the King returned from the Pyrenees after the Treaty
of Peace and the consummation of his Marriage; and considers the great
alterations which have since fallen out in that Kingdom, not only in reference
to Religion, as well Popish as Reformed, but in reference to Justice, to
Policy, to the Finances, and to War; will no longer question, but that the
Earthquake, which is to be after the Witnesses have lain three days and a half
dead, does promise as surprising a change in France as to all those regards,
and an alteration wherewith all the world will be contented, except it be the
Clergy, the Monks, and the Jesuits.

Some will doubless ask, what reason I have to understand France, rather than
any other Kingdom, by this tenth part of the City, which is to fall after the
Eartquake? My reasons are these. (1) I presuppose that the City here spoken of
is Babylon, or the Papal Empire, or the Romish Church, which is the Empire of
Antichrist. This Truth we have already proved. (2) I presuppose that France is
One of the ten Horns of the Beast; One of the ten Kingdoms that were to be
formed out of the ruins of the Roman Empire, according to Daniel, and which was
to begin at the same time with the Beast, according to St. John, that is, to
begin with the Papal Empire. This is evident in History. (3) I presuppose
France is one Street, and one part of the City, i. e. of the Papal Kingdom. Nor
can any deny but that the Gallican Church, or the Church of France styles it
self by the Title of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Church; that the Pope
Reigns there over what is called Spiritual; that he has there his Ministers
and Agents; that he receives Annates from thence; and that there is no
Archbishop or Bishop in France, but who receives his Mission and Authority
from the Pope. (4) I suppose that France is the most beautiful and glorious
Kingdom of all those Kingdoms which are Tributary to the Pope. They do so
account it, by calling the King of France the most Christian King, and the
eldest Son of the Church. And it is worthy of remark, that even in St. John's
time, France was by way of excellency styled the Province; because of all the
Provinces of the Roman Empire, France which was then called Gaul, was the best
and the most powerful. This is so certain, that the name does yet remain, and
is attributed to the Southern part of France, which is styled Province, from
the latin, Provincia. It being therefore said in the Text, that the tenth part
of the City fell; the Holy Spirit did questionless intend by that expression,
the most excellent part of all? So that it is from thence very natural to
understand France by the tenth part of the City. Lastly, we have already
observed, that it is not said that the two Witnesses were killed, and that they
lay unburied in the places or Streets, in the plural number, but in the Street
of the great City, in the singular; which is as much as to say, a Popish
Kingdom marked out by way of excellency. And therefore seeing the Holy Spirit
had the most excellent of all the Popish Kingdoms in his Eye; and seeing we
have seen the death, which in so surprising a manner has befallen the
Witnesses in France; we may without any difficulty conclude, that it is France,
which is this tenth part of the City that is to fall.

(6) It Is said, that the tenth part of the City shall fall. This may at the
first view appear a dreadful prediction against France. But yet it is not so.
For we must observe, that this threatening, is not as it would at first seem,
denounced against the tenth part of the City, but against the City it self.
Because as that is the alone cause of the death of the two Witnesses, so that
is also the object of Gods vengeance. It Is then the City, the Papal Kingdom,
which is to receive a terrible loss, by the falling away of France. Whereas
France it self will increase both its strength and Glory, by that falling off
and withdrawing. So that upon the whole, I do not doubt, but that it is the
conversion of that beautiful Kingdom, which is promised in this place.

And that which confirms me the more in this conjecture is what follows,
namely, that there, i. e. in the tenth part of the City, which was to fall by
an Earthquake, there shall be slain of men seven thousand, and that the remnant
shall be affrighted, and give glory to God. In which words we have two Events
represented unto us, whereof the one is* very different from the other; both of
them worthy of observation. The one is an effect of the vengeance of God; the
other an effect of his Mercy.

The first event, is the death of seven thousand names of men. Which is a
figure, where seven thousand names of men, are put for seven thousand men of
name, that is, of quality, reputation, and dignity. These Men of Name are
doubtless, either the Doctors, who make a great deal of noise in France, in the
Sorbone, in the Society of the Oratory, in the Society of the Jesuits, and
among the Clergy; or else persons of quality, who are distinguished from others
by their birth and by their honor. The Number of seven thousand, denotes an
indefinite number, but very considerable. And the death of these men, will be a
death parallel to the Death of the Witnesses; that so like may be returned unto
them for like. For that the same shall be rendered unto Babylon, which She
rendered unto Sion, is both threatened in the Prophesies of Isaiah, and in the
Revelations of St. John; Isa. 14. 6. Rev. 18. 6.

Not that these seven thousand men, shall be compelled by the fury of
Missionary Dragoons to abjure Popery, and to embrace the Reformed Religion. For
that is not the way by which the Reformed Religion planteth it self in the
hearts of men. That is a method only suitable to the Popish Religion, and to the
Mohammedan. But the meaning is, that they shall no more dare to write, or to
speak in favor of Popery against the Reformation; that their Societies shall
be put down, and that they shall banish themselves out of the Realm, upon their
not finding it to be their interest to continue; all which will be a death unto
them. But we may take the words of the Text literally and without a Figure.
Seeing there shall be killed seven thousand names of men, that is, there shall
be no more of that kind of Doctors who are distinguished by their Societies and
Fraternities, no more Monks, no more Jesuits, and it may be no more
Archbishops, no more Abbots, and no more Cardinals in the Kingdom.

The 2d Event marked in the Prophecy, is that the remnant shall be affrighted
by the resurrection and ascension of the Witnesses; i. e. by seeing the
reestablishment of the Reformed Churches, and shall give glory to God. Which
questionless denotes unto us the conversion of all those people, who belong to
France. For there is nothing by which God is more eminently glorified, than by
the conversion of men. And that expression of their giving glory to the God of
Heaven, deserves to be remarked. Why is it not said, they shall give Glory to
God; why to the God of Heaven? This beyond all contradiction, strikes at them
who put themselves in the place of God. Every one knows the Station, which
the Pope and the Roman Church, hold in all parts of the Papal Kingdom. They
make a God of the Pope, and of the Church, both in ascribing to them the
glorious Attribute of being Infallible, which appertains to none but to the
Deity; and in making the Authority of the Church the Foundation of the Faith of
Christians. But this is a perishable Divinity, a God of the Earth, a false God;
from which men shall turn to the God of Heaven, the living and true God, whose
Word shall then be the alone Foundation of Faith. It Is well known how they have
made the great Louis a God, through their compelling Protestants to change
their Religion, for this only reason, because it was the Kings Will to have it
so. But affairs will alter; and all France shall give Glory to the God of
Heaven. They shall give to Caesar the things that are Cesar's; but not the
things which belong to God. Yea Caesar himself shall give glory to the God of
Heaven.

If what we have said in reference to the Resurrection of the two Witnesses,
and of that which is to ensue thereupon, be no more than a Conjecture, as we
will give it no other Title; yet it may be affirmed, that it is a conjecture
accompanied with great probability, and that there is some Foundation for it.
For if we dare not say, that St. John foretold the Event, which is actually
come to pass; we may say, that such a thing is fallen out, which may be called
both the death of the two Witnesses, and their lying without being put into
Graves. Seeing what we have seen befall the Reformed in France, does exactly
answer to the Terms of the prediction. And if the death of the Witnesses be
what we have explained it; then it cannot be denied, but that all which we have
said in reference to their Resurrection, is a conjecture that has a Foundation
and a probability.

As to the Time when we are to see their Resurrection; there is no doubt but
that we are to reckon from the period, at which their death fell out. And it
may be said with great appearance of truth, that the Edict of Fontain bleau,
which repealed that of Nantes, (that was the Foundation of the Liberty of the
Reformed) was the fatal stroke which gave the Witnesses their death. For the
Edict of Fontain bleau declares that of Nantes to be now useless, seeing there
remain but few Protestants to be converted to the Catholic Religion, and they
hope these will be soon reduced as others have been. Forasmuch then as the
Edict of Fontain bleau was registered toward the end of October, 1685. and that
it speaks of the extinction of the Reformed Religion, and of the Protestants,
(which was that foretold by St. John under the death of the two Witnesses) as a
thing done, and that what remained of them were not to be reckoned upon; we may
then very probably say, that upon counting the three years and a half from the
forementioned October, the Witnesses shall again rise, and the Reformed shall
be re-established.

XXV. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Seventh Trumpet. The Arkopened in Heaven. The
Kingdoms of this world become the Lords. REV. CHAP. 11.
V. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly. V. 15.
And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying,
the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. V. 16. And the four and twenty
Elders which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon their faces, and
worshipped God, saying; V. 17. We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which
art, and wast, and art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great
power, and have reigned. V. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is
come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou
should give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and
them that fear thy Name, small and great, and should destroy them which
destroy the Earth. V. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there
was seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament; and there were lightnings, and
voices, and thundering, and an Earthquake, and great hail.
Although this be the seventh Trumpet, yet it can no way's be the last Judgment
that is spoken of here, as it might seem to be at the first view. For the
pouring out of the seven Vials is to be followed with the destruction of
Babylon, and that is to be followed with the conversion of all Nations, and
with the Reign of a 1000. years. After which shall come the War of God and
Magog. And all these things being to go before the Judgment of the last day, it
is not possible that that should be the subject of this seventh Trumpet, under
which the seven Vials are to be poured out.

Nor do the 24. Elders say, that the time of Judging the quick and the dead was
come, but they only speak of the Dead, which shows that is not the Judgment
of the last day that is spoken of, where the Living shall be judged as well as
the Dead And withal it is here said, that the Kingdoms of this world, are to
become the Kingdoms of Jesus Christ; which admirably agrees to the Millennian
Reign, when all Nations shall be converted; but no way's agrees to the last
Judgment, when all Kingdoms shall come to an End.

We must therefore by the Term Dead, understand the Church of God, but as
afflicted by reason of the War which the Beast was to make against her for the
space 1260 years, ere he came to be destroyed. For Afflictions are in the
Scripture styled a death, 2 Cor. 1. 10. and 2 Cor. 11. 23. And by the Term to
judge, we are to understand to deliver. In which sense David says to God, Ps.
35. v. 24. Judge me according to thy rightoousness, that is, deliver me, because
he adds, and let not mine Enemies rejoice over me. To which purpose there are
many other places in the Scripture. Because therefore the Church shall be
delivered from all her Persecutions, at that time when Babylon comes to be
destroyed, and the Kingdoms of this world brought in to Jesus Christ; it is
here said upon the arrival of these two great Events, that the Dead shall be
judged.

But if we have a mind to retain the natural signification both of the Term
Dead, and of the Term judged; the sense will be, that when Babylon shall be
destroyed, and the Kingdoms of this world converted to Jesus Christ; then the
Martyrs shall be judged, and have justice done them through the whole extent of
the Papal Empire. Whereas they are now accounted of as damned Heretics, they
shall be then reckoned and esteemed blessed, and to have died true Martyrs. So
that this is exactly the first Resurrection, whereof we have spoken in the
Illustration about the thousand years, and of the judgment which is there
mentioned.

The opening of the Temple, which this Seventh Trumpet promises, accords
fitly with the Sense that we have given. Under the Reign of Ahaz, when the
Apostasy was Universal, the Temple was shut. But when a Reformation came to be
made by Hezekiah, the first thing that was done, was the opening of the Temple,
2 Chronicles. 29. 3. Thus the Mystical Temple, which had been shut up under the
Reign of Antichrist, shall be opened, and the worship of God shall be restored.
And which is worthy of our observation, it is not said that a new Temple was
built, but that the ancient Temple was opened. So that the Church, which is the
Mystical Temple, has in despite of the attempts of Antichrist alway's
subsisted. That which we are to see in the great and general Reformation, which
the Seventh Trumpet promises, is not a new Church, but a re-establishment of
the old.

As for the Ark, which was seen at the opening of the Temple; it may be either
considered as a figure of Jesus Christ, or as containing the two Tables of the
Law of God. With respect to the first; the sight of the Ark, signifies that
Jesus Christ, who had been obscured during the Reign of Antichrist, through an
addition of copartners with him both in offices and in the work of Redemption,
and through the joining another sacrifice to that of his death, shall be
perfectly revealed to all the world as the word represents him, when once the
Kingdoms of the Earth are converted and brought in. With respect to the second;
the Sight of the Ark signifies, that the Word of God, the reading whereof had
been forbidden by Antichrist, as of a Book dangerous and hurtful to Salvation,
shall be put into all men's hands, and every one shall be allowed, and have full
liberty to read it and meditate upon it.

Moreover, the Sight of this Ark, does also foretell and promise the
Conversion of the Jews. For the Ark having been lost since the Captivity in
Babylon of the Chaldees; the Sight of it does promise, that when Gods people
shall be delivered out of Antichristian Babylon, that the Jews shall be
converted and recalled.

The opening of the same Temple is spoken of chap. 15. v. 5. as we have
observed in the 20th Illustration of the 1st part. But there are two
differences between the opening of the Temple in that place, and the opening of
it in this. One is, that the Ark does not appear there, as it does here;
because at the first Reformation, the Jews were not Converted, as they shall be
at the second The other is, because the Smoke that proceeded out of the Temple
upon the first opening of it, hindered all from coming into it, because the time
of the conversion of all Nations was not then come; whereas upon the opening of
it now, and that time being come, there is mention of no smoke whereby any
should be indred to enter.

Finally, the Lightnings, the Voices, the Thundrings, and the great Hail, which
accompanied this opening of the Temple; comprehend the third Woe, which was not
to arrive till under the Seventh Trumpet, and which design nothing else save
the judgments that are to be inflicted through the pouring out of the Vials.

XXVI. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Pouring out of the Vials. REV. CHAP. 16.
THere are some who think the fifth Vial is poured forth, and consequently that
the four first are likewise poured out; and this because of that conformity
which seems to appear betwixt the fifth Vial that denounces Darkness, that is
to say, some great disaster to the Seat of the Beast, and between that which
befell the Papal Empire, from the time of the great Schism, till the time of
the Council of Constance, which put an End to that Schism. Seeing the Seat of
the Beast was during that whole time as it were smitten, and his Kingdom was
become full of darkness, through the great decay of the Papal Authority, which
Decay of Authority was much increased by the Reformation that begun under the
Popedom of Leo X.

But this Reason is not of that strength, as to persuade me, that the fifth
Vial was at that time poured out. Forasmuch as the Affliction signified by
Darkness, which befell the Papal Empire through the Reformation begun by
Luther, has not been so great as to answer fully the force of the Terms used
in reference to that Vial, namely, that the Kingdom of the Beast was full of
darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain, Rev. 16. 10. Besides, it was
only the Seat of the Beast, it was the City of Rome which is the Beasts Seat,
that was afflicted by Luthers Reformation; but the Papal Kingdom, was not so
afflicted; on the Contrary, great part of that Empire rejoiced at the
Reformation. Whereas it is to be observed, that it is not said that the Seat of
the Beast, but that the Kingdom of the Beast, was full of darkness. So that the
fifth Vial does as once threaten both Rome and its Empire with another
Affliction that shall befall them; when the general Reformation shall be
accomplished; when all the Western Nations shall come to be delivered from the
Papal Tyranny, and to be perfectly enlightened with the Light of the Gospel. And
therefore the fifth Vial is not poured out, nor by consequence the two last.

It Is expressly said, chap. 15. v. 1. that the Seven Vials, are the seven last
plagues, and that by them the wrath of God is consummated. Now against whom is
it consummated? Without doubt, it is against Babylon, against Rome and the
Papacy, against the Kingdom of Antichrist. And the wrath of God cannot be said
to be consummated, until that prophecy, chap. 18. v. 20. be fulfilled; Rejoice
over her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has avenged
you on her. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the Sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. This Oracle is not yet
fulfilled. Babylon is yet standing. The Kingdom of Antichrist does yet
continue. From whence it does at the least follow, that the last Vial is still
to be poured out, and as I may say, that there is not one drop of it yet fallen.

But the same does appear as evidently in reference to the sour first, as it
does in relation to the three last. For besides that, it is said of them all in
general, that they are the last plagues, and the consummation of the wrath of
God against Babylon; St. John further tells us. chapter 8. v. 13. that he heard an
Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe
to the Inhabitants of the Earth, by reason of the Trumpets that are yet to
sound. And chap. 9. v. 12. after the sounding of the fifth Trumpet, St. John
adds, one Woe is past, and behold there come two Woes more hereafter.

One of these two Woes fell undoubtedly out, under the sixth Trumpet, under
which Mahometanism and the Turkish Armies destroyed the whole East. And
therefore the third Woe must come to pass under the seventh and the last Trumpet.

St. John accordingly declares expressly, chap. 11. v. 14. that the second Woe
is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly. And after that, he immediately
subjoins, that the seventh Angel sounded, and that there were great voices in
heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever. This is a woe for the
Papacy, but it is a happiness for the Church of God. For it is exactly the
general Reformation, which shall comprehend in it the conversion of the Jews,
of the Mahometans, of the Pagans, and of the Papists; and the uniting of all
Sects of Christians into one belief, and into one Worship, together with the
final End of the Papal Kingdom. Whence it uncontroably follows, that all the
Vials being contained under this third Woe, they are yet to be poured out.
Forasmuch as we are this year 1687. still under the sixth Trumpet, and are
groaning under the pressures of the second Woe. Which over and aboye all the
Massacres that were seen in the former ages, has made us to see in this age,
the two Sackcloth Witnesses overcome and killed by the Beast.

So that here we have a new proof that all the Vials from the first to the
last, are yet to be poured out; forasmuch as the Vials are no other thing but
the seven Thunders, which are spoken of Chap. 10. And indeed the Thunders are
seven in number, as well as the Vials are. And as the Thunders do signify the
judgments of God against the Enemies of the Church; so the Vials do signify the
same, in that by them the Wrath of God is to be consummated. Moreover, the
things threatened by the Thunders, are delayed from being executed until the
sounding of the Seventh Trumpet. For St. John tells us, Chap. 10. v. 4. that
being about to write, he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Seal up those
things which the seven Thunders uttered, and write them not. Why was this?
Because they were not to be executed, until the Mystery of God should be
finished, which is not to be till under the Seventh Trumpet. For the Mystery of
God, is the bringing in of all Kingdoms to Jesus Christ, the conversion of all
Nations, and the uniting of all Christians; from whence that peace of the
Church shall arise, which is to continue during the thousand years that Satan
is to be bound. And if there be any difference betwixt the Vials and the
Thunders, it consists only in this, that the Thunders are the denunciation of
the Judgments of God; and that the Vials are the execution of them. For tho the
Thunders were heard by St. John under the Sixth Trumpet, yet they were not to
be executed till under the Seventh, under which it is that all the Vials shall
be poured out.

I do know, that there are famous Writers, who pretend to demonstrate the
effusion of most of the Vials, as already past; by that conformity which they
observe in Events with the Terms that exptess the Evils, which each Vial does
contain. But that conformity does not necessarily prove that they are all
poured forth, nor indeed that any part of them is; what has been now said
proves the contrary in a manner that comes near to demonstration. All that
agreement does only prove, that they shall be poured out in their proper times,
and that of this we are not to doubt, seeing what is already come to pass, is
an assurance of what is to ensue. So that what fell out in the time of Luther,
though conformable to the prediction about the ruin of Babylon, does not serve to
prove that Babylon is entirely fallen; but is as it were an Earnest put into
our hand, whereby the total fall of it is promised unto us, and which is to be
a pledge of the full payment of all that is promised us in reference thereunto.

Forasmuch then as it is certain, that not so much as one of the Vials is yet
poured forth; it becomes us in point of Wisdom to affirm nothing dogmatically
in the expounding of them.

That which may be affirmed as certain and indubitable, is, first, that as the
Trumpets declared the manifestation of Antichrist, and his advances in the
establishment of his Empire, together with the rise of the Mohammedan Religion,
and the growth of the Turkish Empire; so the Vials show the fall and ruin of
these two Enemies of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, That when the Vials come to be poured out, there shall be no long
distance between the pouring nut of one of them, and the effusion of the rest.
Because it is said in the 10th Chapter v. 6. that the Angel swear that there
should be time no longer. That is to say, that there should be no more delay;
that the Judgments of God shall overtake the Beast, without any respit betwixt
one and another; and that the seven Thunders shall break forth, and fall as it
were close and near together. And consequently, that the Vials, which are
nothing but the seven Thunders, shall be so poured out, that before the pouring
forth of the first be ended, the second shall begin, and so the rest.

Thirdly, That there shall be scarce any distance of time, betwixt the sounding
of the sixth Trumpet, and the sounding of the seventh. Seeing it is said, chap.
11. v. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold the third Woe comes quickly. For
we are to observe, that this is not said in the prediction of the two first
Wo's, under the fifth and sixth Trumpets. All that is there said, is only that
they shall come; but this quickly is not added save in the prediction of the
third Woe. Whence we may conclude, that the seventh Trumpet shall immediately
follow the Resurrection of the two Witnesses. Whose Death, as it fell out in
1685. so their Resurrection shall ensue within three years and a half from that
time, because the three days and a half, wherein they are to lie dead, being
prophetic days, are equivalent unto so many years. And then, in a short time
after the Resurrection of the Witnesses, whom the Beast has killed, we shall
see the arrival of the third Woe, that is to avenge the Lambs Wife, for all the
evils which the Mother of Harlots has made her to suffer.

Nor ought we to forget, that the Term in the Original, which signifies a
Vial, signifies also a Cup; in which sense the Term is undoubtedly here used.
For besides, that it is the Judgments of God, which are here treated of, and
which are expressed in the Scripture by the word Cup, as appears both Ps. 75.
v. 8. and by the prayer of our Savior, in his Agony, Let this Cup pass from
me, Matthew. 26. v. 39. I say, besides this, it is evident, that the vengeance
wherewith Babylon is threatened, is expressed by the same Term, Rev. chap. 18.
v. 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double,
according to her works; in the CUP which she has filled, fill to her double.
So that the Cups of God's Wrath, are set in opposition to the golden Cup with
which Babylon made drunk the Nations of the Earth. Babylon's Cup is full of the
furious Wine of her fornications, Rev 17. 2. These Cups which are to be poured
out, are full of the wrath of Almighty God, by which he will make her desolate.

I will again repeat, that seeing these Vials or Cups contain Judgments yet to
come, and which cannot be explained from the Events, as has been done in
expounding of the Visions of the Trumpets; that therefore I design not to speak
otherway's, than by way of Conjecture. This is a deference which should be
paid to the Author of Prophesies* Howsoever we shall see what may be best
alleged, and what carries the greatest probability, by having our eye upon
remembering the Explanations that have been already given.

The first Vial.
V. 2 And the first Angel went, and poured out his Vial upon the Earth, and
there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the
Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image.
The Earth upon which the first Vial fell; is the Antichristian Church, the
Christian Church become Earthly; which is no longer constituted of those that
are Citizens of Heaven, as the true Church of Jesus Christ is; but is made up
of worldly persons, who have nothing else in their aim, but to satisfy their
ambition, avarice, and carnal desires. These will be fretted and grieved, to
see the loss of their Church Revenues, and to be deprived of the means of
gratifying their Iusts. This vexation and sorrow, which is the noisome and
grievous sore upon them, will increase their rage against the Church of God.
They who have the mark of the Beast, represent the Clergy, the Prelates and the
Priests, who are not only distinguished by their Habits, and shaving their
Crowns; but who likewise boast of an indelible Character, that is to say, of a
mark which nothing can efface. These who worship the Image of the Beast,
signify the false zealots, who are intoxicated with the belief of the
Infallibility of the Romish Church, as the ancient Romans were with the
Eternity of Rome, which they styled the Eternal City. These are the Bigots who
are transported with a blind zeal, the Ignorants who are swallowed up in
Superstition, and who yield a greater and a more submissive obedience to their
Guides, than that which God requires of his People. For God does not require a
blind Obedience, which is that which they do render to their Clergy.

The second Vial.
V. 3. And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as
the Blood of a dead man; and every living Soul died in the Sea.
The Sea is the Papal Kingdom in its utmost extent; not only the country
whereof the Pope is Sovereign, but likewise all those Princes, who acknowledge
him for their Spiritual Head and Father. This Empire shall become as the Blood
of a dead Man, so that every Soul which lives in it shall die. That is, the
Government of Popish Princes shall grow so intolerable, that their people shall
not be able to endure their Yoke. As the Fish cannot live in waters, which are
turned into Blood.

The third Vial.
V. 4. And the third Angel poured out his Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains of
Waters, and they became Blood. V. 5. And I heard the Angel of the Waters say,
thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou
have judged thus. V. 6. For they have shed the blood of Saints, and Prophets,
and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy.
The Rivers and the Fountains, are beyond all peradventure the Doctrines
wherewith they nourish Souls. The Doctrine of the Romish Church is a Doctrine
of Blood against all those whom they account Heretics. And it is very
probable, that the same Doctrine shall prove bloody against themselves. And
that their Maxims, such as, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; that
men are to be compelled to go to Mass, because it is written, compel them to
come in; and that it is lawful to do evil, that good may come of it; together
with others of that kind; shall one day serve to make their members arm
against, and tear one another. And by that means, like shall be returned unto
them for like.

The fourth Vial.
V. 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sun, and power was
givrn unto him to shorch men with fire. V. 9. And men were scorched with great
heat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which has power over these plagues; and
they repented not, to give him glory.
This Sun is in all likelyhoood the Ottoman Emperor, who is the Sun of the
Eastern Empire. For as the fourth Trumpet raised and established him, so the
fourth Vial shall shake him, and pull him down. The Subjects of that Empire
shall be mortally afflicted; but instead of being thereby converted, they shall
blaspheme the Name of God, through not acknowledging his providence as the
Supreme and righteous cause of their Judgments.

The fifth Vial.
V. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the Seat of the Beast, and
his Kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. V.
11. And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores,
and repented not of their deeds.
There is nothing here dark, provided it be true that the Beast is the Papal
Empire, according as we have proved, and that Rome is the Seat of this Empire,
as all men do see. So that it is the City of Rome, which is here threatened by
God with an eternal and irrecoverable Ruin. Or rather, this is the execution of
that denunciation, contained in the 18th Chap. and which we have explained in
the first Part. Rome is threatened to be destroyed as Egypt, as Babylon, and as
Sodom. This fifth Vial shows us the fulfilling of all this. Rome being
destroyed, the Beasts Kingdom becomes full of darkness. Which in the Scripture
signifies Sadness and Mourning. It Is easy to apprehend the dejection which the
Papal Empire will be under, and the afflication that they will be in, who have
the Mark of the Beast, his Name, or the Number of his Name, when they see that
Rome is no more. It Is said, that they shall gnaw their tongues, and blaspheme
the God of Heaven; i. e. they shall complain, that God is wanting in making
good his promises, namely, that Rome should not perish while the world stood,
and that she should be alway's the Lady and Mistress of all Churches, of Faith,
and of Religion. Which is a horrid blasphemy; for where has God promised any
such privilege to the City of Rome?

The sixth Vial.
V. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates,
and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might
he prepared. V. 13. And I saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs, come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of
the False Prophet. V. 14. For they are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles,
which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather
them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. V. 15. Behold I come as a
Thief, blesses is he that watches, and keeps his Garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame. V. 16. And they gathered them together into a
place, called in the Hebrew Tongue Armageddon.
The sixth Vial destroys the Empire of the Turks and their Religion; which
the sixth Trumpet had advanced to the highest pitch of its grandeur. For the
River Euphrates does undoubtedly signify the people of that part of the world;
as its being dried up denotes the End of their Empire and of their Religion.
After which there will be nothing to hinder, either the King's of the East, who
shall be enlightened and converted, or the Jews, who are there dispersed in
great numbers, from marching into the West, to help to finish the destruction
of the Beast. It Is remarkable, that the Prophet Isaiah does in the place where
he promises the conversion of the Jews, style them Kings, which as it has a
reference to the Millennian Reign, so it induces to a belief, that the Jews
are these Kings who are here spoken of. The prosperity of Mahometanism and
Popery has kept back the Jews from the Christian Religion, which those two
Religions have so much disfigured. But when through the destruction of Rome,
they shall behold the Seat of the Beast overthrown, and when they shall see the
Kingdom of the Beast become full of darkness, and the great River Euphrates
dried up, then they will open their eyes and be converted.

The Conversion of the Jews, is unquestionably promised in this place, in that
St. John uses an expression like to what Isaiah uses chap. 11. v. 15. where
their conversion is promised. For if St. John speaks of the drying up of
Euphrates; Isaiah says, that God will shake his hand over the River. Moreover,
it is plainly in favor of the Jews, that St. John uses the Hebrew term
Armageddon.

And there came three unclean Spirits like frogs, out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the Mouth of the false
Prophet. Who can doubt but that these are the spiritual Fathers of the three
Orders of Monks, who have made most noise and have done must hurt, namely, the
Jacobin's, the Cordeliers, and the Jesuits? Are not these Spiritual Fathers?
Do they not depend upon the Pope as upon a Deity? Does not the command of that
false Prophet, send them to the East Indies, to America, and to all places? Are
they not troublesome and importunate, as the Frogs are? and are not the
Mansions where they are Cloist'red, nasty and stinking like the dirty pudles?

When the Pepe shall find himself threatened with a total ruin, he shall send to
all parts, he shall hunt out these three Orders of Ghostly Fathers in order to
assemble all his forces. But this rendevouz is said to be in a place called
Armageddon, because they together with all the Enemies of the Church, shall
there irrecoverably perish; as the Nations that were execrated and excepted
from pardon, for having made War against Israel.

Moreover, what we have said concerning these three unclean Spirits, does not
interfer with, nor lessen the probability of the Conjecture which we made about
the Monks being the Locusts. For we have not said that the Monks are to be
totally abolished before the effusion of the 6th Vial; but all we have said
was, that the power which was given them to torment men five Mon'ths, shall
come to an End within an 150 years signified by five prophetic Mon'ths,
counting from October 1540. when the first Bull was emitted for the
establishing the Society of Jesuits, who are principally designed by the
Locusts, as being they who have advanced the Monastic Order to the highest
pitch of their power. But this does not hinder, but that both they and the
other Monks and Friars, shall make a last effort to uphold their own power and
that of the Papacy, about the time when the Sixth Vial shall come to be poured
out.

The Seventh Vial.
V. 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the Air; and there came
a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is done
V. 18. And there were Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings; and there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not since Men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake and so great. V. 19. And the great City was divided into three
parts, and the Cities of the Nations fell, and great Babylon came in
remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the fierceness
of his Wrath. V. 20. And every Island sled away, and the Mountains were not
found. V. 21. And there fell upon men a great Hail out of Heaven, every stone
about the Weight of a talent; and men blasphemed God because of the plague of
the Hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.
We have already observed in the Explication of the fifth Trumpet, that the Air
signifies Religion. But there it signified Religion darkened by the Smoke which
came out of the bottomless pit; whereas here it signifies Religion it self,
which was begotten by that Smoke, namely the Papal and Antichristian Religion.
For it shall be drove away as Smoke by this last Vial. Then there was the Voice
of the Angel heard, saying, it is done; that is, the Mystery whereof there was
mention chap. 10. v. 7. namely, the Mystery of the total ruin of the Papacy; of
the Conversion of the Jews; of the reduction of all the Kingdoms of this world
to Jesus Christ; and of the universal peace of the Church.

As this will be the greatest and the most happy Change that ever was seen in
the world, therefore it is not only said that there shall be Lightnings and
Thunders, but that there shall likewise be a great Earthquake, such as was not
since men were upon the Earth. For Earthquakes, as we have already taken
notice, signify always in Scripture a change that shall fall out in the world
in reference to Religion.

And therefore there was both an Earthquake at the gioing of the Law, and at
the publication of the Gospel; because by that the Iudaick Religion was
established, and by this the Christian. So that we are not to be surprised, to
find in this prediction a greater Earthquake, than ever had been before seen
from the beginning of the world; because the Jews are now to be recalled, the
Mahometans are to be converted, all Nations are to be Enlightened with the
splendour of the Gospel, and the Papacy is irrecoverably to be destroyed.

The Division of the City into three parts, threatens the Papacy, which is
this great City, with three plagues of the Wrath of God. It has been already
observed, that Rome, which is the Seat of the Papal Empire, shall be destroyed
by three different Judgments of God; to wit, as Sodom, as Egypt, and as
Babylon; And the same shall befall the Papacy, which shall be subverted by
three means which we do not yet know.

The Prophet Daniel says, that after the fourth Beast, which represents the
Romam Empire, shall be slain, and after that his body shall be given to the
burning flame; that then the Dominion shall be also taken away from the other
Beasts; and that after the Image, by which the Empire of the world are
represented, shall be broken into pieces, the other Beasts shall have
domination no more, chap. 7. v. 12. chap. 2. v. 44. That is the very same which
St. John fore-tells in this place; and every Island Fled away, and the
Mountains were not found. For by Islands are understood Commonwealths, and
Kingdoms are meant by Mountains. All which is as if he should have said, that
there shall be no more any State, neither Republic, nor a Kingdom, but what
shall be governed by the holy- Laws of the Gospel, and which shall be a
Theocracy, as the State of Israel was under the Government of the Judges.

So that this here is not the last and Universal Judgment, no more than that
chap. 11. v. 18. but it is the particular Judgment of Babylon, that is the
Antichristian Empire, which the peace of the Church shall follow.

The Hail of an extraordinary bigness, that shall fall at the effusion of this
last Vial', can no way's agree to the last judgment, forasmuch as that being
the day of the Resurrection of the Dead, no Hail shall fall to kill men.
Whereas it is here said, that the Hail fell upon men, that unquestionably
signifies, the overwhelming them by reason of their obduration. For it will
come to pass, that some men upon their seeing the vengeance of God against
Babylon, and against its Empire, will instead of being converted, break forth
into blasphemies. These hardened men, are such as have no sense of Religion, but
are tied to Babylon by the bonds of gain, and by the alone chains of interest.
There are at this time a great number of these, who savor nothing of the word
of God, who have no more knowledge than Babel of the Christian Religion, and yet
they pass in the Church of Rome for great Devoto's. They are the men of this
complexion that shall be overwhelmed by the Hail of the seventh and last Vial.

This Hail may be very well said to threaten the rich and innumerable Benefices
of the Roman Clergy. For the vast riches of the Prelates and of the other
Ecclesiastics, being the strong Buttresses of the Papacy; the loss of their
Revenues, may very well be one of the Means, which God in his providence will
make use of to destroy and abolish them. For this is the property of Hail, to
destroy Revenues; and the Papacy being adhered unto only for its riches, when
it comes to be stripped, the whole world will abandon it, which will cause its
ruin.

XXVII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Time that the Beast's Reign is to continue.
THE Holy Spirit marketh the duration of the Reign of the Beast in five several
places. In the 11. Chap. v. 2. it is said, that the Gentiles shall tread the
Holy City under foot forty and two Mon'ths. And in the 3d verse of the same
chapter, it is said, that the two Witnesses shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth. And in the 12 Chap. v. 6.
it is said, that the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she had a place
prepared of God, to be fed there 1260 days. And in the 14th verse of that
Chapter, She is said to be there fed, for a Time, Times, and half a Time. And
chap. 13. v. 5. it is said, power is given unto the Beast to continue forty and
two Mon'ths. From all which we are to observe,

(1) That the 42 Mon'ths, and 1260 Day's are one and the same thing. Because
according to the Greeks, whose language the Revelation was written in, every
Mon'th contained thirty day's, and 42 times thirty make 1260.

(2) That one Time, Times, and half a Time, are one year, two years, and half a
year, which making three years and a half, amounts just to sorty and two
Months; and to 1260 Day's.

(3) That whereas it is expressly said, that power was given unto the Beast to
continue 42 Months; this declares his Duration, during the Time that the
Gentiles shall tread the holy City under foot, and during the Time that the
Woman shall be in the Wilderness, where she is to be fed, while that the
Witnesses prophecy clothed in Sackcloth.

(4) That the 1260 Days, are not to be taken literally for common Days, but
Mystically for so many years. This we cannot doubt of, when we have considered,
that Days are applied so in the Books of the Prophets. In the 4th Chap. of Amos
v. 4. the Prophet bids them bring their Sacrifices and Tyths after three Days,
i. e. after three years, as our Translation renders it. And in the 9th of
Daniel v. 24. the seventy weeks are put for Weeks of years, which make 490
years. And in Ezekiel. chap. 4. v. 4. 5. God says to the Prophet, Lie upon thy
left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it, according to
the number of the days that thou shall lie upon it, thou shall bear their
Iniquity. For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to
the number of the days. I have appointed thee a day for a year.

According then to the Style of the Prophets, which is that of St. John in the
Apocalypse, the Reign of the Beast is to continue 1260 years. And this is a
definite Number, because broken Numbers are in the Scripture put alway's for
definite Numbers, as well as they are so used among the Latins and the Greeks.
So that it is certain, that the Reign of Antichrist, which is the same with
that of the Beast, is to last 1260 years, and neither more nor less.

The Doctors of the Romish Church, pretehd that this Reign shall endure only
three years and a half. And it is their Interest to defend that opinion, that
they may thereby withdraw the eyes of men from the Pope. But in this they
commit two gross mistakes. (1) In that they take the 1260. days of Saint John
for natural day's; whereas they should understand them of Mystical days,
according to the custom of the Prophets, which we have proved. (2) In that they
suppose that Antichrist will be only a single person; whereas he is a
Succession of persons that make war against the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

This the alone passage of St. Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessal. chap.
2. is sufficient to demonstrate. The Papists are at an accord with Protestants,
that the Son of perdition, who sits in the Temple of God as God, and who
exalts himself above all that is called God, is Antichrist. Now this Son of
perdition is not considered by St. Paul as a single person, but as a Succession
of persons in one and the same Seat. This does evidently appear, by the
opposition which the Apostle makes betwixt the Son of perdition, and him who
hindered him from appearing, whom he designeth by him who now lets. All are
likewise agreed, that St. Paul intends by him that lets, the Roman Emperor:
but now by that Emperor, he could not design one Emperor personally, but he
understood all the Emperors collectively that were to succeed, till the time
that they gave their room to the Son of Perdition. And in the same manner is
the Son of perdition to be taken. He is not to be understood personally, but
collectively, for all those who should successively possess that Seat.

And why should they be unwilling that Antichrist should signify the
Antichristian Empire under a Succession of so many Heads; seeing according to
themselves the Name of St. Peter, designeth all the Popes and the Papal Empire?
That verse of Pope Gregory VII. is generally known. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
Diadema Rodolpho.


And why is it, that since the time of Sergius II. when the custom begun of the
Popes changing their Names on the day of their Election, no one Pope has
assumed the name of Peter? There can be no other reason assigned for that
conduct, but that all the Popes, in the quality of Supreme Bishops, pretend to
be Peter. And that therefore it would not only be a needless, but an useless
and an absurd thing to take upon them the name of Peter. For it is to the
Popes, as that of Pharaoh heretofore, which was a common Name to the Kings of
Egypt.

XXVIII. ILLUSTRATION. Of the time, when the Beasts Reign, or the Papal Empire
began.
IT seems long to Protestants, and to a great many others, that they do not
see the End of the Beasts Reign. And they have reason to be weary, seeing the
Tyranny of old Babylon was not near so severe to the Children of Israel, as
that of new Babylon is to them. Therefore they do earnestly enquire when the
Reign of the Beast began, that having discovered when it commenced, they may
know how to mark when it shall end.

The Spring of Nile was unknown for many Ages, and furnished occasion to the
warm disputes of Philosophers. But it is at last discovered by Travelers, and
all those Disputes are ceased. It is much the same, about the beginning of the
Antichristian Empire, or the Beasts Reign. The Learned are divided about it.
Some have placed it in Gregory the Great; others in Boniface that succeeded
him; and a third sort have raised it to the eleventh Age, and have sought for
it in Gregory VII. Yea there are others, who do assert it to be as unknown, as
the Source of Nile was heretofore.

But I do think that I have discovered it, by a Voyage I have made through the
Lands of Antiquity; that is, by means of the light of the Sacred Scriptures,
and through the assistance of History. And that I might succeed in this
undertaking, I have made the following observations.

(1.) That the Antichristian Empire, or the Reign of the Beast, consists in
three things. In Errors in Doctrine, in Idolatry in Worship, and in Tyranny in
Government.

(2.) These three corruptions did not steal into the Christian Religion
together and at once, but separately, and one after another. Error was the
first that crept into Christianity. Idolatry followed Error. And Tyranny thrust
it self in under the favor of Error and Idolatry.

(3.) The Time which St. Paul fore-tels of the falling out of an Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4. 1. is the time of the manifestation of Antichrist. Now that Apostasy
has two Characters. One is the forbidding of Marriage. The other is the the
commanding to abstain from meats, created to be received of them that do
believe.

(4.) St. Paul having drawn the portraiture of Antichrist, whom he styles the
Son of Perdition, 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2. he adds, v. 6. Ye know what withholdeth,
that he might be revealed in his time. Now the Apostle could understand nothing
by that which withholdeth but Heathenism; for the Bishop of Rome could not
raise himself to any grandeur, so long as the Empire continued Pagan. The
Apostle subjoineth, For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work; only he who
now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way. By him who lets he
plainly intends the Roman Emperor, who so long as he continued Pagan, hindered
Antichrist from declaring himself; but as soon as he became Christian, suffered
him to rise and advance; partly by the immoderate bounty he exercised toward
the Bishop of Rome; partly by increasing his Authority, instead of leaving it
within the bounds which he found it; partly by granting him the Title of
Supreme Bishop; and lastly, by withdrawing from Rome, and yielding that place
to that Bishop, through his retirement to Ravenna and Milan.

(5.) From the time that Constantin, the first Christian Emperor, begun to hold
Oecumenick, or general Councils, which were constituted of the Bishops of the
whole Empire; these Councils contributed to the Exaltation of the Bishop of
Rome. So that Gregory I. spoke according to his interest, when he said, that he
had the same regard for the 4. Councils, viz. of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus,
and Calcedon, that he had for the four Gospels. Which was a plain Blasphemy,
and very suitable to Antichrist.

(6.) St. John delivers the Explication which the Angel gave of the Vision of
the 17th Chapter v. 12. in these Words: The ten Horns which thou saw, are
ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet; but receive power as Kings
one hour with the Beast. For we are not to seek for these Kings in the Eastern
Empire, that continued until the Turks became Masters of it, which is something
more than two hundred years; but we are to seek for them in the Western Empire.
And the reason of it is, because there were not several Kingdoms formed out of
the ruins of the Eastern Empire, as there have according to the Terms of the
Vision been formed out of the Western. We are not to confine our selves
positively to the number of ten; seeing that number is taken indefinitely in
the Revelation. Thus chap. 2. v. 10. the tribulation of ten days that is spoken
of, is to denote a long persecution. All that is essential to be remarked is,
that these ten Kingdoms, or Soveraignties are formed out of the ruins of the
Western Empire. Which Daniel says positively, chap. 7. v. 24. as well as St.
John, who from the Angels Interpretation of the Vision, says, that the ten
Kings receive their power in the same hour with the Beast.

After these observations from Scripture, it will be of advantage to consider
the following matters of Fact, which are all expressly recorded in History.

It was in the fourth Age, that the Fasts and Abstinences of the Montemists
came to be received in the Church of Rome: And in that Age Pope Syricius
condemned the Marriage of Priests.

It was in the fourth Age that Pope Mark wrote Letters to Anastasius and to the
Bishops of Egypt, in these words; The Church of Rome has always been without
afault, and through the grace of God, and the protection of St. Peter, for ever
shall be so. Which words favor both of Idolairy and of Blasphemy.

'Twas in the 4th Age, that the 2. first Councils of Nice and Constantinople
were held, as those of Ephesus and Chalcedon were kept in the fifth. And
although as these Councils did not greatly exalt the Bishop of Rome, we may
truly say, that they opened a way, and served as a Bridge to the following
Councils, which have made it their business to advance the Pope to what he is
at this day.

'Twas in the fourth Age, that the Emperors embraced the Christian Religion,
that they were so liberal to the Bishop of Rome, and that they stripped
themselves of the dignity of Supreme Pontiff in favor to him. From the time of
Julius Caesar they had always retained it, that they might thereby render their
persons sacred and inviolable. 'Twas the Emperor Gratian that surrendered it,
and since that time none of his Successors have claimed it.

'Twas in the fifth Age that the Emperors withdrew from Rome, and chose Ravenna
and Milan for their residence.

'Twas in the beginning of the fifth Age, that the Western Empire was destroyed
by the Barbarians, and that, out of the ruins of it, they formed several
Soveraignties in Germany, Gaul, Spain, and Italy.

'Twas in the fifth Age, that in order to allure the Pagans to Christianity,
the Church espoused many of their Ceremonies; such as the Invocation of Saints,
the Worship of Images, the Veneration of Relics, and Prayers for the dead.

'Twas in the beginning of the fifth Age, that Pope Innocent I. defended the
Right of Appeals to the Sea of Rome.

Finally, it was in the fifth Age, that the Controversy between Pope Leo 1. and
other Bishops, about the matter of Appeals, was in the most solemn and
authentic manner, that the Bishop of Rome could desire, ended and determined
in his favor. When the two Emperors Theodosius and Valentintan granted unto
him, and issued out an Edict in the following terms: We by this perpetual
Edict, have ordained, that no Bishop, whether they be of Gaul, or of any other
Provinces, shall contrary to the ancient customs attempt any thing hereafter,
without the Authority of the venerable Pope of the Eternal City. But that
whatsoever the Authority of the Apostolic Sea shall ordain, shall be submitted
to by all others as unto a Law. So that whosoever of the Bishops having
appealed, shall neglect to appear at the Tribunal of the Roman Bishop, shall be
obliged to appear before the Governor of the Province where he lives; provided
always, that whatsoever things our Sacred Predecessors have granted to the
Church of Rome, shall be unchangeably and universally preserved.

We need go no farther in order to seek for the birth of the Antichristian
Empire, or to find the fatal Date where the 1260. days or the 42. Months, of
the continuance of the Beasts Reign does begin. For in what is already
mentioned, we find every thing that goes to the constitution of
Antichristianism, namely, Error in Doctrine, Idolatry in Worship, and Tyranny
in Government. Forasmuch as we find the Roman Church at that time guilty of
Forbidding Marriage, and of Commanding to abstain from Meats, which are the two
characters of the Apostasy foretold by St. Paul. And because we find her
defiled with prayers for the dead, with the Worshipping of Images, with the
Invocation of Saints, with the veneration of Relics, and brought into a
subjection to a Bishop, who was by an Imperial Edict established Sovereign Judge
of all other Bishops within the Circle of the Roman Empire.

That Edict was published anno 445. in favor of Leo I. and of his Successors.
It is then in that year at the soonest and at the latest also, that we are to
fix the fatal Epoche of the birth of the Antichristian Empire, and consequently
may hope to see the End of it, in the year 1705. For if unto 445. which was the
year of the Edict of Valentinian and Theodosius, there be added 1260. the total
will be 1705. And if from 1705. there be subtracted 445. the Remain will be
1260. which is the time of the duration of the Beasts Reign.

The Historian Florus has considered the Roman Empire passing through the
different Ages and periods of human life, and according to that Idea, he has
marked the Birth and Infancy of that Empire under Kings; its youth from Brutus
and Collatinus, who were the first Consuls till the time of Appius Claudius;
its Manhood from Appius Claudius till the time of the Emperor Augustus; and its
Old Age from Augustus till the time of Trajan, under whose Reign that Historian
lived, and under which he says, that the Empire, though verging to a
decrepitness, bestirred it self as if it had been grown young again.

We may very rationally form such an Idea of the Papal or Antichristian Empire.
But we may according to the Scripture go a little further than the Historian
Florus has done, and ascend to the very Conception of this Antichristian
Kingdom. For it was conceived in the time of St. Paul; because he writes to the
Thessalonians 2 Ep. chap. 2. v. 7. that the Mystery of Iniquity did then work.
It was then as an Embrio and a Foetus; but it began to stir in the second
Century, when Victor the Bishop of Rome, upon a very frivolous occasion,
namely, about the day on which Easter should be kept, Excommunicated the
Churches of Asia; but he was too feeble to continue and justify what he had
done. After the conversion of the Emperors, who chose to bring heathenish
Superstitions into the Church in order to facilitate the conversion of the
Pagans; Antichristianism* begun to acquire considerable strength, and strove to
come into the world and to show its head. Especially when Pope Mark in the 4th
age wrote those bold and blasphemous letters which we have mentioned, and when
Innocent I* made that bold effort in reference to the matter of Appeals,
whereof he claimed to be Judge. But yet Antichristianism did not openly appear
nor come abroad, because it had not the assistance of the Secular power to
midwife it into the world. It was then born and came into the world, when the
two Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian came in to its succor; and when by an
Edict, wherein these two Emperors joined and exerted their Authority, the
Bishop of Rome was established Sovereign Judge of all Bishops.

Since that Edict, it has been always growing. Its Infancy was from Leo I.
until Boniface III, who improving the favor of the Emperor Phocas, boldly
assumed the Title of Universal Bishop, which his predecessor Gregory I* durst
not challenge, because that John Bishop of Constantinople had taken it before
him. Its youth was from Boniface III, until the time of that famous Hildebrand,
called Gregory VII, under whose Popedom it arrived at its manly State. For to
this day there was never a Pope more haughty, nor a Tyrant more terrible, than
he was. He brought Henry IV. to come and demand pardon of him in the Castle of
Canoss, where he made him attend three whole days without showing the least
regard to his dignity, and when he had admitted him to audience, treated him
with the like haughtiness, that the most absolute Master would treat the
meanest domestical Servant. Its Manhood extended from thence until the time of
the great Schism which endured 50 years, and was at last ended by the Council
of Constance in the year 1415. And then began its Old age, which is now so far
advanced, that it may be said to be decrepit, and extremely feeble, and to have
as it were one foot in the Grave.

XXIX. ILLUSTRATION. Of the Destruction of Gog and Magog. REV. CHAP. XX.
V. 7. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of
his prison. V. 8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the
four quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle;
the number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea. V. 9. And they went up on the
breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the
beloved City: and fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them. V.
10. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brim-stone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night, for ever and ever.
THe destruction of Gog and Magog being not to arrive until after the
imprisonment of Satan for a thousand years, and till after the Millennian peace
of the Church, we cannot discourse of it otherway's than by conjecture.

This prediction is unquestionably the same with that of Ezekiel. For there
has not hitherto been any Defeat like unto that, which Ezekiel chap. 39.
relates concerning Gog and Magog, which he represents to be such, that they
shall be seven Months in burying their dead Bodies; and that the fire in which
their Arms are burnt, shall last seven years. v. 9, 12. Since Ezekiels time
until this day, there has been seen nothing proportionable unto it, nor any
thing in the whole known world that comes near it. This then being a Sealed
Prophecy, we must wait for the sense of it till it come to be accomplished. Nor
will it be fulfilled until after Satan's Imprisonment and the Churches rest for
a thousand years; and until after the ruin of the Beast and the false Prophet,
who are in this Vision supposed to be in the lake of fire and brimstone. So
that it is highly probable, that St. John does only repeat the prophecy of
Ezekiel.

For as Ezekiel does not relate the Destruction of Gog and Magog, until after
he had described the Resurrection of the Church of Israel; so St. John does not
treat of this Affair, till after the description of the Church's
re-establishment, and of her peace for a 1000 years.

And as Ezekiel represents the people of God, before they came to be assaulted
by Gog and Magog, as a People that were in the enjoyment of an entire peace,
that dwelt void of fear, and who had neither Walls, nor Gates, nor Bars, and
who without being troubled looked after their Herds and their fields; so St.
John does in the same manner represent the Peace of the Church, before the
breaking out of the War which Gog and Magog were to be engaged in.

Finally, As Ezekiel, after he had recounted the Defeat of Gog and Magog,
describes the Mystical Temple, and with that finisheth his Prophecy; so St.
John, after he has recited the destruction of Gog and Magog, describes the
same Temple which Ezekiel had described, and which is nothing else save the
Church and Mystical Temple of the Son of God, and with that he finisheth his
Apocalypse.

If it be demanded, who these Gog and Magog are? I answer, that it appears by
Ezekiel, that they are a people on the north of Judea, as the Tartars and
Scythians are. And in all likelihood they and others sprung from them, are the
people, who being deceived by Satan loosed out of his prison, shall raise the
most dangerous War against the Church, that she ever met with; and that
therefore God shall deliver her after a more illustrious manner, than ever he
had done before.

XXX. ILLUSTRATION. Of St. John's Offense, in falling at the Angel's feet to
Worship him. REV. CHAP. 19.
V. 10. And I fell at his feet to Worship him; and he said unto me, see thou do
it not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony of
Jesus; Worship God: for the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy.
SEeing the Angel reproves St. John, for having east himself at his feet; it
must needs be that that Apostle had therein done amiss. Otherwise the fault
were in the Angel in rebuking that as a sin, which was an action that ought not
to have been blamed. Which is a thing that we are neither to say, nor to think,
of an Angel of light.

But what was this fault of St. John? Can we say that he failed in reference to
the Law and to matter of Right? Certainly this Apostle was sanctified to the
knowledge of the Truth, by that Spirit which inspired him in his divine
Writings; yet sanctification being not perfect save in heaven, there is no
danger in confessing him to have been liable to infirmities, and the rather
because he himself says, 1 Epist. chap. 1. v. 8. that if we say that we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us:

Nevertheless, seeing that if St. John had failed in matter of Right he must
have been guilty of Idolatry; a thing he was not capable of committing, neither
as he was a Jew by his birth; and less as he was a Christian, who had received
a greater measure of the light of Grace; and least of all as he was an Apostle
that had preached against Idolatry, and who had shut up his first Epistle with
that Exhortation, Little children, keep your selves from Idols: it is therefore
safest to say, that he failed in matter of Fact, and that being struck with the
luster of the Angel, he took him for one of the Persons of the Godhead; for
which the Angel does rebuke him.

And what the Angel says in his reprehending of him, does plainly favor this
account. See thou do it not, says he, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy
Brethren that have the Testimony of Jesus: Worship God. The Angel saw that he
took him not for a Creature, but for the Creator. For he does it in the same
manner, that St. Paul and Barnabas reprehended the Lycaonians, Act. 14. 15.
when they would have sacrified to them as unto Jupiter and Mercury; why do ye
these things? we also are men of like passions with you.

The Relapse of St. John into the same fault chap. 22. v. 8. for which he was
again rebuked; does invincibly prove that his sin was a faileur in matter of
Fact. For who can with any probability believe, that St. John would have
worshipped a creature, if he had known him to be such? or who can think but
that if the Angel had thought so of him, he would have rebuked him with greater
severity than he did? Whereas even upon that miscarriage, he contenteth himself
with producing the same reason a second time, thar he had alleged unto him
before.

That which the Angel adds; for the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy; is nothing but an Illustration of the reason which he had assigned
for not suffering St. John to worship him; namely, that I am thy fellow
Servant. For it is all one as if he should have said, the Testimony of Jesus,
which is in thee, as an Apostle, is the same thing with the Spirit of Prophecy
that is in me. We are equal, and therefore you deceive your self, in taking me
for an object which ought to be worshipped.

The Bishop of Rome is not so Scrupulous as the Angel was, nor does he carry it
after that manner; forasmuch as upon the day of his Election, he suffers
himself to be set upon the high Altar; where he is worshipped by all the
Cardinals, and by all the people. By which we come to know, what agreement
there is between the Bishop of Rome, and an Angel of light. And that there is a
great deal more betwixt him and the Angel of Darkness, that had the impudence
to require of Jesus Christ, that he should fall down and Worship him.

XXXI. ILLUSTRATION. Of Christ's directing his Epistles, and his Revelation to
the seven Churches. And why?
AFter that we have explained all the Visions of the Apocalypse; we are not to
forget to inquire the Reason, why Jesus Christ judged it convenient, to direct
it together with the Epistles, particularly to the seven Churches, of Asia,
Ephesus; Smyrna; Pergamus; Thyatira; Sardis; Philadelphia; and Laodicea.

There is unquestionably a Mystery in it, that Jesus Christ should direct this
divine Book to Seven Churches, neither to more, nor to fewer. For (1) the
number seven is a Mysterious Number through this whole Book. It signifies the
universality and the fulfilling of all Times; as appears by the consideration
of the seven Seals, the seven Trumpets, and the seven Vials. Because that
number denotes the whole Train of things, which the Seals, Trumpets* and
Vials, foretell are to come to pass till the very destruction of the
Antichristian Empire.

(2) Christ appears having in his hand Seven Stars, which are the Seven
Pastors of the Seven Churches, and walking in the midst of Seven Candlesticks,
which are the Seven Churches that we have mentioned. But why Seven? Does he not
promise to be the Protector but of these seven Pastors, and the Overseer and
Defender but of these Churches?

(3) There is a Conformity between that Vision in the first Chapter, and those
of the seven Seals, and of the opened Book. For we there find the same pomp,
the sound of a Trumpet, and the glorious presence of our Savior in the midst
of his Church. And withal, he appears there walking in the midst of the seven
Candlesticks, and sitting in the midst of the four living Creatures and the 24.
Elders. By which conformity we are given to understand, that this first Vision
is of equal weight, and of an equal extension with all the other. And that this
of the Seven Churches reached to the End of the world, as all the following
together do.

(4) Jesus Christ says to St. John. v. 19. Write the things which thou have
seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter. Which
is as much as if he had said, write, not only things which concern the Churches
that are mentioned, and which ought to be instructed as these are; but which
also concern all Churches to the End of the world, and whereof the seven that
are named are a model and Type.

(5) The Epistles which Jesus Christ directs to the seven Churches, do
contain Instructions and Reprehensions, which agree unto and exactly express
all the different and several conditions, in which the Christian Church will be
found until the end of the world.

The State of the Church of Ephesus, does lively represent the condition of the
Primitive Church, where Truth prevailed, and where at the last, the decay of
Charity became a disposition and a step to a more doleful State. Whosoever well
considers what is said to the Church of Ephesus, will therein find the
condition of the primitive Church, painted forth to the life.

That of Smyrna, represents the State of the Church during the fourth and fifth
Ages; wherein Arianism had the upperhand; and wherein the Orthodox were
outragiously persecuted. That is the Tribulation of ten days, wherewith Smyrna
is threatened; not the ten persecutions, of which that of Diocletian was the
last.

That of Pergamus, has a reference to the time when Antichrist sits in the
Temple of God, and when the Church of God is hardly visible, through her
dwelling, as the Church of Pergamus did, where Satan had his Throne.

That of Thyatira, has a great conformity to the condition of the Church, when
Antichrist both begun to fall, and begun to raise himself again. According to
the Testimony given by our Savior to that of Thyatira, Thou have not the
Doctrine of Jezebel, and thou have not known the depths of Satan.

That of Sardis, has a resemblance to the Reformed Church, degenerating and
falling into corruption of manners. Thou have a name that thou live, and art
dead. Yet thou have a few names, which have not defiled their Garments.

That of Philadelphia, is a protrature of that of the Church when She shall be
perfectly Reformed; when Sion shall be perfectly reestablished; when the alone
Key of David shall open and shut; when the voice of Jesus Christ shall be
perfectly followed; and that both with respect unto manners, and to faith. This
is the State wherein the Church will be during the time of the Millennian
Reign, whereof we have before spoken.

Lastly, that of Laodicea, is a Mirour wherein we may behold the State of the
Church toward the End of the world. When zeal shall have become cold, Charity
scarce to be found, and corruption shall abound and be universal, and thereby
draw upon the world that Deluge of Fire, which shall give a renovation unto it.

These Reflections do show us the reason, why the Lord directed the seven
Epistles, and all the Visions of the Apocalypse of St. John precisely to the
Seven Churches.

But it is matter of surprise, that Jesus Christ has made no mention* nor
spoken one word of the Church of Rome, nor of the Pope. How comes it to pass,
that he forgets his Vicar, and the Mother of all Churches, which either have
been, or are to be to the end of the world? How comes he to be unmindful of the
Apostolic Sea; of the Seat of Infallibility; of the alone Fountain of all
lawful Vocation and Mission, and of the Center of Religion? For seeing the
Lord, the Son of God, is not man that he should lie, or the Son of man, that he
should repent; it is the more remarkable that he should have forgot, (in a Book
purposely written, to mark out the destiny of the Church, and to distinguish her
from Babylon) points, which according to the Roman Catholics, are fundamental,
and such as men cannot be ignorant of without hazarding Salvation. So that now
it is not possible, that the Church of Rome should be what She pretends. O that
God the Father of Mercy and Light, would remove from the hearts of men, the
vail of prejudices and passions, that all Christians may come to see the danger
of maintaining Communion with the Romish Church, the necessity of Reformation,
and the Conformiry of the Worship, which Protestants render unto God, with the
sacred and inviolable Rule of the Gospel.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS Upon the Apocalypse of St. John, Concerning the
EFFUSION of the VIALS. In Answer to Mr. Jurieu' s Apology for the
Accomplishment of the Scripture-Prophesies.

Printed in the Year 1688.

The PREFACE.
'TWere to be wished, that all who publish their Meditations upon the
Revelation, were found to agree in their Explication of that Divine Book, as
much as they do in their Exposition of the other Sacred Writings. But how
desirable soever this be, it has not hither to come to pass. And an uniformity
of Opinions about the sense of Prophesies, whose Accomplishment is yet to come,
is no less impossible to Interpreters, that are not divinely inspired, than the
knowledge of those future things is which they do predict.

So that it is not strange, that Mr. Jurieu in his Accomplishment of
Prophesies, and the Anonymous Author in his Illustrations upon the Apocalypse,
do not universally accord; and that in their Exposition of the 16. Chap. they
are found to contradict one another. Nay it would be a kind of miracle, should
they upon the many various subjects of the Revelations of St. John, be found in
all things to have the same sentiments.

But possibly some will be surprised, that two Reformed Divines should write
against one another. And probably some may not only be surprised, but
scandaled, throw their seeing two Brethren differ, and throw an apprehension
that the Papists may draw some advantage from their disagreement.

And it must be acknowledged, that if men's surprise at their difference should
have that effect; it had been a thousand times better, that both those Authors
had forever concealed their thoughts, than to give the least matter of scandal
to their Brethren, by publishing of them.

The design therefore of this Preface, is to obviate these two difficulties,
and to justify not only those two Antagonists, but all others who may embark in
this quarrel by espousing the one side or the other.

As to the first difficulty, I do affirm, that if any are offended at the
seeing two Reformed Divines write against each other, in the Exposition of the
16. Chap. about the Effusion of the Vials, the Offense is taken, and not given.
And I do withal maintain, that it is lawful for every one in his Exposition of
Prophesies, to pursue that way which seems best unto him. If in his Explication
he contradict any Article of Faith necessary to Salvation; I do confess, that
in this case all men have reason to be offended with him, who shall by his
Interpretations overthrow any of those Articles; and they have cause to treat
that Expositor as an Innovator, and to disclaim his Exposition as a Heresy.
But which Article of Faith is subverted, or so much as opposed, or any ways
injured, by the either saying, that the Vials are poured out, or that they are
not poured out? Mr. Jurieu apply's all the Events since the tenth Century to
the Vials, as if they had been all this while pouring forth; and the Anonymous
Author of the Illustrations applies them to the Trumpets, which have sounded;
and not to the Vials, which he believes to be still to be poured forth. Now
what Article of Faith is either gainsaid, or wronged, by these two different
Expositions?

But one may say, that it will at least beget a Dispute about the Explication
of a Book, which all Christians ought to pay a deference unto, as a Divine
Book; and a Dispute, which being begun at such a conjuncture as that wherein we
are, may in all probability not have a good issue.

Whereas on the contrary, this Dispute will stir up the Curiosity of diverse
Adversaries, who by coming to read these two Works, will from thence learn very
important Truths, which they are yet ignorant of. They will thereby understand,
that the Pope, whom they worship as a Deity, is the Original Picture of the Son
of perdition, who is Antichrist; that the Papal Empire is the Portraiture of
the Beast with two Horns; that the Romish Church is the Picture of Babylon the
Great; that the spirit of persecution, that reigns in the Papacy, is that of
the Dragon and of Satan; and that suffering has been the character of the true
Christian Church for above these 1500. years. Moreover, this Dispute will
influence many to Read and Study the Revelation, who usually read no more of it
but the three first Chapters, being afraid to look into the rest. Finally, this
Dispute will beget Emulation, and give occasion for new discoveries, and for
the making of new Systemes.

I am not ignorant what the Illustrious Moros heretofore said in his Eloquent
Panegyric upon Calvin, namely, that that great man had Expounded all the Books
of the Scripture except the Revelation, which his not doing of, was an
excellent Commentary. This is a piece of wit, where we may see an ingenious
draught of the Eloquence of that admirable Orator; but the Theologues of our
time ought not to be discouraged by the Example of the incomparable Calvin. We
know that Doctor, who had written so many other learned Commentaries, was
capable to have explained the Revelation, as well as he had done other
Prophesies. And if he did it not, 'twas either because he thought he could
employ his time better; or because he had designed to do it before he should
die; which his dying so soon, hindered the Execution of, which happened when he
was but ^5 years old, or a few day's over. It Is to be hoped, that this Dispute
will cause many through Emulation, to lay out their labors upon this Divine
Book. For tho they who have preceded, have for the most part been incomparable
men, both by reason of the profoundness of their Learning, and the greatness of
their wit (except the Author of the Illustrations, who is and will always be
unworthy to be named) yet there is ground to hope that they who come after,
will see a great deal farther than the former have done, as a Pygmee mounted on
the shoulders of a Giant, is able to see farther than the Giant himself. And is
not all this of more considerable advantage, than all the Scandal can be of
prejudice, that some curious Spirits have taken at the Dispute between Mr.
Jurieu and the Anonymous Author?

And as to the advantage which some sear this Dispute will afford the Papists;
both the Catholics that expect benefit by it, and the Reformed that fear it,
will find it to be only chymerical, and not real. Therefore I must again
repeat, that it is not about an Article of Faith that these disagreeing Authors
contend. To say the Vials Are poured out, or that they are Not poured out, does
equally leave the Reformed Doctrine in its perfection and integrity. And how
Learned soever he may be, and how much soever conversant in the Art of
Sophistry, that attacks the Reformation from thence, he will not be able to
make the least breach upon it.

Would it not be extremely pleasant, to see a Doctor carrying the Mark of the
Beast, libellously triumphing by reason of this Dispute betwixt two
Protestants; and in the mean time taking no Notice of all those Sections, where
both these Author's do unanimously and demonstratively prove, that the Church
of Rome is Babylon the great; that the Papal Empire is the Beast with two
horns; that the Pope is the Son of Perdition, the False Prophet, and the
seventh Head of the Dragon; and that the City of Rome is the Seat of the Beast?
Herein both the Authors have just matter of glorying; and as for that little
difference between them concerning the Effusion of the Vials, they have ground
enough for Reprisals, and a large field for recrimination upon the account of
the difference betwixt the Jansenists, and the Molinists; and between the
Theologues of Italy, and of other places upon the one hand, and those of France
upon the other, who have made a Sacrifice to Louis the great, of the
Infallibility of the Pope, of his Supremacy over Councils, and of his power
over that Sovereigns Person and Temporal Rights. That I may not speak of an
infinite number of differences amongst Papists in reference to other Subjects.
And these are all fundamental points in the Romish Religion, and in reference
to which they cannot differ without one side's falling into Heresy. But
whether a Reformed Divine believe the Vials to be already poured out, or
believe that none of them are yet poured out, he is in both cases equally
Orthodox, and the Reformed Religion is by reason of none of them liable to be
impeached.

So that I may conclude, that this Dispute, if it be rightly apprehended, can
do no prejudice, and that it is of advantage upon many accounts, that the
Anonymous Author should defend his opinion about the Non-Effusion of the Vials,
which Mr. Jurieu has attacked in his Apology. And this he intends to do as
becomes a Reformed Divine* and as a Lover of peace; so that all who read his
Defense shall have cause to be satisfied, except it be such whom Interest and a
false Zeal keep united to the Papal Religion. He were neither an honest nor a
Wise man, who maintaining the Non-Effusion of the Vials, should from thence
take occasion to vent his passion against a Writer, whose labors are of
wonderful Edification to the whole Protestant Party. So that if there occur any
Expressions which may seem somewhat rude, as it is not true, it is false, and a
few more of that Kind; he does declare, that they are only intended against the
matters in debate, and that he would not have used them, were they not
customary Terms in*all Polemical writings, and did not the common usuage render
them necessary and in a manner inevitable.

Mr. Beverly in his Scripture-Line of Time, in Quarto, printed at London 1684.
speaking of the Vials, page 187. says:
BUt that we may know they are not yet begun, whenever they begin, they move
with so swift a Course, that it is impossible there should be any delay in them
after they are begun, or that any of them should be entered, and not all of
them in their Order Swiftly poured out.

A DEFENSE OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS Upon the APOCALYPSE, Of St. JOHN, concerning
the Effusion of the Vials.
MR. Iurieu having in his Accomplishment of the Scripture-Prophesies, asserted
the first Six Vials to be already poured out, and that the seventh has been
pouring forth all along since Luther's Reformation; he could not endure that
the Anonymous Author of the Illustrations upon the Revelation, should endeavor
to prove, that all the Vials are still full of the wrath of God, and that all
of them remain yet to be poured out; tho he had therein no design of
contradicting Mr. Iurieu, more than he had several other Divines, that before
him had been of the same opinion. However Mr. Iurieu thought fit to attacque
that Author in his Apology, in which he attempts two things. 1st, He studies to
prove, that the Vials have for a long time been pouring forth; that the
effusion of the six first is already past; and that the seventh having been a
pouring out for these hundred and sixty years, will be suddenly empty, and
issue in the total ruin of the Papal Empire. 2ly, He endeavors to refute the
reasons by which the Anonymous Author pretends to have proved, that there is
not so much as one of the Vials yet poured out; and that they shall not be,
until under the sounding of the 7th Trumpet.

The foundation upon which Mr. Jurieu has built his Commentary on the 16th
Chapter of the Revelation, consists in this, that he considers the Seven Vials
as Seven Periods of Time. Which Periods he makes to begin in the tenth Century;
so that according to him, the first of the seven plagues, which produced the
Noisome Sore, fell upon the tenth Age; and this first period lasted above 150
years, and extended a great way into the eleventh Century. The Second and Third
plagues, which fell upon the Sea and upon the Rivers, and converted them into
Blood, and which he will have to be nothing else save the Croisado's, reached
from the Eleventh Age to the thirteenth. The fourth plague, that fell upon the
Sun, and which scorched men with fire; is that which (according to him) befell
the Pope upon the increase of his Authority, when he became a Tyrant over the
World, whereas before he had been a Tyrant only over the Church. And this
Period (he says) continued from the year 1074. until the End of the fourteenth
Age. The fifth, which is that which fell upon the Seat of the Beast, he will
have to be the translation of the Papal Seat and Court to Avignon, that rendered
the Papal Kingdom full of darkness, and which lasted from 1305. until 1440. The
sixth Vial, which was poured forth upon the River Euphrates, dried up its
water, and made way for the Kings of the East; is according to him the
irruption of the Turks upon the Eastern Roman Empire; and this 6th period
signified by the sixth Vial, he affirms to have continued from the year 1420
till the time of Luther, which was about a hundred and five and twenty years;
at which time the seventh Vial begun to be poured forth, and will end in the
destruction of the Papal Empire.

This is the great principle that Mr. Iurieu go's upon; the seven Vials, says
he, are certainly seven Periods of time? And from this principle, he draws
three Conclusions. (1) That there is a difference between the seven Vials, and
the seven plagues. That the seven plagues are the judgments of God; and that
the seven Vials denote the seven Periods of time wherein those Judgments are to
fall upon the Papal Empire. (2) That all the Plagues are designed against the
Papal Kingdom, and not so much as one of them against the Empire of the Turks.
It Is certain, says he, that the seven plagues are entirely intended against
the Empire of the Beast. (3) That there are in all thirteen plagues, whereof
the 6 first have destroyed the Roman Empire as Civil, and that these six
plagues fell under the five first Trumpets; and that the sixth Trumpet, which is
subdivided into seven Vials, shall destroy the same Empire as Ecclesiastical
and Papal; and that the Vials have been pouring out since the tenth Century;
that the seventh is not yet wholly poured forth, but that it begun at the time
of Luthers Reformation, where he places the Harvest, and will end at the
general Reformation, which is represented by the Vintage.

I have heard it alway's said, that whatsoever is styled a principle in any
Science, ought to be clear, and of such an evidence as to set it beyond
contradiction. Whereas Mr. Iurieu's principle, that the Seven Vials, are
certainly seven Periods of time, has not this character, being neither certain
nor clear to those that are versed in the reading of the Prophets, in which
there is not so much as one footstep of it to be found. It Is evident and
certain, says Mr. I. because the Term Vial signifies an Hourglass, and not a
Cup. For a Cup is of another form than a Vial, in that this has a large belly
and a narrow Mouth. But it is not about the form of a Vial that we treat, but
about the signification of the Term. Nor is there any Greek Author that
ascribes to the word Vial, the signification of an hourglass. Neither is there
one example to that purpose either in Henry Stevens Thesauras, or in Favorinus,
or in Suidas, or in Hesychius, or in the Glossary. But by all Dictionaries it
does appear that the Term Vial signifies a Cup, a Chalice, in a word, a Vessel
designed to drink in, or any thing rather than a Glass for the measuring of
Time. So that Mr. Iurieu's great principle is more than doubtful; but then the
use to which St. John applies this Term Vial, does make us plainly see its
falsehood. In the 5th chap. of the Revelation v. 8. the four and twenty Elders
fall down before the Throne, having Golden Vials full of odours, which are the
prayers of the Saints. Now can Vials there signify hour-glasses? Were
Hour-glasses used to offer incense in, and to scatter perfumes in the places of
worship, as well as to measure and design time? Surely Mr. Iurieu will grant
that Vials in the 5th chap. of the Revelation are not hourglasses, but Cups;
and the odours whereof they are said to be full, determine their signification
to be Cups, rather than hourglasses. We may also affirm, that the Term Vial
chap. 16. can have no other signification but this, in that the Wrath of God,
whereof they are said to be full, adjudgeth the meaning of them to Bowls, or
Cups, out of which the Enemies of Gods Church are made to drink; rather than to
hour-glasses for the measuring and defining of time. It may be likewise told
him, that it being said chap. 18. v. 3. that Babylon shall drink of the Wrath
of God, tho the word Vial be not in the original, yet it determins the
signification of Vials chap. 16. to be cups, because they are the judgments of
God, which are spoken of in the one place as well as in the other. It may be
farther said unto him, that chap. 16. speaks not simply of Vials, but of
golden Vials; and thereupon he may be asked, whether hour-glasses were
anciently made of gold, so that thereby the Spirit of God might allude unto
them? It may also be demanded of him, whether an hourglass of gold would be
proper to measure time by? Was Gold anciently transparent, that men could see
throw it how the Water run out, as we now see throw glass how the sand drains
away?

But Mr. Iurieu objects, that the Vials are poured forth upon the Earth, upon
the Sea, upon Fountains and Rivers, upon the Sun, upon the Seat of the Beast,
upon Euphrates, and into the Air, which cannot be said of drink or of a potion.
But why? Is it more usual to say, that there are hour-glasses cast into the
Air, upon the Sun, upon the Sea, upon the Earth, and upon the Rivers? It Is most
true, that the phrase, should it be taken in a literal signification, is both
contrary to custom, and common sense; but yet it serves to conduct the Reader
to a Mystical sense; and the rather in that it is expressly said, that the Vials
are full of the wrath of God; which renders the Trope clear and intelligible to
all persons. And if there be any difficulty in the expression, it consists
chiefly in knowing the meaning of the Earth, the Sea, the Fountains, the Sun,
the Seat of the Beast, the Air, and Euphrates, which are the Subjects upon
which the Vials are poured forth. For after we have once attained to the Sense
of the Subject, there remains no room for doubt, out that the effusion of the
Vials, signifies the judgments of God against that which is called the Air, the
Sun, Euphrates, the Seat of the Beast, etc.

Forasmuch then as the Prophecy says expressly, that the Vials are full of the
wrath of God, Mr. Iurieu acts both unreasonably and wholly against the genius
and spirit of Prophecy, in making them to be hour-glasses and Periods of Time.

To give some probability to his Notion, and some kind of evidence to his
principle, he says, that the Seals and the Trumpets denote periods of time.
The Seals, by virtue of an Allusion to Tables, or Chronological Books, where
Times are marked and registered. The Trumpets, by an Allusion to the Iubile
Trumpets of the old Law, whereby the Period of fifty years was marked out. And
that therefore because the Visions of the Seals and Trumpets signify periods of
Times, we are to conclude that the Vision of the Vials does the same. All this
is very easily said, but it is impossible to be proved. It Is most true that St.
John does allude to the expressions of the Prophets and to their Visions; but
no Prophet has made mention of a Sealed Book; and if he had, yet it would
remain still to be proved, that the Seal of that Book signified a certain
Period of time, which it is not so easy to do as to say.

There is somewhat more likelihood in the Allusion to the Trumpets that
proclaimed the Jubilees, because they recurred upon the revolution of every
fifty years. But then in order to our being convinced that St. John made this
allusion, we ought to be first satisfied, that Trumpets were applied to no
other use, save to the publication of the Jubilees; which is most evidently
false, seeing they were used among the Israelites, as well as in the time of
St. John, in the proclaiming of War. And it is clear, that St. John does rather
allude to the Trumpets that proclaimed War, than to the Trumpets whereby the
Jubilees were published. Because the Trumpets of St. John represent the rise
and progress of Popery, and Mahometanism, which are Wars against the Church and
Truth of God. Whereas the Jubilees were years of Prosperity and blessing; for
which reason Isaiah calls the year of Jubilee, the acceptable year of the Lord,
chap. 61. v. 2. Mahomet and Antichrist are the two wild Bores, that spoil the
vineyard of the Lord. They are the two great Enemies of the Gospel; and the
sound of each Trumpet is a signal of the Battles, which those two Enemies
fought against the Church of God; the one of them in the East, and the other in
the West. They denote rather years of lamentation and tears, than of Jubilation
and joy. So that it is not true, that the Trumpets of St. John intimate periods
of Time, by an allusion to the Trumpets which published the Jubilees. And it is
yet less true, that the Vials are hour-glasses to mark these periods by.

Mr. Iurieu's principle being false, all the Conclusions which he draws from it
must necessarily be false also. (1) It Is false, that there is a difference
between the seven plagues, and the seven Vials. Seeing they are the same
Judgments of God against the Enemies of his Church; represented chap. 15. under
the name plagues; and chap. 16 under that of Vials. For as by the plagues, the
wrath of God is fulfilled; so the Vials are not full of divine wrath, but in
order to be accomplished upon his Enemies, when they come to be fully poured
forth. The seven Angels, who are said to have the seven Vials, receive from one
of the four Living Creatures seven golden Vials full of the Wrath of God. In a
word, the Effect and result of the plagues foretold chap. 15. is the same with
the effect of the Vials when fully poured forth, chap. 16. namely, the opening
of the Temple of God, that all Nations may enter in. (2) It Is false, that all
the plagues are designed only against the Empire of the Beast, and that there
is not any of them intended against the Mohammedan Empire. For as Mahomet has
infected the Eastern Roman Empire, so St. John does nothing, but declare as a
prophet, what was to befall the Roman Empire, therein pursuing the History
which Daniel had begun. And from thence we may conclude, that both the Vials
and the Trumpets have in part for their object the Turkish Empire and the
Mohammedan Religion. (3) It Is false, that the sixth Trumpet is subdivided into
the seven Vials, and that the seven Vials have been pouring out since the tenth
Century. For it is the 7th Trumpet that is* subdivided into the Seven Vials,
because it is under the Seventh Trumpet, that the Vials shall be poured out.
Whosoever well considers what is to arrive under the sixth Vial, according as
St. John has described it, and thereupon compares it with what is to come to
pass under the Seventh Trumpet; may from thence prove, that the judgments of
God represented by pouring forth of the Vials, agree admirably with the effect
of the Seventh Trumpet, but do no way's accord with that of the sixth, and may
from thence conclude, that the subdivision which Mr. Iurieu attributes to the
sixth Trumpet, agrees only to the Seventh.

The Anonymous Author might here give over, if he intended no more than to
discover how ill Mr. Iurieu has explained the 16th Chap. of the Revelation,
and that the applications which he has made of Events to the Vials, are all
forced and constrained. But because he has so unhandsomly treated the
Anonymous Author's reasons against the effusion of the Vials, as not to account
them worthy of the name of difficulties; it will be convenient before we
advance to the examination of Mr. Iurieu's application of Events to the Vials,
and to the Defense of the Anonymous Author's reasons, to represent to the
Reader the principles and foundations, upon which the said concealed Author
has built the Systeme of his Illustrations.

The 1st foundation upon which he go's, is that the Apocalypse is nothing but a
continuation of the Prophetical History of Daniel, concerning the fourth
Monarchy, which is the Roman Empire; and concerning the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, which is his Church.

The 2d is, that the Apocalypse predicteth three Changes that were to befall
the Roman Empire. By the first, it was to pass from Paganism to Christianity.
By the second, it was to pass from Christianity to Antichristianism and
Mahometism. And by the third, it is to return from Mahometism, and from
Antichristianism to Christianity purified by a general Reformation.

The 3d is, that the first change fell out under the Sixth Seal; that the 2d
came to pass under the Trumpets; and that the third shall arrive under the
Vials.

The 4th is, that these three Visions, to wit, that of the Seals, that of the
Trumpets, and that of the Vials, are the three principal Visions; and do
comprehend the whole Prophetic History concerning the Roman Empire and the
Church of God, and that all the other Visions are but Commentaries upon these
three.

The 5th is, that none of the Vials are contemporary with any of the Trumpets,
except with the seventh Trumpet; and that there is as much difference between
the time of the Trumpets and that of the Vials, as there is between the time of
building and the time of destroying; and that we are to see all that overthrown
under the Vials, which was established under the Trumpets. This does evidently
appear, in that the Trumpets and the Vials display themselves toward the same
Subjects, and that the effects of the Vials, are different from those of the
Trumpets. And this difference is so great, that whosoever considers it
carefully and without prejudice, will be convinced, that whatsoever was
produced and raised under the Trumpets, shall fall into decay and come to ruin
under the Vials.

For whereas under the first Trumpet there fell upon the Earth, hail mingled
with fire and blood; in the stead of this under the first Vial there falls upon
the same Earth, expressed by those who worship the Beast and who have his mark,
a noisome and grievous Sore.

And whereas under the second Trumpet, there was a burning Mountain cast into
the Sea, so that the third part only of all that was in it died: In like manner
the second Vial is poured forth upon the same Sea, so as to render it wholly
and entirely blood, and to cause every Soul that is in it to die.

The third Trumpet, made the Fountains and the Rivers become bitter; but the
third Vial, represents the Rivers and Fountains changed into blood.

The fourth Trumpet, lay's before us the third part of the Sun, and of the
Moon, and of the Stars Smitten, i. e. the third part of the Roman Empire
darkened by the Pestilential doctrine of Mahomet, and invaded by the Arms of the
Turks: but the fourth Vial, which is poured forth only upon the Sun, seems to
threaten both the Ottoman Empire, and the Mohammedan Religion, with a disaster.

The fifth Trumpet, fore-tells the fall of a great Star, to whom were given the
Keys of the Bottomless Pit, out of which there arose Smoke and Locusts. The
Keys plainly show Rome to be meant, in that She challenges to have the custody
of the Key's committed to her, and pretends to be the Seat of St. Peter: and
this denotes the growth of the Papal Empire. But the fifth Vial, that is
poured out upon the Seat of the Beast, i. e. upon Rome, predicts her
destruction, and therefore represents his Kingdom become full of darkness, and
his Subjects gnawing their tongues through despair.

The sixth Trumpet, as also the sixth Vial, have the River Emphrates for their
Subject. But with this difference, that the Sixth Trumpet loosed the four
Angels that were bound in the River Euphrates, which represents the growth of
the Turkish Empire, and of their Religion; whereas the sixth Vial, dries up the
said River, and produces the End both of their Religion and Empire.

Finally, the Seventh Trumpet, denounces the third and last Woe, and under
this, the Vials of Gods wrath are to be poured forth upon all the Enemies of
his Church, in order thereby to manifest and fulfill the Mystery of God, which
is nothing else save the reuniting all Nations under the Scepter of Jesus
Christ, which will beget the Millennian Reign.

These are the principles, upon which the Anonymous Author has built the
Systeme of his Explanations, which as he judges to be beyond all possibility
of being overthrown; so it is from this source that he will both bring his
Answers to those Reasons, whereby Mr. Iurieu has endeavored to prove, that
all the Vials are already poured out, and also the Defense of the Reasons, by
which he has in his Illustrations proved that they are not yet poured forth.

The proof which Mr. Iurieu grounds upon the conformity of the first four Vials
with the Events observable in the History of the Papal Empire, is perfectly
overthrown by considering the Nature of the Vials themselves. For they are
nothing but the Judgments of God upon the Papal Empire in order to destroy it.
But the Events which he will have to answer to the Vials, produced a quite
contrary effect; they raised it, they increased it, and they brought the Papal
Empire to its grandeur. The wonderful corruption of the tenth Age, signified
according to Mr. Iurieu by the noisome Sore of the first Vial, served to
diffuse the darkness of Error and Idolatry by which that Empire is supported.
The Croisado's, which he will have to be signified by the Sea and Rivers under
the second and third Vials being turned into Blood; as likewise the Suns
scorching men under the 4th Vial, which he will have to prefigure the growth of
the Papal Authority; did all contribute to the rendering that Empire stronger
and more terrible. How then could these Vials which are the judgments of God
upon the Papal Empire, be poured out for the increasing and perfecting the
grandeur of that Empire?

Mr. Iurieu having foreseen this difficulty, has in the second part of his
Accomplishment of Prophesies, Edition second, returned two Answers to it. The
first is, that all the plagues do' not fall upon the Head of the Antichristian
Empire. There are, says he, some of the severe judgments of God, whereof the
Popes are not the subject, but the Instruments. These plagues fall upon those
who worship the Beast, and his Image; and not upon the Beast himself and upon
the false Prophet.

To which I reply, that what he says, namely, that all the Vials are not to be
poured out upon the Head of the Antichristian Empire, as well as upon his
Kingdom, has no better foundation, than his Principles have. Because it is
impossible that an Empire should be smitten with the plagues and judgments of
God, in order to its being weakened and impaired, and that its Head and
Sovereign should in the mean time no way's suffer. The near union that is
between the Head and the members, is wholly inconsistent with such a notion.
Whenever the Body is very sick, the Head is in a very ill condition. And this
holds more tru'ly in reference to a Political Body, than a Natural. Moreover,
whereas it is a Spiritual Empire that is spoken of, namely, Antichristianism;
the judgments that are to be executed upon it, are to be physical and penal
evils, which as punishments are to weaken and subvert it. The judgments of God
against an Empire, whose criminalness from the very nature of it, lies in its
Errors, Idolatries, Tyranny, which comprehend in them the corruption of
manners, cannot consist in Evils of Offense. But the first four Vials,
according to the sense put upon them by Mr. Iurieu, import Evils of Crime and
not of punishment, and do strengthen and advance that Empire in all that is
essential unto it, instead of depressing and enfeebling it. For it never had so
great power and splendour, as it enjoyed from the tenth Age to the 14th, that
is, from the effusion of the first Vial, till the pouring out of the 4th. So
that Mr. I. has very ill applied the Events which he mentions to the 4 first
Vials.

His 2d Answer is, that the prodigious advancement of the Papal Authority,
which raised Antichristianism to its height, proved a step to its ruin. If the
Popes, says he, had continued within the bounds wherein they were in foregoing
Ages, and had not meddled in the affairs of the world, to dispose of them at
their pleasure, the Roman Sea would not have been known to be Antichrist. But
thereupon that Truth became so palpable, that all mankind grew convinced of it.
This Answer indeed is subtle, but is not of that force as to deceive those who
make a right use of their Reason. All Earthly Empires have their beginning,
their progress, and their perfection, according as it pleases the providence
of God to suffer them to increase; and when they are risen to such a height
that they can advance no farther, they then of themselves fall into decay and
ruin. And therefore the Antichristian Empire being Earthly, it is not strange if
we find the like fate and parallel decay to befall it. But Right Reason cannot
fathom, how an Empire should be punished and depressed by the plagues of divine
justice, at a time when it is advancing and mounting to the highest pitch of its
grandeur. We may as reasonably say, that what the School of Hypocrates styles
an Athletick health, is a punishment of God, because according to the judgment
of Physicians, whosoever possesses it, is in danger to lose it and fall into
some mortal disease. This nevertheless is what Mr. Iurieu is forced to affirm,
because he cannot otherway's maintain that the first four Vials are already
poured out.

Let us now come to the fifth Vial, which is to be poured forth upon the Seat
of the Beast. This Vial, says Mr. Iurieu, fell upon Rome, which is the Seat of
the Beast, when she lost her Sun (that Sun which is spoken of in the fourth
Vial) when she lost her Pope, and the Papal Court, which as a whirlpool drew
unto her all the Riches of Europe. Clement V. having left Rome in the year
1305, and fixed his Residence at Avignon, the City which had been the Mistress
of the world remained desolate, and became a Wilderness for the space of 74
years: and this transferring of the Papal Seat to Avignon, was the cause of
that Schism which lasted till the year 1415.

The Anonymous Author had said, that the translation of the Popes Seat from
Rome to Avignon; and what ensued thereupon, was not an Evil of that extent and
greatness, as to answer the whole force of the words of the Prophecy. The
contrary whereof Mr. Iurieu should have shown, which he has not done.
Wherefore that Author does again say, that the removing of the Papal Court to
Avignon, with all that followed upon it, bears no proportion to the greatness
of the judgment of God, predicted to fall upon the Seat of the Beast under the
fifth Vial. For by that Rome is to be totally destroyed; and the 18th. Chap. of
the Revelation, which describes her destruction, is nothing but a Commentary
upon that Vial: as the 13th Chap. is a Commentary upon the 8th and 9th
Chapters, which are those of the Trumpets. When Rome is destroyed, the Papal
Kingdom will lose much of its splendour and strength; which is the reason why
it is said that his Kingdom became full of darkness, because a great many of the
followers of the Beast, will forsake him upon the seeing the destruction of his
Seat. Upon that they will open their eyes and be converted; and they who
continue to adhere to popery, will gnaw their tongues through despite and
grief; and blaspheme God, by saying, that he has failed in performing his word
by which he had promised, that Rome should forever be the Infallible Rule of
Faith, the Center of Unity, and the Fortress of Truth. But we must hereafter
speak more amply of this fifth Vial.

Let us proceed to the sixth Vial, which falls upon the River Euphrates, and
which dries up its waters, that a way may be prepared for the Kings of the
East.

Mr. Iurieu following the learned Mr. Mead, explaineth it in reference to the
irruption of the Turks, whose irruption he will have to be a judgment of God
against the Antichristian Kingdom. So that he pretends this sixth Vial to be
contemporary with the 6th Trumpet which described this Invasion of the Turks. I
do acknowledge that he has reason to say, that the Turks are spoken of both
under the Sixth Trumpet and under the 6th Vial: seeing the Turks have possessed
themselves of near one half of the Roman Empire, which is Daniels 4th Monarchy,
whose History is carried on by St. John. But he ought not to confound the 6th
Trumpet with the sixth Vial, as if they were only one and the same Vision. For
there is as much difference betwixt these two, as there is between the time of
building, and the time of destroying; between the Patience of God, which
suffers and permits his Enemies to become great to the prejudice of his own
Kingdom, and his Vengeance which ruineth, overwhelmeth, and abolisheth his
Enemies. Those two* Empires, namely, that of Antichrist, and that of the Turks,
were formed and grew up under the Trumpets; whereas the Vials threaten to beat
down and overthrow them. This the Anonymous Author lays for a foundation that
cannot be shaken, and upon this he defends, against the learned Mr. Mead, that
the drying up of Euphrates signifies not the Irruption of the Turks upon the
Antichristian Empire, but on the contrary, the end both of the Turkish Empire
and of the Mohammedan Religion.

It Is the prophetic way of speaking to understand Nations by those Rivers that
run through their Countries; and the destruction of Nations, by the drying up
of their Rivers. This appears by Isaiah Chap 19 v. 4, 5. where the Lord
says, he will deliver Egypt into the hands of a fierce King; and the waters
shall fail from the Sea, and the Rivers shall be wasted and dried up. And the
same prophet predicts the destruction of Babylon in the like Terms, Chap. 44.
v. 26, 27, 28. where he tells us, that it is God who confirms the word of his
Servants, and performs the Counsel of his Messengers, that says to
Jerusalem, thou shall be inhabited; and to the Cities of Judah, ye shall be
built; that says to the deep, be dry, and I will dry up thy Rivers; who says
of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to
Jerusalem, ^hou shall be built; and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be
laid. It Is evident that St. John alludeth to this prophecy of Isaiah: for both
the one and the other speak of the drying up of the River Euphrates. Isaiah
intends by the drying up of this River, the destruction of the Babylonish
Empire; and St. John by the drying up of the same River, intends the
destruction of the Turkish Empire, and of the Mohammedan Religion, which are
established in those Countries which Euphrates runs through. Isaiah promises
the subversion of the Babylonish Empire, as a means which God would serve
himself of for the re-establishment of the Jews; and St. John promises the
destruction of the Turkish Empire and of the Mohammedan Religion, as a means
which God will make use of for the Recalling and Conversion of the Jews.

This allusion of St. John to the Prophecy of Isaiah being so visible, one
would wonder that Mr. Iurieu could not perceive it. For if he had observed it,
he would not have taken the Kings of the East to be the Turks, upon a pretense
of the Turks possessing Natolia, which signifies the East* For the Text in St.
John speaks not of one King, but of Kings; whereas there is but one King of
Natolia who is the Grand Signior, all the people that depend upon him being
Slaves. And as it is to do Slaves too great an honor to give them the Title of
Kings; so it is most natural to understand the Jews by these Kings of the East,
and the rather because these two things are certain* First, that the Jews are
in greater number beyond Euphrates, than in all the other places where they are
dispersed. 2ly, that as they were before their being rejected, so they shall
after their being recalled, be Kings, and a Royal Priesthood, no less than
those sincere Christians are, to whom St. Peter gives that Elogy. So that we
ought to conclude the sixth Vial not to be yet poured out, forasmuch as we have
neither seen the Destruction of the Turk and Mahometism, which are signified by
the drying up of the River Euphrates; nor the Recalling of the Jews, denoted by
the coming in of the Kings of the East, which is promised under the Effusion of
the Sixth Vial.

Finally, Mr. Iurieu pretends, that the pouring forth of the seventh Vial,
begun at the time of Luther, and that the Reformation of the last age is the
Harvest spoken of Chap. 14. and that this Harvest is the effect of the seventh
Vial, whose effusion will end upon the sounding of the Seventh Trumpet, for the
final destruction of the Papal Empire, and that this shall be the Vintage,
which signifies the General Conversion of all Nations.

He will also have this Vial to have something singular and peculiar belonging
to it, namely, that one part of it shall be poured out at one time, and the
rest of it at an other. And that between those two times of its effusion, the
Papal Empire shall be healed of her wound, through raising herself to much of her
former greatness, and that nevertheless this Vial shall continue to be running
out. But that is incredible, because it is with reference to this last Vial,
that the Voice coming out of the Temple from the Throne, proclaims it is done,
Rev. 16. 17. so that the half of it cannot still be to run out. Nor is there
the least ground for dividing any of the Vials into several parts, seeing God
has no way's done it* It Is true, that the Harvest was in the last Age, and
that in Luther's time the Sickle was put in, and the Harvest gathered; but then
the Harvest is not an effect of the Seventh Vial, that being wholly for the
Vintage, forasmuch as there remains nothing after that to be done, toward the
filling up the wrath of God against the Antichristian Empire.

But it may be said to the Anonymous Author, that he supposes the six first
Trumpets to give Birth, Growth, Grandeur, and perfection to the Papal Kingdom;
and that nevertheless according to him, the Reformation of Luther, which
lessened the Pope, and diminished his Empire, begun under the sixth Trumpet,
under which we yet are. And that this breaks the Coherence of his Systeme, and
defaceth the Harmony of his Illustrations. To this the Anonymous Author
Answers, that it is not true, that the Reformation made in the foregoing
Age, has produced the effect which they alledg. For we must in reference to
the Papal Authority; distinguish between his pretended Right and the actual
Exercise of it. For it is certain, that the Pope, does not actually exercise the
Right attributed to him, even in all the Dominions which pay him an obedience.
He does not exercise it in France, in that degree and manner, as he does beyond
the Alp's and the Pyrenees, and in several other places. As for the Right, he
possesses it to this day, as he did before the preaching of Luther, and as he
claimed it in the time of the famous Hildebrand Gregory the Seventh. For all
who worship the Beast, who bear his Image* and carry his Mark, do at this time
acknowledge Innocent XI. for the Vicar General of Jesus Christ, as the Lord of
all States and Empires, either directly or indirectly; as the Successor of St.
Peter who has the Keys of Heaven, Hell and Purgatory; as the Sovereign Judge of
Controversies* whose mouth whenever he speaks ex Cathedra, utters
Oracles, which are to be received with an obedience of Faith, as if God himself
had pronounced them. So that it is evident, that the Reformation of Luther is
not the effect of any Vial, but that they are all still to be poured forth,
from the very first to the last.

But it may further be said to the Anonymous Author, can you deny but that the
Reformation of the last Age, was a judgment of God upon the Dominion of the
Beast, and upon the Papal Empire? And if it be a Judgment of God, how can you
undertake to maintain, that none of the Vials which threaten that Empire are
hitherto poured out?

The Anonymous Author confesses, that Luther's Reformation was a judgment of
God upon the Papal Kingdom; but he withal says, that it was an effect of the
sixth Trumpet, which continues as well as the former to represent the War of
Antichrist against the Church* of God. Till then Antichrist had been alway's
victorious; but after a constant course of Victories against the Church of God
during the War of more than a thousand years, he came then to receive a
disaster. Now this misfortune befell the Papal Empire under the sixth Trumpet,
which being the last save one, was the season that the War was hastening to an
End, and that the last Trumpet was about to sound, under which this War will
both actually end, and all the Vials come to be poured forth. But the Damage
which the Reformation has done the Papal Empire, tho it has considerably
dismembered it, is only a beginning of its sorrows, and is but an effect of the
War, which was to continue under all the six Trumpets, and which shall be
finished through the effusion of the Vials.

Nor has Mr. Jurieu any reason to complain against those, who do maintain that
all the Vials are still to be poured out. I understand, says he in the 2d
Edition of his Accomplishment of Prophesies, that since the first Edition of
this Book, there are still some, who to put a reputation upon themselves,
undertake to defend, that none of the seven plagues are yet come to pass, which
is a singularity neither edifying nor comfortable. After which he adds by way
of expostulation, I conjure them to lay aside their humor of contradicting,
and without passion to consider these two things; first, That in the whole
Explication of the 16th Chap. there is not any forced and wrested application;
but thas the Ideas which the Prophet has made use of, are all conformable to
the Events marked in* History; secondly, That in the application of these seven
plagues to the Events, all is coherent and of a piece, and that the Systeme
does in no part disagree with its self* Upon which, I pray them to consider,
whether this can be by chance, and whether any such thing ever was? What is by
accident may agree in some things, but it cannot do so in all!

This is a singular and strange way of proceeding. Is it Lawful for none but
for Eminent writers, to meditate and labor upon the Apocalypse? Or is it a
crime for them to have Sentiments different from those, which Mr. Iurieu has
framed upon this Divine Book? Or may they not contradict him, with the same
liberty, that he does all those who stand in his way, Trosruiulusve fuat? And
are his oppositions of others, more edifying and comfortable, than other men's
contradictions of him?

The Anonymous Author has without all prejudice, considered the Explication of
the 16th Chap. according as Mr Iurieu has given it. And was troubled to find
that the Application which he has made of the Events to the Vials, is wholly
forced. In that he confounds by that Application the Vials with the Trumpets;
and ascribes to the Vials, the proper and natural Effects of the Trumpets. So
that if his Systeme be coherent, and does not contradict it self; yet it has
this great fault, that it does no way accord with the Systeme of St. John.

What I have already said, does abundantly make this evident* but what I have
farther to say in Defense of the Vials not being yet poured out, will justify,
that the Reasons which the Anonymous Author had said, approached to
demonstrations, are at the least difficulties, which deserved that Mr. Iurieu
should have taken pains to have answered them better, than he has hitherto
done.

A Defense of the REASONS, of the Anonymous Author, for the Non-Effusion of the
VIALS.
MR. Iurieu has endeavored three things by way of opposition to these
Reasons. (1) He has confuted them. (2) He studies to show, that this Opinion
which is that of the deceased Mr. de Launoy, agrees very well with the
Hypotheses of Mr. de Launoy, but not with these of the Anonymous Author. (3)
That it does so far diminish the comfort of the Reformed, by how much it sets
the Effusion of the last Vial backward. And besides all this, he opposes the
Explication which the Anonymous Author has given of the fourth Vial. Now it is
necessary to give satisfaction, in reference to all these Articles.

The first proof of the Anonymous Author concludes, that the two last Vials are
still to be poured forth, because the fifth is not yet run out.

If this Reason, says Mr. Jurieu, signify any thing, yet it does not advantage
the Author, who will have none of the Vials to be poured forth; seeing
notwithstanding this argument, there may be four of them already run out.

The Anonymous Author being to prove, that all the Vials are still to be poured
forth; he begun at the End, where he thought best. That then which he alleged,
was that supposing the sixth Vial is to be poured forth before the seventh, the
fifth not being yet poured out, it consequently follows that the two last are
still to be poured forth. Nor was there any thing to be said against this
Reason of the Anonymous Author, but to examine whether he had sufficiently
proved his opinion in reference to the fifth Vial, in order to his proceeding
to the consideration of the four first.

Mr. Iurieu adds, that the Author pretends, that the darkness mentioned under
the fifth Vial, ought to signify the total ruin of the City of Rome. That
Author begs Mr. Iurieu's pardon, if he tell him that he is mistaken, and that
he has in no way's penetrated into the meaning of that Author, who explaineth
that darkness quite after another manner. He considers the effusion of the
fifth Vial upon the Seat of the Beast, as a judgment that should destroy Rome
beyond recovery, and he considers the darkness as an effect of the ruin of the
Seat of the Beast. These were his very words, Rome, which is the Seat of the
Beast, being destroyed, the Kingdom of the Beast becomes full of darkness; and
whereas darkness signifies in the Scripture sorrow and affliction, it is easy
to understand thereby the depressure of the Papal Empire, and the affliction of
those who carry the mark of the Beast, his Name, and the Number of his Name.
This was the Explication, which the Anonymous Author gave of the fifth Vial. He
distinguished with St. John between the Seat of the Beast and the Beast
himself, or his Kingdom. The fifth Vial falls directly and singly upon the
Seat of the Beast: for what End? to overthrow and destroy it forever. Mr.
Jurieu himself approves this distinction. He very pertinently observes, says
Mr. Jurieu, that the Prophecy says not, that the Seat of the Beast, but that
the Kingdom of the Beast, became full of darkness. That is well; but then he
adds, this is directly against the Anonymous Author; seeing if it be not the
City of Rome to which the plague of darkness is to be applied, it is not then
to be ruined by that plague.

It Is strange, that Mr. Jurieu should approve the distinction which the
Anonymous Author has observed in the Prophecy, and that he should not make the
due improvement of it: We are sacredly to adhere to the Terms of the Prophecy,
which does not attribute the darkness to the Seat of the Beast, but to his
Kingdom. For it does not say, that the Seat of the Beast became full of
darkness, but that his Kingdom was filled with darkness. So that the Seat of
the Beast being destroyed by the fifth Vial; the effect of that judgment will
be, that his Kingdom which still continues, shall become dark, shall be
afflicted, and filled with sorrow, upon the having lost its capital Seat. This
is that which darkness does signify, being a Term often applied in the
Scripture to represent a great and sore affliction. This is what the Anonymous
Author would have said, and which he really did say in his Illustrations. And
not that which Mr. Iurieu imputes unto him, of saying that these words, and
his Kingdom became full of darkness, signify a total destruction of the
Papacy, or of the Papal Empire.

It Is all therefore impertinent, which he opposes to this Notion; By what
Rule, says he, and in what language, does darkness necessarily signify a total
ruin? But herein he fights against his own shadow, and not against the
Anonymous Author, who never said nor thought that the darkness under the fifth
Vial signifies the universal destruction of the Papal Empire; for this he
acknowledges is not to arrive till under the seventh Vial. It Is true, that
being speaking of the effusion of the Vials in general, he had said, that the
fifth Vial threatens both Rome and its Empire with a much other kind of
affliction, than that which arose from the great Schism; but upon explaining
the fifth Vial in particular, he had at the same time expounded this
threatening, namely, that Rome shall be then utterly destroyed, but that its
Empire shall not be destroyed till under the seventh Vial. He had withal said
in the same place, that what fell out from the time of the great Schism till
the time of Luther's Reformation, was not an Event of that dreadfulness, as to
come up to the whole force of that expression, that they gnawed their tongues
for pain. Mr. Iurieu answers, that darkness in that place does not signify
the being afflicted, but that it signifies Ignorance and Superstition. Surely
he did not mind these words, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. For as
these words do explain the Term darkness; so they determine the sense of it to
that of affliction, rage, despite, and despair, which the Kingdom of the Beast
will be filled with ^ upon the destruction of the Beasts Seat. Which came not
to pass during the Schism of the Anti-popes. For to speak properly, it was only
the Anti*popes that were then enraged one against another, cursing,
Anathematizing, and treating each other as the Son of Perdition, and
Antichrist; but in the mean time the Cardinals, the Bishops, the Monks, were
never more caressed, and in greater credit with the one side and the other. In
a word, all under the Romish Jurisdiction, were then contented, and pleased
that they could fish in troubled waters. It was not then, that the Beasts
Kingdom was full of darkness, nor then that the Citizens of it gnawed their
tongues for pain; so that we are still to expect the effusion of the fifth Vial
upon the Seat of the Beast; in order to the beholding the Kingdom of the Beast
covered with darkness as the night; and in order to the seeing the Pope, the
Cardinals, the Prelates, the Friars, and all those whom the ruin of Rome shall
not be a means to convert, but who remain bigoted with the Infallibility and
the other privileges of the City of Rome, overwhelmed with sorrow, and gnawen
with inconsolable despair, through seeing their Idol abolished. Seeing the
destruction of Rome, which is the Seat of the Papal Empire, ought to precede
that of its Empire; even as Rome the Seat of the Civil Empire, was ruined
before that Empire; it is therefore the more probable, both that this
destruction is predicted in these words, the fifth Vial was poured out upon the
Seat of the Beast; and that its Destruction will afflict all its Empire, which
is the thing signified by these words, and his Kingdom became full of darkness.

This Exposition is as natural, as that of Mr. Jurieu appears forced and
strained. For it makes that the fifth Vial leaves the Seat of the Beast
untouched with the darkness of his Kingdom, whereas the darkness should be
alone adjudged to the Beasts Seat. For according to him, the darkness denotes
the great Eclipse, which the Papal Authority underwent during the Schism of the
Anti-popes. But according to the Text, it is not the Seat of the Beast, but
only his Kingdom, that becomes full of darkness through the pouring forth of the
fifth Vial. And indeed, during that great Eclipse, the Seat of the Beast
enjoyed an extraordinary luster, and was like unto the Country of Goshen,
while darkness covered all the rest of Egypt. Which is a thing too absurd not
to cause us to observe, how forced the application is, which Mr. Iurieu makes
of Events to the fifth Vial.

The Anonymous Author's second proof consists in this, that the Vials are
styled the last plagues, and that by them the wrath of God is accomplished
against Babylon, against Rome, her Pope, and her Empire. Whence it follows
that nothing of all this being yet come to pass, but Rome being hitherto
standing, her Pope, and her Empire still subsisting, the last Vial must be yet
to be poured out, and as I may say, that not one drop is hitherto fallen.

Mr. Iurieu confesses, that this proof is a difficulty, and the only one which
meriteth that name It Is a great honor that he accounts it so, but a greater
that he has left it in its full strength. The Anonymous Author in urging the
Terms of the last plagues by which the wrath of God is accomplished, had
considered the Vials under the respect that they bear to the Trumpets. For the
wrath of God under them comes to finish the trial of the Churches patience; He
having suffered the birth and progress of Mahometism, and permitted the Papacy
to form it self, and to grow, advance and rise to an insupportable Tyranny, in
order thereby to exercise the Faith and Patience of Believers. This is done,
when the Measure of the Churches afflictions shall be come to their height, and
when God with reference to her shall have accomplished his anger, which will be
upon the sixth Trumpets ceasing to sound; and then the seven Vials, which are
the seven Plagues, shall arrive and begin to take place against the Papacy, and
against Mahometism. It Is for this reason that it is said, that by the seven
plagues, which are the Vials, the wrath of God is finished. From whence it
follows, that the Vials are not contemporary with the 6th Trumpet, and that
it is not the 6th Trumpet which is subdivided into the seven Vials; but that
this subdivision is to be assigned to the seventh Trumpet; even as it is not
the 6th Seal but the Seventh which subdivideth it self into the seven Trumpets.
The sixth Trumpet no less than the preceding five, speaks of nothing save of
War against the Church of God. So long as it lasts, Antichrist abates nothing
of his fury, but constantly makes the same efforts, for the oppressing of the
Truth and such as do profess it; and while it endures, all things go' on at
the same rate against the Church of God. But as soon as the seventh Trumpet
comes to be sounded by the seventh Angel, the case will quite alter, the wrath
of God will break forth, and the Vials empty themselves. And this is the true
Reason why the Vials are called the last plagues, by which the wrath of God is
fulfilled. So that all which Mr. Jurieu has said upon the Term last, tho in it
self very good and very ingenious; yet it is altogether impertinent. His
curious remarks and comparisons, which amount to the fourth part of his
Apology, are very incongruously* placed. For all he says, is founded upon a
principle that is false, namely, that the seven Vials are contemporary with the
seven Trumpets. Whereof as the falsehood is already demonstrated, so it will
farther appear in what is hereafter ^o be said.

The 3d Argument which the Anonymous Author made use of was this; that St. John
Rev. chap. 8. v. 13. declares how he heard an Angel flying through the midst of
heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth,
by reason of the Trumpets that are yet to sound; and that he adds chap. 9. v.
12. after the sounding of the fifth Trumpet, one Woe is past, and behold there
come two Woes more hereafter. For as one of these two last woes did undoubtedly
arrive under the sixth Trumpet, under which Mahometism and the Arms of the
Turks subverted Christianity in the East; so it must needs be that the third Woe
is to arrive under the seventh Trumpet. This also St. John expressly declares
chap. 11. v. 14. the second Woe, says he, is past, and behold the third comes
quickly; after which he immediately subjoins, the seventh Angel sounded, and
there were great voices in heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign forever.
This is a Woe for the Papacy and for Mahometism, but a great happiness here in
this life for the Church of God. For it is plainly the general Reformation,
which shall comprehend the conversion of all Nations, by giving them to see the
total destruction of the Papal Empire. From whence it clearly follows, that
all the Vials are contained under the third Woe, and consequently, that they are
yet all to be poured out; forasmuch as we are still under the sixth Trumpet,
and groaning under the pressures of the second Woe.

Mr. Jurieu says, he does not apprehend how these can be styled invincible
Proofs; and he does. withal add, that it is not true, that the third Woe is
confined to the seventh Trumpet. To which I answer, that it is as clear that
the third Woe is contained under the seventh Trumpet, as it is evident that the
second Woe is comprehended under the sixth, and the first Woe* under the fifth.
But by what does it appear that the first Woe is contained under the fifth
Trumpet, and the second Woe under the sixth? This appears by its being said,
that after the sound of the fourth Trumpet, the Angel cried, Woe, woe, woe, to the
Inhabitants of the Earth* by reason of the Trumpets of the three Angels which
are yet to sound. It likewise appears, in that after the sounding of the sixth
Trumpet, St. John declares chap. 11. v. 14. the second Woe is past, and behold
the third comes quickly. And that we may know when it is to come, St. John
adds, and the seventh Angel sounded, and the Kingdoms of this world became the
Lords and his Christ's. Now can the Kingdoms of this world, be made subject to
Christ, before the destruction of Mahometism and of Popery? It Is then evident
that the 3d Woe is comprehended under the seventh Trumpet, as the 2d is under
the sixth, and the 1st under the fifth; which renders the Argument of the
Anonymous Author unanswerable.

The weakness of this proof, says Mr. Jurieu, which is given us for
invincible, is that it supposes a thing which is not true, and which the
Anonymous Author cannot evince by any sort of reason, viz. that the plagues and
the Vials are all comprehended under the third Woe. To whom that Author
Answers, that he has proved the third Woe to be contained under the seventh
Trumpet, as the 2d is comprehended in the sixth, and the first in the fifth.
And forasmuch as the seventh Trumpet comprehends all the Vials, because they
are not poured out till after it has sounded, it invincibly follows, that the
third Woe is comprehended in the seven Vials, and that the seven Vials do
execute the third Woe. Nor is it to be helped, if Mr. Jurieu will not see what
St. John so plainly declares unto him.

To demonstrate, says Mr. Jurieu, that the seven Vials are not comprehended in
the 3d Woe, it is sufficient to prove, as we have done, that the seven Vials are
seven Periods of time, which run along, as water runs out of an hourglass.
This principle of Mr. Iurieu, that the Vials are seven Periods of time, we have
fully refuted; and have made it appear, that both his principle, and the
reasons by which he endeavors to maintain it, are worth nothing. So that if he
has nothing else to alledg, whereby to make it appear, that the Third Woe is
not contained in the Seventh Trumpet, the Anonymous Author's argument may be
still called invincible.

Moreover, Mr. Iurieu's supposition, that the sixth Trumpet under which we are,
has been exerting its Influences for almost eight hundred years, and that its
subdivided into seven Vials, is a most false principle, and unto which we have
opposed that which is uncontrolable; Namely, that all the 1st 6 Trumpets do
sound before the effusion of any Vial; because according to St. John, there is
not one of them poured out till under the seventh Trumpet, which has not yet
begun to sound. For as none of the Trumpets sound, till after the opening of
the seventh Seal; so none of the Vials are to be poured forth, till under the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet. Mr. Jurieu confesses, that the H. Spirit has
not evidently declared, that the sixth Trumpet is subdivided into 7 Vials, but
he says, it may be inferred from this, that whereas the seventh Trumpet was
sounding when the Turks invaded the Grecian Empire, which was about the tenth
Century, and that we find the first Vial to have fallen about that time upon
the Empire of the Beast, and that therefore the course of the Vials must be
contained under the sixth Trumpet. To which I answer, that nothing of all this
arises from the words of the Prophecy; unless in the vertu' of his principle,
that the Vials are periods of times, and hour-glasses, which run along with the
sixth Trumpet, all which we have showed to be false. And have made it appear,
that the irruption of the Turks upon the Grecian Empire, is an effect of the
sixth Trumpet, but not of the sixth Vial, this being yet to be poured out, as
also the five first.

The Anonymous Author's fourth argument against the Effusion of the Vials, was,
that the Vials are nothing else but the seven Thunders spoken of Chap. 10. Now
the seven Thunders are adjourned till the sounding of the seventh Trumpet;
because St. John being about to write, 'twas said to him, seal the things which
the seven Thunders uttered, and write them not. Why so? because they were not
to be executed till the Mystery of God should be finished, which is not to be
till under the seventh Trumpet, in that the Mystery of God is nothing but the
subjugating of all the Kingdoms of this world to Jesus Christ. And if there be
any difference between the Vials and the Thunders, it consists in this, that
the Thunders are the denunciations of Gods Judgments, and the Vials the
Execution of them. For tho the Thunders were heard by St. John under the sixth
Trumpet, yet it was only in order to their being Executed under the 7th, under
which all the Vials shall be poured out.

Let us now see, how Mr. Iurieu, delivers himself from this Argument. I crave
pardon, says he, of the Anonymous Author, if I tell him that this
Ratiocination of his is attended with two considerable faults. (1) That it
supposes a thing which is more than doubtful, namely, that the seven Thunders
and the seven Vials are the same. I Am at a loss upon what ground he builds an
opinion so extraordinary, and which is so little agreeable to his own
principles. For as to the number of 7, which is found equally in the Thunders
and in the Vials* all the world knows it can be no proof: otherway's the seven
Spirits, the seven Candlesticks, and the seven Trumpets, would all be the same
thing that the seven Vials are.

If Mr. Jurieu would have freed himself from the Anonymous Author's argument,
he ought to have overthrown the whole foundation of it, and not have left the
principal part of it as he has done. For the foundation upon which the
Anonymous Author raised his argument, consists not only in this, that the
Number seven belongs equally to the Thunders as to the Vials, as he
groundlesly supposes; but upon this, that the Thunders signify the judgments
of God against the Enemies of his Church, as well as the Vials do. And upon
this, that the things uttered by the seven Thunders, are delayed till the
sounding of the seventh Trumpet, as appears by the Answer given to St. John
when he was about to write. This being the whole foundation of that Author's
argument, and Mr. Jurieu having no way's overthrown it, because indeed it is
impossible that it should be skaken, being established in the Prophecy, that
Author's proof remains in all its force.

The second fault which Mr. Jurieu finds with that argument, is this; the
foundation of it, says he, accords not with the Author's Principles; seeing
if the Thunders and the seven Vials are not to take up above the space of
twelve or fifteen years, and this toward the End of Antichrists Reign, how
comes an affair; which is to possess so small a Space during the Antichristian
Empire, to be spoken of, before there is any thing said of the birth and
progress of that Empire? And why does the Holy Spirit speak to St. John of the
seven Thunders, which are to subvert an Empire, of whose rise and grandeur he
had not yet spoken one word.

If Mr. Jurieu would have understood the Author's principles, he would have
seen that the Author's opinion about the seven Thunders does perfectly agree
with them. For one of the most solid principles of that Author is, that the
Trumpets show us the establishment and grandeur of the Papcy and of Mahometism,
and that the seven Vials, when they come to be poured out, will destroy them.
Moreover, seeing Mr. Jurieu acknowledges, that the Thunders signify the
judgments of God, and that the number Seven signifies the perfection of his
Judgments; what can be more natural, than to conclude as that Author does, that
the Thunders are the denunciation of that dreadful storm that will fall upon
the Effusion of the Vials? Mr. Jurieu, cannot but confess, that the Thunders
representing the judgments of God against the Enemies of his Church, cannot
without violence be placed under the Trumpets, because these give both birth
unto the Churches Enemies, and suffer them to grow and subsist.

I do not know why Mr. Jurieu should place in the numher of the Author's
Arguments against the effusion of the Vials, that which he had not said, save
only to prove that they shall be poured out without the interposure of any
considerable time between the one and the other. And that because it is said
chap. 10. v. 6. that the Angel swear there should be time no longer. For it is
evident, that the Author did not alledg this, save only to make it appear, that
the Vials shall be poured forth, the one immediately after the other; for the
proof whereof he had brought the Angels Oath, swearing, that time should be no
longer. Which is as much as if he had expressly said, there should be no longer
delay, no longer forbearance, and that the Patience of God should no longer
restrain his wrath against his Enemies. Now this Oath being sworn after the
sounding of the sixth Trumpet, and before the seventh, under which the Thunders
were to manifest themselves, and the Vials to be poured out; it can have
reference to nothing, but to the seven Thunders and the seven Vials, which are
to accomplish the wrath of God against his Enemies, and at the same time to
consummate the Mystery of the Millennian Reign.

If Mr. Jurieu has put this consideration into the number of that Author's
proofs against the effusion of the Vials, because he saw that the said Author
could have Reasoned thus; All the Vials are to be poured out immediately after
one another, and in a very short space of time, as appears by the Angels
Oath; and therefore it is not true that they have been running out for these 800
years; nor is it true that the seventh has been a pouring out all along since
Luther began to preach. And whereas the Anonymous Author had further remarked
toward the proof of the same thing, that when the 3d Woe is denounced, it is
said, behold the 3d Woe comes quickly; which word quickly had not been made use
of in the denunciation of the two first Woes. Then, I say, Mr. Jurieu has
returned no Answer, which gives ground to believe, that he had nothing solid
to Reply.

But possibly Mr. Iurieu may say, that this quickly ought to be understood with
reference to the two first Woes, namely, that the 3d Woe shall more closly
follow the 2d, than the 2d followed the 1st; and that this does not conclude
that the Vials are to be poured out so near one to another, nor with so great
celerity. I Answer unto him, that this cannot be the meaning of it, because the
three Woes are confined to the three last Trumpets; the 1st to the fifth, the
2d to the sixth, and the third to the seventh. For according to Mr. Iurieu, the
sixth has been exerting its Influences for almost these 800 years, and the 3d
Woe is not yet come, nor shall come till under the sound of the seventh Trumpet.
So that the whole course of the fifth Trumpet was not so far distant from the
sixth Trumpet, to which the 2d Woe is attributed; as the whole Course of the 6th
is distant from the beginning of the 7th; under which the 3d Woe is to arrive.
And therefore it must be owned, that the word quickly being used only in
reference to the 3d Woe, signifies that all the plagues, or which is the same
thing, that all the Vials shall be poured out close upon one another; and that
it does as much as import; that there shall not be so much time employed for
destroying the Empire of the Beast, as there was for the raising of it.

Mr. Iurieu had obliged the Anonymous Author, if he had answered that which
occurs in the Preface to his Illustrations, and which is laid down in these
Terms. It Is evident that there are in the Revelation three principal Visions,
in which are contained all the great Events that relate to the Roman Empire and
to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, i. e. which concern the True Church and the
False* These Visions, are those of the Seals, those of the Trumpets, and those
of the Vials. All the other are but Draughts, in which what is represented in
the Visions of the Seals, Trumpets, and Vials, is reassumed, enlarged, and more
circumstantially explained. For the name Seven, which is Mystical, and which
implies perfection, does inform us, that these three Visions comprehend all.
For it is found in that of the Seals, in that of the Trumpets, and in that of
the Vials, and also in that of the Thunders, which are the Forerunners of the
Vials. Moreover, these three Visions, are immediately linked one to another; so
that the second, which is that of the Trumpets, begins under the 7th Seal;
and the 3d, which is that of the Vials, begins under the 7th Trumpet.

As this is the foundation of the Anonymous Author's Systeme, and as he has
there declared the Key of the Revelation; Mr. Iurieu, who knows the art of
Reasoning, might have observed in that Preface a chain of Ratiocination able to
dazzle the Eyes of the Reader. For if it be true, that the Vials are not poured
out till under the Seventh Trumpet, as the Trumpets sound not till upon the
opening of the Seventh Seal; then it is most certain, that all the Vials remain
still to be poured out, forasmuch as the Seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded,
and that we are hitherto under the Sixth. Even as it might be justly said, that
none of the Trumpets had sounded; provided it were true that we were yet under
the Sixth Seal, and, that the Seventh were not until this time opened. This
Reason does necessarily and naturally follow from that which the Anonymous
Author had laid down in his Preface, and which is the foundation of his
Systeme. And if Mr. Iurieu has vouchsafed no Answer to it, doubtless it is
because he could find no difficulty in it.

To the foregoing Arguments, the Anonymous Author will add two more, which
whether he shall call proofs or difficulties, is to him indifferent. The first
arises from the comparing Rev. chap. 11. v. 19. with chap. 15. v. 5, 6, 7. In
chap. 11. we read, that the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and that there
was seen in his Temple the Ark of his Testament, and that there were
lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great hail. And
chap. 15. we read that St. John looked, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle
of the Testimony in Heaven was opened; and the seven Angels who had the seven
plagues came out of the Temple, and one of the four Living Creatures gave to
the seven Angels seven golden Vials full of the Wrath of the Living God. It Is
evident that these two Visions are parralel; and that they both tend to one and
the same End. For in each of them we find the opening of the Temple of God,
which had been shut against the Jews, but is now opened to receive them. In the
one we see the Ark of the Covenant, in the other the Tabernacle of Testimony.
This Ark and this Tabernacle of Testimony, are Jesus Christ, whom the Jews
shall come to Adore. Popery and Mahometism are the two great obstacles, which
hinder the conversion of the Jews, and which confirm them in their obstinacy;
but behold seven Angels, who receive seven Vials, for the destruction of the
Papacy and Mahometism. Now the Temple of God not being opened till under the
seventh Trumpet, which has not yet sounded, it invincibly follows, that none
of all the Vials are hitherto poured out.

The Anonymous Author's other new Argument, which he adds to the former, is
taken from that which St. John says, chap. 15. v. 1. I saw another great Sign
in Heaven. He had said the same thing chap. 12. v. 3. with respect to the
Subject of the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, which represent the whole
extent of the Roman Empire, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical, i. e. Papal:
taking this Extent and duration down from the time that these Revelations were
given to St. John* For the 12th chap. is a commentary upon the Vision of the
Trumpets; because we find in that chap. the same thing that we find in the
Vision of the Trumpets; namely, the War of the Dragon against the Woman, and
against those that are of her Seed. So that St. John coming to say chap. 15.
with respect to the Subject of the seven Plagues, which are the Seven Vials, I
saw another great Sign in Heaven; it is plain that this Sign is different from
the first, and represents quite another thing. So that if the Holy Spirit do
promise in this the ruin of the Papal Empire, as he had predicted in that the
birth and growth of the said Empire; we cannot make the Vials to be poured
forth under the Sixth Trumpet, without mixing what the Spirit of God would
separate, and without confounding two different Signs, and the different things
which are represented by those Signs.

To which Arguments there may be yet a third subjoined, grounded upon chap. 15.
v. 8. For it is there said, that after one of the four living Creatures had
given to the seven Angels seven Vials full of the wrath of the Living God, the
Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his Power, and no
man was able to enter into the Temple, till the 7 plagues of the seven Angels
were fulfilled. From thence there clearly result two Truths. One, that the
seven plagues and the seven Vials are one and the same thing, and that they
signify the same Judgments of God: Which is against the opinion of Mr. Iurieu,
who pretends, that the plagues are a different thing from the Vials; that the
plagues are the judgments of God, and the Vials periods of Time. The other,
that the Prophecy does not say, no man could enter into the Temple, until the
seventh Vial of the seventh Angel was fulfilled, but until the seven Vials of
the seven Angels were fulfilled. Which shows us, that none of them are yet
poured out; because it is only under the Seventh Trumpet, which has not yet
sounded, that the Seven Angels receive the seven Vials to pour them out. And
that it is not until then, that the Temple is to be filled with Smoke from the
glory of God and his power; which as it denotes an extraordinary mark of the
Gracious presence of God in the midst of his Church, so it is that which we have
not yet seen. This prophecy does manifestly allude to the Cloud that filled the
Tabernacle of Moses, and the Temple of Solomon. Exodus 40. 34, 35. 1* Kings 8.
10.

After that Mr. Iurieu had essayed, to overthrow the Reasons by which the
Anonymous Author had proved, that all the Vials are still to be poured out; he
in the next place endeavors to confute the signification of a Cup or Boul,
which that Author had ascribed to the Vials. How is it, says he, that he does
not perceive, that the figure of Vials is not borrowed from the cups of Gods
wrath, but from hour-glasses? This we have already refuted, and made it appear,
that tho the* Term Vial should sometimes signify an hourglass, yet it cannot
have that sense here. Because Hour-glasses of Gold are no way's fit to indicate
Time, which is measured by the running of Water or Sand. And especially because
the term Golden Vial, is used Chap 5. v. 8. to import a Cup, and not an
hourglass.

Let us see whether what Mr. Iurieu adds next, be more to the purpose. The form
of Cups, says he, is altogether different from that of Vials. For these have a
large belly and a narrow mouth, whereas Cups on the contrary are wide above and
narrow below, which make some say, that the Vials are poured into Cups, that so
men may drink what was in the Vial, as I have observed in reporting the common
opinion.

There can be nothing more impertinent than this speculation. For whatsoever
opposition he supposes between the form of Vials and of Cups; yet it is
certain, that all the best Greek Author's, call that which we drink in by the
name of Vial. And whosoever has observed Laborers at their refreshment, must
needs know, that they carry nothing into the fields with them save Bottles,
which have a large belly, and a narrow mouth, and that by the strait mouth,
they are so able to drink the liquor out of the Bottle, as to empty it.

But this, says Mr. Jurieu, after I have better thought upon it, is not the
point; for I affirm, that the figure of a drinking Cup has no room in any part
of this Vision. Because the Vial falls alway's on the Earth or on the Sea, but
never into a Cup.

But how could he forget that both the Term to drink, and the Term Cup, are
used chap. 18. 3, 6* Which chapter is at least a Commentary upon the fifth
Vial; seeing we find nothing in it, save a description of the ruin of Babylon?
Does he not know, that Vials being used in this Vision in a Mystical sense, do
signify nothing but the judgments of God, by which the Enemies of his Church
are to be destroyed? And that unless it be in a Mystical sense, neither the
Term Vial, nor that of a Cup, nor that of drinking, are any way to the purpose?

The Anonymous Author had said in the explaining of the fourth Vial, that the
Sun upon which it falls, is in all probability the Eastern Roman Empire, and
that as the fourth Trumpet raised the Turkish Empire, so the 4th Vial shall
shake and afflict it.

I may observe, says Mr. Jurieu, that this Interpretation is contrary to all
kind of principles. For whereas the seven Vials are alone designed against the
Empire of the Beast, i. e. for Antichristianism, behold one of the Vials is
said to fall upon the Empire of the Turks, which is no part of the
Antichristian Empire.

That Interpretation is not therefore contrary to all sort of Principles,
because it is contrary to Mr. Jurieu. For it is according to this Principle, that
the Revelation continues the History of the fourth Monarchy, which Daniel had
begun. And that this Monarchy being the Roman Empire, as it was in the time of
St. John; the Holy Spirit does in the Visions of the Seals, of the Trumpets,
and of the Vials, represent unto us every thing of importance that was to befall
it. Now whereas the Turks invading the Eastern part of the Roman Empire, and
their establishing there both an Empire and the Mohammedan Religion, was
foretold in the Vision of the Trumpets; it is but reasonable to affirm, that the
Vials shall destroy that which the Trumpets had raised in the East; as well as
that they shall destroy that which the same Trumpets have built in the Western
Roman Empire.

The Anonymous Author had said, that the Subjects of the Turkish Empire, shall
be mortally afflicted by the Effusion of that Vial; but that instead of being
converted, they shall blaspheme the name of God.

In opposition to this, Mr. Jurieu says, that the Prophets give us to
understand, that upon Babylons falling, all the Infidels, and consequently the
Mahometans, shall be converted.

I do acknowledge, that after Babylon shall be fallen, the Mahometans shall be
converted; but then it is not the fourth Vial which falls upon Babylon,
seeing it subsisteth after that is poured out; and it is only the fifth Vial
that destroyed the Antichristian Empire.

I may add, says Mr. Jurieu, that it being the Papal Empire which is intended
in this Vision, the Sun therefore of the fourth Vial can signify nothing but
the Sovereign of that Empire which is spoken of, and so can only signify the
Pope, and not the Turkish Emperor. But the falsity of this Principle we have
made appear, by the Evidence we have given to a principle opposite unto it.

Mr. Iurieu farther adds, I may also observe, says he, that this is so far
from signifying the ruin of the Turks, that granting them to be here spoken of,
it would import their Exaltation. Forasmuch as it is said of the Sun mentioned
in the fourth Vial, that power was given unto him to scorch men with fire;
which implies their destroying others, rather than the being themselves
destroyed.

The Anonymous Author, before his entering upon the Exposition of the Vials, had
made a declaration which should not be forgotten; namely, that seeing the Vials
contain Judgments to come, and which cannot be cleared up by Events, as the
Vision of the Trumpets may, that therefore he proposed to speak no otherway of
them than in way of conjecture, which is a deference that we owe to the Author
of Prophecy. However, that what he was to say would appear very probable, if
the preceding Illustrations which he had delivered were du'ly thought upon.

It Is true, the Anonymous Author does believe, that the fourth Vial is to be
poured out upon the Eastern Roman Empire, which is now under the power of the
Turks; and this agreeable to the relation that is between the Trumpets and the
Vials, the latter whereof shall overthrow what the former had built. But
whether the Sun here signify precisely the Turkish Emperor, or the Musti, who
is the Vicar of Mahomet, is that which he can only conjecture at, but does not
certainly know. And tho he had said, that this Vial shall shake and distress
that Empire, yet he had not said that it shall destroy it, as Mr. Iurieu
charge upon him. There is a difference between those two Expressions. The
House of Austria is shaken and brought very low in comparison of what it was
under Charles V. but nevertheless it is not ruined. The Papal Empire is brought
low in respect of what it was under Leo X. but yet it remains undestroyed under
Innocent XI. It Is the drying up the River Euphrates foretold to be under the
Sixth Vial, which signifies the total ruin of the Ottoman Empire, and of
Mahometism.

But to pass all this by, says Mr. Jurieu, and only to observe, that if the
fourth Vial answers the fourth Trumpet, there is then no probability, that
the fourth Trumpet having lasted several Ages, during which time the Turkish
Empire was established, that the 4th Vial should in so short a space ruin it.

This is yet another fancy which Mr. Iurieu fathers upon the Anonymous Author,
namely, that the fourth Vial is wholly to destroy the Empire of the Turks.
Whereas he expressly said, that that was not to be till under the sixth Vial.
And who knows what will be the course of Gods justice, when he once begins to
execute his judgments? And when the Creator shall go about the making of a new
world, can we think that his Arm is so shortened, that he needs more time for
this second world, than he did for the first?

Whereas the Anonymous Author had in his Exposition of the Vials followed Mr.
de Launay; Mr. Iurieu says, the said Author might have perceived, that though
the Explanation he has given, agree with the hypothesis of Mr. de Launay, yet
it does no way's accord with his own. And that because Mr. de Launay places
the End of the Antichristian Empire many ages hence, while that Author will not
allow above eighteen years for its subsistence.

Surely Mr. Iurieu would not have made this Reflection, if he had minded what
that Judicious Expositor had said upon the 2d verse of the Eleventh Chap. of
the Revelation. Where he makes this Remark, that the Scripture in the pointing
out a thing of great moment, does not alway's fix the beginning of it to a day
or to a year, so that it may appear when it shall terminate or when it
commenced; but takes notice of it sometimes long before, and as it were from
the first moment of its conception and peeping forth. And after he had alleged
two examples out of the Old Testament, and one out of the New to this purpose,
he adds, I am willing to make this observation, that it may thereby appear,
that it is possible we are not so far from the End of 1260 years, as many do
imagine. Now we are to observe, that it is 36 years since Mr. de Launays Book
was published, and that it had been written 16 years before it was sent to
Geneva where it was printed. What may we then think that holy man would have
said, had he lived until our time? And if 52 years after he had made that
ingenious Remark, he had beheld this extraordinary revolution, which within
these two years is fallen out in France, and whereof he had never thought,
Doubtless he would have looked upon this judgment of God that is fallen upon
the Church with a swiftness resembling Lightning, and which like a fire from
heaven has so suddenly consumed it, as a forerunner of a judgment that shall
come alike expeditiously, and fall with more swiftness upon Antichrist and his
Emissaries, who are the Cruel Enemies of his Church.

Finally, whereas the Anonymous Author had stated the Epoche of the Birth of
the Antichristian Empire to be the year 445. and had fixed its End to be in the
year 1705 so that all the Vials must be poured out within the compass of
eighteen years at most. Mr. Iurieu cries out against this, and says, he wonders
how such a thought could fall into the mind of a rational man, and how any
person that had carefully studied the Prophesies, as he confesses the
Anonymous Author to have succesfully done, should in this point so forget
himself.

The said Author has neither forgotten himself here nor elsewhere. He
considered his Illustrations oftener than once, and his assigning so short a
time for the Effusion of the Vials, is so far from being strange or absurd,
that it is most natural and rational. The 7 Thunders do naturally raise an Idea
of a storm that shall be extraordinary terrible, and that there shall be
nothing wanting to make its horror perfect, forasmuch as the number seven notes
perfection. Now a Storm or Hurrican is accompanied with these two qualities,
one that it is rapid, and the other that it does not endure. From whence it
follows, that if the Thunders are to manifest themselves in the Effusion of
the Vials, or that they are the Vials, as the Anonymous Author thinks he has
proved, that then the space of 18 or of 15 years, may be time enough for the
pouring them out.

In a word, this Storm will in its rise resemble Elijah's Cloud, which at first
was but as the Palm of a man's hand mounting out of she Sea, but whose growth
was so swift and rapid, that Ahab was forced to get hastily into his chariot,
that he might not be overtaken by the abundance of rain that fell, 2 Kings 18.
44, 45.

But if the seven Vials should have no relation to the seven Thunders, as Mr.
Jurieu imagines they have not; yet it cannot be denied, but that they
manifestly allude to the Plagues of Egypt, because they are called plagues as
well as they are styled Vials. And this will suffice to show the Anonymous
Author's opinion to be extremely natural. Seeing the plagues with which God
smote Egypt, did not take up fifteen years. It Is true, the sacred History does
not express the time that elapsed from the first plague until the last; all
that it does being to note that there past one Month from the death of the
first born, till the time of passing through the Red Sea, where the whole power
of Egypt was swallowed up and buried. And seeing we are not to allot years, and
may be need not to allow Months for the Execution of all the Egyptian Plagues;
does it seem strange that the Anonymous Author should conceive, that all the
Vials will be poured forth within the space of 18 or 15 years.

Let us also remember, that as there is no natural Agent which acts with the
rapidity that Fire does; so our God is a consuming Fire, and it is a terrible
thing to fall into his hands. This Fire devoured in less than three Months all
the Churches of a great Kingdom. And if the divine Vengeance has taken so
little time to destroy his own house; what offense can it be to conceive that
he will take but 15 or 18 years to destroy Babylon and her Empire?

But it may be said, that there were more than 18 years required to the first
Reformation. And how then is it probable that there shall not be more required
for the last, for the general one, which shall extend it self universally, as
well over all Infidels, as over the Papists and the Pagans? It may not be amiss
to hear what Bellarmin speaks of the Reformation of Luther, in the Preface to
his Controversies. Who is there, says he, that does not know, how the Lutheran
Heresy being born a little while since in Saxony, like a pestilence overran
all Germany in a little time, and how having spread it self into the North and
East, it infected Denmark, Norway, Swedland, Gothland and Hungary? And having
extended it self with the like swiftness into the West and South, how it there
desolated France, England, Scotland, and how at last it crossed the Alps, and
even entered into Italy? Now the Anonymous Author is fully persuaded, that the
general Reformation, which will comprehend the abolishment of Popery and
Mahometism, will proceed more swiftly and be dispatched with a great deal more
rapidity. Forasmuch as it is said of the third Woe, that contains the Effusion
of the Vials; behold the 3d Woe comes quickly; which is not said in reference
to the two former, and where this word quickly does not appear. He is also
persuaded, that there is no man who will not easily be brought to be of his
mind, that does but reflect upon the power, upon the Justice, and upon the
Jealousy of him, who is to be the Admirable Author of this wonderful
Reformation, the Avenger of his beloved Jerusalem, and the inexorable Judge of
Babylon, against whom he has himself denounced Rev. 18. 8. that the plagues
wherewith she is threatened shall come in one day, or in one hour, as the
Original has it.

Moreover, should we grant to Mr. Iurieu, that the 7. plagues are a thing
distinct from the 7. Vials, and that the 7. Vials are hour-glasses; it would
nevertheless appear that 15 or 18 years is a time long enough for those Glasses
to run out in; nor was it hitherto heard, that there was a Glass for the
measuring of Time, which required a year, or a Month, or so much as a day to
run out in.

This is what the Anonymous Author has to Answer in Defense of his
Illustrations, against the illustrious Author, who has taken the pains to
attack them. And he is fully persuaded, that the seven Vials are the 7 Plagues,
and that the seven Plagues are the future judgments of God, of which he expects
to see the Execution about the beginning of the next Age. If any one can
convince him of the contrary, by Reasons which he cannot solidly Reply unto, he
is not so fond of his opinion as to make it his Idol, but is immediately ready
both to renounce it, and to publish to the world that he was mistaken. For
having the Example of the great St. Augustine in his Retractations before him,
he will account it no shame to make such a confession, because he seeks nothing
in this Dispute, but the clearing up of the Revelation, and the Edification of
the Public.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 11 line 21 Hoad read Head. P. 12. l. 1. Pomer r. power. after same r.
time. P. 17. l. 16. r. paganism. P. 30. l. last r. deprived. P. 57. l. last r.
Idol. P. 59. l. 16. after it r. self. P. 82. l. 5. them r. men. P. 99. l. 25.
r. depend. P. 116. l. 7. r. child. P. 176. l. 18. r. Kings. P. 180. l. 7. which
r. whose. P. 183. l. 27. Mother r. Motto. P. 185. l. 18. r. ambiguity. P. 213.
l. 9. is r. in. P. 241. l. 19. god. r. gog. P. 250. l. 32. nut r. out.


