A NEW DISCOURSE ABOUT THE FIRE of LONDON, AND THE Probability of Self-murder,
IN A LETTER to a FRIEND CONCERNING Sir EDMVNDBVRY GODFREY's Death.
SIR,
SInce it is the Genius of the Age to be Skeptical and Inquisitive, permit me to
deal frankly with you, in giving a free Account of my retired and deep thoughts
concerning things that have created and been the business of much Discourse.
The first is relating to the Firing of London, the latter the Death of Sir Ed.
G. Methinks after the Conjectures, Proof, Declaration and Narratives of others,
a man may, to bring off all Parties from suspicion, find out an unoffensive way
of salving the Enquiries, and to better purpose than it has been yet.

For instance: In September. 66. it is reported by some, that there was a dreadful
Fire in the great City you live in. Now to anger no sort of Men, for if we (as
some have done) impute it to the Papists, whose liquorish Palates might be
tempted with the Delicacies and Fecundity of that place, and this whet their
Appetites with an insatiable Gusto of the Sweetnesses that Heretics had long
enjoyed and surfeited on; if these (as it is common in the Country, to obtain
Honey and pilfer the winged Inhabitants,) thought it expedient by Smoke and
Sulphur to unhive the secure Inmates, then it will reflect on the Civility and
obliging humor of the Popish party, as if persons bent on Mischief, and that
could by no less light than of a general Conflagration, direct and lead men
into the beaten way of the Catholic Church; and how must this suspicion excite
a strange Ferment in Citizens against modest and good natured Jesuits, as the
reputed Authors of their late Calamities: Whereas we of that Religion would
persuade the World, that we only design good, and the Conversion of this
Kingdom, to bring our misguided Children into the warm bosom of the Mother
Church, and this we can do without throwing Firebrarnds at them: Tell us
nothing of Committees, and Parliaments, and Chair-men, we have a good steady,
old Gentleman, that with a Nod and Wink is more infallible and positive than
all you can be. Or if the Say-so of his Holiness will not overbalance all the
pretended Evidence of the probability that Catholics burnt the City, for
satisfaction in the matter, take this following Account of that general Flame
and dreadful Fire.

Suppose that once upon a time the Citizens should meet, (and you know many of
them are for unlawful Conventicles) and when they foresaw a cold Winter
approach, agree and club together in a cursed Association, for the Security of
their Estates, and Increase of Trade, and to advance House-rents, and have the
Streets made more capacious and commodious, Buildings more uniform and
splendid, for the sole benefit and encouragement of decayed Masons and
Carpenters, and for their own convenience of going a Birding, and recreating
themselves in the Country the ensuing Winter: Why on such weighty and
important grounds and deep considerations, from prospect of ensuing profit and
pleasure, should not these contrive and conspire each man to put fire to his
own House, buy up Gunpowder and combustible matter, to make the work more
speedy and general? Though I cannot think they durst ever attempt this design;
only they had also agreed to drink lustily the Night before, and so each man
being full of Liquor, having his Engine prepared and mounted, promised to piss
out the Fire, as far as he was instrumental and concerned in its kindling: And
this we have proof sufficient for, and as great as the thing will bear to
produce: for who dares contradict so plain a demonstration, That the Citizens
falling out with their old, and wooden, and paper Habitations, did not burn
them by consent, to erect better and more uniform in their places; but no
further to salve this puzzling Enquiry, till we hear a better account from
others: For although Fire is a good Servant, yet it proves an imperious and
turbulent Master; and can there be Smoke where there is no Fire? You may
consider besides, how could it kindle in Puddinglane, and run with and against
wind, and despise the help and obstinate endeavors to quench it; outrun the
Guards, nay Constables; had there not been some Conspiracy on work, and the
Devil blowing the Coals? But I cannot tell you more of this at present, till I
find how it will obtain belief; and why should it not, as well as other
Elaborate Squibbs and Crackers, composed and stufft with as great Impertinency,
and not backed with so high and presumptive Probability, which to unthinking men
looks as like Demonstration as an Apple is to a Nutt? Should I have troubled
you with any thing more staid and serious, I had not past the Censure of some
critical and pert, conceited and censorious Reader. Farewell.

BUT did Sir E. G. Kill himself? Yes, no question on it: But when, how, and with
what Numerical Weapon, this Time must discover: For we Catholics, and men that
have for some years used the Plea, will by hook or crook make out any thing,
and can give Demonstration for what we please. They are your dull, unthinking
and tame Animals, that are fed by Propositions, Syllogisms, and hard Terms,
that design to Impose upon Mankind with that weather-beaten and unlucky word
called Truth: If we Squires of the Quill can Caball, and get an humble Petition
from our dear Friends, Knights of the Post, by a trick called Legierdemain, two
or three Cramp words, and Hocus Pocus, (a Game almost now forgotten in this
lazy and dull Age) which our Forefathers called Blind-mans-buffe, we can make a
Statue move, and the Horse winch and caper in the Stocks-Market, and the Dragon
on Bow Steeple fly as swift as Mahomets Dove, and prove us Prophets of the
rarest invention and Edition since your Grandame cried Nut-crackers and
Ginger-bread. But I had almost amongst my Pedigree and Intimates, as men that
speak much, outrun my Subject, and forgot the Novel way of Probation.

Who dares say, or without my License think that the Knight was Murdered, or
indeed that he is dead? It Is true, there was a man about the 17th of October. 78.
within a mile of an Oak, that was for some days missing; and 'twas then said,
he was gone a Wooing; and men on that Errand may be out of the way, and forget
themselves: for Love is blind, and like a Wild-goose Chase, or a Fairy Dance;
and if the wanton Boy Cupid, or the Grand Matrone of Fairy-Land should seduce
an Amorous Justice, and puff him on to Green-Bury-Hill, must three of that Name
be supposed mad, to do this ill Office, and take the Odium, and Swing for the
enchanting trick of that (O Injurious) busy Gad and whimsical Nothing? I have
heard these Night-walkers do pinch People in their Slumbers; and to the Neat
and spruce Houswives, drop Money in their Shoes, and keep clean the place they
delight in: And I doubt not to prove when occasion is, that these waggish
Twit-twats finding the Worshipful so industrious and cleanly, might in
Civility, when he run his Gloves and Stick through his Hands and Armpits, and his
Sword into his Body, to prevent being suspected, so clean his Shoes; and
having no Money about them, (for they spent all their means on Charon Godfrey's
Ferry-man) drop a little Hay-seeds or Bents into his Shoes, and weave them
into his Stockins; and so the Murder is out. For whoever proves the contrary,
must take heed what he says, for we Writers stand upon our Prerogative, which
is to call any man that stands in our way, or is not an Inhabitant of our
Enchanted Island, by one ugly Name or other, and then make as much sport with
him as the Noble Divertion the Morocco Ambassador was lately entertained with
in Southwark. If any man dares tell me, there was such a thing as old Tongue
and Oats privy to a Plott the Westminster-men called Hellish and Damnable; we
have a way to make the penitent Son call his Father Knave, and tho a man of no
Great Invention, we'll call that terrible project the Creature of his doting
Fancy, and give no credit to either Timothy or Titus: For who knows what kind
of men may usurp those Names, and obtrude thin and fine-spun Stories upon the
Mobile? For shall two or three little and vicious Creatures, compel my belief
of what I have the Authority and Interest of my Mother Church to persuade me
could never be? When did you find any but peevish and restless Fanatics,
credulous and thin-pated Whiggs, guilty of Plotting? These, that we swear have
no Religion but Rebellion, no Faith but Faction, may Depose and Murder Kings;
but did ever a Loyal Roman Catholic, or your Ruffling Banditti, or men of
Parts and Ingenuity, of Gallantry and Temper, that are Cap-a-pe for the Church
and Government? We that have spent our Fortunes in his Majesty's Service, and
by our Pens support Church and State? When did we Royallists Conspire or
Associate to do mischief? No, if Godfrey is dead, he may thank himself. If a
Gun lets fly at a man in a Coach, dares any say he is murdered? A man may kill
or be killed, but why should we pry into the mysterious and meritorious
Contrivers? When men stand in the way, may they not be removed without such a
Din and Clamor, and calling the instruments Murderers? Who can prove that the
Sword did not owe the person wearing it a Grudge; and taking him alone and at
advantage, steal unawares into his Body? There is a man that lives somewhere
may witness this: I have forgot whether it is the Vertuoso at Salisbury, or the
Anatomist in Cambridge, for they are both cunning and shrewd Artists: And a man
of ordinary ingenuity and slender experience, may in three years time offer
great Problems and Phoenomena's, past either Bedlow's or Prance's Solution. Or
why might not the Knight have drunk College or Dr. Butler's Ale the Saturday
Morning, and being walking find it grumble, (as if he had a Pope in his Belly)
and for Privacy retire to Primrose-hill, and laying by his Gloves and Stick,
and turning the Hilt of his unlucky Sword to the Ground, being in haste, forget
himself, and sit down on his Swords point, and do himself a mischief? and when
eased, he might unbutton his Doublet; (for his Collar you must remember was
made high, and galled his Neck, and made it doddle this and the other way:) Why
may he not in a Bravado try whether his Sword would enter, and how far a man
might without danger, and unprovok't, Kill himself? Is not this probable? let
me dare any man to Swear the contrary.

I remember (and it is as much as I can) that in Harry the Eighths time, there
were a sort of Blades truly Loyal, and serviceable to the Government, that
were Whiggishly inclined, and would persuade (had not he understood Trap, and
could not be imposed upon with Baubles and Political Rattles) that the Old
Gentleman at Rome (God bless his Holiness) was an Enemy to his Grandeur and
Supreme Power: But though none of the most dutiful Sons, yet he found it his
Interest to adhere to the Papal See; and though for a time seduced by Cromwell
and Father Cranmer, yet (good man) he dyed in the Bosom of the Mother Church.
Why then should any politic Sir dissuade Princes from their Duty and
Submission, when great Harry, who Justled with his Infallibility, dyed at his
feet? What reason have Church men and zealous Fanatics to clamor and rail so
hotly against an old Man that designs their good, and reducing them by gentle
Methods of Collusion, and good words of Fire and Faggot, into either Obedience
or Purgatory, or Heaven, all which are but several steps to promotion? But,
Sir, being not much concerned about the Arts and Methods of Policy, I shall
give you no further Trouble, only beg the favor of being still esteemed

Your Faithful Friend, Philopolis.

London, Printed for R.Janeway in Queens-head-alley in Paternoster Row, 1682.


