

RAWLEIGH Redivivus; OR THE Life and Death OF THE Right Honorable ANTHONY Late
EARL of SHAFTSBURY.

Humbly Dedicated to the Protesting Lords.

By Philanax Misopappas.

Virtuti Pompeij quae potest Par Oration inveniri? Cicero. LONDON, Printed for
Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey, 1683.

TO THE Most Illustrious and Highborn Prince James Duke of Monmouth, And to
the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Kent, Theophilus Earl of Huntington,
William Earl of Bedford, James Earl of Salisbury, Gilbert Earl of Clare, Thomas
Earl of Stamford, Robert Earl of Sunderland, Arthur Earl of Essex, Charles Earl
of Macklesfield, Charles Viscount Mordant, Philip Lord Wharton, William Lord
Pagett, Ford Lord Gray of Wark, John Lord Lovelace, Henry Lord Herbert of
Cherbury, Charles Lord Cornwallis, Thomas Lord Crew, Who entered their
Protestation against the Lords rejecting the Impeachment of Edward Fitz-Harris,
and generously asserted the Commons Right to Impeach any Subject whatsoever.
Great Sirs,
THe following Tract, humbly offered to your Lordships, and for which the
Author implores your Patronage, is a brief, but yet true and impartial History
of the Life and Policies, the Rise and Fortunes, Troubles and Exit of the late
Earl of Shaftsbury, whose great Actions, constant Loyalty, and successful
Councils, certainly are worthy the transmitting to Posterity; for whose sake,
as well as the vindicating his Name and Honor from the bold and confident,
although ridiculous and groundless Calumnies wherewith the Roman Achitophels
have maliciously aspersed him. I have endeavored to Decipher him, and draw his
Image according to the best of my skill, although infinitely below his Deserts;
which justly merit the being portrayed by a more skilful hand; and one whose
extraordinary acquirements, and admirable proficiency in Politics, renders
capable of representing his Lordships wonderful Parts and Abilities, in the
most apt and lively Touches. Especially in regard the malice of (...) has
somewhat (...) his best Feature, and un^^^fully sullyed the most Beautiful and
Loyalest of his Actions.

My Lds. It was the extraordinary Endowments wherewith this Earl was enriched,
that drew upon him so much Envy, and swelled his Adversaries to such an height
of Malice and Fury; fearing lest he might prove their Rival, and acquire a
greater Interest in the Favor of his Sovereign, then they were willing he
should. Or else it was his imitation of the magnanimous Roman, who being
Commanded by the Emperor to forbear coming to the Senate, and threatened with
Imprisonment if he presumed to appear in that Assembly, boldly answered, You
may do as you will, but I must do as I ought. Nor had ever any Man larger
Experience (then his Lordship) of the truth and reality of what the famous Sir
Walter Raleigh so long since wisely observed, That he who follows Truth too
near at the Heels, may have his Teeth struch out thereby; and that he who goes
after her, often loses her sight and himself too.

Most Noble Patriots, I acknowledge that it is no small persecution of your
Illustrious Greatness, to be thus troubled with the impertinent Address of one
so much below you. And am very sensible, that the Generosity and good Nature of
persons, who, like your selves, shine with Glory and Splendour in a superior
Orb, frequently draw upon them unnecessary and needless Dedications. And
therefore I should not have been guilty of presuming to six your Honorable
Names to any trifle of mine, had not the nature of the thing laid a kind of
necessity upon me, and furnished me with an unanswerable Argument and
sufficient Apology for so doing.

May it please your Lordships, You are all under the same Circumstances, and
you have (like him) adventured to stem the Stream, and dared to be Virtuous,
when to be wicked and debauched is in Fashion: And have presumed to be Loyal,
under the disadvantage of exposing your selves thereby to the malice and rage
of a sort of Men, who with an Hellish Industry have long endeavored to
Metamorphise your very Virtues into Vices; and Transubstantiate your Loyalty
into a Crime. You have with a firm resolution and undaunted courage, opposed in
the very face of danger, the ambitious and growing designs of a bloody and
malicious Crew, who have Burned our City, Assassinated our Magistrates, Forged
Shame Blots, and invented Meal-Tub Conspiracies to ruin our Nobility and
Gentry. And if Divine Goodness had not protected us, and disappointed them,
would have murdered our Sovereign, Massacred our Persons, Extirpated our
Religion, Plundered our Houses, seized our Estates, trampled upon our Laws,
inslaved our Wives and Children, and subjected our Posterity to a Bondage
infinitely worse then that of Egypt. And whatsoever is Sacred and Dear to us as
English Men or Christians, must have been sacrificed to their Revenge; for the
satiating whereof, and to give vent to their fury, they would have turned the
Paradise of the World into an Acheldama.

And moreover, my Lords, his Enemies are your Enemies, his Reproaches are all
directed at and center in You. You were all to be involved in the same Guilt,
and made Parties in the same pretended Conspiracy. And You were by an imaginary
Power (derived from that Infallible Fop the Pope) all condemned to the same
Fate, in the secret Consults and private Cabals of Rome, as appears by the
Scheme found in the Meal-Tub, and afterward more fully discovered by Mr.
Dangerfield. Nor is it unworthy Your consideration, that the time when that
cursed Conspiracy was hatching, and some Circumstances in the management
thereof, renders it not altogether improbable, that it derived its Original
from, and was engaged in, upon the success of a certain Story; upon the account
whereof, the greatest of You stands at this day stripped of all Your Honorary
Places.

But that which further encouraged me to make this Address to Your Lordships,
was, Your being his intimate Acquaintance and constant Companions, his familiar
Friends, and only Associates, with whom he maintained an exact Correspondence,
and almost daily conversed withal; whereby You must necessarily be better
acquainted with, and have a clearer prospect of the Principles and Temper,
Designs and Inclinations of his Lordship, than any of his detractors can
possibly pretend to: since many of them never had any personal knowledge of,
and much less intimate Acquaintance with him; and most of them never saw him in
their Lives. Nor have many of his Accusers, notwithstanding their formal and
confident charging him with Treason, ever born a Part, or made a Figure large
enough in the World to procure them admittance to his Person, or imbolden them
to appear in his presence, or so much as exchange two words with him in their
whole Lives. You know his Loyal Behavior toward, and constant cleaving to the
Interest of his Sovereign; and are surviving Testimonies of the extraordinary
Reverence and profound Veneration wherewith he always made mention of His
Majesty, whenever you had occasion to speak of him in Your public or private
Discourses; nor can You have forgotten his frequent lamenting his own
unhappiness, in being so strangely misrepresented to His Majesty.

And, may it please Your Lordships, as Heaven has been so propitious to the
Earl to remove him far above the reach of his Enemies Fury, so I am firmly
assured, that the same Almighty Power will always protect your Lives and
Honors from the dire effects of Romish Policy, and all the Jesuitical Crafts
and subtle Artifices of the Antichristian Crew. And render the implacable
malice of those, whom all intelligent Men begin now to see are Your Enemies
without cause, unable to effect any thing to Your prejudice And make it serve
only as a File to set off the Glory of Your Loyalty, or like an Eclipse to the
Sun, make the Luster of Your Innocence appear to the whole World with the more
Brightness and Splendor; or at least, enable You to take an extraordinary
pleasure and satisfaction in the delightful contemplation, That Your Name,
shall live when theirs are dead, and survive with Honor, whilst theirs with
Infamy and Shame shall be buried in Oblivion; and that the remembrance of your
Virtues shall be to all succeeding Ages, as Odoriferous as the Aramalick
Spices, and the exhilerating Perfumes of Arabia, or the delightful fragrancy
which naturally flows in the Months of April and May from a Garden of Roses:
When the remembrance of their wicked and treacherous Enterprises shall be
nauseous and offen. five to all Men.

But the Fabric being so small, I must not suffer the entrance into it to
exceed an equal proportion; nor by enlarging my dull praises of the deceased
Earl, injuriously detain your Lordships too long from the Harmony of his
Actions; the Reviewing whereof afford abundantly more delight and satisfaction
than any thing I am able to say in his commendation can probably yield. And
therefore (wishing your Lordships may long shine as Stars in our British
Hemisphere, and in conjunction with our glorious Sun, send forth such
Illustrious Beams and powerful Rays, as may effectually dispel those sable
Clouds which have so long overspread and darkened our Island) I commend Your
Lordships to the protection of him that sits in the Heavens, and laughs at the
Machivilian Plots of Rome, and sees and derides all their subtle Enterprises;
hoping he will graciously defend you from all impending dangers, by hiding you
in the hollow of his Hand, and under the shadow of his Wing. And humbly beg you
would put a candid construction upon my presuming so rudely to obtrude a
Dedication upon you; and entreat a favorable Acceptance of the mean and
incongruous Present of him who is really ambitious to subscribe himself,

Your Lordships, Most hnmble, most obedient, and most devoted Servant, S.N.

RAWLEIGH Redivivus: Or, the STATE Politician; BEING An Historical Account of
the Life and Death of that Wise and Loyal Statesman, Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury.
PART I.
STate Policy is a kind of Heavenly Knowledge, which is by God and Nature
locked up as a sacred Jewel in a few very rare Cabinets, purposely framed and
designed for that use by the all wise God, and is so essential to the peace and
flourishing condition of a Nation that we ought to pay it all the reverence and
veneration imaginable, and account it too sacred to be exposed and prostituted
to the view of base and vulgar eyes.

But as the best things converted into putrefaction, are the most nauseous and
hurtful, so this Noble and Angelical Science has been strangely abused by some
sordid pretenders to it. And every Age has produced some Achitophels, who have
abused the divine treasure bestowed upon them by the great Jehovah, for the
Service of their Country, and the promoting the Civil and Sacred Interest of
the Commonwealth wherein they live, by making it only subserviant to their
base and wicked ends. These are a sort of men that have indeed the Wisdom of
the Serpent (but not a Dove-like innocence) and can, like him, clothe all their
cursed Designs and Hellish Machinations, whereby they intend the ruin of their
Prince, the Religion they pretend to own and practice, together with the famous
and flourishing Kingdom wherein they live (unhappy in nothing so much as the
producing such unnatural and ungrateful Animals) with subtle and specious
pretenses of Loyalty, Prerogative, Decency and Order, and what not; accounting
Heaven and future bliss a mere bubble, and the checks of Conscience too
inconsiderable a trifle to impede, sacrificing all that is Sacred to Ambition,
and aspire to Wealth and Grandeur by others ruin and destruction; since if the
Great Alexander, the Conquering Pomp, or the Victorious Caesar, had boggled at
invading other Men's Rights, they could never have obtained so much Renown and
Glory. Nor had their Names swelled or looked so big in the Rolls of Fame.
Whilst the honest Politician is the Atlas of the falling State, cures her when
sick, cements it when dis-joynted, meets her in her several Emergencies with
suitable reliefs: And like a skilful Pilate, manages the Helm with such skill
and dexterity, that he carries her safely through all perplexing intricasies,
and secures her in the Harbor of Peace and Tranquillity, where she Rides free
from the danger of those boisterous Storms that threatened her Ruin.

Such an one was Philip de Comines to Lewis 11. and Cromwell to Henry 8. Such
was Burleigh to our late Protestant Queen, whose sedate Councils, like a sacred
Oracle, very much influenced the prosperity of her Reign; which was so
extraordinary, that no History affords a parallel: and future Ages will read her
happy Annals with a Divine Wonder. And such an one was our parallel, the
ingenious Sir Walter Rawleigh to King James; for whom he did several eminent
pieces of Service, as well in order to the bringing him to, and placing him
upon the English Throne, as afterward. Notwithstanding which, he was so
unhappy as to lose the Favor of his Prince, and be abandoned, to the rage and
malice of his Enemies.

And such an one was the unparalleled Shaftesbury, whose Policy was always
founded upon the solid Basis of Piety and Judgment; upon which firm Foundation
he endeavored to raise the admirable superstructure of Royal Government in the
Prince, free from all manner of Arbitrary severity, and a willing subjection in
the People, without any kind of force or compunction; so uniting the Interest
of the Governor with that of the governed, and knitting both with such
reciprocal mixtures, that the welfare of the one might be unavoidably involved
in the good of the other; That Majesty might be maintained in its just
Splendor, and the Royal Prerogatives of the Crown preserved from suffering any
kind of diminution: And yet the Liberty of the Subject remain, and Property be
no way infringed or violated.

In a word, his Wisdom in contriving the peaceable Restoration of his Majesty
to his Crown and Kingdom, his sagacity in Counselling whilst in that capacity,
his Faithfulness in the discharge of places of Trust, his exact Administration
of Justice to his Fellow Subjects, his Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty at
all times, his invincible Patience under the Calumnies wherewith he was
unjustly loaded. His Charity, Affability, etc. when it shall be conveyed by
History to the knowledge of the following Ages, it will procure him such a just
and deserved Esteem, that they will be ready to Adore him, and wonder at our
stupidity; and make them with a disdaining abhorrence reflect upon our Folly,
in slighting such an inestimable Treasure.

This Great and Illustrious Peer was Nobly descended from the two Ancient
Families of the Coopers and Ashleys, being Son and Heir to Sir John Cooper of
Rockburn in the County of Wilts, by Ann his Wife, Daughter and sole Heir to Sir
Anthony Ashley of Wimborn St. Giles in the County of Dorset, Knight and
Baronet. For which reason he was called Anthony Ashley Cooper, thereby to bear
up the name of his Mothers Family as well as his Fathers; which would otherwise
have been extinct. He was Born in the Month of July, Anno Dom. 1621. being the
19th year of the Reign of King James.

At his Baptism his Mother desired Sir Anthony Ashly to stand for Godfather;
which he willingly consented to, and having no more Children but that Daughter,
named him Anthony Ashley for the aforesaid reason.

Great care was taken in the Education of this young branch of Honor, who was
to enjoy the Fountains, and maintain the Honor and Name of two such Rich and
Illustrious Families; his Father being worth about Eight Thousand Pounds per
Annum. So that he was not raised from a mean Fortune, as some of his
Adversaries would maliciously persuade the World, but born to a large one. In
his very Childhood his Activity, quick Apprehension, and ready Wit, made an
early discovery (even at that tender Age) of those extraordinary parts
wherewith God and Nature had so liberally enriched his capacious Soul. He had a
natural inclination to Learning; wherein he made such a surprising Progress,
that it was the wonder and amazement of all that knew him; and his Father, to
encourage and improve those pregnant Parts wherewith this happy Youth was
blessed, sent him to the University of Oxford, and placed him in
Trinity-Colledge, under the ear of an Ingenious and Learned Tutor: where
neglecting all things that served only for idle and vain speculatitions, and
denying himself that Liberty which other Youths allowed themselves for
Recreation, he fell to those Studies that were more useful and necessary, and
tended to fit and prepare him for the serving his King and Country in any
employment or capacity whatsoever; which he followed so hard, and made such an
unusual progress therein, that it is almost incredible; so that every one
admired him: and he was by all Men accounted the most prodigious Youth in the
whole University. And those who knew him, began to believe, that what had been
predicted of him by a German Gentleman, might in time prove true.

This Gentleman being a Protestant, and Persecuted upon that account, left
Germany, and fled to England for succor; and falling by accident into the
company of Sir John Cooper: Sir John being an Hospitable Gentleman, especially
to those that were sufferers upon the account of the True Religion, gave him an
Invitation to his House; which the Gentleman accepting, went accordingly: and
was entertained by Sir John with abundance of Respect and Generosity for a
considerable time. The Gentleman was extremely pleased with his Entertainment
in general; but was more especially delighted with that pleasant and (...)
Diversion which the extraordinary Parts of his young Son afforded him. And
would frequently (after having entertained him with various, difficult and
intricate Discourses, which required the most mature and profoundest Judgment
to determine; wherein he always found him so ready and expert, that it exceeds
all belief) say to Sir John, I can do no less than contemplate your Felicity in
this Son, and almost envy you the happiness. He is certainly the Phoenix of his
Age. I find him endowed with such a deep Judgment and capacious Understanding,
that I am confident, if he live to years of Maturity, he will be the
profoundest Politician, and the most prodigious Statesman that ever this
Nation did produce. But more especially once directing himself to the young
Gentleman, he spoke to the effect following, as if guided thereto by some
strange and unaccountable impulse; and if we compare it with the circumstances
of this Lords Life, it will appear to be prophetic.

Child, said he, (as it was his custom to call him) if thou will be Religious,
and keep close to God, and take care to avoid the vain and distractive
allurements of Profaneness and Debauchery, and entertain a fixed resolution to
improve all thy Parts and Abilities for the advancing the Protestant (and the
prejudice of the Romish) Religion, you shall be a Man of the largest Parts in
Christendom, and shall be an instrument of doing an extraordinary piece of
Service to your Prince, which shall be very acceptable to him; whereupon you
shall stand high in his Favor, and be promoted to very great Honor: yet
should afterward lose the Princes Favor, and be as much dis-respected as
before Honored and Admired; yet at the same time you shall be one of the most
Popular Men under Heaven, etc. And that you may know that this will fall out
according to my Prediction, pray remember this that I am now going to tell you,
and Write it down in your Pocketbook, that you may not forget it. Not long
after your coming from the University, you shall be in extreme danger of
Drowning; telling him the very day when it should happen.

Whereupon, although he gave no extraordinary credit to these Predictions, yet
having a great Love and Veneration for the Gentleman, upon the account of his
Piety and Wisdom, he endeavored to the uttermost of his power (as much as
possible, to avoid the Watery Eliment.

When he had spent some years at the University, he was removed from Trinity
College to Gray's Inn; where, with the like pains and industry, he applied
himself to the Study of the Law: in the knowledge whereof, he arrived at such
Perfection, that several Judicious Men and great Lawyers did affirm, That he
understood the nature of our Britanick. Laws and ancient Customs and
Constitutions of the Kingdom, as well (if not better) than any Man living; and
could express himself with so much Eloquence, and deliver his Sentiments of
things with so much clearness and smoothness, interwoven with such convincing
Arguments, deduced from Philosophy and Reason, that there was a perfect harmohy
in his words.

Whilst he was at Gray's Inn, he appointed to go with several young Gentleman of
his Acquaintance to Greenwich by Water: but when he was upon the Stairs going
to take Boat, (some of his company being already in the Boat) it came suddenly
into his Mind, that that was the day whereof the Gentleman had foretold him;
and pausing a little, he remembered several circumstances that confirmed him
therein: the Gentlemen who were in the Boat seeing him to stand in a study, and
make no haste into the Boat, they called to him to come away. Gentlemen, said
he, I entreat you to excuse my going with you; for I now call to mind some
extraordinary business, which obliges me to stay in Town. But his company was
too pleasant to be so easily relinquished: wherefore one of them stepping out
of the Boat, endeavored by his importunity to alter his resolution, and
persuade him to go with them according to his first intention; but being not
able to prevail, he protested he would carry him into the Boat if he would not
go willingly: so that being unwilling to disoblige them, he adventured to go,
although with much reluctance. As they were shooting the Bridge, it being low
Water, the force of the Ebb carried their Boat with such violence against a
Loyter that was just gone through before them, that she sunk; but several Boats
presently making toward them, they were all saved: however, their design for
Bowling at Greenwich was spoiled for that day.

Having spent some considerable time in the Inns of Court, his Relations began
to think of disposing of him in Marriage; and a suitable Match was enquired
after, that might answer the largeness of his Fortune. At length a Marriage is
agreed (by the consent of both Families) between him and Margaret, Daughter to
Thomas Lord Coventry, sometime Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England: whose
agreeable Conversation rendered his Life the more pleasant and delightful. He
had no Issue by this Wife.

His second Wife was the Lady Frances, Daughter to the Earl of Exeter; by whom
he had Issue his only Son and Heir, Anthony Lord Ashly, now Earl of
Shaftesbury; who married the virtuous and ingenious Lady, the Lady Dorothy,
Daughter to John Earl of Rutland; by whom he has Issue two Sons; Anthony a
Youth of about Twelve years of Age, extremely like his Grandfather, both for
Person and Parts; for which reason he was so dear to him, that his Life seemed
to be bound up in this Grandsons, as Jacobs was said to be in his Son
Benjamin's.

His last Wife was Margaret, Daughter to William Lord Spencer, a most
accomplished and Virtuous Lady; whose exemplary Piety is so extraordinary, that
she may very well be proposed as a pattern for other Noble Personages to
imitate; her constant custom being to rise by Five of the Clock in the Morning,
and she usually spends two or three hours there in her private Devotions.

No sooner did the Fame of his great Abilities reach the Royal Ear, but his
late Majesty cast a favorable Eye upon him, employing him in several eminent
Services; which he performed with an exact Loyalty, to the satisfaction of his
Majesty; from whose Interest he never departed, otherwise then as Hushai from
King David, when the Tribes of Israel revolted from him, in order to the using
his Interest for the Service of his Prince, and endeavor by his Wisdom and
Counsel so to order and influence the Councils and Designs of the Conspirators,
that they might be the less hurtful to his Sovereign, and tend to the overthrow
of themselves. And it is admirable to contemplate with what dexterous Skill and
exquisite Policy he so managed all their Councils, as to make them run directly
toward, and naturally tend to swell the Royal Stream; which immediately upon
their Ebb, flowed so suddenly and swiftly, that like a swelling Sea, it easily
overflowed all those Banks which were cast up to impede its Flux; and by its
irresistible force, bore down all before it, until at last it terminated in the
full Tide of his Majesty's Restoration. Like the Generous Hushai, never resting
until he saw his Ejected Sovereign, like the glorious Sun, newly escaped from a
total Eclipse, return to the possession of his Crown and Kingdom.

His Majesty having December 5. 1639. upon the advice of the Earl of Strafford,
and Marquess of Hamilton, and Doctor Land Archbishop of Canterbury, declared
his resolution for the calling a Parliament. After 11 years interval, he was
(by the unanimous consent of the Inhabitants of the Borough of Tewkesbury in
Gloucester-shire, chosen to serve as Burgess for that Town; Sir Edward Alford
being chosen for the other. On Monday April 13. 1640. this Parliament opened;
and were acquainted by his Majesty, That he thought never any King had greater
cause to call his People together, nor more weighty Affairs to confer with them
about, then himself: the particulars whereof he referred to the Lord Keeper: By
whom they were recommended to the Parliament in an elegant Speech. The
Parliament sat in debate of those things recommended to them till the fifth of
May, when his Majesty concluding they were too slow in giving those Supplies he
demanded, Dissolved them, publishing a Declaration thereupon, containing an
account of his Reasons for that Dissolution. This was the fourth Parliament
which had been Dissolved by his Majesty.

In the beginning of our unhappy Troubles, he raised a Regiment for the Service
of his Majesty; and was by him (upon the Rupture with the Parliament, made
Governor of Waymouth; being at the same time High Sheriff of the County of
Dorset: And when he saw that the War would unavoidably break out, he summoned
(by virtue of his Pesse Contitatus) the whole County from sixteen years old, to
meet at Dorchester, which is the County Town, thereby to engage them to stand
by his Majesty: But before that day appointed for their Meeting, his Majesty
sent down Colonel William Ashburnham with a Commission to be Governor of the
County of Dorset: whereupon he repaired presently to Dorchester, and showed his
Commission to the High Sheriff. At which time the Sheriff acquainted the
Colonel with what he had done in reference to his Majesty's Interest, by
summoning the County: wherewith the Colonel was very well pleased. But Sir
Anthony concluding that the Colonel's being sent to command as Governor of the
County, notwithstanding his being Governor of Weymouth, and high Sheriff of
Dorset-shire, proceeded from some secret suspicion which his Majesty had
conceived of his Fidelity, (perhaps occasioned by the malicious whisperings of
some about the King, who grew Jealous of him, lest the greatness of his Parts
should in time have raised him higher in his Majesty's Favor and good Opinion,
then would have consisted with their Interest) took Horse the next Morning, and
went to his own House, about 20 Miles from thence; the next day he went to his
Brothers, and from thence to London.

The day being come for the Counties Meeting, they flocked in vast numbers to
Dorchester; there being scarce a Man in the whole County wanting: whereupon the
Colonel (being informed that the High Sheriff was not in Town) went up to the
Guild Hall, being accompanied with several of the chief of the Town, and told
the People, That he was glad to see so great an appearance; and that they
yielded so ready Obedience to the Summons of their Sheriff, who was at that
time absent; telling them, that the occasioning of Summoning of them, was to
engage them to his Majesty's Interest: asking them, If those unhappy
differences that were arisen between the King and his Parliament could not be
composed, but should break out into a War, who they would stand by, his Majesty
or the Parliament. Whereupon they all cried out with one consent, By the King,
We will stand by the King against all Opposers whatsoever. Gentlemen, said the
Colonel, I thank you for this Declaration which you have now made of your Loyal
Intentions; I hope your Hearts have gone with your Words therein: and that you
will make good your Promises when his Majesty's Occasions shall require it.
Whereupon they were dismissed and sent home.

In October 1645. he was chosen Sheriff of Norfolk; which choice was November
the first, approved of and confirmed by the Parliament. And the next year,
1646. he was chosen Sheriff of the County of Wilts; discharging the Offices
both years with abundance of Candor and Generosity. And in the year 1651. the
Parliament out of a deep sense of his profound Wisdom, appointed him, January
20. with twenty persons more, to sit as a Committee, to consider of the
inconveniences which were in the Law, and the Mischiefs which frequently arise
from the Delays, and other Irregularities in the Administration thereof; and
ordered them to report their Opinion therein to the House.

Not long after this the Scene of Affairs altered, and Cromwell's Ambitious
Designs for Usurping the Supreme Power being now ripe, he resolved to put them
into execution; and as the first Essay, took upon him to Dissolve that remnant
of a Parliament. To which purpose, on the 20th of April 1653. he entered the
House, attended by some of his principal Officers, and delivered several
Reasons why they ought to be Dissolved, and a period put to their Sitting;
which was immediately done. The Speaker, with all the rest of the Members, some
through fear, and others by force, presently departed the House, all the Nation
rejoicing thereat; and scarce any man grieved for their Dissolution but
themselves: every one affirmed, that although probably the Nation could not be
much bettered by this change, yet worse could not possibly befall it. However
Cromwell did not think it time as yet to take the Government absolutely into
his own hands; wherefore he summoned another Convention somewhat like the
former, to which he gave the name of a Parliament.

Whereupon, Sir A. being looked upon by his Countrymen, as the fittest person
to oppose and baffle any extravagant motions or designs that should be proposed
to, or carried on by them, was returned to serve therein for his Native County
of Wilts.

This Convention had several strange things under debate, that would have been
very dangerous and prejudicial to the Nation; and he acted the part of a Wise
Politician, and a true English Man, in rendering their Debates ineffectual and
to no purpose, as well by his ingenious Arguments drawn from Scripture and
Reason, as the Interest he had in the Gentlemen of the Country; whereby he
engaged them to appear also against the Designs which were then carrying on.
Whereat the contrary Faction being strangely exasperated, stormed exceedingly,
and pushed forward their Designs with the greater fury. Whereupon the rest
(although the Majority) fearing to be undermined, by their laying hold of an
opportunity to Assemble themselves in their absence, any Forty being a Quorum,
and thereby accomplish their Designs, resolved to Dissolve themselves; which
they did accordingly: and so by that means quashed those mischievous Designs
upon which they were Brooding.

However, Cromwell resolved, that whoever lost, he would be no loser by this
Dissolution; wherefore he (by a strange way of Reasoning) pretended, that by
this means the whole Supreme Power and Authority of the three Nations, (both
Civil and Military) was of course devolved into his hands; and thereupon called
a Council of Officers to consult about settling the Government: who after
several Debates, resolved to have a Commonwealth in a single Person; which
Person should be Oliver Cromwell, by the name of Lord Protector, etc.

Whereupon Cromwell calls a Parliament, which met September 3. 1654. whereof
Sir A. was chosen a Member, the Country supposing him to be the fittest Man
they could choose to obviate and undermine Cromwells Tyrannical Designs.
Cromwell makes a Politic smooth Speech to them, endeavoring to persuade them
to embrace his Interest; promising (for their encouragement) to do strange
things for the good of the Nation, if they would but afford him their
Assistance in order thereunto. But although some of the Members were Men for
his turn, and were resolved to serve him in his ambitious Designs to the
uttermost of their power, although themselves and their Posterity suffered for
it, yet Sir Anthony, and abundance of others, were too Wise to be imposed upon,
and too courageous to be hectored into a compliance. So that being the
Majority, they over-number'd those who were for complying with the Usurpers
Interest, and rendered his hopes in that Parliament vain and ineffectual.
Whereat the Tyrant, being enraged to see his expectations so frustrated,
Dissolved them; lest if he had suffered them to sit any longer, they might have
overthrown his new acquired Usurpations.

But the Protector being extremely necessitated for Money, and having a longing
desire to have his Power confirmed to him by the consent of the People, hoping
that a second Representative would grant him that which the first refused,
Issues out his Writs for the Election of another Parliament. Yet remembering the
Speeches and Carriage of Sir Anthony, and some other Members of the late
Parliament, he gave secret directions to the Sheriffs of the several Counties,
to use their utmost endeavor to prevent (if possible) their being chosen, or
returned to serve in that Parliament. However, the Countries striving to please
themselves rather then the Protector; and preferring their own Interest before
Cromwells, Returned Sir Anthony, and most of the other Members that opposed the
Protectors Designs in the late Parliament, to serve in this: whereby this
Stratagem failed of producing its desired effects; which forced him to take new
Measures, and invent the following Shifts, viz.

That every Member before he was to sit in the House, was imposed upon solemnly
to engage himself by promise, not to act any thing prejudicial to the present
Government. But fearing lest this device should not keep out enough to make the
Parliament pliable and fit for his purpose, he gave special directions, not to
admit of any into the House, but those only that produced a Certificate or
Warrant in the following form.

Com' Bucks.
These are to certify that W.E. etc. is returned to serve in this present
Parliament for the said County, and approved of by his Highnesses Council.

Sept. 17. 1656. Nath. Tailor Clerk of the Commonwealth in Chancery.

September 17. 1656. being the day appointed for the Meeting of this
Parliament, he went to the Parliament House at Westminster, expecting to Sit
there as a Member of that Parliament: But found Entrance not only denied to
himself, but to above an Hundred more, who had been Members of the former
Parliament, and had rendered themselves obnoxious to the Usurper, by Opposing
and Acting in contradiction to his Designs of Establishing his Tyranny: They
being all Excluded for want of the aforesaid Certificate or Warrant. Whereupon
(after having consulted together) they applied themselves for Redress to that
part of the Parliament which was admitted to Sit. Acquainting them by way of
complaint, that above an Hundred of the Members which were chosen by the
Country, and sent up to serve in the Parliament, were not able to obtain
admittance into the House, being kept out by order of the Protector. But those
within the House, being all of them Cromwells Creatures, upon the Questions
being put, Resolved, That those persons ought to make their Application to the
Council for Acceptance and Approbation.

Whereupon, finding that they could obtain no relief against those Arbitrary
and Illegal Practices of the Usurper, they unanimously consented to draw up and
publish a Remonstrance, wherein they claimed the privilege of the Ancient
Fundamental Laws, and their Birthright as Freemen of England. But the
Remonstrance being much too large to be here inserted, I shall only present you
with one or two Paragraphs, as a Specimen of those brave Heroes Resolutions
against a Protectorian Invasion: And the greatness of their Courage, and brave
English Gallantry, will be the more conspicuous, if we consider this was done
when the then Protector was in his Zenith; when he had made almost all Europe
tremble before him, ahd gave Laws to his Neighboring Princes; and held that
Thunder in his Fist, wherewith he shook the Nation off her very Foundations:
And the House too filled with those who either were, or seemed to be his
Creatures: Yet in a general Defiance of this so Potent a Conqueror, did those
Noble Patriots (amongst other things) Remonstrate.

When our Worthy Ancestors have been met in Parliaments, and have found
Oppression and Tyranny supported by such strong hands, that they could not
prevail to secure their Countries, Lives and Liberties by wholesome Laws, they
have often made their Protestations against Injustice and Oppression; and
forewarned the People of their danger. In like manner, we who have been duly
chosen by the People to be Members of the Parliament, that should now have met,
and have an undoubted Right to meet, Sit, and Vote in Parliament, although we
are Oppressed by Force of Arms, and shut out of the usual place of Parliament
Sitting; yet having Hearts sensible of that highest Trust reposed in us, and
being filled with Cares for the Church and Commonwealth, which with grief of
heart we behold bleeding; we do hold our selves bound in duty to God, and our
Country, to declare unto the People of England, their and our woeful condition,
and the most evident danger of the utter Subversion of Religion, Liberty,
Right, and Property.

We believe the Rumor is now gone through the Nation, that Armed Men, employed
by the L. P. have prevented the free Meeting and Sitting of the intended
Parliament, and have forcibly shut out of doors such Members as he and his
Council supposed would not be frighted or flattered to betray their Country,
and give up their Religion, Lives, and Estates to be at his Will, to selve his
Lawless Ambition. But we fear that the Slavery, Rapines, Oppressions,
Cruelties, Murders, and Confusions that are comprehended in this horrid Fact,
are not so sensibly discerned, or so much laid to heart as the case requires;
and we doubt not, but as the common practice of the Man has been, the Name of
God, and Religion, and formal Fasts and Prayers will be made use of to color
over the Blackness of the Fact: We do therefore in faithfulness to God and our
Country, hereby Remonstrate;

First, That whereas by the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, the People ought
not to be bound by any Laws, but such as are freely consented unto by their
chosen Deputies in Parliament, and it is a most wicked Usurpation, even against
the very Laws of Nature, for any man to impose his Will or Discretion upon
another as a Rule, unless there be some compact or Agreement between the
parties for that intent. And whereas by the Mercy of God only, in preserving
this Fundamental Law and Liberty, the good People of England have beyond memory
of any Record, preserved their Estates, Families, and Lives, which had
otherwise been destroyed at the will of every wicked Tyrant; and by keeping
this only as their undoubted Right, they have been kept from being brutish
Slaves to the lusts of their Kings, who would otherwise have despoiled them of
their Persons, Lives, and Estates by their Proclamations, and the Orders of
themselves and their Council. Now the L. P. has by force of Arms invaded this
Fundamental Right and Liberty, and violently prevented the meeting of the
peoples chosen Deputies in Parliament; and he and his Council boldly declare;

That none of the Peoples Deputies shall meet in Parliament, unless they agree
to the measure of their Fantasies, Humors and Lusts.

They now render the people such Fools, or Beasts, as know not who are fit to
be trusted by them with their Lives, Estates and Families: But he and his
Council, that daily devour their Estates, and Liberties, will judge who are fit
to counsel and advise about Laws to preserve their Estates and Liberties. Thus
does he now openly assume a power to pack an Assembly of his Confidents,
Parasites, and Confederates, and to call them a Parliament, that he may from
thence pretend that the People have consented to become his Slaves, and to have
their persons and Estates at his Diseretion. And if the people shall tamely
submit to such a Power, who can doubt but he may pack such a Number as will
obey all his Commands, and consent to his taking what part of our Estates he
pleases, and to impose what Yoaks he thinks fit to make us draw in.

They know it to be the undoubted Right of the People to trust whom they think
fit, and as much the Right of every man duly chosen and trusted, to meet and
Vote in Parliament, without asking their leave, or begging their Tickets. And
although there have been frequent Secret Designs for many years to subvert
Religion, Liberty, and Property in this Nation; and to that end the Designs of
Tyranny have attempted to destroy sometimes the Being, sometimes the Power,
Privileges, and Freedom of Parliaments; yet the Mercy of God has almost
miraculously preserved the Being, Privileges and Authority of Parliaments, and
therein Religion, Liberty, and Property, until the time of the Lord Protector.

But now he has assumed an absolute Arbitrary Sovereignty (as if he came down
from the Throne of God) to create to himself, and his Confederates, such Powers
and Authorities, as must not be under the cognizance of the Peoples
Parliaments. His Proclamations he declares shall be binding Laws to Parliaments
themselves; he takes upon him to be above the whole Body, and every Member of
it, by no other Rule or Law than his pleasure, as if he were their Absolute
Lord, and had bought all the People of England for his Slaves. Doubtless he
would pretend only to have Conquered England at his own Expense; and, were
there as much Truth as there is Falsehood in that pretense, yet he could not but
know that the Right of the Peoples Deputies to their Ancient Powers and
Privileges would remain good against him, as against their public capital
Enemy. Whom every man ought to destroy, until by some agreement with the Body
of the People in Parliament, some sort of governing Power in him were submitted
unto, that hereby he might cease to be a public Enemy and Destroyer, and
become a King, or Governor, according to the conditions accepted by the
People; and if he would so pretend, he could not be so discharged from his
public Enmity by any Condition or Agreement made with a part of the Peoples
chosen Deputies, whilst he shut out the other part; for no part of the
Representatives Body are trusted to consent to any thing in the Nations behalf,
if the whole have not their free Liberty of Debating and Voting in the Matters
propounded.

If he would pretend no higher than to be our Conqueror, who for Peace and his
own safeties sake, was content to cease from being a public Enemy, and to be
admitted a Governor, he would not compass those ends by forcibly excluding (as
now he does) whom he pleases of the Representative Body of People, who were to
submit to him on the Peoples behalf; therefore he either takes upon him to be
such a Conqueror as scorris the Peoples acceptance of him by their
Representative as their Governor, and fears not to remain a public Enemy, or
else he takes himself to be such an unheard of Sovereign, that against him the
People have no claim of Property or Right in themselves, or any thing else; for
he has now declared, that the Peoples choice cannot give any man a Right to
sit in Parliament, but the Right must be derived from his gracious Will and
Pleasure, with that of his Counselors, and his Clerks Ticket only must be
their evidence for it.

Thus has he exalted himself to a Throne like unto God's, as if he were of
himself, and his power from himself, and we were all made for him, to be
commanded and disposed of by him, to work for him, and serve his Pleasure and
Ambition.

A little after there is an Instance of Chief Justice Tresilian, who was
executed at Tyburn in the time of Richard the Second, for advising the King,
that he might at any time dissolve the Parliament, and command the Members to
depart under the penalty of Treason. Diverse other Protestations were contained
in that Instrument against the Arbitrariness and Tyranny of that proceeding;
and in conclusion they declare they will pour out their complaints before the
Lord against their powerful Oppressors, hoping he will redeem his People out of
the hands of wicked and deceitful Men. This Protestation was Signed by One
hundred and seventeen persons, whereof Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper was chief, and
many others of great Loyalty and Integrity, some whereof are since dead, but
many yet survive; and as a reward of their Loyalty, enjoy Places of Honor and
Profit under his present Majesty.

By this we may easily discern the Opinion he had of the Illegal and Arbitrary
proceedings of Cromwell, and how much of the sufferings of the Loyal Party
would have been prevented, had that point of a free Parliament been then
gained: and consequently His Majesty's Restoration must have happened sooner
than it did. This Remonstrance had not power enough however to work their
present admission into the House, so that that part of a Parliament which was
suffered to sit, did every thing to the desire of Cromwell, answering both
those ends for which they were Convened, viz. the raising Money, and confirming
his Title; which was no sooner done, but he Prorogued them until he had
occasion to Fleece them again; which interval was laid hold on by this true
English Gentleman as a fit opportunity to engage them, when they met again, to
do themselves and the Nation Justice, by admitting him and the rest of the
Members that were kept out by the Protector, to take their place in Parliament;
and so managed some of the Members, who were moderate men, that they resolved
not to be so basely trampled on by the Tyrant any longer.

The Prorogation being expired, the Parliament make their appearance at
Westminster, where the Protector makes a fair Speech to them, promising them
strange things if they would go on and prosecute his Designs. But
notwithstanding this Speech, the Commons were no sooner retired to their House,
than Cromwell discovered to his no small perplexity, that the Face of his
beloved Parliament, from whose tractableness and compliance he had promised
himself the greatest happiness imaginable, was strangely altered: For they
presently fell to Voting, That no Member legally Chosen and Returned, could be
excluded from performing their Duty, but by consent of Parliament; and
thereupon immediately proceeded to the calling over their House, and admitted
Sir Anthony and the rest, who had subscribed the Remonstrance (to the no good
liking of the Protector) who were no sooner in, and the House full, but they so
influenced the rest, that they soon became the majority, and began to undo what
the others had done in their absence; and presumed so far as to question the
Tyrants Power. Wherefore finding them so bold, he concluded it would not be
convenient to let a business of so high a nature run too far, lest it should,
if neglected, put a period to all his ambitious Designs. Wherefore going to his
Pageant House of Lords, he sent for them, and after having made a large Speech
to them, in the conclusion told them, That it did concern his Interest, as well
as the public Peace and Tranquillity of the Nation, to terminate that
Parliament, and therefore he did then dissolve them, and put an end to their
Sitting.

The constant correspondence he always maintained with the Royal Party, and
that almost to the hazard of his Life and Family, are sufficient Testimonies of
his sincerity to his Masters Interest and Service; his House was a Sanctuary
for distressed Royalists, and his correspondence with the Kings Friends (though
closely managed, as the necessities of those times required) are not unknown to
those that were the principal managers of his Majesty's Affairs at that time.
This made Cromwell so apprehensive of this great Assertor of his Countries
Rights, and Opposer of Arbitrary Government and Enthusiasm, that though his
vast Abilities were known (at least) to equal the ablest Pilot of the State,
which was the only motive that induced the Usurper, in the infancy of his
Usurpation, to nominate him for one of his Council, in hope thereby to allure
him to his Interest, and wheedle and Wire-draw him into a compliance with his
ambitious and mischievous designs; yet we cannot find him amongst the Creatures
of his Cabinet Council, nor amongst the Eleven Major Generals, to whom the Care
of the Nation was committed: No, their Principles, their Aims and Designs were
incompatible; one was for Subverting, the other for Maintaining the Ancient
standing Fundamentals of the Nation; which once dissolved, it was impossible
but an Universal Deluge of Confusion, Blood and Rapine must ensue. This made
our brave Patriot (with diverse of the Heroic English Race) to the utmost
oppose the growth of a Protectorian Tyranny.

And when the Rump had again usurped the Power into their hands, they
endeavored to oblige him by nominating him to be one of their Council of
State, and one of the Commissioners for the managing their Army.
Notwithstanding which, he continued his Intelligence with, and Endeavors for
the Restoration of his Sovereign. So that we find him accused before them for
keeping Intelligence with the King, and for having raised Men to join with Sir
George Booth in attempting to restore and bring His Majesty that now is to his
Rightful Throne. Many persons of great note were imprisoned on the account of
this Plot; and amongst the rest Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, who was really guilty
(if there could be any Guilt in Loyalty, and an honest endeavor to free his
Country from those deplorable miseries under which it then groaned) for indeed
he was a principal contriver of the Business, being one of the secret Cabal;
and had always kept Intelligence with Sir George; and had raised a party in
Dorset-shire to join with him, which upon the miscarrying of the Design, timely
dispersed themselves: And although no man knew better then he how to obviate
the Reasons of the House, and plead his own Cause, yet he was not without great
difficulty cleared and discharged of that Imputation by the Rump; who shortly
after entrusted him with the Custody of the Tower of London, the Command of a
Regiment of Horse; and gave him (with six others to assist him) the Government
and Command of their Army.

So that now he began to advance the great work of Restoring his Majesty, with
more success and speed than before. To which end he (and Eight more who had
been of the Old Council of State) sent a Letter to General Monk, to proceed in
his generous Undertakings for the advantage and settlement of the three
Nations; and persuaded him to come to London, in order to the better
prosecuting what he had so well begun. Whereupon the General (having disposed
and ordered all things according to his desire) advanced toward England,
accompanied with several English Gentlemen who held correspondence with him;
and being acquainted with the Generals Designs, went thither on purpose to
accompany him hither: where he was no sooner arrived, but he was highly
Honored and Complemented by the Rump, and made one of the Council who was to
order and dispose of public Affairs: but to qualify them for this Trust, they
were to have an Oath imposed upon them, wherein they were to abjure the Royal
Family. But that being directly contrary to the generous Designs of those two
Noble Patriots of the Royal Cause, and bold Adventurers for the Interest of
their injured Sovereign; the one by his Head to contrive, and the other by his
Arms to execute what was contrived, as well as assist in Counselling and
Advising; They opposed it as unreasonable, and a Snare to their Consciences;
and by their influence upon Colonel Morly, procured it to be so warmly opposed,
that both Oath and Council fell, and came to nothing.

Doctor Clarges having happily discovered, that Lambert and others, were making
parties, and drawing Forces together to oppose their Loyal Designs, repaired
immediately to Sir Anthony, accounting him the fittest person to be acquainted
with a business of that nature (being not only firm to the Kings Interest, but
by his Wisdom and Policy knew how to undermine those who were averse to it)
wherefore having related the particulars to him, desiring him to communicate it
to the Council, and prevail with them to take speedy care about it, lest if
neglected, it should prove of dangerous consequence. Which he did accordingly,
and so managed the Council, that timely care was taken in it; and even that
attempt of Lamberts, which in it self threatened the contrary, was by his
Skill, dexterously managed for the advantage of his Majesty's Interest, and the
hastening his happy Restoration.

General Monk having forced the Parliament to admit the secluded Members, they
were no sooner seated in the House, but they fell to such kind of work, as
plainly discovered to all intelligent Men, what would be the Issue of those
things which were then transacted: for they ordered the Release of all those
who were Imprisoned for Petitioning for a Free Parliament, together with the
Members of the Common Council of London. They enlarged the Generals Commission,
constituting him one of the Generals at Sea. Discharged Sir George Booth, and
others, committed upon the account of his Rising; and ordered the Examination
of him and his Lady to be taken off the File, and given to them. Then having
appointed a free Parliament to meet in the April following, they Dissolved
themselves; appointing a Council of State to govern in the mean while,
consisting for the most part of Loyal Gentlemen; whose Names were as follows:
Arthur Ansley Lord President, William Pierpoynt, John Crew, Richard Knightly,
Colonel Popham, Colonel Morley, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Sir Gilbert Gerard,
Lord St. John, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir John Evelin, Sir William Waller, Sir
Richard Onslow, Sergeant Maynard, Sir William Lewis, Colonel Montague, Colonel
Hanly, Colonel Norton, Denzill Hollis, Sir John Temple, Colonel Tompson, Sir
John Trever, Sir John Holland, Sir John Poltis, Colonel Birch, Sir Harbottle
Grimston, John Swinton, John Weaver, Colonel Rossiter, Lord Fairfax, Lord
General Monk. This Council was so influenced by the two great Contrivers and
Managers of the happy change, that everything done by them tended to the
furthering thereof.

And April 25. 1660. the new Parliament met in both Houses; which was the most
considerable step they had yet made toward the accomplishing their great End;
and gave an entrance to, and made way for the perfecting the whole Contrivance.
For His Majesty immediately hereupon, dispatched away Sir John Greenvil (who was
afterward created Earl of Bath) with Letters to both Houses of Parliament, and
General Monk; which were delivered to them upon the first day of May, (being
but the seventh day after the opening of the Parliament) together with his
Majesty's gracious Declaration to all his Loving Subjects. Wherein he expresses
abundance of compassion and tenderness to the Nation; which had been so long
harrass'd by an unnatural War.

These Letters, and the Declaration, were received by the Parliament with a Joy
and Veneration so extraordinary, that I find my self at a loss for words
wherewith to express it. And their pleasure and satisfaction was such, that in
an ecstasy of Joy, they suddenly drew the Curtain, and exposed the Beautiful
and Glorious Scene to the delightful view of the languishing Spectators;
wherein they plainly law the happy Issue of those Policies and Councils that
were before Riddles too mysterious for vulgar understandings to unfold, or once
imagine whither they tended, or where they would terminate, by the following
Resolves of both Houses.

Resolved by the House of Peers, That they do own and declare, That according
to the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Government is, and
ought to be, by King, Lords, and Commons.

Resolved, That a Committee of Eight Lords do join with a Committee of the
House of Commons, to consider of an Answer to His Majesty's gracious Letter and
Declaration.

Resolved by the House of Commons, That a Committee be appointed to prepare an
Answer to His Majesty's Letter, expressing the Great and Joyfid sense of this
House for his Gracious Offers, and their humble and hearty Thanks to His
Majesty for the same; and with professions of their Loyalty and Duty to His
Majesty: And that this House will give a speedy Answer to His Majesty's
Gracious Proposals.

Resolved, That the sum of 50000 1. be Presented His Majesty from this House.

The receiving those Letters, and the Parliaments compliance therewith, was no
sooner reported to the City, but the Citizens were almost overwhelmed with Joy;
the harmony of the Bells, and the flaming Piles which enlightened every Street,
surrounded with incredible Shouts and Acclamations of Joy, were sufficient
demonstrations of the infinite pleasure and satisfaction they took in this no
less wonderful then happy Revolution; and the several Counties taking the Alarm
from London, contended which should outvie each other in expressions of
Loyalty and Joy.

Then the Parliament proceeded to draw up a Letter in Answer to His Majesty's
subscribing it to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, desiring him speedily to
return to the Exercises of his Kingly Office; appointing Commissioners to go
over to Holland, and attend His Majesty during the remainder of his stay there,
and in his return to England. Of these Commissioners, there were six for the
House of Lords; for the House of Commons Twelve, whereof our great Patriot was
one; and Twenty for the City of London.

Instructions being delivered to the Commissioners, they set Sail for Holland
in several Frigates, appointed by the Parliament to attend them; and after some
danger by bad Weather, they Landed at the Hague, whither His Majesty was then
removed from Breda, (where he had resided some time before) as being a place
nearer and more convenient for his Shipping; the disposal whereof, and of the
whole Fleet, was remitted to His Majesty's pleasure, General Montague having
received Orders from the Parliament to Obey His Majesty's Orders and Directions
therein. The Commissioners were no sooner arrived but they went and waited on
His Majesty, and with all imaginable Respect and Veneration, delivered their
respective Messages, and behaved themselves according to the Instructions they
received from their Principals: beseeching His Majesty in the name of his
Parliament and People to return and reassume the Scepter, assuring him, That
he should be infinitely welcome without any terms. They were received by his
Majesty with a Port and Grace like himself, and entertained with extraordinary
Favor and Magnificence.

In the mean time the Parliament Proclaimed the King; which was performed with
all the Joy, Splendor and Magnificence, that Love or Loyalty could inspire.
The chief Lords of the House of Peers, and the most eminent of the House of
Commons, the Lord General, together with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, all in
their Coaches, attended by the whole Militia of the City; waited upon, and
assisted in the Ceremony; and the Shouts and Acclamations of the crouding
Multitudes, was so extraordinary, that although all the Bells throughout the
City and Suburbs were at that time Ringing, yet their noise was not to be heard.

The King preparing for his Return, was magnisicently Treated by the Dutch, and
highly Complimented by all the Foreign Ambassadors. And the Dutch, knowing
that they should thereby very much please the King, enlarged their Civilities
to our great Patriot, and the rest of the Commissioners from the Parliament and
City, treating them by their Deputies, to their great content and satisfaction.

Whilst this great Adventurer for the Royal Cause continued in Holland, one day
as he was doing his Duty in waiting on his Sovereign, had the unhappiness to be
overthrown in a Carravan, whereby he received an unfortunate Wound in his side
between the Ribs; which in time came to an Exulceration; and was in the year
1672. when he was Lord Chancellor, forced to be opened: The Operation was
performed by Mr. Knolls the Chyrurgeon, by the Advice and Direction of the
famous Doctor Willis; and supposed to be the greatest Cure that ever was done
upon the Body of Man: From whence we may learn, the hard Fate which sometimes
attend the most commendable Actions, since this (which was the greatest mark
and ensign of Loyalty) should be made the matter of the greatest Obloquy and
Reproach; most of those malicious Pamphlets that have been written against him,
being filled with Invectives, grounded upon the Story of the Tap. Oh monstrous
Ingratitude!

His Majesty having prepared all things in readiness, Embarked for England,
the Royal Charles being appointed for that purpose: And was attended by the
Commissioners, and a numerous Company of English Gentry, and waited on by
General Mountague with the whole Fleet; and having a fair and gentle Gale,
Landed at Dover May 25. where he was met by the General and chief Nobility, and
so conducted to Canterbury, Rochester, and Darkford, and from thence to London;
where His Majesty found the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, ready in a Tent which was
pitched in St. Georges Fields to receive him; the several Regiments being there
placed in Order, made a Lane for his Majesty to pass through, the Sword being
delivered him, according to Custom he re-delivered it, and after a splendid
Treat, proceeded into London by Southwark, from the Bridge to Temple Bar, the
Streets were Railed; on one side with Standings for the Liveries; and on the
other with the Trained Bands, and sevefal Companies of Gentlemen Volunteers in
White Doublets, under the Command of Sir John Staywell, through which His
Majesty passed in a Splendid and Triumphant manner: being bravely attended by
Sir Anthony, and the rest of the Commissioners of the Parliament and City;
together with all the principal Nobility and Gentry of England, with
innumerable others; and so he passed to White Hall, where both Houses of
Parliament waited his Arrival: whose Speakers in elegant Speeches acquainted
him with the Felicity and Happiness they conceived in this happy Revolution.

The Friday following His Majesty went the private way to the House of Lords;
and after having made a short Speech, signed those Acts which were ready for
the Royal Assent. And not long after, proceeded to the choice of his
Privy Council; and in consideration of the great Esteem he had for Sir Anthony
Ashly Cooper, nominated him for one of them; Wisely considering, That he whose
Counsels had been so successful in contriving His Restoration, might be highly
necessary, and very much conduce to the Establishment of Him in His Kingdom;
and to show the extraordinary Esteem he had for his Parts and Abilities, he
advanced him to be one of the first Rank in the Council, placing him above his
Royal Brother the Duke of Gloncester, and even General Monk himself, whom his
Majesty use to (...) Political Father. And having in sundry respects (says Sir
William Dugdale in his History of the Baronage of England, whom we cannot
suspect of Partiality) manifested his Loyalty to Charles the First, and his
great Affection to his Country in the late perilous and difficult Times, and
likewise to our present Sovereign, by his prudent and seasonable Advice and
Consultation with General Monk, in order to His Majesty's Restoration; in
consideration of these his acceptable Services, he was by Letters Patents
bearing date at Westminster, upon the 20th day of April, in the Thirteenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign, advanced to the Degree and Dignity of a Baron of this
Realm, by the Title of Lord Ashly of Wimbourne St. Giles, and to the Heirs
Males of his Body. This Honor was conferred upon him in the Banqueting House
at White Hall, three days before His Majesty's Coronation, in order to his
assisting in the performance of that splendid Ceremony.

And when his Majesty was pleased to issue out the Grand Commission of Oyer and
Terminer for the Trial of the Regicides, directed to several Noble Persons,
choice was made of this Honorable Lord to be of the number of that Court, his
Majesty deeming him to be a Person whose Prudence and Loyalty rendered him as
deserving of the Honor to which his Majesty therein preferred him, as any
other contained in that Commission.

And as if his Majesty had so high a Valuation for his Lordship, that he
thought his profound Parts and exemplary Loyalty merited a perpetual confluence
of Royal Favors, he raised him at several times to higher degrees of Honor,
making him Chancellor of his Exchequer, Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Dorset, and one of the Lord Commissioners of the
Treasury. But all these being too small to compensate his Merits, and
demonstrate the Royal Bounty and Princely Gratitude of his Sovereign, whose
Generous Nature inclines him to delight in nothing more, then to reward like a
King.

He was advanced to the Title and Dignity of an Earl, being in the year 1672.
created Earl of Shaftesbury, and Lord Cooper of Paulet, to him and the Heirs
Males of his Body; by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, upon the 23
d. day of April, in the Twenty Fourth Year of his Majesty's Reign. And in
November following, upon the Resignation of Sir Orlando Bridgeman, his Majesty
to gratify the uninterrupted good Services of the Earl of Shaftesbury,
Chancellor of his Exchequer, and one of the Lord Commissioners of the Treasury,
was pleased to give unto him the Keeping of the said Great Seal, with the Title
of Lord High Chancellor of England, (these are the words of the Gazette) being
the second Person that had enjoyed that Title since his Majesty's Reign.
Whereby he was placed by his Great Master, in the highest Orb that any Subject
could possibly move in. The Kings Conscience being as it were, committed to his
Care and Management. And with what Prudence and Candor, Honor and Integrity,
he acquitted himself in that great and weighty Employment, the Transactions of
the Court of Chancery during the time of his Chancellorship, will best
testisie. Justice then run in an equal Channel; so that the Cause of the Rich
was not suffered to swallow up the Rights of the Poor; nor was the strong or
cunning Oppressor permitted to devour the weak or unskilful Opposer: but the
abused found Relief suitable to their Distress; and those by whom they were
abused, a severe Reprehension answerable to their Crimes. The mischievous
Consequences which commonly arise from the delays and other practices of that
Court, were by his ingenious and judicious Management, very much abated; and
every thing weighed and determined with such an exact Judgment and Equity, that
it almost exceeds all possibility of belief.

And because the Traducers of this Lords Loyalty, not only reproach him with
the Tap, which was an unquestionable Mark of Loyalty and Honor, it being got
in conducting his Majesty to his Crown and Kingdom; but have likewise quarreled
at his constant Faithfulness to the Royal Interest, and endeavored to abuse
every thing he did for his Majesty's Service, as they have done the speech he
made to the Parliament upon the account of the Dutch War: And that the World
may see the temper of the Men, and upon what ground it is they were his
Enemies, I have set down the Speech verbatim as follows:

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commous.
THe King has spoken so fully, so excellently well, and so like Himself, that
you are not to expect much from me. There is not a word in His Speech that has
not its full weight: And, I dare with assurance say, will have its effect with
you. His Majesty had called you sooner, and His Affairs required it, but that
He was resolved to give you all the ease, and vacancy to your own private
Concerns; and the People as much respit from Payments and Taxes, as the
necessity of His Business, or their Preservation would permit. And yet (which I
cannot but here mention to you) by the Crafty insinuations of some ill affected
persons, there have been spread strange and desperate Rumors, which your
Meeting together this day, has sufficiently proved both malicious and false.

His Majesty has told you, that He is now engaged in an important, very
expensive, and indeed a War absolutely necessary and unavoidable. He has
referred you to His Declaration, where you will find the Personal indignities
by Pictures, and Medals, and other public affronts, His Majesty has received
from the States, their Breach of Treaties both in the Surinam, and East India
business: and at last they came to that height of Insolence, as to deny the
honor and right of the Flag, though an undoubted Jewel of this Crown, never to
be parted with, and by them particularly owned in the late Treaty of Breda, and
never contested in any Age. And whilst the King first long expected, and then
solemnly demanded Satisfaction, they disputed His Title to it in all the Courts
of Christendom, and made great Offers to the French King, if he would stand by
them against us. But the most Christian King too well remembered what they did
at Munster, contrary to so many Treaties, and solemn Engagements; and how
dangerous a Neighbor they were to all Crowned heads.

The King and His Ministers had here a hard time, and lay every day under new
Obloquies. Sometimes they were represented as selling all to France to make
this War: Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Hull, were to be given into the French
hands for Caution. The next day news came, that France and Holland were agreed.
Then the obloquy was turned from treachery to folly: The Ministers were now
Fools, that some days before were Villains. And indeed the Coffee-houses were
not to be blamed for their last apprehensions; since if that Conjunction had
taken effect, then England had been in a far worse case then now it is, and the
War had been turned upon us. But both Kings knowing their Interests, resolved
to Join against them, who were the Common Enemies to all Monarchies, and I may
say, especially to ours, their only Competitor for Trade, and Power at Sea; and
who only stand in their way to an universal Empire, as great as Rome. This the
States understood so well, and had swallowed so deep, that under all their
present distress and danger, they are so intoxicated with that vast ambition,
that they slight a Treaty, and refuse a Cessation.

All this you, and the whole Nation saw before the last War; but it could not
then be so well timed, or our Alliances so well made. But you judged aright,
that at any rate, Delenda est Carthago, That Government was to be brought down.
And therefore the King may well say to you, It Is your War. He took his measures
from you, and they were just and right ones: and He expects a suitable
assistance to so necessary and expensive an Action; which He has hitherto
maintained at His own charge, and was unwilling either to trouble you, or
burden the Country, until it came to an inevitable necessity. And His Majesty
commands me to tell you, that unless it be a certain Sum, and speedily raised,
it can never answer the Occasion.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

Reputation is the great support of War or Peace. This War had never begun, nor
had the States ever slighted the King, or ever refused Him Satisfaction,
neither had this War continued to this day, or subsisted now, but that the
States were deceived in their measures, and apprehended His Majesty in that
great want of money, that He must sit down under any Affronts, and was not able
to begin, or carry on a War. Nay, at this day the States support themselves
amongst their People by this only falsehood, that they are assured of the temper
of England, and of the parliament, and that you will not supply the King in
this War: And that if they can hold out till your meeting, they will have new
life, and may take new measures. There are lately taken two of their principal
Agents, with their Credentials and Instructions to this purpose, who are now in
the Tower, and shall be proceeded against according to the Law of Nations. But
the King is sufficiently assured of His people: Knows you better: and can never
doubt His Parliament. This had not been mentioned, but to show you of what
importance the frankness and seasonableness of this Supply is, as well as the
fullness of it. Let me say, the King has brought the States to that condition,
that your hearty conjunction, at this time, in supplying His Majesty, will make
them never more formidable to Kings, or dangerous to England. And if after this
you suffer them to get up, let this be remembered, The States of Holland are
Englands eternal Enemy both by Interest and Inclination.

In the next place, to the supply for the carrying on of the War, His Majesty
recommends to you the taking care of His Debts. What you gave the last Session
did not near answer your own expectation. Besides, another confiderable Aid you
designed His Majesty, was unfortunately lost in the birth; so that the King was
forced for the carrying on of His affairs, much against His will, to put a stop
to the payments out of the Exchequer. He saw the pressures upon himself, and
growing inconveniences to His People by great Interest; and the difference
through all His Business between Ready money, and Orders. This gave the King
the necessity of that proceeding; to make use of His own Revenue, which has
been of so great effect in this War. But though he has put a stop to the
trade, and gain of the Bankers, yet he would be unwilling to ruin them, and
oppress so many Families as are concerned in those Debts; Besides, it were too
disprortionable a burden upon many of His good Subjects. But neither the
Bankers, nor they, have reason to complain, if you now take them into your
care, and they have paid them what was due to them when the Stop was made, with
Six per Cent. Interest from that time. The King is very much concerned both in
Honor and Interest to see this done. And yet he desires you not to mis-time
it: but that it may have only the second place, and that you will first settle
what you intend about the Supply.

His Majesty has so fully vindicated His Declaration from that Calumny
concerning the Papists, that no reasonable scruple can be made by any good man.
He has sufficiently justified it by the time it was published in, and the
effects He has had from it; and might have done it more, from the
agreeableness of it, to His own natural disposition, which no good English man
can wish other then it is. He loves not blood, or rigorous severities; but
where mild, or gentle ways may be used by a wise Prince, He is certain to
choose them. The Church of England and all good Protestants, have reason to
rejoice in such a Head, and such a Defender. His Majesty does declare His care
and Concerns for the Church, and will maintain them in all their Rights and
Privileges, equal, if not beyond any of His Predecessors: He was born and bred
up in it: It was that his Father died for: We all know how great temptations
and offers He resisted abroad, when He was in His lowest condition: And He
thinks it the Honor of His Reign, that He has been the Restorer of the
Church: It Is that He will ever maintain, and hopes to leave to posterity, in
greater luster, and upon surer grounds, then our Ancestors ever saw it. But His
Majesty is not convinced that violent ways are the Interest of Religion or the
Church.

There is one thing more which I am commanded to speak to you of, Which is the
jealousy that has been foolishly spread abroad, of the Forces the King has
raised in this War. Wherein the King has opened himself freely to you, and
confessed the fault on the other hand. For if this last Summer had not proved a
miracle of Storms and Tempests, such as secured their East India Fleet, and
protected their Seacoast from a descent, nothing but the true reason (want of
Money) could have justified the defect in the number of our Forces. It Is that
His Majesty is providing for against the next Spring, having given out Orders
for the raising of seven or eight Regiments more of Foot, under the Command of
Persons of the greatest Fortunes and Quality. And I am earnestly to recommend
to you, that in your Supplies, you will take into your consideration this
necessary addition of charge.

And after His Majesty's conclusion of His Speech, let me conclude, nay, let us
all conclude with blessing God, and the King. Let us bless God, that he has
given us such a King to be the Repairer of our Breaches both in Church and
State: and the restorer of our paths to dwell in: That in the midst of War and
Misery, which rages in our Neighbor Countries, our Garners are full, and there
is no complaining in our Streets: And a Man can hardly know that there is a
War. Let us bless God, that has given this King signally the hearts of His
People, and most particularly of this Parliament, who in their Affection and
Loyalty to their Prince, have exceeded all their Predecessors. A Parliament
with whom the King has many years lived with all the Caresses of a happy
Marriage. Has the King had a concern? You have wedded it. Has His Majesty
wanted Supplies? You have readily, cheerfully, and fully provided for them. You
have relied upon the Wisdom and Conduct of His Majesty in all His affairs: so
that you have never attempted to exceed your bounds, or to impose upon Him:
whilst the King on the other hand, has made your Counsels the foundations of
all His proceedings; and has been so tender of you, that he has upon His own
Revenue and Credit endeavored to support even Foreign Wars, that he might be
least uneasy to you, or burdensome to His People. And let me say, that though
this Marriage be according to Moses's Law, where the Husband can give a Bill of
Divorce, put her away, and take another: Yet I can assure you, it is as
impossible for the King to part with this Parliament, as it is for you to
depart from that Loyalty, Affection, and Dutiful Beha viour, you have hitherto
showed toward Him.

Let us bless the King for taking away all our Fears, and leaving no room for
Jealousies: For those Assurances and Promises He has made us. Let us bless God
and the King, that our Religion is safe: That the Church of England is the care
of our Prince: That Parliaments are safe: That our Properties and Liberties are
safe. What more has a good English man to ask, but that this King may long
Reign, and that this Triple-Alliance of King, Parliament and People, may never
be dissolved?

The King having about that time made Si Edward Turner (Speaker of the House of
Commons) Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the Lord Chancellor acquainted them
therewith; and recommended to them His Majesty's, Pleasure for their Electing a
new Speaker in the following Speech:

My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to tell you, That he has many things to say to
you, but he thinks not this a proper time, but will defer it till the House of
Commons be completed with a new Speaker. For His Majesty has since the last
Session, as a mark of His Favor to His House of Commons, and that he might
reward so good a Servant, taken their late Speaker, Sir Edward Turner, to be
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and called him by Writ to be an Assistant to
this House. I am therefore commanded to acquaint you Gentlemen of the House of
Commons, That it is the Kings Pleasure you repair to your House, and Elect a
Discreet, Wise, and Learned man, who after he has been by you Presented, and
that Presentation by His Majesty admitted, shall then possess the Office of
your common Mouth and Speaker. And the King is pleased to be here to Morrow in
the Afternoon, to receive the Presentment of him accordingly.

The Commons having Elected Sir Job Charlton to be their Speaker (who being by
them Presented to the King) Addressed himself to His Majesty in the following
words:

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in Obedience to
your Royal Command, have proceeded to the Choice of a Speaker.

They have among them many worthy Persons, eminently qualified for so great a
Trust; yet with too favorable an Eye have cast it upon me, who am really
conscious to my self of so many infirmities, rendering me much unsit for so
great an Employment: And although my endeavors of excusing my self before
them, have not been successful, yet they have been so Indulgent, as to permit
me to continue my endeavors therein before Your Majesty's most piercing and
discerning Judgment.

The Veneration due to Majesty, which lodges in every Loyal Breast, makes it
not an easy matter to speak before Your Majesty, at any time, or in any
capacity; But to speak before Your Majesty in Your Exaltation, thus gloriously
supported and attended; and that as Speaker of Your House of Commons, requires
greater Abilities then I can pretend to own; I am not also without fear, That
the Public Affairs, wherein Your Majesty and Your Kingdom, in this Juncture of
time, are so highly concerned, may receive detriment through my weakness.

I therefore with a plain humble heart, prostrate at Your Royal feet, beseech,
That You will Command them to review what they have done, and to proceed to
another Election.

To which the Lord Chancellor made the following Answer:

Mr. Sergeant Charlton,
THe King has very attentively heard your discreet and handsome Discourse,
whereby you endeavor to excuse and disable your self for the place of Speaker;
In answer whereof, His Majesty has commanded me to say to you, That he does in
no sort admit of the same; For his Majesty has had long experience of your
Abilities, good Affection, Integrity and Resolution in several employments of
great Trust and Weight: He knows you have been long a Parliament Man, and
therefore every way fitted and qualified for the Employment: Besides, he cannot
disapprove the Election of this House of Commons, especially where they have
expressed so much Duty in choosing one Worthy and Acceptable to him. And
therefore the King does allow of the Election, and admits you for Speaker.

Sir Job Charlton seeing his excuse could not be admitted, but that
notwithstanding his Majesty had confirmed the Commons Choice by his Royal
Approbation, spoke as follows:

Great SIR,
SInce it is Your Gracious Pleasure not to accept of my humble Excuse, but by
Your Royal Approbation to six me under this Great, though Honorable Weight,
and to think me sit to be invested with a Trust of so high a nature as this is.

I take it in the first place to be incumbent upon me, that I render Your
Majesty all possible thanks, which I now humbly do with a heart full of all
Duty, and affected with a deeper sense of Gratitude then I can find words to
express.

Next, from Your Royal Determination in this Affair, whereby you have imprinted
a new Character upon me, I take courage against my own diffidence, and
cheerfully bend my self with such strength and abilities as God shall give to
the Service so graciously designed me; no way doubting, that Your Majesty will
please to pardon my Frailties, to accept of my faithful Endeavors, and always
to look favorably on the Work of Your own hands.

And now Sir, my first Entrance upon this Service, obliges me to make a few
necessary, but humble Petitions on the behalf of Your most Loyal and Dutiful
House of Commons.

1. That for our better Attendance on the Public Service, we and our Servants
may be free in our Persons and Estates from Arrests and other Disturbances. 2.
That in our Debates, Liberty and Freedom of Speech be allowed us. 3. That as
occasions shall require, Your Majesty upon our humble Suit, and at such times
as Your Majesty shall judge seasonable, will vouchsafe us access to Your Royal
Person. 4. That all our Proceedings may receive a favorable Construction.
That God, who has brought You back to the Throne of Your Fathers, and with
You all our Comforts, grant You a long and a prosperous Reign, and send you
Victory over all Your Enemies, and every good man's heart will say, Amen.

To which the Lord Chancellor replied:

Mr. Speaker,
THe Kings Majesty has heard and well weighed your short and Eloquent Oration;
And in the first place much approves that you have with so much advantage,
introduced a shorter way of speaking upon this occasion: His Majesty does well
accept of all those dutiful and affectionate Expressions in which you have
delivered your Submission to his Royal Pleasure; And looks upon it as a good
Omen to his Affairs, and as an Evidence that the House of Commons have still
the same Heart, that have chosen such a Mouth. The conjuncture of time, and the
King and Kingdoms Affairs require such a House of Commons, such a Speaker; for
with Reverence to the holy Scripture, upon this occasion the King may say, He
that is not with me is against me; for he that does not now put his Hand and
Heart to support the King in the common cause of this Kingdom, can hardly ever
hope for such another opportunity, or find a time to make satisfaction for the
Omission of this.

Next, I am commanded by his Majesty to answer your four Petitions, whereof the
first being, The freedom of you and your Servants in your Persons and Estates,
without Arrest or other disturbance, the King is graciously pleased to grant it
as full as to any of your Predecessors.

The Second for Liberty and Freedom of Speech; the Third for Access to his
Royal Person. And the Fourth, That your proceedings may receive a Favorable
construction, are all freely and fully granted by his Majesty.

During the time of his Chancellourship he lived at Exeter-House in the Strand,
and managed and maintained all things with a Port and Bravery suitable to the
Greatness and Dignity of his place; exceeding therein all who have enjoyed that
Honor in his Majesty's Reign: as will appear by the manner of his proceeding
from his House to Westminster Hall, the first day of Hilary Term, January 23.
being the first Term after his receiving the Seal.

In the Morning the Twelve Judges, and the several Officers of the High Court
of Chancery, together with the whole Body of the Law, repaired to Exeter-house,
where they were entertained at a splendid and magnificent Treat by his
Lordship; which being ended, he proceeded (according to the ancient and
laudable Custom) to Westminster in the following Order.

First went

The Beadles, The Constables, The High Constable, The Tipstaffes, The Crier of
the Court, The Gentlemen Clerks, The Sixty Clerks of the Chancery, The Master
of the Subpoena Office, The Master of the Affidavit, The Students of the Inns
of Court, The Cursitors, The Clerk of the Patents, The Registers, The
Barristers at Law, The Clerks of the Hanaper, The Prothonotary. The Clerk of
the Crown, The Examiners, The Clerks of the Petty Bag. The Six Clerks.
Then proceeded the following Officers, being all of them bare:

The Sealer to the Great Seal, The Chafe Wax to the Great Seal, The Usher of
the Court, The Master of the Rolls's Gentlemen, The Lord Chancellors Gentlemen,
The Secretaries, The Steward of the House, and Warden of the Fleet, The
Gentleman Usher, The Seal-bearer, carrying the Purse wherein was the Great
Seal, The Sergeant at Arms attending the Great Seal, carrying the Mace, After
whom came the Lord High Chancellor himself on Horseback, being richly Arrayed.
The Gentleman of his Horse, attended by a Page, a Groom, and Six Footmen
walking along by his Stirrup.
Next to the Lord High Chancellor followed The Lord Chief Justice, The Master
of the Rolls, The Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the rest of the Judges
according to their Seigniority.

And last of all came The Kings Sergeant at Law, The Kings Attorny-General, The
Kings Solicitor-General, The Kings Council, The Duke of Yorks Attorney, and his
Solicitor, together with the several Masters of Chancery.

In which Order they passed all along the Strand by White Hall through
Kings-street, and so to Westminster Hall, the Streets being Lined with
abundance of crouding Spectators; who were exceedingly pleased with the Decency
and Gallantry thereof.

All the time he enjoyed the Chancellorship, he managed it with as much Honor
and Advantage to his Majesty, as any that ever did or will enjoy it. And that
not only upon the Bench, but in the Senate too; wherein he endeavored to the
uttermost of his Power to vindicate his Majesty's Actions; and by his admirable
Eloquence labored to prevent or remove any Misunderstandings and Jealousies
between the King and his Parliament, as appears by the many excellent Speeches
he made to the Two Houses, when he was the mouth of the King to his People; and
had the Honor to be more successful therein then any who have succeeded him in
that Honorable Station. His sentiments of, and veneration for his Sovereign,
and the smooth and charming Eloquence wherewith he fluently expressed himself
upon all occasions, sufficiently appear in that Speech which he made to the
Lord Treasurer, December the 5th 1672. upon his taking his Oath before him in
the Exchequer.

My Lord Treasurer,
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty knowing your Integrity, Abilities and
Experience in his Affairs, and particularly those of his Treasury, has thought
fit to make choice of you to be his Lord High Treasurer of England, and what
necessarily accompanies that place, has by his Letters Patents under the Great
Seal, made you Treasurer of his Exchequer.

The Lord High Treasurer of Englands Office, is held by the Kings delivery of
the White-Staff; The Treasurers of the Exchequer has ever been held by Letters
Patents; And is that by which your Lordship is more immediately entitled to be
a Chief Judge of this Court.

It were too nice and tedious, and peradventure too formal, to give an account
of the several distinct Powers of these two Offices, Reason and the length of
time has now so woven them together. But as they are both in your Lordship, I
may justly say you are in a place of the first Rank, as to Dignity, Power,
Trust, and Influence of Affairs. A place that requires such a Man as our great
Masters Wisdom has found for it; from whose Natural temper we may expect
Courage, Quickness and Resolution; from whose Education, Wisdom and Experience;
and from whose Extraction, that Noble and Illustrious House of the Cliffords,
an Heroic Mind, a large Soul, and an unshaken Fidelity to the Crown.

My Lord, it is a great Honor much beyond even the place it self, that you are
chosen to it by this King, who without Flattery I may say, is as great a Master
in the knowledge of Men and Things, as this or any other Age has produced: And
let me say farther, It is not only your Honor that you are chosen by Him, but
it is your Safety too, that you have him to serve, with whom no subtle
Insinuations of any near him, nor the aspiring Interest of a Favorite, shall
ever prevail against those that serve him well. Nor can his Servants fear to be
sacrificed to the Malice, Fury or Mistake of a more swelling Popular greatness;
a Prince under whom the unfortunate fall gently; a Prince, in a word, that best
of all Mankind deserves that Title, Deliciae humani generis.

My Lord, I will not hold you long, for you have a Journey to go; after you
have taken your Oath, and your place in this Court, you are (according to
ancient Custom) to visit all the Offices in the upper and lower Exchequer; and
therefore let me end with this Wish, or rather Prophecy, That you may exceed
all your Predecessors, the Abilities and Fidelity of the Renowned Lord
Burleigh; the Sagacity, Quickness, and great dispatch of his Son the Lord
Salisbury; and the Uprightness, Integrity and Wisdom of that great Man that
went last before you the Earl of Southampton.

And as the E. endeavors were incessant to serve his Sovereign, so he was no
less solicituos to serve the Public good, endeavoring to make the Courts of
Judicature (as much as possible) answer the Ends for which they were designed,
viz. The ease of the Subject, laboring to have the Kings Prerogative and the
Subjects Property so interwoven, that they might always be inseparable; as
appears by that excellent Speech made by him in the Exchequer, January 24.
1673. at Sergeant Thurlands taking the Oath, in order to be made a Baron, as
follows:

Mr. Sergeant Thurland,
THe King of his Grace and Favor has made choice of you to be one of the
Barons of the Exchequer; he designed to place you in a Court of more profit,
though not of more Dignity; but your own modesty has chosen this Court, where
you thought you could serve the King best: and I could not choose but mention
it here to your Honor; it being the greatest Instance of a good Man, That he
had rather be found serviceable than rich. His Majesty has had large proof of
your former Service: besides, he takes you upon the Credit of that
Recommendation, that has justly the best place with him, I mean his Royal
Brothers. Some few things it is fit I should here mention to you, and leave
with you as Admonitions, or rather Remembrances.

In the first place, you are to maintain the Kings Prerogative; and let not the
Kings Prerogative, and the Law, be two things with you; for the Kings
Prerogative is Law, and the principal of it: Therefore in maintaining that, you
maintain the Law. The Government of England is so excellently interwoven, that
every part of the Prerogative has a broad mixture of the Interest of the
Subject; the ease and safety of the People being inseparable from the greatness
and security of the Crown.

In the next place let me advise you, that you acquaint your self with the
Revenue, as also the ancient Records, Precedents and Practices of this Court;
for want of which knowledge, I have seen this Court a most excellent Common
Pleas; when at the same time I could not say so much for it as an Exchequer.

In the Third place, Let me recommend to you, so to manage the Kings Justice
and the Revenue, as the King may have most profit, and the Subjects least
Vexation. Raking for old Debts, the number of Informations, Projects upon
Concealments, I could not find (in the Eleven years Exprerience I have had in
this Court) ever to advantage the Crown; but such proceedings have (for the
most part) delivered up the Kings good Subjects into the hands of the worst of
Men.

There is another thing I have observed in this Court which I shall mind you
of; which is, when the Court hearkens too much to the Clerks and Officers of
it, and are too apt to send out Process, when the Money may be raised by other
ways, more easy to the People. I do not say that the Kings Duty should be
lost, or that the strictest course should not be taken, rather then that be;
for when you consider how much the Officers of this Court, and the
Under-sheriffs get by Process upon small Sums, more then the Kings Duty comes
to; and upon what sort of People this falls, (viz.) The Farmer, Husbandman and
Clothier in the Country, that is generally the Collector, Constable and
Tyshingman; and so disturbs the Industrious part of the Nation, you will think
it fit to make that the last way, when no other will serve.

Give me leave also to mind you of one thing more, it is in your Oath, That the
Kings Needs ye shill speed before all others: that is, the business of the
Revenue of the Crown you are to dispatch before all other, and not turn your
Court into a Court of Common Pleas, and let that justle out what you were
constituted for.

In the last place, Let me conclude with what concerns all my Lords the Judges
as well as you, let me recommend to you the Port and Way of Living suitable to
the Dignity of your Place, and what the King allows you. There is not any thing
that gains more Reputation and Respect to the Government then that does; and
let me tell you, Magistrates as well as Merchants are supported by their
Reputation.

To his successful Counsel do both King and Kingdom owe the happy Conduct of
Affairs for many years together; the events of his Advices always agreeing
with, and answering the Ends for which they were at first proposed, so that the
King seldom failed of any thing that was carried on by his direction; for which
reason, his wise Administration and management of Things, had as it were
incorporated him into the very Heart of his Prince: So that all Men began now
to conclude, That this great Man (whose constant Loyalty had rendered him so
dear to His Majesty) was too firmly fixed and rooted in the Royal Favor, than
ever to be removed, or alienated therefrom; since he did, as most Men imagined,
sit so high, and withal so safely, that he was above the reach of Envy, or the
possibility of being undermined by any subtle and false Insinuations, or
sacrificed to the malice of any aspiring Favorite. Yet Fortune, who is always
fickle, and constant in nothing but inconstancy, never proved more false to any
then she did to him. And his unshaken faithfulness to His Majesty, from whose
Interest no Temptation could ever allure him, together with the Figure he made,
and the High Station wherein he deservedly stood, was so far from defending him
against, that it subjected him to the Euvy, and exposed him to the spleenful
hate, and insatiable Revenge of those who became his inveterate and implacable
Enemies; for no other reason, then his extraordinary Zeal, to have His Majesty
safe in his Person, by being Great in the Hearts of his Subjects, and Reign
without a Competitor, and thereby become Formidable to his Enemies; and be able
(like his Predecessors) to give Laws to the Neighboring Princes. The only way
to promote the public Good, maintain the Security of Religion, the Safety of
the Government, and advance the Honor of the English Nation.

Wherefore they having resolved upon his ruin; and knowing that the higher he
mounted the more likely he would be to fall, and if he did fall, it would be
with the greater precipitancy and danger: They racked all their Inventions, and
improved all their Interest at Court to have him advanced to higher Honor,
although he was already exalted, even above his own Ambition, and thereby
involved into so much danger, that he was forced every Night to keep a constant
Guard about his House, thereby to secure his Person from the bloody Attempts of
Popish Raviliacks, or Roman Godfredizers. So that this hopeful project not
succeeding according to expectation, may he rend by the future Ages in the
British Chronicles, to his immortal Glory, and the shame and infamy of his
Enemies.

But although they were not able with all their combinated strengths to trample
him into an Ignominious Grave, yet they quickly after found an occasion of
Triumph, upon the taking from him his Honorable Employment, to which he
ascended upon abundance of Merit, used with abundance of Impartiality, and
resigned with as much Innocence and Honor, in the following manner:

About November 1673. The King was pleased to send for his Lordship to
Whitehall; where, upon His Majesty's Command, he resigned the Great Seal of
England to be disposed of as His Majesty should think fit. And thus this mighty
Minister of State (who had, to the satisfaction and admiration of all good Men,
and to the hurt and prejudice (and therefore to the hate and envy) of none but
the Papists, improved that Power whereunto the Grace and Favor of his
Sovereign had raised him) did, without any kind of murmuring or repining, lay
it down again at the Feet of him from whom he at first derived it. Never
abating of his usual Briskness, nor altering the natural cheerfulness of his
Temper, upon the loss of his Honorary Places: but on the contrary, when he had
delivered the Seal, he put on his Sword; accounting it as much Honor and
Happiness to walk with that by his side unenvied, as to have the Mace and Purse
carried before him with abundance of Emulation and Grudge, besides danger.

In the Afternoon he was visited at his Mansion House by his Highness Prince
Rupert, and diverse other Peers and Gentlemen of Quality, who gratefully
acknowledged themselves to be extremely obliged by his just and honest
discharge of that Trust which had been reposed in him, for which they returned
him thanks.

And many whose tedious or difficult Suits were discharged by his dexterity and
wisdom, will ever remember him with Honor and Veneration. For by his admirable
Prudence, deep Judgment, and quick Apprehension, he used presently, and that
with abundance of Facility and Ease, to penetrate into the most intricate and
difficult Causes, and disperse those Cloudy Mists wherewith the subtle Lawyer
had darkened and perplexed the Just and Honest Title; as the Author of the
Character of a Loyal Statesman ingeniously expresses it: -- His choice
sagacity,
Strait salv'd the knot that subtle Lawyers tied,
And through all Foggs discerned the oppressed side:
Banished delays, and so this Noble Peer
Became a Star of Honor in our Sphere.
A needful Atlas of our State, etc.


And indeed he managed the Court of Chancery with such an unbiased Judgment
and Uprightness, that forced even those who lost the Cause, to admire his
sagacity, and confess the equality of his Justice.

THE SECOND PART OF RALEGH Redevivus.
THE discarding the great SHAFTSBVRY, was some abatement to the excessive
sorrow of his Papist Enemies, and proved a seasonable allay to that tormenting
Grief, which, peradventure, might otherwise, Vulter-like, have preyed upon, and
fretted and consumed their Vitals, and thereby have saved the World from that
trouble it has already felt, and may expect from them. But not containing
themselves with his being discarded, resolved still to prosecute his ruin, and
thereby render their revenge the more full and complete. And in order
thereunto, they first vainly attempted to Murder his unblemished Reputation,
and bring his Loyalty into Suspicion, and then, with an insernal Impudence,
accused him of High Treason; (the same Project, whereby they have since so
often unsuccessfully attempted his ruin) obligeing Colonel -- to pursue and
prosecute the Accuation; and to make him the more capable of performing it,
they did with all the Art and Industry, wherewith Hell and Rome could furnish
them, make a narrow search, and exact scrutiny into the several Offices he had
passed through, hoping there, to find some casual accident or other, which
might by their Hellish Policy, have been improved to High Treason; well
knowing that sudden surprise, the want of a true information, or the falling
short of a full and clear underderstanding of some material Circumstances,
might expose the most profound and exactest Judge in the World, to a mistake in
Judgment. Yet, to their amazement, and anguish, and the glory, and of that
Divine Providence, whereby the Almighty, who fore-sees the issue and events of
all sublunary Actions, wisely orders, and disposes all things to the advantage
of the favorites of Heaven, they found no such casual flips, or oversights in
his management, that could any way answer the pains they had taken in searching
the Records of his Actions, or favor the Designs they were carrying on against
him. For, having with a complicated malice, and impatiency of destroying him,
who of all others, stood most in the way of their other Designs, amazed
together, and mustered up all the worst things which those Infallible Vipers,
by the force of their Roman Venom, were able to draw, and attract out of the
Court Rolls, so disgested and phrased, as might best serve the purpose to which
they were designed, and presented them to the King's Learned Council, in the
Law, for their judgment, whether there were any thing contained therein, upon
which they might find matter whereon to ground an accusation of Treason. They
did, after a serious perusal of the several particulars, and pretended Crimes,
affirm to their everlasting Honor, that there was nothing which amounted to
Treason, contained therein. So that all their pains and industry, noise and
clamor, served to no other purpose, than the exposing there own folly and
wickedness, and the making His Loyalty and Justice, shine with the more
brightness and splendor; and the giving him a fresh provocation, as well as
future opportunity, to pry more narrowly into, and with the greater vigor,
oppose their Machivilian Designs, against His Sovereign, the Protestant
Religion, and the interest of Britain; and thereby sadly frustrate their
BVDDING HOPS.

Nor was it long before their pregnant and groaning Designs, gave him an
occasion to demonstrate his Zeal therein; for about April, or May, 1675. an odd
kind of a Bill was unexpectedly offered one Morning in the House of Lords,
whereby all such as enjoyed any beneficial Offices or Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military: to which was added, Privy-Councellor,
Justices of the Peace, and Members of Parliament, were under a penalty to take
the Oath, and make the Declaration and Abhorrence ensuing.

I A. B. Do Declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King; And that I do abhor that Traiterous position, of
taking Arms by His Authority, against His Person, or those that are
Commissioned by Him in pursuance of such Commission. And I do Swear, That I
will not at any time endeavor any alteration of Government, either in Church
or State. So help me God.

The same Oath was brought in the House of Commons, in the Plague Year, at
Oxford, and great endeavors used to have it imposed upon the Nation; but was
strenuously opposed by the very same persons, that now introduced it into the
House of Lords, and by their assistance, thrown out as a pernicious thing,
tending to the general infecting the Vitals of the Kingdom. And although it
then passed in a particular Bill, commonly known by the Name of the Five Mile
Act, because it only concerned the Nonconformist Preachers; yet, even in that,
it was mightily opposed by that faithful Friend to the Crown, the late Earl of
Southampton, whose sentiments and judgment, in an Affair of that Nature, might
certainly have been accounted the Platform and Standard of Prudence and
Loyalty. This Oath they said was but a little thing, being only a moderate
security to the Church and Crown. Yet, their so stiffly defending it, when
opposed by His Lordship, and others, together with their fierce and united
endeavors, to have it pass the House, made all thinking men suspect that there
was some extraordinary Design wrapped up in it; and therefore contended for by
them, not as a triffle, but a thing of that weight, that the whole stress of
Affairs depended thereon. And indeed the Word Commission, as it was there to be
taken, was of an extraordinary Extent and Latitude: for if it should have been
for taking away Estate or Life, by force; or if the perion Commissionated were
under never so many disabilities, by Acts of Parliament, yet, the taking that
Oath, would have removed all those Incapacities, or his Commission would have
ended the despute.

So that it came at last to be one of the greatest Contest, perhaps, that ever
happened in Parliament; wherein his Lordship, and diverse, other Illustrous
Peers, being assured of their own Loyalty and Merit, stood up against the Oath,
and pleaded for the Ancient English Liberties: with the same Pious Virtue, and
Heroic Courage, and Resolution, wherewith their Noble Ancestors had formerly
defended the great (...) of England; only they deserved far greater
Commendation and Honor, in regard they grapled with far greater difficulties,
and had not so fair a Field to engage in, but fought it out, under all the
disadvantages imaginable; being overlaid by numbers, and the noise of the
House, like the wind, baring hard upon them: nor, being so few, could they as
their Adversaries, withdraw to refresh themselves, in a whole days engagement,
yet, never was there a fuller demonstration. How dull a thing humane loquence
is, and how small and inconsiderable! The most towering and insulting
greatness, when bright Truth discovers all things in their proper colors, and
dementions, and like the Sun, shoots its enlightening Rays through all their
fallacies. The Dispute lasted many days, with much eagerness on both sides, and
was so warmly opposed, that the Parliament was Prorogued before the Lords came
to any Resolution about it, but in the next Sessions, they ordered it to be
burnt: It might be injurious to the rest of the Noble Lords, who took part with
him therein, to attribute the whole success to him; yet, the Promoters accused
him of having first opposed it, and that he and the Duke of Buckingham, stirred
up, and influenced the rest.

And therefore the Popish Party, who, it is probable, hoped to have reaped the
greatest advantage by that Oath banded against him, with as much fierceness as
ever; and although they had failed of Murdering his Person, yet resolved to
accomplish the ruin of his Reputation, influencing several Protestants, as
well Clergy, as Laiety, to lend their helping hand to this great Work. The
former were to bespatter him in their Pulpits, as if they were Conjuring down
the Devil, instead of commending the Blessed Jesus, in the Tenders of the
Gospel. The other were to bespatter him with their Pens, thereby to procure him
the hatred of the Vulgar, who commonly take up things upon Trust, and believe
every thing they read to be true: and because they could procure no better,
they employed Needham, a mercenary Wretch, who had, with an audacious
impudence, and unparalleled virulency, Writ against two Kings; (Viz.) Our
present Sovereign, and His Royal Father, and therefore the more fit for such an
undertaking. His first Essay, was in a Libellous Pamphlet, called, Advice to
the Men of Shaftsbury, wherein he falsely charged him with many fictitious
Crimes, and imaginary Designs, against the Government.

And thus having prepared the way to his ruin, (as they imagined) they hoped
to accomplish by it an accident which happened quickly after in the ensuing
Parliament, which met February 15th. 1676. after 15 months Prorogation upon
this occasion. As soon as the King had finished his Speech, the Commons
withdrew, and the Lords had taken their Respective Seats: The Duke of
Buckingham, who usually says what he thinks, stood up and argued with great
strength of reason, that according to the Laws and Constitution of Parliaments,
that unpresidented Prorogation was null, and the Parliament consequently
Dissolved, offering moreover to maintain it to all the Judges; and desiring, as
has been usual in such Cases, That they might give their Opinions; but a
certain Lord fancying himself a better Judge of that weighty Point in Law, moved
that the Duke of Buckingham might be called to the Bar; whereupon his Lordship
stood up and opposed it as an extravagant motion, and ascertained the validity
of Buckingham's Proposals with all the Cicilian height of Courage and Reason.
Whereupon another Lord of no less consideration, than the former, who had
called the Duke to the Bar, stood up in as great pet, as if the Salt had been
thrown down, or some such like ominous accident had happened, and with
abundance of earnestness renewed the motion for calling the Duke to the Bar;
but there were too many Lords between for that motion to succeed, and advice
was brought every moment from the House of Commons that the things was yet in
agitation, among them which gave his Lordship an opportunity to appear with
extraordinary vigor in defense of the Duke's Person, and his Proposal, so that
the Earl seemed more properly another Principle than the Duke's Second:
Whereupon the Lord Chancellor, therefore undertook on the contrary to make the
Prorogation look very formidable, laying the best color upon it, and the worst
upon his Opponants. Thus, for five or six hours, it grew to be a fixed Debate;
many arguing it on both sides in a regular method, until they received the
welcome News, that the Commons were risen without doing any thing; whereupon
the greater number called for the Question, and had it in the affirmative, that
the Debate should be laid aside.

And thus being flasht, but not satisfied with their Victory, they fell
desperately upon them, who had affirmed the dissolution the same night, and the
next day voted his Lordship with the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Salisbury,
and the Lord Wharton, to be committed to the Tower, under the Notion of
Contempt, during his Majesty's, and the Houses pleasures. The Contempt for
which they were committed, was their refusing to recant their Opinions, and ask
pardon of the King, and the House of Lords, notwithstanding the liberty and
freedom of Speech, which His Majesty verbally, and of course allows them at the
opening of every Parliament. The Warrant for the committing his Lordship,
together with the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Wharton; ran Thus,

ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Constable of his Majesty's Tower of London; his Deputies shall reserve the
Bodies of James Earl of Salisbury, Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, and Philip Lord
Wharton, Members of this House, and keep them in safe Custody within the said
Tower during his Majesty's Pleasure, and the Pleasure of this House, for their
high Contempts committed against this House: And this shall be your sufficient
Warrant on that behalf.

J. Brown, Cler. Par.

To the Constable of the Tower.
THE four Lords continued in the Tower so long, that the Parliament was several
times Adjourned during their Confinement, which his Lordship bore with
abundance of patience, and incredible cheerfulness, considering the many
weaknesses and infirmities of Body he then labored under: They expected to
have been Released, at least of course, by Prorogation; but Adjournments was so
much in use at that time, that it made them despair of being releived that way,
wherefore finding no end of their Captivity, they looked upon the procuring
their Liberty to deserve as much care as others took to retain them in durance;
to which end, they, each of them, chose the method he judged most proper.

The Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Wharton, upon
their application to His Majesty by a Petition, were enlarged: But Shaftsbury
could not come off so; for having made his Addresses to His Majesty in an
humble Petition, to be restored to his Liberty and the Favor of his Majesty;
he found the Royal Earl deaf to his Suit, and no relief to be obtained that way.

Whereupon, his Lordship applied himself to the Court of King's Bench, the
constant Residence of His Majesty's Justice, whether he was brought Wednesday,
Jan. 27. 1677. upon the Return of an Alias Habeas Corpus, directed to the
Constable of the Tower; and there being some dispute about the sufficiency of
the Return, his Council prays to have the Return filled, and Friday appointed
to debate the sufficiency of it; which being granted, the Earl was re-manded
back again unto the Tower.

On Friday morning his Lordship was brought up again, and then the Case was
strongly and learnedly argued on both sides; and after the discussing the Point
about the sufficiency of the Return, then Mr. Williams, Mr. Wallop, and Mr.
Smith. who were Council for his Lordship, gave diverse weighty Reasons in the
Earls behalf, that the Court might and ought to relieve him.

The Attorney and Solicitor Generals argued the contrary; showing diverse Causes
why that Court could not relieve a person committed by Parliament. So soon as
they had done, the Earl stood, up and in an Elegant Speech spoke for himself,
and directing him self to the Court, delivered himself to this Effect:

MY LORDS,
I Did not intend to have spoken one word in this business, but something has
been objected, and laid to my charge by the Kings Council, Mr. Attorney, and
Mr. Solicitor: that inforces me to say something for your better satisfaction.
They have told you, that my Council in their Arguments said, That this Court
was greater than the House of Peers, which I dare to appeal to your Lordships
and the whole Court, that it was never spoken by them, I am sure it was not
spoken by any direction of mine: What is done by my Council and by me, is, That
this Court is the most proper place to resort unto in those Cases where the
Liberty of the Subject is concerned. The Lords House is the Supreme Court of
Judicature in the Kingdom, but yet there is a Jurisdiction which the Lords
House do not meddle with. The Kings Council mentioned as a wonder, that a
Member of the Lords House should come hither, and thereby diminish the
Jurisdiction of that Court. I acknowledge them to be superior to this or, any
Court in England. To whom all Appeals, and Writs of Error are brought; and yet
there is a Jurisdiction that they do not challenge, and which is not natural to
them or proper for them. They claim not to meddle in Original Cases, and so I
might mention in other things: And I do not think it a kindness to any Power or
Body of Men, to give them a Power or Jurisdiction, which is not natural or
proper to their Constitutions. I do not think it would be any kindness to the
Lords to make them absolute and above the Law, for so I humbly conceive this
must do if it be adjudged that they, by a general Warrant, or without any
particular Cause assigned, do commit me or any man to a perpetual and
indefinite Imprisonment: And my Lords, I am not so inconsiderable a person, but
what you do in my Case must be Law for every man in England. Mr. Attorney is
pleased to say I am a Member of the Lords House, and to lay wait on the word
Member.

It Is true, I am one of them, and no man has a greater reverence and esteem
for the Lords than my self: But I hope, my being a Peer, or a Member of either
House, shall not lose my privilege of being an Englishman, or make me to have
the less Title to Magna Charta, or the other Laws of English Liberty. My
Opinion is not with one of my Council, who argued very learnedly, that the
passing an Act by the Kings Royal Assent can not make a Session, because the
usual Promise was not in it. It was without any instruction of mine that he
mentioned that Point. The Kings Council tells your Lordships of the Laws, and
Customs of Parliaments; and if this were so, I should submit; but this Case of
mine, is primae impressionis; and is a new way, such as neither Mr. Attorney,
nor Mr. Solicitor, can show any President of; and I have no other remedy or
place to apply my self to, than the way I take.

Mr. Attorney confesses, that the Kings Pleasure may Release me without the
Lords: if so, this Court is Coram Rege; This is the proper place to determine
the Kings Pleasure. This Court will and ought to judge of an Act of Parliament,
null and void if it be against Magna Charta, much more may judge an order of
the House that is put in Execution to deprive any Subject of his Liberty. And
if this Order or Commitment be a Judgment as the King's Council affirms, then
it is out of the Lords hands, and properly before your Lordships, as much as
the Acts which were lately passed, which I presume you will not refuse to Judge
of; notwithstanding Mr. Attorney General says, this Parliament is yet in
being, yet, I take it something ill, that he tells me, I might have applied
elsewhere.

My Lords, they speak much of the custom of Parliament, but I do affirm there
is no custom of Parliament, that ever their own Members should be put out of
their own power, and the inconveniences will be endless.

Mr. Attorney was pleased easily to ansiver the Objection of one of my Council,
if a great Minister be so committed, he has the Cure of a Pardon, a
Prorogation, or a Dissolution; But if the Case should be put, why forty
Members, or a greater number, may not as well be taken away, without Remedy in
any of the King's Courts, he will not so easily answer. And if there can be no
relief in this Case, no Man can foresee what will be hereafter.

I desire your Lordships well to consider what Rule you make in my Case, for it
will be a president that may in future Ages, concern every Man in England. My
Lord, Mr. Attorney says, you either can release, or remand me; I differ from
him in that Opinion; I do not insist upon a Release; I have been a Prisoner
above five Months already, and came hither of necessity, having no other way to
get my Liberty, and therefore am very willing to tender your Lordship Bail,
which are in or near the Court, as good as any are in England, either for their
Estate or Quality; and I am ready to give any sum or member.

My Lords, this Court being now possessed of this business, I am now your
Prisoner.

The Court having heard all that could be said, pro and con, on both sides,
delivered their Opinions Seriatim; one of the Judges indeed was not there in
Person, but he adventured hour (to show the exactness of his Justice) to
depute Judge Jones to speak for him, when it came to his turn, and declare
(although he had not heard what his Lordships Council, or himself, could say)
that it was his Opinion, his Lordship ought to be remanded, and the rest of the
Court unanimously concurring with the Opinion of their absent Brother, he was
by them remanded back again to the Tower according.

And thus his Lordship, being denied redress in the Court of King's Bench,
remained a Prisoner in the Tower, until the February following; and then on the
fourteenth of that Month, the Parliament being then sitting, he presented a
Petition to the House of Lords, wherein he makes a very humble submission, both
to His Majesty, and the House of Peers: but they objecting against the
Petitions he had presented to His Majesty, as not having made a satisfactory
acknowledgment of his Crimes, after some debate, rejected this Petition.

Whereupon the weak condition he was then brought into, by his confinement,
requiring speedy enlargement, he presented another Petition to His Majesty, and
likewise to the House of Lords, in both which he renewed his Supplication, to be
released from his imprisonment. And not only acknowledged with all humble
submission, That his endeavoring to maintain the Parliaments being Dissolved,
was an ill advised Action; (and so must every Man acknowledge, who will strive
in vain to sail against Wind and Tide,) but in the most submissive Terms,
assured them, that he was ready to make what further acknowledgment and
submission they should require, and that in the way and manner too, which they
should please to direct; yet, unfortunate Earl, he could not obtain his Liberty
upon these Terms neither, another pretense being then laid hold on, for the
prolonging his Imprisonment. Which was the horrid Crime of endeavoring his
enlargment, by applying himself to the Court of King's Bench, in order to his
being admitted to Bail. And yet, a certain Gentleman in the World, who had at
that time, a mighty influence upon Affairs, and improved this imaginary fault,
as much as possible, to the prejudice of the Earl; has since that time, been
himself, guilty of the supposed Crime. And not only so, but has rendered
himself also more pertinacious therein, by his reiterated applications to that
Court, to take Bail for him.

His Lordships Second Petition, to the House of Lords, was as follows:

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament
Assembled.
The humble Petition of Anthony Earl of SHAFTSBVRY,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner on the 16th. of February, 1676. was committed Prisoner to
the Tower of London, by your Lordships, because he did not obey your Lordships
Order, where he has continued in close confinement to the great decay of his
Health, and danger of his Life, as well as prejudice of his Estate, and Family.
In all humble Obedience therefore unto your Lordships, he does acknowledge,
That his endeavoring to maintain that this Parliament is Dissolved, was an ill
advised Action, for which he humbly begs the Pardon of the King's Majesty, and
of this most Honorable House; and does in all humble Duty and Observance to
your Lordships, beseech you to believe that he would not do any thing
willingly, to incur your displeasure.

Wherefore your Petitioner, in all humble Duty, and Obedience, both to His
Majesty, and your Lordships, has made his humble submission, and
acknowledgment, in his most humble Petition unto the Kings most Sacred Majesty,
and is ready to make his further submission to His Majesty, and this Honorable
House, according to the direction thereof. And he does most humbly implore your
Lordships, that you will be pleased to restore him to your favor, and
discharge him from his Imprisonment.

And your Petitioner, etc. SHAFTSBVRY.

THis Petition being read, the Lord Chancellor acquainted the House, that His
Majesty had received a Third Petition from the Earl of Shaftsbury, more
submissive than the two former. But His Majesty understanding that he had
endeavored to free himself from the censure of this House, by appealing to the
King's Bench, to have there judgment thereupon during the late Adjournments:
does not think fit as yet, to signify his pleasure as to his discharge, until
this House has taken that matter into consideration.

Upon which the Lords refusing to make an Address to His Majesty, for his
Lordships discharge, entered into a debate concerning his Appeal from their
House to the King's Bench, for an Habeas Corpus: but not being able to come to
any Resolution about it that day, the next day it was resumed again, and the
Records of the King's Bench produced, by which it did appear, that two Rules of
Court had been obtained upon the motion of his Lordships Council, and the
returns thereupon were read; by which it did appear, that the Earl had been
committed the 16th. of February, 1676. for a Contempt committed against the
House of Lords, and then the remitture of the Earl to the Tower was read. After
this, a Petition from his Lordship to the House was read, wherein he took
notice of an Order of the House, for bringing thither the Records of the
King's Bench Court, concerning the matter of an Habeas Corpus, brought by him;
acquainting them, that he took himself to be very much concerned, that they
should enter into a debate of that Nature, in his absence, since he had an
undoubted Right to be present, and plead for himself, when a debate of any new
matter against him was entered upon: and that although he could not pretend, but
that there might be a probability of his having erred, for want of a President
to guide him, and being deprived of the benefit of Council, by reason of his
close confinement, yet he resolved not to do any thing willingly, that might in
the least offend His Majesty, or their Lordships; and therefore, humbly laid
hold of that opportunity, to give further Evidence thereof, by casting himself
at their Lordships feet, and as he humbly begged the Pardon of His Majesty, so
he also implored the forgiveness of their Lordships, for offending them in any
thing whatsoever.

The debate was somewhat long, but at last it came to this Issue.

They Resolved, and Declared, That it was a breach of the privilege of that
House, for any Lord, committed by them, to bring an Habeas Corpus, in any
inseriour Court, to free himself from that Imprisonment, during the Session of
Parliament; and that the Earl of Shaftsbury, should have Liberty to make his
full defense, notwithstanding the Resolution, and Declaration, aforesaid.

Friday, February 22d. The Lords directed a Warrant to the Constable of the
Tower, to bring his Lordship to their Bar, on the Monday following; The Earl of
Northampton then Constable of the Tower, accordingly brought him, where,
kneeling at the Bar, he received an account from the Lord Chancellor, of the
Resolutions of the Lords, concerning his Appeal to the Court of King's Bench;
whereupon his Lordship stood up, and made his reply, to this Effect:

MY LORDS,
I Have presumed to present two Petitions to this Honorable House. The first
your Lordships mention, I do again here personally renew, humbly desiring that
I may be admitted to make that humble submission and acknowledgment, your
Lordships will please to Order. And that after a Twelvemonths close
Imprisonment, to a Man of my Age, and Infirmities, your Lordships will Pardon
the folly, and unadvisedness of any of my Words, or Actions. And as to my
Second Petition, I most humbly thank your Lordships, for acquainting me with
your Resolution, and Declaration, in the Point; and though Liberty be in it
self very desirable, and as my Physician (a very Learned Man) thought
absolutely necessary to the preservation of my Life; yet, I do profess to your
Lordships, upon my Honor, that I would have perished, rather than have brought
my Habeas Corpus, had I then apprehended, or been informed, that it had been a
breach of the Privilege of this Honorable House: it is my Duty, it is my
Interest, to support your Privileges, I shall never oppose them. My Lords, I
do fully acquiesce in the Resolution, and Declaration, of this Honorable
House: I go not about to justify my self, but cast my self at your Lordships
feet, acknowledge my Error, and humbly beg your Pardon, not only for having
brought my Habeas Corpus, but for all other my Words, and Actions.

Then was one Blany called into the House, who had delivered a Paper to the
Lord Treasurer, pretending to give an account of some words, spoken by his
Lordship, in the Court of King's Bench, when he moved to be bailed there. But
though this whole Transaction was no longer than since last Hillary Term, yet,
Blany could not affirm that what was Written in the said Paper, was really
spoken by his Lordship; so that the Treasurer not being able to to make any
thing of Blanys Story, (which was an hard Case, that so much pains should be
taken to so little purpose) the House of Lords proceeded to a Resolution, in
what form his Lordship should make his submission, and acknowledgment: which
being drawn up, imported much the same, with which he had before Declared:
which being read to him by the Lord Chancellor, his Lordship repeated the same
at the Bar, and than withdrew.

Whereupon the House ordered, That the Lords with white sleeves, should wait
upon His Majesty, and acquaint him the House had received satisfaction from his
Lordship, in the matter of the Habeas Corpus, and the other Contempt, for which
he stood committed, and were become humble Suitors to His Majesty, that he would
be pleased to discharge him from his Imprisonment: and that their Lordships
acquaint the House with His Majesty's Answer. All which was done accordingly,
and the Lord Treasurer reported to the House, That the Lords with white
sleeves, had waited upon His Majesty, according to their Lordships Order. And
that His Majesty was pleased to make this Answer, That he would give Order for
his Lordships discharge, which was accordingly performed: and his Lordship, by
regaining his Liberty, made more capable of serving His Majesty, and the
Protestant Religion, against the dark and misterous designs, which were then
carrying on against both.

But although the Lords proceeded with so much rigure and severity, against his
Lordship, (who deserved to have been more kindly dealt withal by any, who
pretend to any Loyalty to their Prince, since he made so considerable a Figure,
and had so great a share in the contriving, and management of the happy
Revolution, in 1666.) when they were in an unusual heat, artificialy kindled,
and carefully blown into a Flame, by some unseen hand, who secretly managed the
Bellows: yet, when that heat had spent it self, and the House acted with more
freedom, and deliberation, they acknowledge the wrong and injury, done to his
Lordship and the other Noblemen, who were committed upon that account: and to
prevent that illegal preceding from being made use of, as a President in
future times, they damned the several proceedings thereon, by ordering the
Commitment, and all things that concerned that Affair, to be expunged, and
razed out of their Jornal Books: that so, if possible, the very memory of them
might be extinguished.

And thus this illusterous Peer, did at length regain his Liberty, although
somewhat sooner, perhaps, than his Popish Enemies desired, or expected he
should: but not without being severaly burlesqued, by a second Advice to the
Men of Shaftsbury, Written by the Author of the former; hoping by a frequent,
and unwearied charging him with many fictitious Crimes, slyly insinuated, and
audatiously affirmed, with all the confidence and formality, imaginable; they
should at length, get them believed to be real ones. The whole Composition,
both of this, and the former Advice, was made up of nothing in the World, but
malice and revenge, carefully infused into the mercinary wretch, by the same
aspring Favorite, who had improved the Earls Application to the Court of
King's Bench, into a Crime; and were inbibed by him, with all imaginable
greediness, hoping thereby to relieve his wants, and supply his necessity; and
as liberally cast out in those two scurilous Libels, to poison, and infect the
froth of the Town, and the scum of the Universities, and that they might be the
more successful, the Name of the Author is carefully concealed, not from any
sparks of modesty, but that he might thereby with the more advantage, and
security, exercise his Impudence, in defaming the Earl: wisely considering,
That if his Name (which justly deserves to be Intom'd, and Rot in his own
infamy) should have been perfixed to them, it would certainly have spoiled the
Design, by making it appear too barefaced. And indeed, it redounds very much
to the Earls Honor, and Renown, that his Enemies could procure no other to
Write against him, than one, whose Pen had been so long employed against his
Sovereign.

But notwithstanding all those devices, the Earls Honor, and Reputation, was
above the reach of their malice, as well as his Loyalty had been above the
reach of their poison, and infection. Nor was he thereby discouraged from
opposing the Designs of the Papishes, as vigorously as ever: but endeavored
notwithstanding, in the several Sessions of Parliament, to procure the passing
such wholesome Laws, as might restrain Debauchery, and secure us against the
growing Designs of Rome, and France; which tended to undermine the Protestant
Religion, the interest of the English Nation, and prejudice, and endanger His
Majesty's Person, and Government. But more especially those two admirable
Bills; The first whereof provided, That no Papish should hold any Offices, or
enjoy any places of profit, or trust, either Civil, or Military: upon which His
Royal Highness laid down several great Offices and Places, which were held, and
enjoyed by him. And the second, for the disabling any Papish from siting as a
Member in either House of Parliament, although this latter could not pass
without a Proviso, that it should not extend to the Duke of YORK.

However, these Acts of Parliament did not prevent there proceeding in those
monstrous Designs, which they had so long been forming in their secret Cabals:
To Murder the King, subvert the Government, Massacre the Protestant Nobility,
and Gentry, extirpate the Protestant Religion, and introduce Popery into this
Kingdom. Having for that purpose, maintained Correspondence with a Neighboring
Prince, procured indulgences from Rome, to dispense with their taking the Oaths
of Supremacy, and Allegiance, together with all other Tests, when it should be
necessary for the management of their Affairs; collected Money, appointed
Officers, delivered out Commissions, procured a Bull from the Pope, for the
Excommunicating of His most Sacred Majesty; held diverse Consults at Wild-House,
the White Horse Tavern, and several other places, to consider of the methods
which they were to take in this Conspiracy, and appoint every one the part
which he was to act in the Plot. Wherein those vile (...), and Traitors, with
an Hellish Impudence, adventured to Declare the best of Kings to be
Excommunicated, and Condemned as an Heretic, by the pretended power of the
Pope, to lose both his Crown and Life: together with all the Protestant
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of England, who had rendered themselves any
way obnoxious, by their endeavors to suppress Popery, especially His Grace the
Duke of Monmouth, and the Earl of Shaftsbury. Nor were their Designs
discovered, till they were just ready to be put in Execution; all things being
in as much readiness, as they were in the Gunpowder Treason against King James.

But yet, the watchful Providence of the Almighty, by whom (and not by that
Grand Impost^^ at Rome) Kings Reign, and Princes Decree, Justice, it was
seasonably discovered, to their amazement, and confusion, whereby they were
driven to the very depths of despair; fearing that their Villainy being so
plainly discovered, and their Cruelty, and Treason exposed, and undeniably
proved by Coleman's Letters, Godfrey's Murder, Arnald's Assassination, etc.
they should never be able to clear themselves, and retrieve their Plot.
However, they Resolved to attempt both the one, and the other, by charging his
Lordship, and others, who had been the most Zealous Prosecuters of the Plot;
not only of having invented this Plot, which they affirmed was altogether a
fiction, but also with carrying on a Treasonable Design against the King's
Majesty, under color thereof.

The Plot being thus discovered, his Lordship being moved by a Principal of
Loyalty, to His Majesty's Love, to his Country, and Zeal to the Protestant
Religion; endeavored to the utmost of his power, to have it narrowly enquired
into, and searched to the bottom, that so the mischevious Consequences of it
might be the better provided against: and the King's Person, and Government,
the Protestant Religion, and the English Nation, might by an early Provision,
be secured against the like attempts, for the future, as well as the present
frustrated, which so much enraged them, that it added fuel to their malice, and
sharpened their desire of accomplishing his ruin. Assuring themselves, as the
Lords in the Tower told Mr. Dangerfield, That if they were as well rid of him,
as they were of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, they should then be able to conquer all
difficulties, stifle the Popish Plot, and bear down all before them. Wherefore,
finding him the greatest hinderance to their Designs, and the most active Man
in prosecuting their Plot, they entered into a Resolution, to dispatch him into
another World: as was affirmed by -- Messenger, Gentleman of the Horse, to the
Lord Arundel of Warder, about three Weeks, or a Month, before Mr. William
Stayley was apprehended: even so early did they begin their Designs of
Murdering him, for endeavoring to expose their Plot. And not long after,
Stayley, and Mattisson, being together at the Cross-Keys Tavern, in Covent
Garden, Declared, That to prevent the severities which might be the event of
this discovery, they must take a speedy course to destroy some particular
persons, who were the most active Men at that juncture of time; and that it was
resolved on, to kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, as being the great encourager, and
influencer of the rest: not long after which Matteson pulled a Pistol out of
his Pocket, in Mr. Prance's Shop, affirming he would therewith do Shaftsbury's
business, having provided the same for that purpose; several others also
assures Mr. Prance, that he would speedily be destroyed.

But after this, their rage was heigthned, and they supposed themselves obliged
to a greater vigilance, in accomplishing his ruin, upon the account of a
Speech which was said to be spoken by him in the House of Lords, March, 25.
1679. upon occasion of the Houses Resolving it self into State of England,
which was to the following Effect.

MY LORDS,
YOU are now appointing the consideration of the State of England, to be taken
up in a Committee of the whole House, some day the next Week. I do not know how
well what I have to say may be received, for I never study either to make my
Court well, or to be popular; I always speak what I am commanded by the
dictates of the Spirit within me. There are some other considerations that
concern England so nearly, that without them you will come far short of Safety
and Quiet at home. We have a little Sister and she has no Breasts, what shall
we do for our Sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a Wall,
we will build on her a Palace of Silver; if she be a Door, we will enclose her
with Boards of Caedar. We have several little Sisters without Breasts, the
French Protestant Churches, the two Kingdoms of Ireland and Scotland; the
foreign Protestants are a Wall, the only Wall and Defense to England; upon it
you may build Palaces of Silver, glorious Palaces. The protection of the
Protestants abroad, is the greatest power and security the Crown of England can
attain to, and which can only help us to give check to the growing greatness of
France. Scotland and Ireland are two Doors, either to let in good or mischief
upon us; they are much weakened by the Artifice of our cunning Enemies, and we
ought to enclose them with Boards of Caedar.

Popery and Slavery, like two Sisters, go hand in hand, sometimes the one goes
first, sometimes the other, but wherever the one enters, the other is always
following close at the Heels.

In England Popery was to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland Slavery went
before, and Popery was to follow. I do not think your Lordships, or the
Parliament have Jurisdiction there. It is a Noble and Ancient Kingdom; they
have an Illustrious Nobility, a Gallant Gentry, a Learned Clergy, and an
understanding, worthy People; but yet we cannot think of England as we ought,
without reflecting on the condition thereof. They are under the same Prince,
and the influence of the same Favorites, and Councils: When they are hardly
dealt with, can we that are Richer expect better usuage? For it is certain, that
in all absolute Governments, the poorest Countries are most favorably dealt
with. When the Ancient Nobility there cannot enjoy their Royalties, their
Shrievaldoms, and their Stewardies, which they and their Ancestors have
possessed for several hundred of years, but that now they are enjoined by the
Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as are
their known Enemies, can we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long, under the
same persons and Administration of Affairs? If the CouncilTable there can
imprison any Nobleman, or Gentleman, for several years, without bringing him to
Trial, or giving the least Reason for what they do: can we expect the same men
will preserve the Liberty of the Subject here?

My Lords, I will confess that I am not very well versed in the particular Laws
of Scotland; but this I do know, that all the Northern Countries have by their
Laws an undoubted and inviolable Right to their Liberties, and Properties; yet
Scotland has outdone all the Eastern and Southern Countries, in having their
Lives, Liberties, and Estates subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of
those that govern. They have lately plundered and harassed the richest and
wealthiest Countries of that Kingdom, and brought down the barbarous
Highlanders to devour them; and all this almost without a colorable pretense
to do it: Nor can there be found a Reason of State for what they have done; but
that those wicked Ministers designed to procure a Rebellion at any Rate; which
as they managed it, was only prevented by the miraculous hand of God, or
otherwise all the Papists in England would have been armed, and the fairest
opportunity given, in the nick of time for the execution of that wicked and
bloody Design the Papists had: and it is not possible for any man that duly
considers it, to think other, but that those Ministers that acted that, were as
guilty of the Plot as any of the Lords that are in Question for it.

My Lords, I am forced to speak this the plainer, because till the pressure be
fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, it is not possible for me, or any
thinking man to believe that good is meant us here. We must still be upon our
guard apprehending that the Principle is not changed at Court, and that those
men that are still in place and Authority, have that influence upon the mind of
Our Excellent Prince, that he is not, nor cannot be that to us, that his own
Nature and Goodness would incline him to. I know your Lordships can order
nothing in this; but there are those that hear me which can put a perfect cure
to it; until that be done, the Scottish Weed is like Death in the pot, Mors in
Olla. But there is something too, now I consider, that most immediately
concerns us, their Act of Twenty two Thousand Men to be ready to invade us upon
all occasions. This I hear, that the Lords of the Council there have treated as
they do all other Laws, and expounded it into a standing Army of Six Thousand
Men. I am sure we have Reason and Right to beseech the King, that that Act may
be better considered in the next Parliament there. I shall say no more for
Scotland at this time, I am afraid your Lordships will think I have said too
much, having no concern there: but if a French Nobleman should come to dwell in
my House and Family, I should think it concerned me to ask what he did in
France; for if we were there a Felon, a Rogue, a Plunderer, I should desire him
to live elsewhere; and I hope your Lordships will do the same thing for the
Nation, if you find Cause.

My Lords, Give me leave to speak two or three words concerning our other
Sister, Ireland: Thither I hear is sent Douglas's Regiment, to secure us
against the French. Besides, I am credibly informed that the Papists have their
Arms restored, and the Protestants are not many of them yet recovered from
being the suspected Party. The Sea-Towns as well as the Inland, are full of
Papists: That Kingdom cannot long continue in the English hands, if some better
care be not taken of it. This is in your Power, and there is not bing there but
is under your Laws. Therefore I beg, that this Kingdom at least, may be taken
into consideration, together with the State of England; for I am sure there can
be no safety here, if these Doors are not shut up and made sure.

But His Majesty had another kind of esteem for his Lordship, for not long
after the making of this Speech, having Dissolved His Privy Council, and chosen
a new one, he was pleased to constitute the Earl President thereof; a Place so
considerable for Honor and Trust, that it has not been enjoyed by any Subject
for many years, and was improved by him as much to the advantage of His Majesty
and the Protestant Interest, as possible.

And when the Bill for excluding the Duke of York, had passed the House of
Commons, as the only expedient they could find out to suppress the Designs of
the Papists, and prevent their ever introducing the Popish Religion into
England; they sent it up to the House of Lords, where his Lordship was one of
those Honorable Lords, who Voted for its passing that House, in order to its
being offered to His Majesty, for His Royal Assent.

The Grand Jury returned for the Hundred of Osalstone, in the County of
Middlesex, in June the 2d. 1680. finding the Constables defective in not
presenting the Papists as they ought: it was ordered they should make further
presentiments by the 16th. of that Instant, upon which day they met again to
receive them, when likewise a Bill against D. Y. for not coming to Church, was
brought before them, together with the following Reasons for his being
indicted, subscribed by the persons undernam'd.

First, Because the 25th. Car. 2d. when an Act was made to throw Popish
Recusants out of all Offices, and Places of Trust: the Duke did then lay down
several great Offices and Places, (as Lord High Admiral of England,
Generalissimo of all His Majesty's Forces, both by Land and Sea, Governor of
the Cinque Ports, and diverse others,) thereby to avoid the punishmant of that
Law against Papists.

Secondly, 30. Car. 2d. when an Act was made to disable Papists to sit in
either House of Parliament, there was a Proviso incerted in that Act, That it
should not extend to D. Y. on purpose to save his right of sitting in the Lords
House, though he refused to take those Oaths which the Protestant Peers ought
to do.

Thirdly, That His Majesty in His Speech, March 6th. the 31st. year of his
Reign, does give for a Reason to the Parliament, why he sent His Brother out of
England, (Viz.) Because he would leave no Man Room to say that he had not
removed all Causes which might influence him to Popish Councils.

Fourthly, That there has been diverse Letters read in both Houses of
Parliament, and at the secret Committee of both Houses, from several Cardinals
and others, at Rome, and also from other Popish Bishops and Agents of the Pope,
in other Foreign Parts: which do apparently show the great Correspondencies
between him and the Pope, and how the Pope could not choose but weep for joy,
at the reading of some of his Letters, and what great satisfaction it was to
the Pope, to hear that he was advanced to the Catholic Religion; as likewise
that the Pope has granted him Briefs, sent him Beads, and ample Indulgencies,
with much more to this purpose.

Fifthly, The whole House of Commons has Declared him to be a Papist in their
Votes, Sunday, April, 6th. 1679. wherein they resolved nemine contradicente,
that the Duke of York's being a Papist, and his hopes of coming such to the
Crown, had given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the present
Conspiracy, and Designs of the Papists, against the King and the Protestant
Religion.

Sixthly, That besides all this Proof, and much more to this purpose, it is
most notorious and evident, he has for many years absented from Protestant
Churches, during Religious Worship.

These are the Reasons why we believe him to be a Papist; this was subscribed,
and delivered by his Lordship, together with the Earl of Huntington, and the
Lords, Gray of Wark, Russel, Cavendish, Brandon, and Wharton: as also by Sir
William Cowper, Barronet, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Barronet, Sir Edward Hungerford,
Knight of the Bath, Sir Scroop How, Thomas Thinn, Esquire William Forrester, Esquire
and John Trenchard, Esquire

But whilst the Jury were in debate of the Matter, they were sent for up by the
Court of King's Bench, and dismissed, so that nothing was done upon it more than
the Juries having receieved the presentment. Wherefore, on Wednesday, July, the
Thirtieth, the former Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, with the addition of the
Lord Clare, Sir John Cope, Barronet, Sir Rowland Gwynne, and Mr. Wandsford,
presented the same to a second Grand Jury, who were discharged as the former.

But whilst his Lordship was thus vigorously prosecuting the Popish Plot, in
the face of danger, the Papists were as vigilent in contriving his ruin,
though with somewhat more secrecy and silence, resolving to seize the Prey
before they gave the least Alarm or Notice of their intention, as appeared by
their close Caballistical Designs, carried on against this Earl, and all the
rest of the Protestant Nobility, and Gentry in England, wherein Mr. Dangerfield
was a considerable Agent, having been for that purpose fetched out of Newgate,
by the Papists; who hoping to reap a vast advantage by having him to manage
their Affairs, willingly disburst a large sum to discharge his Debts. The first
sangunary work they employed him in was, to attempt the Murder of his
Lordship, promising him 500 pounds for so acceptable a service (as they
apprehended it to be) he inquired the Reason why they thirsted after his Life,
and how there might be any probable way proposed, whereby it might be
accomplished? to which it was answered. That as to the first, they should be
glad to have him out of the way, because, if they were rid of him, as they were
of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, it would be no difficult thing to bear down all the
rest of their Opposers. As to the second, They affirmed it to be as easy as
desirable, since, said the Lord P -- s, my Man Wood was at Thannet House, two
nights since, upon pretense of an Errand, but his business was to view the
House, and observe what conveniences there were to make his escape after the
fact was done: assuring him that Wood found the thing so feasible, that after
he came back, he declared himself sorry that he was not provided to have done
it then. And to encourage him to undertake this sanguinary enterprise with the
more cheerfulness, he gave him Ten Guinneys in hand, as an assurance that the
full reward should be paid so soon as the fatal stroke should be given.
Promising moreover, that Mr. Regaut, a Virginia Merchant, of Mrs. Celliers
acquaintance, should come to him on Sunday following, to instruct him in the
most dexterous and probable means of putting the Design in execution, and
secure the payment of the 500 l.

All things being thus agreed on, the Lord P -- s, took him by the hand, and
wished him good success; And to render him the more pliable and active in this
designed Tragady, he was sent first to the Lord Castlemain, then to Sharp the
Priest, and last of all to Jack Gadbury the Fortune Tellers: by all whom he was
severely scoulded, for not complying with the Popish Lords in their command to
kill the King, insolently upbraiding him with horrid ingratitude, in refusing
to perform that for which he was taken out of Prison and maintained in so much
splendor, ever since. Hoping that this chiding might raise in him a
magnanimous Resolution to regain the Credit he had lost by that refusal, by a
Resolute perpetrating the Murder of his Lordship.

Dangerfield being thus prepared, on the Sunday following Regaut came to Mrs.
Celliers, and having first dined together, he gave him general directions how
to accomplish the Murder, demanding how he would order the Money to be paid,
when he had performed the enterprise? telling him, that if he pleased, it
should be brought in Guinneys, and lest with Mrs. Cellier, for him; but he
disliking the way, desired, That when Regaut heard that the Lord Shaftsbury was
Dead, and should receive a Note from him, that then he would immediately pay
the Money for his use, which he promised should be done accordingly. But ordered
him to attend on Sharp, and some others, for more particular instructions, how
to Act this Tragedy; He attended upon them several times, before they could
resolve what method he should take. However, to prevent his flaging, he was
commanded by the Conspirators to repair to Knowles the Priest, to confess, and
receive the Sacrament, which he did at Knowles's Lodging, at a Coffe-House in
White-fryars, from whom he received some directions, how to proceed in the
Murder: but Dangerfield telling him that they were silly and impractable,
Knowles sent him to the Lady Abergaveny, telling him that she was a Witty Lady,
and had some Correspondence with the Lord Shaftsbury, and therefore was the
more capable of advising him. Wherefore he presently repared to her Lodgings at
the House of Mr. Grissin, in great Lincoln's Inn Fields, where he found easy
admittance into her Ladyships Chamber, upon sending in word that he came from
Knowles. So soon as he entered, he acquainted her who he was, and the business
he waited upon her Ladyship about. Sir, said she, I have received a very good
Character of you, and therefore think my self obliged to return you thanks for
the extraordinary diligence wherewith you have managed our business hitherto,
and I hope you will proceed with the like care until you have finished what you
have so well begun. As for the taking the Earl of Shaftsbury out of the way,
it is a thing of no difficulty, it being altogether as easy to kill him, as to
kill a Bird on a Tree. Pray Madam, which way shall I do it, with so much (...)
and ease, said Dangerfield? why several ways, replied the Lady, it may be
done; but I would have you pretend to Cure the Gout, and my Lord being troubled
with that Distemper, I will recommend you to him under that pretense, whereby
you will easily gain admittance, which having obtained, you must watch your
opportunity to dispatch him.

From thence Dangerfield went to P -- s's House, and acquainted the Countess
where he had been, and the several ways which had been proposed by Knowles and
others, for the Murdering the Earl of Shaftsbury, but more especially the
Ladys Project, as being the more likely way to succeed. To which the Countess
replied, It was but a silly contrivance, yet, peradventure it might do.
However, she gave him no order to proceed thereon as yet. But resolving, if
possible, to make sure work, they obliged him to charge his Lordship with
Treason, by making him one of the Protestant Peers, whom they intended to
charge with a Conspiracy against the Kings Crown, and Life; that so if they
failed of Murdering him with their hands, they might however destroy him with
their breath. To which purpose, his name was enrolled in that List which was
found in the Meal-Tub, and gave the first light into their Plot, which was more
fully discovered by Dangerfield's miscarrying in the chief part of their
Conspiracy; (Viz.) placing the Treasonable Papers in Colonel Manse's Chamber,
whereby all was spoiled for that time. And Dangerfield being to wait on His
Majesty, to give him an account of this pretended Plot, the Countess of P -- s
gave him directions to lay all the Burden he could upon the Presbyterians in
general, but more especially upon His Grace the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of
Shaftsbury, Lord Gray, of Wark, Lord Howard of Escrick, the Duke of Buckingham,
and some others. And that he should explain to His Majesty, the meaning of the
Contents of the several Papers he had presented to the Duke (who was the person
that introduced him to His Majesty, to make this pretended discovery) and how
the Presbyterians were resolved to use their utmost endeavors for the reducing
the present Government, and setting up a Commonwealth once more, and settling
His Grace the Duke of Monmouth therein (a likely business) and that the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and other persons of Honor, were issuing out Commissions for that
purpose, and had promised some to several persons.

And having hereby secured this Design indifferently well, as they thought, and
being now come to a Resolution in what method Dangerfield should attempt his
Lordships Life, they commanded him to repair to Sharp, and confess and receive,
(it being their common custom to make them receive the Sacrament, and
Introduction to the horridest Villainies) and the crafty Priest having first
palliated the Murder, by urging the necessity of it, and the extraordinary
advantage that would thereby redound to their Cause and Party, and so covered
the Crime with a Mantle of Religion, that he made it appear meritorious. He
then proceeded with abundance of Formality, and Jesuitical Zeal, to Conjure him
by all that was good or sacred, that he should with all possible speed stab his
Lordship, so soon as he should receive order from the Popish Lords so to do. He
promised he would, and so the impudent Ecclesiastical Villian dismissed him
with abundance of costly benedictions and hearty wishes for the happy success
of his enterprises. And a Letter coming for the Lords in the Tower, which
commanded him to go that very night, and put their Resolution of stabing his
Lordship in Execution, he received instructions not to enter into any discourse
with him, when he had him alone, but after a little Apology for his coming to
his Lordship without being sent, or introduced by any other person, and
desiring to know whither, if it should sall out to be in his power to serve
him, he should obtain so much favor of his Lordship, as to find his service
acceptable to his work; and then receiving a short French Dagger (as he judges
it to be) provided for that purpose, by the Virginia Merchant, he went
immediately to Thannet House, in Aldersgate Street, where his Lordship lived,
and found admittance with more ease and freedom, than he expected; the Earls
Innocence rendering him altogether without suspicion; But Dangerfield finding
diverse persons in the Room where his Lordship was, and fearing least some of
them migt know him, and thereby he be discovered, he pretended his business
required privacy, and humbly desired to speak with his Lordship alone,
whereupon he sent him with one of his Gentleman up stairs, and soon after his
Lordship coming himself to know what business he had with him, Dangerfield
repeated over the story wherein he had been instructed, but his Lordship not
knowing what to make of it, entered into some other discourse with him; but
Dangerfield perceiving some persons to be at the other end of the Room, was
struck with a sudden horror and sear of mind, and the dread of being
discovered was so terrible to him, that he was in tormented to be gone, and
presently taking his leave returned, and acquainted those who had employed him,
that he had been with his Lordship, and there being too many persons in the
Room, be thought it not safe to make an attempt upon him at that time; but
withal to save his Credit, assured them the thing was easy to be done, and
promised to do it the next time he went. The next morning early, his Boy went
to the Tower with a Letter, wherein he gavean Account to the Lords, that he had
entered himself at the Earl of Shaftsburys, and promised without fail, to
dispatch him within a few days. The Countess her self wrote an Answer to that
Letter, and ordered Dangerfield to go to the King, and acquaint His Majesty
that he had been at his Lordships to make some further discovery of the New
Plot, and that he should tell His Majesty Verbatim, what he had said to his
Lordship, and that he had promised to get him an employ, and to take care of
him. The next morning he went to the King, and repeated his Lesson accordingly.

About two or three days after, he was ordered by the Conspirators to repair to
his Lordship again, and frame a discourse to him, to this or the like Effect:
(Viz.) My Lord, I am now come with something that very nearly concerns both
your Lordships Honor and Person: for if your Lordship should be sent for
before the King and Council, and there have several Accusations of High Treason
brought in against you, and you should thereupon be committed to the Tower, and
that the Evidence, to maintain those Accusations, should prove Letters written
by your Lordships own hand, then I hope you will believe I am your faithful
Servant. Having received these Instructions, and the Dagger, he went in the
dusk of the Evening, a second time to Thannet House, where sending for Mr.
Shepherd, one of his Lordships Gentlemen, to the Door, he acquainted him with
his desire of speaking privately with his Lord. Mr. Shepherd having first
acquainted his Lordship therewith, took him into a Room, which Dangefield
supposed to be his Lordships Closet, desiring him to stay there, and telling
him the Earl would come to him presently.

But as soon as the Gentleman was retired, Dangerfield began to look about the
Room, and found another Door, besides that at which he came in; and perceiving
it lead into the same Room where he had been with his Lordship before, he
concluded, that if the Earl came into the Closet, he would immediately have
stabbed him, having the advantage of two Doors to escape by, intending so soon
as the fatal stroke had been given, to put out the Candle, and under the color
of lighting it, make his escape. But Divine Providence so ordered it, that his
Lordship came not at all into the Room, but after two hours waiting (which he
employed in searching many Letters, and other Papers, which he found in a
Table-Drawer, putting some of them into his Pocket, which when they came to be
perused, proved to be Letters from Sir Richard Bulstrode, His Majesty's Agent
at Brussels, the Contents whereof imported no more than the then present
posture of Affairs in that Country) sent for him into the next, which
disappointment so confounded him, that he had no power to proceed in his bloody
determinations: but having repeated his Lesson to his Lordship, left him to
meditate upon the comused and groundless story, and returned with a seigned
cheerfulness, which made those that had sent him flush with hopes that he had
succeeded in his enterprise; but when they understood the contrary they were
extremely concerned, having assured themselves of the like success that they
had found in the Assassination of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. And Mr. Wood was sent
from his Lord to tell him, that of all people, he admired to find him so great
a Coward: and that however it was his Lordships pleasure to try him once more,
ordering him in the mean time to make the most of those Letters, by repairing
to White Hall, and acquainting the King with the Discourse he had with his
Lordship, and show the Letters of Sir Richard Bulstrode, to His Majesty, that
thereby he might obtain the greater Credit; and least the Earl should have
suspected the Intreague, by missing of his Letters, and be with the King before
him, he was commanded to make no manner of delay, but repair immediately to His
Majesty; For, said he, if the Earl should be there before you, it may be more
prejudicial to you, than perhaps you imagine. He was moreover to tell the King,
that a great number of very dangerous Papers relating to the Presbyterians
design, were in the Lodging of Colonel Mansel, and desired a Warrant to seize
on them.

Upon this Dangerfield went immediately to Mr. Cheffinch, who had introduced
him to His Majesty once before, and was by him placed in a Room which the King
was to pass through; and His Majesty seeing him there, asked him what he had to
say to him? he answered, according to the instructions he had received, and
humbly prayed a Warrant to search the Collonel's Lodgings; His Majesty bid him
repair to Mr. Secretary Coventry, and acquaint him with the business, who would
thereupon grant him a Warrant. Upon this away went Dangerfield to the
Secretary, and having first acquainted him with the Story, told him it was His
Majesty's pleasure he should wait on him for a Warrant: Notwithstanding which
the Secretary absolutely refused to grant him one, unless he would first make
Affidavit, that there were such Papers in the Collonel's Chamber, and what the
Contents of them were. But the Gentleman could do neither: The first he could
not Swear, because the Papers were not then there, but were to have been
conveyed thither after the Warrant was obtained; And the second he was afraid
to Swear, least the Secretary, who was a very wise and judicious person, should
presently apprehend the Truth, that they were framed and conveyed thither by
himself, since it would have been impossible otherwise to have known the
Contents of Letters in a Gentleman's Chamber, with whom he had never exchanged
two words in his Life; wherefore refusing to make Affidavit, he was forced to
go away without a Warrant. Whereupon he repaired to the Lord Peter -- telling
him what had happened, and that he had been twice at the Earl of Shaftsburys.
His Lordship seemed to be well pleased therewith, and promised, that when any
Forces were raised, he would put in for a Regiment of Horse, and would give him
a Troop in the same, but withal, bid him be sure to do the Earls business the
third time. However the Countess of Powis and Mrs. Cellier, were extremely
angry with him for refusing to make such Affidavit as the Secretary required,
for the obtaining a Warrant: telling him he might safely have sworn, since he
had formerly seen, and been at the Writing of some of them, and that at the
worst, it could not be Perjury, because the Oath was not made in a Court of
Record, persuading him to make amens for that oversight, by repairing again to
Thannet House, and there, without any hissitation or fear, stab the Earl of
Shaftsbury. He desired to be excused in that Affair, assuring her that his two
former disappointments had so discouraged him, that he could not possibly
persuade himself ever to make any further attempts in that kind. At which her
Ladyship seeming very much concerned, obraided him with Cowardice, and said she
would go her self. -- No Madam, replied Mrs. Cellier, that shall not be, for I
will go and do the business so effectually, that there shall be no occasion for
a second attempt, whereby I will convince the World, that some of our Sex are
braver, and more courageous and daring, than the Men.

Then the Countess asked him if he had learned where Mr. Mansel's Lodgings
were? yes, said he, with a great deal of trouble, I have; he Lodges at
Westminster. Why then you timorous person, said she, pray take these Papers and
convey them privately into some part of his Chamber, Closet, or Trunks. He told
her it was impossible to do that, in regard he had no manner of knowledge of
him. You must, said her Ladyship, find out some way or other to get acquainted
with him, and then you must invite him to the Tavern, and Drink smartly,
whereby you may doubtless have an opportunity to Lodge the Papers in some part
of his Clothes, and so soon as you have done that, you must immediately upon
pretense that he has spoke Treason, call for a Constable, and get him
apprehended, and searched, and the Papers carried to the King and Council, and
so get him committed. This was to have been the Introduction to their
Conspiracy for destroying not only this Illustrious Lord, whose virtue, and
firm, and stedy cleaving to the Interest of His Majesty, and the Protestant
Religion, had rendered him the greatest Object of their hatred and malice, but
likewise of all the chief English Protestant Nobility and Gentry, who had any
way discovered their Aversation to Popery, by endeavoring to have their
Hellish Designs against the Sacred Life of His Majesty, and the Protestant
Religion, thoroughly searched into and prosecuted.

For upon this he was to have moved the King and Council, to have empowered him
to search the Lodgings and Houses of several other Gentlemen (whither they were
to have conveyed the like Treasonable Papers.) Then she delivered him fifteen
Letters, and a List of Names, but one of the Letters, and the List of Names,
being Written by her own hand, she desired him to get them Transcribed: which
he offering to do himself, was told by her, that it must not be done by him,
because they were to be brought before the King and Council, and the King
having received from him some Remarks, Written with his own hand already, would
thereby discover the whole to be forged. Wherefore having got a Scrivener
over against Sommerset House, to Transcribe them, he went to Ax-yard in
Kings-street, Westminster, where inquiring for Lodgings, he was directed to Mr.
Harris's, which was the very House where the Colonel Lodged: and there, under
the feigned Name of Thomas, desired to know what Chambers they had to dispose
of, and being showed all the Rooms in the House, none would please him, but the
two Rooms up one pair of Stairs; but was told that Colonel Mansel Lodged in
them, and therefore they could not be disposed of without his consent, which
could not then be obtained in regard he was not at home, so that he could not
effect any thing at that time.

Wherefore the Female Hero resolving to approve her self the Champion of the
Popish Cause, went with a feigned Complement to his Lordship, hoping before her
return, to give him a Wound somewhat more fatal than that which she had
formerly given to some others of our Sex. But his Lordship according to his
usual custom when he Treated with Strangers, kept a strict Eye upon her during
the whole time they were discoursing together, and perceiving her to be busily
fumbling about her Pockets, he gently laid his hand upon hers, and pleasently
drol'd with her concerning the business she pretended to visit him about,
whereat being very much troubled and discouraged, she presently took leave of
his Lordship. But being advanced almost as far as the Door, and reflecting upon
the disgrace she should bring upon her self, by having promised never to return
but with the happy News of Victory, and yet accomplishing as little, or less
than Dangerfield, whose Cowardice she had exclaimed against with so much scorn
and contempt, she suddenly returned toward his Lordship, resolving not to stir
from the spot, until she had laid him at her Foot. But the Earl seeing her come
back, steps to her, and as if guided by the direction of some superior
influence, laid his hand upon hers as before, which so dashed her out of
countenance, that she was forced to depart without success. Heaven having
Decreed that this Illusterous Peer, who had been so useful to the King and
Kingdom, should not loose his Life so tamely, and fall a Sacrafice to papal
Rage; Nor that the English Anals should ever report to succeeding Ages, that
the great Shaftsbury was slain by the feeble hand of an Impeous Strumpet.

This disappointment heightened their Rage, and made them resolve to hasten the
finishing of their Plot, not doubting but to involve him in the common ruin of
the rest of the Protestant Nobility. Wherefore Dangerfield went presently and
took the two Rooms where Mansel Lodged, he having consented to remove one pair
of Stairs higher, that so he might not hinder the House of so benificial a
Lodger as he seemed to be. And being conducted into the Room where the Colonel
was to Lodge, whilst his own was put in order, and fitted for him, he laid hold
of that opportunity to place those Treasonable Papers behind the Colonel's
Beds-head, and then acquainted the Conspirators with what he had done, who
ordered him to go again to the King, and desire a Warrant to search.
Accordingly he went to Mr. Cheffinch, and was by him brought to His Majesty,
whom he earnestly solicited for a Warrant: but His Majesty according to His
accustomed wisdom, sent him again to Secretary Coventry, who being no less
suspicious of him now, than he was before, no Warrant was to be obtained from
him; wherefore the Conspirators being informed, they resolved, That having
proceeded so far, they would not be baffled by one difficulty, wherefore they
commanded him to repair to some of the Custom-House Officers, and pretending to
inform them where a considerable quantity of prohibited goods that had been
Imported were, concealed to procure a Warrant to search, which was easily
granted, and two Officers sent to search the House: he first carried them to
his own Room, for the better coloring the business, and having searched there
and found nothing, he conducted them into the Colonel's Chamber, who was at
that time abroad; where they did, upon his assurance that the goods were in
that Room, make a thorough search, breaking open his Trunks and Boxes, and with
the exactest scrutiny imaginable, examined the very Bed-Clothes, but no
prohibited goods being to be found, they were about to depart, when Dangerfield
intimating that probably they might be hid behind the Bed, they presently
removed it about three foot from the Wall, but could find nothing; whereupon
Dangerfield stepping forward looked in, and seeing the bundle of Papers lying
where he had placed them, presently cried, What Is that lies there? whereupon
one of the Officers taking it down and opening it, he presently snatched one of
the Papers (which was the List of Names, some Written at length, and others
only the two first Letters) and cried, Here Is Treason! The Searcher opening
another, and beginning to read therein, Dangerfield cried out again, There Is
Treason likewise in that Paper against His Majesty, wherefore the Papers ought
to be all seized, and the person who owns them, if he were present, to be
secured: persuading them to carry the Papers to some Secretary of State.
However, they knowing better what belonged to their own Office, than that of a
Justice of the Peace, refused so to do, but carried them to their own Masters
at the Custom-House, whereof he informed the Conspirators; who fearing, least
by that means their Design might be spoiled, and their hopes frustrated,
ordered him to go forthwith and tell the King the manner how he had caused the
Papers to be seized, which he did, and His Majesty sent him to call Mr.
Secretary Coventry, to give some order about it: which done he returned, and
acquainted Mrs. Cellier and the Countess, what he had done, and that he had the
Honor to be in a Room alone with His Majesty. Oh! what an opportunity have you
lost, says one, and how bravely might he have killed the King, says the
other, if he had been provided. And yet these vile Miscreants, who could lament
Dangerfields not perpetrating so horrid a Crime, have the impudence to call
themselves Loyalists, and are, notwithstanding their disloyal Principles and
Practices, believed to be so, by some persons in the World, whose pretenses to
Loyalty and the Protestant Religion, made people except other things from them.

Mrs. Harris being surprised at the finding Treasonable Papers in her House,
presently went in search of the Colonel, and having found him, acquainted him
with what had happened, persuading him to take Lodgings in the City, and
promised to send his things to him, if he would do so: but he rejected her
advice as pernicious, and proceeding only from a Feminine simplicity, and
timerousness, since his so doing would have been censured as a slight, and that
would have argued Guilt, and his personal Guilt would have involved hundreds of
other innocent persons in the same Condemnation. Wherefore being assured of his
own Loyalty and Innocence, he went to the Custom-House, to know by what
Authority his Box was seized, and what was become of those Papers which were
pertended to be found in his Chamber, and was answered, That they were all
returned to his Lodging again; whereupon getting together the Officers of the
Custom-House, the Master and Mistress of the House, and what other persons were
present at the seizure, Justice Warcup took their Depositions, and found upon
the whole matter, that it was a malicious Design to involve a great number of
Innocent persons in the Guilt of Treason and Rebellion against His Majesty;
whereupon he made out a Warrant for apprehending him, which being delivered to
a Constable, they went along with him to Mrs. Celliers, where he then, and the
St. Omers Novices formerly had Lodged, there the Constable and Warrant found
him. When he understood their business, he exclaimed against Mansel, crying
out, It was his doing, thinking thereby to shuffle off his own Guilt; but it
should not do, for he had been that day with the King himself, and with Mr.
Secretary Coventry, and had acquainted them with the business; And before he
gets home, says he, there will be inquiry made for him at his Lodging. Well,
says the Justice, your Hectoring will not serve your turn, if you will give
security to appear at the Council Board, by Nine of the Clock to Morrow
Morning, we will give you no more trouble at this time, but if not, you must go
to Prison. Whereupon Cellier and her Son-in-Law, entered into Recognizance for
his appearance at the Council the next day, which he did accordingly; but as
ill luck would have it, he unfortunately met with a most unhappy and
mischevious accident: for as he was going down the Council Stairs, he met with
Mr. Do'iley an Officer, belonging to the Mint, who knew him, and had formerly
prosecuted him for uttering false Guinneys; whereupon being conscious of his
Guilt, and fearing that the Gentleman would undoubtedly have discovered it to
the King and Council, and thereby have ruined his Credit, and spoil the hopeful
Design he was carrying on. He began without any kind of provocation, to Curse
and Damn him, demanding what he had to say to him? and swearing, That if he had
him out of the Court, he would cut his Crown, and threatened, that when he met
him in a convenient place, he would revenge the injury. Whereat Do'iley being
very much surprised, and seeing Sir Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, just going to the Council, he being one of the Members thereof
(and as providence ordered came so opportunely, as to hear the words that
passed between them:) he steps to him, and acquaints him with Dangerfield's
Character, and complained of the abuse he had then received from him; as soon
as his Lordship came into the Council Chamber, he acquainted His Majesty and
the Council therewith, who thereupon sent Justice Walcup, and ordered him to
take Do'ley's depositions concerning Dangerfield; ordering moreover a Messenger
to take him into Custody, which was presently done, and he was carried to the
King's Head Tavern, whither the Justice came to examine him as soon as the the
Council was risen. But in the mean while he Writ a Note to Mrs. Cellier, and
ordered her to acquaint the Lord and Lady Powis, that he was apprehended, for
they knew that the Messenger would not suffer the Note to be sent, until he had
first read the Contents of it; which having done, the Boy carried it according
to directions.

The next day Colonel Mansel and he, being both called into the Council
Chamber, the Lord Chancellor demanded of the Colonel, what Correspondencies
these were which he held? Here are Papers, says he, of dangerous Consequence,
importing no less than the levying Men, and raising Rebellion against the King;
here is also a Catalogue of Names whom you have listed. The Colonel affirmed he
knew nothing either of the Letter or List of Names, nor never did, or ever
would hold any Treasonable Correspondence with any Man living; And humbly
prayed the favor of the Court, that he might be permitted, how he came by a
sight of those Papers, assuring them that he did not question but to make it
appear, that those Papers were brought into his Chamber by Dangerfield; and
upon leave given by the Board, he gave them a full and clear account of the
whole Matter, whereupon he was ordered to call in his Witnesses, which he did.
And Mr. Harris made Oath, That the Papers then before the Council, were the
same which were left at his House by Mr. Sretch, and Mr. Bostock: who made
Oath, That being informed by Dangerfield of certain prohibited goods concealed
in Ax-yard, they appointed to meet him at Mrs. Celliers, in order to go with
him to seize them, but when they came there he was not then ready, having not
yet lain at his New Lodgings; but told them, that he intended to go to them
that very night, and therefore appointed them to come the Wednesday following
in the Morning, and that when they came there, they found Dangerfield in his
Chamber, and one Bedford with him; and that Dangerfield took them aside, least
Bedford should hear, and whispered to them, that the goods were in the Room
above Stairs, and desired them to charge him to assist 'em, which they did (and
that after a narrow search) finding no such goods as they were informed of, he
pointed toward the Bed, whereupon they pulled it away from the Wall, and
searched very narrowly, but could discover no goods, nor did the Papers appear
to them; whereupon he pointed to the Beds-head, and then Mr. Stretch went
behind the Bed with a Candle, but could see nothing. And that then Dangerfield
went himself behind the Bed, and calling to them, cried, What Is that hangs
there? pointing to a bundle of Papers, that were pinned to the Beds-head; which
they had no sooner taken down, but he snatched one of them out of the Officers
hand, and cried out, Here Is Treason! There was in that Paper, words to this
Effect. I wonder at your delay, and that the four Lords have left us! for now
the Tyrant has declared himself a Papish; (which agreed very well with what
they afterward endeavored to charge upon his Lordship, and the rest of the
Protestant Nobility:) upon the reading of which words, he cried out, Did not I
tell you these were Treasonable Papers? they ought to be secured, and the
person whose Chamber this is, if he were present. They swore likewise, that the
Papers which the Council had then before them, were the same which they took
down from behind the Beds-head, and that they did verily believe them to be
placed there by Dangerfield.

The Council proceeding no further in the examination of the Plot that day, the
Justice took Bail for Dangerfield, till the next day; And then the Colonel
Petitioning that the rest of his Witnesses might be heard, His Majesty
Adjourned the Examination thereof till the next Council day, in regard of some
other business which the Council had then before them, whereupon Dangerfield
moved, that till then he might be Bailed, but His Majesty refused to grant it,
and ordered in Council, that he should be taken into Custody by the Messenger:
who acquainting Dangerfield therewith, he stormed, and said, He was confident
there was no such order, for he knew there were those persons that would not
suffer him to be so Treated: but the Messenger insisting upon his order,
demanded his Sword, which he very unwillingly delivered, and so was conducted
to the Messengers House. He had the impudence to move the Board, that the
Colonel might be committed likewise, but my Lord Chancellor opposed the motion,
and so it fell.

On the Monday following, they being both called into Council, and Dangerfield
having by that time received instructions from the Conspirators, how to proceed
in it, Addressed himself to His Majesty, affirming there were in all sixteen
Papers, desiring to know what was become of the rest which was before the
Council, and what was become of the Box of Treasonable Papers, and two or three
hundred Letters. Adding, That Mansel had got together a company of Witnesses to
disparage the Kings Evidence, and to palliate his Treasonable Practices, and
desiring leave to ask him some questions, which being granted, he asked him, if
he did not frequent a Club in Westminster Market? whether he did not know one
Disney Lisle, English Grange, and Brown? whether he did not bring into the Club
a Pamphlet, called, A Word without Doors, and read it public to the Club?
whether he did not after the reading thereof, utter Seditious Words again His
Royal Highness.

Mansel replied, He knew many of the Gentlemen he had named, that they were
very honest Gentlemen, and good Subjects, and that all of them lived in
Westminster, except Captain Brown, who had been Lieutenant to Major Russel's
Troop of Horse, in His Royal Highnesses Regiment. But for all Treasonable
discourse with them, or any other persons, he utterly disowned, and was
thereupon commanded to call the rest of his Witnesses, who appearing, proved
that there were no more Papers taken in the Chamber than what was before the
Council; And Mr. Bedford, who lay with Dangerfield the night before the
pretended discovery, and was to have been an Assistant in the management of the
Plot, acquainted the Council, That after the searching the Colonels Chamber,
and seizing the Papers there, he went to Mrs. Celliers, and told Dangerfield
what an ill thing he had done, both in injuring Mr. Mansel, and likewise by
engaging him in so base and vile a business, desiring him therefore to discover
and lay open the whole contrivance, and who it was that put him upon it; And
that Dangerfield replied, He did not doubt but to come off well enough, since
so great persons had engaged him in it, etc. Mr. D'oiley deposed, that he had
prosecuted him at two several Sessions, held in the Old Bailey, for uttering
false Guinneys; to which Dangerfield replied, He was indeed twice prosecuted
upon that account, but it was out of pure malice: And that for the second time,
he had received His Majesty's Gracious Pardon: wherefore he hoped those Matters
would not be remembered against him now, to the prejudice of his Evidence. The
Earl of Essex demanded of him, who had solicited His Majesty for his Pardon?
he answered, Captain Richardson; then his Boy Witnessed that he had Lodged at
Powis's House, and had been several times at the Lord Powis's Lodgings at the
Tower: That he had several times sent him with Letters and other Papers, to the
Lord Powis, and that he had brought him back Answers: That the Lady Powis had
been several times at Mrs. Celliers, during the time that Dangerfield Lodged
there, and particularly on the Saturday was seven night before, when she was
alone with him in a Room, in private discourse, about half an hour. Then the
Lord Chancellor asked him whether he had ever been with the Earl of Shaftsbury?
to which he replied, He had been several times with his Lordship, and had
discoursed with him, repeating some of those things which had passed between
them. You are in the mean time, says the Chancellor, a fine Fellow, to come
first to the King, then to the Lord Powis, and from thence to the Earl of
Shaftsburys, and discover to one, what discourse you had with the other, and go
with one Story to the Earl of Shaftsbury, and bring another to the Council; And
indeed the business appeared so plain to the Board, that they committed him to
Newgate, by the following Warrant.

THese are in His Majesty's Name, to require you to (...) into your Custody the
person of Thomas Willoughby (which was the Name he then went by) herewith sent
you, for forgng Letters, importing High Treason, and fixing the same privately
at Mr. Mansel's Chamber, to render him Guilty thereof without cause; And you
are to keep him safe till he shall be delivered by due course of Law: for
which, this shall be your Warrant.

Council Chamger, Whitehall, October, 27th, 1679.
To the Keeper of Newgate, or his Deputy.
ANd now the wickedness which had hitherto hovered in the Dark Cavernes, began
to be more and more exposed: for Mrs. Celliers House being searched, the whole
Scheam of their Villainies was found hid in a Tub of Meal, they having assured
themselves that none would be so scrutinous as to to search there: whereupon
she was apprehended, and being examined concerning Mr. Dangerfield, she said
she had entertained him upon no other account than to get in desperate Debts.
However, being sent to the Gate House, she presently dispatched away a Paper to
him, telling him, That now her Life lay in his hands, and therefore directed
him to confirm what she had said; That he was taken into her House only to get
in bad Debts, etc. sending him withal Twenty Shillings in Silver, and a Guinney
and two Books of Account, that so he might Conover, and be perfect in his
Lesson. But taking Caution by the unfortunate Mr. Coleman, he resolved not to
throw away his Life as he had done, nor patiently consent to be Hanged, to
please the Conspirators. Wherefore he made a full discovery of the whole
Matter, upon Oath before Sir Robert Clayton, then Lord Mayor of London;
whereupon Sir Robert repaired to Whitehall, and gave an account thereof to His
Majesty, who presently sent it to the Council, and Dangerfield was thereupon by
order of Council brought before them, and was further examined by their
Lordships, who thereupon committed the Earl of Castlemain to the Tower, Mr.
Gadbury to the Gate House, Mrs. Cellier, and Mr. Regaut, to Newgate, and the
Countess and others, into the Custody of His Majesty's Messengers: and the
whole Design was at several times undeniably proved before them, by innumerably
concurring Circumstances, and substantial Evidences, and the Conspirators
themselves confessed the greatest part of it to be true. But yet hoping to make
the best of it, and turn it off to the Lord Shaftsbury, and the rest of the
Protestants, whose ruin they thirsted for: their Oracle Gadbury, pretended to
make some great discovery, in case His Majesty would grant him his Pardon,
which he Graciously promised to do. But his Lordship hearing thereof, and
suspecting that those who had endeavored to ruin him by a Plot, to charge him
with Treason, and had failed of accomplishing it, that way would not scruple at
attempting to attain their end, by false and feigned discoveries thereof:
desired that no Pardon might pass the Seal for Gadbury, until he had first been
heard in Council, whereby he wisely prevented that mischief which was supposed
to be designed against his Lordship, by that Jesuited Star-gazing Caballistical
Whiffler. That which confirmed most men in their Opinion, that he had some
design against the Earl, was this, That although he did shortly after receive
the King's Gracious Pardon, yet no discovery made by him was ever heard of to
this day.

But these things were scarce over when another design to murder him is
discovered by Francisco de Feria, who deposed at the Bar of the House of
Commons, that being prefered to be Interpreter and Secretary of Languages, to
the Lord Gasper, Abrew de Freitas Ambassador in Ordinary from the Prince of
Portugal to the King of England. The Ambassador persuaded him to kill the Earl
of Shaftsbury, by throwing a hand-Granado into his Coach, which he said was
easy to be done, when his Lordship was traveling upon the Road into the
Country, which he did often.

What an heroic and magnanimous Soul must he then be master of, that could so
bravely bare up against all those boisterous Storms and continual Tempests
which were perpetually raised against him by the art and malice of the Popish
Crew. And that notwithstanding those innumerable difficulties and dangers
wherewith he was always surrounded, and which still threatened his ruin, the
simple consideration of his own Innocence and Loyalty was able to maintain an
undisturbed quiet, and a perpetual Serenity within him.

But however these frequent disappointments enraged, yet it did not discourage
them from further Attempts against his Life and Honor; but rather added to
their fury, and increased their desire of revenge. The next endeavor therefore
to prove that he the Earl of Essex and the Lord Wharton had assisted Oats,
Tongue, and Bedloe, in contriving the Popish Plot. To which purpose they
corrupted Mr. Blood, and prevailed with him to write a treasonable Letter to
Oats, and then cause the Doctor's Papers to be searched and rummaged, in hope
to find it there, and so to prove him to be a Confederate with his Lordship and
other Protestant Nobles. But the Doctor sent the Letter to Sir Joseph
Williamson, then Secretary of State, and thereby spoiled that Design, whereupon
they sent one Lewis to his Lordship, to desire he would send by him the said
Lewis some Directions to Dr. Oats, under his Lordship's own handwriting, how
he should manage himself in reference to the Plot; but the Earl absolutely
denied to have any thing to do therewith: And having failed in this Project,
they next procured young Tongue, Son to Dr. Tongue, to prove that his Father,
the Earl of Shaftsbury, and Oats, invented the Popish Plot; Whereupon one of
the Lords of the Council asked him, If they contrived Coleman's Letters too? To
which he could make no reply; and indeed the whole business was so weak and
ridiculous, that it effected nothing more than the depressing the Wretch that
was to have been the Evidence of it under the weight of his own Guilt, he being
committed to the King's Bench, where he has ever since remained.

Besides their public Designs, they had several secret Projects and Artifices
to accomplish his Ruin; As forging of his Hand, and other such like base and
villainous Arts, as appears by their intercepting Letters directed to his
Lordship; and after having incerted Treason in them, in a hand as near the
Original as they could possibly counterfeit, transmitted them to such hands as
would certainly acquaint our Ministers of State therewith, but more especially
a certain Gentleman who had commanded a Regiment of Horse in the Service of his
late Majesty, for whose sake, and his present Majesty's, he suffered the loss
of all that he had, writ to the Earl about relieving him against the Gout with
which he was much afflicted, whose Letter was intercepted (the person that writ
it, lived at that time in the Frengch King's Dominions) and after they had
added to it an account that the Writer was able to furnish the Earl with Forty
thousand men from France, to oppose the D. Y's Interest; it was then conveyed
to some of the French Ministers of State, presuming they would send a Copy of
it hither, but by an overruling Providence, the Letter was strangely returned
into the Gentleman's own hands, whereby the mischief they intended was
prevented.

His Majesty having prorogued the Parliament, his Lordship together with the
Earls of Huntington, Clare, Stamford, etc. the Lords North and Gray, Chando's,
Gray, Howard, and Herbert, being introduced to his Majesty's Presence, by his
Highness Prince Rupert, presented the following Petition and Advice to His
Majesty.

SIR,
WE are here to cast our selves at your Majestys feet, being Ten of the Peers
of Your Realm of England, and in our own Names, and in the Names of several
others of our fellow Peers, do humbly beg, That Your Majesty would consider the
great Danger Your Royal Person is in, as also the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of these Your Nations.

We humbly pray, that in a time when all these are so highly concerned, Your
Majesty will effectually use Your Great Council the Parliament.

SIR, Out of the deepest sense of Duty and Loyalty to Your Majesty, we offer it
as our humble Advice and earnest Petition, that the Parliament may sit at the
time appointed, and that Your Majesty would be Graciously pleased to give
public Notice and Assurance thereof, that the minds of Your Majestys Subjects
may be settled, and their fear removed.

To this Petition and Advice His Majesty answered, He would consider of what
they had offered, and told them, that he heartily wished all other people were
as solicitous for the peace and good of the Nation as he was, and ever would
be. However he was pleased soon after to Prorogue the Parliament from the 26th.
of January, till the 11th. of November following.

About this time his Lordship was visited with a violent and dangerous fit of
Sickness, and his recovery was somewhat doubted of, but Heaven was pleased to
spare him to be a further Scourge and Terror to the Papists, those common
Pests of Christendom, and sworn Enemies to His Majesty, and the English Nation.

The Romanists having tried so many ways and different methods for
accomplishing his Ruin, resolved to try a new Stratagem for the effecting
thereof; viz. The tampering with Dugdale, to retract his Evidence concerning
the Popish-plot, and endeavor to prevail with him to withdraw himself into
some place beyond the Seas, and leave a Writing behind him wherein he was to
retract all he had sworn against the Papists, and pretend that the occasion of
his Retraction was an extreme trouble and anguish of Conscience, for having so
unjustly and wickedly injured the Papists, and procured the shedding of
innocent blood; affirming that it was by the instigation of his Lordship, and
other Protestants (of unblemished Loyalty to His Majesty) upon whom he was
moreover to six the Odium of a Presbyterian Plot, not only against the Papists,
but against His Majesty's Person and Government. But the mischief of it was,
they had not then Debauched his Conscience, persuaded him to question the Truth
of God's Omnisciency, or wholly Erradicated the Belief of a Deity out of his
mind, and thereby render him hardy enough to undertake so Barbarous a Work,
without any kind of Hissitation. Wherefore being touched with some Remorse at
so horrid a Villainy, he gave an account of the business to his Lordship, and
some others, and so that design suffered the same fate with the rest, and
produced no other effect, than exposing the malice of his Enemies, and the
informing him what he must live in a daily expectation of, from those
indefatigable wretches, and purchasers of Perjury, by offers of two Thousand
Pounds, and promises of other Rewards and Gratitudes. A Sum so considerable,
and Arguments so powerful and irresistible, that it would have been a rarity,
much more amazing, and would infinitely have transcended any of those, called,
The Seven Wonders of the World, if they should always have been so unhappy, as
not to meet with some Profligate Villain or other, who would upon those
considerations, engage to Swear whatsoever they should dictate, and even defy
the Almighty, and storm Heaven it self to gain so immence a Treasure, and
acquire a Fortune so far above what their Birth or Education ever gave them a
Prospect of.

In December, 1680. he was present at, and assisted in the trying William
Viscount Stafford, upon an Impeachment of the House of Commons, for Ploting and
Conspiring with the Pope and his Emissaries to Murder the King, exterpate the
Protestant Religion, and subvert the Government of these Kingdoms; and after a
fair Trial, his Lordship with the Majority of the Peers, sound him Guilty of
the Treason whereof he stood Impeached, upon which he received Sentence to be
Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, the rigor whereof was remitted by the Gracious
Pleasure of His Majesty; And not long after he was beheaded on a Scaffold
erected for that purpose on Tower Hill.

On the 10th. of Jannuary, His Majesty Prorogued the Parliament, and on the
18th. they were Dissolved by Proclamation, and a New one summoned to meet at
Oxford, on the 21 st. of the following March; which being looked upon by his
Lordship, and diverse others of the Nobility and Gentry, to be ominous, and
attended with much hazard and danger, (and was afterward really found to be so
by some.) To prevent which, the Earl joined with several Noblemen in presenting
a humble Petition and Advice, full of Tenderness and Affection, Duty and
Loyalty, to His Majesty's Person and Government; humbly requesting that the
Parliament summoned to meet at Oxford, might be Graciously permitted to meet,
and sit at Westminster. It was presented to His Majesty by the Earl of Essex,
who acquainted the King with the design and intent of their Petition, in the
following words.

May it please Your Majesty,
THe Lords here present, together with diverse other Peers of the Realm, taking
notice, that by your late Proclamation Your Majesty has Declared an Intention
of calling a Parliament at Oxford: and observing from Histories and Records,
how unfortunate many such Assemblies have been, when called at a place remote
from the Capital City; as particularly the Congress in Henry the Seconds time
at Clarendon: Three several Parliaments at Oxford, in Henry the Thirds time;
and at Coventry, in Henry the Sixths time, with diverse others, which have
proved very fatal to those Kings, and have been followed with great mischief to
the whole Kingdom. And considering the present posture of Affairs, the many
Jealousies and Discontents which are among the People, we have great cause to
apprehend that the Consequences of the sitting of a Parliament now at Oxford,
may be as fatal to Your Majesty and the Nation, as those others mentioned have
been to the then Reigning Kings; and therefore we do conceive that we cannot
answer it to God, to Your Majesty, or to the People, if we, being Peers of the
Realm, should not on so important an occasion, humbly offer our Advise to Your
Majesty; that if possible, Your Majesty may be prevailed with, to alter this
(as we apprehend) unseasonable Resolution. The Grounds and Reasons of our
Opinion, are contained in this our Petition, which we humbly present to Your
Majesty.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition and Advice of the Lords undernamed, Peers of the Realm.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas Your Majesty has been pleased, by diverse Spechees and Messages
to Your Houses of Parliament, rightly to present to them the dangers that
threaten Your Majesty's Person, and the whole Kingdom, from the mischievous and
wicked Plots of the Papists, and the sudden growth of a foreign Power; unto
which no stop or remedy could be provided, unless it were by Parliament, and an
Union of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, in one Mind, and one Interest.

And the Lord Chancellor, in pursuance of Your Majesty's Commands, having more
at large demonstrated the said dangers to be as great as we, in the midst of
our fears, could imagine them; and so pressing, that our Liberties, Religion,
Lives, and the whole Kingdom, would certainly be lost, if a speedy provision
was not made against them.

And Your Majesty on the 21st. of April, 1679. having called unto Your Council
many Honorable and Worthy Persons, and Declared to them, and to the whole
Kingdom, That being sensible of the Evil Effects of a single Ministry, or
private Advice, or foreign Committee, for the general Direction of Your
Affairs, Your Majesty would for the future refer all things unto that Council,
and by the constant Advice of them, together with the frequent use of Your
great Council the Parliament, Your Majesty was hereafter resolved to govern the
Kingdom: We began to hope we should see an end of our Miseries.

But, to our unspeakable grief and sorrow, we soon found our expectations
frustrated; the Parliament then subsisting was Prorogued, and Dissolved, before
it could perfect what was intended for our relief and security: And though
another was thereupon called, yet by many Prorogations it was put off till the
21st. of October past; and notwithstanding Your Majesty was then again pleased
to acknowledge, that neither your Person, nor your Kingdom, could be safe, till
the Matter of the Plot was gone through: It was unexpectedly Prorogued on the
10th. of this Month, before any sufficient Order could be taken therein: All
their just and pious endeavors to save the Nation were overthrown, the good
Bills they had been industriously preparing to Unite Your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects brought to naught: The discovery of the Irish Plots stifled: The
Witnesses that came in frequently more fully to Declare that, both of England
and Ireland discouraged. Those foreign Kingdoms and States, who by a happy
Conjunction with us, might give a check to the French Powers, disheartened, even
to such a despair of their own security against the growing greatness of that
Monarch; as we fear may enduce them to take New Resolutions, and perhaps such
as may be fatal to Us: the Strength and Courage of our Enemies, both at home
and abroad increased, and our selves left in the utmost danger of seeing our
Country brought into utter desolation.

In these extremities we had nothing under God to comfort us, but the hopes
that Your Majesty (being touched with the groans of your perishing People)
would have suffered Your Parliament to meet at the day unto which it was
Prorogued, and that no further interruption should have been given to their
proceedings, in order to their saving of the Nation: But that failed us too, so
then we heard that Your Majesty had been prevailed with to Dissolve it, and to
call another to meet at Oxford, where neither Lords nor Commons can be in
safety, but will be daily exposed to the Swords of the Papists, and their
Adherents, of whom too many are crept into Your Majesty's Guards. The Liberty
of speaking according to their Consciences will be thereby destroyed, and the
validity of all their Acts and Proceedings (consisting in it) left disputable.
The straitness of the place no way admits of such a concourse of persons as now
follows every Parliament: The Witnesses which are necessary to give Evidence
against the Popish Lords; such Judges, or others, whom the Commons have
impeached, or had resolved to impeach, can neither bear the charge of going
thither, nor trust themselves under the Protection of a Parliament, that is it
self evidently under the power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Premises considered, We Your Majesty's Petitioners, out of a just
abhorrence of such a dangerous and pernicious Council, (which the Authors have
not dared to avow) and the direful apprehensions of the calamities, and
miseries that may ensue thereupon; do make it our most humble Prayer and
Advice, that the Parliament may not sit at a place where it will not be able to
Act with that freedom which is necessary; and especially to give unto their
Acts and Proceedings that Authority which they ought to have amongst the
people, and have ever had, unless impaired by some Awe upon them (of which
there wants not presidents;) and that Your Majesty would be Graciously pleased
to order it to sit at Westminster, (it being the usual place, and where they
may consult with Safety and Freedom.

And Your Petitioners, etc. Monmouth, Kent, Huntingdon, Bedford, Salisbury,
Clare, Stamford, Essex, Shaftsbury, Mordent, Ewers, Paget, Gray, Herbert,
Howard, Delamer,


BUt His Majesty resolving not to alter His Resolution for the Parliaments
setting at Oxford, and the time of their metting drawing near, the Members from
all parts repaired thither, and apprehending themselves in danger of being
exposed in a place so remote from London, to the Insolency of the Papists, upon
the account of that Vigilency and Courage, wherewith they had prosecuted the
Popish Plot in former, Parliaments, they appeared there with a Guard, some of
them, being accompanied thither by their Tenants and Neighbors; some by the
Freeholders by whom they were chosen, and many of them only by their own
Domisticks; And to say the Truth, the whole number was so inconsiderable, that
it served rather for Ornament than Strength, and could have afforded but little
assistance, if the Papists, had made an assault upon them, as was feared. Going
thus attended to Parliaments, holden at places remote from the Royal City, has
always been usual and customary, and accounted not only honest, but desent and
honorable too, especially in times of difficulty and danger, when not only a
Suspicion, but unquestionable Evidence, and undeniable Proof of a design to
destroy the King, murder His Subjects, and subvert the Government, renders it
foolish and unsafe to do otherwise, least thereby the innocent and unwary,
expose themselves to the insolence and fury of their stronger Adversaries. But
notwithstanding this ancient and laudable Custom, it was looked upon at this
time as an ill thing, and great improvement made thereof toward the effecting
what had been formerly so often unsuccessfully attempted, as will appear by the
sequel of this History.

The King having made preparations for His Journey to Oxford, went first to
Windsor, and from thence to the University, being met upon the Border of the
County, by the High Sherift and his Attendance, and at Wbateby by the Lord
Norris, Lord Lieutenant of the County, with a great Train of Gentry, and the
two Troops of the County Militia, who conducted him to the Eastgate of the
City, where he was received by the Mayor, and the rest of the Magistrates, and
welcomed by the Recorder, in an elegant and florid Oration; Then the Mayor
presented him with the Mace and Sword, which being returned again, the Mayor
attended with the Aldermen and Recorder, carried the Mace before His Majesty to
Christ Colledge-Gate, from whence the King passing to His Lodgings, which were
prepared for him in the College, was received by the Bishop, and welcomed in a
Latin Speech which he made on his Knees. And the next morning His Majesty was
attended by the Vice Chancellor, the Orator, and the rest of the Officers
belonging to the University; The Orator making a Speech to the King in Latin,
and to the Queen in English.

His Lordship and diverse other persons, imitated those of other parts, and went
to Oxford, accompanied likewise with several persons of their Neighbors and
Acquaintance, who Innocently offered to wait on them some part of the way, and
others, throughout to Oxford.

On the 21st. the Parliament met at the Convocation House; The King told them
he had not parted with His last House of Commons, had it not been for their
unwarrantable proceedings; he commended to them the prosecution of the Plot,
etc. Having ended his Speech, the Commons returned to their House to choose
themselves a Speaker, and unanimously made choice of Mr. Williams, who had been
Speaker of the former Parliament; the choice being over, they presented him to
His Majesty, and the Speaker Addressing himself to the King, acquainted Him,
That the Commons according to His Majesty's command, had proceeded to choose
them a Speaker, and to show that they were not given to change, they had chosen
him; and that he did according to their command, prostrate himself at His
Majesty's Feet to receive his pleasure, with a Head and Heart full of Loyalty
to His Sacred Person, Armed with a settled Resolution, never to depart from His
ancient and well settled Government. The King having approved of the choice,
and confirmed him for Speaker, the Commons withdrew, and repaired to their own
House, and settled Elections, etc. On the 25th. they entered upon the
consideration of the Matter relating to the Bill, which had passed both Houses
in the last Parliament, for repeal of the Act of the 35th. of Elizabeth, but
was not tendered to His Majesty for the Royal Assent; and resolved that a
Messenger should be sent to the Lords, to desire a Conference thereupon.

Another Message was also ordered to be sent to the Lords, to put them in mind
that they had formerly by their Speaker demanded judgment of High Treason at
their Bar, against the Earl of Danby, and therefore desired them to appoint a
day to give judgment against him upon their Impeachment.

The Impeachment of Fitz-Harris was next entered upon, in order whereunto his
Examination being-read in the House, they ordered it to be Printed, and that
Fitz-Harris should be impeached at the Lords Bar, and a Committee appointed to
draw up Articles against him. The House ordered Sir Lionel Jenkins to carry up
the Impeachment to the Lords, which he at first refused; but perceiving the
Commons were ready to proceed against him for that Contempt, he complied, and
went up and impeached Fitz-Harris at the Bar of the Lords House, in the Name of
the Commons and People of England. The Impeachment of Fitz-Harris being thus
delivered to the Lords, they rejected it, whereupon his Lordship and Eighteen
Peers, entered their Proestation against their throwing of it out; The Commons
likewise Voted it to be illegal, and the next Morning March, 28th. His Majesty
sent for them into the House of Lords, and told them that their beginnings had
been such, that he could expect no good of this Parliament, and therefore
thought fit to Dissolve them, and accordingly the Chancellor by the Kings
Command, Declared the Parliament Dissolved.

By this unexpected and sudden Dissolution, a final conclusion was put to all
their Debates, and all their further examinations of, and prosecuting the
Popish Plot, was terminated by a full Point.

The Parliament being thus Dissolved, the King took Coach immediately, and
departed to Windsor the same day, and after a few hoursstay, returned to
Whitehall, and the Earl likewise returned to London; having first left as a
mark of his magnificence and bounty, a piece of Plate to Baliol College.

With this Parliament we may conclude the Active part of his Lordships Life,
for about that time the Scene altered and he becomes only passive in the
remainder of his Life, in relating the Storms whereof I am fallen into such a
Laborinth of Plots, Sham-Plots, misterious Intreagues, Subornations, and
Perjuries, and confident Affirmations of moral Impossibilities, as no Age ever
produced, or History can parallel, so that it cannot be expected I should Write
an exact History thereof; but the Reader must be content to let it remain as a
considerable part of the Mystery of Iniquity, until such time as he to whom all
things are open and naked, shall bless the World with a full and clear
discovery of the secret. But as a commical Prologue to the intended Tragedy, a
company of Obscure Varlets, Irish Bogtrotters, Skipkennels, and Indigent
Extravagants, who having profusely wasted their own Fortunes, would gladly
embrace any opportunity to repair them by the ruin of others; and treated each
other with no less than the assurances of vast and mighty Fortunes, and being
advanced to places of Profit and Honor: And some of them in a bravary, and to
excite others to an imitation of them in their wicked Practices, chinks their
Guinneys, and exposes their Golden Rewards, affirming that so should be done to
the Man who was beloved; with other encouragements and invitations to persuade
and allure them to come over and labor at the work of Transubstantiating the
Plot. And indeed to such a height of Ambition and vain Glory they arrived over,
that they commonly discoursed of being advanced to Captains and Ensigns Places,
Deanries and Prebendaries, and putting a mighty value upon themselves, scorned
to think of less than great Preferments, and as much Money as they would demand.

Not long after the Dissolution of the Oxford Parliament, one Brian Hans came
to his Lordships, pretending to be some Gentleman of Quality, and that he could
make very considerable discoveries of the Popish Plot, and the Murder of Sir
Edmond bury Godfrey, and desired his Lordship in order thereunto to procure him
a blank Pardon, being very unwilling as he pretended, to have his Name known,
until he had his Pardon procured for him. The Earl, who was always ready to
serve His Majesty and the Protestant Interest; and supposing that this could be
no inconsiderable Peach of Service to discover the Murder of the aforesaid
Knight more fully than had been hitherto done, which must necessarily give a
greater light into the Plot, he endeavored to get him one, but it could not be
obtained. And not long after this pretended Gentleman of Quality dwindled into
a mean and obscure Wretch, and of a pretended Evidence of the real Popish Plot,
degenerated into a blustering Witness of a fictious Protestant one; For being
apprehended, and carried before the Council, instead of discovering any thing
about the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, he accused his Lordship and others
of having endeavored to suborn him to do it. Whereupon Mr. Rouse, a Gentleman
who had been some time employed by Sir Thomas Player, in paying off the Army
which had been Disbanded not long before; and Mr. College, who had attended
some of the Parliament Men to Oxford. And Saturday, July the 2d. 1681. in the
Morning his Lordship was apprehended by a Messenger, by Virtue of a Warrant
from the Council, and his Papers all seized and carried to Whitehall, where the
King likewise arrived from Windsor, about Ten of the Clock; and then he was
examined before His Majesty and the Council, some of the Judges likewise were
present. His Lordship knowing himself clear of what was laid to his charge,
boldly affirmed, and solemnly protested his Innocence, adding as it was
reported, That were he Guilty of those Crimes whereof he was accused, he was
certainly a Madman, and had thereby rendered himself more fit for Bedlam, than
the Tower, whither upon the Sequel he was committed close Prisoner for High
Treason, and conveyed thither by Water, in a Barge; and the King returned the
same day to Windsor. And now the better to prepare peoples minds to believe
what he was to be charged withal, the Jesuits and Condemned Priests in
Newgate, and some other of the Popish Crew, privately dispersed diverse Hellish
and Lying Pamphlets, wherein they maliciously aspersed him with Conspiring
Treason against His Majesty; one whereof which was somewhat more impudent and
mischievous than the rest, and was called, Articles against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, was dispensed with some privacy and caution. The Articles were as
follows:

I. That he had imagined to compass and procure the Death of the King, the
Subvertion of the Government, and the known Laws of the Land, by reducing this
Ancient Monarchy into a Republic. II. That he used great endeavors to possess
the People that His Majesty was a Papist, and designed to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Power; and to that end had promoted several Seditious and Treasonable
Libels against His Majesty's Person and Government, purposely to bring His
Majesty into an odium and Contempt with His loving Subjects. III. That He
endeavored to Levy War against the King, both in England and Ireland, and
bring Blod-shed and Confuston upon His Majesty's good People, under pretense of
prosecuting the Popish Blot, and preserving the Protestant Religion, the
Liberty and Property of the Subject, as He and His Confederates have done in
the late Rebellion. IV. That he endeavored to render the Church of England as
Rediculous as Popery, and Defamed all His Majesty's Officers both by Land and
Sea; and all others, who out of a due senfe of Loyalty adhere to the Crown
stiling them Tories, Tantivies, Masqueraders, etc. purposely to frighten them
from their Duty, and wean them from their Sovereign, to adhere to Him and His
Faction. V. That He countenanced, harbored, and hired persons to Swear against
the Queen, and His Royal Highness. VI. That He procured several Sums of Money to
be Raised and Collected to carry on these most abominable Designs.
And to represent him as monstrously unnatural and bloody as themselves, and
render him hateful and detestable to all Men, who would be so Brainless, as to
believe the silly and rediculous Shams; the Articler adds in the close of his
Libel, this strange and improbable Rodemantado: that when the Sergeant at Arms
apprehended him, he desired him to eat something before he appeared before the
King and Council; whereupon says the Libeller, his Lordship answered, I have
no Stomach to eat, unless I could get a Roasted Irishman.

The Sessions of the Peace for London and Middlesex, beginning on the Wednesday
following, he presented a Petition to the Court, desiring to be brought to a
speedy Trial, or else admitted to Bail. Upon the 8th. Stephen College had an
Indictment presented against him to the Grand Jury, who were all of them
substantial Men; And after having heard all that could be said on both sides,
they returned an Ignoramus upon the Bill, but being removed to Oxford, and
tried there, was found Guilty, and was accordingly Condemned and Executed; and
a forged Paper presented and published by one Thompson a Printer, and supposed
to be Writ by some Jesuit, who are always so good at inventing of Shams,
called, His last Speech, wherein he was made to confess all that he was charged
with, although it afterward appeared that he absolutely denied he was any way
Guilty, affirming his Innocence to the last Breath. August 31st. his Lordship
presented another Petition to the Judges at the Sessions at the Old-Bayly,
desiring that he might be either Tried or Bailed, pursuant to the Act of Habeas
Corpus, to which the Court returned answer, That being charged with no Crime in
that Court, and being Prisoners in the Tower, they could take no Cognizance of
them, but they must seek their relief at the King's Bench Bar the next Term;
great preparations were made for his Trial, and abundance of Witnesses
procured, and Mr. Samuel Wilson, a Gentleman belonging to his Lordship, was
likewise committed to Prison, for speaking some Treasonable words as was sworn
by some of those Evidences. Now you must know this Wilson was the Gentleman
whom his Lordship entrusted to attend the Council when his Papers were looked
over, and take away those which were returned, and indorce the rest with his
own Name; and that the Paper said to be found in the Earls Closet, perporting
an Assosiation, was not indorced by him.

In the mean time, notwithstanding they had abundance of Witnesses, yet they
desired to have some, whose port and figure in the World might procure them the
greater Credit, and thereby render them the more capable of accomplishing their
end in the Earls ruin; And as they imagined, Fortune offered them the most
likely and favorable opportunity that could possibly be desired or wished for,
by the following accident. Captain Henry Wilkinson, a Gentleman that had
always (...) the Royal Interest, and had hazarded his Life, and impared his
Estate in the service of his Prince; having a desire to settle in the Island of
Carolina, applied himself to the Proprietors for an employment in that Country,
and had upon the account of his Loyalty to His Majesty, a promise made him of
being employed as Governor under the Proprietors by his Lordship, who was one
of the chief Proprietors, and to whom upon the account of his great judgment
and discretion, the rest had committed the whole management. The Captain having
obtained this promise, hired two Ships to convey himself and Family, and what
other persons were to go with him thither, whereof one of them was a Relation
of mine. Upon this one Booth, a person well Born, but by his wicked and
prosligate Life, had wasted his Patrimony, lost all his employments, and
rendered himself very indigent and necessitous, applied himself to the Captain,
desired to go with him to Carolina; and withal perfiked a time for coming on
Board, and engaged to bring with him about sixteen Servants, or upwards. This
was easily promised, but not so easily performed: Servants and Companions
enough he might have had, who had like himself, reduced themselves to Poverty
and Distress, and would for that reason, have been glad of such an opportunity
of being freed from the Scorn and Contempt of their acquaintance, and the Dread
of a Goal; But how to pay for their passage, or employ them when they came
there, he knew no more than the Man in the Moon. But after a little
consideration, he resolved of the following adventure to supply that
difficulty; He first forged Letters, as directed to him from persons of
Quality, desiring him to buy them several Rich Goods of Mercers, Drapers,
Vpholsterers, etc. and then he went with those Letters to some Tradesmen, with
whom he had for that purpose procured some kind of acquaintance, shows them the
Letters, tells them if they would use him well, he would buy the Goods of them;
you shall, says he, have your Money as soon as I have acquainted the persons
that I have bought the Goods, and can receive and answer from them again. After
this manner he went to Mr. Halford a Mercer in the Strand, with a pretended
Letter from the Lady Ogle, now Duchess of Summerset; wherein he was ordered to
buy her several curious flowred Silks, and other Rich Goods, to the value of
between Two and Three Hundred Pounds, that Mr. Halford might give the better
Credit to the business, he procured the Gentleman's Brother to go with him. And
for your Brothers sake Sir, said he, I have a very great kindness for you, and
would rather you should take my Money, than any other Man; adding, That he
expected shortly to be Steward to the Duke of Norfolk, and then he would
endeavor to procure him the Custom of that Family; But supposing the Shop to
be too public, and therefore not safe enough to treat in, he invited him to
the Kings-Arms Tavern, and there discoursed the business. I have not all the
Goods you mention, in my Shop, says Halford, but in a day or two, I can get
them, pray do, says he. You may be sure, Halford imagining he had gotten a
brave Customer, applied himself with double diligence to procure the Goods
against the time appointed; but the Merchant he bought them of knowing they
were Goods he did not usually deal in, especially such quantities, he asked him
who they were for? whereupon Halford told him the whole Story; you had best
have a care you are not cheated, says he, I do not like the business, however
you may do as you find occasion. At the time appointed he came to see the
Goods, and liked them very well, and intended they should have been the
cheapest that ever he bought. But Halford being thus cautioned, told him the
Goods came to a great deal of Money, that he was a young beginner, and could not
conveniently trust him for them, but if he would pay him ready Money, he would
to oblige him, sell him cheaper than he should buy at any other Shop. Sir, said
Booth, I am content, I will come and setch the Goods, and pay you ready Money,
but never came near him more. After the same manner he went to Mr. John Ridges
an Vpholsterer, who lives in St. James's, near St. James's House, and has a
Shop likewise in Long-Lane in the City, but came off with the like success. My
design of brevity will not permit me to mention all his tricks of this Nature,
nor how he served the Tailor in Field-Lane.

These disappointments rendered him unable to perform his promise to the
Captain, and wholly diverted his thoughts from Carolina, accounting it a vain
thing to go thither, being thus unhappyly disappointed of his Cargo: And the
Captain being so disappointed by him and others of his passengers, and having
had two Shipslye so long at his own charges to attend them, had thereby
Contracted some Debts, for which he was Arrested, and his Ship and Goods seized
on; when he was first Arrested he was sent to the Counter, but quickly after
removed himself to the King's Bench. This accident created new thoughts in
Booth's working Brain, and put him upon a New Project for the repairing of his
broken Fortunes, and the making himself amends for his late disappointments.
The Earl of Shaftsbury committed the other day to the Tower for High Treason,
and Wilkinson, who was upon his commendation to have gone Deputy Governor of
Carolina, in the King's Bench for Debt; And can I contrive to get no advantage
thereby? Yes, in spite of Fate, and Maugre all the Powers of Heaven and Hell,
I will attempt it, I will set up for an Evidence my self, and will so manage
the matter, that I will procure him to be one too: his poverty and loss, and
the sorrows of a Goal, will undoubtedly dispose him to a compliance with my
motion. But therein the mercenary wretch reckoned without his Hoasts, and found
himself woefully deceived in the idle immagination, that every Man's Conscience
was as much viciated and depraved as his own, and would adventure upon the most
vile and abominable practices whatsoever, in hope thereby to free themselves
from those pinching necessities which they were involved in, and by failing in
that enterprise, learned the true difference between being impoverished by the
want of success in Trade or Merchandice, and the being undone by Profuseness
and Debauchery.

Before he adventured to Address himself to the Captain about the business, he
sent others to brake the Matter to him, relating the particular Circumstan, ces
the Captain was at that time underand instructing them how to behave themselves
toward him. Being thus instructed, October 8th. 1681. Bains visited the
Captain in the King's Bench, where after some Complements and Preparitary
Discourse, to make way for, and dispose the Captain to comply with what he had
to osser, he proceeded to tell him that he must needs know something of the
Earl of Shaftsbury's Design against the King, and persuading him to discover it
to him; and promised if he would do so, he would procure him a Pardon, and a
great Reward: The Captain answered, He knew nothing by his Lordship but that he
was a very Loyal Person. So soon as he was gone, the Captain acquainted Major
James with what Bains had offered, and the Major presently took his Pen and
Ink, and wrote it down in his Pocket Book. Two or Three days after, Booth
adventured to try his own Fortune, and that he might prove more successful than
his forerunner, procured leave for the Captain to go out of the Prison to
Booth's Lodging, at Mr. Waver's in the Rules, where they entertained him with a
Noble and Splendid Treat: and assured him, if he would be an Evidence against
the Earl, he should have 500 l. per. ann. settled upon him and his Heirs, as a
Reward, or if he liked a 1000 l. in ready Money better, he should have so much
paid him down; and finding him still untractable, they persuaded his Wife to
use her Interest with him, and endeavor to prevail with him, and work him to a
compliance with what they desired, telling her she might thereby be made for
ever. But when all this, and many other contrivancies failed them, they gave in
an Information of High Treason against him to the King and Council, by whose
order he was brought before them, and straightly examined concerning what he knew
of a Plot against the King, and to have seized on His Person at Oxford. The
Captain persisted in his own Innocence, and affirmed he knew no such thing by
the Lord Shaftsbury, or any other: Then Booth swore High Treason against him,
and deposed that Wilkinson was to have been Captain of a Troop of Horse
consisting of Fifty Men, which were to be employed in seizing the King at
Oxford, when the Parliament sat there: and to gain the greater Credit to his
Oath, and make the thing more probable, he affirmed himself was Listed under
him as one of them; although to my knowledge, and the knowledge of many more,
The Getleman at that very time when the Parliament met at Oxford, and this was
pretended to be done, was busily employed in the aforesaid Affair of providing
for his Voyage to Carolina.

The Captain upon this Deposition, was committed back again to the King's Bench
Prison, where he acquainted the Major with what had passed at the Council, and
he Writ that down likewise as he had done the rest; and the Captain willing to
expose the Villainy, and prevent the mischief of his mercinary Breath, published
an account of the whole Matter to the World, to which I refer the Reader for
further satisfaction.

His Lordship having continued in the Tower from July, till the latter end of
November, without obtaing a Trial, His Majesty then issued out a Commission of
Oyer and Terminer, to be held at the Old-Bayly on the 24th. of that Month, when
an Indictment of High Treason against his Lordship was preferred to the Grand
Jury, summoned upon that occasion which was the most substantial of any that
had been known for a long time before. The Court being set, and the Jury sworn,
the Witnesses gave in the like Evidence to the Court as they had formerly done
to the Council. They generally swore much to the same purposes, and Booth was
one of the chief Evidences; who declared upon Oath, that the Earl told him,
That he and others had considered with themselves, it was necessary for them to
have Guards at Oxford; and that he had for that reason provided Fifty
Gentlemen, and had entrusted Captain Wilkinson with the command and management
of them; that he himself was Listed as one of them, (yet could name none of the
rest) and that he had thereupon bought himself a very good Stone-horse, with
other Accoutrements for the said Service; And that Captain Wilkinson promised
to furnish his Man with a Horse. Now, that the World may the better judge of
the truth or falseness of what this Man swore in the face of so great an
Assembly, and from thence argue the validity of the other Evidences, I have
transcribed Verbatim an Advertisement, which was thereupon published the next
Week in Janeway's Intelligence, Number 65.

WHereas upon Thursday last, an Indictment was preferred to the Grand Jury at
the Old-Bayly, against the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, and whereas
Mr. Booth was produced as one of the Evidences, who swore in open Court, That
Captain Wilkinson was engaged with the said Earl against His Majesty and the
Government, and that the said Captain was to command a Troop of Horse to be
mounted with Fifty Gentlemen, and that the said Mr. Booth had Listed himself as
one of the Troop. Also the said Mr. Booth made Oath, that he had bought himself
a good Stone-horse, and other Accoutrements for the said Service, and Captain
Wilkinson was to furnish his Man with a Horse.

This is therefore to give Notice, That if any one can make it appear, that Mr.
Booth bought any such Horse, with his Marks and Color, and who he bought him
of about March last, or that he had any such Horse within that time, and what
Stable he was kept at, shall have upon good proof made thereof to the said
Captain Wilkinson, Five Guinneys paid him for a Reward of his pains.

Also if any person can make appear, That the said Captain Wilkinson has
bought or had any Horse, Gelding, or Mare, for these Two Years last past, or
ever has been upon the back of any for the same space of time, saving one
Gelding which he borrowed to Ride to Wickam, when the Members of the last
Parliament went to Oxford; Or that ever Captain Wilkinson has been nearer
Oxford these Twenty Years, than the said Town of Wickam, upon proof thereof, he
shall have Five Guinneys for his Reward.

Henry Wilkinson.

It Is worthy of every Man's consideration, that this was not delayed till the
thing was worn out of mind, but Published whilst it was yet hot and fresh in
every Man's Memory; And that therefore if any such Horse had been bought and
kept by Booth, either the person who sold him, or those who were present at the
buying of him, or the Innkeeper where he stood, or the Ostler that looked to
him, or some one or other who must undoubtedly have seen him Ride, or at least
the person to whom he afterward sold him, would certainly either out of a
Principle of Love and Loyalty to His Majesty, to detect the impudence of the
Captain, in Publishing this Declaration to vindicate the Honor and Reputation
of Booth, to despite the Earl and render him the more Guilty, or else out of
Love and Desire of the Five Guinneys, have appeared and given Evidence thereof.
The same may be said of the Captain's Horse, and therefore it must be granted,
that neither the one nor the other had any Horse at all: and if so, how
improbable a Story it is, That the Captain should command a Troop of Horse,
when at that same time he had not a Horse to Ride on, nor never had been in 20
years, at the place where this Troop was to be commanded; And yet upon the
Evidence of this Man and others of the like temper, foam Men would have had his
Lordship found Guilty, and Convicted of no less Crime than High Treason,
railing against, and villifying the Grand Jury, for doing otherwise.

After a full hearing of all that the Witnesses had to say, the Jury, thought
themselves obliged to return an Ignoramus upon the Bill, which occasioned a
general joy and satisfaction, as plainly appeared by the many Bone-fires which
were that Night made almost in every Street, and at several Country Towns, upon
hearing the News thereof.

The Earl being thus cleared by the Grand Jury, moved to be discharged, but
could not obtain it, till 13 of Feb. following, and then both he and several
others who were Prisoners upon the account of this imaginary Plot were
released; And having thus gained his Liberty she Arrested several persons,
whereof some of them were Evidences against him, in an Action of Conspiracy,
and one Cradock and others, in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, but was not
able to bring any of them to a Trial. For on the 4th. of May, being the first
day of the Term, Cradock, whose Trial was expected to be brought on first,
moved by his Council, that the Trial might not be in London or Middlesex, but
in some other Country; upon which motion the Court ordered, That on the Friday
following, the Earl should show cause, why it should not be Tried in another
Country. Accordingly his Lordship appeared in Court himself, and Declared it
was his desire to have it Tried by an indifferent Jury, but only desired to
have it Tried that Term by a Middlesex Jury; asserting, That an indifferent
Jury might as well be had there, as in any Country in England. On the 12th. the
like motion was made in the behalf of Graham whereupon his Lordship finding he
could not have it tried in London, and not willing it should be tried in any
other County, in regard an Address of Abhorrence against a certain Paper said
to be found in his Lordships Closet, importing an Association was preferred in
most Counties; declared, That since he could not have the undoubted Privilege
of a Peer, to lay his Action in any County in England, he would remit it at
present, and wait till he had a better opportunity to revive it.

After this, his Lordship continued at his house in Aldersgate Street until the
(...) November following, and then he went over to Holland: The Seas were
somewhat Tempestuous, and some who went over in company with the same Ship were
cast away; but the Providence of God ordered That to save his life, which is
often the loss of others; viz. An unskilful Pilot, who being not well
acquainted with the Haven, and withal somewhat timorous, would not be persuaded
to venture in till he had a calmer Sea. As soon as he arrived, and was known,
he was visited by some of the States and others of the greatest Quality, who
welcomed him into that Country, and Congratulated his having so happily escaped
the danger of the Seas.

The Earl not long after his Arrival, took a spacious House in Amsterdam, where
he intended to reside; he was to pay for it a yearly Rent of an Hundred and
fifty pounds per annum, but before the House was furnished and fitted for his
use, his usual Destemper, the Gout, seized him, and handled him with great
violence for somedays, and then it began to wear away, and the Earl was
indifferently recovered, but suddenly and unexpectedly returning again, and
getting into his Stomach, he fell into a dangerous Relapse, which proved
mortal, and terminated in his Death. He discovered in the time of his Sickness
abundance of patience, and an admirable temper of mind, yielding an entire
submission to the Divine Will, and solacing his Soul in the Contemplation of
that Transcending Glory and Happiness whereinto he was passing, and wherein he
should for ever remain free from the Malice of ambitious and aspiring
Favorites, and secure from the fatal Consequence of the poisonous and
infectious Breaths, of all mereinary Villains. He expired in the Arms of a
Reverend Divine, and will certainly prove as great and as universal a Loss as
has happened to England in many years.

He died at Amsterdam, January 21. 1682. Or rather like the fairest Fruit,
which being ripened by Nature, and arrived at its perfect Maturity, falls of
its own accord. So this Nobleman being arrived at a full Age, was with the more
facility and ease shaken down by Death, and glided into the Grave without
compulsion in the Sixty second year of his Age; during the time of his
Sickness, he was frequently visited by several Persons of Quality, and some
Lords of the States, and others who did not visit him in person, sent often to
see him, and enquire of his Condition; and when he was dead, many of the
States, and diverse other Gentlemen put themselves into Mourning, and ordered
that his Corpse should be exempted from all Toll, Fees, and Customs in every
place it should be carried through within their Dominions, in order to its
passage to England: His Body was first wrapped in Sear-cloath, and then in
Lead, all but his Head and Face, whereon he had nothing, save one of the
Perrywigs he used to wear in his Lifetime, and in that manner he was laid in a
rich Coffin, in the stead whereof, just over the Earl's Face was placed a
Crystal Glass, whereby every one that pleased might view his Face; which to the
admiration of all that saw it, appeared as fresh and beautiful as when he was
living; nor was there any considerable alteration to be discerned therein. The
Ship which Transported him to England, was hung with Mourning, and adorned with
mournful Streamers and Escuchions, and being Landed at Pool in Dorsetshire, the
Gentlemen of the County, to show the extraordinary respect they had to his
Lordship, and although they were not invited, yet they got together and went in
a body to meet the Corpse, and accompanied it to his ancient Seat at Wimbourn
St. Giles's, where he was decently and honorably Interred, and will have a
stately Monument erected over him.

He made his Countess, Sir William Cooper, etc. Executors of his Will, wherein
he gave very liberally to his Grandson the Lord Ashley, and Intailed the whole
Estate upon him after the death of his Son the present Earl of Shaftsbury. And
as he had formerly been the making of several of his Servants and others by his
Liberality, so he was no less bountiful at his Death, having left very
considerable Legacies to his Servants, especially those who were with him in
Holland; besides several Gifts to pious and charitable uses.

And having thus traced this Nobleman from the Cradle through all the
Labyrinths and Vicissitudes of his Life, to the Hour of his Death, and from
thence to his Envied Grave. I shall conclude this Tract with his Character; a
Character so extraordinary and rare, that it will certainly deserve, and
therefore justly command the Admiration of all men.

But I will fist incert the Elegy and Character of Sir Walter Rawleigh,
wherewith the Author of his Life concludes his History thereof.

GReat Heart! who taught thee so to die,
Death yielding thee the Victory
Where took'st thou leave of life? If here,
How could thou be so far from fear.
But sure thou die, and quit'st the state
of Flesh and Blood before that fate;
Else what a Miracle was wrought,
To triumph both in flesh and thought.
I saw in every stander by
Pale Death, Life only in thine Eye:
The Legacy thou gav'st us then,
We'll sue for, when thou die again.
Farwell, Truth shall this Story say,
We died, Thou only live that day.
Thus died that Knight who was Spain's Scourge and Terror, and Gondamor's
Triumph, whom the whole Nation pitied, and several Princes interceded for.
Queen Elizabeth's Favorite, and her Successors Sacrifice; a Person of so much
Worth, and so great Interest, that King James would not execute him without an
Apology; One of such incomparable Policy, that he was too hard for Essex, was
the Envy of Leicester, and Cicill's Rival, who grew jealous of his excellent
Parts, and was afraid of being supplanted by him. His Head was wished on the
Secretarie's Shoulders, and his Life valued by some at an higher Rate than the
Infanta of Spain, though a Lady incomparably excelling in both the Gifts of
Mind and Body.

Authors are perplexed under what Tophick to place him, whether of Statesman,
Seaman, Soldier, Chemist, or Chronologer; for in all these he did excel, he
could make every thing he read or heard his own, and his own he could easily
improve to the greatest Advantage. He seemed to be Born to that only which he
went about, so dexterous was he in all his Undertakings in Court, Camp, by Sea,
by Land, with Sword, and with Pen.

The Earls person was somewhat small but very comely, God and Nature having
distributed in the framing thereof an exact agreeableness, and an equal
proportion to every Part and Member. But as the smallest Cabinets usually
enclose the Richest Jewels, so his little Body enclosed a great and vastly
Capatious Soul; the Virtues and Perfections whereof as far transcended the
generallity of the offspring of Adam, as Gold exceeds Silver, or Diamonds
transcends Pebles in value; He had a courageous and undaunted Mind, a deep
Judgment, and a quick and ready Apprehension; he was Religious toward God,
Loyal to his Prince, True to his Country, Faithful to his Friends, Charitable
to his Enemies, Liberal to the Poor, Chaste in his Affections, and made the
keeping of his Solemn Contracts in Marriage, Sacred and Inviolable, and the
preserving his Chaste Soul free from Polution, a considerable part of his
Religion. He was Courteous and Affable in his Carriage toward all Men,
Sociable and Free in his Converse; yet so wonderfully reserved as to any of his
great Designs and Projects, that he never revealed his Intentitions to the
nearest Relations, or the most intimate Friends, which made him so
extraordinary useful to His Majesty in the late Times, and rendered him
capable of ordering and disposing all public Actions and Councils, so that
they naturally tended toward his Restoration. 'Twas his close and reserved
temper, that rendered the penetrating into his Sentiments and Intentions, a
work so intricate and perplexing, that the greatest diligence of the many Spies
who had their Eyes constantly fixed upon, and perpetually watched and pried
into his Actions, were not able to effect it; and made it a Task too hard and
difficult, even for Cromwell himself to perform. It was that which rendered
those who undertook it unable to prove him Guilty of a Plot, wherein he was
really engaged, and was a principal promoter and contriver thereof; (Viz.) The
rising of Sir George Booth. And this close and reserved temper, strongly argues
his Innocence in the late charge of Treason; for can any Man in his right
Senses imagine, that the Earl who had till now been so reserved and private in
all his Designs, even to near Relations, noble Personages, and familiar
Friends; should all on a sudden, relinquish his constant and avowed Practice,
and transform himself into a perfect Changeling, by freely discovering that he
designed no less than Rebelling against his Sovereign; The levying Men, the
forming of an Army, and deposing the King, and thereby put himself into the
Power, and expose his Life and Honor to the mercy of Six or Eight needy and
mercinary Fellows? That he should do so, will appear very improbable, if we
reflect upon the temper of the Earl, and the condition of the Men who pretended
to such a familiarity with him, and insight into his Designs; unless we can
suppose that the longer he lived, the more foolish he grew: or that the more
experience he had of the endeavors of the Papists to effect his Ruin, by
fixing the Guilt of Treason upon him, the more careful he would be to furnish
them with Witnesses, to prove and make good their Charge. He was such a
Proficient in Wisdom and Policy, that he seemed like a Second Solomon: and so
clear an understanding of the Mysteries both of Law and Divinity, that he could
easily, and with great readiness, resolve the most difficulty Queries, and
discuss the greatest Mysteries and Critical Nicities thereof. Which made Dr.
Ward, Bishop of Sailsbury, who held an intimate Correspondence with him,
delight in his Converse, and value his acquaintance at a high rate; And so did
Sir Matthew Hailes, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench; and many more, both
Lawyers and Divines, who had the happiness to be acquainted with him. And
occasioned His Majesty, as it is said, upon the being informed of his desiding
a very difficult Case when he was Chancellor, to affirm, as in a Rapture, That
he had a Chancellor, who was Master of more Law than all His Judges, and was
possessed of more Divinity, than all his Bishops.

Nor was he less skilled in the Mysteries of Trade and Merchandise, wherein he
projected and accomplished several great things, as well for the benefit of
others and the good of the Public, as the enriching of himself.

But in nothing did he more excel, than in the steddiness aad evenness of his
Temper, not valuing or exalting himself upon the account of Court Preferments
or popular Applause. For having been a considerable Agent in accomplishing His
Majesty's Restoration, he assisted in Conducting Him back from his Banishment
to the Possession of his Crown and Kingdom. And as a Reward of his Loyalty, was
highly advanced in the Opinion, and Dignified with the Favor of his Sovereign:
And his Temples deservedly Incircled with a flourishing Coronet by the Hand of
Majesty; By whom he was raised to the very Top and Pinnacle of Honor, placed in
the Highest Seat of Justice, and Enriched with a Power to distribute Judgment
and Equity to the Nation: Glories enough to have Dazzled a Soul less steady than
his, and swelled it with Pride and Arrogance; Whilst he ascended the several
Steps to Honor, and mounted to the Highest Seat of Dignity, with a becoming
Gravity, and an admirable Composedness, and Equality of Mind.

Nor did all that Sublimity and Grandeur wherewith he was Environed, beget any
kind of Haughtiness in him, or make him Treat those with Scorn and Contempt
that moved in a lower Sphere. For you might have seen him when Shining in the
very Meridion of his Glory, and arrived at the Achme of Power and Authority,
with a wonderful Humility and Condescension, stop to Reserve the Complaint of
the meanest Supplicant, and with an unwearied Diligence, patiently hearing the
Cause of the Poorest, and do them Justice, and Relieve them when Oppressed, as
soon, and with as much Pleasure as he would the Rich and the Honorable.

But that which is yet more Admirable and Astonishing, He descended from the
height of Glory with a perfect Unconcernedness, and laid down the Ensigns of
his Grandeur with a smiling Countenance, whereby he suffered an Eclipse of his
Honor, without any Diminution of his Brightness, and the divesting him of his
Ensigns, deprived him not of one single Ray of his Luster; but with the Heart
of an Ancient Roman he dismounted the Curul without the least Disturbance or
Regret, and discovered them; and in his late Imprisonments, and the Reproaches
and Calumnies wherewith he has been sufficiently Loaded; a Noble Soul firmly
fixed in his own Worth, and shining like the Sun with a perpetual Equality of
Light without suffering any manner of Decrease or Abatement of his Luster and
Brightness; And thereby gave sufficient Demonstration that he was,

PAR, SINE, PARI.
Soon after the News of his Death owned at London, this following ELEGY Was
written by an Ingenious Person, to Illustrate the Greatness of his Loss.
THE Busy Statesmen who by Toyls unblest,
Torment themselves to give their Country rest,
Those public great First-Movers of the State,
Who almost turn the mighty Wheels of Fate,
Roll the vast Stone like Sysyphus in vain;
Whilst Deaths last Call ends a whole Ages Pain.
The Graves long Rubicon must All pass over,
Whence launching Caesar's can return no more.
Farewell, Great Shaftsbury! Times Sithe can stretch
Where malice, sword, and axes never could reach,
Thy Life, Great Statesman, stood in Fate so high,
That thou by naught but Heaven's own Hand could't Die.
Yes, Heaven alone compiles thy Funeral Vrn:
Less than the Sun the Phoenix shall not burn.
What did wise Solon, or Lycurgus do?
Lycurgus Died like thee, an Exile too.
And whilst proud Belgia thy Bones Entombs,
And triumphs at the Glory it assumes,
Belgia, who in thy Fate has now done more
Than all her Trumps or Opdams could before.
Belgia has vanquished more in thy one Grave
Than all the Wounds her Thunder ever gave.
Sleep then thou Activ'st of Mankind? Oh make
Thy last low bed, and Deaths long Requient take,
Thou who whilst living kept'st the World awake.
Oh, may thy Funeral-Rites walk that large round,
Till to thy Western-shore thy Loss resound;
Till Carolina shall in Mourning stand,
With all the Cypress of a Widdow'd Land.
Let Fools and Knaves through their false Optics find
Thy Spots, and be to all thy Brightness blind,
Let Envy all her monstrous Forms suggest,
And lodge the Raven in the Eagles Nest.
Let 'em rail on, and vent their hurtless Gall,
Whilst Shaftsbury's Renown surmounts 'em all.
From his clear Fame the dissolved Clouds shall throw,
And leave the Earthly Vapors all below.
Yes Mighty Man, lay thy great Relics down,
Thou Idol of the Crowd, Friend of the Crown;
Shaftsbury in popular Arts and Hearts so learned,
As with his Weight the Scale of Nations turned: Foe.
To him the Kingdoms Genius bended low;
The Thrones best Friend, Romes formidablest
If the best Gifts which the kind Stars dispense,
The highest Prodigies of Wit and Sense,
For Immortality Foundations lay;
No Greater Soul e're lodged in Walls of Clay.
Swiftly his restless Orb of Fire went round,
And Light and Warmth we from his Influence found.
His kindest Rays and temperate Heat
The Protestants still favored Climates met:
There his best Aspect smiled; whilst Rome alone
Felt all the Fury of his Torrid Zone.
This was the Cause did such great Foes engage
With such keen Malice, and such Mortal Rage.
For this so high the Roman Vengeance boyls
With Fires more hot than their Old Smithfield Piles.
But Heaven's kind Call has all their Engines crossed
Heaven that has lodged thee on that safer Coast,
Whence thou lookst down and see thy mighty Hunters lost.
EPITAPH.
UNder this Stone does Sleeping lie
All that was Earth of Shaftsbury.
But Funeral-Tears and weeping Eyes
Infallibility denies.
Whilst his Wished Death's enough to be
The Subject of a Jubilee.
A more Sworn Foe to Roman Pride
Not Hannibal himself ever Di'd.
For which his Deathless Fame below,
His Soul above -- His Soul -- Ah, no!
From Heaven's locked out too sure, if they
Who succeed Peter keep the Key.
Doomed to Hells hottest burning Seat,
It the Popes Curse can do the Feat.
If Papal Rage and Roman Spite
For any but themselves Hellfire can light.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for and sold by Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry.
THE Complete Works of that Reverend and Learned Divine, Mr. Isaac Ambrose.

Bentivolio and Urania in six Books, by Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D. the fourth
Edition, with large Amendments, wherein all the obscure Words throughout the
Book are interpreted in the Margin, which makes this much more Delightful to
read than the former Editions.

Mr. James Janeway's Legacy to his Friends, containing Twenty Seven Famous
Instances of Gods Providence, in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eye Witnesses to many of them.

An Historical Account of the Heroic Life and Magnanimous Actions of the most
Illustrious Protestant Prince, James Duke of Monmouth, Containing an Account of
his Birth, Education, Places and Titles, with his Great and Martial
Achievements in Flanders, and Scotland, his Disgrace and Departure both from
Court and Kingdom; with the most material Circumstances that have occurred
since his Return.

Psalmorum, Davidis, Paraphrasis, Paetica, Georgii Buchanani, Scoti Argumentis
ac Melodiis Explicata, Atque Illustrata.

Catastrophe Mundi, or Merlin Revived, in a Discourse of Prophesies, and
Predictions, and their Remarkable Accomplishments: With Mr. Lillies
Hieroglyphics exactly Cut, and Notes and Observations thereon; As also a
Collection of all the ancient reputed Prophesies that are Extant, Touching the
Grand Revolutions like to happen in these latter Ages.

Historical Memoirs of the Life and Death of that wise and valiant Prince,
Rupert, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Cumberland, etc. Containing a
brief but impartial Account of his Great and Martial Achievements, during the
time of the Civil Wars; together with his several Engagements in the Wars
between His Majesty and the States General of the United Provinces.

The Romish Mass. Book faithfully Translated into English; with Notes and
Observations thereupon, plainly demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy
thereof; Containing 1. The Cautelae, or Caveats of the Mass. 2. The Canon of
the Mass. 3. The History of the Mass; showing when, how, and by whom it was
patched together: With a Curious Copper Cut prefixed, representing the Priest a
saying Mass. With unanswerable Arguments proving it no Service of God.
Published at this juncture to prevent the Designs of those that are
endeavoring to Introduce Popery amongst us. Dedicated to the Right Reverend
Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London. Price bound One Shilling. Sold by
Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey.

The Famous Voyages of the ever Renowned and Valiant Sir Francis Drake, into
the West Indies: viz. His great Adventures for Gold and Silver, and the gaining
thereof; with a particular Account of the Famous Battle of Nombre de Dios. A
large Account of that Voyage wherein he encompassed the World: His Voyage with
Captain Knollis, and others; their taking the Towns of S. Jago, Sancto Domingo,
Carthagena, etc. His last Voyage in which he Died, being accompanied with
several Valiant Commanders, and the manner of his Burial. To which is added, An
Account of his Vallorous Exploits in 1588. in the Spanish Invasion. Printed for
Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey. Price bound One Shilling.

By the Absense of the Author, and the Oversight of the Printer, these faults
have escaped the Press.
TItle 2d. part, read Raleigh, and Redivivus, line 4. r. Popish, p. 2. l. ult.
r. Glory of, p. 3. l. 15. r. amazed, p. 7. l. 2. r. Charter, l. 10. r. baring,
p. 9. l. r. it by, p. 19. l. 18. r. defense, p. 11. l. 5. r. fleshed, p. 13. l.
12. r. Ear, p. 18. l. 22. r. however, p. 26. l. 27. delea to, p. 29. l. 20. r.
wretch, p. 30. l. 8. r. Entombed, l, 16, r. Emploid, p. 32. l. 13. r.
Miscreants, p. 33. l. 2. r. Impostor, l. 23 r. principle, l. 24. r. Loyalty to
his Majesty, Love to his Country, etc. p. 40. l. 11. r. they. 47. l. 11. r.
schooled p. 49. l. 19. r. facility, p. 52. l. 19. r. from. p. 54. l. 1. r.
torment, p. 65. l. 10. r. whereof, p. 11. l. 25. r. often admitted, r. to tell,
p. 72. l. 7. r. stretch, p. 80. l. 9. r. innumerable, l. 24. r. they, p. 99. l.
22. r. message, p. 10. l. 21. r. story, p. 102. l. 26. r. were arrived at, p.
103. l. 5. r. Lordship, l. 17. r. piece, p. 109. l. 11. r. espoused.


