THREE SERMONS UPON THE SACRAMENT IN WHICH Transubstantiation is impartially
considerd, as to Reason, Scripture, and Tradition.

To which is added a Sermon upon the Feast of S. George.

By N. N. Preacher in Ordinary to their Majesty's.

LONDON. M.DC.LXXXVIII.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, June. 14. 1688.
Quomodo fiet istud?
How shall this be done?
Luke. 1.34.
THe Enemies of Christ's Divinity abhor the Faith of it, as contrary to Sense,
because all those who saw him, plainly saw he was a Man; and opposite to
Reason, because it seems to them impossible, either for Immensity to be
comprehended in the compass of a man, or for one Person to subsist in two
Natures. The Enemies of Transubstantiation urge the same arguments against it.
They say it is contrary to Sense, because all those who see it, plainly see it is
bread; and opposite to Reason, because it seems to them impossible, either for
Christ's body to be comprehended in so small a compass, or for one body to be
at the same time in two places, Never was S. Paul's advice more seasonable than
in this Age of ours. He tells us, that it is our Duty 2. Cor. 10.5.
to cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. I must confess, it is natural enough to entertain a doubtful thought
of what is far above the reach of Reason. When things are so extremely
difficult, that no man can conceive the manner how they are performed, we
presently are apt to think they are impossible; How shall this be done? But
this is a proud thought that must be humbled; it is a rebellious imagination
which (if S. Paul says true) must be cast down; it exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and must be brought into captivity. S. John Damascen in his
Orthodox Faith, 3. b. 14. chapter
proposes an illustrious example of our Duty, in a parallel betwixt the
Incarnation and Eucharist; and by the Blessed Virgin's humble submission to
that mystery, shows how we ought to captivate our understanding in believing
this. Thus he discourses and compares both mysteries, How shall this be done,
said the Blessed Virgin, seeing I know not a man? The Archangel Gabriel
answered; The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee. You also ask me the like Question; How can bread be made
the body of Christ, and wine mixed with water become the blood of Christ? I also
give you the same answer; The Holy Ghost descends, and effects such things as
far exceed not only our expressions, but our understandings. The mysteries of
Faith would be no longer mysteries, if Reason comprehended them, much less
would they deserve that Name, if Sense discoverd them. We commonly say, that
Seeing is Believing; and amongst Men acquainted with the cheats of a deceitful
world, we find the wisest are the slowest in believing what they do not see.
But yet the word of God has so much credit with us, that we confidently trust
him farther than we see him: and when we hear him say, This is my body, we
believe it though we do not see it. Nor is it any wonder, that we boldly
venture to believe such things as are beyond the reach of Sense; more than it
is, that we believe such points as are above the reach of Reason. If
Transubstantiation were either contrary to Sense or Reason; then indeed the
clamours of our Adversaries would be something plausible: But if it be neither
contrary to Sense, as I shall plainly show in my first part; nor contrary to
Reason, as I shall endeavor to prove in my second; all their unreasonable
clamours will be little valued; and all their noise, which is the last and
weakest refuge of a baffed Cause, will signify just nothing. Permit me only,
in the first place, to beg the assistance of my Savior whose cause I plead,
and to desire his Virgin Mother, with all the Angels and Saints in Heaven, to
join their prayers with mine.

FIRST PART.
We are all of us willing to believe our eyes; and truly we have reason to
believe them, especially when all men's eyes agree, and in all times and places
give the same information to our understandings. Not that I think it is
impossible for the Almighty to deceive the eyes of all men by a constant
miracle of his Omnipotence; but that I have good reason to suppose he uses
methods more conformable to reasonable nature. One great occasion of men's
thinking that their senses are imposed upon, is but a false persuasion, that
when they see the Sacrament, they must believe the outward form, the surface,
and the qualities, which we see, touch, and taste, to be the true Body and Blood
of Christ. If this were so, they would have reason to be jealous of their
senses being contradicted. But if these people would reflect, that all this
outward form, the surface, and the qualities, which we observe, are really in
all respects the very same as they are represented to our senses: that they are
not believed by us to be the true Body and Blood of Christ, but only the coat
which clothes it, the curtain which is drawn before it, the veil which shrouds
it and hides it from our senses: that when we fall down on our knees to adore
our Savior Jesus Christ, whom we firmly believe to be really and substantially
present by a miracle insensible and imperceptible to all our senses, we do not
adore the coat which clothes him, nor the curtain which is drawn before him,
nor the veil which shrouds and hides him from us: we only adore the God of our
Salvation, who in the mystery of the Incarnation hid his Divinity in flesh, and
in the mystery of Transubstantiation hides his flesh and blood under the forms
of bread and wine: Verily, says the Prophet Isaiah, c, 45. v. 15.
Thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior. If people
would but leisurely reflect, that all which they perceive by any of their
senses is really and truly the same as they perceive it; that Faith dos not
oblige them to believe the contrary, but only to believe that under the
superficies of these outward forms the Body and Blood of Christ are hid
miraculously, and concealed from all their senses: Then they would easily
conclude that Transubstantiation is not contrary to sense. My word alone
perhaps has not sufficient credit with you: you may hear S. Anselm, in the end
of the eleventh Century, after the condemnation of Berengarius. In the 1. chapter
of his Tract de Sacramento Altaris, he plainly says, That similitude of bread
which upon the Altar appears to our corporeal eyes, considerd in it self, is
not the body of our Lord. No, no: you may believe your eyes, that all the
exterior forms of bread are truly there; it is only necessary to believe that
the body of our Lord is really containd and hidden under them. And thus the
Council of Trent expressly declares in the 1. chapter of the 13. Session; not that
the sensible things themselves are truly the Body of Christ, but that under
them his Body is containd.

It Is written in the 1. of Samuel; c. 16. v. 7.
Men look upon the outward appearances, but God looks upon the heart. In like
manner, our Senses only perceive the outward appearances of their objects; but
our Understanding, by which we are made to the image of God, is the only
Faculty which can discern the inward substance. The naked notion of subsistent
Being cannot be perceived by any sense, because it neither has dimension,
motion, posture, figure, color, nor any of those modifications which affect
our senses. The qualities and modes of matter intercept our sight, no sense can
penetrate the superficies of it, and discern the nakedness of substance through
the clothes it wears; we neither see it, nor feel it, more than we see or feel
the substance of the Soul which animates our Body.

Now, I must needs acknowledge that, if when we receive the Sacrament, we saw
it round, and yet believd it square; if we saw it white, and yet believd it
black; if we felt it rough, and yet believd it smooth; if we felt it dry, and
yet believd it moist; if we tasted sweetness in it, and yet believd it bitter;
No man could then deny but that our Faith would teach things evidently contrary
to what our Senses tell us. But, as the case stands with us in this article, I
never yet could see how any thing, but ignorance, can possibly excuse all those
who flap us ore the mouth with the absurdity of contradicting all our senses.
We really believe, the superficies or outward form is round and white, just as
we see it; if we feel it rough and dry, we take it to be such; and when we taste
it sweet, we do not question but it is so. We firmly, without any hesitation,
believe all that our Senses represent unto us; we declare to all the world that
we believe our Senses; we live and die in a persuasion that in this mystery our
Senses tell us nothing but what is true; And yet some people have the face to
tell us, that we contradict our senses. A strange world it is, we live in now,
that makes no conscience of saying any thing!

I know very well, you will readily object, that after consecration we see the
Substance of bread, and we believe the Substance is not there: is not this,
contradicting of our Senses? I grant, that after consecration we see the
substance as plainly as we did before; but this I flatly deny, that any man
ever saw the substance of bread either before or after. It Is true; most men,
who do not understand Philosophy, are apt to think that when they see bread lie
before them, they see the substance of it: They never imagine that there is as
much difference betwixt seeing bread, and seeing the substance of bread, as
there is betwixt seeing substance with all its clothes on, and seeing of it
naked. When they see the length, breadth, depth, the figure, texture, color,
of the parts of bread, they think they see the substance; and it is no wonder,
that they are mistaken, because they do not understand what substance is. But
if they would go to school to Aristotle or Cartesius, the two chief Masters of
the old and new Philosophy, the First would reach them, that when they think
they see or feel the substance of any body, they only see and feel the
accidents, the quantity and qualities that cover it; The second would easily
inform them, and let them know they only see and feel the superficies and modes
of matter, which may remain the same, to all intents and purposes, and make the
same impression upon our senses, although the entity of matter be entirely
changed. If any of you are so curious, you may read Cartesius himself upon this
subject, in the end of his Meditations, page 137 of the 5. edition, printed at
Amsterdam, in the year 1670. Notandum denique per supersiciem panis aut vini
alteriusve corporis, non hic intelligi partem ullam substantiae nec
quantitatis.... fed tantummodo terminum illum qui medius esse concipitur inter
singulas ejus particulas and corpora ipsas ambientia, quique nullam plane
entitatem habeat nisi modalem. Iam vero cum in solo termino contactus fiat, and
nihil nisi per contactum sentiatur, manifestum est ex hoc uno quod dicantur
panis and vini substantiae in alicujus alterius rei substantiam Ita mutari, ut
haec nova substantia sub eisdem plane terminis contineatur sub quibus
aliae..... jam existerent si adessent; sequi necessatio illam novam substantiam
eodem plane modo sensus omnes nostros afficere debere, quo panis and vinum
illos afficerent si nulla transubstantiatio facta esset. loc. cit. Praeterea
nihil est incomprehensibile aut difficile in eo quod Deus Creator omnium possit
unam substantiam in aliam mutare, quodque haec posterior substantia sub eadem
plane superficie remaneat sub qua prior continebatur. Nec etiam quidquam
rationi magis consentancum dici potest, nec vulgo apud Philosophos magis
receptum, quam non modo omnem sensum sed omnem corporis in corpus actionem
fieti per contactum, huncque contactum in sola superficie esse posse; Vnde
sequitur evidenter eandem superficiem, quantumvis substantia quae sub ea est
mutetur, eodem semper modo agere ac pati debere. Quapropter ausim sperare
ventutum tempus aliquando, quo illa opinio quae ponit accidentia realia,....
explodetur, and mea ut certa and indubitata in ejus locum recipietur, ibid.
page 139.




Some of my Auditory may perhaps be a little surprised to hear so much
Philosophy deliverd in a pulpit, whence they usually expect the Law of God and
Christian Doctrine. If without Philosophy we cannot find the way to Heaven,
what will become of all those Christians who never found the way to school?
Pray give me leave: There are a great many Christians (let them be as ignorant
as you please, especially in matters of Philosophy) who never the less think
they are wise enough to judge the greatest mysteries and secrets of it: And
when they hear the Catholic Church affirm, that, in the Eucharist, the
interior substances of bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of
Christ, nothing remaining (but the outward forms) of bread and wine; in stead
of receiving humbly the Christian Doctrine which the Church proposes, they
immediately take upon them to condemn it as an error, and cry it down as a
ridiculous absurdity which contradicts our senses. All this while they never
consider how little it becomes them to pretend to judge of things, they do not
understand. Tell them that in the principles both of the old and new
Philosophy, we never see the nakedness of any substance whatsoever, but only
the outward forms which hide it from us; and therefore, if the Almighty have a
mind to change the substance only, not the accidents, we may watch him as
narrowly as we please, and never discover any alteration, because all that our
senses can perceive, remains the same; and as, before the substance was
miraculously changed, we could not see it; so, after it is miraculously changed,
we cannot miss it. Talk to them of these notions in the plainest terms you can,
they will ask you what you mean. and wonder what you would be at. They neither
know the nature of the substance nor the accidents; they know not whether
Transubstantiation be contrary to sense or no; and yet they still will tell a
man, it contradicts their senses. It Is very hard, in such a case as this, if
they who do not understand Philosophy, may tell us, we deny our senses; and
they who understand it, may not be allowed to tell them fairly, they are very
much mistaken. Mistakes in matters of religion are dangerous: And certainly so
much Philosophy as is needful to set us right, cannot but be allowable when
such mistakes as these proceed from want of understanding it.

I shall conclude this part of my discourse, with showing, in as easy terms as
the matter will bear, that it is impossible for any of our senses to give
evidence against our faith of Transubstantiation. If we believd that
Transubstantiation were a sensible change, a change of any thing that is
sensible in the bread and wine; then indeed, our senses being judges of
sensible things might easily give evidence against our faith: They might
depose, that nothing sensible is changed, but that all things sensible remain
the same as formerly they were; and no man could deny but that our Faith would
contradict our Senses. But, on the contrary, if we do not believe that
Transubstantiation is a sensible change; if we believe no change of any thing
which is sensible; then, truly, our senses, not being judges of insensible
things, cannot give evidence against us; they cannot depose that no insensible
thing is changed, because insensible matters fall not within their cognizance;
and therefore, whether they are changed or not, is more than they can tell. If
there should happen a dispute concerning difference of colors, whether they
are changed or not? Would you remit it to the arbitration of five blind men?
Since therefore the dispute betwixt us, is about the insensible difference of
substance, whether it be changed or not, How can our senses give their
sentiment one way or other, either for it, or against it?

This argument is so convincing, that it will not bear the least appearance of
a solid Answer; and withal so plain, that any man without Philosophy may
clearly understand it. To which I shall only add a word or two more, to put a
stop to all the cavills which may possibly arise from the diversity of
schoolmen's fancies.

It Is evident that the Catholic Church, by the substance which is believed to
be changed in the Sacrament, dos not understand any thing that is sensible in
bread and wine. The Council of Trent in the 2. Canon of the 13. Session,
supposes as a certain and undoubted truth, that all things sensible remain the
same; manentibus speciebus panis and vini: And, in the 1. chapter of the same
Session, tells us, that the body and blood of Christ are contained under them,
sub specie illarum rerum sensibilium. It Is true, the Council dos not offer to
define what substance is; it dos not tell us what it understands by substance;
it meddles not with definitions of Philosophy but only definitions of Faith,
determining what Truths were first delivered to the Church by Christ and his
Apostles. But, though we know not in particular what 'twas the Council meant by
substance, This we know for certain, that it meant not any of those sensible
things, but only that insensible subsistent Being which is hidden under them:
And this is enough to silence all disputes about the Evidence of Sense. Let,
who will, tell us that the substances of bread and wine are sensible, we always
shall have this to say, That if by substance they mean something which is
sensible, the Council dos not mean the same; They mean one sort of substance,
The Council means another; and therefore all their arguments from evidence of
sense are every one misplaced; they are levelled against a chimerical
Transubstantiation of their own invention, and not against that which the
Council has defined. In a word, if any Transubstantiation be contrary to sense,
Let them look to it; we are not at all concerned in the matter; such a
Transubstantiation is not ours but theirs. I humbly recommend this to your
serious thoughts, and undertake to prove, that Transubstantiation is not
contrary to Reason, in the second part of my Discourse.

SECOND PART.
The Oracles of Holy Scripture, in the book of Job, assure us, 36.26.
God is great, and we know him not. As we do not know him, so we do not know
his power; and therefore it is written in the following chapter; 37.5.
He dos great things which we cannot comprehend. His works are great; we cannot
comprehend them: But hence it dos not follow that they are impossible, because
He can do great things which we cannot comprehend. We all of us agree that
mysteries of Faith are far above the reach of Reason, but it is our great
misfortune, and one of the worst effects of our original Corruption, That
though we thus agree in generals, yet in the examen of particulars we easily
confound their being above Reason with their being contrary, and presently
conclude them contrary because they are above it. All this proceeds from
nothing but a secret pride or vanity, which make us willing to suppose that we
are wiser than we are; that we comprehend the secret Natures of things;
understand clearly the essential constitution of their Beings; see evidently
all the attributes appropriated to them, and all the qualities irreconcileably
repugnant to their natures. Supposing this, we readily pronounce, This is
impossible, That cannot be, This is a mere chimera, That Is a contradiction;
And, all this while, reflect not that we may perhaps be very much mistaken in
our arbitrary notions, from whence we draw so easily these bold Conclusions. We
do not consider the History, as well as Theory, of Natural Philosophy; if we
did, we should find such strange varieties and alterations in it, as would
demonstrate the uncertainty of of all its principles. Corpuscular Philosophy
was well enough received in ancient times under Democritus and Epicurus:
Afterward it was, in a manner, quite laid by, and Aristotle's Notions
succeeded in the place: And now, the world begins to seem unsatisfied; his
matter and form, his quantity and qualities begin to look a little out of
countenance; and the Corpuscular Philosophy begins to come in play again. If we
would spend one serious thought upon these Revolutions in the very
fundamentalls of our Natural Philosophy, we should learn the best and the most
beneficial knowledge in the world, which is the knowledge of our ignorance: We
should find that the vain humor, which inclines some few to dogmatize in
Natural Philosophy, proceeds not from their being wise than their neighbors,
but rather from the strength of their imaginations than the power of their
Reasons: We should see, that, since the Fall of Adam, even the works of nature
are above our reach, Eccles. 3.11.
No man, says Solomon, can find them out from the beginning to the end: When
any mystery of Faith seems not to suit so well, as we would have it, with the
notions which we fancy most, We should rather suspect that we may be mistaken
in our principles, than cry it down as a chimerical absurdity, below God's
Majesty, above his Art, and beyond the utmost stretch of his Omnipotence.

As the mystery of the Incarnation seemd mere folly to the Gentiles, and a
scandal to the Jews; so now the mystery of Transubstantiation seems impossible
to some, incredible to others. It seems impossible, 1. for the Natural Body of
Christ to be consigned within so small a compass; 2. for one Body to be at the
same time in two places. It seems incredible. 1. that Christ should put himself
to the expense of so superfluous a miracle, since he might easily have given us
the very same grace without it; 2. that he should humble himself so low as to
expose his sacred body and blood to almost all the abuses and indignities which
bread and wine are subject to. These are the principal considerations whence
some are pleased to draw this inference; That Transubstantiation is evidently
contrary to Reason.

It Is strange to see, when once our minds are prepossesst with an aversion from
any doctrine, how blind we are in our enquiries, how partial and unequal in our
judgments. We easily believe the Incarnation, and although we know that God is
infinitely greater than our little souls are able to conceive, although we know
that there can be no limits in the vast extension of his boundless Being,
although we know that his Immensity has every where a Center, no where a
Circumference, yet because this is an article which we are willing to believe,
we make no doubt but all Gods Greatness may be lodged within the compass of a
man; and that this man, who lived and died amongst us, is the great Creator
and Conserver of the Universe. Why have you not the impudence to ridicule this
mystery, and say it is evidently contrary to Reason? Why do you not tell the
world that it involves clear contradiction, infinity measured,
incomprehensibility comprehended, Immensity containd within the compass of a
man? The reason is, because you like this article well enough; your education
has not armed you against it; your first institution to piety has been
accompanied with daily persuasions and inducements to submit your reason to it,
and not to admit of every probable appearance of impossibility as a sufficient
evidence against it. How comes it then, that, in an Age so skeptical in all
things else, you are so positive and so, dogmatical in this, That it is
impossible for the Body of Christ to shrink into the compass of a little bit of
bread? or, at the same time, be in several places? You can believe one Nature
in three Persons really distinguished, and one Person in two Natures, And yet
you cannot believe one Body in two Places. Is not this, streining at the lesser
difficulty and swallowing the greater? and had not our Savior reason to
complain of the Math. 23.24.
blind Guides that strein at a Gnat, and swallow a camel?

The Common Answer to this Argument is: That we are better acquainted with the
Nature of a Body, than of a Spirit. Bodies are the familiar object of our
Senses, and if we do not know the Nature of them, we know nothing at all: But
our Notions of a Spirit are so imperfect, that it is an argument of wisdom,
rather than weakness, to submit our judgments in things we cannot understand.

I must confess; if we consider only the superficial knowledge of Bodies. our
Mathematicians measure very skillfully their three dimensions, we demonstrate
many ingenious Truths, both useful and delightful, and have knowledge enough
to make us proud: But, if we consider the inward constitution or nature of
these very same bodies which we measure so skillfully, we shall soon find we
have ignorance enough to humble us. It Is an easy thing to tell me the length of
a Line, and to measure it by so many inches; But, who can tell me what this
line is made of? is it a chain of indivisible points immediately linkt together?
or is it composed of parts which may be really divided less and less, for
ever and ever, world without end? The first is an unconceivable piece of
nonsense: And the second is a Labyrinth which when our Reason enters it can
never find the way out. What are we more acquainted with, or what is more
familiar to us, than Light and Color? And yet no body can tell certainly what
they are: The Learned have disputed some thousands of years about it, and are
not agreed upon the point. We see; and we believe our eyes; And nothing is more
certain than that we do so: Yet nevertheless when we come to examine strictly,
by what means, and how this operation is performed; we are as much in the dark
as if we were stark blind. We move from place to place; we measure our motion,
as to time and space; we know very well, whether one motion be longer or
shorter, whether it be swifter or slower, than another: And yet when our
Natural Philosophers enquire into the nature of this Motion, nothing is more
uncertain: The greatest Wits have ever been at a loss when they pretend to
explicate how Motion is possible; And Zeno's argument has never been clearly
answered. In the same manner, although nothing is more certain than that all the
Bodies, which we ever were acquainted with, have three dimensions, length,
breadth, and depth; yet if we strictly enquire into the essential notion of a
Body by which it differs from a Spirit, we shall find it not so easy to
determine, but that this matter is very dark, as well as others I have
mentiond. To make it as clear as I can, I suppose; 1. that there is no
substance but what is either a body or a Spirit; 2. that no Spirit either has
dimensions, or is capable of having them: From whence I conclude; 1. that every
substance which either has dimensions or is capable of having them, is a body
and no spirit; 2. that actual dimensions are not the essence of a body, because
the Idea of them presupposes the capacity of having them, and this Capacity is
the first Idea by which a Body differs from a Spirit. The Question is; Whether
it is possible for a Body to be stripped naked of all its dimensions, and subsist
without them?

It Is no wonder, there is such confusion in deciding of this Case, because our
Philosophers and Mathematicians are not Country men; They have each a peculiar
language to themselves; and (which is worst of all) when they use the same
words, they understand them in a different sense. A Mathematician never
considers the Nature of a Body, neither is it to his purpose; all his business
is to measure it. The vulgar part of mankind never consider what a Body is made
of, any farther than they can either use it, or make money of it. So that a
Body miraculously stripped of all its dimensions, being neither measurable, nor
useful, nor marketable, is certainly (in the language of Mathematicians, and
of the Vulgar) no Body at all. All the trade they drive with Bodies is by
weight and measure; and therefore it is no wonder, if by the word Body, they
conceive nothing but Dimensions. These people, by their own confession, have
only a superficial knowledge of a Body: They declare frankly, they know nothing
of it but the outside. Philosophers are the only men that consider the inside
of Nature: They are not content to gaze without; but endeavor to enter the
very Sanctuary, and discover what lies hid behind the Veil. And these men, if
the rest of the world would give them a fair hearing and not make too much
noise, would soon decide the difficulty. The Question is (putting the Case,
that a Body were divested of its natural dimensions) whether the Remainder
would be still a Body, or not?

It Is evident that, in the Mathematical or Vulgar sense, it would not be so:
Neither is that the true meaning of the Question. We do not ask, whether the
Dimensions would remain when they are gone? We know very well, it implies a
most manifest contradiction. Our enquiry is only concerning the Essence of a
natural Body, that is, of a Substance which is not a Spirit. And, without all
doubt, when we suppose nothing to be taken from a Body but its actual
dimensions, That which we conceive to remain is still a natural Body, because
it is certainly no Spirit: it still retains a real capacity of having its
natural dimensions, and this Capacity is absolutely repugnant to the nature of
a Spirit. Thus you plainly see, that the Supposition, we talk of, dos not
destroy the Essence of a natural Body; it dos not imply any Contradiction; And
therefore dos not leave any reasonable ground of denying the possibility of it.
Men may fancy what they please; and will ever do so, without asking their
neighbors leave; There Is no remedy for it: But, after all, He must be a bold
man that undertakes to demonstrate the absolute impossibility of the Hypothesis
I speak of.

To return to my argument, I would now gladly enquire; since, in the
Incarnation and Trinity, it is no argument of weakness, but of wisdom, to
submit our judgments; Why is it not so in this? If the Nature of God, and the
divine Persons, are objects so spiritual, and so much out of our reach, that it
dos not become us to dogmatize in matters belonging to them: Pray, tell me what
acquaintance have we with a Body divested of all its natural dimensions, and
reduced to the condition of a Spirit? All our Mathematical and Vulgar notions,
of which we are so confident, are (in this case) so far from giving us any
light, that they are rather like so much dust in our eyes that hinders us from
seeing. It Is no part of our Faith, that Christ in the Sacrament has all his
natural dimensions: if it were, Then indeed these Notions might furnish
something to say against it. One might argue, as S. Augustine dos against
Faustus, that Christ as to his corporal presence could not, at the same time,
be in the Sun and Moon, and on the Cross. But, in our present Hypothesis, all
our experimental knowledge of a Body is out of doors; And all our pretended
demonstrations are mere nonsense. It Is evident, that without local extension a
Body is neither confined by being in one place, nor divided by being in two:
And it is as easy a matter to measure a line without length, an angle without
space, or a circle without diameter, as it is to find work for Mathematical
conclusions in a Body without dimensions.

Some will ingenuously confess, they do not think that Transubstantiation is
impossible; but they are apt to think it is incredible, either that Christ
should work so great a miracle without necessity, or humble himself to all
those great indignities to which the Sacrament is every day exposed. Romans 9. 20.
O man, says the Apostle, who art thou that replyest against God? His Goodness
is as infinite as his Omnipotence; and it is as great an insolence to give laws
to the one, as to give limits to the other. He seems to value more the
reputation of his Goodness than of his Power; and if we trace his Providence
throughout the Conduct of the Moral World, we cannot but observe that He has
taken much more pains to show his goodness than to show his greatness. In the
Creation of the Universe He showed his Power: But what was that to the
Incarnation of the Son of God? All the Perfections of Creatures disappear, and
shrink to nothing, when compared to the perfection of their great Creator; And
the whole Universe, by which God shows his Greatness, is nothing in comparison
of Jesus Christ by whom he shows his Kindness to us. You all are scandalized at
their ingratitude, who will not give God thanks for this inestimable favor;
will not believe that he has been so good, so merciful, so kind. They say,
that though 't were possible it is not credible that God should work so great a
miracle without necessity; that there was none at all for him to come himself
in person; that he might have sent a holy man for our instruction, he might
have charged him with our sins, he might have pardoned both him and us without
condign satisfaction: It Is true, The Scripture seems to speak in plain terms the
Divinity of Christ; but yet may bear another sense, and may admit a much more
credible interpretation. If a Socinian should urge this argument against you,
you would scarce have patience to hear him. Why then do you object the same
against the mystery of Transubstantiation? Why do you tell us, it is incredible
that God should work so great a miracle without necessity? that the real
presence is not absolutely necessary? that the Sacrament might have sufficient
efficacy to give grace without it? Why do you say, that though the Scripture
plainly speaks in favor of this mystery, yet we are not obliged to take it in
the literal sense? that the figurative sense is much more easy to conceive,
and therefore is a much more credible interpretation? O man, says S. Paul to
the Romans, 9.20.
Who art thou that replyest against God? 11.33. and 34.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor! This is the only
answer you can give to a Socinian; Apply it to your selves, and rest content:
Your argument is just the same, and either proves both mysteries incredible, or
neither.

When you object, that nothing can be more incredible, than that the Body and
Blood, the sacred Humanity of Christ is shrouded under the outward forms of
bread and wine, and consequently exposed to all indignities which they are
subject to. Pray, give me leave to ask you, whether or no it be not more
incredible, which we read in S. Paul, and in the Prophet Isaiah; that 1. Tim.
c. 3. v. 16.
God was manifest in flesh; that in this flesh Isai. chapter 53.
He was despised and rejected of men, and we esteemed him not: He bore our
griefs, and carried our sorrows: He was wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities: He was oppresst, he was afflicted: Phil. ch, 2. v,
6.7,
He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant; and
being found in fashion as man, humbled himself and became obedient unto death?
Is not this more incredible than all that you can say of the Sacrament?

Ah! my dear Jesus! it grieves my heart to see, that thou have made thy self of
no reputation, by taking upon thee the form of bread; and that, by being found
in fashion as bread, thou have humbled thy self so low, as to be still
despised, rejected, and disesteem'd by men. But yet it is a comfort to me, when
I think that thy most sacred Body in the Sacrament is now immortal and
impassible; thou do not now bear all our griefs, and carry all our sorrows;
thou art not wounded there for our transgressions, nor bruised for our
iniquities; thou art not capable of being now afflicted and oppresst. Compute
then, if you please, all the indignities the Sacrament is subject to; and by
the way take notice that it is a Sacrament no longer than the Sacramental forms
are incorrupted; Remember that the natural alterations, which they undergo, can
never operate upon him; Take these considerations along with you, And, if you
have that candor and sincerity which I am willing to suppose you have, you
will ingenuously confess that these indignities which Christ now seems to
suffer in the forms of bread and wine, are nothing in comparison of those which
once He sufferd in the form of man.

S. Paul writes to the Colossians; 2. ch 8. v.
Beware least any man deceive you, by Philosophy and vain fallacy, according to
the Tradition of men, and the elements of the world, and not according to
Christ. He writes to the Corinthians, that it is their duty to 2. Ep. 10. chapter 5.
v.
cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. He writes to the Romans, that they 11. chapter 20. v.
stand by faith; bids them not be high-minded, but fear; and in the following
chapter bids them have a care of being 12. chapter 16. n.
wise in their own conceits. These Admonitions of the Apostle were superscribed
to the Colossians, Corinthians, and Romans; they were not written to us; but
yet they were written for us, and for our instruction. It Is a great insolence
for human Reason to exalt it self against Omnipotence: an insolence much
greater than the Pride of Lucifer: He only said, he would be like the Highest;
but we are not content with that, we will be Higher than the Highest. We summon
the Highest God of Heaven and Earth before the high Tribunal of our Reason; we
make him accountable to us for his actions; And by our arbitrary notions of
precarious Philosophy We make no scruple to pronounce, what sentence we think
fit, upon his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. But the day will come, when they who
thus exalt themselves shall certainly be humbled; and (as S. Peter assures us)
They who now 1. Ep. 5. chapter 6. v.
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, shall be exalted in due time:
which happyness may the Almighty grant us through the grace and merits of his
only beloved Son our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

A SERMON Preached before their MAJESTY'S AT WINDSOR. August. 26. 1688.
Hoc est Corpus meum.
This is my Body.
Math. 26.26.
AMongst the nine and thirty articles of the pretended Reformation, the twenty
eighth asserts; 1. that Transubstantiation cannot be proved by holy Writ; 2.
that it is repugnant to plain words of holy Scripture. It neither is my
inclination nor design to throw dirt in the face of any men, but only to wipe
it inoffensively and fairly of our own; by appealing to their own Translation
of the Bible; and showing, 1. that Transubstantiation is not any way repugnant
to plain words of holy Scripture; 2. that nothing can be better proud by holy
Writ. This is in short the whole extent of my design, and shall be the subject
of your entertainment, as soon I have begged the assistance of my Savior,
desiring his Virgin Mother with all the Angels and Saints to second my petition.

FIRST PART.
That all men do not rightly understand the word of God in Scripture, is a
Truth which no man can deny that has a grain of common sense. Every man plainly
sees how in our Nation the reformed religion is crumbled into multitudes of
Sects, as opposite in many things to one another, as they are to us. They all
read Scripture, follow Scripture, prove and disprove what they please by
Scripture; and all the while, as they agree in nothing more than in the book,
so they agree in nothing less than in the sense. No man is bound to think his
neighbor, or the whole Church, wiser than himself; but every man has as much
liberty, as he has vanity, to think himself the best interpreter of Scripture
for himself. Amidst this great confusion, what wonder is it, if we find that
many, with as little modesty as reason, face us down, that Transubstantiation
is repugnant to plain words of holy Scripture?

The Text, which first appears against us, is in the 3. chapter of the Acts where
it is said of Christ, that v. 21.
the Heavens must receive him till the time of restitution of all things:
whence it plainly follows, that his body is in heaven, and must be in heaven
till the time of restitution, that is, till the day of judgment. All this is
very true; and we believe it as much as any of our neighbors. But how comes
this Text to contradict his real presence in the Sacrament? The Scripture tells
us that our Saviors Body is in heaven; but where dos it teach us that it is
not at the same time upon earth? Where dos it plainly say, No miracle can make
one body at the same time be in several places? Show us but this deliverd
plainly in the Scripture, and then we will grant that Transubstantiation is
repugnant to it. Some, upon this occasion, produce the Angel's words, who in
the last chapter of S. Matthew, told the women at the sepulcher, He is not
here, for He is risen: where the Angel seems to conclude, that because his body
was in another place, therefore it was not in that place. All the whole stress
of this argument depends upon a word of so little moment, that the last of S.
Mark quite leaves it out; and the last of S. Luke not only leaves it cut, but
puts another in the place: in S. Mark, the Angel says, He is risen, He is not
here; in S. Luke he says, He is not here, but is risen. But however, if the
Angel's Reasoning in S. Matthew must be so much magnified; when they have made
the best they can of it, 'twill amount to neither more nor less than this; He
is not here, because he is risen, that is, He is not here because he is gone
from hence; which inference is not a jot the worse, although we should suppose
that the same body may be, at the same time, in a thousand places. Let us
suppose his Body at the same time, if you please, in millions of places; yet,
if it be true, that he is risen and gone from hence, it follows evidently that
he is not here.

The second Text is found in the 3. chapter of S. Paul to the Colossians; where he
gives both them and us good counsel; bids us v. 1.2.
seek for things above, things which are only to be found in heaven, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God; joys which are heavenly and everlasting,
which in the same chapter he calls the v. 24.
reward of our inheritance; He bids us raise our hearts above the world, above
the vanities the pleasures and temptations of it: Alas! all this is nothing to
our present purpose; all this we believe, although we know his body is as
really on earth, as it is in heaven. Did not our Savior preach the same to his
Apostles? And yet he lived amongst them upon Earth.

The third Text lies before us in the 14. of S. Mark, where our Redeemer makes
a plain Antithesis betwixt him and the poor, compares himself with them, and
shows the difference betwixt their case and his. v. 7.
You have the poor with you always, says he, and when you will you may do them
good, but me you have not always: as if he should say; you will always have the
poor in a condition of doing them good; but, as for me, you will not always
have me in that indigent condition, you will not hereafter be in a capacity of
doing me any good. When he was visible amongst us before his resurrection, he
was subject to our natural necessities, and it was in our power to relieve and
ease him: But in the Sacrament he is immortal and impassible, incapable of
being injured by the malice of his enemies, or betterd by the service of his
friends.

This Text not being able to support so weak a cause, a fourth is borrowd from
the 1. Cor. in the 11. chapter, where the Apostle says, v. 26.
We show the Lord's death till he comes: therefore he is not come yet; and, if
he be not come. How is he really present in the Sacrament? Let us reflect a
little, and examine the sense of these words, till he comes. This coming of our
Savior is repeated frequently in Scripture: in the 1. chapter of the Acts, we
read, v. 11.
He shall come in like manner as you have seen him go, in the 14. of S. Mark,
v. 62.
You shall see him coming in the clouds; in the 24. of S. Math. v. 30.
They shall see him coming in power and great glory. Every man that can but say
his Creed, is well acquainted with this coming, which is so much celebrated in
the Scripture; we all believe that this his coming is so judge the quick and
the dead. When they read in the Bible, we show the Lords death till he comes;
they infer. Therefore he is not come yet: Very true: The Lord's Day is not
come; the Day of judgment is not come; and only God knows when it will come:
But, is it therefore evident that in the Sacrament there is no
Transubstantiation, no Real Presence, because the Day of judgment is not come?
I am inclined to think that, when it dos come, when Christ comes to judge the
world, and calls all those to an account who have pretended, every one
according to their fancy, to reform his Church, they then will wish too late
that, either they had let the Church alone, or else had had much better
evidence than this to justify the Reformation.

The fifth Text seems to promise more, and yet performs as little as the rest:
We find it in the 22, of S. Luke, where our Savior says, v. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me. Now, say they, we cannot remember any thing but
what is absent, and therefore the Body of Christ must of necessity be absent
from the Sacrament, cannot be really and truly present in it. Pray, cannot I
remember God, and take delight in thinking of his goodness? Remember my own
sinful soul, and pity her condition? And is not my soul present in my Body? Is
not the Almighty present every where? v. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, says Solomon in the last
chapter of Ecclesiastes; and yet this great Creator is not absent from us: S.
Paul says, in the 17. chapter of the Acts, v. 27.
He is not far from every one of us. Though He is always present, yet we easily
forget him, because he is not present to our senses: And I am afraid, because
we do not see the invisible body and blood of Christ, I am afraid we now and
then forget how great a treasure we receive when we approach the Sacrament: I
am afraid, because we neither see nor feel our souls, we oftentimes neglect and
almost quite forget the great concern of our salvation, differring it from time
to time, till by God's judgment death surprises us, and we are lost for all
Eternity.

The two last Texts as they have most appearance so they have the least of
substance when they are examined. S. Paul says in his 1. Cor. 11. chapter v. 28.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread: Our Savior says,
in the 26. chapter of S. Math. v. 29.
I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine: Both of them speak thus
after consecration; Both of them call it bread and wine; And therefore, after
consecration, it still remains true bread and wine. You see how fairly I
propose the difficulty, and now I humbly beg your best attention to the Answer.
S. Paul dos not say, This is Bread: Our Savior dos not say, This is Wine: S.
Paul dos not contradict our Savior; nor dos our Savior contradict himself:
Why then do they call it bread and wine? The Answer is obvious; Not because it
was bread and wine then, but because it was bread and wine before. Nothing is
more familiar in Scripture than this way of speaking. S. John in the 9. chapter of
his Ghospel, relating the miraculous cure of the man that was born blind, tells
us in the 7. v. He went his way and washed and came seeing: and yet afterward
in the 17. v. he calls him blind, and tells us what they say to the blind man
again. Why dos the Scripture call him blind after his sight was restord? The
reason is, not because he was blind then, but because he was blind before. Turn
to the 7. chapter of S. Luke, and in the 22. v. you will read these words of our
Savior, The blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear: he says they see, and yet
he calls them blind; he says they walk, and yet he calls them lame; he says
they hear, and yet he calls them deaf. Why dos he call them blind, lame, and
deaf, when he himself bears witness that they see, walk, and hear? The Answer
lies before you: He calls them so, not because they were so then, but because
they were so before. In the 2. chapter of S. John, the substantial change of water
into wine was much the same as Transubstantiation, and therefore the example is
fitter for the purpose. In the 9 v. you read, that the Ruler of the Feast
tasted the water that was made wine: You cannot but observe how plainly the
Scripture says, it was made wine, and at the same time plainly calls it water.
Will any man deny this miracle, and say it was not really and truly wine,
because the Scripture calls it water after it was made wine? No, no; it is clear
that, when the miracle was done, the Scripture calls it water, not because it
was water then, but because it was water before. Read the 7. chapter of Exodus:
you will find in the 10. v. Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and it became
a Serpent: in the 11. v. The Magicians of Egypt also did in like manner: and in
the 12. v. They cast down every man his rod, but Aaron's rod swallowd up their
rods. Pause here one moment. The Scripture plainly tells us that these rods
were all changed into Serpents; and yet, after the change, the Scripture calls
them rods; not because they were rods then, but because they were rods before.
If any of our Adversaries have a mind to say, these rods were not changed into
Serpents, that Christ never changed water into wine, that when he told S.
John's disciples the blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear, he sent them back
to their master with so many lies in their mouths; if they have a mind to say,
our Savior never cured the man born blind; then they may have the same
pretense to magnify this trifling argument: But if they are the men which I
would willingly believe they are, if they are candid and sincere, if they
submit their judgment fairly to the word of God, as it is plainly written in
their own translation of of the Bible; they cannot but ingenuously confess that
Transubstantiation is not any way repugnant to plain words of holy Scripture;
but that Scripture it self contutes the best of all their arguments which they
produce against it.

I will not say it is ignorance, but I am sure it is either that, or want of
ingenuity, which makes men argue that, because there are some metaphors in
Scripture. Therefore the words of Consecration are a Metaphor or Figure. No man
denies but that we often meet with metaphors in Scripture; but then, either the
common phrase of speaking evidently marks them out, or else they are explaind
by what fore-runs or follows the expression, and so explaind that no judicious
Reader doubts the meaning of them.

When, in the 6. of S. John, our Savior says, I am the bread of life; He adds,
he that comes to me shall never hunger: When, in the 8. He says, I am the light
of the world; He adds, he that follows me, shall have the light of life: When,
in the 10. He says, I am the door; He adds, by me if any man enter, he shall be
saved: When, in the 14. He says, I am the way; He adds, no man comes to my
Father, but by me: When, in the 15. He says, I am the Vine; He adds, he that
abides in me, brings forth much fruit.

So when S. Paul tells the Ephesians, 5. chapter 30. v. We are members of his body,
of his flesh and of his bones; He explicared it in the 23. v. that this Body,
which Christ is the Head and Savior of, is the Church; And when he mentions
flesh and bones, he only carries on the metaphor by a mysterious allusion to
the 2. of Genesis, because as Eve's Body drew its Being from the side of the
first Adam when he slept in Paradise, so also the Church derives the grace,
which animates it, from the side the flesh and bones of the last Adam when he
slept his mortal sleep upon the Cross. The verse, which follows, leads directly
to the place, and gives us, word for word, the 24. v. of the 2. of Genesis,
that we may evidently know the Sense and Ground of the Comparison.

In the same manner, no less care is taken in the 1. to the Cor. 10. chapter and 4.
v. to explicate these words, That Rock was Christ. S. Paul seems to write with
as much caution as if he had forseen how much these words would be abused by
those who now compare them with the words of Consecration. Lest any man might
think that, when he said that rock was Christ, he took the word rock in the
literal sense, he plainly says, he speaks of spiritual meat and spiritual
drink; he says in the same verse, they drank of that spiritual rock which
followd them, and that rock, (that is, that spiritual rock) was Christ. What
could a man say more to acquaint the world with the true meaning of his words,
and give us an assurance that it is not literal, but only figurative and
metaphorical?

Some people are willing to believe that, because Christ's body and blood are
only metaphorically broken and shed for us in the Sacrament, therefore they are
not really his body and blood: As if, because one word is figurative in a
sentence, therefore all the rest must be so too, merely for keeping it company;
or as if we were obliged to believe that, because Christ's sitting at the right
hand of his Father is a mere metaphor, therefore he did not really ascend to
Heaven. When in S. Luke, and in the 1 Cor. we read these words, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood; the Cup is one metaphor, the Testament is another,
but hence it dos not follow that the blood of Christ is merely metaphorical:
For, in the common way of speaking, when we say, This Glass is a new Health in
Wine, the glass is one metaphor, the health is another, and yet the wine is
truly and substantially Wine. Having thus exposed the weakness of their
arguments, by which they undertake to show that Transubstantiation is repugnant
to plain words of holy Scripture; I shall now endeavor to make out, that
Transubstantiation may (if any thing can) be plainly proud by holy Writ: the
proof of which shall make the second part of my Discourse.

SECOND PART.
In the 6. chapter of S. John, our Savior promises that he will give us his flesh,
that sacred flesh which he designed to sacrifice upon the Cross for our
Redemption. In the 51. v. he says, the Bread that I will give is my Flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. I know very well that in the
former verses, from 26. to 51. He uses some expressions which are purely
metaphorical: But, whatsoever a few modern Authors may say of this matter, I
can never be persuaded, that this chapter talks of nothing else but Faith; and
that from 50. to 60. the Eating, which is so much talked of, signifies nothing
but Believing. We have appealed to Scripture: Let it judge the Case betwixt us.

When in the 52 v. we read how the Jews strove amongst themselves, saying, How
can this man give us his flesh to eat? we know they understood him in the
literal Sense, and wonderd how it could be true. If he had spoken only in a
figurative Sense; it had been easy to have told them so. In other matters, of
much less importance, 'twas his usual custom to expound his meaning. John, the
3. chapter and 4. v. Nicodemus said to him, How can a man be born again when he is
old? He let him understand He did not mean it in the literal sense, but that He
spoke of Baptism: Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Matthew. 13. He proposed to his Disciples the Parable of
the Sower: They understood it not: He presently expounded it to them. The
Parable of Tares they understood as little; but, as soon as they desired him,
He declared to them the whole mystery of it. In these and other occasions, when
he had spoken any thing obscurely, He was always willing to interpret it: And
there was never more necessity than when the Jews were scandalized to hear him
say, the Bread that I will give is my Flesh. If he only designed to give them
Bread and not his Flesh. I will not say He ought to have explained himself,
because to punish their perverseness He might lawfully have left them in their
ignorance; and, though he were the Light of the world, yet He might justly
leave those in the dark who obslinately shut their eyes against him. But, that
our Savior should not only refuse to explicate his words, but also make it his
business to confirm them in an error; that He, who came to instruct the world,
should labor to deceive it; that He, who left the ninety nine sheep in the
Desert, should endeavor to drive the lost sheep farther from the true way
home; Let, who will, say it, A Christian must be ashamed to think it. If he
were then resolved to give us nothing else to eat and drink but bread and wine,
is it probable that He would so industriously repeat the eating of his Flesh
and drinking of his Blood? Is it possible that he should tell them in the 55.
v. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed, if really the meat
and drink were neither Flesh nor Blood? When, in the 24. of S. Luke, our
Adversaries read, our Lord is risen indeed; or, in the 4. of S. John, this is
indeed the Savior of the world, They understand it and believe it in the
literal sense: But, when they read these words, my Flesh is meat indeed, and my
Blood is drink indeed, they believe it is nothing else but sacred bread and
wine. Is this Believing Scripture? No, no; When Scripture speaks as plainly in
one place as in another, and no convincing reason can be given why they force
the sense of this place more than that, if they believe that and not this, They
do not believe the Scripture but themselves; They do not believe because they
read it, but because they like it.

When the Disciples saw how seriously their Master taught the literal sense,
they cried out, in the 60. v this is a hard saying, who can hear it? They
considered it foolishly (says S. Austin) In Psalm. 98.
they understood it carnally, and thought our Lord would chop of morsels of his
flesh, and give it them: They were not only startled at the seeming
impossibility, but also at the barbarousness of the design: And the three
following verses show us how our Savior endeavored to let them know, it
neither was impossible, nor barbarous. Dos this offend you? says He; Do you
think I am not able to make good my words? Surely you know not who I am, you
would not otherwise mistrust my Almighty Power. But what if you shall see the
Son of man ascend up where he was before? Then I suppose you will know that I am
God, and from that miracle conclude that this is easy to me, and that I have
not only wisdom to contrive but power to execute my promise. Dos this offend
you? It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: The words
that I speak unto you they are Spirit and they are Life. I do not intend to
give dead morsels of my flesh, which being separated from my Spirit and
Divinity will profit nothing, because they will not give your souls the lise of
grace. You shall not eat it in the natural form of human flesh; that is indeed
a carnal and a barbarous way of eating it: But nevertheless, under the form of
bread, you shall receive the true and real substance of my flesh; and this is
that spiritual way of eating which you are not yet acquainted with. This is the
mystery which I expect you should believe: This neither is impossible nor
barbarous: This is not contrary to Reason, though it be above it. But yet, says
he, v. 64. there are some of you that believe not: And, v. 65. he tells the
reason why; because, says he, no man can come unto me, unless it be given to
him of my Father. Proud, Silly, Wretches, as we are? We think it is sufficient
to read Gods word; we think there goes no more than reading to believe it; we
never reflect that no man can believe the word of God the Son, unless he first
receive the powerful grace of Christian Humility from God the Father; that
Grace by which we willingly submit our Reason to such mysteries as are above it.

The 66. v. lays before our eyes the sad example of those many disciples who
from that time went back and walked no more with him. They heard the same words
which our Adversaries read; They heard the 63. v. which is so much magnified;
They heard with great attention and curiosity; and if from those expressions
they had so clearly understood, that by his flesh he only meant a holy sign or
figure of it, they never would have damnd themselves eternally by walking no
more with him. They watchfully observed his countenance; his way of speaking;
and, as we better understand a friend when we discourse with him than when we
only read his Letters, so these disciples having the advantage of our Saviors
presence and familiar conversation could not but understand him much better
than those who only read in Scripture a small part of those discourses with
which He entertaind them. They plainly understood that, though he smoothed the
difficulty by telling them He did not speak of carnal eating, yet nevertheless
he still spoke positively, as to the literal Sense: They had not that great
grace of Christian Humility, without which none can universally submit their
Reason to Divine Authority: They could not come to God the Son, because they
were not drawn by God the Father: Proud, as they were, away they went and walked
no more with Jesus Christ, because this mystery was something above their small
capacity; their weak imaginations could not reach it.

See here an ancient Model of the modern Reformation! They heard the Church
teach as our Savior taught, that the Sacramental Bread is Flesh indeed, and
the Sacramental Wine is Blood indeed, And so away they went with these words in
their mouths, This is a hard saying; who can hear it? away they went, and walked
with her no more.

Our Savior, who saw them thus abandon Him, and much more feelingly resented
their eternal loss, than the contempt of his Voracity, did not so much as
offer to call them back again, as certainly He would have done, had they been
only guilty of mistaking what he meant; but turned immediately to his Apostles,
and in the 67. v. said to them, Will you also go away? Whereupon Simon Peter
answered him; Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life;
and we believe and are sure that Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: We
believe, and are sure that Thou art able to make good thy words, although some
people think them hard, and cannot hear them.

What our Savior promised in the 6. of S. John, He performd at his last
supper: And it is no wonder that he talked of it so much before hand, because he
dearly loved those whom he died for, and always had his eye upon the Legacy
which he designed to leave them. The night before his death, in his last Will
and Testament, He left us this holy Sacrament as a perpetual monument of his
Affection. We wrangle and dispute about it, what This is? whether it is truly
Bread, or truly the Body of Christ? We agree that Holy Writ shall be the Judge.
We find, in Holy Writ, four Copies of our Savior's Will and Testament; in the
26. of S. Matthew, the 14. of S. Mark, the 22. of S. Luke, and the 11. of the
1. to the Corinthians. We open all of them; resolving to stand or fall by their
determination. In all the Copies of his Testament, the words are plain, This is
my Body: And, as soon as the words are read, They presently tell us; it is true,
Our Savior plainly says, This is my Body; but yet He only means, it is a
sacred piece of bread, a holy figure of his body. For my part, I have ever
admired, but never can sufficiently admire, in this occasion, the confidence of
some men, that make such noise with Scripture; and yet, as soon as ever the
book is open, tell us the Scripture says one thing, and means another, quite
contrary to what it says.

If it be said, that nothing is more usual than to give Signs the names of what
they signify: I easily confess, it is very true; when things are certainly known
to be Signs: because, Signs being only Substitutes, our thoughts never stop at
them, but are presently fixed upon the things they signify; and, by the same
reason that they put another thing in our minds, it is no wonder if they put
another name in our mouths. Thus Joseph plainly answered Pharaoh's question,
when he said, Genes, 49.26.
The seven Kine are seven years. But when God instituted Circumcision in the
17. of Genesis, He did not say, in the 10. verse, This Circumcision is my
Covenant; but, in the 11. it shall be a token of my Covenant. So, in the 12. of
Exodus, when he instituted first the eating of the Paschal Lamb, from the 5. v.
to the 10. it plainly appears there was something in it more than ordinary, and
that it was not insignificant; so that it is no wonder we find it written in
the 11. v. It is the Passover of the Lord: Moreover, the following verses
explicate the figurative sense; the 26 v. puts the question, what mean you by
this service? What dos it signify? and the 27. gives the answer, it is the
Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, that is, it signifies the Passover. But, in
our present case, 1. the Scripture dos not insinuate before hand, that bread
was an empty Sign of Christ's body; 2. there is nothing in Scripture that gives
evidence for such interpretation of our Savior's words, as I have showed in the
first part of my Discourse.

If any one object, that Bread and Flesh are opposite, and therefore the sense
must of necessity be figurative: For a full answer to this difficulty I referr
you to the 7. of S. Luke, where in the 22. v our Savior says, the blind see,
the lame walk, the deaf hear, the dead are raised. To be blind and see, to be
lame and walk, to be deaf and hear, to be dead and alive, are things quite
disparate and opposite, and yet our Savior's words were evidently true in the
plain literal sense. From whence we may also infer, that as these words the
dead are raised cannot be literally true, unless the carcass be substantially
changed into a living man; so when our Savior says This is my Body, these
words can never be true in the plain literal sense, unless the Bread be by a
miracle substantially changed into his Flesh.

To prove the literal sense, and to convince us of it, what can we wish for
more than the unan^mous consent of all the four Evangelists, and the
subscription of S. Paul? There is not one of them that writes, This is only a
Sign of my body, a mere Figure of my flesh. It Is impossible the Sense should
every where be figurative in so many several places and yet be no where
explicated in the figurative sense. In other things, of less concern, we find
that, what is metaphorically writ by one is explicated by another. S. Luke in
his 11. chapter writes, if I in the finger of God cast out Devils: S. Matthew in
the 12. chapter explains it, if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God. S. John, 6.
chapter writes. Jesus the Son of Joseph, S. Luke 3. chapter explains it, Jesus being,
as was supposed, the Son of Joseph. Our Savior frequently invites the thirsty
to him, and promises them living water: S. John in the 7. chapter explains it, He
spoke this of the spirit which they, who believd on him, should receive. But
these words, which we read in all of them, are not explained by any one of
them. From whence it is easy to infer, that all these sacred Penmen never
understood our Adversaries figurative sense: They literally understood it, as
we do; believd it as they understood it; and writ as they believed it.

S. Mark 4. chapter 34. v. says of our Savior, that when they were alone He
expounded all things to his Disciples. If then our Savior used a Figure, when
he said, This is my Body, it is certain that when they were alone (at least) he
expounded this figure to them. Perhaps the four Evangelists and the Apostle
knew well enough this exposition, but forgot to write it. This will not serve
the turn. Our Savior promised them their memory should ever be assisted by his
holy Spirit: In the 14. chapter of S. John; v. 26.
the Holy Ghost, says he, shall bring all things into your remembrance
whatsoever I have said unto you. Perhaps they every one thought of it when they
writ, but did not think it worth the writing. But if our Adversaries well
consider the sixth Article of Reformation, which tells us all things necessary
to Salvation are contained in Scripture, they will scarce find room for this
reply: because this exposition would have been so necessary to prevent the
Idolatry which they accuse us of, and consequently necessary to Salvation.
Since therefore this Interpretation never could have been forgot, if ever they
had known it; Since it could not be omitted if they had remembered it; it
follows clearly that this explication was never known amongst them, but only is
a new invention of the modern Reformation, directly contradictory to Scripture.

I cannot but admire when I reflect, how thick a mist men's passions and
prejudices raise before their eyes. And this is undoubtedly the reason why so
many able men of the reforming Party study Transubstantiation in Scripture,
search with diligence, and great appearance of sincerity, yet never find it. If
they were equal and impartial judges of the Texts which lie before them, they
soon would see how grievously they are mistaken in the true intent and meaning
of them. By the example of this instance they would judge the rest; acknowledge
the injustice of the Reformation; return home joyfully to their old
Mother Church, and full of admiration of God's mercy to them 1. Pet. 2.9.
show forth the praises of Him who called them out of darkness into his
wonderful light, which guides us through this vale of misery to the
everlasting joys of Heaven. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WORCESTER. August. 24. 1687.
Interroga Majores tuos and dicent tibi.
Ask thy Elders, and They will tell thee.
Deuteronomy. 32.7.
It Is now no less than six and thirty years, Most Sacred MAJESTY, since our City
of Worcester has been honored with the Presence of our King. Our Loyalty was
then sufficiently tried; and now it is abundantly rewarded. ward. Our Loyalty,
which then was so well known to all the world, invited your Royal Brother to
this Refuge: And we employed our best endeavors to preserve his sacred Person:
But 'twas too great an Honor for us: The Almighty took it wholly to himself;
and, by a surprising miracle of Providence, afterward granted to our earnest
Prayers what He before denied to our unfortunate Arms. As we have never
forfeited the credit of our Loyalty, we hope your MAJESTY is well assured we
shall be always ready to expose our lives and fortunes in your MAJESTY's
service. It is not in the power of Subjects to give their Prince a more
convincing assurance that they always will be Loyal, than that they always have
been so. I only wish, with all my heart, that we had ever been as Loyal to the
Church as to the State; and that we had as zealously opposed the Reformation of
our Faith, as we withstood the Alteration of our Government.

When I first appeared in this Place, I made it my business to prove, that
according to principles of Natural Philosophy, the Mystery of
Transubstantiation is neither contrary to Sense nor Reason. In my second Sermon
I endeavored to show, it is so far from being contrary to Holy Writ, that no
judicious Reader, who is free from prejudice, can understand Scripture without
it. And, this being my third appearance where it is expected I should finish
what I have begun, I now undertake to prove it is so far from being contrary to
the purer faith of the first Ages, that for the first eight Centuries the
Fathers universally believed it. Remember the days of old, says Moses, Consider
the years of many generations; Ask thy Fathers and they will show thee, thy
Elders and they will tell thee. My time is short, considering the work I have
before me: But yet I hope it will not be accounted loss of time, to spend one
moment on my knees, in begging the assistance of my Savior, and desiring his
Virgin Mother with all the Blessed Spirits to accompany my prayers upon Earth
with theirs in Heaven.

FIRST PART.
* Before I enter upon our proofs of Transubstantiation it will be worth
observing, how almost all our Adversaries are mistaken, upon a groundless
supposition, that if they can find expressions in the Fathers which import that
the Sacrament is a type a sign a figure, They need not seek any farther; The
question is already decided; The Fathers never believed the mystery of
Transubstantiation. Now, I must needs conless, if we denied the Sacrament to be
a type a sign or figure, we ought to stand corrected: Or, if all this were
inconsistent with the mystery of Transubstantiation, we ought to own our
Fathers Belief was contrary to ours. But if in both these points our
Adversaries are mistaken, we must beg their pardon if we still persever in our
ancient Faith.

* If they would only consider the difference betwixt the inward substance and
the outward form, betwixt the infide and the outside, of the Sacrament; They
would easily reconcile the different expressions which they meet with in the
Fathers writings. When the Fathens were intent upon the outward form, They call
it a type, a sign, a figure; They say it is not his Body and Blood, but that it
signifies it, represents it, and contains it.

* S. Austin in his 23. epistle to Bonifacius, says, the Sacrament of the Body
of Christ is in some manner Christ's Body,.... as the Sacrament of Faith is
Faith. The parity is good betwixt the outward form of bread, and Baptism, in
this respect, that both are signs: Only this difference there is, the first
contains what it signifies, the other dos not. So in his book against
Adimantus, 12. chapter he says. Our Lord did not doubt to say, This is my Body,
when He gave them a sign of his Body. And why should he doubt? If a man give
his friend a purse of money, He dos not doubt to say, This is my Money,
although the Purse be only a sign of it. If a purse be empty, it is an empty
sign: But if it be full, it then contains all that it signifies, and what it
represents is truly and substantially present. Bread in the Old Law was an
empty sign of Christ's Body: The outward form of Bread is still a sign of it;
but not an empty sign, because it really contains the selfsame Body which it
represents. I take no notice of S. Austin's words in the 3. book of his
Christian Doctrine, where he says, Our Savior chapter 16.
seems to command a heinous wickedness,... therefore it is a figure: I take no
notice of it, because He dos not say it is an empty figure. He only says, our
Saviors speech is figurative in opposition to the literal sense of the
Capernaites, that barbarous sense in which, indeed, it is a heinous crime to
eat our Savior's flesh.

* I also pass over Tertullian's words, in his 4. book against Marcion; chapter 40.
This is my Body, that is, This figure of my Body: I pass them over because the
true sense amounts to no more, than that This bread, which in the Old Law was
but a figure of my Body, now in the New Law is my Body. The obscurity of this
great man is well enough known to all that are acquainted with him: Nor can
any, who converse with him, be ignorant that the figure Hyperbaton is often in
his mouth. In the same book, chapter 11. he says, To a Parable will I open my
mouth, that is, Similitude: and (in his book against Praxeas) Christ is dead,
that is, Anointed This is enough to show the affected transposition of his
words: And, for the sense, it may be easily conjectured by the design of his
book; the principal end of which, is to show the correspondency betwixt the Old
Law and the New; to which purpose it was a very pertinent observation, that the
Form of Bread, in the Old Law was an empty figure of what is fullfill'd in the
New. In the same sense Tertullian says in his 1. book against Marcion, that chapter
14.
Christ by Bread represents his Body: that is, by the outward form of Bread He
exhibits it substantially present. So, in his 4 book, he says, that chapter 22.
God the Father represented Christ on Mount Thabor saying, This is my Son. So
likewise in his book, of Prayer, he says, chapter 5.
We pray for the representation (that is, the real presence) of God's Kingdom.
And, again, speaking of the Day of judgment, in his book concerning the
Resurrection, he says; chapter 14.
it cannot be without the representation (that is, the personal presence) of
all all Mankind: They who delight in reading Tertullian may find a great deal
more to this effect; But this is enough to satisfy any rational man that my
interpretation is not forced.

* Facundus of Hermian speaks in the same Dialect, when in his (...) for the
defense of the Tria Capitula, He says; the Sacrament... is called his Body and
Blood; not that the Bread is properly his Body and the Cup his Blood, but
because they contain the mysteries of his Body and Blood. He explicates there,
how signs are called by the names of what they signify: And argues, that the
Sacrament of Adoption may be called Adoption, as the outward forms of bread and
wine are called the body and blood of Christ. The Argument is good: because
these outward forms of bread and wine, considered in themselves, are only
signs; they are not properly the body of our Lord; they are only called so,
because they are types and figures of it; But, that they are not empty signs
the same Author tells us, when he says in the same place, that they are called
so because they contain the mysteries of his body and blood.

* If some of you, perhaps, still think it strange that such expressions as
these should be made use of frequently, by men who really believed this
mystery; For your farther satisfaction you may please to reflect, that not only
the Fathers of the first six Centuries, but also our most eminent Authors who
have written since the Condemnation of Berengarius, and who undoubtedly held
Transubstantiation, nevertheless use the very same phrase of speaking. It would
be tedious to run over many instances: One, out of S. Anselm, will be enough to
satisfy your curiosity. About the end of the eleventh Century when, by our
English Reformers confession, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was fully
settled and established, He writes thus, in his Treatise De Sacramento Altaris,
That similitude of bread, which upon the Altar appears to our corporeal eyes,
considered in it self, is not the Body of our Lord.

* Some people have such little souls, they cannot raise their thoughts above
their vulgar notions; they are not much acquainted with those signs which
signify things present; those signs which are not appointed to supply the
defect of real presence, but only to supply the want of visible appearance: And
therefore they will not allow that there are any such signs in the World. Say
what you will, they mind not what you say, but tell you over and over again,
that, if the outward form of the Sacrament be a sign of his Body, it is certain
his Body is not really and truly present. Have but a little patience; and I
shall quickly clear this point. My Speech and Motion are signs of Life and Soul
in me: And must I believe a Sophister, if any were so silly as to tell me,
Therefore I am a dead man, because it is the nature of all signs to exclude the
real presence of what they signify? The form of a Serpent in Paradise was in
some manner a sign of the Evil Spirit that tempted Eve; and was not this Evil
Spirit really and truly present? The form of a Dove appearing at our Savior's
Baptism; and the forms of fiery tongues appearing on the day of Pentecost,
represented the Holy Ghost; And will you say the Holy Ghost was never really
present, neither one time nor other? The human forms which, in the old
Testament, the Angels usually assumed, represented the Angels; And were those
Angels never truly and substantially present? Such instances as these, I may
presume, our Adversaries do not well consider: if they did, they never would
conclude that the Fathers denied the mystery of Transubstantiation, because
they call the outward form a type, a sign, or figure.

* Besides this mighty difficulty, which I now have clearly satisfied, There
remains one more; which is, that according to the Doctrine of the Fathers, the
Substance of bread remains after Consecration. Here, I must needs confess, they
charge us home: And, if they can perform what they promise, we are always ready
to come over to them. But having been, so long, in full and peaceable
possession of a Truth delivered to us as an ancient article of Faith, they
cannot reasonably expect that we should quit our hold, before they bring clear
evidence against our Title to it. Necessity obliges them to make this bold
attempt. They know, if once they grant that all the Torrent of Antiquity runs
clear and strong against them, they never can be able to bear up against the
stream. They are sensible how plainly the Fathers speak their mind in favor of
this mystery; And therefore search amongst the darkest passages of all their
Writings, where they are glad to meet with any thing that makes a plausible
appearance.

* The Sum of their Objection is this; that S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, and
Gelasius expressly affirm, that the substance of bread remains after
Consecration; and therefore it is not changed into the body of Christ.

* This, at first sight, seems plausible enough, nor is it any wonder if it
startle those who never heard of it before. And yet, if all these great Men, by
their substance, meant no more than the true nature of the outward forms and
sensible qualities; there is no danger of their disbelieving
Transubstantiation. We believe the substance is really changed; and these
Fathers were pleased to say, the substance is really the same: but yet* after
all the noise they make with it, the Fathers and we may agree so far as to be
both in the right, if we take the same word in different senses; and they by
substance mean one thing, whilst we mean another. Philosophy, both old and new,
distinguishes betwixt the inward substance and the outward forms of all
corporeal Beings. These are the usual and familiar object of our Senses; that is
an entity so subtle and so metaphysical that nothing but our Understanding can
discern it. It Is not, indeed, a Spirit; but it is no more to be discovered by
our Senses, than a human Soul is in a Body. Extension, figure, color, and its
other qualities, are the Apparel which it wears; and these affect our Senses;
But the naked Substance of all Bodies is perpetually hidden from them. However,
although Philosophers make this distinction betwixt the inward substance and
the outward forms, nevertheless the Generality of Mankind look no farther than
their Senses lead them: They judge of bodies by their qualities and natural
effects: By these they sensibly discern one Substance from another: And this is
all they think of, when they talk of Substance. When any of the Fathers say,
the Substance or nature of bread and wine remains after consecration, they
only condescend so far as to accomodate their way of speaking to the vulgar
phrase: And truly, what they mean, we all believe: We doubt not but all, which
is vulgarly understood by substance, is the same: We doubt not but our Senses
tell us truth; and that all the outward forms and qualities of bread and wine
remain unaltered: The Council of Trent declares there is no change in these;
Sess. 13. can. 2.
manentibus speciebus panis and vini. If therefore the Fathers use sometimes
this vulgar notion of Substance, what wonder is it if sometimes they tell us,
that the nature or the Substance is the same? What wonder is it, if S.
Chrysostom in his epistle to Cesarius, write thus? As before Consecration we
call it Bread, but after it is no longer called Bread but the Body of our Lord,
although the Nature of Bread remains in it; and it dos not become two Bodies
but one Body of Christ: So here the Divine Nature being joined to the Human,
they both make one Son, and one Person. By the Nature of a Body we usually
aprehend no more than the exterior qualities which we discover by our Senses;
And when we find a change in these, we usually say the Nature changes, although
the Body still remain the same. And, by the same rule, when the accidents make
still the same impression upon our Senses, although the Body by a miracle be
changed, we say the Nature is the same. Besides, These very words, which are
produced against us, show clearly that S Chrysostom distinguishes betwixt the
Nature of bread, and the Body of bread. Dos not he say that although the Nature
or accidents of Bread remain, yet the Body or Substance of bread dos not
remain; because there remains but One Body; and this one Body, if we believe
him, is not the Body of bread, but the Body of Christ?

* With as little reason they triumph because Theodoret says in his 2.
Dialogue; The mystical Symboles remain in their former Substance form and
figure, and may be seen and touched as before: And Gelasius, in his book De
duabus in Christo naturis, says, the Substance or Nature of bread and wine dos
not cease.... they remain in the propriety of their Nature.

* Theodoret dos not speak of the corporeal Substance of bread by which it
differs from a Spirit; but expressly names the mystical Symboles which are the
outward forms and accidents of bread and wine: And Gelasius urging the same
argument against the Eutychians, uses the word Substance only once, and the
word Nature twice, to let us see that by the Substance of the mystical
Symboles, or (as he calls them) the Sacraments which we receive, he only means
the nature or the essence of the sensible Accidents.

* And now I desire to know what wonder there is in all this? Is it any unheard
of News to Men of Letters, that such words as substance, nature, essence, are
promiscuously made use of, even by Philosophers? and that, by them, they mean
to signify the notion of any other predicament, or any real being, as well as
that of substance? S. Austin was undoubtedly a great Philosopher, and yet He
calls every real Being by the name of Substance. In his Enarration upon the 68.
Psalm, he says. Quod nulla substantia est, nihil omnino est: That which has no
substance is nothing at all.

* If this be true (you will say) their argument against the Eutychians will be
good for nothing. Excuse me. The Eutychians held that there was only One
Nature in Christ, because they were pleased to fancy that his human nature was
absorpt in the Divinity and changed into it. To prove the substantial change of
human nature into the Divinity, they argued from the miraculous change of bread
into the body of Christ; which argument they never would have urged, if they
had not known that the Catholics of that Age believed the mystery of
Transubstantiation. Theodoret and Gelasius answer, that the outward forms of
bread and wine remain the same as formerly; from whence it follows evidently
that, not only the accidents of human nature but also, the very subsiance of
it, still remains in Christ: Because the accidents of human nature, separated
from the substance of it, are neither capable of hypostatick union with God,
nor of exercising the vital operations of a Man. But mang learned men who read
Gelasius and Theodoret, want either skill or patience to understand them. They
find these words, the substance of bread remains, and are so much transported
with the joyful news of any thing that looks but like an argument against the
Old Religion they have undertaken to reform; they do not well consider what the
word may signify, but willingly suppose the Sense is just the same as they
would have it; set their hearts at rest; and look no farther.

* I have now sufficiently examined what the Fathers say concerning the outward
form of the Sacrament; what they mean by calling it a type, a sign, or figure;
and what they understand when they call it the substance or nature of bread. I
now come close to the main point of the Question: What they have taught and
constantly believed, during the first eight Centuries, concerning the inward
substance of the Sacrament; Whether they believed it was the substance of bread
and wine, or the substance of Christ's body and blood?

SECOND PART.
Paschasius Rathertus a French Monk, Native of Soisson in Picardy, wrote a
book, in the year 831. de Corpore and Sanguine Domini, at the request of one of
his Scholars, called Placidius, an Abbot, to whom he dedicated it. He makes it
his business to explain and prove three points: 1. that the body and blood of
Christ are truly and substantially present; 2. that the substances of bread and
wine remain no longer after Consecration; 3. that the body is the very same
which was born of the Virgin, suffered on the Cross, and rose from the
Sepulcre. He was the more willing to write this book, because some people out
of ignorance began to doubt of several truths relating to the Sacrament. This I
gather from an epistle of Paschasius to Frudegard, where I find these words,
Although some people are out of ignorance mistaken; nevertheless as yet no body
openly contradicts this doctrine, which all the World believes and professes.

Our Adversaries take a great deal of pains to persuade us, that Paschasius was
the first broacher of this Doctrine; from him they date the first Rise of it,
about the beginning of the IX. Age, although it did not take root nor was fully
settled and established, till toward the end of the eleventh. They add; that
this was the most likely time for the Enemy to sow his Tares, when the
Christian World was lulled asleep in ignorance and superstition; that the
generality of people, being quiet and secure, were ready to receive any thing
that came in under a pretense of mystery in religion; but the men most eminent
for piety and learning in that time made great resistance against it. This is
the Account which now is generally given by our modern Writers, and
particularly by the Author of a late Discourse against Transubstantiation.

It Is easily said; and the contrary is as easily proved. Read Leo Allatius in
his 3. book of the perpetual agreement betwixt East and West, and you will find
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople saying, that the bread and wine are not
an image or a figure, But that they are transmuted into the body and blood of
Christ. Read Haymo Bishop of Halberstadt in his Treatise De Corpore and
Sanguine Domini, (you may find it in the 12. Tome, of the Spicilegium) his
words are these; We believe therefore, and faithfully confess and hold, that
the substance of bread and wine, by the operation of the Divine Virtue, is
substantially changed into another substance, that is, Body and Blood..... The
taste of bread and wine remains, and the figure; the nature of the substances
being wholly changed into the body and blood of Christ. Read Theodorus (...)
Abucara, in the Bibliotheca Patrum printed at Lions, you will find that in his
22. Opuscule he says, The Holy Ghost descends, and by his Divinity changes the
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. I omit several others, who
lived in the same Age with Paschasius, and all witness that the Church believd
the mystery of Transubstantiation. It Is well known that the 3. part of
Paschasius's doctrine occasioned some disputes about the manner of speaking.
They allowed the body to be the same in substance, but not altogether the same;
because it is not in the same form; it has no corporal motion or action; in a
word, it is present (in some respects) after the manner of a spirit,
imperceptible to sense, all in the whole and all in every part. This Spiritual
presence of his body was much urged against Paschasius to prove, the body is
not absolutely the same: But nevertheless, if we do not prefer darkness before
light, we cannot but see that They who wrote against the third part, did not
write against the second; and they, who quarreld with his way of speaking, did
not deny the mystery of Transubstantiation; as appears by the testimonies of
his pretended Adversaries. Amalarius in the 24. ch of his 3. book, says We
believe the simple nature of bread and wine mixed (with water) to be changed
into a reasonable nature, to wit, the body and blood of Christ. Rabanus
Archbishop of Mentz in the 10. chapter of his 7. book, to Theotmarus, De sacris
ordinibus; Who, says he, would ever have believed that bread could have been
changed into flesh, and wine into blood, unless our Savior himself had said
it, who created bread and wine and all things out of nothing? These men were
also Authors of the same IX. Age; And after all these testimonies I leave you
to judge whether the IX. Age did not generally believe the mystery of
Transubstantiation; or whether Paschasius was the first that broacht it in the
Western Church.

I do not insist upon the authority of Bertram either one way or other: but
however I shall give you a short account of him, as much as may suffice to
justify my letting him alone. The first question, which he proposes in the
beginning, is page 1.
whether the body of Christ be done in a mystery, or in truth? that is to say,
according to his own words, whether it contain some secret thing, or whether
the bodily sight do outwardly behold whatsoever is done? I have not hitherto
met with any Author of the IX. Age, that ever said, Our eye sees all that our
faith believes: but we are to suppose that some body said so, or else that
Bertram was mistaken. He answers, with a great deal of truth, that p. 5.
it cannot be called a mystery wherein there is nothing covered with some veil
and removed from our bodily senses. Outwardly, says he, the form of bread is
set out, but inwardly a thing far differing, p. 6. London-Edit. 1687.
which is not discerned to be Christ's body by the carnal senses. Afterward he
compares this Sacrament with that of Baptism; and finally in the 18. page he
concludes; Therefore the things that are seen, and things that are believed,
are not all one. This was indeed a mighty piece of business; and one would
think that eighteen pages were little enough to prove, that things visible and
things invisible are not all one. However the Answer is as wise as the
Question, and dos not contradict the doctrine of Transubstantiation. His
comparison of Baptism, though very unequal, is tolerable enough; and shows how,
in all Sacraments, the inward virtue is distinguished from the outward form. But
when he begins to take a ramble among page 18.
our Fathers that were under a Cloud: when he inquires so seriously page 19.
how the grosseness of a very thick air could sanctify the people? and tells
us how page 20.
the cloud gave out the cleanness of sanctification, in respect that it
contained invisibly the sanctisication of the Holy Ghost: when he makes it an
article of our faith page 24.
to believe firmly that in the Wilderness Christ made the Manna and the Water
of the Rock to become his own body and blood, as truly and as effectually as
now he changes the bread and wine: when he goes on, and argues that page 26.
even as he could do the one a little before he sufferd, so likewise he was
able to do the other a great while before he was born: finally, when he tells
us further-more, that the Sacramental bread and wine is as much turned into the
body and page 68.69.
blood of the believing people, as into the body and blood of Christ; and
proves it stoutly, because where there is but one sanctification, there must
needs follow the like mystery: When I consider what stuff this is, and how he
has put it together; I begin to think it is no great matter, either what he says,
or what he would say if he could speak. Several learned Men have taken pains to
excuse him, and to show that all these instances were only intended to prove
the difference betwixt the outward form and inward substance of the Sacrament.
If this were all; I confess he might mean well; but He has expresst himself so
very ill, that (for my part) I do not think him worth quarreling for. I am very
well contented to leave him as I find him, and to let our Adversaries make the
best they can of him. If He pursued his notions too far, and left the Church,
He was the first that ever did so, in this matter: and besides, He wandered by
himself, for no body in the IX. Age followed him.

Let us now consider the VIII. Age; And we shall see the stream of Truth run
clearer, as we approach nigher the Fountain. S. John Damascen in his Orthodox
Faith, 3. Book and 14. chapter, discourses thus: The Body truly joined to the
Divinity is that which was born of the Virgin; not that the Body, He assumed,
descends from heaven; but the bread it self and wine are changed into the Body
and Blood of God: which, if you ask, How it can be done? It Is enough for you to
hear, it is done by the Holy Ghost.... Nothing says he, is more clear and
certain, than that God's word is true and efficacious and omnipotent..... After
a wonderful manner they are changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, and are
not two, but one and the same... Neither are the Bread and Wine a Figure of
Christ's Body and Blood, but the Body it self of our Lord, accompanied with his
Divinity: For our Lord himself said; This is, not a sign of my Body, but my
Body; nor a sign of my Blood, but my Blood.

Hitherto ye have heard S. John Damascen; Pray, what do ye think of him? Do ye
think that No body in the VIII. Age believed the mystery of Transubstantiation?
Well: but He was only one man. What say ye then, if I produce 350. more? I mean
the 350. Bishops who sat in the VII. general Council, called in the 87. year
of the VIII. Age.

* The Iconoclast Heretics would not allow any relative worship; and therefore
refused all worship of any images but the Eucharist. All other images of
Christ's Humanity, subsisting by themselves, were (as they fancied) false
images, and favored the Heresy of Nestorius who gave his Humanity a proper
subsistence by it self: But the outward form of the Sacrament not being a thing
subsistent by it self, but supported by the invisible substance and Person of
Christ, was a true image and might not only be retained but adored. So clear it
is, that the Iconoclasts did not deny Transubstantiation; but, because they
believed it, therefore they allowed the adoration of the Eucharist. They say,
indeed, the Sacramental bread must not be figured in the shape of a human body,
for fear of introducing Idolatry; but they only feared the introducing of other
Image Worship, given to other pictures of our Savior which do not really
contain Him. However, they did not speak their mind so plain, but that the
Council doubted of their meaning: and, supposing that by the word image they
understood an empty sign, the Bishops quarreld with the seeming contradiction
of their terms, calling the Eucharist, sometimes an Image, sometimes his Body:
And argued against them that if it be an empty image, it cannot be this Divine
Body.

Read the VI. Action, and you will find the Judgment of the whole Council
deliverd plainly in these words: None of the Trompets of the Holy Ghost, the
holy Apostles and our illustrious Fathers, did ever call our unbloody
Sacrifice... an image of his Body. Neither did they learn of our Lord, so to
say and confess... He did not say, Take and eat the image of my Body.... The
bread and wine, before they are sanctified, are called Types; but after their
sanctification they are properly called the Body and Blood of Christ: They are
so, and are believed to be so. These are the words of 350. Bishops, who all
with one voice declare, They firmly believe that, what was bread before, is
after consecration properly Christ's body, and not only an image of it: And
this is all we understand by Transubstantiation.

So much for the VIII. Age. I come now to the 3. next Ages, the V. the VI. and
VII. And because the Reforming Party is willing to believe S. Austin favors
them, we will begin with S. Austin. I am not ignorant that in his Writings upon
the Ghospel of S.John. he copiously dilates upon the figurative sense; and that
in his 3. book De Doctrina Christiana, he says that the Sacrament is a figure
of our Lord's Passion, which when we receive, we ought to lay up in our memory,
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. But on the other side, I know,
that as when S. Austin says, in his 9. Tract upon S. John, that the conversion
of water into wine was a figure of the spiritual conversion of the Law into the
Ghospel, He dos not deny the substantial change of water into wine; so when he
says, the Sacrament is a figure of Christ's Passion, He dos not deny
Transubstantiation. In the 9. chapter of his 2. book, Contra Adv. Legis and
Prophetarum, he says, that with faithful hearts and mouths we receive the
Mediator of God and men Christ Jesus, giving us his flesh to eat, and his
Blood to drink; although it seems more horrible, to eat man's flesh, than to
kill it, or to drink man's blood, than to shed it. In this place, he first
distinguishes two ways of eating; oral, and spiritua; and then asserts them
both. And I could wish they would take a little notice of this place, who so
much please themselves with popular declamations against the pretended
barbarousness of this Mystery. In his Comments upon the 33. Psalm, He makes no
difficulty of admitting all the real consequences of this mystery, which to our
Adversaries seem absurd and impossible; as for example; that Christ's Body
should be at the same time in two places, that he should hold himself in his
own hand, give himself to his Disciples, keep himself to himself, and the like.
First he moves the difficulty: Who is carried in his own hands? In another's
hands one may be carried; No man is carried in his own. Afterward he answers;
Christ was carried in his own hands; when commending to them his own Body, He
said, This is my Body; For he carried that Body in his own hands. I will only
mention one more testimony of this Father; but so plain a one, that it is
impossible any man in his wits should have uttered if he had not believed the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. In his Comments upon the 98. Psalm; Christ,
says he, took flesh of the flesh of Mary; in this flesh he walked here with us;
this flesh he gave us to eat, that we may be saved: No body eats this flesh,
but first Adores it. Observe his words: He plainly speaks of oral eating; he
dos not mean only believing: if he did, he would not say, we always adore
before we eat; because it is evident, we do not adore before we believe. Pray,
what is this we adore before we eat? is it only apiece of bread, a wafer, a
sacred figure of Christ's body? Surely you will not make S. Austin, and all the
Christians of his time. Idolaters? Adore a thing which they believed was not
their God? No, no: They believed that although before the words of Consecration
it was only a piece of bread, yet after Consecration it was by God's
Omnipotence substantially changed into the Body of Christ, and so became their
God as well as their Food; And therefore the Christians of that Age adored the
Sacrament before they durst approach to eat it; and S. Austin was so zealous
for this Adoration, that he says in the same place, It is not only lawful to
adore, but a Sin not to adore.

The Dispute that was betwixt Nestorius and S Cyril of Alexandria, plainly
shows that in those times this mystery was universally believed. Nestorius
fancied there were two persons in Christ, the one true God, the other true Man,
and pretended to prove that the Flesh of Christ and his Divinity are not united
in one Person. The Scripture plainly told him that we eat the Flesh of Christ;
But, said he, We do not eat the Divinity; Therefore the Flesh and the Divinity
are not united in one Person. If S. Cyril had believed that what we eat with
our mouths is mere bread, He might easily have answered; That this argument only
proves, the nature of bread and the Divine nature are not united in one Person.
But, because he believed that the Sacrament which seems mere bread, is not any
longer bread, but the true substance of Christ's Body; therefore he answered
that although we do not eat the Divine Nature, yet the holy Flesh of Christ is
not common Flesh.... it is the proper Body of the Word, which gives life to all
things. This Argument and Answer you may read in his Apology for his
Anathema's. The Catholics and the Nestorians both agreed in the common belief,
that the Sacrament is not bread, but the Flesh of Christ: Otherwise Nestorius
had been the most silly Disputant that ever lived, and S. Cyril had been quite
infatuated that did not give another Answer. Nestorius argued: We do not eat
the Divinity; Therefore the Flesh is not united to the Divine Person. S. Cyril
answered: The Flesh, which we eat, gives life; therefore it is united to the
Divine Person; without which it profits nothing, according to our Savior's
words in the sixth chapter of S. John.

Gelasius Bishop of Cyzicus in his book De duabus in Christo Naturis, proves
against the Eutychians that there are two Natures in Christ; Because in the
Sacrament there are two natures, to wit, the visible nature of the outward
forms, and the invisible nature of Christ's substance: And explicating how this
is performed, he says; The Bread and Wine are changed, by the Operation of the
Holy Ghost, into the Divine substance. The Accidents of bread and wine remain
according to Gelasius, in the propriety of their Nature; but yet the bread and
wine are changed into the Divine Substance. Think a little of this; and tell
me, what it is, if it be not Transubstantiation.

Theodoret in his first Dialogue, taking notice how Jacob in the 49. of
Genesis, gave our Savior's Blood the name of Wine, and our Savior in the
Ghospel gave Wine the name of his Blood, He says, The reason is manifest;
because he would have those who partake of the divine mysteries, not to mind
the Nature of the things which are seen; but, by the change of names, believe
the change which is made by grace. In the second Dialogue, he says of the
Sacramental bread and wine: They are understood to be, what they are made to
be; and are believed to be such; and are Adored, because they are the same
which we believe them to be. In the first Dialogue, he says, the Sacramental
bread is changed; In the second, he says, it is adored. What change is this
which makes the Sacramental bread deserve to be adored? Consider it a while,
and you will find it nothing else but Transubstantiation.

I should be tedious, if I undertook to lay before you all the Testimonies of
the Fathers who, in these three Ages, have writ upon this subject. These which
I have produced already, are beyond exception: They declare the Faith of the
Ages they lived in; They say the Sacramental bread is changed into the
Substance of Christ; They say, No body eats it, but first adores it; They say
it is a Sin not to adore it: All this They say, and this is all we understand
by Transubstantiation.

I come now to the first four Centuries, and put the Question to those Fathers
who had the happyness to flourish in the best and purest times of Christianity;
Whether the inward Substance of the Sacrament be bread and wine, or whether it
be the Body and Blood of Christ? If it be true, that the inward Substance of
the Sacrament is really the Body or Flesh of Christ, it follows evidently that
it is no longer Bread: And, whether it be true, or no, is the Question which
the Fathers of the first four Ages are to answer.

S. Ignatius in his epistle to the Romans, speaking of this bread of God, says
it is the Flesh of Jesus Christ.

S. Justin martyr, in his Apology to Antoninus Pius, says, We are taught that
it is the Body and Blood of Jesus Incarnate.

S. Ireneus in his fifth book against heresies, ch 11. speaking of the bread
and wine, says that by the word of God they are made the Eucharist which is the
Body and Blood of Christ.

Origin in his 7. homily upon the 6. of Numbers, says Then in a figure, Manna
was their meat; but now, in reality, the Flesh of God the Word is our true meat.

Optatus, in his 6. book against Parmenian, gives the Sacrament no other name:
What is the Altar? (says he) but the seat of Christ's Body and Blood? He
repeats it over and over again; And, if all the while he meant only a figure,
it is strange he should never call it by the right name.

S. Ephrem the Deacon, in his book, De Natura Dei curiose non scrutanda; says,
Our Savior has given us his Body and Blood; and that this gift of his exceeds
all admiration, all expression, all understanding: Which he would never have
said, if he had thought it had been but a figure.

To all these proofs, and several more which I omit, the Author of a late
Dialogue in which the mysteries of Trinity and Transubstantiation are compared,
returns this answer: that the Reformers themselves general say the Eucharist
is the Body of Christ; And yet they all deny the mystery of Transubstantiation.

This is soon said; and amounts to no more than this: That the Reformers say as
we do, and think otherwise; They say, it is his body; and they think, it is
not. But you must give me leave to tell you, that although their words look one
way and their thoughts another; I have no reason to suspect this fallacy of
speech in the good Fathers of the first four Centuries. What they received, in
plain terms, from our Savior and his Apostles, They deliverd with the same
sincerity and candor to succeeding Ages. Hear what S. Hilary of Poictiers
tells you, in his 8. book De Trinitate, where taking notice of our Savior's
words in the 6. chapter of S. John, He says, There is no place lest for doubting of
the Truth of his Body and Blood; for now, by our Lord's Profession, and our
Faith, it is truly his Body, and truly his Blood. Hear S. Epiphanius in his
Ancorat; where, to oppose the Allegorical Sense of Origin in the Creation of
Paradise, He alleges several places out of Scripture; which, though they are
hard to understand, are universally believed in the plain literal sense.
Amongst the rest he produces the example of the Eucharist, and thus discourses
upon it: We see it is not equal, nor like the Body of Christ; and yet our
Savior would pronounce, This is my Body; Nor is there any one who dos not
believe these words of his: For he, who dos not believe them to be true, falls
absolutely from the state of Grace and of Salvation. What think ye of this? Do
ye think these great Men did not understand the faith of the Age they lived in?
Do ye think they were not able to inform the World, concerning the Faith of
former Ages, much better than our late Reformers, who came into the World above
a thousand years after them? They tell us, The literal Sense is matter of
Faith; and that they who do not believe it are neither in the State of Grace,
nor of Salvation.

If it be said, that any Real Presence of Christ's Body, or the Impanation of
his Person, is enough: What need is there of Transubstantiation to verify the
literal Sense? The Answer is obvious and clear. 1. Our Savior did not say, My
Body is here, but This is my Body: And although any real presence is enough to
make good the former Assertion, yet nothing less than a Substantial change can
verify the later. 2. Although by virtue of an hypostatick union, it may be as
true to say, This bread is Christ, as to say, This Man is God; yet still 'twill
be as false to say, This Bread is the Body of Christ, as to say, This Humanity
is the Divinity. Besides, it falls out a little unluckily that this Invention,
only serves to pull down the old Transubstantiation, and to set up a new one;
by changing the subsistence of bread, into the divine Subsistence, the Second
Person of the B. Trinity.

It cannot be literally verified that This Bread (or This thing which was
bread) is the Flesh of Christ; unless the bread be changed into his flesh; that
is, cease to be bread, and begin to be his flesh: And this is the substantial
change which we call Transubstantiation. There are two sorts of changes: one
accidental, as when cold water is made warm; another substantial, as when our
Savior changed water into wine. An accidental change may warm the water; but
only a substantial change can make it wine. In the same manner, an accidental
change may make bread a Sacrament, but nothing less than a substantial change
can make it the Flesh or Body of Christ.

* The Fathers often compare these changes, but never confound the one with the
other. S. Cyril of Jerusalem in his 1. Mystagogick Catechize, observes that,
as Bread, by invocation of the Trinity, is made the Body of Christ; so meats
offered to Devils are made impure by invocation of them. In his 3. Catechize,
he says; As bread, after the invocation, is the Body of Christ, so the Ointment
after consecration is the Chrisme of Christ. S. Ambrose in his 4. book De
Sacramentis, chapter 4. proves that Christ can effect great changes above nature,
because by his grace We are new Creatures in Him. But yet the Fathers do not
say, These changes are equal to That by which Bread is made the Body of Christ.
These Assertions, This meat is impure, This ointment is the Chrism of Christ,
This man is a new creature in Christ; All This is evidently verified in the
plain literal Sense by a mere accidental change: But when the Fathers say, This
bread is the Flesh of Christ, Nothing but a substantial change can verify the
plain Sense of the Letter; Nothing can make it literally true but
Transubstantiation.

Bread is one Body, one corporeal Substance: The Flesh of Christ is another
Body, another corporeal Substance. Change that into this; You change one Body
into another, one Substance into another; And then, I pray, What change is
this, if it be not Substantial? What is it, if it be not Transubstantiation?
It Is clear, that when the Fathers of the first four Ages speak of the wonderful
change made in the Sacrament, they speak of the change of Bread into the Flesh
or Body of Christ; They speak not, of an Accidental change, but a Substantial
one, which now the Church calls Transubstantiation: And therefore I have
nothing more to do but cite the Fathers words, and so conclude.

S. Gaudentius is his 2. Tract upon Exodus, says, He, the Creator and Lord of
Nature, who produces bread out of the earth, produces also his own proper body
out of bread, because he can do it, and promised to do it: And He who produced
wine out of water, produces also his blood out of wine.... For when he gave the
consecrated bread and wine to his disciples, He said; This is my Body, This is
my Blood. Let us believe him whom we have believed; Truth cannot tell a lie.

S. Chrysostom in his 83. homily upon S. Matthew, has these excellent words;
Let us every where believe God Almighty; nor contradict him, although what He
says seem contrary to our Reason and our Eyes..... His word cannot deceive us;
Our Sense is easily deceived: That never erres. This often is mistaken. Since
therefore He says, This is my Body; Let us be persuaded of it, and believe
it.... These are not the works of human power. He who did these things at his
last supper, He it is who now performs them. We only are his Ministers; it is He
that Sanctifies, He that Transmutes the bread and wine into his Body and Blood.
So that, as the same Saint says in his 25. homily upon the 1. to the
Corinthians, That, which is in the Chalice, is that which flowed from his side,
and that we are partakers of.

S. Ambrose in his book De his qui mysteriis initiantur; chapter 9. Perhaps you will
say, says he, I see quite another thing: How do you assure me that I receive
the Body of Christ? And this is that which remains for us to prove. How great,
says he, are the examples which we use to show, that it is not the thing which
Nature formed, but the thing which the Blessing has consecrated; and that the
Blessing has greater force than Nature; because, by the Blessing, even the
Nature it self is changed. Afterward He instances in the change of rods into
Serpents, and of water into blood; and thus pursues his discourse. If, says he,
the word of Elias was powerful enough to command fire down from Heaven, shall
not the word of Christ be able to change the Nature of the Elements? You have
read, of the whole Creation; He said, and they were made, He commanded, and
they were created: The Word therefore of Christ, which could make out of
nothing that which was not; cannot it change those things which are, into what
they were not?

S. Gregory Nyssen in his Catechistical Discourse, chapter 37. professes the same
faith: I do believe, says he, that by the word of God, the Sanctified bread is
transmuted into the Body of God the Word... Not that by mediation of
nourishment it becomes the body of the Word; but that immediately by the Word it
is transmuted into his body, by these words, This is my Body.... the Nature of
the things, which appear, being transelemented, that is, transubstantiated,
into it.

S. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem, in his 4. Mystagogick Catechize, discourses
thus: Do not consider it as mere bread and wine; for now it is the Body and
Blood of Christ according to our Lord's own words. Although your Sense suggest
otherwise, let your faith confirm you, that you may not judge the thing by the
Taste.... and a little after, he goes on; knowing, says he, and holding for
certain, that the bread which we see, is not bread, although it taste like
bread; and the wine which we see, is not wine, although it taste like wine. S.
Hierome in his Catalogue, and Theodoret in his 2. Dialogue, are witnesses that
S. Cyril was the Author of this work. And now I appeal to the judgment of my
Auditory, whether I may not venture to defy any Catholic of this present Age,
to express in plainer terms our Faith of Transubstantiation.

* However, It Is very strange, (you will say) if this were the faith of the first
Ages, that None of the Heathens, nor so much as Julian the Apostat, should take
notice of it. This, if we believe a late Author, is to a wise man instead of a
thousand Demonstrations, that no such doctrine was then believed.

* As for Julian the Apostat; Of three books, which he wrote, we have but one,
and that imperfect. Had he objected it, it is certain S. Cyril of Alexandria
never would have taken notice of it in his Answer: So cautious he is in
speaking, even of Baptism, that he passes it over in these terms; I should say
many more things.... if I did not fear the ears of the profane. For commonly
they laugh at things they cannot understand.

* As for the Heathens, it is sufficient to reflect what care was taken by the
primitive Christians to hide the mysteries of our Religion, and to keep our
books out of the hands of Infidels. This privacy of ours made Celsus call our
Doctrine Clancular: and Origin, in his first book against him, answers that it
is proper, not only to Christian Doctrine, but also to Philosophy, to have some
things in it, which are not communicated to every one. Tertullian, in his 4.
book, Ad Uxorem, chapter 5 for this reason, would not allow Christian women to
marry Pagan husbands: will not your Husband, says he, know what you taste in
Secret, before you eat of any other meat? And S. Basil in his book Concerning
the Holy Ghost, chapter 27. says, that The Apostles and Fathers in the beginning of
the Church, by privacy and silence preserved the dignity of their Mysteries.

* But, because my Author thinks this Demonstration worth a Thousand, I am the
more willing to answer him in his own words, that though I have untied the
knot, I could with more ease have cut it. For since it is plain and evident from
all the Records of the first eight Centuries, that Transubstantiation always
was believed, it is the wildest, and the most extravagant thing in the world to
set up a pretended Demonstration of Reason against plain experience and matter
of Fact. This is just like Zeno's Demonstration against Motion, when Diogenes
walked before his eyes. A man may demonstrate till his head and heart ache,
before he shall ever be able to prove, that which certainly was, never to have
been. All the Reason in the World is too weak to Cope with so tough and
obstinate a difficulty.

I have now performed my promise. I have in three Sermons proved; 1. that
Transubstantiation is neither contrary to Sense nor Reason; 2. that it follows
clearly from the plainest words in Scripture; 3. that it has been the perpetual
faith of the Catholic Church, not only since Paschasius, but ever since the
first foundation of Christian Religion. And now I not only beg of you, but
earnestly conjure you by all that ought to be most dear to you, by all your
desires and expectations of eternal Happyness, to consider seriously and
leisurely three fundamental principles of Christianity.

1. That without Faith it is impossible to please God. They are the words of S.
Paul to the Hebrews, chapter 11. v. 16.

2. That there is but one Body, one Spirit,... one Lord, one Faith. They are
the words of the same Apostle to the Ephesians, chapter 4. v. 4. and 5.

3. That we ought to follow the Direction of this one Lord, to find out this
one Faith. This Direction is written in the Prophet Jeremy, ch 6. v. 16. Thus
says the Lord: stand in the ways and see; And ask for the Old Paths, where is
the good Way, and walk therein; and you shall find rest for your souls.

It Is natural for men to please themselves with thinking how much they are wiser
than their Predecessors. Nothing is more agreeable to Man's proud inclinations,
than to be always finding faults and giving magisterial directions for the
mending of them: And this is that which makes the very Name of Reformation
pleasing and delightful. To give it its due; Reforming is a pretty Thing, if
it were well applied. If every Man would make it his chief business to reform
himself; O! what a Happy Reformation should we live to see! But this alas, is
much the smallest part of all our Business. There is no Vanity, no Pleasure, in
Reforming of our selves: We only gain a Victory where we desire it not; and
only triumph over our own faults. A proud man would as willingly sit out, as
play at such small game as this: All his delight is to reform his Neighbors.
And here, I must confess, if Men were only a little overbusy in reforming of
their neighbors Manners, the Folly of their Pride were in some measure
tolerable. But when our insolence attempts the Reformation of their Faith, and
of that Church to which Divine as well as Human Laws require Obedience and
Submission; the specious Name and popular Pretense will never sanctify the
Crime. If they who, in the last Age, undertook the Reformation of our Church,
were known to be infallible; some grains of blind Obedience might be easily
allowed. But since they may perhaps be grievously mistaken, it very much
behooves you to consider it. It Is a common saying; if a man cheat me once, it is
his fault; but if he cheat me twice, it is mine. It Is not the first time that a
considerable Party in the Catholic Church has separated from the whole, upon
these plausible pretenses of Reformation, to correct Abuses, Innovations, and
Errors. Did not the Arians, thirteen hundred years since, begin to separate
upon this popular pretense? Did not they, in the same manner, amuse their
Proselytes with plausible stories, of errors, innovations, and abuses, crept
into the Church? Did not they make as great a noise against the
Consubstantiality of God the Son? complain as much of Spiritual Tyranny?
inveigh as much against the Council of Nice for making, introducing, and
imposing, a new, unheard of, Article of Faith: quite contrary to the belief of
three preceding Ages, and plainly opposite to Holy Writ? All This, you know,
was false: You know that, though the word was new, the faith was old and
plainly proved by Scripture: And yet these popular noises which then the Arians
buzzed into the peoples ears, amused them so. They never entertained the least
suspicion of their being cheated. Had our Reformers been the first, and you had
been deceived, The fault had then been theirs. But, since the same trick has
been played so often in the Church, if now you are deceived, the fault is yours.
I have laid before your eyes, this day, a prospect of the eight first Ages.
They accuse the Catholic Church of making a new Article of Faith: And, by the
most Authentic Records of Antiquity, it has been plainly proved that they
themselves are guilty of unmaking an old Article of Faith, as ancient as Christ
and his Apostles. Remember the days of old; Consider the years of many
generations; Ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and They will
tell thee. Stand in in the ways, and see; and ask for the old paths, where is
the good way, and walk therein: There is no other Way which can conduct you
safely to the Joys of Heaven; which I wish you all, in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. When this Sermon was preached before his Majesty,
several paragraphs (which are all marks with a *) were omitted, for brevity
sake; but are here printed, as they were found in the Author's papers.


A SERMON Preached before their MAJESTY'S AT WHITE HALL. April 23. 1688.
Printed by his Majesty's Order.
Sine me nihil potestis facere.
Without me you can do nothing.
John. 15.5.
THe principal difference betwixt the daring Boldness of a Heathen and the true
Valor of a Christian, Sacred MAJESTY'S, consists in this; The first is
grounded in Pride, the second in Humility: The first begins from a vain
Imagination of our own Sufficiency, as if we were able to do all things; The
second from a true Idea of our natural Weakness who are able to do nothing of
our selves. This was the reason why our Savior Jesus Christ instructing his
Apostles, those great Hero's of the Church, was pleased to settle this
foundation for the superstructure of their great and glorious Actions, Without
me you can do nothing. That they might better understand it, He compared them
to the branches of a Vine, which being separated from the Root immediately fade
and wither without bringing fruit. I am the Vine, you are the Branches; Without
me you are fruitless; Without Humility all that seems great and glorious is but
a splendid Bubble, a mere empty Nothing.

All this, you will say, is very true: Humi'ity is never out of Season. But why so
much of it in this Day's Ghospel? Why is it now in Season, more than any other
time? The Reason is; Because no Virtue is so apt to puff us up with Pride, as
Fortitude. A Hero, among men, is too often like Lucifer, among the Angels. From
the Meridian of his aspiring height, if he look down, it is with Contempt, if
upward, it is with Emulation of being like the Highest. No wonder, whilst he
lives and flourishes, if he desires to be like God; For, even when he is dead,
Posterity is apt to make him so. Hence it is, the Hero's of Antiquity have
peopled an imaginary Heaven with so many Deities, and Mankind was so ignorantly
Superstitious as to offer Sacrifices to them. Had we not been instructed better
by the Word of God, and particularly by the Ghospel of this Day; Our Nation,
for ought I know, might have been guilty of the same extravagance: S. George
might then, perhaps, have been a God among us. But since all Catholics, are
well acquainted with this great and fundamental Truth, contained in the words
of my Text; Without Christ all the Apostles, all the Saints in Heaven, can do
Nothing; The Knowledge of this Truth has dashed the hopes of Hell; the Gates of
it can never prevail against us; We cannot, if we do not quite renounce our
Faith, We cannot be in danger of so gross Idolatry. My first design, in this
Discourse, is to maintain the Honor which redounds upon S. George from
Solemnity we celebrate: My second is, to show the obligation incumbent upon
all, and particularly those of his Profession, to follow his Example. That I
may have success in both, I shall endeavor to obtain the assistance of my
Savior, addressing my humble prayers to Him without whom we are able to do
Nothing.

FIRST PART.
From a deep Sense of this important Truth, which is the first foundation of
Christian Humility, the Catholic Church has ever been persuaded that it is her
Duty to appoint the Festivals of Saints, for these two reasons: 1. to offer up
our humble Thanks to God, for all the signal instances of his great Power and
Mercy, all the Favors He so graciously bestowed upon his Saints, who could do
nothing of themselves: 2. to offer up our humble Prayers to God, that since we
also are not able to do any thing without him, He may please to help us with
proportionable Graces, such as may enable us to follow their Example. Humble
Thanksgiving, Humble Prayer, are the Duties of this Day-In the performance of
the first, we raise our thoughts to Heaven, and contemplating this great Saint
before the Throne of God (where he acknowledges, and renders Thanks for, all
the miracles of Grace, which raised him to so high a Station of Glory there) we
fall devoutly down upon our knees, with admiration of God's great Mercy, and
Thanksgiving for the powerful assistance which appeared so signally in him who
of himself was able to do Nothing. In the second, we look down upon our selves,
and conscious of our Frailty we begin to Pray with all Humility, that since his
Goodness has been heretofore so great, He may continue it to us: And, at the
same time, this great Saint, remembering the danger he has escaped,
compassionates the danger we are in, and humbly Prays that since the same
Redeemer died for him and us, the selfsame helps which carried on the work of
his Salvation may be employed in ours, Having thus fairly stated and divided the
whole Duty of the Day, I shall proceed to justify the Honor which from hence
redounds upon the Saint whose Feast we celebrate.

I need not tell you, that if any Saint deserve a Festival in honor of his
memory, S. George may very well expect it from us more than any other Nation.
All Christendom has been ambitious of his Patronage; and almost every Part been
at a holy strife with one another which should honor him most. In Portugal
they look upon him as the Soldier's Patron: In Germany we find a Military
Order dedicated to him: In Italy we have seen the great decay of the Italian
Soldiery recovered by S. George's Regiment. In Asia the Georgians, which way
soever they employ their forces, carry with them a fair Banner with the Picture
of S. George upon it. In the Armenian Churches they religiously observe his
Feast. Among the Greeks they keep the same Solemnity; And they who travel in
those parts can hardly find two Churches in a Town whereof one is not dedicated
to S George. Thus have all Countries studied to outvie each other in the Honor
of this Saint. But as the Genius of this Nation suits more than any with his
proper Character, We bid the fairest for his Patronage. What Saint more proper
to be Patron of a Warlike Nation, than a Warlike Saint? A Nation whose Valor
has been always envied and admired by all the World, what could could they want
to make them Saints as well as Soldiers, but the Patronage and great Example
of S. George, a Soldier and a Saint?

But yet, I know not how it comes to pass, there are a certain sort of people
in the World so superstitiously over-jealous of God's Honor and so scrupulous
in misinterpreting their Duty to Him, that they dare not upon any terms allow
the least proportion of Honor to a Saint, for fear of giving God too little,
and the Saint too much. I do not pretend to enter now into the Lists of
Disputation; but only to present you some few obvious reflections, relating to
the main Dispute, which may contribute something toward the removal of these
groundless fears and scandalous misapprehensions.

In the first place; If we think as humbly and as meanly of the Saint, as he
dos of himself, We cannot therefore be accounted guilty of Idolatry: The Saint
is then no more our Idol than he is his own. You cannot imagine that the Saints
in Heaven idolize themselves: If therefore we esteem the Saints no more than
they esteem themselves; There is no danger (upon this account) of honoring
them too much. The Saints in Heaven are more humble now than ever. It Is true;
They see God face to face; They see in him all they desire to see: But yet this
Knowledge dos not puff them up with Pride, because they see in Him that He is
All, and they are Nothing. They only believed it upon Earth; but now they
plainly see it. S. Paul is now persuaded more than ever, that Gel. 6.3.
if a man think himself to be Something, when he is Nothing, he deceives
himself. All the Aposiles plainly see the Evidence of what our Savior once
taught them; without me you are able to do nothing. S George himself is now
convinced, more sensibly than ever, of the Prophet's Doctrine; Ierem. 9.23.
Let not the Mighty man glory in his Might; Let not the daring Hero glory in
his Courage; Let him rather humble himself so much the more in presence of his
God, who made him Great. They All annihilate themselves in presence of their
God, Job. 26.11.
The Pillars of Heaven tremble in his sight; They tremble, not so much with
fear, as with an awful and profound Humility; They Apos. 4.10.
cast down their Crowns before the Throne; and All at once acknowledge they are
Nothing of themselves. Pause here one moment, and reflect how little the
greatest Saints esteem themselves: Reflect again; We value them no more than
this; And then you will ingenuously. confess, We do not value them too much.

In the second place; if by our Festival Thanksgiving to their God and ours, We
only honor them as they honor us; that is to say, as Branches of the selfsame
Vine without which they, as well as we, are able to do nothing; Then, I
suppose, we may conclude, We do not honor them above their merit. And, if we
well examine the Design of these Solemnities; if we consider nothing on the one
side, but the Honor which accrews to them, because we bear them company in
giving Thanks; and, on the other side, the Honor which redounds upon us by
their gracious return of the like Kindness, their espousing of our Cause, their
joining of their interest with ours; We shall find that, barely by our Festival
Thanksgiving-Days, we only honor them as we are honored by them. Although we
celebrate this Day the Sacrifice of Mass in memory and honor of S George,
Council of Trent. sess. 22. chap. 3.
we offer not the Sacrifice to him, but to God alone, who crowned him with
immortal Glory; offering our humble Thanks to God both for his Victory and his
Eternal Triumph. By our Thanksgiving we direct the Sacrifice no more to this
great Saint, than to your Sacred MAJESTY'S; for in the self^ame Sacrifice we
offer our most hearty thanks to the same God for the inestimable Blessing of
your Sacred MAJESTY'S Coronation upon Earth, the Annual Solemnity of which
returns this Day, with that of S. George's Coronation in Heaven. We join our
Thanks with his; He joins his Prayers with ours. If it be such an Honor to
this great and glorious Saint, that we poor Sinners bear him Company, attend,
and wait upon him to the Throne of Grace, to offer up our Thanks with his:
Consider well, and tell me whether or no, it be not a great Honor to us
miserable Sinners, that this great and glorious Saint appears before us,
introduces us, presents us to our God and his, and offers up his Prayer, his
Petition, his Address with ours? Can you imagine a more honorable Testimony of
our Excellency, than that the Blessed Saints in Heaven, notwithstanding all
their glorious advantages above poor Sinners, nevertheless esteem so much, and
set so great a value on, God's Image in us, as to offer up their humble
Supplications for us, and to interpose with such profound Humility betwixt our
angry God and us, as if in Heaven they so highly prised us, as to solemnise
Humiliation-Days in favor of us?

This, I confess, appears to me enough to counterballance all our
Holy-Day-Thanksgivings upon Earth. But I have yet more weight to put into the
Scale, which will not fail to bear it down. If it be such an Honor, to the
Saints above, that Sinners here below keep Holy Days to celebrate their
Victories with marks of joy and thanks; surely we must allow that it is no
little Honor to repentant Sinners, that the Angels and Saints in Heaven
celebrate, with jubilation and thanksgiving, all the Victories of Grace by
which we overcome our Enemies on Earth. I do not say, They keep our Holy Days;
because all such expressions, transferred from Earth to Heaven, loose their
sense, and we are always at a loss for words, when ever we pretend to talk of
things so far above us: But yet I am inclined to think that all those Days, in
which a Sinner is converted, are Thanksgiving-Days in Heaven: Luke. 15.7. and
10.
There is Joy in Heaven, There is Joy in presence of the Angels and Saints of
God, over one Sinner that repents. Consider this, and you will easily
conclude that we receive great honor, whilst we give it; and that we are
ungrateful, if we think we give too much.

In the third, and last place; if the Honor we allow to Saints be of the
selfsame kind with what we do to one another. We cannot then be reasonably
scandalized at the excess; we cannot, surely, be so vain as to imagine that a
Saint in Heaven is not as deserving as a Sinner upon Earth. We daily pray to
one another, as we pray to them: The Honor is no more Divine when we desire
the Prayers of a Saint, than when we beg the Prayers of a Sinner: We injure
Christ no more when we demand their intercession there, than when we ask the
intercession of our Neighbors here: The Mediatourship of Christ is still the
same, whether the Prayers of our Friends be interposed on this side, or on
the other side of Heaven.

I cannot but reflect, whilst I am talking thus, it may perhaps appear a little
strange, that I employ my time to show how little honor we allow our Saint,
when many people are in expectation of a Panegyric to persuade them that they
cannot honor him too much. But it is enough for me if I have done him justice.
I am sure our Saint desires no more than he deserves; And I have said enough to
prove that he deserves as much as we allow him. By our desiring of his
intercession we do him no more honor than we do to one another. By our
Thanksgiving for his Happyness, we only are so grateful, as to honor God in
him, who honors God in us. By our Consideration of his Merit, we conceive as
humble an Idea of him, as our Saint dos of himself; and are, in that respect,
as innocent as he.

O! what a Joy it is to a dejected Sinner, that S. George himself was once a
Man infirm and frail as well as we; and that the Difference which now we so
admire betwixt him and our selves, is not in any Excellency he can boast of,
but a pure effect of God's great Mercy to him. It Is true here, what S Bernard
says upon the like occasion; This Man was once like us; framed of the same
clay, cast in the same mould, and subject to the same infirmities of Flesh and
Blood: We have reason to rejoice, and to be ashamed: rejoice that He is gone
before us, and be ashamed that, though we may, we will not follow his Example;
Which is an Obligation incumbent upon All, and particularly those of his
Profession, as I shall show you in the second part of my Discourse.

SECOND PART.
As Nothing is more difficult than for a man to be a Soldier and a Saint, So
there is Nothing which our God appears more zealously concerned for, than the
Reputation of so great a Work; Nothing of which He is more jealous, than least
the admiring World, whose eyes are dazzled with the splendor of Heroic
Actions, may rob Him of the Honor, and assume it to themselves. He will not
allow the Branch 'to glory in the Fruit it bears; because it cannot bear fruit
of it self: Divide it from the Vine; it withers without Fruit, Men gather it,
make fire, and burn it.

But, though the Branch be fruitless when it is separated from the Root, Yet
nevertheless as long as it remains united to the Vine it flourishes and
fructifies: John. 15.5.
He who abides in me, brings forth much Fruit 1. John. chapter 5. v. 4.
This is the Victory, says the Apostle, by which we overcome the World, Our
Faith (I mean Our Faith in this our Savior's Doctrine) that though without Him
We are able to do nothing, Yet with his help we may be able to do all things:
John. 15.7.
If you abide in me, if you place all your trust, your hope, and confidence in
me, ask what you will, it shall be done. A Diffidence in our own strength, A
loving Confidence in God, is so agreeable, it charms him so, He in a manner
lends us his Omnipotence, and by his Grace enables us to conquer all things.

S. Paul, of all men living, had the least opinion of his own sufficiency; He
confessed he had not, of himself, the power to think so much as one good
thought; And yet he doubted not but he was able to do all things by the
Strength of Grace; Psalm. 4.13.
I can do all things, says he, through Christ who strengthens me. Although he
was not present when our Savior encouraged his Apostles, when He carefully
forewarned them of the dangerous Adventures they were like to meet with, when
He told them that although their Enemies were strong yet He was infinitely
stronger; Although S. Paul was absent when our Savior gave them this
Encouragement, he was as much assured of his Protection, as if he had been
present, and had heard Him say, John, chapter 16. v. 33.
Take Courage, I have overcome the World.

Nothing could be more seasonable, than this Comsort, to a Soldier, who values
above all things the Security of his Salvation, and desires to be a Saint. A
Soldier and a Saint are things so hard to reconcile, that He who has the
Courage to encounter any Death, and look it in the face as boldly as S. George
himself, has seldom Courage to attempt the following of his Example, but
concludes, that in so dangerous a state of Life, it is morally impossible to be
a Saint.

It Is not that Sober men are scrupulous upon the Quality of that Profession; or
that they think the State of life unlawful. They know that when S. John the
Baptist preached Repentance to the People, and when the Soldiers came among the
rest to learn their Duty, He did not bid them throw away their Arms; he did not
tell them their Vocation was criminal, he did not say that there was no
Salvation for them if they did not quit those dangerous occasions of Sin: He
only gave them such Directions as were proper to their Calling; giving them to
understand, that they ought Luke chapter 3. v. 14.
not to Do violence, But observe the Order of military Discipline, and be
Content with their Pay.

They do not think it is a Sin to be a Soldier; but are afraid that it is
almost impossible to be a Soldier without Sinning. Nor do they think that
Piety is inconsistent with the Courage of a Soldier: They know that Virtue
raises men above the fear of Death; and that No man so much contemns this life
as he who values nothing but the next. But yet they observe and by their daily
observation find, the Circumstances are extremely difficult in which a Military
life engages them; and when they seriously compare their weakness on the one
side with the difficulty on the other, they are almost ready to Despair.

To tell these men, The Grace of God is powerful; to mind them, that although
the Enemies of our Eternal Happyness are numerous and strong our Savior by the
power of his Grace has vanquished all of them; and that he therefore bids them
reassume their Courage, because He has overcome the World: This, I confess, may
be some comfort to them; though it be not perhaps enough to allay those fears
and apprehensions which arise from the immense disparity betwixt our God and
us. Alas! what great encouragement to him, who knows his frailcy, to consider
that our Savior Jesus Christ has overcome the world? What wonder that a Man,
who was true God, could conquer all his Enemies? Show us a Man, say they,
infirm and frail, whose flesh and blood are subject to the same Corruptions as
ours; Let such a Man divide his whole life betwixt Camp and Garrison; And, if
He notwithstanding all this lives and dies a Saint, then we shall have some
hopes that we may be enabled by God's Grace to follow his Example.

If this be all they ask, if this will answer all their fears, and make them
ashamed to plead such vain excuses for a loose and irrel gious life; Let them
reflect upon the great Example of the Saint whose Feast we celebrate. He was so
much a Soldier, and so eminent in that Profession, that by the Splendor of
his Military Virtues, he obscured and darkened all his other Excellencies:
Nothing else appears upon the Authentic Records of his Fame; The rest lies
buried in the Rubbish of Antiquity, under the Trophies of a Soldier and a
Saint. He was no more a God than we are: setting aside God's Grace, he was a
man no better than the mea he left behind him: And yet he lived and died a
Saint: He now triumphs for all Eternity in Heaven: Thence He looks down upon us
with a sensible compassion of their cowardly mistake, who think it is
impossible to follow his Example: And, if he might but speak, He would exhort
them, in our Savior's words, Take Courage I have overcome the World: I, who
when I lived on Earth, desired as much, and more than you do, the Salvation of
my soul; who had the selfsame fearful apprehensions, which you have, of the
difficulties which occurr in such a dangerous Vocation: I, who thought it
almost impossible to be Devout in Camp, Sober in Garrison, Innocent in such
corrupted Conversation; Nevertheless, by the assistance of God's Grace I came
to be what now I am; Take Courage; I, as frail a man as you are, I have
overcome the dangers which you are so much afraid of, I have overcome the World.

I have said enough to show that Soldiers may, if they please, be Saints: and
nothing now remains, but this; that all good Christians, all Saints, must of
necessity be Soldiers. It Is not sufficient that the Soldier follow the Example
of the Saint; The Saint must also follow the Example of the Soldier. To let
you see, there is no new mystery in what I say, I take the liberty to lay before
your eyes the Field of Battle which engages all the World, without exception,
under one of these two Standards, either that of Jesus Christ, or that of
Lucifer. S. Michael had defeated him in Heaven; But however, upon Earth he
reinforced his bafled strength; and to make sure of his intended Conquest of
our Paradise below, he would not openly invade it, but surprised it, by a base
inglorious treachery, without proclaiming War. Having thus possessed himself of
this low World, the Prince of Darkness governed it, he domineerd and
tyrannized, till Jesus Christ the Son of God appeared against him; 1. Ie. 3, 8.
and was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. He
immediately set up the standard of the Cross. It Is true; He pressed none to serve
him; He only listed Volunteers; Math. 16.24.
If any man will (says he) come after me Let him take up his Cross, and follow
me. But yet, to show there is no Neutrality allowable in such a War, He
proclaimed himself an Enemy to all that fought not for him; Math. 12.30.
He who is not with me, is against me.

The Church, in Scripture; is compared in several places, to a Vineyard, to a
Kingdom, to an Army: To a Vineyard, because under the care of one Husbandman;
to a Kingdom, because governed by one Prince, and to an Army, because under the
Conduct of one General. As in this Vineyard every Branch abiding in the Vine is
fruitful: As in this Kingdom every good man is a Loyal Subject to his Prince:
So in this Army all good Christians are Soldiers, fighting every one against
the common Enemy, under the Standard and Command of Jesus Christ our General.

Raise up your thoughts above the world: Consider all the Blessed Spirits who
are happy there: Assure your selves there is not one of them a Saint triumphant
now in Heaven, who was not formerly a Soldier militant on Earth. S. Paul
assures us, that there is not one who wears a Crown of Glory there, but what he
fought for here; 2. Tim. 2.5.
He is not crowned, says he, except he have fought lawfully.

Our Savior tells us in the Ghospel of S. Luke, Our Enemy the Devil is both
Luke. 11.21.
Strong and Armed: And is it not then the Duty of all Christians to arm against
him? Hear how S Paul describes a Christian, and tell me what he meant, if not a
Soldier? Ephesians. chapter 6.
Put on the whole Armor of God, your Loins girded with Truth; taking the
Shield of Faith, and the Helmet of Salvation. And why all this? ibid.
That you may be able to stand against the Devil; the Apoc. 12.9.
Old Serpont whose History begins in Genesis and ends in the Apocalypse.

S. George is always pictured fighting with a Serpent. The Story, which perhaps
was first occasioned by the Picture, is a Fable: But however, if the Maxim of
Mythologists be true, that there is seldom any Fable without some foundation in
History, we may believe the Picture is, D. Heylin. Hist. of S. G.
at least in part, Historical; as being thus contrived of purpose (in those
times, and by those men, who most affectionatly were devoted to our Martyr) to
publish to Posterity how bravely he refell'd the Devil, that Old Serpent, the
old Enemy of Mankind; with how much courage he resisted all his violent
assaults; And with how much constancy he stood immovable ibid.
in the profession of his Faith: the whole Church praying with him, and
kneeling (like the Virgin) by him, in that holy Action, that God would give him
strength to live and die victorious in a War which all good Christians are
engaged in, and a War in which we all are equally obliged to follow the example
of our then Victorious and now Triumphing Saint.

Whenever we see the George hang at the Breast of any Knight of that most
noble and heroic Order, I could wish it would mind us, How happy all those are
who by a frequent memory of his Example wear a deep impression of it in their
Hearts. I cannot but admire the Piety of that great Edward Ill.
Prince, the Glory of his Times, and Ornament of Europe, who in the Institution
of it, took such care to recommend it, with such marks of honor, to Posterity.
Nor can I pass without reflection, how suitable the Statutes are to the
intention of the Founder and how well they answer his design; by ordering that
the George be never laid aside, although the other Ornaments upon occasion may
be let alone, and only are of obligation upon solemn Days. Because the
Spiritual War, in which all Christians are Soldiers, is perpetual and without
intermission; Because the Devil, like a cunning Serpent, always lies in ambush
ready to surprise us; Because he every day so frequently assaults us and
obliges us to be upon our guard; Therefore the Image of this Fighting Saint
must always be before their eyes, always appear upon their breasts, and always
awake the memory of those, who, over and above the common tie of Christianity,
are by their Knighthood bound in honor not to lay aside S. George's resolution
of encountering the infernal Serpent, the malicious Enemy of their Eternal
Happyness, that so they may at length receive an Everlasting Crown of Glory.
And this is the reason why, at the Investitre of any of these Knights, when
first the George is put about their Necks, the Chancellor of the Order reads an
Admonition importing that They wear the Image of the Blessed Soldier of
Christ, S. George, to the end that by his imitation they may be provoked, and
having stoutly vanquished their Enemies both of Body and Soul, they may not only
receive the praise of this transient Combat, but be crowned with the Palm of
Eternal Victory. Not only They whose Dignity entitles them to wear the George
upon their Breasts, but All who with respect behold it there, are animated and
instructed by it, to discharge the Essential Duty of a Christian, whose Life is
a continual Warfate upon Earth.

S. George himself had never been Victorious without God's Grace. Without
Christ, he had been able to do Nothing. The very same Grace we may have for
asking, if we are sincere. The whole Courch prays, this Day, that God may grant
it us. Let us Therefore Conclude; and join our Prayers with Here Is: O God, who
by thy Blessed Martyr George's intercession and merits do rejoice us,
mercifully grant, that we who by him crave thy Blessings, may receive them by
the Gift of thy Grace, Through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.

A LETTER Concerning the COUNCIL OF TRENT.
SR,
Having perused the The History of the Council of Trent, written in Italian by
Pietro Soave Polano, translated by N. B. printed London. 1676. in fol. pages
769. If my Reader have a different Edition, he may observe his whole number of
pages, and (by the Rule of Three) as this of mine is to that, so will my
quotations be to his.
Author you so much recommended to me, I am apt to fancy that never any two
Historians disagreed more than yours and mine; the one so zealous in exalting,
the other in depressing of the Council. But yet I am not of opinion that this
was the only difference bewixt them. Pallavicini had the freedom of the Vatican
Archives; He referrs himself to the Records of the Council, and the writings of
He setts down their names, l. 8. c. 10. n. 14.
such Persons as were Members of it: Moreover. He is so far from being partial,
that D. Still. Rat. Account.
Aquilino says He has done the Church more disservice by his Answer, than his
Adversary had done by his History. As for your friend Soave, I am afraid he is
apt to make the worst of things, even when he speaks truth as to the substance.
His intimate acquaintance with the Archbishop of Spalatro, and his
correspondency with the French Huguenots. are enough to make me suspicious of
him. If you tell me, he was a Popish Friar. I must mind you, that he was a
Venetian Papist, that he lived in a time of great dissentions betwixt the State
of Venice and the Pope, and that he was even then engaged in writing against
the Pope's proceedings. It Is hard to say how much he was a friend to the Church,
But any man may see how bitter an enemy he was to the Court of Rome. He liked
well enough to be meddling with State Affairs, and the Senators consulted him
as an Oracle: which unusual honor was enough to make him proud and factious;
and, whether it did or not, He only knows who sees men's hearts. However all
this put together is enough to make me suspect him. Pallavicini, you will say,
being of the Court-party deserves to be suspected too. But, if that be all you
have to say against him, we will not quarrel about preliminaries, nor loose
time in disputing what grains of allowance are due to each of them. Upon
condition you will believe your friend Soave when he speaks well of the Council, I
am content to believe Pallavicini whenever he speaks ill of it.

You remember how easily, when I saw you last, you agreed with me, that if the
Council of Trent were as General, as free, and as legal in all it is
circumstances, as the first four Councils were, you must needs own your self
obliged in conscience, to submit to it, and to leave of Protesting against it
'Twas fair and reasonable, and what I might expect from a Son of the Church of
England: I desired no more in hand, but was willing to give credit for the rest.

I might have told you that if the Council had been only Patriarchal; it would
have bound the English Reformers to the obedience of non-contradiction. Three
British Bishops sat in the 1. Council of Arles: and S. Athanasius in his 2.
Apol. says that they were present in the Council of Sardice, which ratified the
Pope's power in decision of Appeals: From whence you may conclude, that the
British Clergy were subject to the canons of Arles and Sardice, and
consequently to the Western Patriarch. We find them also afterward in the
Council of Constance where voting by Nations the English were one of the four
in condemning these doctrines of Huss and Wickliff, that The Pope is not the
immediate Vicar of Christ, and that The chief Bishop of the Roman Church has no
Pri^nacy over other particular Churches. I might have added the testimony of
your own Dr. Field, who in his book of the Church freely confesses, that The
Decrees of Popes made with the consent and joint concurrence of the other
Western Bishops, do bind the Western Provinces that are subject to him as
Patriarch of the West. But this is not the case: the Council of Trent is truly
General; and, if the Reformers cannot manifestly prove the contrary, they
remain without excuse. The Objections which you sent me in your Letter, I have
considerd at leisure, and, according to promise, have sent you here my Answers:
but, before I set them down, I must beg your pardon if I try your patience with
some few remarks which follow. Chapter Gov. P. IV.

1. A General Council requires, either the presence of all the Catholic
Patriarchs, or their Legates, with the Bishops of so many Provinces as can well
convene, or their Delegates; or else (in their necessary absence) it requires
that the Acts and Decrees be approved, either by all, or by the major part of
the absent Prelates.

2. As for such a General Council as comprehends all the Bishops of the
Catholic Universe, there never was yet any. We find always a greater or lesser
number, according to diverse circumstances; propinquity of place, peace of
Princes, numerosity of Sects, etc. The first four Councils, of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, by reason of the Oriental Heresies,
were held in the East, and consisted principally of Oriental Bishops. In the I.
were present only the Pope's two Legates, and three Western Bishops. The II.
had no Western Bishop at all, but only was afterward confirmed by the Pope and
his Council. The III. had only three Delegates, sent by the Pope and his
Occidental Council. They transacted most of their business, and condemned
Nestorius, without the presence of the Antiochian Patriarch. The IV. had only
four Legates sent by the Bishop of Rome, two African Bishops, and one Sicilian.
They acted without Dioscorus the Alexandrian Patriarch. They deposed him for
favoring Heretics, and for his contumacy against the Sea of Rome.

3. If all Catholic Prelates, or the much greater part, be personally present
in the Council, there is no need of farther acceptance to confirm it. But, this
wanting, it is supplied by the after-acceptation of such persons as are capable
of a vote, and so many as, if they had been present, would have made it the
much greater part of Catholic Prelates, that is, of such as were not before
shut of the Church by Heresy or Schism. The II. and V. General Councils
became such by the confirmation and after acceptance of Damasus and Vigilius
with their Western Bishops; and it is a fundamental principle of Government not
simply Monarchical, that No Laws can be promulgated, no Unity preserved, if of
their Governors the lesser part be not regulated by the greater.

4. The Council remains General, notwithstanding the absence of some
considerable Churches: 1. if they cannot conveniently come: 2. if they refuse
without just hindrance: 3. if they were formerly cut of by Heresy or Schism.
The Catholic Church is narrower than Christianity and a Council may be
General, though the Church were reduced to one Patriarchate.

5. All that were capable of a voice in any General Council, were summoned to
Trent The Eastern Bishops, in the Turks Dominions could not conveniently come,
there being war betwixt Christians and Turks. The Division, which occasioned
the Assembly, arose only in the West, and therefore there was less need of
their presence. Moreover six Greek Bishops sat in the Council: And, ten years
after, the Wittenberg Divines sent the Augustan Confession to Hieremy Patriarch
of Constantinople, whose Answer to them differs very little from the Decrees of
Trent. It Is true; Cyril Lucar 1629.
published a Calvinistical Contession: But his immediate Successor Cyril of
Iberia assembled at Constantinople a Synod of 23. Bishops, besides the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem; And again, his Successor Parthenius
assembled another of 25. Bishops, and amongst them the Metropolitan of Moscovy:
Both these Synods anathematized Lucar with his Adherents; and also justified
these Tenets of the Council, the Corporal Presence of Christ's Body and Blood
with the Symboles; Invocation of Saints; Veneration of sacred Images; Prayer
and Alms for the Faithful deceased with repentance, as betterable in their
present condition by them; Free will; seven Sacraments; Church Infallibility,
etc. See Leo Allatius, De perpetuo Consensu etc. l. 3. See Monsieur Arnauld's
Answer to Claude l. 4 ch 7.

6. The absence of the Protestant Clergy from the Council did not hinder it is
being General. 1. They who are not Bishops, have no right to sit there. 2. When
Bishops contumaciously absent themselves for fear of Censure, their presence is
not requisite; otherwise farewell the Power of all General Councils. 3. There
is no place due to them whose Doctrines have been anathematized in former
General Councils. Veneration of Images was declared lawful in the II. of Nice.
Our Canon of Scripture, Purgatory; Seven Sacraments, and Pope's Supremacy, were
defined in the Council of Florence: Auricular Confession and
Transubstantiation, in that of Lateran.

7. Although in the first Sessions under Paul III. there were only about 48.
Bishops. 3. Benedictine Abbots, 5. Generals of Religious Orders, with about 40.
able Divines by way of Counselors: This paucity under Paul or Julius was amply
recompensed by a greater number of Prelates under Pius IV who all unanimously
received and ratified the former Acts of the Council. If you count them, you will
find in the Catalogue, 270. to which if you add the learned Divines who
assisted, the whole number amounts to about 450. persons.

8. A General Council requires, that the Pope either preside in it; or approve
the Acts of it, as in the case of the II. and V. General Council. In the IV.
VI. VII. and VIII. the Protestants allow that he presided To the III. he
deputed S. Cyril. To the I. he sent his Legates. Osius, you will say, subscribed
before them. 1. It Is thought he presided in the Pope's name with them 2. If not,
it was a pure indulgence of honor to him: The Legates subscribed before all
the Patriarchs. 3. The subscriptions were manifestly irregular, because the
Bishop of Antioch who was the III. Patriarch, suscribed after the Bishops of
Egypt, and also those of Palestine, which were subject to him. I have now done
with my remarks, and shall make what have I can with your objections, setting
them down in the same order you sent them.

I. The Eastern Bishops were absent: and the Protestants would not go to the
Council. A. 1. There were six Greek Bishops present: Afterward three Eastern
Patriarchs, and two Assemblies of their Prelates approved the chief points. The
Protestants had no right to a decisive voice: Their opinions had been censured
in former Councils, and were like to be condemned again in this: If, for these
reasons, they absented; 'twas their own fault: The Council was never the worse
for it. 2. Read the Bulls of Convocation: you will find that all and every one
who, either by law, by custom, or by privilege, have any right to be present,
or to deliver their opinion, in General Councils, were summoned to appear in
Trent. 3. Soave himself relates how there was a deliberation of sending, and
granting safe conduct, to the Greek Churches under the Turk; p. 451.
but it was presently seen, says he, that these poor men afflicted in
servitude, could not without danger, and assisiance of money, think of
Councils. He says also, that p. 408.
although the Pope was put in mind, that to send Nuncio's into England and to
Princes elsewhere, who do profess open Separation from the Sea of Rome, would
be a disreputation to him; yet he answered that he would humble himself to
Heresy, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls to Christ, did become
that See.

II. In some of the first Sessions there were not above fifty Bishops. A. The
difficulties and disturbances of the Times bear all that blame. All was fully
recompensed in the end, by a numerous and unanimous ratification of all, and by
the acceptance of the absent Prelates afterward. Soave says, that, under Pius
IV. p. 504.
the Actions of this Council were in greater expectation than in former times,
in regard the number of the Prelates were assembled four times as many as
before. He says, p. 757.
All the Decrees made in this Council, under Paul and Julius, as well of Faith
as Reformation, were recited: And the Secretary going into the midst did
interrogate, whether the Fathers were pleased that Confirmation should be
demanded of Pope ^ius IV. of all things decreed under Paul, Julius, and his
Holiness; and they answered, not one by one but all together, Placet.
Pallavicini says the same; only he proves that l. 24. c. 8.
the votes were given, as usually, one by one.

III. Many of the Bishops were only Titular: And many made, during the Council,
that the Papalins might over-vote the Ultramontans. A. As to the first part;
Soave takes notice only of two Titular Bishops, the Archbishop of Armagh in
Ireland, and Upsal in Sweden; both driven from their Sees by persecution of
Protestants, both true Bishops by their Ordination, and both sent by the Pope
in the beginning of the Council. The second part, being barely asserted, locks
like a groundless calumny, and may justly be supposed such, till some proof
appear.

IV. The Popes, of those times, and major part of the Prelates, would never
allow this Title, of the Council, Representing the Universal Church: Therefore
they themselves did not look upon it as a General Council. A. Here I must beg
your pardon, if I think you very much mistaken in your inference. This Title
was usurped by the Councils of Constance and Basil; but never assumed by any
Council, which was totally approved. You know very well, that Catholic Divines
are divided upon the point; whether the Pope be superior to a General Council;
or whether a General Council, without him, be so complete a Representati e of
the Univerial Church, as to be superior to the Pope? They who maintained the
superiority of a General Council, were zealous for this Title; and the others
constantly opposed it: But both parties always agreed, that the Council of
Trent was as truly General, as the first four Councils were, or any have been
since.

V. It was never received by the Protestants: Nor by the French Catholics. A.
1. The Council of Nice was never received by the Arians. 2 It was universally
received by both Ecclesiastical and Civil State of France: in point of Doctrine
3. The Decrees of Reformation were approved by all the Catholic Clergy of that
Kingdom. In the Assembly at Blois, in the year, 1576. The Archbi hop of Lions
in the name of all the Ecclesiastical State of France begged the assistance of
the King's Authority to put this Reformation in execution. In the Assembly of
Melun, 1579. the Bishop of Bazas, in their name, made the same request to the
King, chiefly because they are tied and bound to all Laws, so made by the
Catholic Church, upon pain of being reputed Schismatical, and of incurring the
curse of Eternal Damnation. At Fontainebleau in the year, 1582. The Archbishop
of Bourges tells the King, The stain and reproach of Schism rests upon your
Kingdom amongst other Countries. And this is the cause, why the Clergy does now
again most humbly desire, etc. In the General Assembly of the States at Paris,
in the year, 1614. Cardinal Perron, and Cardinal Richelieu, then Bishop of
Luson, prosecuted in vain the same request. Thus you see the Catholic Clergy
of France unanimously receiving and approving the Council of Trent in matter of
Discipline. The Civil State, as it has no share in the Votes of the Council, so
their non-approbation cannot diminish the Authority of it. You may guess at the
reasons of excepting against it, by what the Queen Regent, Catherine de
Medicis, was pleased to tell the Pope's Nuncio; that the Council could not be
admitted, because by the Council's Decrees the King could not gratify such
Ministers of State, as had done him singular service, with the means of
Religious Houses, and of Church. Benefices.

VI. Leo X. before the Convocation of the Council, had declared that Luther and
his Adherents were Heretics: Being therefore already condemned, why should
they come to Council? A. 10 Their Errors had been condemned in former General
Councils: and, since it really was so, Why might not the Pope say so 12.
Because the Pope had condemned them therefore they See Scave p. 11.
appealed to a General Council: and, since they had appealed to it, Why should
they not go to it?

VII. It was not a legal Council. A. That is to say, it was not such a one as
they had a mind to. Luther, being questioned, first made friends to be tried in
Germany. As soon as he was there condemned by Cajetan, he appealed to the Pope.
Immediately after, foreseeing his condemnation there, he intercepted this appeal
with ibid. p. 8.
another, from the Pope to a General Council; having ground to imagine, He
would never call one, who was supposed, to fear that it would severely reform
him and his Court. As soon as he saw that, in good earnest, a Bull was
published, in the year, 1537. to call a Council at Vicenza; he began presently,
to vilify Councils, and put out a book De Conciliis, to prove that they always
did more harm than good; not sparing so much as the first Councils of Nice, or
of the Apostles Then he appealed from Council to Scripture, where He that makes
himself supreme Judge of the Sense, may easily maintain what absurdity he
pleases. Soave tells us, he was p. 17.
used to say, that he was so well assured of his Doctrine, that, it being
Divine, he would not submit it so much as to the judgment of Angels; yea, that
with it he was to judge all, both men and Angels. After this, his Followers
thought it more plausible not to shuffle so visibly, but to admit a Council,
and clog it with such conditions as would quite disarm it, and make it useless.
You may read them in Soave, as follows.

p. 600.
1. That it should be celebrated in Germany; 2. That it should not be intimated
by the Pope; 3. That He should not preside, but be part of the Council, subject
to the determinations of it; 4. That the Bishops and other Prelates should be
freed from their Oath given to the Pope; 5. That the Holy Scripture might be
Judge in Council, and all Humane Authority excluded; 6. That the Divines of the
States of the Augustan Confession. sent to the Council, might not only have a
consulting, but a deciding voice; 7. That the Decisions in Council should not
be made, as in Secular matters, by plurality of voices; but the more sound
opinions preferred, that is, those which were regulated by the word of God. You
will not deny, but that in England we have had some Kings whose title to the
Crown has been unquestionable, and that some free and legal Parliaments have
been assembled during their reign. Give me leave to put the case, that two or
three Counties had revolted, protesting against all that would be done in such
a Parliament, and resusing to send any Deputies to it, but upon these
conditions: 1. that it be assembled in their Territory; 2. that it be not
called by the King; 3. that his Majesty may be subject to it; 4. that all the
members of it be freed from their Oath of Allegiance; 5. that all Humane
Authority of former Parliaments may be excluded; 6. that they may depute as
many as they please with a decisive voice; 7. that (for fear of being
over-voted) the Decisions be not made, as usually, by plurality of voices, but
that the more sound opinions, (that is, their own) may be preferred. What would
you think of these Articles? Would you conclude, the Parliament was illegal, if
it did not submit to their demands? I do not pretend here, to make an exact
parallel betwixt the Monarchy of the Church and that of England: yet however
the parity is not so unequal, but that it may help to open your eyes.

VIII. The Parties concerned were Judges in their own case. A. No more than in
the I. of Nice. The world was then divided into Catholics and Arians, as now
into Catholics and Protestants: And, as the Catholics had then a right to
judge the one, so now they had the very same right to judge the other. If any
part separate from the whole, it does not therefore acquire a right of saying,
that the Whole, from which they divide themselves, is now a Party, and
therefore must not judge them. Pope Leo and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria
counteraccus'd one another of Heresy; and yet the Pope legally presided in the
IV. General Council which condemned Dioscorus. Neither was it ever thought a
sufficient excuse for Dioscorus to say, the Pope was a Party and Judge in his
own case.

Mr: Chillingworth confesses, that, in controversies of Religion, it is in a
manner impossible to avoid but the Judge must be a Party. For this must be the
first controversy, whether he be a Judge or no; and in that he must be a Party.
Such is the Pope's Case, in the Definition of his Supremacy. The same necessity
is found in supreme Civil power. Inferior Courts are liable to Appeals: But,
if some of the King's subjects rebel against him, and oppose his prerogatives
or laws; it is evidently necessary that the King must judge his own case, or the
Offense must not be judged at all. What must the King do? Substitute an equal
number of Royalists and Rebels? This can never be an effectual provision for
the Common Peace of Government. Or must he remit the arbitration to a
neighboring State? 1. This state is always interess'd; and therefore partial.
2. This does not leave, within the compass of any Kingdom upon earth,
sufficient power to procure the common good 3. Were it allowed in Civil Power,
it cannot be applied to our present case, unless Controversies in Religion
could be decided out of the Church, by men of no Religion at all.

In the National Synod of Dort, in the year, 1618. the Low Country Remonstrants
seeing themselves like to be over-voted by the Protestants, made the same
excuses; saying, that the major part of the Synod was declared of a contrary
party; that they were already excommunicated by them, and, therefore, they
ought not to be Judges. To this, the Synod replied: that, if this exception
were admitted, it would subvert the whole frame of Ecclesiastical Government:
that Pastors would be discouraged from their duty of opposing the first
beginnings of Heresy, if therefore they must forfeit their right of giving
suffrages, or being Judges, afterward: that the Arians and other Heretics
might ever have pleaded the same exception against the Orthodox Fathers: that
Divines neither are, nor ought to be, indifferent in matters of Religion; so
that, if only Neuters may be judges, there will be none left in the Church, and
we must go abroad (no body knows where) to look for 'em. This was the substance
of their Answer; which I here set down in the Latin, to satisfy your
curiosity. Nunquam praxim hanc Ecclesiarum fuisse, ut Pastores, quoties
exorientibus erroribus ex officio se opponerent, propterea jure suffragiorum,
aut de illis ipsis erroribus judicandi potestate, exciderent Ita enim omnem
everti judiciorum Ecclesiasticorum ordinem; efficique ne Pastores officio suo
fideliter fungi queant.... Eos qui in doctrina aut moribus scandalorum autores
sunt, semper Censores suos, Consistoria, Classes, Synodos, ceu partem adversam,
rejicere.... ad eum modum Arianis, aliisque olim hereticis, adversus Orthodoxos
Pastores semper licuisset excipere. The English Divines delivered their opinion
in these terms: 1. Huic sententiae refragatur perpetua praxis omnium
Ecclesiarum. Nam in Synodis Oecumenicis. Nicaeno, etc. ii, qui antiquitus
receptam doctrinam oppugnarunt ab illis, qui eandem sibi traditam admiserunt
and approbarunt, examinati, judicati, damnati sunt. 2. Ipsius rei necessitas
huc cogit. Theologi enim, in negotio religionis, neque esse solent tanquam
abrasae tabulae, neque esse debent. Si igitur soli neutrales possent esse
judices, extra Ecclesiam in qua lites enatae sunt, quaerendi essent. 3. Ipsa
aequitas suadere videtur. Nam quae ratio reddi potest, ut suffragiorum jure
priventur omnes illi Pastores, qui ex officio receptam Ecclesiae Doctrinam
propugnates secus docentibus adversati sunt. Si hoc obtinuerit, nova dogmata
spargentibus nemo obsisteret, ne ipso facto jus omne postmodum de illis
controver. siis judicandi amitteret. Pray, give me leave now to ask, Why might
not the Parties be Judges in the Council of Trent, as well as in the Synod of
Dort? If, in one case, the Remonstrants were obliged to submit to the
Protestants, Why were not the Protestants obliged to submit to the Catholics
in the other? The Synod was sorc'd to pretend some disparity; and, for want of
a better, alleged this; that the Protestants and Remonstrants were under the
same Magistracy. And, what if if they were? We are not now talking of Civil
Assemblies, but of Ecclesiastical. Dos the division of Civil Power destroy the
Unity of the Catholic Church, which we believe in our Creed? Or, if there be
any reason why (when any Schism arises) the Authority of the Whole is devolved
to the major part, does not the same Reason conclude as evidently in favor of
a General, as of a National, Council?

IX. To make it better appear, which was the major part, the Protestants ought
to have had a decisive voice in Council. A. 1. Binius says, that the Council
premitted this caution, that, if the Protestants were allowed, for once, to
give a Placet, it should be no prejudice to the right and honor of the present
and future Councils: which looks as if the Council were not fully resolved to
deny this to them, if much insisted upon. 2. They, who openly maintain such
doctrines as have been formerly condemned in General Councils, are cut of from
the Catholic Church; they are not Members of it; and therefore can have no
right to a decisive voice. 3. If it had been permitted, they were still certain
to be over-voted by 270. Bishops; to whom if you add the Catholic Divines, by
the same rule as the Protestants, there remained no ground for any hopes. This
the Protestants saw well enough, and therefore were willing to wave all
Ecclesiastical Judges. Soave tells you, how they shuffled in this point. One
time, they proposed a Decision by Laics indifferently chosen, in an equal
number, on both sides. Another time, they appealed to p. 73.
a godly and free Council, which is not the Tribunal of Pope and Priests only,
but of all the Orders of the Church, not excluding the Seculars. Here indeed
the Clergy were admitted to this godly and free Council; but it was only, by
way of spectators, to see what the Laity would please to do there for, ibid.
the Pope making himself a party to the cause, it was just that the manner and
form of the proceeding, should be letermin'd by the Princes. This was the ib.
Answer of 15. Princes, and 30, Cities, assembled in Smalcalda, 1535. Again,
about two years after, when the p. 76.
Emperor sent his Vice Chancellor to exhort them to receive the Council, they
answered, that they had always demanded a free and Christian Council, that every
man may freely speak, Turks and Infidels being excluded. Here you see, that
every man, who called himself a Christian, (no matter how otherwise qualified)
was to have a free Vote in Council: only Turks and Infidels were to be
excluded. Judge you, what a free and godly Council this was like to be. Mean
time, all this was only a copy of their countenance. They clearly foresaw that
the much greater part, of those to whom God has committed the care of his
Church, would certainly condemn their errors: They were already self-condemned,
as to Authority; And therefore they never intended to appear in any legal
Council, but hated the very thought of it: Although though the Name of a
Council was very plausible, and fit to be made use of, for a time, to amuse the
world with (...) an opinion of the Reformers, that they were not proud and
obstinate; but always willing to hear reason, and desirous to be better
informed.

The Duke of Prussia was more sincere, when Canobius came to invite him; He p.
413.
answered plainly, without any mincing or disguising of the matter, that he was
of the Augustan Confession, and therefore could not consent to a Popish
Council. Yet, after all, to do the Protestants justice, I must needs confess
that, as soon as they were no longer in fear of the Emperor, they began to
unmask and speak as plainly as the Duke did. Read Soave's Annals, 1562. he says
that, p. 599.
so soon as the Diet was assembled in Francfort, the Prince of Conde sent to
treat an union of the Huguenots with those of the Confession of Ausburg; and,
in particular, to make a joint demand, for a free and new Council, in which the
resolutions of Trent might be examined, the French men of the old Catholic
Religion giving hope also that they would agree unto it... But the Dutch
Protestants were most averse from a Gouncil, so long as Germany might be in
peace without it. And therefore a book was printed in Francfort, full of
reasons why they neither would, nor could, come to Trent, with protestation of
the nullity of all that was, or would be, done in that place.

One thing, which makes me less wonder they could never agree to any Council of
ours, is this, that I find in Soave, they could not agree in a Council of their
own. p. 411.
In Germany, says he, the Princes of the Augustan Confession, assembled in
Neumburg, being ashamed that their Religion should be esteemed a Confusion for
the variety of Doctrines amongst them, did propose that they might first agree
in one, and then resolve whother they ought to refuse or accept the Synod...
They said, the Augustan Confession was to be the ground of their Doctrine; but,
there being diverse copies of that Confession, which differed, in regard of
diverse additions made in diverse of them, some approving one and some another,
Many thought they ought to take that only which was presented to Charles in the
year, 1530. Whereunto those of the Palatinate did not consent, unless it were
declared, in a Proheme made unto it, that the other Edition did agree with it.
The Duke of Saxony answered, that they could not stop the eyes and ears of the
world, that they should not see and hear their differences; and that if they
would make show of union, where they were at variance, they should be convinced
of vanity and lying: And, after many contentions, they remained without
agreement in that point. How should the Catholics please them, if they knew
not how to please themselves?

X. The burning of John Huss was a sufficient excuse for the Protestants, not
to rely upon any Safe conduct. A. I must beg your pardon, if I believe no such
matter. It was no excuse at all. His Safe conduct was of the ordinary form;
Theirs was extraordinary: And. therefore the Case was quite different.

It Is certain that the Ordinary Safeconducts secure a man only from unjust
violence, but not from the just execution of a legal sentence, if he be found
guilty, When a person, suspected of a crime, is cited to appear, and to answer
for himself, the Ordinary Safe Conduct secures him from all abuses or affronts
which might otherwise be offered to him, either going, staying, or returning:
but however, if, after a fair Trial, he be legally condemned: it will never
save him from suffering according to Law. If this were all the Security that
Huss relied upon, we may justly admire his confidence, in going so boldly to
the Council; but cannot reasonably wonder, either at his imprisonment, or
execution.

That this was all the Security given him, appears by the testimony of one of
his own Disciples, who wrote his Acts which are published in the beginning of
his Works, and says he was an eyewitness of what passed. He relates the words
of the Emperor Sigismond telling Huss to his face, at Constance; Acta Iohannis
Huss. p. 15.
Although, says he, Some say that, by your friends and patrons, you received
our Letters of Public Faith, fifteen days after your imprisonment; yet we can
prove, by the testimony of many Princes and men of chief note, that, before you
left Frague, you received our Letters by Wenceslaus of Duba. and John of Chlum,
to whose trusty care we recommended you, THAT NO INJURY MIGHT BE DONE TO YOU,
but that you might speak freely, and answer for your self, before the whole
Council, concerning your faith and doctrine. And this, you see, the most
Reverend Lords, Cardinals and Bishops, have so performed, that I have reason to
give them many thanks... Now therefore we advise you, not to defend any thing
obstinately, but to submit your self, with what obedience you ought, to the
Authority of the Holy Council. If you do this, we will endeavor, that, for our
sakes, you may be favorably dismissed by the Council. If not... We truly will
never patronize your obstinacy and your errors.

In this discourse of the Emperor I observe, 1. That the Letters of Public
Faith were given to Huss, only that no injury might be done to him: And
therefore conclude, that, if contrary to the common law of Safe-conducts he
endeavored to make his escape, his imprisonment was just, and no injury done.
See Bremus a Protestant Lawyer, Quaest. ult. de securitate, who cites a great
number of others, agreeing with him this opinion. that Public Faith is ended
or forfeited, if a man, having received Public Faith, committs a new crime, be
cause, for this, he may be punished. 2. That the friends of Huss made no great
scruple of telling stories in favor of him, and of raising a false report that
the Letters were given him the fifteenth day after his confinement; thinking,
perhaps, that by this rumor the Emperor would be obliged in honor, to rescue
him out of prison: Which deceitful dealing makes me less wonder, either that
his Disciples make no mention of his endeavoring to escape, or that the Nobles
of Bohemia, take no notice of it in their Letters of complaint to the Emperor;
and makes me more apt to believe the Relation of it, set down by Ulricus
Reichental, an inhabitant of Consiance, an eyewitness of what happened, and an
accurate Historian of the Council, whom if you understand not in the original
Teutonick, you may read this part translated into Latin by Cochlaeus, lib. 11.
Hist. Hussitarum, page 73.

Before Huss was guilty of this crime, he had been kindly received and
favorably treated at Constance, as well as all the way thither This he
confesses himself, in his Letters to his friends. Epist. 5.
We came, says he, to Constance, after the feast of All Saints, passing through
the Cities without any ill usage, And we lodge in a street which is nigh the
Pope's Palace. Again; Ep. 6.
All my affairs are in a good posture, says he; Scitote quod been sto per
omnia. And, in his Letter above cited, speaking of Latzembock and Lepka to
whose care the Emperor had recommended him, he says, Ep. 5.
They have been with the Pope, and have spoken to him concerning me; Who
answered, that he will do nothing by violence. Besides, his Chamber-fellow
Plebanus de Jannowitz wrote a Letter dated from Constance, the Saturday before
S Martin's feast; in which he tells, how Ep. 4. Hussiticarum.
the Bishop of Constance with his Official, came to their Lodging, letting them
know that the Pope suspended the interdict and the sentences of excommunication
against Master John; desiving him nevertheless, that, to avoid scandal and
discourse of the People, he would absent himself from the solemn services of
the Mass; otherwise, that he might freely go about to see the Town, the
Churches, or any other places, at he pleased.. We have, says he, full liberty
in Constance.

Afterward, as Ulricus relates it, the people flocked together, to hear Huss
say Mass in his Lodging; which being a scandalous thing, (he having been
excommunicated for Heresy, and not having yet justified himself) the Bishop of
Constance, as Ordinary of the place, prohibited his doing so: But, Huss still
persisting to celebrate, and the Bishop forbidding the people to be present, he
began to look upon it as an evil omen of his future condemnation, and resolved
to contrive his escape. Upon the third Sunday in Lent, when Huss did not appear
at dinner, Latzembock went immediately to the Governor of the City, and
complained of the flight of John Huss. The gates being shut, and search made,
Huss was found hid in a Cart of the same Latzembock, where he lay covered with
hay and straw, which had been ordered to be transported out of town, that
afternoon. Latzembock made him be set on horse back, and brought him to the
Pope's Palace. He pleaded, that, having Safe Conduct, he ought not to be
impriprison'd. But this Noble Bohemian (who knew very well what Safe Conduct he
had, he being committed to his care, by Sigismond) answered, It Is so Decreed,
that either you must justify your Cause, that it is not heretical; or die,
unless you renounce it. I do not say, this was not severe; The Imperial Laws
are severe enough: but yet, since it was according to the Common Law of
Ordinary Safe-conducts, it cannot be truly called an Injury, And, by the same
rule, that the Emperor was not obliged, according to his Letters, to patronize
his obstinacy and his errors, neither was he obliged to protect him from the
course of Common Law in this occasion.

Nevertheless I am apt to believe, that the Emperor did really design to
procure (as much as he could, by fair means) more favor for him than the
rigor of the Law allowed. Among other reasons which incline me to this
opinion, these two may suffice at present: 1. that John Chlum Inter Epist.
Hussiticas. number. 57.
complained, his Master's Safe Conduct was violated: 2. that the Emperor
himself in his Answer to the Nobles of Bohemia, writes, He Cochlaus l. 4, Hist.
Hussita^. p. 155.
often solicited for him; often, in a passion, went out of the Council; yea
rather, upon his account, departed from Constance; till they said, If You will
not give Justice leave to take its course in Council, what have We to do here?
Whereupon says he, I concluded, it was not in my power to do any thing more, in
this matter. Neither was it lawful for me to speak any more, of this Business;
because, by so doing, the Council would have been dissolved. Thus He behaved
himself; And, whether it were Vanity, or Generosity, or Policy, that moved him,
is not my business to enquire; It Is enough for your satisfaction and mine, that,
by his Letters of Public Faith, He was not obliged, either in Conscience, or
in Honor, to rescue him out of the hands of Justice, but only to protect him
from Unjust Violence.

It Is incredible, you will say, that Huss should be such a fool as to go to
Constance upon these terms. Neither can I deny but that it must be some degree
of folly for any man to be so confident of his own abilities as to cope with a
whole Council, and to defy all his Opposers to convince him of his errors. But
why might not the Master be as bold as the Scholar? I mean Jerome of Prague who
followed him soon after, to Constance, upon the same terms, with a Safe Conduct
from the Council. Sess. 6.
Citamus... quatenus compareas... recepturus, ac facturus, in omnibus Justitiae
complementum, ad quod A VIOLENTIA, JUSTITIA SEMPER SALVA, omnem
Salvum-conductum nostrum, quantum in nobis est, and Fides exigit Orthodoxa,
praesentium tenore offerimus. Observe these words, a violentia; The
Safe Conduct was only to secure him from unjust violence. Observe also the
following clause, Justitia semper salva; He was not to expect any protection
against Justice. If Jerome desired no more than this from the Council, Why
might not Huss be content with as much from the Emperor?

That this was the Ordinary form of all Safe-conducts, granted according to
Common Law, appears evidently by the general consent of Lawyers; among which,
for your better satisfaction, I shall cite only such as were Protestants.
Bremus, q. 7. de Securitate, says, this is the common Imperial form of
Safe-conducts; Damus tibi Fidem Publicam, causam dicendi in Judicio, CONTRA
VIM, NON CONTRA JURIS EXECUTIONEM. Mynsingerus, Observe. 82. upon the Judgment
of the Imperial Chamber, says, Quando datur alicui Securitas, vel Salvus
conductus, Tunc intelligitur solum de VIOLENTIA, quae de facto CONTRA JUS
infertur. Et ideo, meo tempore, cuidam, qui habebat Salvum-conductum, capto
propter delictum, vel maleficium, and supcanti in Camera pro Mandato de
relaxando... petiti Processus a Dominis Assessoribus sunt denegati. Again,
Everardus Specklan. another Lawyer, Centuria 1. q. 1.. 18. cites a great many
Authors, All agreeing that such is the usual form. And, in the Jus Camerale,
Tit. 276. (See the Edition of Goldastus) this Law of Maximilianus Augustus is
read; Subditos Judicio Rotwilensi avocaturi, Fidem actori Publicam, CONTRA VIM,
NON CONTRA JUS, dare tenentor. Any man, that understands Latin, sees plainly by
these quotations, that Common Law, in such Cases, always grants Security from
Injury, but not from Justice.

That Huss had no Safe Conduct from the Pope, he expressly acknowledges,
Epist. 6. I came, says he, to Constance, without Safe conduct from the Pope.
That he had none from the Council, appears not only by his silence, but by
Soave's History, pages, 298. and 307. which I shall cite in the following
Objection. That the Safe Conduct, which he had from the Emperor, was never
intended to hinder the Council's proceeding against him, according to the
Canons, is manifest, not only by what has been already said, but by the
Emperor's Letters of Public Faith, dated from Spire, October. 18. 1414. extant
in Goldastus his Appendix Documentorum ad Commentarios de Regni Bohemiae
Juribus and Privilegiis. p. 81. We heartily recommend, to all and every one of
you, the honorable Master John Huss Bachelor of Divinity, and Master of Arts,
the Bearer of These, whom We have taken into Our protection and Safeguard of
the Holy Empire, passing from the Kingdom of Bohemia to the General Council
which is shortly to be held in the City of Constance: Desiring you to receive
him kindly, and treat him favorably, whenever he shall come unto you, and
that you will and ought to show your readiness, in promoting what belongs to
his speed and safety, either by Land or Water, permitting also, him, his
servants, his horses, and all things else belonging to him, freely, and without
any hindrance, to pass, to stop, to stay, and to return, by any passages,
ports, bridges, lands, dominions, jurisdictions, cities, towns, castles,
villages, and whatsoever places of yours, without any expense of tribute, toll,
or any other payment; And, that you will, and ought, for the honor and respect
of our Majesty, to provide Secure and Safe conduct for him and his, when
occasion shall require.

All this the Emperor commanded, as much as lay in Him, And, in all this, his
subjects obeyed, as much as lay in them. He had no Authority over the Council,
in matters of Religion: Nor do I find the least syllable of any promise, made
by the Emperor to him, that the Council should not proceed against him,
according to Law. He came upon his good behavior, and in his own defense;
confiding in his own prudence and abilities, as well as in the Emperor's
Letters; in which there is no sign of these two promises, 1. that he should not
be imprisoned, if by any misdemeanour he deserved it; 2. that he should not be
executed, if legally condemned.

Both these promises were plainly included in the Extraordinary Safe Conduct
which the Tridentine Council granted to the Protestants: And therefore, as I
told you in the beginning, The Case was quite different. Read Soave, and if you
believe him, you will begin to be ashamed of your objection. p. 348, Conc. Trid
Sess. 15. and 18.
The Synod does make Faith to all Priests, Princes, and Persons of what
condition soever... Safe conduct, to come, remain, PROPOSE, and speak IN THE
SYNOD, to HANDLE and EXAMINE WHAT THEY THINK FIT. give Articles, and confirm
them, ANSWER the OBJECTIONS of the Council, and DISPUTE with those, whom it
does elect, declaring that the CONTROVERSIES in this Council shall be handled
according to the HOLY SCRIPTURE, Traditions of the APOSTLES, approved COUNCILS,
Consent of the CATHOLIC CHURCH, and Authority of the Holy FATHERS; adding,
that they SHALL NOT BE PUNISHED upon PRETENSE OF RELIGION, or OFFENSES
COMMITTED, or which WILL BE COMMITTED... and shall RETURN, when it shall seem
good unto them, WITHOUT LET, with SAFETY OF THEIR ROBE, HONOR, and PERSONS,
but with the knowledge of the Deputies of the Synod, that provision may be made
for their Security: granting that, in this Safe conduct, ALL those CLAUSES be
held to be included, which are NECESSARY FOR REAL and FULL ASSURANCE: Adding,
that if any of the Protestants, either in coming, or in Trent, or in returning,
SHALL COMMIT ANY ENORMITY, which shall NULLIFY THE BENEFIT OF THIS PUBLIC
FAITH, he shall be PUNISHED BY THEIR OWN Protestant JUDGES, so that the Synod
may be satisfied: and, on the other side, if any Catholic in coming hither,
remaining here, or returning, SHALL COMMIT ANY THING which may VIOLATE THIS
SAFE CONDUCT, he shall be punished by the Synod, WITH APPROBATION OF THE GERMAN
Protestant 's THEMSELVES, who shall be present in Trent.... which things it
promises faithfully, in the name of all faithful Christians, Ecclesiastical
and Secular. If Huss and Jerome had come to Constance with such a Safe Conduct,
they had neither been imprisoned, nor executed. With such a one as this, the
Bohemians went afterward to Basil, were civilly used, and returned quietly
home. With this the Wittenberg Protestants went to Trent, remained quiet there,
and returned without receiving any affront. That no more of the Protestants
followed their example, in going thither, was their own fault: They knew very
well, they might have gone, remained, and returned, securely, if they pleased.
Consider all this, at leisure; and then, tell me (if you can) what is become of
your Excuse.

XI. The Councils of Constance and Sienna had declared it lawful to break the
faith of any Safe Conduct whatsoever. A. Read the Decrees; you will plainly see
the contrary. The Council of Constance dos not say, it is lawful for any,
whosoever they are, to violate the faith of their promises; but only declares,
that no Secular Power can legally hinder the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, because it is, not only independent of it, but manifestly
superior to it, in matters of Religion. It Is a common Maxim of the Law; Superior
legibus aut pactis Inferioris non ligatur. And, in all appearance, the design
of the Council was to satisfy the World, that, although the Emperor had
pretended to grant an Extraordinary Safe Conduct, such as exempts a man from
Justice as well as Violence, it could not have hindered the supreme Power of
Pope and Council from proceeding according to the Canons, in Causes which are
purely of Religion.

This was the reason why the Protestants would not rely upon the Emperor's
Safe Conduct; Nor can I blame them for it. See Soave, p. 298. Duke Maurice
wrote to the Emperor, that his Safe Conduct was not sufficient. For, in the
Council of Constance, it was determined, that THEY MIGHT PROCEED AGAINST THOSE
THAT CAME TO THE COUNCIL, THOUGH THEY HAD SAFE CONDUCT FROM THE EMPEROR. And
that, therefore the Bohemians would not go Basil, but under the Public Faith
of the whole Council. See p. 307. The Ambassadors went all together to the
Presidents, and told them, that the Emperor had given the Protestants a
Safe Conduct, but that they were not contented with it, alleging that it was
decreed in the Council of Constance, and really executed, that THE COUNCIL IS
NOT BOUND BY THE SAFE CONDUCT OF ANY, WHOSOEVER HE BE; and therefore they
required one from the Synod. These Protestants, you see, understood the Council
in the same sense as I do: How come you to understand it otherwise?

Let the Decree speak for it self, and judge case betwixt us. It runs thus:
Presens Sancta Synodus, ex QUOVIS SALVO CONDUCTU per Imperatorem, Reges, and
alios Seculi Principes, HAERETICIS vel de Haeresi diffamatis, putantes eosdem
sic a suis erroribus revocare, quocunque vinculo se adstrinxerint, CONCESSO,
NULLUM Fidei Catholicae, vel JURISDICTIONI ECCLESIASTICAE, praejudicium
generari, vel IMPEDIMENTUM PRAESTARI POSSE seu DEBERE declarat, QUOMINUS dicto
Salvo-conductu non obstante, LICEAT JUDICI competenti and ECCLESIASTICO de
hujusmodi personarum erroribus IN QUIRERE. and alias contra eos DEBITE
PROCEDERE, eosdemque PUNIRE, QUANTUM JUSTITIA SUADEBIT, si suos errores
revocare pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de Salvo conductu confiss ad locum
vonerint Judicii, alias non venturi: Nec sic promittentem, cum fecerit quod in
ipso est, ex hoc in aliquo remansisse obligatum. Conc. Constable. Sess. 17.

The Council does not say, that any one, who makes a promise, is not obliged in
conscience to keep it, to the utmost of his just and lawful power: But only
declares, that every man's Promises, and Obligations of performance, are
confined within the limits of his own Jurisdiction, which he cannot lawfully
exceed; And that, therefore, No man either can promise, or be by promise
obliged to perform, any more. This is the plain sense of those words: Nec ipsum
promittentem Imperatorem, Regem, vel alium quemvis Seculi Principem, cum
fecerit quod in ipso est, quod nimirum, ex officio, and jure suo, potest ac
debet, ex hoc Salvo conductu, in aliquo, quod Jurisdictioni obsit
Ecclesiasticae, remansisse ulterius obligatum. Can you blame this Doctrine?
Does not every body know, 1. that any man may promise, and every man ought to
perform, what lies in his power? 2. that no man can, either promise to encroach
upon a power superior to his own, or be obliged to perform it?

The 1. Act of the Council of Sienna proceeds upon the same principles. Though
it was very inconsiderable in its issue and conclusion, it was General in its
convocation and design; It imitated the Council of Constance, in assuming the
Title of Representing the Universal Church; And, by virtue of the supreme
Ecclesiastical Power implied in that Title, They commanded All Governors
Ecclesiastical and Secular, to prosecute the Laws against the followers of Huss
and Wickliff, revoking and forbidding all privileges, immunities, exemptions,
and Safe-conducts whatsoever; Privilegiis, Exemptionibus, Immunitatibus, SALVIS
CONDUCTIBUS, a quibuscumque Personis, Ecclesiasticis vel Secularibus, etiamsi
Pontificali, Imperiali, Regali, aut Ducali; aut alia quacumque Ecclesiastica
vel Seculari praesulgeant dignitate, concessis vel concedendis, NON OBSTANTIBUS
QUIBUSCUNQUE. You may look upon this Persecuting Decree as a severe thing, and
blame it (if you please) upon that account: But you cannot justly blame the
Doctrine upon which it is grounded, it being the very same with that of the
Council of Constance.

If you ask me, Why then dos the Council of Trent insert this clause in the end
of the Safe Conduct, that p 348.
the Synod shall not use, or suffer any to use, any authority, power, right,
statute, or privilege, of laws, canons, or Councils, ESPECIALLY that of
Constance, and of Sienna; which things, in this behalf, and for this time, the
Council does disallow? Why dos it disallow these Statutes, if they were fair
and just? A. It dos not disallow them absolutely, but only conditionally; that
is, IF they contain any doctrine contrary to the Security of Public Faith. The
reason of this proceeding was, because among the Protestants there were a great
many who had an ill opinion of these Decrees, and were very jealous of them.
'Twas more easy for the Council to protest, that, whatsoever they were, they
should not prejudice the Safe Conduct; than it was, to persuade them that the
Decrees were innocent. It was the charitable design of the Council to use all
condescension possible, and give such an extraordinary Safe Conduct, as might
prevent all jealousies and take away all excuses. And here it is, that the
Synod might justly say, what the Pope said upon other occasion, They p. 408.
humbled themselves to Heresy, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls
to Christ, did become that Council.

If you have a mind to see a great deal more of this charitable condescension
toward them, read Soave's History, where he tells you how, the Council having
granted them a Safe Conduct in the 13. Session, they excepted against it, and
demanded another of a more ample form, which was soon after granted, and
published in the 15. Session, Jan. 25. 1552. Observe how Soave relates it. p.
343.
The Emperor's Ambassadors desired to have the draught of it, before it was
published, to show it the Protestants, that if it did not give them
satisfaction, it might be so amended, that they might not have an occasion to
refuse it, as they did the other. Afterward the Emperor's Ambassadors called
the Protestants to them, and the Ambassador Pictavius exhorted them to give
some little part of satisfaction to the Council, as they received much from it;
told them that it was concluded, to receive their Mandates and Persons, and to
hear their Propositions, and to defer the conclusion of the points of Doctrine,
though already discussed and digested, to expect the Divines, and hear them
first; that they have a very ample Safe Conduct, as they desired... that it was
necessary to yield something to the time, and not to desire all at once; that
when they shall be entered into the business, occasion will make them obtain
many things which before seemed hard... that they themselves, the Emperor's
Ambassadors, have matters to propose of great moment, and do stand only
expecting that the Protestants should begin, that afterward they themselves
may come forth also. For this cause he prayed them to proceed slowly in their
demand, that the Pope should submit himself to the Council. For the Fathers do
know that there is something to be amended in the Papal greatness; but withal,
that they must go on cunningly; that they themselves have daily experience,
what dexterity and art must be used in treating with the Pope's Ministers
Therefore let their Divines come, who should have a convenient audience in all
things, and when they shall see themselves wronged, it shall ever be free for
them to depart. The Protestants retiring and considering the draught of the
Safe Conduct, were not content. They required four things more; 1. a decisive
voice; 2. that the Scripture, and interpreters conformable to it, should be
Judges; 3. that they might exercise their religion in their own houses; 4. that
nothing should be done in contempt of their doctrine. p. 349.
The Imperialists persuaded them to go on with dexterity; saying, as before,
that with time they should obtain all; but, seeking things distasteful, and
before there was opportunity, every thing would be more hard: that the 3.
article was understood to be granted, because it was not forbid: and that the
4. was plainly expressed, because good usage was promised. Ambassador Toledo
had told them, p. 344.
that the chief importance was in the Security of coming and departing; that
the residue appertained to the manner of their Negotiation, which might more
easily be concluded by the presence of the Divines, that it was too much
obstinacy, to yield in nothing, and to desire to give laws to the whole Church.
After all this, p. 352.
the Protestants received the Safe Conduct; but, with protestation, that they
did it, only to send it to their Princes. Would not any body think, these men
were very hard to please?

XII. When some of the Protestants came to Trent. they were denied audience,
and liberty of disputing. A. Neither the one, nor the other, was denied them.
It Is true, they were not heard, but whose fault was that? It was because the
victorious Army of the Protestants made the Bishops run away from Trent, before
the preliminaries of the Treaty could be well agreed upon. They came about the
middle of March, and departed in the beginning of April. Have but a little
patience to hear Soave tell the story, and you will presently see that this
objection is a mere calumny. ibid.
The Electors of Mentz and Collen departed the eleventh of March.... four
Divines of Wittenberg and two of Argentina came to Trent afterward, and
desired to begin the Conference. The Legate answered, that the nineteenth of
March being a day appointed for the Session, they would then consider about a
form how to treat. Was this, denying audience? Afterward a resolution was
taken, to prolong the Session till the first of May. This was some Delay
indeed, and little enough to deliberate upon the preliminaries of so unusual a
Treaty; but however, it was no Denial. Mean time, p. 352.
the Protestants often desired the Action should begin (it seems, they were in
great have) but difficulty was still raised, sometimes about the manner of
treating, sometimes about the matter with which to begin... p. 353.
the Adherents of Caesar, Spaniards, and others, moved by the Emperor's
Ambassadors, desired to proceed; but the Papalins (he has always a fling at the
Court) suspecting that the end of the Imperialists was to come to the
Reformation of the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of delay. The Legate,
says he, was thought to feign himself sick; but Soave, I presume, did not think
so himself, because he tells us in the very next page, that he died soon after
at Verona, which was no good proof of his dissimulation But let us go on with
his story. ibid.
The first of April, the Elector of Saxony besieged Ausburg, which did render
it self the third day, and the sixth news came thereof to Trent, and that all
Tirol did arm, and meant to go to Inspruc... Therefore many of the Italian
Bishops embarked, and went down the river Adice, to go to Verona, and the
Protestan's determined to depart. See here the true cause of their departure:
and tell me no more, of their being either denied audience, or liberty of
disputing.

XIII. The place was not secure. A. Very true; it was far from being secure for
the Catholics: The Protestant Army forced them to suspend the Council, April,
28. Neither was it any wonder, that they were so much afraid of their
victorious arms: Soave says, p 355.
The Emperor was forced to fly by night, with all his Court from Inspruc, and
to wander in the mountains of Trent, and that a few hours after, Maurice
arrived there, the same night, and made himself Lord of the Emperor's baggage.
Consider here, on the one side, how littie reason the Protestants have to
complain of the choice of this place: 1. it was nigher the Protestants of
Germany, than the Catholics of Spain and France: 2. the Pope's forces had no
access thither; 'twas in the Emperor's power: 3. the appearance only, of the
Protestant Army, was enough to fright away the Council. On the other sid, you
see how justly the Pope refused to call a Council in any City of Germany, for
fear of the Protestant arms. As for the Canon, Ut illic lites terminentur ubi
exortae sunt, it is understood of those causes, where some fact is to be proved
by witnesses that live upon the place.

XIV. The Council was not free. It was called by the Pope: And nothing could be
determined till the Pope sent his instructions from Rome. A If any man have a
right to convocate the supreme Ecclesiastical Assembly, it is certainly He who
has from God the supreme Ecclesiastical power upon earth; and this right, of
calling it, appertains as manifestly to the Pope, as the convocation of a
Provincial Council belongs to the Metropolitan. Moreover, Scave says. the
Princes in the Diet of Noremberg desired p, 31.
that by the Pope with consent of the Emperor, a free Council should be
intimated as soon as was possible: he says, the Emperor sent Letters to the
Diet of Spira, that p. 34.
he was resolved to pass into Italy, and to Rome, to treat with the Pope, for
the calling of a Council: and afterward, under Pius IV. he says, p. 304.
all Princes had agreed in demanding it.

As to the Second part of your objection; It Is certain that, if it had stood
with the Pope's convenience, He ought to have been present. In his absence,
'twas necessary for the Legates, representing his person, to receive frequent
directions from him, that they might the better supply the want of his
presence. If, for this reason, it was lawful to give them instructions before
the Council began; why not, afterward, as long as the Council was sitting? In
fine, whatsoever advice came from Rome, Nothing in matter of Doctrine was
determined, which any considerable part resisted. Soave himself confesses, 538.
that it was a general Maxim in this Council, that to establish a Decree of
Reformation, a major part of voices was sufficient; but that a Decree of Faith
could not be made if a considerable part did contradict.

XV. Many of the Bishops were Pensioners to the Pope. A. Soave acknowledges,
that several p. 116.
of the Bishops, moved by poverty, made grievous complaints, and threatened that
they would depart. If therefore the Pope maintained some of them, it was a
great charity done by him; a good example to Princes; a thing which formerly
used to be done by the Emperors. 2. Secular Princes had more money than the
Pope; and, if it had been the policy of his Holiness, they might easily have
countermin'd it. 3. All the Popes, in their Bulls of Convocation, desired and
exhorted all Secular Princes to send as many of their Bishops as possibly they
could. 4. His Pensioners were not necessary for him, at least in the Protestant
Controversies; and therefore this is no excuse for the Reformation.

XVI. In some Sessions, under Paul and Julius. there were scarce any besides
Italians. A. 1. The Council being drawn out from 1545. till 1563. and actually
sitting for about four years, it cannot be rationally expected that any great
frequency of Bishops should be continually present. 2. The disorders, caused by
the Calvinists in France, and by the Lutherans in Germany, required their
Bishops residence to secure Catholic Religion at home; otherwise they would
not have been absent from the Synod. 3. The dissentions that happened betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor, and King of France, and the civil wars betwixt Catholics
and Protestants, hindered the Bishops, sometimes of one Nation, sometimes of
another, from attending the Council. 4. All this was fully recompensed, in the
third and last Convocation of the Council, under Pius IV.

XVII. In the end of the Council, we find 187. Italian Bishops, and all the
rest make only 83. A. 1. All these Italians were not of the Pope's Territory,
but a great many of them subject to the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke
of Florence, and the State of Venice. In several matters they had different
instructions, and adhered to their diverse interests, even in opposition to the
Pope, when the Ambassadors of their Princes craved their assistance. Soave
tells us, p. 522.
it was publichly said by the Papalins (so he is pleased to call them) that
France had ever pretended to limit the Popo's power, and subject it to the
Canous; and that this opinion would be followed by many Italians, who, because
they cannot, or know not how to make use of the preferments of the Court, do
envy those that do; besides those, who are desirous of novity, they know not
why, of whom there seemed to be a considerable number.

2. It Is no great matter, as to our present purpose, whether the Pope had all
the Italian suffrages at his beck, or no; because it is certain he had no need
at all, of any such assistance in deciding the Protestant controversies, in
which the Bishops, of all nations, unanimously agreed. See what Soave says,
concerning the following points. Apostolical Traditions. p. 145. It was
approved by all, that they should be received, as of equal authority with the
Scriptures. Vulgar Edition of Scripture. p. 150. It was approved almost by a
general consent. and p. 152 the Congregation being ended, the Cardinal Santa
Croce assembled those that had opposed the Vulgar Edition, and showed they had
no reason to complain, because it was not prohibited, but left free to correct
it, and to have recourse to the Original; but that only it was forbid to say,
there were in it Errors of Faith for which it ought to be corrected. Original
Sin. p. 164. No man resisted the condemnation of the Articles. Justification
and Merit. p. 215. In condemning the Lutheran opinions all did agree with
exquisite Unity. Sacraments. p. 219. All the Divines agreed in affirming the
number seven, and condemning the contrary opinion as heretical. Baptism and
Confirmation. p. 232. All parties were satisfied. Worship of Christ in the
Eucharist. p. 306. All agreed. Communion under one kind. p. 306. All made use
of long discourses, but all to the same purpose. and p. 485. They all agreed
that there was no necessity, or precept, of the Cup. Transubstantiation. p.
309. There was a contention between the two Schools, Dominican and Franciscan,
which troubled the Fathers, with the subtility and small fruit thereof. The
Dominicans said, the one substance is made of the other; The Franciscans said;
the one does succeed the other, Both agreed, that it is properly and truly
called Transubstantiation: and p. 310 it was determined in the General
Congregation, to use an expression so universal as might be accommodated to the
meaning of both parties, without approving or condemning, either the one, or
the other. Sacrifice of Mass. p. 508. In the discussions of the Divines, all
were uniform in condemning the Protestant opinions; although there was some
contention. whether or no Christ at supper offered himself; p. 538. some
saying, that, in regard of the three and twenty contradictors, it was not
lawfully decided; and others answering, that an eighth part could not be called
considerable. Auricular Confession. p. 328.329, 330. No disagreement appears
among the Prelates or Divines, concerning the 6.7. and 8. can. of the 14.
Session. Extreme Unction. p. 330. The Divines spoke with some prolixity, but
without any difference among themselves. Promotion of married persons to holy
Orders. p. 698. The Fathers did uniformly, and without difficulty, agree upon
the negative. Matrimony. p. 730. The doctrine, and anathematisms, were read; to
which all consented. Purgatory. Invocation of Saints p. 749 The Decrees were
read, and all approved, with great brevity and little contradiction.
Indulgences. p. 757. The Decrees were read, and approved by all.

XVIII. Proxies were not allowed to have decisive votes. A. 1. There were but
seven in the Council. 2. They had votes in consultations, among the rest. 3.
They had no right to a decisive vote. 4. Were it indifferently allowed, it
would encourage Bishops to pretend necessity of their absence.

XIX. All the Bishops were sworn to the Pope, before they sat in Council. A.
1. They never swore to vote against their judgment: They only swore Canonical
obedience and fidelity to him, that is, such obedience and fidelity as the
Canons of former Councils require, Bellarmin, De Council, lib. 1. cap. 21.
as long as he is Pope, and so long as he commands those things, which,
according to God, and according to the Canons, he can command; but they do not
swear, that they will not in Council say what they think; or that they will not
depose him, if they convict him of being a Heretic. 2. An Oath taken in
general terms, to defend his Canonical rights, leaves the Council in perfect
liberty to examine what is Canonical, and what not. 3. Without the Oath they
are strictly bound, by the Canons, to the same obedience and fidelity; so that
it induces no new obligation, but only confirms what was their duty before. 4.
Parliament Men swearing sidelity to their King, according to the Laws, do not
loose the freedom of their Vote, nor the power of changing many Laws, and
making others, with the King's consent. 5. Every Bishop in the English Church,
at his consecration, swear due obedience to his Archbishop and his Successors:
Why may not Catholic Bishops swear as much obedience to the Pope? And what
harm is there, if they take the very same Oath again, before they sit in
Council?

XX. In one of the Congregations the Bishop of Guadice was interrupted and
affronted; and the Cardinal of Lorain complained, the Council was not free. A.
This happened only once, and satisfaction was presently given Soave relates it
thus. p. 593.
The Bishop of Guadice speaking of the last Sess. 23.
Canon, where it was determined, that Bishops called by the Pope are true and
lawful, said that there were also Bishops, not called by the Pope, nor
confim'd by him, which nevertheless were true and lawful. For example he
brought four Suffragans, elected and ordained by the Archbishop of Salzburg,
who take no confirmation from the Pope. Cardinal Simoneta did not suffer him to
proceed, saying, that whatsoever the Arthbishop of Salzburg or other Primates
did, was all by the Pope's authority. The Bishop of Cava, and two more, called
him Schismatic, and said he ought to be put out of the Council. Immediately
there followed a great noise among the Prelates, as well of whispering as of
feet, partly in offense of the Prelate that gave his voice, and partly in
defense. The Legates did hardly appease the stir, by making others proceed, who
were to speak in that Congregation; which being ended, Lorain said the Bishop
had not spoken ill.... and indeed it was found that the Bishop had not spoken
ill, and the Canon was corrected; for whereas it said, the Bishops called by
the Pope of Rome, it was altered thus; the Bishops assumed by the authority of
the Pope of Rome..... Mantua did also reprehend the noise made with feet and
words, saying that, if hereafter they did not speak with respect, They, the
Legates, would go out of the Congregation.... Lorain commended the admonition,
and said that as the Legates ought not to go out of the Congregation, for any
occasion whatsoever, so it was most just that the perturbers of it, should be
punished. Here you have a full account of the whole matter. It was only a
sudden heat, and soon over. The public reprehension. of those who made a
noise, was satisfaction abundantly sufficient for what was past: And the
altering of the Canon, according to the Bishop's advice, was a very
extraordinary encouragement for him, and every body else, to speak freely for
the future. The Cardinal complained, before the satisfaction was given, and the
Canon altered, but not after. Besides, it is not impossible for great men to
find fault when there is but little reason for it. They are used to be
humored, and when they are crossed, a small matter is enough for great
complaints. I Will give you an instance out of Soave. p. 615.
Lorain and Madruccio had composed a form concerning Residence; The Legates
approved it at first sight; afterward, consulting with the Canonists, they
disliked one part. Lorain and Madruccio were much offended with this mutation,
and thought they were disparaged. Lorain said, it was not a free Council. Why
was not the Council free? If the form which they two had composed, had been
blindly received without examen; if, out of compliment to them, it had been
approved nemine contradicente; All had been well; The Council had been free
enough: But because some others took the liberty to consider it, and spoke
their minds freely in contradicting it; therefore the Council was not free.
Madruccio ibid.
did not forbear to say, there was a secret Council, within the Council, which
did arrogate more authority. The Canonists, who examined the form which they
two had composed, are here called a secret Council, and accused of arrogance;
not because they assumed more authority, but because they pretended to an equal
liberty of speaking as freely against the form as others had spoken for it. So
prond and so ambitious we are, to have our own opinions idolized, and to
enlarge the empire of our fancies by enforcing them upon our neighbors; that
when we meet with any opposition, though ever so reasonable, we are straightened
for want of room, and complain for want of liberty. So, when Guzdellun came to
the Council, and had p. 617.
seen the passages of one day, he said, he understood plainly the Council was
not free. What these passages were, Soave does not tell us: and, I am sure, if
any thing had happened contrary to the liberty of the Council, the Relation of it
would have been nuts to him. Since therefore your Historian leaves us to
conjecture what we please; for ought I know, Guzdellun might have so great an
opinion of himself, as to imagine, that, when he came to Council, the weight of
his reasons would have presently turned the scale of their deliberations, and
that in one day he should carry all before him: but afterward, when he plainly
sound his mistake, and saw he could not in one day have all things determined
as he pleased, then it was he understood plainly, the Council was not free.

XXI. In the History of the Council we find several grievous complaints of the
Spanish Prelates, that they had not their liberty in proposing and determining
the divine right of Residence. A. Let us hear their several complaints in
order, and if you believe your own Historian, you will find they had no reason
to complain.

1. p. 474.
They complained of the Pope for holding the Council in servitude, to which he
ought to leave free power to handle and determine all things, and not to meddle
himself. A. This last clause is manifestly unreasonable; Why should not he
meddle as well as they? Pray, read Soave, and see in what manner he meddled
with them. p. 470.
He commended them for speaking according to their Conscience.... He complained
of those who referred themselves unto him, because the Council was assembled
that every one may deliver his opinion... p. 471.
He was pleased that every one should deliver his opinion freely... but said,
it was a strange thing, that he who was Head of the Church, and other Prelates,
who have voice in Council, may not be informed of what is handled, and speak
their opinion.. whereas, on the other side, it is plain that so many Prelates
come to Trent with commission from their Princes, according to which they
proceed; and that the Ambassadors by Letters and persuasions do compel them to
follow the interests of their Masters, and yet, for all this, no man says, that
therefore the Council is not free. This He amplified with much vehemence, and
certainly with a great deal of reason.

2. In their Letter to the King of Spain, They p. 515.
complained of the Legates for not suffering the point of Residence to be
concluded, before they could have an answer from Rome. A. They themselves
aquainted the King with these matters: Why might not the Legates inform the
Pope? They ibid.
beseech'd his Majesty to consult with godly men about this Article: Why might
not the Pope consult with godly men, as well as He? They ibid.
assured themselves that, after mature deliberation, He would favor their
opinion: Whether He would or not, was more than they could tell, till they had
an answer; and Why might not an answer be expected from Rome, as well as from
Madrid?

3. In the same Letter, they complained ibid.
that there was no liberty in the Council, because the Italians did overcome
with plurality of voices. A. In the same Letter they tell the King, that two
thirds of the Prelates did desire the Definition, and that all the Ambassadors
did favor the Truth herein. If two thirds were for them, and only one third
against them, can you tell me how it was possible for them to be overcome with
plurality of voices?

4. They complained that p. 475.
when a proposition is made in which 70. Bishops do uniformly agree, they are
hindered even to speak thereof. A. Who hindered them? Soave tells us, that the
King of Spain wrote to his Ambassador to let p. 505.
his Prelates know, He thought the Declaration did not befit the present time,
and therefore wished them to desist; and that the French Ambassadors wrote to
their Master, how little hopes they had of p 507.
reforming the Court of Rome, because the Spaniards, who were very zealous for
the Reformation, were cooled, and put in fear, by the reprehension of their
King. But the Pope, instead of wishing them to desist, p. 470.
commended them for speaking according to their Conscience. Neither did the
Legates wish them to desist: They only p. 473.
answered, that the Article was not fit to be proposed in that Session, but
that it should be done in time convenient: which was so far from being any
hindrance of their speaking, that upon the very next occasion p. 477.
they began to discourse again of it... and the heat grew so great, that some
of the Ultramontans threatened to protest and depart; and perhaps would have
departed, had not the Ambassadors pacified them. So unreasonably jealous men
are of their Liberty, that, even when they take too much, they think they have
too little.

XXII. Andrew Dudith, Bishop of Five-churches, sent by the Emperor Ferdinand
as his Ambassador to the Council, writes afterward a Letter to Maximilian II.
in which he complains that the votes were not weighed but numbered, that the
Pope had a hundred for one, that the Holy Ghost was sent from Rome in a
Postillons Cloak bag... O monstrous extraordinary madness! Nothing could be
ratified which the Bishops did decree, unless the Pope made himself the Author
of it. A. 1. His Lordship was perhaps a little angry when he wrote this Letter;
and an angry man, you know, is apt to talk extravagantly: Iratus nil nisi
monstra loquitur. What would you say, if a Member of the House, a friend of
yours, should complain at the same rate; O monstrous extraordinary madness!
nothing could be ratified in Parliament which the Lords and Commons did decree,
unless his Majesty were pleased to give his Royal Assent. Would you take this
for the language of his Reason or his Passion? 2. Although he seemed a
Catholic when he sat in Council, yet he declared himself a Protestant soon
after; which is another motive to suspect he makes the worst of things. 3. It Is
remarkable that his conceit of the Cloak-bag was first made use of in Trent,
when the Legates, finding p. 464.
a fourth part only against the divine right of Residence, and observing how p.
465.
they came to words of some bitterness, they exhorted the Fathers to modesty,
gave them leave to depart, and agreed to give the Pope an account of all. This
did not please the Spaniards: but, why Bishop Dudith should find fault, I
cannot understand. Soave tells us, he employed his Rhetoric to oppose the
Bishop of Aiace, and to prove that it was lawful for Bishops to p. 457.
busy themselves in the Courts of Princes, and in the Affairs of the world. as
being Judges, Chancellors, Secretaries, Counselors, Treasurers, etc. which
was, as Soave observes, a plain p 458.
contradicting of those who thought that Residence was de jure divino. Pray,
help me now, if you can, to reconcile your Friend's History with the Bishop's
Letter.

1. In his Letter, we find him very bitter against the hireling Bishops, the
images of Daedalus that moved by nerves which were none of their own, the
country bag-pipes which could not speak, but as breath was put into them. And
who would think, after all this, that in your History we should find him among
these very Papalins, and as busy as the best of them, giving his suffrage with
them, against the Decree of Residence? Who hired him? what nerves moved him to
side with them? Whose breath was put into him to make him speak in favor of
them? 2. In his Letter, he complains the votes were not weighed but numbered:
And, in your History, the agreement of the Legates, not to determine a point of
Doctrine, which p. 464.
a fourth part did dislike, makes it plainly appear, that the votes of Bishop
Dudith's party were not only numbered but weighed. 3. If we believe his Letter,
the Pope had an hundred for one, and if those had not been enough, he could
have sent a thousand more in a Cloakbag to have helped in time of need: And, if
Soave's History may be believed, the Papalins in this occasion were ibid.
a fourth part only; They had three for one against them. How to accord these
matters, I confess, I am at a loss: when you have nothing else to do, you may
try you skill at leisure, Mean time, I can discover no other reason, he had to
quarrel with the Council, but that it was a Body with a Head. He had a mortal
aversion against the Pope: And, whether the Papalins were for Dudith or against
him, 'twas all the same: If his Holiness were consulted, he had not patience to
support it without exclaiming, O monstrous extraordinary madness! What shall
you and I call Passion, if this must pass for Reason?

XXIII. Soave himself, after having related the manner how the Council was
transferred from Trent to Bolonia, defies any man p. 251.
to say what liberty they had. A. Let us hear him tell his own story; take it
in pieces; and see whether Soave be not able to answer himself.

The Article of Residence being set on foot by the Spaniards, together with
several other points of Reformation; the Legates wrote to Paul III. that p. 239.
the Prelates did every day take more liberty, not refraining to speak of the
Cardinals without respect, and with small reverence of his Holiness: that
hereafter it would be hard to keep them in order, because they had many private
assemblies among themselves... and that it was not likely they would be so
bold, without they were upheld, and perhaps incited, by some great Prince. The
Pope considerd, that all the Reformation aimed to restrain his Authority, and
to enlarge the power of Bishops... that p. 241.
the Spaniards are a wise Nation who step not one foot forward without looking
a great way before them... He thought that this webb was secretly spun by the
Emperor, in regard his Ambassador did daily treat with them... He weighed
above all, his words used to the Nuncio, that he had no greater enemy than the
Pope. He feared that when he had established an absolute authority in Germany,
he would think to do alike in Italy, making use of the Council to suppress the
Papacy... To translate it to a place where he had more absolute authority,
seemed the best Counsel... Bolonia seemed the best place... and he resolved to
cause it to done by the Legates, by the Authority given them in the Bull of
Translation. Being thus resolved, he sent a private Gentleman, with Letters of
credit, to do this Embassage to both the Legates... p. 248.
The 21. of April, the Popes messenger appeared and declared to the Legates his
Credence... At this time, it happened fitly, that many in the families of the
Prelates were sick... the air had been moist many days before... the Physicians
spoke as if the disease were contagious... it was reported that the neighbor
places would have no commerce with the City.. The Physicians were examined, and
a Process made concerning the Pestilent infirmity... the Process was prosecuted
until the 8. day, when news came that Verona would trasick no more with them...
Therefore, the 9. day, a general Congregation was held, and Monte took this
opportunity to propose the Translation of the Council, and cause the Popu's
Bull to be read... The Emperor's Prelates answered that the disease and dangers
were not so great, and looked upon it as p. 250.
a pretense. The next day a Congregation was called to consult upon the same
matter. It was sound that 11. Prelates were already parted; and they began to
speak of the place, whither to go. That it should be in Germany all did abhor.
It could not be in the State of any Prince, because they had treated with none.
The Legates proposed Bolonia... The Imperialists did contradict: but the major
part consented... The next day, the Session being held, and the Decree read,
25. Bishops and 3. Generals did assent, but the Cardinal Pacceco and 17. other
Bishops opposed. Among those that consented, there was not one of the
Emperor's subjects, etc. In this Relation I have purposely omitted several
clauses, not only for brevity sake, but because I cannot think that any man is
obliged to believe such abusive constructions and conjectures, without better
proof than Soave's bare word for it. And now you may here observe, 1. How little
power the Pope had in Trent, since he thought it not fit to appear in this
business, and since the Legates were in great danger of finding an insuperable
opposition, had not the sickness happened fitly for the purpose. 2. How much
power the Emperor had over all his Prelates. Soave says, p. 250.
the Imperialists were commanded by the Emperor's Ambassador, not to depart,
until his Majesty were informed, and gave them order. He gives an account
afterward of their p. 253.
remaining in Trent by express order from the Emperor, and obstinately p. 260.
refusing to go or send to Bolonia, to acknowledge the Council; although the
Pope p. 262.
prayed them, either to come, or send Proctors. 3. The Pope praying on the one
side, the Emperor commanding on the other; the prayers being slighted, the
commands being punctually obeyed; it is easy to conclude, which was most likely
to restrain the liberty of the Council, when returned to Trent: especially, if
we consider the Emperor's being then p. 283.
King of Spain and Naples, Prince of the Low Countries, and having other
adherencies in Italy. 4. The Emperor's Protestation, read by Valasco in the
Council of Bolonia, shows plainly what liberty might be expected from him, who
assumed to himself the arbitrary privilege of judging the p. 263.
opinions of the Fathers, and determining who did speak for conscience sake,
and p. 264.
who, though not so many in number, ought to be preferred, as more wise. At
this rate, All the other Prelates of the Universal Church, what would they
signify? Though they were ten for one against them, it is no matter; the
Prelates of the Emperor must always be supposed to be the men who speak for
conscience sake, the men who are more wise, and therefore the men who ought to
be preferred. 5. If the Pope, having just reason to suspect the future
servitude of the Council, endeavored to prevent the great disorders, which
might happen in Trent, by giving secret instructions to his Legates, to
transfer the Synod to Bolonia, Who can blame him?


Soave says, p. 251.
it scandalized every one. And yet I know not why they should be scandalized,
any more than you and I were, when King Charles removed the Parliament from
Westminster to Oxford. He goes on, if the two Legates could command all the
Prelates to part from Trent, and compel them by censures, Let any man say that
can, what liberty they had. It Is easily said; They had, all of them, liberty to
vote freely according to their conscience; The Legates commanded no body; The
matter was put to Votes, and the Majority carried it: And now, Let any man say,
that can, what liberty they wanted.

XXIV. This is not all. The same Author (having rehearsed how the Fathers at
Bolonia unanimously agreed, not to treat of returning to Trent, till those, who
remained there, first came to Bolonia, to unite with the rest, and acknowledge
the Council;) concludes with these words, ibid.
The Spirit which was wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did, and
the Bishops to believe as the Legates, did work as formerly it had done. A.
Have but patience to consider well what Soave himself has said elsewhere; p.
260.
and, if you believe him, you will believe he is mistaken here. 1. Pray, what
spirit formerly moved all the Imperialists to stay behind at Trent, when the
rest went with the Legates to Bolonia? In Trent the Bishops formerly had
disagreed about going thence: Afterward in Bolonia they all agreed about
staying there. And, truly, if Soave could have persuaded us that Concord and
Discord are all one, he might easily have made us believe that in Bolonia, The
spirit workt as formerly it had done. Besides, These of Bolonia were the major
part, and it is no wonder they persever'd in their resolutions: Those of Trent
were the lesser part, which ought to have submitted; and yet, although the Pope
exhorted them to their duty, and p. 262.
prayed them, either to come, or to send Proctors, they still remained as
obstinate as the others were constant. And, I must needs say, betwixt you and
me, if your Friend Soave had been impartial, he would never have committed such
a mistake in the misplacing of his jest: He would have told us (with a great
deal of Truth, and without appearance of impiety) that The spirit which was
wont to move the Ambassadors to think as the Emperor did, and the Bishops to
believe as the Ambassadors, did work as formerly it had done. 2. If, by this
conceit, he would insinuate that the Legates were always Papalins; I must beg
your pardon, if I undertake to prove it notoriously false, by his own History.
He often tells us, how the proceedings of the Legates were contrary to the
instructions they received from Rome. p. 470.
The Court did generally complain of all the Legates, for suffering the Article
of Residence to be proposed... because they had an example of the disorder,
which this dispute caused in the first Council. 3. Although I do not find that,
in this Council, the Ambassadors of any Secular Prince ever dissented among
themselves, in things relating to their Master's interests; yet Soave himself
assures us, that, in this case of Residence, only two of the Legates were for
the Papalins, and three against them: p. 464.
Altemps followed Simoneta, and the other two adhered to Mantua. By which you
may clearly see that your Historian was grievously mistaken, when he said, the
spirit was wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did; for, by his own
computation, there were three to two among them, who were moved to think quite
contrary. 4. You remember the contest which arose, concerning the third
Convocation of the Council: The Spanish Ambassador p. 473.
made earnest suit in the King's name, that it might be declared a Continuation
of the Council, begun under Paul III. and prosecuted under Julius. He was
assisted by the Spanish Prelates, and others who followed them... On the other
side, the Emperor's Ambassadors used strong persuasions to the contrary,
saying they would presently depart and protest.. The Legates were divided:
Seripando had no other aim, but that it should be determined to be a
Continuation... but Mantua did constantly resist... Here you may take notice
once more, that Soave's jests are not always true ones: The Spirit did not move
Mantua to think as the Pope did: for when the p 474.
news came to Rome, the Pope was sorry to see that Cardinal joynd with the
Spaniards in the point of Residence, and opposite to them in the Continuation;
which was to cross him in all things. 5. Afterward p. 478.
the Pope resolved that the Continuation should be declared, let the Emperor
do what he could; and dispatched a Currier to Trent with this Commission. If
the Spirit had been wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did, why dos
Soave tell us that, this Commission being arrived the second of June, they all
resolved uniformly to inform the Pope better, and show him the impossibility to
perform his Order? Why dos he tell us, that the next day... at night, a Currier
came with Letters, that his Holiness did refer all to the wisdom and judgment
of the Legates? I might cite you a great deal more, to this purpose; but this
is enough to show, 1. that the Legates spoke freely their minds, and acted
according to their Conscience; 2. that the Pope did not endeavor to hold the
Council in servitude.


XXV. Nothing could be debated but what the Legates proposed; the Pope's
Commissions running with this clause, proponentibus Legatis. A. 1. At least the
Council voted freely upon the matters which were proposed. 2. In great
Assemblies such a method is necessary, to avoid confusion. 3. It was at length
Sess 24. cap. 21. de Reform.
declared, that the clause was not inserted with design of changing the usual
methed of treating matters in, General Councils; and then, Soave says, p. 728.
The difficulty received an end, with satisfaction of all.

You that have read Soave, may easily remember a great many passages, in which
the Prelates overruled the Legates, and forced them to debate things which
they had no mind to. 1. This clause, proponentibus Legatis, was ibid.
much agitated: 2. The Title of the Council, Representing the Universal Church:
3. The divine right of Residence: 4. The Institution of Bishops being de jure
divino: 5. The general Reformation of the Church: which point might have been
pusht perhaps too far, if the Legates had not wisely counterpoised it, with
proposing a suitable Reformation of Secular Princes. 6. Concerning the grant of
the Cup, demanded by the Emperor, you read in Soave, that p. 530.
the Legates were desirous to give him satisfaction, but could not, because the
party of the negative prevailed. 7. About admitting the Protestant Divines to
disputation, you find that p. 343.
this opinion was readily embraced, first by the Dutch, then by the Spanish
Prelates, and at last somewhat coldly by the Italians, the Legate remaining
immovable, and showing plainly that he stood quiet, being forced by necessity.

Give me leave to add one instance more, and if you are not fully satisfied
with it, I shall know what to think of you. Read Soave, p. 498. and 499. and
observe, 1. how boldly the Bishops of Veglia and Sidonia spoke their minds
concerning the corruptions of Rome, and Reformation of the Pope himself; 2. how
moderately the Legates and other Papalins discoursed about it, when, the
Congregation being ended, they remained in the place together to consider the
boldness, and too much license, of the Prelates, in broaching new matters.

Upon this occasion Castello, who had been Speaker under Julius, told them that
Cardinal Crescentius was used to interrupt them and sometimes impose them
silence. But the Cardinal of Varmia sharply reprehended this practice, and
said, that Nothing is more necessary to a Christian Synod than Liberty; and
that, reading the Councils of the better times, one shall find contentions and
discords in the beginnings of them, even in the presence of the Emperors,
which notwithstanding did, in the end, turn, by the assistance of the Holy
Ghost, into a mavelous concord; and that was the miracle which did pacify
the world. He said, there were infinite contentions in the Nicene Council, and
most exorbitant in the Ephesine, and therefore no wonder if there were now some
diversity of opinions civilly carried, which he that would resist by human and
violent means, will let the world know that the Council is not free, and take
from it all reputation; that it is good to refer the cause unto God, who will
govern Councils, and moderate those who are assembled in his name. The Cardinal
of Mantua approved this opinion, and disliked the proceeding of Crescentius,
but said, it was not contrary to the liberty of the Council to moderate abuses
with Decrees, prescribing the order and time of speaking, and distributing to
every one his own part. This was commended by Varmia, and they agreed to give
order for it.

XXVI. Notwithstanding all this, the Legates would not give leave to propose
the Article concerning the Institution of Bishops. p. 550.
Granata, Braganza, Messina, and Segovia, having obtained audience of the
Legates, desired that they might handle the Articles, that Bishops are
instituted by Christ, and are Superior to Priests jure divino. The Legates,
after they had conferred together, answered, that it was fit to declare, a
Bishop is superior, but p. 551.
that it was not necessary to say, quo jure. Granata replied, that there was a
Controversy, and that, if the Divines did dispute it, the necessity of deciding
this point would be known. The Legates would not consent by any means. A. 1.
They did not absolutely forbid the debating of this matter. 2. After experience
of the contentions about Residence, they could not but foresee that this
dispute, so much connected with the other, might occasion greater disorders, of
which they would have been guilty, had they given leave: and therefore they
ibid.
would not consent by any means. 3. The Divines and Prelates freely took leave,
though it was not given them; and never spoke more boldly, than they did upon
this subject. If you will not believe me, believe your friend Soave: Read what
follows, and believe your own eyes.

Michael Orencuspe, a Divine of the Bishop of Pampelona, argued, p. 558.
that howsoever it be true and certain, that Bishops are superior jure
Pontificio, yet the Lutherans are not in this regard to be condemned for
Heretics, because that cannot be an Article of Faith, which is grounded only
upon the Law of man.

ibid.
John Fonseca a Divine of the Archbishop of Granata followed, saying, it neither
was, nor could be forbidden to speak of it. For the Article being proposed to
be discussed, whether it be heretical or no, it is necessary to understand
whether it be against Faith; against which it cannot be, if it do not repugn to
the Law of God. He said that if the Pope be instituted by Christ, because be
has said to Peter, Feed my Lambs, Bishops are likewise instituted by him,
because he has said alike to all the Apostles, as my Father has sent me, so I
send you. And, if the Pope be Successor of S. Peter, the Bishops are Successors
of the Apostles; which he proved by many Authorities out of the Fathers. He
added, that to be confirmed or created by the Pope, did not conclude, that they
were not instituted by Christ, or had not authority from him. For the Pope
himself is created by the Cardinals, and yet has his authority from Christ: So
the Bishops receive the Diocese from the Pope, and authority from Christ, Their
Superiority over Priests he proved to be jure divino, by authority of many
Fathers, who say that Bishops succeed the Apostles, and Priests the seventy two
Disciples.

Antony Grossetus insisted upon the same point. p. 559.
He said it was necessary to declare, that Bishops have not commission, for
their Office, from men; for so they would be Hirelings, to whom the Lambs do
not belong, because the man, who had committed the care unto them, being
satisfied, they had no more to think on.... In the end, he excused himself,
that he had spoken without premeditation... not remembering that that point was
forbidden to be spoke of Here it is that Soave would make us believe, that
Grossetus feared some bad encounter; but, I am sure, if any bad encounter had
ever happened to him, upon this account, Soave would have taken care to let us
know it. Have but a little patience to observe how freely and boldly the
Bishops delivered their opinions in the following Congregations, and then I Will
give you leave to tell me, if you can, what bad encounter they feared.

The Archbishop of Granata said, p. 565.
They must needs declare both these two points, that is, that Bishops are
instituted jure divino, and are jure divino superior to Priests: And he
confirmed his opinion at large, with many reasons, arguments, and
authorities... He cited Pope Eleutherius, who, in an epistle to the Bishops of
France, wrote, that Christ had committed the Church Universal to them. He
added, that Ambrose upon the Epistle to the Corinthians says, that the Bishop
holds the place of Christ, and is Vicar of the Lord... that there are extant
Epistles of Cyprian to Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, and Stephanus, Popes, where
he gives them the title of Brothers; and of Austin, written in his own name,
and of the Bishops of Africa, in which the Popes Innocentius and Bonifacius are
likewise called Brothers; and, which is most plain, not only in the Epistles of
those two Saints, but of many others, the Pope is called Colleague... that it
is against the nature of a College to consist of persons of diverse kinds... In
this College of Bishops, the Pope is Head; but, for edification only... that S.
Gregory says in his epistle to Johannes Syracusanus, that when a Bishop is in
a fault, he is subject to the Apostolic See, but otherwise all are equal by
reason of humility, which Christian Humility is never separated from the Truth.
He inveighed against those Theologues who said, that S. Peter had ordained the
other Apostles Bishops... p. 566.
He jested at those Divines who had said, that all the Apostles were instituted
by Christ, and made equal in authority, but that it was personal in them, and
ought not to pass to their Successors, except that of S. Peter; asking them, as
if they had been present, with what ground, authority, or reason, they were
induced to make such a bold affirmation, invented within these fifty years
only, expressly contrary to the Scripture, in which Christ said to all the
Apostles, I will be with you until the end of the world, which words, because
they cannot be expounded of their particular persons only, must be necessarily
understood of the succession of all.

p. 567.
The Archbishop of Braga proved at large, the Institution of Bishops de jure
divino. He said, that the Pope cannot take from Bishops the Authority given
them in their consecration, which does contain in it the power, not only of
Order but of Jurisdiction... that to Titular Bishops a City is allotted, which
would not be necessary, if the Episcopal Order could subsist without
Jurisdiction. He was followed by the Bishops of Segovia, of Segna, and others,
who spoke as boldy as himself, not fearing any bad encounter; and Soave says p.
569.
almost the half were of that opinion.

Afterward, p. 577,
to quench the boiling heat of the controversy about the Institution of
Bishops, that it might not increase, by means of so many who were prepared to
contradict Laynez, they would not hold any Congregation for many days. And yet
they were so far from fearing any bad encounter, that almost every day p 578,
three or four of them joined together, and went to some of the Legates to
renew the instance. And, one day, the Bishop of Guadice, with four others, told
them, among other things, that ibid.
as a Prince dos institute, in a City, a Judge of the first instance, and a
Judge of Appeal, who though he be superior, yet cannot take authority from the
other, nor usurp the causes belonging to him: so Christ in the Church has
instituted all Bishops, and the Pope superior, in whom the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was; yet so, that others had theirs depending on
Christ alone.

After all this, the Bishop of Segovia, when the Prelates met again in
Congregation, argued p. 582.
that it was decided in the Congregations under Julius III. that Bishops are
instituted jure divino; though it was not published in Session, by reason of the
sudden dissolution of the Council... The Cardinal of Mantua caused the Acts of
that time to be searched, and that to be read by the Secretary, which was then
defined to be published... Three Heads of Doctrine were then composed, and in
the third, which was of Hierarchy, it was said, The Holy Synod does teach, that
those are not to be hearkened unto, who say that Bishops are not inslituted sure
divino, it appearing manifestly by the words of the Ghospel, that Christ our
Lord has himself called the Apostles, and promoted them to the degree of
Apostleship, into whose place the Bishops are subrogated; neither ought we to
think that this so eminent and necessary a Degree, has been brought into the
Church by human institution. There were also eight Canons, the last whereof
said thus: He that shall say, that Bishops are not instituted Jure divino, or
are not Superior to Priests, or have not power to ordain, or that this does
belong to Priests, Let him be Anathema. This the Cardinal of Mantua
interpreted, only of the power of Order, and the Bishop of Segovia understood
it of All, which contains Order and Jurisdiction; and, though he answered
reverently in appearance, there past so many replies, that they were forced to
break up the Congregation.

When the Cardinal of Lorain came to Trent, he told the Cardinal of Mantua, he
p 583.
would not be curious in unprofitable questions; that, for his own part, he was
more inclined to the opinion which does affirm the Institution of Bishops, and
the Obligation of Residence, to be de jure divino; but, though it were
certainly true, he saw no necessity, or opportunity, to proceed to a
declaration thereof. Nevertheless, when Lorain came to Council, p. 598.
The Bishop of Liria, to inform him of all the reasons of the Spaniards, did
recapitulate, with great eloquence, whatsoever they had said in this matter:
And added besides, that nothing was more in favor of the Lutherans, than to
say that Bishops are instituted by the Law of man.

When Lorain gave his suffrage, he proposed the reasons on both sides; he p.
596.
concluded in the end, that the Question was boundless; and exhorted the
Fathers to leave it, omitting jure divino, and saying instituted by Christ. But
notwithstanding this, ibid.
The French Prelates, who spoke after Lorain, did not use the same ambiguity,
but maintained openly, that the Authority of Bishops was de jure divino.

Again, in another Congregation, p. 598.
The French made proof of their liberty. They said, that the Institution and
Jurisdiction of Bishops was de jure divino, as well as that of the Pope; that
there was no difference, but in degree of Superiority; and that the Pope's
Authority is confined within the limits of the Canons, relating and commending
the style of the Parliaments of France, that when any Pope's Bull is presented,
which contains any thing contrary to the Canons received in France, they
pronounce it to be abusive, and forbid the execution. Have you never heard,
that such boldness as this, even in a free Parliament, has been enough to send
a man to the Tower? And yet, Soave confesses, They were heard with much
patience. Consider well these passages, from the beginning to the end of this
Dispute; and tell me then, what liberty was wanting in the Council.

XXVII. If the Prelates were so bold, and took such liberty, How was it
possible for the Council to end so quietly? A. In some matters, they had full
p. 728.
satisfaction; as in the clause, Proponentibus Legatis. In some, a considerable
part opposed, as in the Doctrine of Residence; which therefore, according to
the p. 538.
general Maxim of the Council, could not be determined. In others, as the
Institution of Bishops, and the Pope's Authority, although their arguments had
been urged, repeated, and amplified, in several Congregations, yet still the
major part was of another opinion; it was, therefore, impossible to come to any
determination: And, you know, how natural it is, for reasonable men, to be
quiet and silent, when they plainly see, it is in vain to speak.

XXVIII. Was not the Pope's Authority, at length, made use of, to restrain
their liberty, under pretense of their abusing it? A. Soave himself, who never
makes-the best of things, is pleased to tell us quite another story. Lorain
(who, at his first coming to Trent, had opposed the p. 583.
declaration of these points. and had p. 596.
exhorted the Fathers to leave it) p. 684.
proposed the omission of the two Articles, of the Institution of Bishops, and
Authority of the Pope, as things wherein the parties were too passionate. And
very fitly, says your Author, ibid.
an Order came from the Emperor to his Ambassadors, to use all means that the
Authority of the Pope should not be discussed in Council; which his Majesty
did, because he saw the major part inclined to enlarge it... The Ambassadors,
having treated with the Legates in conformity hereof, as also with Lorain, and
other principal Prelates, did cause this Article to be omitted, as also that
other of the Institution of Bishops. But first they made many consultations
about it, that all might rest contented.

XXIX. Why were the Popes, of those times, so afraid of a General Council? Why
so averse from it? Why did they, to secure themselves, shift sides so often
betwixt the Emperor and King of France? A. You might as well have asked me,
Why dos a Pilot fear a storm? Why is he so averse from it? Why dos he trimm the
boat so often? S. Peter's Ship, in those days, was grievously tossed, and
almost coverd with the waves: But our Lord, who seemed to sleep, at length
arose, commanded the winds and the Sea, and there followed a great Calm.

XXX. Why did they avoid, and defer so long, the General Reformation? Why were
Bulls given secretly to the Legates, to suspend or transfer the Council, as
occasion served? Why did they openly declare, that a Council is ever dangerous,
when the Pope's Authority is questioned? A. You Will never have done with these
cramp-questions, except a man give you as good as you bring. Is not the
Reformation of Abuses, in the Church, as dangerous as the Redressing of
Grievances, in the State? If our Nation were in the same ferment, as under the
reign of Charles I. would you blame his Majesty for pretending to prorogue or
dissolve as he pleases? And have we not, ever since, great reason to believe
that a Parliament (though, otherwise, excellent in it self) is always
dangerous, when the King's Authority is questioned? In those tumults of
Ecclefiastical Affairs, Reformation was a dangerous business: And, had the
Reformers been let slip at the Abuses, they would perhaps have worried the
whole Church. If S. Paul was in perils among false Brethren, the Successor of
S. Peter was no less. p. 284.
Not only the Protestants did impugn his Authority, but many Princes also would
restrain it, and many Bishops did think to moderate it. p. 205.
The Spaniards had a secret, which they communicated only among themselves, to
make great the Episcopal Authority, so that the Pope could not restrain it. The
French had p. 532.
ever pretended to limit the Pope's power, and subject it to the Canons and
Councils, p. 349.
The Emperor's Ambassadors had given the Protestants hope to moderate the
Papal Authority, and said that they expected to see a Gate laid open by their
negotiation, that afterward they might second it: and Julius III. had
intelligence, that the Emperor had a design to advance himself, by debasing of
the Papacy. This was enough to make the Popes, of that Age, take care to look
before they leaped. But yet this was not all, if Soave says true. The p. 17.
Governors of Countries regarded not much, what the Council might determine
concerning Doctrines; but desired it might be such a one, as might reduce the
Priests and Friars to their beginning; hoping that by that means the regalities
and temporal jurisdictions might return unto them. And therefore they said, it
was in vain to call a Council where the Bishops, and other Prelates, only,
should have a deliberative voice; because they ought to be reformed, and it was
necessary that others should have the charge thereof, who could not be deceived
by their proper interests. Here you see, in plain English, what the Reformation
was like to come to. 1. The design was laid to bring the Ecclesiastics to
their beginning: They were to be brought to their Staff and Scrip again, and
sent about their business, whilst the Reformers plonder'd the Church, and
divided the spoils. 2. To do it with more ease, it was in vain to call a
Council of Bishops, but the Laity were to have the charge thereof, who could
not be deceived by their proper interests. This Reason, I confess, if it had
taken place, would have been worth it is weight in gold: but, pray, give me
leave to make the case your own. Suppose a man should demand your purse; and,
upon refusal, tell you He is the better Judge, whether or no you ought to
deliver; because your interest blinds you, but He cannot be deceived by his
praper interest. Would you believe this honest Gentleman? How did you like this
method of Reforming, when our English Rebels threw the Sovereignty out of
doors, and the Church of England out of the windows? Did you fancy that those
Church-and-State-Menders deserved to have the charge of those matters, and that
it was necessary they should have it, because they could not be deceived by
their proper interests?

If such a Throughout-Reformation as this, had been effectually procured, All
had been well: Complaints would then have ceased, because there would have been
nothing left to complain of: The Reformers would have reduced the Pope, the
Cardinals, the Bishops Priests and Friars, to their beginning, which in plain
English is little better than reducing them to their end: The Faction would
then have triumphed, according to their hearts desire; just as our Rebels did,
when they had brought our Monarchy to it is beginning, by beheading of the
Government. But, this not being effected, All the rest was nothing to the
purpose. One would think that eleven or twelve Decrees, containing above 140.
chapters of Reformation, might be some degree of satisfaction to any reasonable
men: But, when people are disappointed in their principal design, right or
wrong it is all the same, they are out of humor; and, when they are so, it is a
hard matter to please them. This was the reason why the Lutheran Critics were
so sharp in censuring and ridiculing the Decrees, as soon as each Session of
the Council was published in Germany. p. 504. The Birth of the Mountains, was a
proverb much in vogue, which Soave has recorded in more places than one, though
otherwise worded, The travail of the mountains, and the nativity of the mouse:
an expression proper enough to let us understand, what vast projects they had
laid of reducing all things to their beginning; and how much they were
disappointed in them; since what was decreed by the Council, compared with what
they would have done themselves, was no more than a mouse to a mountain. In the
same page, he goes on; Concerning the Reformation it was said, that more light
points could not be handled, nor more lightly; and that they did imitate the
Physician, who, in a hectical body, labored to kill the Itch. This was another
pleasant jest, which Soave took care of, for fear it should be lost. But, let
him jest as he pleases, the Itch, he talks of, is not so easily cured. This
humor, of Reforming, is a very itching humor: And the Itch is a strange
restless disease: Even the wiser sort of mankind, when they have once got it,
cannot for their lives forbear Scratching, though they know by experience that
it dos more harm than good.

Read the Decrees of Reformation from the beginning to the end, and if you read
them with a serious attention, I am very confident, an impartial man, as you
are, will not say they are, either light, or lightly handled. If you have the
Council in your Library, I had rather you would read them there, than in Soave;
who, I must needs tell you, is not so exact as I could wish him. Under pretense
of relating the substance, he leaves out a great many circumstances, which a
curious man would be desirous to know: And besides, although I have compared a
very small part of his translation with the original, I find several mistakes
in it. p. 503. n. 1. he reads is, for is not. p. 692. n. 12. he reads six, for
five. p. 733. n. 2. he reads two, for three. p 753. n. 1. of two express
commands, he has made only one exhortation. Such negligences as these are
enough to make me suspect him in other matters; and are a great argument that
it was more his business, to find fault with the Reformation, than to give an
exact account of it. But, whether you consult the Council or his History, that
you may find out all the Decrees in order, without any trouble, I have directed
you to all the Sessions of the one, and pages of the other. V. 173. 174 VI.
211. 212. VII. 247. 248. XIII. 320. 321. XIV. 331. 332. 333. 334. XXI. 503.
XXII. 537. 538. XXIII. 691. 692. 693. XXIV. 730. 731. 732. 733. 734. 735. XXV.
751. 752. 753. 754. 755. 756. And, for your better satisfaction. I have set
down some few instances of Soave's Translation, comparing it with the Original,
and enclosing, what he has either altered or omitted, in a parenthesis like
[this.]

1. Concerning Scripture. The first point of Reformation, in the first chapter,
of the first Decree, is this, p. 173. n. 1.
that in the Churches, where there is a stipend allotted for reading Divinity,
the Bishop should provide that the Holy Scripture should be read by the
Stipendary, if he be sit; and, not being sit, the Bishop should depute a
Substitute to perform the charge: But, for hereafter, that the Benefice should
not be conferred but upon a sufficient person. That in the Cathedral Churches
of populous Cities, and Collegiate Churches of great Castles, where no such
stipend is assigned, the first Prebend that falls void, should be applied to
that use, or a simple Benefice, or a contribution of all Beneficed men, to
institute the Lecture. And again, concerning p. 693. n. 18.
the institution of Seminaries, it was constituted, that every Episcopal Church
should have a certain number of boys, brought up in a College, to learn, among
other things, the Holy Scripture. All this Sess. 5. c. 1.
The Holy Synod orders and decrees [least that heavenly Treasure of Sacred
Books, which the Holy Ghost has so liberally bestowed upon mankind, should lie
neglected.]

2. Concerning Ecclesiastics. p. 732. n. 1.
The Decrees of Reformation did contain. That whosoever have right in the
Promotion, shall be admonished that it is a mortal sin, if they shall not use
all diligence to promote the most worthy and most profitable to the Church. And
it was added, How necessary it is, that the Pope, in regard of his Duty, should
endeavor to assume Cardinals of [most] excellent worth, and to provide the
Church of fit Pastors, because if the flock should perish by [the evil
government of persons negligent and forgetful of their duty] Christ will
demand an account of his Holiness. p. 733. n. 3.
That [Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, and] Bishops, shall be bound to
visit [their proper] Diocese... That the Visitor shall go with a modest train
of men and horses, dispatching the Visitation, as soon as may be; and shall not
receive any [money, or present, whatsoever it be, or in what manner soever it
be offered] but frugal and moderate Diet... ibid. n. 4.
That the Bishops shall be bound to preach in person; or, having a lawful
impediment, by others. And in case the Parish Priest be hindered, that he cannot
preach in his own Church, he shall, at his charge, maintain another to do it,
deputed by the Bishops... That the Bishop shall admonish every one [that, where
it may conveniently be done, he ought] to go to his own Parish, to hear the
Sermon: and that None [either Secular, or Regular, even in the Churches of
their own Order,] shall preach against the Bishop's will, p. 734. n. 10,
That where Visitation, or Correction of manners, is in question, no exemption
or appeal, though to the Apostolic See, shall [any way] hinder or suspend the
execution of that which is decreed or adjudged. p. 735. n. 17.
That no Ecclesiastical person, though a Cardinal, shall have more than one
Benefice, which not being able to maintain him, another simple Benefice may be
added, so that they do not both require Residence, which shall be understood of
all Benefices, of what title or quality soever, though Commended. And he that
has now more Benefices than one, shall be bound to leave all but one, within
six months; or, if not, they shall be all void. p. 753. n. 3.
The Reading of the General Reformation did follow, which, after an Exhortation
to Bishops, for exemplary life, [commandeth, not only that they be content
with] modesty and frugality of [houshold-stuff and table; but also, that in the
rest of their way of living, and in their whole house, nothing may appear but
what bears the character of simplicity, zeal, and contempt of Vanities: And
absolutely] does forbid them to enrich their friends or kindred, with the
revenues of the Church; but, if poor, to allot them their distribution, as to
the rest of the poor. What has been said of Bishops, it Decrees to be observed
by all beneficed Eccleasticks, either Secular or Regular, and also by the
Cardinals.

Here I have cited only eight points, a very inconsiderable part, of the whole
Reformation which contains above a hundred and forty chapters: But, for a man
of your skill, a pattern is enough to judge of the whole piece. And, besides
all these Decrees, there are also others of Doctrine, forbidding and condemning
several abuses, which are worth your taking notice of.

1. Concerning Purgatory. p. 751.
The Synod teaches no more, than that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls
detained in it, are assisted by the suffrages of the faithful, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore it does command Bishops to teach sound
doctrine in this matter [such as is delivered by the Holy Fathers, and Sacred
Councils] and cause it to be preached, without handling subtle questions before
the ignorant people, nor suffering uncertain and unlikely things to be
published; Prohibiting curiosities, superstition, and unhonest gain.

2. Concerning Masses. p. 537.
A Decree was read concerning abuses, to be corrected, in the celebration of
Masses: And contained in substance; that the Bishops ought to forbid all things
brought in by Avarice. Irreverence, or Superstition.

3. p. 751.
In matter of Saints, it does command Bishops, and all others who have the
charge of teaching, to instruct the people concerning the intercession and
invocation of them, according to the ancient doctrine of the Church, consent of
Fathers, and decrees of Councils, teaching, that the Saints do pray for men,
that it is profitable to invocate them, and to have recourse to their prayers
and assistance, to obtain benefits from God, through Jesus Christ his Son our
Lord, who is our only Savior and Redeemer. Concerning Images; that those of
Christ and the Saints, ought to have due honor given them; but that there is
no divinity or virtue in them... Afterward it adds, that, desiring to take
away the abuses, and occasions of pernicious errors, it does Ordain (...) that
all Superstition, in invocation of Saints, in worship of Relics, and in use
of Images, be taken away.

4. Concerning Indulgences. p. 757.
The Synod does only anathematize those that shall say, they are unprofitable,
and that the Church has not power to grant them. It does command that all
those offices of Pardon-mongers be abolished: And, for the other abuses [which
have taken their rise from superstition, ignorance, irreverence, or any other
way, Whereas they cannot conveniently be forbidden, in particular, by reason of
the manifold corruptions of provinces, and places where they are committed,] it
does command the Bishops, that every one shall collect all those of his own
Church, to propose them in the Provincial Synod, p. 733. n. 2.
which shall be called by the Metropolitan, or the most ancient Suffragan,
within one year, at the most, after the end of this Synod, and afterward,
every [three] years, at least.

Tell me now your opinion concerning these matters. All these points, are they
light, and lightly handled? Are they all nothing to the purpose? Suppose the
Vineyard had been a little neglected, and the Vines wanted pruning, Will
nothing else serve your turn, but reducing them to their beginning, and cutting
them up by the Roots?

I had almost quite forgot to tell you that, in the end of the General
Reformation, the Council has taken particular care, that no Dispensing power
may obstruct the force and benefit of the Decrees. Be it known to all men, says
the Council, p. 756. n. 18.
that the Canons shall be observed [exactly and] indistinctly by all, and shall
not be dispensed, but for [an urgent and just] cause, heard with [great]
maturity, and without cost [by whosoere they are, to whom it appertains:
Otherwise, the Dispensation shall be judged Surreptitious.] If the Cause be,
not only just but urgent; if the justice and urgency be well known before the
grant of it; if nothing be given to any whosoever for it; Such a Dispensation
is unquestionably blameless. And now, I desire to know, How was it possible for
the Council to provide more effectually for the punctual observance of all
these three conditions, than by declaring that otherwise the Dispensation is,
and shall be, surreptitious, and of no effect?

XXXI. In the end of the Council, there was great joy in Rome, for having
cheated the world, and advanced their interest, where they feared to have their
wings clipped. A. Here I know not how you will be able to make the two ends of
Soave's History meet. In his first book, he talks much at this rate; and, in
his last, he largely contradicts it. He tells us, in the end, how the Pope and
Cardinals deliberated upon the matter, whether or no the Decrees of
Reformation, were to be confirmed; And says, that p. 759.
the Court, understanding that the Pope was resolved upon the Confirmation,
changed their joy into grief; All the Officers complained of the losses they
should receive in their offices, if that Reformation were executed...
Supplications also, and Memorials, were given to the Pope, by those, who,
having bought their Offices, and foreseeing this loss, demanded restitution...
The Pope having diligently considered thereof, deputed eight Cardinals to
consult upon the Confirmation; and to think upon some remedies for the
complaints of the Court... He concludes, It is certain, that they who did
procure the Council, had no aim but to pull down the Pope's Authority; And,
while the Council did last, every one did speak, as if it had power to give
Laws to him.

After all, you think to mortify me with objecting, that the corruptions of
the Court, and the abuses tolerated in the Church, are at great as ever. But
you must give me leave to tell you, 1. I am not obliged to take your bare word
for it; 2. Whether it be true or false, it is nothing to my present purpose. If
false, you are to blame for saying so: If true, it is none of the Council's
fault. Having proceeded legally, and having made good Laws, the Council has
done its part: it is ours, to do the rest. My business is to defend the Council:
I have nothing to do, to rake the dunghill of the Church. Has the Decalogue
less Authority, because the greatest part of mankind are so disobedient? Or is
the Ghospel less Sacred, because there are so few who live according to the
maxims of it? If this be the only reason, why you Protest against the Council
of Trent, because the Decrees of Reformation are not every where, in all
things, punctually observed; I see no reason, why you may not, with as good a
grace, Protest against the Ghospel, and the Ten Commandments.

I have now done with your Objections: And although I am not of the Poet's
mind, that Brevity is always good, be it, or be it not, understood; Yet I have
endeavored to be as short as possibly I could, because, when I deal with a man
of your parts, a word is enough to the wise, and few words are best.

As for Soave, whom you so much admire, I desire to ask you a few questions,
before I tell you what I think of him. Suppose a mortal enemy of yours should
Libel you, by the way of History; call you Rogue and Rascal in the very
Preface; and, at the same time, persuade his Reader, that he follows exactly
the truth: Would you have me take this Author for an Oracle? Would you not
think me reasonable, if I suspected almost every word he said? And ought not I
to do the Council as much Justice, as I would my Friend? It Is certain that Soave
was a mortal enemy of the Council: In the very beginning, he declares it: He
says, p. 2.
it has caused the greatest deformation that ever was, and calls it the Iliad
of the Age; which is as kind a compliment to the Fathers, as if he had called
them, a pack of Villains. He tells us indeed, in the same place, that he is not
possessed with any passion, which may make him err; and this was well enough
said; But how shall a body do to believe him? If it were your own case, I Am
sure you would not like my being credulous: And how do I know but that an Enemy
of the Council may deserve as little credit, as an Enemy of yours?

Another reason, why I do not like him, is because he takes upon him to write
men's private thoughts, with as much assurance as he writes their words and
actions. He hardly ever speaks of any intelligence coming to Rome, but he
entertains his Reader with a pleasant Scene, in which he brings the Pope alone
upon the Stage, discoursing with himself his secret apprehensions and
deliberations upon every matter; such thoughts as no wise man would trust his
neighbor with, although he were the best and surest friend he had in the
world. How Soave could possibly come to any certain knowledge of such things, I
am not able to comprehend: And truly, if a man, in one case, will tell me more
than he can know; I have just reason to be afraid that, in another, he will tell
me more than he dos know.

A third reason, which weighs more with me than all the rest, is this: You tell
me, on the one side, He was a Popish Friar; And, on the other, I cannot
believe, but that (although perhaps, for some reasons, he did not openly
profess it) He was really a Protestant. It appears so plainly, by his censuring
the Decrees of Doctrine, as well as those of Reformation, and by the severe
reflections of his own, which he intermixes with those of the Lutheran
Critics; that I do not conceive how any man of sense, who reads him with
attention, can be of another opinion. Had he been a barefaced Protestant, I
should be more inclined to believe him. There is something of integrity and
honor in a man that openly professes what he is: And, although passion and
prejudice may blind him, yet I am apt to think that such a person will never
deceive me, more than he deceives himself. But a Protestant, that lives and
dies in the profession of a Popish Friar, How can I believe his words, when the
most serious of his actions are only so many lies? For my own part, I would as
soon make choice of a Catholic Jew to comment upon the Ghospel, and to write
the life of Christ, as I would choose a Protestant Friar to write the History
of a General Council.

Before I end my Letter, give me leave, once more, to mind you of the Discourse
we had, when we saw one another last. We both agreed, that C. II. p. 1.
it were a very irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and leave it to
the inhabitants to be the Interpreters and Judges of those Laws; for then every
man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing as either Right or
Wrong: that ibid.
therefore we cannot suppose, that God Almighty would leave us at those
Uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and leave every man to be his own
Judge: that ib.
Christ left his Spirit and Power to his Church, by which they were the Judges,
even of the Scripture it self, many years after the Apostles, which Books were
Canonical, and which were not: that ibid. p. 2.
the Judgment of the Church, is without Appeal; otherwise, what they decide
would be no farther to be followed than it agrees with every man's private
Judgment: that because, in the Apostles Creed, we believe in the Holy Catholic
Church, therefore we ought to believe in the first four General Councils, which
were true and legal Representatives of it: And lastly, that if the Council of
Trent were proved to be as General, as free, and as legal in all it is
circumstances, as any of the first four Councils were; then you must needs own
your self obliged in Conscience to submit to it, and to leave of Protesting
against it.

This last part I have here endeavored to prove, out of Soave himself, your
own Historian, who always makes the worst of things, and never speaks a
favorable word, but when the Power of Truth constrains him to it. If I have
not performed according to expectation; it is your own fault, who are to blame
for having a better opinion of me than I deserve. I am no Doctor, nor Graduate;
but every way unfit to be a Champion of the Cause. Yet, having received your
Commands, I have just reason to expect, that you will easily pardon a man, who
in this occasion is guilty of no other crime than being ready to show himself,

Your Obedient Servant, N. N.
Sept. 22. 1686.
Page. 70. line. 1. read. rewarded. p. 75. *. 4. r. chapter 14. p. 76. l. 8. r. his
9. book. p. 85. l. 26. r. many. p. 86. l. 29. r. the year 831. p. 89. l. 8.
dele de. p. 114. l. 21. r. his 2. book. p. 152. l 27. r. shut out. p. 161. l.
6. r. it has. p. 165. l. 1. r. your. p. 168. l. 5. r. haereticis. p. 172. l. 3.
dele an. p. 176. l. 26. r. in this. p. 189. l. 22. r. to. Basil. p. 190. l. 9.
r. the case. ibid. l. 13. r. HAERETICIS. p. 194. l. 1. r. another. p. 225. l.
3. r. Charles II. p. 240. *. 2. r. 590.

FINIS.

