REader, there are some faults which are escaped in the printing, which do much
darken the fense, the which thou may do well with thy Pen to mend, according to
the Errata.

Page 1. lin. 30. read and obtained. Page 16. l. 16. for selves r. self: page
18. l. 33. for the r. that: page 19. l. 1. r. Work, and thou: page 22. l. 14.
for i^, r. into: l. 15. for Cannons, r. Can^es: page 39. l. 5. for expect, r.
expected: page 47. l. 27. blot out one and: page 52. l. 5. for you r. thee: l.
6. r. between me: page 54. l. 12, for against it: r. against them: l. 21. for
they, r. this: page 67. l. 6. r. hat on: page 68. l. 25. r. that I had: page
72. l. 32. for thee r. that: page 92. l. 1. for set, r, sent: page 100. l. 34.
for we saw, r. he saw: page 101. l. 11. r. Poison of Asps: page 105. l. 26. for
Duth, r. Dutch: l. 33. for Duth, r. Dutch: page 107. l. 26. r. the least: page
113. 24. for you, r. thou: page 120. l. 3. r. t^ok not upon him.

NEW-ENGLAND'S ENSIGN: It being THE ACCOUNT OF Cruelty, the Professors Pride,
and the Articles of their Faith; Signified in Characters written in blood,
wickedly begun, barbarously continued, and inhumanly finished (so far as they
have gone) by the present power of darkness possessed in the Priests and Rulers
in New England, with the Dutch also inhabiting the same Land; In a bloody and
cruel birth, which the Husband to the Whore of Babylon, has brought forth, by
ravishing and torturing the seed of the Virgin of Israel.

Happy are they who are blessed out of the hands of Hypocrites, by whom my
Savior suffered.

As it is said in David, Behold, and see, our hands, our sides, and our ears,
if we be not the people Christ Jesus suffers in.

This being an Account of the Sufferings sustained by us in New England, (with
the Dutch) the most part of it in these two last years, 1657, 1658. With a
Letter to John Indicot, and John Norton, Governor, and chief Priest of Boston,
and another to the town of Boston. Also, the several late Conditions of a
friend upon Road-Iland, before, in and after distraction; With some Quaeries
unto all sorts of people, who want that which we have, etc. Written at Sea, by
us whom the Wicked in scorn calls Quakers, in the second month of the Year
1659. This being a Confirmation of so much as Francis Howgill truly published
in his Book titled, The Popish Inquisition newly erected in New England, etc.

London, Printed by T. L. for G. Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the
West End of Paul's, 1659.

New-England's Ensign, etc.
Reader,
IF thou would be informed of the present and true estate, how thing is, and
has been, concerning Religion in New England, peruse these following lines,
which what is therein mentioned, is the real truth of what it has afforded in
less then these two last years, and judge thou with that of God in thy
conscience, if their shame has not far outrun their fame; for a bloodier
Character, I believe, thou have not read nor heard in these late days, a
people pretending wholly to hold up the most refined Church, that has so
largely committed sacrilege as these have done; for since my Father fetched me
out of the lowest hell, and led me through the graves of sin and death, wherein
I saw lying all the Professors under the Sun; yet amongst them all, I have not
met with such a cup of cruelty, as there with my fellows I drunk from the
hands of our Contrymen, the cruel English Jews, who professes Christ in
the letter, but crucifieth him in the life where ever he appears; Greater
hypocrites are not under the Sun then they are in word, and in show they appear
beautiful unto men, but in covetousness and deceitful dealing, secret lust, and
dissimulation, they flow; Penitency nor Mercy, Justice nor Righteousness in
reality, is not in the least amongst them; if I speak any other then I have
seen and heard, and my hands have handled amongst them* then should I be like
unto them; if I speak as from revenge and malice against that people, I were to
be blamed, but in reality to forewarn all to beware of hypocrites, of which
sort in all Nations they are the head. If thou can have patience to peruse my
words with the least degree of savor or taste of the Saints travels sustained
through true experience, obtained through obedience to the light of the Lord
Jesus Christ, hearken and I shall speak; I was in darkness, yea gross darkness
covered me, and Satan (as King over all the earth) ruled over me, and I knew it
not, until the terrors of God fell upon me for sin; and then out of the belly
of hell cried I, so grievous was my complaint, and so doleful was my cry, that
I was vomited forth as one not worthy to have place in all the earth; my bones
did waste, and my flesh was as the slime for Pharoah's house, ready to be
converted into every crawling creature, as the plague changed, so did the boil,
and the form of the creature was accordingly. This is the word of Truth, he
that can receive it let him. In this distress, I heard a cry in the coasts of
Goshen, of light that was broken forth, and that there was a measure of it
given to every man to profit withal; but so dark was I, and so grossly bl^nde,
what this Light was I knew not, nor amongst all Professors, Priests nor others,
I had never heard it spoken of, nor preached for salvation to the ends of the
earth. Then called I to question all that ever I had either read or heard, to
the last tittle of my Belief, wherein I said, that he descended into hell, and
read that he was given for a light into the world, although the whole world lay
in wickedness, and the Devil the god thereof, according to the Scriptures; and
I had sought heaven long, yet knew I not in the least measure that which first
discovers hell; yet from amongst the wickedest of men was I crauled, and
loathed the basest of abominations, and desires great to live justly and to
enjoy God, (no man's groans greater) which set me to inquire after this new
light which was so called amongst the wicked, and what effect it wrought
amongst such as did believe in it; I heard that it did convince of sin, and
being believed in, obeyed, and followed, led out of all manner of uncleanness.
Then said I in my heart, if so, it should not want following, for I was weary
of my sin, and my transgressions was before me continually, yea I loathed my
life unto death when I saw Christ so low descended, and compassed about with
such a caul of corruption, it brought me as low as he, yea even to dye with
him: And believing in this Light, I shall tell thee Reader of a Truth what
further effect it wrought in me, without in the least giving thee the report as
from any other man besides my self, that thou may know the truth thereof, O
Theophilus, whatsoever thou art; it was unto me as the Angel of his presence,
and caused me to carry the Ark back again into Egypt, and charged me there to
abide until he brought the word; (for he that travels before, strives in his
own strength. There was I constrained in Mezech to cry, Woe is me, as one
delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the soul might be
saved in the day of the Lord; He that can receive it let him. There left I the
leaven of the Pharisees, and kneading of do^gh, and making of cakes, and baking
them upon the Altars made unto sin, and fed only upon Angels food, which I
reaped, a^tending at the Altar of Incense to receive the Word; in the strength
whereof [Reader] to the death of all flesh and self, I have obtained mercy,
peace with God, redemption from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, an heir of
his kingdom, a member of his Body, a Minister of his Spirit, and an inheritor
of his Eternal Rest, blessed for ever. Betwixt this death and this life, this
heavinese and this help, this desolation and restoration, are all the Families,
Kindreds, and People upon earth, be of what notion or profession they will, and
having past through the Dragons den, and the most vainest and beast lie place
of all Bruits, the most publicly profane, and the most covertly corrupt, the
English in New England is the worst (especially their Priest and Rulers;) for,
for all their feigned and whining profession, there we found the Fiery Trials
(as from men) having past through all their Pattents [so called] bearing the
testimony of the Word of God; of the Indians never received. I any harm, but
freely entertained with such as they had. Moreover by such as were by the
English accounted the basest of men, whom many of them they had barbarously
banished from amongst them, whom we found in Road-Iland, Long-Iland,
Provindence, and elsewhere; also in Plimouth-Pattent were we received, and in
several other places as the Messengers of God, and Sephas: And what we; with
these also, who have believed our report, have reaped from their cruel hands,
hereafter f^lloweth, with the places and parties thus entreated; And also a
true Copy of the Law whereby they acted thus against us; such a one as I am
sure never proc^eded out of Sion; Shall David want a King to sit upon his
Throne for ever? Shall not God raise up Judges in righteousness, who shall
plead his cause with the men of this generation, that they may be judged as men
in the flesh, and their reward given them according to God in the Spirit? Shall
innocent blood lie buried in the dust for ever? Surely nay; thou will revenge
thine own Elect, who cries unto thee day and night, against these who builds up
Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with oppression, cruelty and iniquity: So after
the discharging of my conscience toward God, in the committing these things to
public view, recommending them to the consciences and considerations of all
that are in Authority, the chief Magistrate and his Assistants who sits in
Council with him, and who ought in righteousness so much as in them lies, to
see these grievances and abuses regulated, or otherwise these things at their
hands will be required; for let them be assured, that that spirit which has
attempted unto blood in such a high nature as they have done, not being called
to an account for it, will attempt to take away life, if still suffered; as you
may further understand their cruel intent by a Law set forth in this present
year 1658. and this as surely they seek after, as the enemies of God does after
thine, or did after thy father O. C. for as little art thou esteemed by the
one, as by the other, further then base and self ends leads them to seek unto
thee; for when we were moved of the Lord to make our appeal once and again,
that our cause might be heard and tried by the chief Magistrate, or whom he
pleased to appoint, we were utterly denied it, and his Name slighted, and
never so much as made mention of, in their proeeedings in that bloody and cruel
place of Boston; and as the least principle of the law of Love bears rule in
thee, it will lead thee to do for thy neighbors and friends as for thy self,
and if this thou do not, thou can not be justified in the sight of God, nor
from our blood clear in the day of thine account; and least thou or any one
should question the truth hereof, we the Sufferers are the Subscribers, who are
all of us by name and nature freeborn English people, whom if thou, or any by
thy appointment, shall call us to question concerning the truth hereof, I am
satisfied we shall be as ready to do the second, as we have been to suffer for
the first; And it being the honor of a King to find out a cause, find out
this as thou art Noble, and if any man can contradict the truth of one passage
in this particular, I shall freely bear the blame and shame thereof, who has
been, and am an eye and ear-witness unto them all, Called amongst men,

Humphrey Norton.

Reader, Thou may further understand, that variety of Laws they invent and
establish at the least two times every year, and if occasion seem to present,
they can do it two times a week, as they did by John Rous and Humphrey Norton,
and several others, having whipped us once according to their former Law, soon
after our imprisonment, as thou will further understand in what follows; In
the week following, their malice was so great against us, that they made a
second, whereby to whip us two times a week; but this they read unto us, and
put in execution upon our bodies, but would not suffer us to have a copy of it;
and I knowing that there is an everlasting Law established and given forth,
with Statutes and Ordinances attending on it (recorded in the book of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah) against all transgressions
whatsoever committed and uncommitted, I could do no less but smile at their
blindness.

So that Reader, finding their Laws not worthy of losing or wasting thy time
in, I shall commit no more to thy view then necessity puts me upon to certify
unto thee the truth and nakedness o^ the things herein mentioned; And that thou
with us may judge of the Tree by its fruits, here follows one of them.

At a Council held at Boston, the 11. of July, 1656.
Whereas there are several Laws long since made and published in this
Jurisdiction, bearing testimony against Heretics and erroneous persons, yet
notwithstanding Simon Kempthorn of Charls-Town, Master of the Ship-Swallow of
Boston, has brought into this Jurisdiction from the Island of Barbados, two
Women, who name themselves Anne, the Wife of one Austin, and Mary Fisher, being
of that sort of people commonly known by the Name of Quakers, who upon
examination are found not only to be transgressors of the former Laws, but do
hold many very dangerous, heretical, and blasphemous Opinions, and they also
acknowledge that they came here purposely to propagate their said errors and
heresies, bringing with them, and spreading here sundry Books, wherein are
contained many most corrupt, heretical, and blasphemous Doctrines, contrary to
the truth of the Gospel professed amongst us; the Council therefore tendering
the preservation of the Peace and Truth enjoyed and professed among the
Churches of Christ in this Country; do here by order,

First, That all such corrupt books as shall be found upon search, to be
brought in and spread by the foresaid persons, be forthwith burned and
destroyed by the common executioner. Secondly, That the said Anne and Mary be
kept in close prison, and none admitted communication with them without leave
from the Governor, Deputy Governor, or any two Magistrates, to prevent the
spreading of their corrupt Opinions, until such time as they be delivered by
Authority aboard some Vessel to be transporte^ out of the Country. Thirdly,
the said Simon Kempthorne is hereby enjoined speedily and directly to
^ransport, or cause to be transported the said persons from hence unto the
Barbado's from whence they came, he defraying all the charge of their
imprisonment; and for the effectual performance hereof, he is to give security
to the Secretary in a Bond of a hundred Pounds sterling; and on his refusal to
give such security, he is to be committed to prison till he do it.

By the Council, Edward Rawson, Secretary.

The Sufferers under this Law.
Reader, Thou may understand, That besides what I am to give thee an account
of concerning their proceedings in these two last years, to wit, 57, and 58.
That as a Preface to this their work they thus began in 56; there being two of
the servants of God, called Mary Fisher, and Anna Austin, moved from Barbados
to the Town of Boston, which when there arrived, they having notice of it, the
deputy Governor Richard Bellingham sent to stop them from coming ashore until
they saw their own time, in sending their Marshal for them, and to search for
what Books they had, which being done, thou may understand by their order,
that their common Executioner was appointed to destroy them (O learned and
malicious cruelty!) as if another man had not been sufficient to have burnt a
few harmless Books, who like their Masters can neither fight, strike, nor
quarrel, (but the common Executioner must have the honor of it) and they
committed to close Prisor, none to come at them to confer with them, but whom
they had a mind to suffer for the abusing or ensnaring of them, as apparently
does appear by their reviling language, in that which they call their Law, as
cursed Heretics, Adamites, Blasphemers, etc. and accusing them for Witches;
whereupon they took upon them to appoint women to search them, who also took
men along with them, which if they had denied or refused, to have bound and
constrained them, but such was their innocence that they suffered all
whatsoever they attempted to do unto them, which inhumanely was in the manner
following: Stripped them stark naked, not missing head not feet, searching
betwixt their toes, and amongst their hair, t^wing and abusing their bodies
more then modesty can mention, in so much that Anne who was a married woman,
and had born 5 children said, That she had not suffered so much in the birth of
them all, as she had done under their barbarous and cruel hands; who also
amongst other lies and slanders, reported that one of them before their search
was a man in woman's apparel; but lies are licensed amongst them, both by
Priest and Ruler, for in Court and Pulpit I have heard it without resraint or
limit of theirs; and after five weeks imprisonment, or thereupon, with these
and the like abuses which are too tedious to mention, they sent them away
without the making manifest against them the transgression of any known Law in
the least (as thou may perceive by their Order) but what is against us all,
crying out as with one consent, Away with this people, and give us a troop of
Robbers, Hosea 6. 9. to wit Priests.

About two days after these two were had out of prison to be shipped away for
Barbados, from whence they came, we eight, to wit, Christopher Holder, Thomas
Thriston, William Brend, John Copeland, Mary Prince, Sarah Gibbens, Mary
Weatherhead, Dorothy Waugh, who when according to the will of God we were come
to an anchor in Boston in New England; being made sensible of the cries and
groans of his seed, which cried unto him for help and deliverance from under
the cruel bondage it served, and the captivity it was held in by the cruel
Lords which bear rule over it, the Ministers and Magistrates (so called) but
rather bloody Masters and oppressors, for so they are in truth; which cries and
groans, having entered into the ears of the Lord God of Sabbaths, whose
compassion is great toward his seed, and whose love is large to satisfy those
who desire after the knowledge of his ways i^ sincerity; for the deliverance of
which seed, he is risen in great majesty and power, the arm whereof is
stretched forth does evidently appear* in raising up and gathering to himself
his servants, sons and daughters, whom he has made true witnesses of his Name,
according to the working of which mighty power, which has subdued all things
to himself in us, and has made us obedient to the command of his Spirit, and
who brought us to the place of his appointment, which when there we came,
Robert Lock Commander of the Ship would not suffer us to go ashore, until he
had given in our names to the Governor; which being done, the Marshal with the
Constable was sent aboard with a Warrant to search the Boxes, Chests and Trunks
of the Quakers for Erroneous Books, and hellish Pamphlets, as they called them,
and take them from us ( -- Oh! what will become of you in that day when a dog
dare not lift his tongue against the quakers) the which they did, taking away
what they found, having an Order to bring us eight, with one Richard Smith whom
they ^alled our Proselite before the Court then sitting at Boston; which thing
being done, and we going in the strength of our God to bear witness unto his
name and truth before all sorts of people, being called thereunto, but by the
Rulers thereof rejected, and we the messengers thereof evilly entreated, after
so great a travel, and so long a passage, in stead of being entertained
according to the Scriptures they profess, which says, Be not forgetful to
entertain strangers, which thing these who witnessed the power of godliness,
and lived in it ever did, but they having a form, but deny and speak evil of
the power thereof, ^id heap false accusations upon us, and send us to prison,
and that their wickedness might the more appear, and they themselves made
manifest, gave order that none should visit us, which if these actions of their
be to do as they would be done unto, and so fulfill the royal Law, let the wise
in heart judge. Again, after a friv^lous examination once and again, the
greatest part thereof being touching the Trinity, unto which we answered
according to the Scriptures, That the Father, Son, and Spirit we own, but a
Trinity the Scripture speaks not of, and so the Father who then was with us,
preserved us by his power, as in the hollow of his hand, so that they could not
touch us, before whom the hearts of the people failed for fear, yea greatly was
these Hypocrites surprised, the Magistrates and Priests being bent together
against us, one of which was John Norton by name, their chief Priest, going
about to prove the Scriptures to be the rule and guide of life, brought Romans
106, 7, 8. but stayed not there, but turned to the 2 Pet. 1. 19. and being
asked by us what that light was there spoken of, which shined in a dark place;
he said, i^ was the eternal Word: And being asked what the dark place was,
William Brend (having his hand on his breast) he said he thought it was under
his hand; who said to him, Then thou means the heart; he answered, Yea; We
asked whether the Eternal word was not a sufficient guide; He said, Yea: And
being asked whether it was his rule and guide; he said it was when he was
guided aright: Then said some of the Magistrates, what difference is there
between us and you if we ^old the same thing? then the Governor cried out, he
could not say so; and John Norton would have denied what he had said, but some
of the Magistrates affirmed he did say so; then was there a division among
themselves, some affirming, and some contradicting; so they sent us to prison,
and the day following called us forth again in public, asking us questions to
which we had answered the day before in private, which they had written down;
and we called to them to have our answers read, but they refused so to do: Upon
which, we refused to answer, seeing they lay in wait to ensnare. We asked them
what Law we had broken, for which we had been imprisoned? The Governor said he
would have us to take heed we broke none of their Ecclesiastical Laws, for it
we did, we were sure to stretch by a halter; [mark Reader, what savor there is
in their expressions] So they proceeded to sentence us to banishment, which
they grounded upon fals^ accusations, ordering us to be sent to prison again,
there to be kept without Bail or Mainprise, until such time as we be sent
away to the place from whence we came in the ship that brought us; for which
end they sent for Robert Lock before them, the Commander of that ship, and did
require of him to carry us back again upon his own charge, and also to give in
his bond to them to land us no where but in England; which he refusing, they
forthwith cast him into prison, where he lay four days; and seeing he was
likely to lose his voyage, entered into reason, and thereupon st^^ped to their
unrighteous yoke, and gave in bond so to do; then was he set at liberty, and we
continued under their cruelty nigh eleven weeks, having these following Orders
executed upon us, and was on the one and twentieth of the eighth month forced
from prison a shipboard in a violent manner.

An Order to the Keeper of the Prison.
You are by virtue hereof, to keep the Quakers formerly ^^mmitted to your
custody as dangerous persons, industrious to ^^^prove all their abilites to
seduce the people of this Jurisdiction both by words and letters to the
abominable tenent of the Quakers, and to keep them close prisoners, not
suffering them to speak or confer with any person, not permitting them to have
paper or ink.

The 18. of the 6 month, 1656. Edward Rawson, Secretary;

An Order to the Goalor for to search as often as he sees meet, the Boxes,
Chests, and Things of the quakers formerly committed to your custody, for pen,
ink and paper, papers and books, and take them from them: This last being
subscribed by

John Indicot Governor, Richard Bellingham, de Governor.
Dated the 27. of the 7 month, 1656.
Another to the Marshal-General Edward Michelson, or his Deputy.
You are by virtue of an Order of the General Court sitting at Boston the
twentieth of October, 1656. required and hereby empowered, forthwith to impress
a sufficient Boat with sufficient and convenient help, and take out of prison
William Brend, John Copeland, Thomas Thi^ston* and Christopher Holder; Mary
Prince, Sarah Gibbens, Mary Weatherhad, and Dorothy Waugh, and carry them and
deliver them aboard Mr. Lock's ship, now at Nantaschit, according to Order, and
hereof not to fail.

Dated at Boston the 10. of October 1656. By the Court. Edward Rawson,
Secretary.

To the Marshal-General Edward Michelson or his Depury.
You are by virtue hereof, required to levy on the goods and chattels of
William Brend and John Copeland, the value of 10. s. and deliver the same to
William Salter, Keeper of the Common Prison in Boston, in satisfaction of so
much due to him for his fees, (by Order of Court in their commitment) together
with 2 s. for this Execution; whereof you are not to fail.

Dated at Boston the 20 of October 1656. Edward Rawson, Secretary.

There was four of these copies, for every two one; by which they took our
bedding, and sent us away without it, and also a Bible the Goalor took,
although he said we denied the Scriptures; yea, so great was his envy against
us, as that he took away our candles, not suffering us to have light in the
night-season, because (as he said) we should not see to write, to trouble the
Magistrates and infect the people; whose cruel dealing and inhumane carriage
toward us, was much more then what is here related, it being too tedious to
mention; this being in short, the truth of what then passed betwixt us, and was
acted upon us, which we in patience did suffer, committing our cause to him who
judges righteously, who is at hand to give unto every man according to his
deeds; the Truth of what is here related, we whose names are here before
mentioned, are true witnesses of it; which if those that have been herein most
deeply engaged against God and us his Servants, shall go about to gainsay, in
the day wherein the righteous judgments of God shall be made manifest upon all
unrighteousness of men, shall their mouths be stopped, when they come to receive
a due recompense of reward for all unrighteousness, and inherit the wrath due
unto them for resisting so great love of God, whose love is large, and
long-suffering great, of which I am a Witness, glory to the Lord God for ever,
who of their blood is clear if they perish, I having by the power of God stood
a witness against their wickedness, by which power I was called out from
amongst them, and sent unto them, who am a Servant of Christ, and a Sufferer
for the Seeds sake which suffers amongst them, who shall wait in hope,
believing it shall be delivered, and raised up to the glory of the Father.

John Copeland.

Also Reader, Richard Smith who is before mentioned, who came in the ship with
us, and they called our Proselite, did they commit to prison, who though he be
an Inhabitant on Long-Iland in that land, and have wife and children there,
although they did openly accuse us of uncleanness, (such is the vanity of their
Religion, having their tongues unbridled, that to speak truth they have no
delight, plainly showing that their Religion is a lie, and the god of this
world the Father of it) in going m^n and women together, running away from our
Parents, wives and children; yet so great was their fear, and their faith so
weak, that they would not let him go to his through the Country, [ for fear of
infecting the people with our poisonous Doctrine, as they called it] but kept
him about three weeks in prison, until there was an opportunity to send him
away by water: In which time John Indicot Governor, said he was deluded, and
therefore he would have him have some discourse with three or four godly
Ministers to convince him of his Error; so upon the first day of the week he
asked the Goalor to go to their Meeting, the which he did, and having sat
while the Priest had done, he spoke and said, It was the saying of the Governor
that I should have some discourse with some of the godly Ministers, that they
might convict me of the error that he said I was i^, saying that I was deluded;
and said to them all, if there was any such as were godly that could convict
him of any error that he held, he was ready there to hear; then the Governor
said he did intend it should be in private; Richard Smith answered and said, it
was his desire it should be in public; and being enraged at him, they
forthwith had him away to prison again, who after they sent away by water, as
is before mentioned; Yet here ended not their malice, but as it is written, The
wicked shall wax worse and worse, so they fulfilled it in proceeding to act
further wick^dness upon an ancient man whose gray hairs is honorable; but
instead of honoring the hoary head, and rising up and giving place to him that
is grave in years, according to the Scriptures they profess, they cast him into
prison the same day that they forced the other away; and to please their God
Mammon, whom they so duly served, sined him several pounds, as will appear by
what here follows.

One Nicholas Upshall, an old man, an inhabitant of the town of Boston, who had
long waited for the consolation of Israel, the appearance of which he could not
find among the profession of New England (though they call themselves by the
name of of Christ) having been a member among them for many years, and had
endeavored out of his zeal to build a little Babel by them called the Church
at the new meeting house in Boston; but his first zeal not being according to
true knowledge, as the second appeared unto him, That God was not worshipped in
Temples made with hands, godly indignation rising up in him against that Idol,
he would not have left one stone upon another before half forty years was
expired; for which the pillars upon which the pinnacle is built, whereupon Satan
stands crying to Christ, Cast thy self down, we will not have thee to rule
over us, joined together against him, to cast him out of Covenant, Court and
Country, and sentenced him to banishment, as hereafter does appear. This
ancient man was much refreshed at the coming of these fo^ementioned people,
finding in them that which he desired after, and was much troubled at the cruel
actings of the Magistrates and people of Boston toward them; upon the same day
the former were put forth of prison, they put him in, who having proclaimed a
Law with the beating of a Drum against those people called quakers before the
said Nicholas's door, he being much troubled in spirit with it, seeing their
unrighteous dealing against the innocent, did bare witness against their Law,
for which he was sent for the next morning unto the General Court, where he
spoke to them to this purpose, That the prosecution of that Law was the
forerunner of a Judgment upon the Country, and therefore in the tenderness
and love which he bore to the people and country, did desire them to take heed
what they did, lest they were found fighters against God; whose love they
rejected, and committed him to prison, and fined him twenty pound, and ordered
him to banishment within the space of one month, and that if he should
return, he should be kept close prisoner until he did acknowledge his fault in
declaring against their Law, which Law hereafter follows; yet after four
days was released: And again showed their inhumanity, to banish an ancient man
of about sixty years, from his wife and family in the time of winter, although
for many years had been very sickly, of whom if the Lord had not been more
tender then these unmerciful men, he might have perished; and before the time
was expired which they had appointed him for departing their Colony, they sent
for him to another Court to reckon with him for not coming to their Meeting,
for which according to their Law he was to pay five shillings for every first
days missing; so they reckoned three pound more that he was to pay upon this
account, by which it appears what it is they seek after, who will so soon take
occasion to get money, the love of which Paul says, is the root of all evil,
which while some have coveted after, have erred from the Faith; which is truly
fulfilled in New England: When the time was near expired, Nicholas went to
Sandwitch in Plymouth-Patent, intending there to winter amongst some that were
more readier to entertain the persecuted, then to persecute; but the Governor
thereof, whose name was Bradford, being an envious man, hearing of his coming,
sent a Warrant that none should entertain him; but his purpose not being
effected, he sent a second special Warrant to bring Nicholas to Plymouth; [it
is worth observing] An Indian Prince, for so he appears by his speech, hearing
of their dealing with this ancient, weak man, called them Wicked men, and said
unto him Ne. tup, which is to say, Friend, if thou will live with me, J will
make thee a good warm house; this he spoke in his own language, preaching
condemnation thereby to the English Christian, teaching them an example of
compassion toward the persecuted, whom they of Boston had barbarously banished
in the winter season, which are such in those parts, that several have perished
in traveling betwixt town and town, yea where they are not three miles
distant, yet would not this vile man have this ancient man entertainad by any,
issuing out his second Warrant to appear at Plymouth, which is called twenty
miles distant from Sandvvitch: But Nicholas not being able to go, vvrote to the
Governor, that if he perished his blood would be required at his hand; and
some of the Magistrates being more moderate spirits, spoke for him, that he
might stay the Winter, so he was permitted: But in the Spring they banished him
out of their Coasts to Road-Iland, the habitation of the hunted-Christ, where
none of the dumb dogs dare come so much as to lift their tongues for lucre:
This we are Witnesses of, who have been sent out of all their Coasts into
that Island, where we ever found a place to rest our heads when weary we have
been, [God reward the Receiver!]

Again, in the year 1657. beginning in the sixth month, There being certain of
the servants of God come for New England; and being according to his providence
cast upon a certain Island lying betwixt the English and the Dutch, arrived in
New-Amsterdam, where the day following certain of the Strangers had drawings
forth into the Town and Country to seek the scattered seed, two of which
declared in the streets, to wit, Mary W^a ^^erhead and Dorothy Waugh, for which
they were apprehended and cast into miery dungeons apart each from other, where
was much Vermin; the which two after they had been there about eight days,
were had out thence, having their arms tied, and rods made fast to them, and
two Negroes going with them, until they came at a Boat which was to go to
Road-Iland* into which they was put and carried away.

Again, One Robert Hodgshone, a true and faithful servant of God, who has
sacrificed up himself, withal whatsoever was near and deer unto him for the
testimonies sake unto him committed, was moved forth amongst the English in
these parts, to make known unto them the Gospel of God, which by several of
them in several parts thereabouts was gladly received and believed, against
which the Heathen raged, and the people imagined mischievous things; he being
at a place called Hempsteed, expecting to have a Meeting amongst such as was
seeking after God, being walking in an Orchard belonging to such as was willing
to receive a meeting, there came unto him an Officer, who laid violent hands
upon him, and carried him before one Gildersleaue titled a Magistrate, an
Englishman; who taking counsel at the baser sort of people, committed him
prisoner while he rode to the Dutch-Governor, it being in that Jurisdiction who
brought the Fiscal so called, with a guard of Musketeers, who took him into
their custody, who searched him and took away his knives, and papers, and
Scripture-book, and pinioned him all the night and the next day, so that he had
hardly liberty to refresh or rest himself any way; and they searched strictly
for those that had entertained him, and laid hold on two Women, the one having
two small children, the one of which fed upon her breast, and got a cart, and
conveyed the woman away in it, and him they tied to the hinder part of it
pinioned, and so haled him through the vvoods in the night-season, whereby he
was much torn and abused; so coming to the town called Nevv-Amscerdam, they
loosed the prisoner, and the Jailer led him by the rope vvherevvithall he was
pinioned, unto the Dungeon where he was cast, and committed the women
prisoners to another place, and there continued them during their pleasure: At
the time of their Court they caused the prisoner, to wit, Robert Hodg^hone, to
be brought before them, and took his examination in writing, and committed him
to the Dun^eon again; afterward they took him forth, and read an accusation
against him in their own language; the words that were interpreted to him by
Captain Willet were these: It is the Generals pleasure, seeing you have
behaved your selves thus, you are to work two years at a Wheelbarrow with a
Negor, or pay or cause to be paid six hundred Gilders. Then Robert endeavored
to make his defense by way of sober reply, but was not suffered to speak, but
taken away, and returned again to the Dungeon, and there kept, no English
suffered to come at him for several days; then at their pleasure took they him
out again, and pinioned him, and set his face toward the Court-Chamber, taking
off his hat, and read another accusation against him in Dutch, which he
understood not, but many of their own Nation who heard it shook their heads at
it, and when they had done, cast him into the Dungeon again; after certain
days took him forth betimes in a morning, and chained him to a Wheelbarrow,
and commanded him to work; his answer was, He was never brought up nor used to
that work; so they caused a ^egor to take a pitch-rope nigh four inches about,
and beat him with it until he fell down, and they took him up again by
strength, and beat him until he fell down again the second time; it was
judged that he received an hundred blows; then they forced him up with the
Barrow to the Fort before the Governors house, and made complaint to him that
they could not make him work; so he stood chained to the Barrow, and nigh unto
the middle of the day, the Sun shining very hot, and he being much bruised
and swelled with blows, being kept much from food also, was very faint, and
sat down upon the ground; waiting with his mind staid upon the Lord, felt his
strength and refreshment, as the oil of gladness, which made him whole; but
still by them kept chained at the Barrow until the seventh hour in the night,
then loosed and put into the Dungeon until the morning about the sixth hour,
then taken forth again, and locked to the Barrow, with a guard set upon him
that none might come so much as to speak with him; being kept there until
the seventh hour, (as before) and brought forth the next day in like manner,
and afterward loosed, and carried before the Governor, who asked him if he
would work; if not, he should be whipped every day: then he demanded what Law he
had broken, and called for his accusers that he might know his transgression,
and told him, That if he were called to that work by the Lord he should not
refuse it; then thiy chained him to the Barrow again, and told him, that if he
spoke to any one he should be punished worse; yet his mouth was opened to such
as came about him: then they seeing that he could not be silent, they put him
up into the Dungeon, and kept him close several days, two nights one day and
an half without bread or water; then took him out very early in the morning to
a private Chamber, and stripped him to the waste, and hung him up by the hands,
and tied a great logg to his feet, that he could not turn his body, and set a
strong Negor with rods, who laid many stripes upon him both backward and
forward, wherewith he cut his flesh very much, and drew much blood upon him;
then was he loosed and put into the Dungeon, too bad a place for swine, being
a stinking hole and full of Vermin, not suffering any to come and wash his
stripes, and within two days took him forth again, and hung him up as before,
the Jailer being very drunk forced another Negor to lay many more stripes upon
him; and seeing no end of their cruelty, spoke to the Fiscal to give him some
time of consideration, and to suffer some English to come unto him, which was
granted: An English woman came unto him and vvashed his stripes, who seeing
him brought so lovv of body, spoke to her husband that she expected that he
could not live until the next morning; the words took such impression upon
him, that he went to the Fiscall, and proffered him a fat Ox, if he would
suffer him to come and be at his house until he was recovered; but the
Governor would not, except the whole fine was paid; which many gladly would
have done; but the prisoner could not consent to it: for within three days
that they had vvhipped him, he was made strong as ever, and free to labor,
which was a great torment to them, their aim being altogether to get money;
And a great trouble to many both Dutch and English, that he could not consent
for them to pay the Fine, but choosed rather to work then to be burdensome to
any, such was his innocence; neither could he eat the Governors bread except
he did work for it, although little besides was suffered to be brought to
him; tender people were troubled at the courseness of his food, it being such
as vvherevvithall they fed their Slaves; but he choosed rather from a contented
mind so to do, seeing he wrought for it, then to be burdensome or
troublesome to any ^ort of people whatsoever; for his own labor in the Lord
would have afforded him food sufficicient, but he could not suffer it, seeing
the Dutch lying in vvait daily against the English that lives under them how*
they might ensnare them, they being kept in great bondage and servitude by
them, as hereafter you will further understand; this being the substance taken
out of his own true relation given under his hand,

Robert Hodgshone,

Reader, There being an entire neerness betwixt the forementioned sufferer and
me, for whose innocence sake I cannot hold my peace, we having been partakers
of the spirit of life and love together several days and years, and baptized
we have been into many trials, which has caused us for the comfort of each
other to communicate what might administer strength unto us; And I perceiving
that many have scrupled at this my brothers working, I shall impart unto thee
what grounds he gave me for it, when by the Fathers will we were brought
together again in the strange Land; the which thing I dare say he did in as
much innocence (in his measure) as Paul did in consenting to be let down the
wall in a basket, or the spies flying from the Harlots house upon the wall; for
when he called unto them for a time of consideration, in which he committed
himself for counsel wholly to the Lord God, he told me that the Word came unto
him, Work, thou shall know more of my mind then ever thou have done, and this
is according unto what he formerly said unto the Governor, that if the Lord
called him to work he should not deny it; here was the Lords call, and his
servants answer, for which I am sure he lost not his reward, nor I m^ne, in
lending my shoulder, for Moses to lean upon, when I saw that raging enemy
Amalek rising up against him, who was delivered out of their hands, with
h^nour, contrary to their expectation, not paying them one penny, nor none for
him; but for his faithful suffering in this sad condition for several week:,
the Lord alone wrought his deliverance,

H. Norton.

Part of the Relation given in by such English as are grievously oppressed
under the Dutch government in New-Holland: A Declaration to all the World of
the persecuting spirit, how it has manifested it self in these parts of
America, against the people in scorn by the wicked called Quakers, (as is well
known to hundreds, of their savage and unheard of cruelty to Robert Hodgshone,
which I doubt not but you will have a true Relation of, besides prisoning and
banishing others which came out of England, besides the Inhabitants that were
honest, and could not conform to the times unjustly to please men, who were
hardly dealt withal by the Dutch, because they entertained these people called
Quakers:
There being many English amongst us, who fled away from under the persecuting
spirit bearing Rule in the United Colonies in New England, the Author himself
being an eyewitness of it, unto whom the Dutch Governor said, speaking
against Liberty of Conscience, in the hearing of John Townsend, Richard and
others, That the liberty of his Brother Henry's Conscience was in his breast,
and withal struck his hand on it, this was on the eleventh day of the seventh
month, as says the Author: Also the said Governor sent forth to prohibit any
for entertaining Quakers on the penalty of fifty pounds sterling, for every
transgression, although it were but one person one night, and for the
encouragement of base spirits to inform, they were to have a third part, and to
be concealed, notwithstanding many of us did entertain them willingly, suffered
them to speak in our houses, for which some were imprisoned, and some fined, as
John Tilton, Joan Chatterton, and Henry Townsend, judged by the Governor to pay
500 gilders, cast into prison, and threatened to depart that jurisdiction, about
the 7. of the 6. month (1658) with Tobias Feak and Edward Heart, who were
Englishmen and Officers in a town called Flushing in the new Netherlands on
Long Island, because they could not prosecute the Dutch governors Order against
the Quakers in that Town; there Consciences engaging them otherways which they
certified by signing a letter to the foresaid Governor giving him grounds
sufficiently for what they did, were kept in prison according to their wills in
a wicked and cruel manner? Again, the foresaid Henry Townsend being called
before the Governor and Court, they demanded of him if he would pay the Money,
who answered that his person and estate was under their hands they might take
it if they would, but he would not pay it them; then might he speak no more,
but forthwith cast into prison, because he could not consent to the giving away
of his estate unjustly; although it were in the middle of the eleventh month
(1657) (a cold time of the year) on the ninth day of his imprisonment, he was
moved to write to the Governor and Fiscal, that he could not pay the money
upon that account, although he l^y in an irksome prison, and of a weakly
constitution and sickly, besides the cry of his wife and small children, yet
did he prohibit her and his friends from giving them any thing being fearful to
wrong a tender Conscience, but the time of the year being so cold, that his
wife and friends was in fear that he should have perished there, besides the
necessity of his being at home, which thing lay v^ry sad upon her, so that she
with his Friends ^^ok a pair of Oxen, and a Horse al^hough he had no more, and
gave them to the persecuters to free him ont of their hands. Much more of their
cruelty I might truly relate, but for being tedious to the Reader; this is
truth as attests T. H.

More of their names we see in wisdom not meet to publish in Print, because of
the cruelty of the Dutch, but rather keep them hid; But if any in Authority in
England should call us to question for it, who out of bowels of mercy would
labor to relieve their imbond aged brethren. I the Relator, with several
others, who are Witnesses of this thing to be truth, shall count it a sma^l
matter to confirm it for their redemption who were Laborers amongst them in
the Lord, Called,

Robert Hodgshone, Humphrey Norton.

THE ACCOUNT OF Cruelty, the Professor's Pride, and the Articles of their
Faith; WITH Their Proceedings beginning in the sixth month of the year, 1657.
AFter our landing at Road-Iland according to the will of God, where we were
gladly received, when others inhumanely thrust us away from them, as may be
seen in what here follows.

We two, Christopher Holder and John Copeland, was moved of the Lord to go to
an Island called Martins Vineyard, whereof Thomas Maho was then Governor, in
which place is many Indians, and coming there on the sixteenth of the sixth
month 1657 we went to their Meeting, and after the Priest Thomas Maho (the
Governor's son) had done his speech, one of us spoke a fevv words, and then
was both of us by he Constable thrust out of doors, and forthwith the doors
were shut; yet going thither on the later part of that day, after some dispute
with them we departed; but on the morrow the Governor with the Constable came
to us, who after some words with us, required us to be gone off the Illand; our
answer was, in the will of God we stood to go as he made our way for us, but he
being not satisfied with this Answer, hired an Indian to have us away, saying,
that it was the will of God that we should go to day, and required mon^y of us
to pay the Indian for carrying us, but we seeing little of our going that day,
did say that we could not pay the Indian, forasmuch as we did not hire him, nor
set him on work; then he commanded the Constable to search for our money; who
accordingly did and took from us nine shillings, which when they had so done,
delivered us into the hands of the Indians to have us away over the water in
the main Land, (in one of their Cannons which is a piece of a tree ^ewed
hollow) who forthwith had us away from them, where we remained among the
Indians three days, till there was a calm season to have us over the Sea which
was about nine miles (a great Sea for such a small Vessel) all which time we
received no small love from the Indians, the like we could not receive from the
ENGLISH for what we eat we could not persuade him whom we were withal to take
money for it, he saying that we was strangers, and Jehovah taught him to love
strangers: So on the 20 of the sixth month 1657. we were landed on the other
side: and coming to Sandwitch a town in Plymouth Colony we were gladly
received by many; yet great was the stir, and noise of the tumultuous City,
yea all in an uproar, hearing that we who were called by such a name as
Quakers was come into those parts: A great fire was kindled, and the hearts
of many did burn within them, so that in the heat thereof, some said one thing,
and some another; but the most Part knew not what was the matter; yea so it is
in truth, our God went before us, whose presence, was and is with us,
compassing of us, whose dread took hold of them* so that their hearts failed
them for fear of those things which was coming upon them: So after we had
been at San^witch, some small time, we passed to New Plymouth, and being at
the Ordinary there, Thomas Southworth one of their Magistrates of that Town,
with several of their Church Members came to us, who after a long dispute
required us to be gone, and on the morrow early was the under Marshal set to
keep us from going away, into whose hands we were committed Prisoners by Thomas
Southworth, before whom with one John Alden a Magistrate in the next Town was
we called the same day, who after examination, from whence we were, and why we
came thither? and such like questions, which were answered, and they having
nothing in justice against us, yet required they of us to be gone out of their
Colony, telling us, they had an Order or Law that we should not stay there; we
required to see it, but they would not show it us, telling us that we were at
liberty, so we returned unto the Ordinary again; yet in the morning early was
the Constable sent by word of mouth from them to keep us from going to
Sandwich* unto which place we told them the day before, we could not ^e free to
pass out of the Colo^y till we had been there, finding the Lords drawings; so
thither again, as we were passing the Constable seized on us, and had us out of
the bounds of Plymouth Town, toward Road Island six miles as he was commanded,
who leaving us, we soon turned to the place before mentioned, whither we came*
some of the people being set against us; especially the Teachers made an
unrighteous complaint to the Governor Thomas Prince by Name, whose ear being
open to the wicked (but stopped to the cry of the just as may hereafter appear,
by adding iniquity to oppression) did cause us to be brought before him, who
sinding nothing against us, yet for being only called Quakers, did require us
to depart, the which thing standing in the will of God we could not do, and so
did answer him; then he to answer the unrighteous complaints made against us,
and false charges, as deceivers, etc. whose great cry was, Help O Governor,
help us against these Quakers, that are now come amongst us, and secure them
and send them away from us; in answering to which cry he was not sparing to use
his power, by setting his hand to write an unjust Warrant, accompanied with
lies, calling us extravagant persons and vagabonds, giving charge to apprehend
us in the Name of his Highness the Lord Protector, (whose name they labor to
defame, as upon due consideration will be found and plainly seen by what
follows) and bring us to Plymouth, which accordingly was done, and we
apprehended and kept Prisoners by the Constables Deputy; who being demanded a
copy of the Warrant, a friend that stood by said it was a usual thing to give
a Copy of it, if required, was afterward for so saying fined 10 shillings;
when to Plymouth we were brought, where was then sitting the Magistrates
hereaf^er named, we standing before them, the power of the Lord being over
them, they said little to us, only told us of a Law that they had whereby we
were not to stay in their Colony; we required to see it, they answered, it was
sufficient that they said it, and would not show it to us; so after saying that
they did believe that we did not know that they had such a law, yet required us
to depart, the which thing we could not do; they proceeded to sentence us,
threatening of us if we came again, they would exercise the Law on us which is
for Vagabonds: So they still kept us Prisoners committing us into the
Constables hand, and wrote a Warrant, a true Copy is as follows:

New Plymouth to the under-Marshal of the Jurisdiction of Plymouth before said.

Whereas there has been two extravagant persons professing themselves to be
Quakers at the Town of Plymouth, who according to order may not be permitted to
abide within the liberty of our jurisdiction. These are therefore in the Name
of his Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, to will
and command yon forth^ith on Receipt hereof, to son ^oy the said persons, v. z.
Chistopher Holder and John Copeland, unto the utmost bounds of our
Iuris^iction: Whereof fail not at your peril:

Dated at Plymouth the 31 of August, 57. Thomas Prince Governor. John Alden.
Josiah Winslow. Thomas Southworth.


The which Warrant was put in Execution by the under Marshal on us, who did
have us out of the Jurisdiction which was fifty miles to Road Island, so he
left us on the second of the seventh month, 1657. we then going to it, and
that none may question the truth which is here in short related, we shall be
ready to confirm it, who are true Witnesses of it, whose Names are here
subscribed,

Christopher Holder, John Copeland.

Thus by what is here mentioned may plainly be seen how unchristian like we
were entertained this being the truth of the dealing we have met with from a
professing people, (who once was persecuted, but now are turned persecutors)
persecuting us for this cause only for seeking out and visiting the seed of
God, according to the will of our heavenly Father, which is our delight so to
do, who alone is our peace and strength for ever.

Again, Humphrey Norton a servant of God being by him moved to go and visit his
seed, in the aforementioned Patent of Plymouth, and also had drawings to their
Colony Court, but before their sitting was apprehended with a lying Warrant,
such as the same Governor used unto the rest, calling us extravagant persons,
which after being brought prisoner to their Colony Town called Plymouth, and
kept several days Prisoner without Mittimus: Or any other thing in that nature
delivered unto him, he seeing that their intent was to continue him in tha^
kind; until their Country and Court had been reduced, and he dealt withal
underhand, sent unto the Governor and Magistrates after this manner: Seeing
you have apprehended me publicly as an evil doer, and has continued me
contrary to Law, Equity; and good Conscience. I require of you a public
examination, and if found guilty, publicly punished, if not, cleared: Which
forthwith was done, and he brought before them, and after a certain space in
Examination and Reasoning, their Magistrates at that time being many of them
moderate, which since some has withdrawn, and others hardened, as hereafter you
will further understand; but their Governor (to wit) Thomas Prince* like unto a
mad Dog, ready to bite at every one that crosses his way, told me, that I
could not prove by Scripture that that light which lights every one was
sufficient to salvation, and with all his strength strove to carry it; so to
manifest his blindness, and to satisfy the simple, showed him in express
words, That the grace of God that brings salvation had appeared unto all men*
and Christ said, his grace is sufficient, this little grain at that time stopped
the Lions mouth* which when he could find no transgression against him, caused
him to be turned forth, and after short space called in again* and sentenced
him to banishment, in the like manner, and by the same man that they did the
two before mentioned, C. H. and ^. ^. he having laid it to the conscience of
Thomas Prince, whether it were to do as he would be done unto, yea or nay; to
give unto a stranger whose face he never saw, the name of an extravagant
person, and put the proof upon him, and asked him if he were not once a
stranger in that land himself, and how he would have taken it, if one had told
him that he had been an extravagant person; so after his departure, they
invented several lies against him, and entered them upon their lying Record, as
hereafter you will further understand.

At that same time and against that same Court, it being about the beginning of
the eighth Month (57) summoned they Ralph Allin, with William Newland,
(Inhabitants in Sandwitch) men fearing God, and of a good report, to appear at
Plymouth, to serve on a Jury, (which was 20 miles distant from them) and not
being unwilling to find cause of crime against Ralph Allin, they summoned him
to serve on the high and petty Juries at one and the self same time; so that
hereafter you will with me find out the end of this Enmity; such was their
Innocence, that in obedience to their Order they went, and manifested their
willingness to serve their Country, so that they might do it without swearing,
(which for conscience sake they could not) but the Governor would not, except
they would swear, and break the doctrine of Christ, which they refusing was
dismissed, after requiring them further to attend the Court; for this se^ how
this unrighteous Ruler served them; I cannot compare it better then like unto a
malicious Dame calling in her Dog, he having done then no harm, concludes it is
to dinner, but having not formerly done her will, forthwith takes him and hangs
him; or at least delivers him up to one appointed to that end. For they being
called again the second time, were accused for keeping disorderly meetings in
their houses, which was not mentioned unto them at first, although thereunto
none but their neighbors and Friends did repair to wait upon God, saving such
as they sent to disturb them, who had also threatened them with Fines, both
persons and places where so they did, as hereafter you will further understand,
for which these men were there fined and required to find Sureties for the
good behavior, (upon the penalty of 80 l.) for six months, which they
refusing, it being a thing tending to the worship of God, and the wronging of
their consciences, and granted in the Instrument of Government, (a privilege of
great price, and higher value then to be parted from upon such base terms) yea
such was the Nobility of those two men, that they chose rather to suffer then
to be scared, or ^^^ived of it; for which they were committed to the chief
Marshal, where they were continued, betwixt 20 and 30 miles from their wives
and small children, they having many, with relations and occasions, and upon
great charge and expense, they being sentenced by the Governor, to pay five
shillings at their commitment, and five shillings at their releasement, and
five shillings every day whilst they were there continued, which was until the
first Month (58) and longer by his Order; before the middle of which time, they
were proffered by the Magistrates, if they would neither receive nor hear the
Quakers (as they call them) they should be forthwith released, which they not
entering into Covenant to the denial of Christ and his Messengers, were
continued near five months prisoners, the fine also they levied, taking from
William Newland one heifer, valued by them at 27 shillings, but was better then
thirty shillings, the other having been wickedly fined formerly, and overplus
taken, which they detained; therefore judge ye, if they intended these men for
Jury men. Reader thou may understand, that their Marshal was a moderate man,
and finding in his prisoners the like, referred himself unto them, they having
testified against the Governors Order, yet satisfied they him according to
content, being neither free nor willing, to eat his bread for nothing.

Again in the eleventh month (57) two of the persecuted people, called William
Brend, and John Copeland, coming to a Plantation (in the aforesaid Patent)
called Situate, being received there by one James Cudworth, who was then one
of their Magistrates, and also one of their Captains, but he being one then that
could not persecute, they quickly put him out of place, which whilst they were
there in the Winter season, there came one with a Warrant (which he had ^etched
several miles in a cold night) from ^^siah Winslow, so had envy filled their
hearts, that he with others haled them forth of the house, and with them a
woman-Friend Sarah Gibbins by name, not regarding the season, although there
was then two Magistrates in the Town, the one of which was a grave, old, sober
man, and of a tender conscience, called Timothy Hatherly, who when he saw it,
said that Master Envy had procured that, and ga^^ another unto the Strangers
by way of protection, and delive^ed them at that time out of the hands of the
wicked, and kept himself also from innocent blood, which Order follows in
this manner: These are therefore to any that may interrupt these two men in
their passage, that you let them pass quietly on their way, they offering no
wrong to any:

Timothy Hatherly.



This same old man after the signing of a Warrant for the commitment of William
Newland, and Ralph Allin, (which I am satisfied he would not have done, but
that their Governor being a wretched man overpoured him) was taken sick, and
as I am informed nigh unto death in which time he did declare, That there was
nothing that lay so hard upon his spirit that ever he had done as that did, and
were it to do again, said it should not by him be done, which manifestly since
has made it appear, having deserted their Court, and also seeing their
proceedings so corrupt and cruel, to sit, although they besought it of him (as
I am informed) yet these two before mentioned, notwithstanding his endeavoring
to protect them, and thereindeavouring to make their way accordingly, coming
through the town of Plymouth, were pursued by a Magistrate Thomas Southworth by
name, who caused them to be apprehended by an Officer, and brought them unto
such a sort of Examination as is usual with them, and were sentenced by them
to be severely whipped, because they could not promise to depart their Colony
within forty eight hours, although they denied it not, but the promise was
contrary to their consciences, having committed themselves wholly to the
disposing of their Father, and their will and time being in his hand; also to
leave their adversaries without excuse, they pleaded the Protectors (so called)
Instrument of Government; but that was of no value with them, but altogether
slighted, and bid them look to their sentence, which was both of them to be
whipped; Wlliam Brend for saying unto one of them who accused them for being
false prophets, told him he lied; and the other for signing a Paper wherein it
was said, John Aldens head shook, and his knees trembled; they having nothing
against them, took these occasions, although for the first, nor yet the second
would they produce any Law that was transgressed, neither the paper wherein it
was so said; yet in the Winter-season did they strip them both, William Brend
being a man of great years, yet not regarded, (yea, true it is, that the unjust
knows no shame) but caused him to be whipped with ten stripes, and the other with
twenty two, backward and forward, drawing blood off of breasts and arms, at
which one Edward Perry (an Inhabitant of the Collony) could not but testify
against their cruelty, for which one of the Magistrates called him their fool.
Again, the said Magistrate that caused William Brend to be whipped for saying,
Thou lie, being charged by him to seek after our blood, said to William, Thou
lie; vvhereupon John Copeland laid it before them, Whether by the Law of
Equity (for so saying) he deserved not the same thing? But Equity cannot enter
where Truth is not in place; yea, of both the eye and ear of Equity, they are
blind and deaf, yea, even so deaf as those who will not hear.

Thus Reader thou may see how far the Account of Cruelty is given, this being
a true Relation, though far short of what they have done, as you will see by
their Law, and what hereafter follows; such is their impudency, that instead
of being ashamed for what they have done, they have follovved their elder
Sister Boston in her Abominations, and made a law whereby they rob with
violence, and shed the blood of the innocnet.

This is a Copy of their Law made at Plymouth, in the first Month, 1658.
Whereas there has been several persons come into this Government, commonly
called Quakers, whose Doctrines and Practices manifestly tend to the subverting
of y^ Fundamentals of Christian Religion, Church-Oroer, and y^ civil Peace of
this Government, as appears by the Testimonies given in several Depositions,
and otherwise; It is enacted by this Court and the Authority thereof, That no
Quakers, nor persons commonly so called, be entertained by any person or
persons within this Government under the penalty of five pounds for every such
Default, or be whipped; and in case any one should entertain any of those persons
ignorantly, i^ he testify on his Oath that he knew them not to be such, he
shall be free of the aforesaid Penalty; provided that he upon his first
discovering them ^o be such, do discover them to the Constable or his Deputy.

It is also enacted by the Conrt and the Authority thereof, That if any Ranter
or Quaker, or any person commonly so called, shall come into any Township
within this Government, and by any person or persons be known or suspected to
be such a one, the persons so knowing or suspecting him, shall forthwith
acquaint the Constable or his Deputy on pain of Presentment, and so liable to
censure in Court, who forthwith shall diligently endeavor to apprehend them,
and command them to depart out of the Township and this Government: And in case
any such person delay or refuse to depart, then the said Constable or Deputy
shall apprehend them or him, and bring him or them before the Magistrate in
their Township, if there be any; and where there is none, to the select men
appointed by the Court for that purpose, who shall cause him or them to be
whipped by the Constable or his Deputy, or pay five pounds, and then conveyed out
of the township; and the same course to be taken with every of them as often as
any of them transgress this Order; in case of extremity for harbor or Food,
the Constable or his Deputy shall relieve them for their Money; Provided they
suffer not any person or persons to resort unto them whilst they are under
their Custody.

And forasmuch as the Meeting of such persons (whethe^ strangers or others)
proves to the destructiug of the Peace of this Government, it is therefore
enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That henceforth no such
Meeting be assembled or kept by any person in any place within this Government,
under the penalty of 40. s. a time for every Speaker, and 10. s. a time for
every hearer, and 40. s. a time for the owner of the place that permits them so
to meet together; and if they meet together at the Silent (so called) then
every person so meeting together, shall pay 10. s. a time, and the owner of the
place shall pay 40. s. a time.

Forasmuch as it was ordered at June-Court last, that all such as were
housekeepers, or at their own dispose, that were not freemen, and have not
taken the Oath of Fidelity to this Government, should take the said Oath by the
time then prefixed or to be fixed to the Collonies use the sum of five pounds;
And whereas diverse persons notwithstanding all patience and long forbearance,
refuse to take the said Oath, and yet make their residence amongst us, it is
therefore enacted by the Court, That every such person or persons shall every
General Court be summoned to make their appearance thereat, during the time of
their abode in this Government; and if any such person or persons shall refuse
to take the said Oath, shall be fined the sum of 5. l. to the Collonies use.
Whereas the multitude of Freemen is but small, and the Inhabitants of the
Townships many more, who have equal Votes with the Freemen in the choice of
Deputies, who being the Body of the Freemen representative, together with the
Magistrates, have equal Votes for the enacting of Laws, who by weakness,
prejudice, or otherways, it has or may come to pass, that very unfit or
unworthy persons may be chosen, that cannot answer the Courts Trust in such
place; It is therefore ordered, That at such Coures as Magistrates and Deputies
are to act in making Laws, and being assembled, the Court in the first place
take notice of their Members, and if they find any unfit for such a Trust, that
they and the reason thereof, be returned to the Town from whence they were
sent, that they may make choice of more able persons to send in the stead, as
the time will permit.

Whereas it has been an ancient and wholesome Order, bearing da^e, etc. That
no person coming from of her parts, be allowed an Inhabitant of the
Jurisdiction but by the Approbation of the Governor or two of the Magistrates
at the least, and that many persons contrary to this Order of Court crept into
some Towns^ips, which are, and may be a great disturbance to our more peaceable
proceedings; Be it enacted, That if any such person or persons shall be found,
that has not, does not, nor will not apply and approve themselves so as to
procure the approbation of the Governor and two of the Assistants, that such be
enquired after, and if any such person shall be found, that either they depart
the Government, or else that the Court take some such course therein as shall
be thought meet.

It is enacted by the Court, That henceforth no public Meeting shall be set
up, but such as the Court shall approve of.

This Law is crushed and broken, and instead of it they have made another new
babble.

Reply; Reader, to answer the body of their Rabble, I shall not, but so much as
I do answer, it shall be according to truth, if God permit.

Whereas they say, That the Doctrines and Practices of the Quakers, tends to
the subversion of Christian Religion, Church Order, peace of the Government, as
appears by the testimonies given in several depositions.

I answer; Reader, Judge thou with that of God in thee, what fundamentals of
Religion, Church Order and Government theirs are, seeing that against ours the
gates of hell cannot prevail, our Religion, Church, and Order, being all settled
and established upon the same, without persecution, bloodshed, or false Oaths,
which they term Depositions.

And seeing that out of disdain they rank us with the Ranters, whose lives
leads to the same loathsomness as does their own; I shall only turn the term
upon their heads, and leave it.

Again, examine thy self if ever thou heard a company which called themselves a
Court, who by one consent appointed select men to see the innocent whipped,
(which is no other then select Whippers) I appeal to that of God in every man,
if ever they heard the like appointment made against dogs, or any other
creature which is far below man.

Their second part of this I commit to the consideration of Richard Cromwell and
his Council, whether this Law of theirs, or his Instrument of Government, must
have the pre-eminence; and whether it stands not upon him either to own or
disovvn such Laws so bound up with such forfeitures, and (as they say) is done
in his Name, which if his Name were Christ's Co^t, he could not, nor would not
suffer it to be so rent. In their 3. part, where they speak of such as have
not taken their Oath of Fidelity, (as they call it) I remember when I was
before them, they put it upon me to answer, Whether the Scriptures were uot
the Rule of Life, and ground of Faith; My answer was, Nay; neither can you
prove it by the Scriptures, to be either the Rule of life, or ground of faith:
The Governor brought that Scripture, They are able to make wise unto salvation,
through faith in Christ Jesus; from whence it was made appear in the presence
of that people, That Jesus was both the Author and Finisher of Faith, and Rule
and Guide of life, which made a flut in the House. Afterward the Governor
proffered me (in words) their Oath of Fidelity, the which I put upon him to
prove by Scripture that ever he heard of such an Oath, and so it was left. And
whereas they speak of diverse persons residing amongst them, not having taken
the oath, etc. All those persons (to the best of my knowledge) (who have been
often amongst them) is this forementioned Ralph Allin, whose Father (so far as
I know) dyed in that Township, where this his eldest Son, with six Brethren
and Sisters, all, or most of them have continued in the same Town and Collony
above twenty years, their Father and they being both of good report, yet have
they endeavored to banish, ruinate and undo him, who has at least eight,
nine, or ten children, and all this for rising up, and cannot lie at the feet
of their god Mammon.

Their fourth part also, I shall leave to the consciences of the Rulers therein
concerned, to take notice how they labor to cast the innocent (who are
engrafted into Christ) out of Court and Country; finding Jesus such an
Instrument of Justice, and such an Enemy to Hell, and the Powers thereof, the
Devil does what he can that he may not have the oversight of his proceedings,
therefore says he (being assembled in the first place) Take notice of the
Members, etc.

Again, their fifth part also I commit to the same consideration, what an
ancient and wholesome pill it is, bearing date neither from time nor place, so
that its rise is neither from beginning nor end, and its intent is accordingly,
who will not suffer a forreigner to have a rest in their borders, neither
place in House, Court, nor Country, without the consent of such as in their
Act is mentioned, the whole World lying in Wickedness, the Devil being god and
guide therein, the Rulers are bent that the ends thereof shall never be
redeemed to become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; therefore do
they establish such ancient Antidotes as this, which they have dug out of
the bottomless pit, for which they are ashamed to bring their black proof.
These several persons again herein mentioned, is this same Ralph Allin, whom
for several years they have envied, and maliciously used, having renewed this
last year against him this Antidote, thinking thereby to cover their malice and
wickedness, for which God will plague them; if there be any more, it is such as
are one with him, who cannot bow their knee to Baal; You may also understand by
their last clause, that it is one with all the rest, that no place, nor peace,
nor comfort, union nor society, must the people of God have under their
Government, it being altogether against God and Christ, true Church and its
order, life, power and spirit. This Testimony have I sealed amongst them with
my blood, and God is my record at this day, it is true therefore as the Wicked
make void the Law of the Righteous, even so does the righteous make void the
Law of the Wicked, and reconciliation betwixt them there cannot be, says

H. N.

Again, here follows the practice and exercise of this Law, with the Parties
and Causes which suffered under it; if this Law had had so much as the show of
good things to come, they had put an end to it before its beginning; for before
this they had left sacrifcing Goats and Calves, and offered up two poor sheep
in sacrifice upon their Altar-Stocks, (to wit) William Brend, and John
Copeland, as by what is written before you may understand.

The Sufferings of Humphrey Norton, and John Rous, at their June-Court, 1658.
I Humphrey Norton being in Road-Island, certain days after my sufferings at
New Haven, the Lord God did accompany me with this cry two days together, or
more, Bonds abides thee, Bonds abides thee, and presented before me Plymouth
Patent, and their Court, which according to his Will, and in obedience to his
Spirit I went (with my beloved Brother, John Rous) into that Patent; and seeing
and hearing of the sufferings inflicted upon the people of God inhabiting
there, with the wrongs, sufferings and abuses sustained by me and others of the
servants of God, I drew up these particulars following, and sent them before me
to the Governor and other of his Assistants the day before, that so they might
not be unacquainted with the matter; which when I came there (according to the
Will of God as he had showed me) I was taken up in the street and cast into
Bonds, according to the malice of the Devil; And when I came before them with
my yokefellow John Rous; they asked us upon what grounds we came into their
Collony, and would neither acknowledge nor deny the receiving of my grounds,
neither would they receive them from me, and cause them to be read, nor suffer
me to read them, but sent us back to prison without Mittimus, (as they call it)
Bill of Charge, or Copy of their Law; no Justice could we have from them (no
more then two sheep that is to be judged by a company of Wolves) but we have
learned to bear it with patience, knowing that our forerunner was so dealt
with before us by the same generation; and having pass^d their unjust Sentence
on us according to their Wills, they brought us to the Stocks, where after
prayer and saluting each other in public, the people gave reverence with
astonishment; the Executioner coming to put off our Clothes, was bid to have
patience, and he should see that we could give our backs to the smiter, which
being done, he laid upon us thirty eight stripes, being told by the standers
by: After this was done (saluting the life which appeared in the least measure
in any) we returned in the glory of true sufferers, kept far from
transgression, but in truth, for not departing out of their Colony when their
Constable (so called) commanded us, having the grounds here following to make
good.

1. I who am called and chosen of God to bear the Testimony of Jesus (the Word
of God) against all unrighteousness and oppression in all sorts of people
whatsoever, having formerly been in this Colony, and before your Court held at
Plymouth, and being cleared (so far as I remember) without the least clause of
the transgression of any Law of God whatsoever, laid to my Charge, the which I
charged upon you after my Trial, by way of false Imprisonment, and required
thereupon to know who might discharge the house whereunto I was confined; the
answer was made (as I remember) by John Alden Magistrate, after asking me if I
had Silver, told me it should be left to my freedom whether I would do it, or
leave it unto them; since which time (and in my absence) I am informed that I
am recorded in your Court Book for being convicted of several Errors, and at
that time neither the Convictions nor the Convictors mentioned to me, as the
grounds before mentioned makes manifest.

2. Again I am informed that it is given and received in upon Oath against me,
That I have held forth, and therewith stand charged in your Court-Book for some
unsound and untrue Doctrines.

3. I require it of you, that such as has given Oath against me, with all such
as were eye and ear-witnesses, by whom these things were spoken, may appear
before me and you, face to face.

4. I am unsatisfied touching the sufferings sustained by William Brend and
John Copeland.

5. The injustice and unparalled means used against us the said people for the
depriving and disappointing of our peaceable meeting together to wait upon God
in the way of his Worship, according to the life and practice of the Saints and
holy men of God declared of, and holden forth in Scripture.

6. The Impositions of Fines, Taxes and Oppressions laid upon the people of God
in these parts.

7. To know the ground of your late Laws whereby you do these things against
them and us; and to hear it made forth how any that fears God, and professes
him in the least measure, can be bound by Oath or otherwise, to execute or
prosecute the said Laws with a safe conscience.

8. Whether you will not grant unto us who are by the scorners called Quakers,
and all other freeborn English men, the liberty and exercise of a pure
conscience, ( Proviso) That this Liberty do not extend to liscentiousness in
the least measure.

9. Whether it does not stand good in Equity and Justice, That such as will
have such a Ministry as must be upholden by Tithes, or Hire, or Gifts, or
Rewards, and says it is their conscience to have such, Whether they only
ought not to uphold them? And seeing you have, and may have this liberty,
Whether you will not grant that such as have a Ministry freely received from
the Lord, and for his sake freely gives it, ought not in conscience, and are
not to have their liberty? And whether all such as are the children of God, and
are taught of God, and needs not that any man teach them, (according to the
Scriptures, Matthew. 10. 8. 1 John 2. 27. 3 John 7. 8.) ought to be debarred from
this Teacher, and forced contrary to their consciences to uphold another,
seeing it is written, They that help, and he that is helped, shall both perish
together? Therefore had not people need to take heed what they do?

10. I require of you the true ground and cause why William Newland, with Ralph
Allin, was retained and kept prisoners from their Families, they being both
very great, having many small children, with Relations and occasions, from the
eight Month, 1657. until the first Month, 1658. putting them thereby to great
loss in expense, beside all other losses and damages which did thereby ensue.

11. By what Law Edward Perry's Goods, with Peter Gants and others, were forced
from them, without making restitution or account of them to the owners in the
least? And whether these things must be continued without regulating, this
knowing, that for these things, and all such, you must and ought to give an
account? For deeds done in corners must no longer be hid, but must be preached
upon the house top to the shame and condemnation of him and them that acts it.

12. Whether you acknowledge it to be just, and done by your order, the taking
away of Arthur Hewlands Iron Furniture belonging to his Draught, to the quite
disabling and disappointing him of the use of the same, to his loss and damage?
And whether these things so continued will not by probability be the ruinating
and destroying of Families, and the undoing of the Commonwealth.

13. Again, William Allin, Thomas Greenfeild, Peter Gant, with others, have
their Goods lately distrained, and part forced from one or more of them,
without their transgression of any Law of God; and whether these things you
intend to continue and tolerate without making restitution, yea or nay? The
particulars of these things plainly laid open, will yield an ill savor, such a
one as his Name you make use of, will be too short a cover for.

14. Whether you acknowledge the Governor and Government as it is now
established in old England? And if so, Whether you ought to act contrary to it?
And whether this Law of yours for the banishing of us, is not contrary to it?
And whether the spirit that would banish us out of this Pattent, if it had
power would not do the same in banishing us out of old England, Ireland, and
Scotland, and the dominions thereof? And whether this be to do as you would be
done unto, yea or nay? Is not banished men turned banishers, and that
forconscience-sake? Will not such as this produce the plagues of God upon a
people that he has raised up from the dust, who has groaned under the grief
of oppression, and now are become the chief of oppressors.

15. Whether we the said people may have peaceble and quiet commerce and
trading into any part of your Pattent, as occasion shall offer, from
Road-Island, or elsewhere?

These and what further may be presented to remembrance by the Lord God, is the
just grounds whereupon my intent and desire is, to appear before your Court and
Country, and all who may be concerned herein (if God permit) H. Norton.

A Plain answer I expect to the particulars herein mentioned but none came,
notvvithstanding all the grounds before mentioned, and the sufferings
sustained, they returned us back to prison, and there continued us a certain
space, even so long as they would, that so they might see the patience and
faith of the Saints, both in prisons and stocks, for which end they put four
there, for owning of us in the veiw of the people; after they had executed
their wills upon us, by vvhiping us, one of their Magistrates told us that we
were free paying our fees; our answer was, If any thing was due to him, he
might go to the keeper of the cursed purss (to wit, John Alden who was
treasurer of the robberies, which by violence they took from the innocent) the
which a Minister of their own making, and maintaining one Tompson by name said
on his conscience we were men of noble spiri^s, he could neither find in his
heart to stay in the Court to hear and see the proceedings, nor come to the
stocks to see our sufferings.

Sometime after the two before mentioned had suffered, we two Christopher
Holder and John Copeland, went into the same Collony, unto a Town called
Sandwitch, and going to a meeting of the Lords people, as the Lord drew us so
we went, it being the 23. of the 4. month 58. the Marshall with a Constable
who lay in wait for us apprehended us, and said we were their prisoners; so we
demanded to see their warrant, which was to this effect to search in all
suspicious places for strangers, commonly called quakers, and apprehend them
and have them out of the Tovvnship, and upon their return in again, the select
men were to see them whipped, who by the Court was appointed for that end,
according to their law; but they required us to go out forthwith, which we
could not do at their wills, although we refused not if the will of the Lord
were so, but they being evilly bent, acquainted the select men of us; who
would not see us whipped; yet notvvithstanding the Marshall, George Barloe
burning in envy against us, kept us till the 29. of the same month prisoners in
his house, sending to others to know what he might do with us; who finding a
man Thomas Hinckley by name called a Magistrate in Barnstable, fit to satisfy
his bloody appetite, the which thing the select men could not do; so he had us
to Barnstable, a Town about ten miles from thence, whither went above twenty
friends who did accompany us, who were eye and ear-witnesses of the cruelty
then acted on us, who taking with him a whip which he had made of the form and
fashion which his cruel envious spirit had invented, who after a frivolous
examination, and false accusations cast on us by Thomas Hinckley, telling the
Marshal that he knew what to do with us, who had us forthwith to the post of an
old house, where he tied us and gave us thirty three stripes; the which cruelty
acted on us, the people cried out against (there being at that time many
beholders) amongst which was one women crying out in the grief of her soul and
the anguish of her spirit) How long Lord! how long shall it be ere thou avenge
the blood of thine elect! and after bewailing her self, and lamenting her loss,
said to this purpose, Did she forsake father and mother, and all her dear
relations to come to New England for this? did I ever think that New England
would come to this? who would have thought it? so after he had done, he had us
again to Sandwitch, and on the morrow we were had out of the Township, being
desired not to come in again; the effect and sense of this struck so deep, and
the impression of his bloody strokes being so barbarous, that I know by
experience a re^dy and willing horse, would run himself unto death before he
had suffered the like torment, they having fetched from their brethren at
Boston an example, the cord of their covenant (wherewith they abused the Saints
bodies) it being threefold, amounting to an hundred stripes save one; the
impenitent inflicter, whose conscience is feared as with a hot iron, having
tasted of the terrors of God (if his own tongue be true) for his filthiness in
defiling himself with a poor Indian woman, and other vile works which he has
wrought, who then and at that time was an Officer of their Court, a member of
their Mother Church old Jezabel by name, who has filled their hearts with the
filth of her abominations.

Again for confirmation hereof, take own man's one account, and signed with his
own name, which is as follows.

A note of what I suffered by the Court since the 8 month 57.

I was served to the eighth month Court 57. by two warrants, one to serve on
the Jury betwixt party and party, and the other to answer to something against
me, but had not liberty to see the warrant; to the first I was called, I
pro^ered to serve on the Jury, but refused to swear, for which I was fined ten
shillings; for the other warrant I had laid to my chargfor persuading the
Officer to give Christopher Holder and John Copeland. a copy of his Warrant,
for which I was fined ten shillings; and for a meeting I had in my house I was
to find sureties for the good behavior in eighty pounds I and my sureties till
June Court, which I refused to do, I was committed to the Marshal, where I was
kept prisoner till the first month Court 1658. where I was released by the
Governor, paying fees five shillings for committing and releasing, and half a
crown a day, which came to about eighteen pounds, which I refused to pay; but
the Marshal was content with six pounds for my diet, which I was content to
give, not having made any agreement for it. Since in the latter end of the
month called July came one George Barloe, a pretended officer, to apprehend
quakers, and in the night after we were in bed, entered my house without light
or any with him (in the manner of a robber) went out of one rome into another,
came to my bedside, asked for strangers; going forth I made the door fast after
him; he again broke open my door; after all this injury I was summoned to
October Court on this account, and although nothing was proved against me, I
laid open to the Magistrates the injury sustained, as his coming into my house
alone, and after his breaking my door and frighting my children; all the remedy
I had, I was fined twenty shillings under pretense, because I had not brought
my daughters; yet was never summoned to bring them.

Witness my hand William Newland.

One thing remarkable after the enterprizing his house, finding fire, demanded
of the master of the same a candle, wh^^^^ with to make search, he being a man
both capable and willing to manifest unto this Officer the virtue of his power,
calls to mind a pail of water which quickly he fetched and forthwith cast it
into the fire, and set the Officer to seek a light elsewhere.

Here follows more of the sufferings sustained in that one and the self same
Town called Sandwitch, the relation being given by the sufferers under their
own hands, who write thus.

A Declaration of the sufferings of several friends in the Town of Sandwitch,
for their obedience to the commands of Christ, from the cruelty of the
oppressing power, in the Collony of Plymouth, who have made laws to bind us by
oath (contrary to the law of Christ, whose law is so strongly written in our
hearts, and the keeping of it so delightsome to us, and the gloriousness of its
life daily appearing, makes us to endure the cross patiently, and suffer the
spoiling of our goods with joy) as they say to be true and faithful to the
State, and to all such laws as shall be made, pretending them to be good and
wholesome, though evil and distructive, which we are witnesses of; the which
oath we refusing to take, declaring that we could not swear at all, they have
fined us five pounds a court, and to appear every General Court, which is three
times in a year, which is as they say fifteen pounds a year for refusing to
swear; and for the executing their cruelty, John Alden their treasurer (who is
now filling up the measure of that wicked treasury) has sent the Marshal
Samuel Nash, who has taken George Barloe the other Marshal with him, and has
done as follows

First; being sent by john Alden, they came to us, and demanded a fine of ten
pounds for refusing to take the oath, but we knovving the unjust end of their
actings, had not much to answer, only declared against it; so they coming to
our several habitations strained upon the best of our cattle, and coming to
Edward Perries yard where his cattle were, he not satisfying of their wills,
but declaring his innocence in suffering, they being at work for him who is the
prince of darkness, the fruits of the works of darkness was by them brought
forth, for they having marked for the ten pounds, two Cows, and two Hiefers,
and went to mark more, a neighbor standing by asked them how many they intended
to mark? they answered two Cows besides the Heifers, he answered, they had
marked so many already, and showed them the cattle; yet notwithstanding they
marked another Covv; also at that time took a Cow of the same man's which was
in his yard, and marked for another man; also marked other men's cattle to
answer the fine charged upon him; so they marked for the ten pounds fine, three
Cows and two Heifers vvorth sixteen pound; after this, being summoned to
another Court, the Governor Thomas Prince, demanded of us the taking of the
oath we formerly refused, who pretended (seeing we said we could not
svvear) if we would be bound body and goods to be true, as before is said,
the which also we refused; one answering said, He would bind himself by
promise to be faithful to the State; Thomas Prince ansvvered, in a deriding
manner, said, you cannot promise, you cannot make a promise; he ansvvered yea,
I can promise against evil; the other still ansvvered in derision; so they
fined us five pounds a piece more that Court; and not long after the Court, the
Marshall came for the cattle which they had formerly marked, and also for the
last five pounds; and coming to Edward Perry demanded the last fine, his
answer being much as the former, the Marshall went from him to the restof his
company, and he having brought his cattle out of the woods into his field, and
having a fat Cow amongst them to kill, also having a man to help him, went
about it, the Marshals and their company being in the field talking together,
and he that helped him driving the Cow to the place where she was killed; one
of the Marshals asked him whose Cow that was? he ansvvered, What if it be mine?
so no more words being spoken, he brought the Cow to the place, and when we
were ready to knock her down; one that helped the Marshal to drive the cattle,
came in have both in body and spirit, and said, do not kill that Cow; we asked
him whether he were the Marshal, also whether he had any order to take the Cow,
and required to see an order; whereupon came George Barloe one of the Marshals,
he was asked whether he had any order, and required if he had to show it; but
he said he had not, but the other Marshal had was absent; so we seeing no order
we killed the Cow, and after we had killed her, the other Marshal came, of whom
an order was demanded if he had any, but he would show none although it was
required that before they took any cattle out of the field to see their order,
but none they would show, but notwithstanding drive away two Cows for the last
five pounds fine; and so great is their rage that for that which was killed,
they required another as good of him that helped to kill her, because he
knocked her down, and since John Alden has sent a warrant or mittimus without
examination to the Constable to take his body, and to carry him to Plymouth,
and deliver him to the Marshall, there to be kept till the first month 59.
this being in the ninth month 58. so he was had before John Alden and William
Collier, who has bound him to let them have as good a Covv, and to answer it
at the next Court, though it was plainly declared by Edward Parry to John
Alden, that if he had ought against any man, it must be against him, for he
that helped was as his servant and did it by his order; which thing he made
light of, and since has sent the Marshall, who has seized upon one of his
Cows, so that for that five pound from Edward Perry they have taken three
Covvs, which are worth eleven pounds; Behold what a violent crush this is, to
take away twenty seven pounds for fifteen pounds! is this to deliver the
innocent and help the needy? surely the proverb that Wisdom spoke is true,
which says; As a roaring Lion, and a raging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler to a
poor people; Also taken from Robert Harper two young Oxen and one Heifer for
ten pounds fine, worth thirteen pounds; and marked from Ralph Allin in cattle,
eleven pounds ten shillings for ten pounds fine, and from Thomas Greenfeild is
taken two Cows, and from Richard Kerby for the whole fifteen pounds fine, they
have taken four Cows, one of them with a bell about her neck, also a call, all
which are vvorth sixteen pounds: Also from William Allin, whom they have fined
fifteen pound, they have taken two Covvs and a Steer, which are worth thirteen
pounds, the last five pounds not being yet fetched by them.

Ralph Allin, Edward Perry, Richard Kerby; Robert Harper, Thomas Greenfeild,
William Allin witnesses.

Again, Matthew Allin for the same, to wit, for not swearing, fined ten
pounds, for which they distrained and took away three Cows, for which if he had
been in want, would willingly have given twelve pounds (as he says himself.)
Daniel VVing for the same twelve pounds; George Allin also for five pounds sine
cattle seized on to the value of six pounds; William Gifford for the same
twelve pounds; George Web, John Allin, with others fined also (but spared
because they had it not) Thomas Ewer also refusing to take the oath, they stopped
seven pounds in Richard Chadwels hand for which he labored; and for refusing to
Train they strained from him the worth of ten shillings. Peter Gaunt a man of
great age, and an inhabitant in that Town twenty one years, and one of the
approved men amongst them, at the setting up of their Church-worship also in
the time of that ignorance, did do that which they required concerning their
oath of fidelity; yet now he fearing God, although his natural strength be much
spent, required of him to train, which for conscience sake he could not do;
they demanded of him ten shillings, which refusing to pay, they distrained of
his household stuff so much Pewter as they pleased, it being a thing not easy
to come at in those parts; again they summoned him to their court at Plymouth,
notwithstanding his age, and a great distance he was off, being as aforesaid
twenty miles, who when there he came, was committed with other friends to the
Goalor, who afterward by the Governor was called for and fined twenty
shillings for not putting off his hat, for which they attached a young beast
which they themselves prized at thirty five shillings; also William Allin being
accused for breaking into a man's house, for want of other occasion, charged him
and others (according to the law) with felony; [mind what malice here is,]
this they did against him, and several others (because they came into a house
where two friends were imprisoned, the door being open) which when there he
came, the man of the house cleared him to the Governor, who then having
nothing whereof justly to accuse him, told him there was a mistake in the
summons, yet fined him twenty shillings for not putting off his hat, for which
they took a brass ketle prized by them at twenty five shillings; this they did,
besides thirteen pounds worth of cattle forced from him, because he could not
svvear: Daniel Wing twenty shillings for the hat; another Ralph Alli^ twenty
shillings for the hat, one vveather sheep distrained.

Again, Thomas Greenfield put by from the Jury for not swearing, fined twenty
shillings, for which they distrained his goods. Edward Perry for not training,
distrained and taken away to the value of seven shillings, besides all other
fines, John Te^kins for the same one pot distrained, which was of great use
unto him, of which he was debarred; Robert Harper for the same, pewter taken
to the value of four shillings.

Reader, thou may take notice, that though these people be such as pretend
much to honor the Sabbath day as they call it, yet by order of Court did the
Constable come to a meeting of friends in Sandwitch-Town on the first day as
they were waiting upon the Lord, and sommoned fourteen of them to be at a
Court at Plymouth the next day, being twenty miles distant, where theyvvere
fined five pounds a piece for refusing to swear, which is contrary to the law
of God and wholesome law of the English nation; and at this Court, being in the
beginning of the fourth month 1658. they appointed the forementioned Barloe
Marshal, or rather pursevant of Barnestable, Sandwitch, and Yarmouth, which
office he has executed with as much malice as any be. All this distress,
forced robbery, and violent stealth, is done in the name of his Highness, Lord
Protector of England, etc. as they say, and more also which here follows; four
of them at the same time put in the stocks, for taking John Rous by the hand
when he came from before the Court.

Again sixteen of them summoned to their Octob^r Court, so called by them, and
there all fined again five pounds a man for the oath; ^thou may understand
that this was in the 8. month 58. so that their may see their cruelty still
continued with an intent to ruinace that harmless and Innocent people; and if
thy name thou suffer to cover this, I am sure they will laugh at thee, for they
call thee Protector of England, Ireland and Scotland; but New England not yet
that Pattent, is not once named by them that ever Iyet heard; for if it were so
in righteousness, thou most needs, and that in conscience protect that poor
people from being utterly ruinated, and so as chief Magistrate thou art owned
by the sufferers; appear therefore in plainness, and show unto all thy like or
dislike of these their doings, that every man may know thee by thy fruits, and
whether thou take the protection of New England into thy hand yea or nay, of
which the inhabitants with many more have great need, if equity and justice
thou execute therein.

Again three of them, to wit, William Allin, Robert Harper, Thomas Greenfeild,
for not departing out of the Court, forthwith upon the Governors command
although not refusing so to do, was committed to the Marshall and carried
away to prison, the Court breaking up that night, was there left and
continued.

The actings of George Barloe of Sandvvich, he being ordered by the Court at
Plymouth for the preventing the peaceable meeting together of the servants of
the Lord (to vvait upon him in the silence of all flesh) as by his actions
plainly will appear; he having received a Warrant to search all suspicious
places, to apprehend strangers called quakers, by this order comes into our
meetings, sometimes bringing others with him and sometimes alone, we sitting
still in our places, he requires of several of us to remove and to give way
to him, pretending to search the house for strangers, and if we do not
satisfy his will by giving way to him (which none can do who are truly
waiting upon the Lord) then he breaks, forth in bitter expressions, pulling
some, and thrusting others, threatening some of us to put us in the stocks, and
saying to some of us, if we remove not to tread on us; also pulling off and and
lifting up our hats, pretending that he does not know us, using many words both
by flattery and violence to draw forth words from us; and when he sees he can
get none, then he breaks forth with many false charges against us, who are
innocent from doing any wrong, either to him or any of those by whom he is set
to work mischief against us; also to prevent this vile person from disquieting
of us (when attending upon the Lord) we have removed from our houses into the
woods; a neighbor, and one of his own nature, whom he forced to go along with
him, said he was ashamed of him to see him upon the first day in the morning,
hunting the people by their footings, as a Dog hunting some other creatures,
this is and has been a very common thing with him and others, whom they have
employed, the first day and other days, thus to do; as witness,

Edward Perry, Humphrey Norton.

Here also is the Sum of part of the Fines levied out of one Town in Plymouth
patent called Sandwitch.
This they have sustained in less then one years time, besides imprisonings,
stockings, abusings, and halings, in and from their own houses, some of them
being men of low estates, that to outward appearance this which is done unto
them may be their ruinating, and utter undoing in outward estate, if neither
pity, mercy, nor compassion be used toward them, which these have none, as
witness their Marshal George Barloe, who said he would not leave them worth a
groat, such is the clemency of a New England Member.

William Newland having formerly taken their Oath of Infidelity escaped with 1.
l. 10. s. He and Ral^h Allin having been cast into the Marshals hands which put
them in charges to the sum of 12 l. 0. Edward Perry 27 l. 7 s Robert Harper 13
l. 4 s Ralph Allin 12 l. 10 s Thomas Greenfield 11 l. 0 s Richard Kirby 16 l. 0
s William Allin 14 l. 5 s. William Gifford 12 l. 0 s. Matthew Allin 12 l. 0 s.
Daniel VVing 12 l. 0 s. George Allin 6 l. 0 s. Peter Gaunt ^e also having
formerly taken the Infidels Oath, escaped with so much as 2 l. 5 s Thomas Ewer
7 l. 10. s. Another Ralph Allin 1 l. 0 s. The Sum 160 l. 11 s.
Again in Marshfield, A town in that Patent; Arthur Howland, a man of a great
age, near unto 70 years, who Simeon like has waited long for his Salvation,
who seeing him now appear in his Temple, could no longer with his estate,
supply the Priests Office, who seeing it in measure fulfilled, could do no
other then bear his Testimony against it; for which they strained his Iron
Furniture, belonging to his draught, to the quite disabling him, and
disappointing him of the use of the same, to his great loss and damage. Again,
the aforesaid Arthur for not delivering up unto the Constable at his command (a
servant of God called Robert Hodgshon) he having no warrant for what he did but
said Josiah Winslow would bear him out in it, for this they fined the old man
fire pounds, for which they took away a Steer and a Bull, the 28 of the third
month, 1658. which the old man said, for the reteining and protecting the
aforesaid Robert, he conceived he was bound in obedience to his Prince Oliver
so to do, he having holden forth the same in his Instrument of Government:

Arthur Howland.

And I am satisfied in obedience to his Conscience could do no less, he having
been a receiver and a reliever of the Saints and servants of God, and of such
as is and has been persecuted, he himself having been one formerly in the
Bishops days as well as now, I am Witness of it.

H. N.

Again, such was their wickedness against this old man, that they would have
cast him into bonds in the cold Winter season, which he said he had rather
repair to the chief Magistrate, and seek redress there, for which he used
several Arguments to them, but their Prison being readier then their Protectors
presence, had been the place provided for him (by their appointment, such was
their cruelty) had not his brother and friends, (who could not bear it) entered
into bond for him. Again, Henry Howland his brother in the Town of Duxbery, for
having a meeting in his house, and not serving on the Jury, fined, and levied,
1 l. 10 s.

Henry Howland.

New Havens proceedings against Humphrey Norton and others.
Humphrey Norton a servant of God, being going to visit his seed under the
Dutch Government coming into an English Plantation, called Southo^d, belonging
to New-havens Jurisdiction, was that evening forthwith apprehended, and not so
much as once asked what way he traveled, but committed to the Marshal, and by
water conveyed to New Haven, where after a frivolous Examination, having
nothing justly against him, was cast into Prison, and laid upon him a great
weight of Irons day and night linked to a great lump of Wood, it being in the
twelfth month 16^7. They continued him 20 days in this condition, in a cold
open Prison, not suffering him to have either fire or candle, or any to come at
him, but such as did abuse him; under which trial Satan came unto him, tempting
him: I heard him say of a truth, that he told the Devil to his face, That he
was a Fool, upon the eleventh of the first month, 1658 he was called forth
before their Court so called, where not the least clause of transgression was
proved against him, having also put forth some queries to their chief Priest:

John Davenport who denied to answer them in writing, saying he saw how he had
served his Brother Young, but would answer them there in the peoples hearing in
words, which H. N. endeavoring to make Reply, Upon his Answer in the audience
of the people, they caused a great Iron Key to be tied cross his mouth, and
said he should answer when the Priest had done, but that was like the rest, for
the Priest had no sooner done, but he fled away as fast as he might, and he
continued with the Key in his mouth until he was gone: And after spending the
part of two days in his trial, they sentenced him to be severely whipped, and
burnt in the hand with the Letter H. for Heresy, and to be conveyed out of
their Colonie, in the manner of Banishment, not to return but upon the utmost
penalty that the Law would infl^ct: Also fined ten pounds, as they said to pay
the Court and Colonie their charges, and this says he that gave the sentence,
must be done this afternoon; shortly after the Drum beat, and the people
gathered a great many; and straightway he was fetched forth and offered upon
their Altar-Stocks in the view of all the people, was stripped to the waste, with
his back turned to the Magistrates, and by report of them that stood by, had 36
stripes; but he himself knows not how many; for they had no sooner done (then I
heard him say that his Body was all as if it had been covered with Balm) then
turning his face to the Magistrates, they brought a pan with hot burning coals
and their Iron in it, and took his right hand made fast in the stocks, and
burnt it more deep then ever I saw any impression upon any quick creature,
after which being loosed, the Lord opened his mouth in prayer, and he uttered
his voice toward heaven, from whence came his help, who covered the heads of
his enemies with shame and contempt, but himself with peace, love and joy;
after which several times they proffered him his deliverance paying his fine and
his fees: His answer was always such, that if they would do it for two pence,
they might never have it from him, nor none by his consent; or if he would but
promise it, which thing he could not do; but a Dutchman whose face he never saw
before, engaged unto them for twenty Nobles altogether without his consent,
which they wickedly received in stead of ten pounds, making their Law a lie;
the aforesaid Dutchman being asked a reason why he would offer it, said his own
spirit within him made him do it, besides him not another face appeared with
him, nor for him, only they seemed to force salves upon him, for the killing of
the fire, the which he refused, not needing it; the Marshal being a malicious
man and much tormented, would have a reason why he would not receive it his
answer was, he could not suffer a dog to lick his sores, (am I a Dog says the
Marshal?) And William Brend and several others, being moved to bear the message
of the Lord to the same place, being all threatened and sent away in the manner
of Banishment, some of them not suffered to discharge and unburthen their
Consciences, for which unto the place they were called, but forced away with
the burden of that Word upon them; or which one through the power of the
Prince of darkness has finished her testimony in the Sea, Mary VVeatherhead by
name: Another of them being forced and hasted away, it being their meetingday,
crying out, Woe be unto you for Humphrey Nortons sake, Woe be unto you.

Reader, That thou may be truly certified of what manner of spirits the
New England Priests are, I shall give you a brief account of what passed
between my beloved brother ^ohn Copeland, and a high Priest we met with at
Hartf^rd, it being the will of God, that his seed should be sought out in all
parts, we were moved to go to Hartford, (in the Jurisdiction of ^anitticote)
for that purpose, and after some passages at the Town; which will not be
needful to relate, we being at the Ordinary were sent for by the Governor to
come to his house, and we went; where were assembled the Governor, a moderate
man, and some of the Magistrates, so called, and their Priest called Samuel
Stone; after some questions asked us by the Governor as from whence we came,
and whether we were going, of which we gave him an account as the Lord gave us
freedom; Samuel Stone asked us, What God is? we said a Spirit, then with his
Logic he did thus cavil; a Spirit is an Angel, and an Angel is a creature, God
is not a creature, therefore God is not a Spirit; the which we did deny, it
being both contrary to Scripture and truth, but by it he showed how learned he
was that had learned more of Logic then of God; for had he known God he dared
not thus to have spoken: After some more words he said further, That God is the
Author of all wisdom, and all arts, the which we denied, and put him to prove
it, and in stead of proving it, he went to raise another Argument nothing to
the purpose, but we kept him to what he said, and put him to prove it by
Scripture, but he would not nor could not; then we said, There is a wisdom,
which is earthly, sensual, and devilish; and God is not the Author of that
wisdom, and God will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
understanding of the prudent; and we said, God would not destroy the wisdom
which he is the author of, so this learned man was much pusled, not being able
to make good what he had said in the face of many of his hearers that were then
present; then the Governor seeing him thus taken in his own net, did help him
saying, That was not wisdom, but folly, but God is the Author of all true
wisdom; we answered if Samuel had said so at first, we should have easily
consented to it, then Samuel Stone said the Apostle spoke there improperly, but
we affirmed that the Spirit of God always spoke properly: After this he raised
another lying Argument, which was this; None are saved without a promise, you
have no promise in the Scripture, and therefore are not saved; to which we
replied, the Promise is, I will give him for a Covenant, a light, that he may
be my Salvation to the ends of the earth, to as many as believe in him; we
believe in him, and are in the ends of the earth, and therefore are saved by
him; to which he objected nothing, so after some words the day being spent, one
of their Magistrates read us their Law, that we were not to stay in their
Colonie: Thus may all see how these four united Colonies, as they are called,
have agreed to banish Christ out of their coasts by a Law; O what a brotherhood
is this, that thus uses the friends of God; and abuses his servants sons and
daughters by whipping, burning, and otherwise mangling their bodies! but it is
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled which says, They shall hale you before
Rulers and Governors for my Names sake, and as they have done unto me, so will
they do unto you, says Christ, because they know not the Father nor me; yet
amongst all the Colonies found we not the like moderation as in this, most of
the Magistrates being more noble, then those of the other Colonies; after some
days stay, we departed from that Town toward Road-Island, and by this thou
may see what husks the Priests of New England feeds their Flocks with: Thus
in short have I given thee an account of some of the Doctrines of one of the
highest of the New England Pharisees, who is accounted the greatest disputant
in all the Land, (as one of his Hearers told us) but it has so pleased the
Father, by babes to confound and stop the mouths of such wise ones, that he in
all, and over all, may be glorified for ever,

John Rous.

Reader, I being one with the suffering seed, was after some travels and
sufferings, as thou may understand, in other remote parts moved to go to
New England, and was brought to Road-Island according to the will or him who
had moved me, and after spending some few days there, I was moved to go into
other parts of the land, where I met with the most loathsome hypocrisy, and
abominable deceit that ever I saw or heard of, and that committed by those who
pretend themselves to be no less then members of the Church of Christ, but how
disagreeable their practices are, to the spirit of him whom they profess, if
thou art one who have tasted of it, thou will easily judge; and I can truly
say that under this pretense of theirs, almost all manner of wickedness is
covered, pride, gluttony, envy, deceitful dealings (as vvitness many of their
creditors, the Merchants upon the Exchange in London and elsewhere; who for it
has often cried out against it) bloodshed, lust, and what else might be
mentioned; and such hypocrisy have I seen amongst the highest members of their
chiefest Churches, that I have sometimes said within my self, A man that has a
covetous and deceitful rotten heart, lying lips which abound among them, and a
smooth fawning flattering tongue and short hair, and a deadly enmity against
those that are called Quakers and others that oppose their ways, such a
hypocrite is a fit man to be a member of any New England Church; a plain
demonstration of which thou may see in their character of their Religion
written in blood, wherein all is not written that they have done, and we have
suffered by them; but the chiefest heads are gathered together, and presented
to public view, that the simple may be informed, and their cruelty and
oppression laid open to the honest hearted, and God glorified who has counted
us worthy to suffer for his names sake, for whose sake we have been accounted
as sheep for the slaughter, and killed all the day long by the Butchers, so
that if thou should ask me who were the chief upholders of their Church and
Religion, I should answer, their Goalor, Hangman, Governor, and
Deputy Governor, and not their Pastor and Teacher, and Elder, and Deacon, for
if they can well avoid it, they care not for coming where we are, unless it be
when we are called before their Court, to fasten some false accusation on us if
they can, the which-they have not spared; and touching the matter and manner of
their worship, it is most like the ridged Presbyters, so called, but a little
differing from the late Bishops, only they use not their blind service and
surp-cloaths, but in stead of them have inventions of their own, and in cruelty
are nothing behind them (for which God will take vengence on them.) It was so
ordered of the Lord, that I with my beloved brother Humph. Norton, were moved
to go to the great meeting house at Boston upon one of their Lector days; a
little after the Goalor a member of their Church had nigh murdered one of our
friends that was then in prison, where we found John Norton their Teacher set
up, who like a babbling Pharisee, run over a vain repetition near an hour long
(like an impudent smoth-fac'd harlot, who was telling her Paramoors a long fair
story of her husbands kindness, while nothing but vvantonness and wickedness is
in her heart) when his glass was out, he begun his Sermon, wherein amongst many
lifeless expressions he spoke much of the danger of these who are called
quakers, and did much labor to stain their innocence, with many feigned words;
and did often call upon the people to believe what he said, as though they did
not mind him enough, though some gaped on him, as if they expected honey
should have dropped from his lips (but sure I am little but Gall and Vinegar
fell from him while I was there, with which many of his hearers, are
abundantly filled, a flood of which Christ in any of his disciples may sooner
have from them then a cup of cold water to refresh him) how often hungry
fouls amongst them have been so deceived by him, I leave to that of God in
their consciences to judge; and amongst other of his vain conceits, he uttered
this (whereby he plainly discovered the blindness and rottenness of his heart)
That the justice of God is the Armor of the devil, the which if true, then is
the devil sometimes covered with justice, which is more then ever I heard any
of his servants say on his behalf before; for which and the rest of his
rottenness and deceit, I leave him to the judgment of him who has prepared a
portion for hypocrites in utter darkness, where they shall reap the fruits of
their labor^, and commend thee to the grace of God, by it to be guided in all
things in which as thou wal^s, thou will love truth and simplicity, and ha^^
hypocrisy and deceit, though with us thou suffer persecution and reproach, the
which if thou suffer with patience, I am one with thee, and rests a Witness for
God against all hypocrisy, Called John Rous.

Also Sarah Gibbins and D^rothy Waugh, called to Hartford in the forementioned
Colonie of Caniticote, for their entertainment, they took their clothes, and
sold them, and sent themselves away.

Here follows a Copy of Boston Law, under which the Saints have suffered, and
which Nich. Upshal testified against.

Whereas there is a cursed sect of heretics lately risen up in the world,
which are commonly called Quakers, who take upon them to be immediately sent of
God, and infallibly assisted by the Spirit to speak and write blasphemous
opinions, despising government, and the order of God in Church and
Commonwealth, speaking evil of dignities, reproaching and reviling Magistrates
and Ministers, seeking to turn the people from the faith, and gain Proselites
to their pernicious ways; this Court taking into serious consideration the
premises, and to prevent the like mischief as by their means is wrought in our
native Land, does hereby order, and by the authority of this Court, Be it
ordered and enacted, That what Master or Commander of any Ship, Bark, Pink or
Catch, that shall henceforth bring into any Harbor, Creek, or Cove, within
this Jurisdiction, any Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics, shall
pay or cause to be paid the fine of one hundred pounds to the Treasurer of the
Country, except it appear he want true knowledge or information of their being
such, and in that case he has liberty to clear himself by his Oath, when
sufficient proof to the contrary is wanting; and for default of good payment,
or good security for it, shall be cast into prison, and there to continue till
the said sum be satisfied to the Treasurer as aforesaid; and that Commander of
any Catch, Ship or Uessel that shall bring them being legally convicted, shall
give in sufficient security to the Governor or any one or more of the
Magistrates who have power to determine the same, to carry them back to the
place whence he brought them, and on his refusal so to do, the Governor or one
or more of the Magistrates are hereby empowered to issue out his or their
Warrants to commit such Master or Commander to prison, there to continue till
he give in sufficient security to the content of the Governor or any of the
Magistrates as aforesaid: And it is hereby further ordered and enacted, That
what Quakers soever shall arrive in this Country from foreign parts, or shall
come into this jurisdiction from any parts adjacent, shall be forthwith
committed to the house of Correction, and at their entrance to be severely
whipped, and by the Master thereof to be kept constantly to work, and none
suffered to converse or speak with them during ye time of their imprisonment,
which shall be no longer then necessity requires; and it is ordered; If any
person shall knowingly import into any harbor of this Jurisdiction, any
Quakers Books or Writings, Concerning their devilish opinions, shall pay for
every such Book or writing, being legally proved against him or them, the sum
of ^ve pounds, and whosoever shall disperse or conceal any such Book or
Writing, and it be found with him or her, or in his or her house, and shall not
immediately deliver the same to the next Magistrate, shall forfeit and pay five
pounds, for the dispersing or concealing of every such Book or Writing; And it
is hereby further enacted, That if any person within this Colonie, shall take
upon them to defend the heretical opinions of the said Quakers, or any of their
Books or Papers as aforesaid, if legally proved, shall be fined for the first
time forty shillings; if they shall persist in the same, and shall again
defend it the second time four pounds; yet notwithstanding if they shall again
so defend and maintain the said Quakers heretical opinions, they shall be
committed to the house of correction, till there be convenient passage to send
them out of the land, being sentenced by the Court of Assistants to banishment:
Lastly, It is hereby ordered, That what person or persons soever shall revile
the person of Magistrates or Ministers as is usual with the Quakers, such
person or persons shall be severely whipped, or pay the sum of five pounds: This
is a true Copy of the Courts Order, as attests,

Edward Rawson Secretary.

The Sufferers under this Law hereafter follows, who has crushed it, and
trampled over it, and testified against it, and replied to it, as follows:
And this they do because they neither know the Father nor us, they hate us
without a cause.

Whereas there is a printed Paper lately come to my hands, like unto a
Pamphlet, being unsubscribed by any Magistrate, but runs in the Name of the
general Court held upon such and such days at Boston, wherein they have taken
occasion to blaspheme God, belie his people, transgress his Laws, and limit his
spirit, and all this is done by you professors, who were either banished men
your selves, or such as fled for a tender conscience sake, or worse; and he
that provides for all that loves him, provided and sound out this Land for you,
amongst whom there is a scattered seed, from which you strive to limit his
spirit (by your unrighteous Laws) from the gathering it home unto himself,
having forged and invented Laws contrary to God, Christ, and the Scriptures,
and thereby has acted such things as is to be admired; (clear your selves as
well as you can:) And seeing they are grounded upon none of these three, examine
from whence they have their rise, and from what ground, seeing the Devil only
is the Author of all unrighteousness, malice and lies; the three first lies
against us, is, That we are Cursed, a Sect, and Heretics; the fourth, That we
take it upon us that we are immediately sent of God, and infallibly assisted by
the spirit to speak and write blasphemous Opinions; This a cursed and
blasphemous lie against God, to charge that which is infallible, with
blasphemous Opinions; Seeing that there is no spirit infallible, but God; in
the day wherein you are brought to give an account for every idle word, you
vvil wish that for this your tongues had cloven to the roof of your mouths.
Your fifth, Despising Government; your sixth and seventh, the Order of God in
Church and Commonwealth: Your eighth, speaking evil of Dignities: Your ninth
and tenth, reviling Magistrates and Ministers: Your eleventh, that we seek to
turn people from the faith: Your twelfth and thirteenth, That our Ways are
pernicious, and seeking to make proselytes: Your fourteenth, That we have
wrought mischief in our native Land: Your fifteenth, That it is usual with us
to revile, etc. Surely you are bent to do evil, or otherwise you would never
utter such untruths as these; I can truly and safely say it, That upon the same
spirit that forged these fifteen lies, have you published a Law to limit the
spirit of God from coming within your coasts by threatenings and fines upon such
as shall convey any of these persons wherein the Spirit of God speaks. Examine
from whence you have this Law to lay on and levy Fines, I am sure neither the
Spirit of truth nor the Scriptures is your rule, for this (also such a Clause
you have in it) that if any bring us unadvisedly, if they will but break the
doctrine of Christ by taking of an Oath, shall be freed from such things as are
therein mentioned; And finding your Law grounded upon fifteen falsehoods, I
shall mention no more of your matter then I must needs, but seeing this
inveterate hatred that this Spirit of yours has in it, which gives forth
threatenings in no less words, then Fines and Banishment against such as speaks,
or continues speaking in the behalf of the truth of God, (for none there is
besides it) I say, ought you not to leave the banishing of them to him who gave
you and them the Land? Is not their right as good as yours? beware of this
banishing, will you go and fight still against God? who has given this Land as
a lot unto the banished, that so through the scattered seed, he might raise up
a people to his praise; and seeing I have charged upon your account, Fifteen
untruths at the fewest in a small Paper, which things I shall make good through
the assistance of God so to be, upon these grounds following; that as I am
drawn through the power and Spirit of God to come into your Pattent, that I may
be admitted peaceably with my friend or friends to have a public meeting both
with your Magistrates, and them you call your Ministers, with the people, and
time and place appointed, where all may freely come, and all have liberty to
speak, (unto whom the Word is revealed) one by one* that all may hear, and all
may be comforted without interruption or ensnaring: And if this you deny, you
are not worthy to bear these Names, much less the Offices, and if this you will
be so noble as to grant, let me have it under thy hand John Indicot, with any
one or two of thy Assistants directed unto Nicholas Easton on Road-Island, for
to be delivered to the hands of Humphrey Norton. Be well advised, and this do,
for thou art not sensible what good it may may bring forth, and if this you
deny, I can do no less then publish it, for the clearing of the truth of God
from falsehoods and lies, which are come forth in Print against the innocent,
who acknowledge both the Father and the Son, as in due time the Lord God will
make it manifest amongst you to the shame of his enemies:

Road Island, the seventh of the ninth month, 1657.
On the last day of the sixth Month 1657. they wickedly and shamelesly began to
execute this Law on an innocent and harmless woman, as plainly appears by the
ensuing lines.

Mary Clark a modest and an innocent woman, who feared God with all her
household, left her husband and family, to go on the Lords errand to the town of
Boston in New England, the burden of his word lying so sore upon her, that she
regarded not what sufferings she sustained, so that according to his will, she
was discharged from under it, who repairing thitherwards to do the will of him
that sent her; About the 29 of the sixth month 1657. was betrayed by Judas the
son of perdition, a Member of their Church, who informed them of her coming,
who shortly after apprehended her, delivering her over to the Tormentors,
impowring them barbarously to abuse her body, with about twenty merciless
stripes, with a threefold cord, which being unfolded amounts to sixty, such
being the Seals of their cursed Covenant, and one of the Articles of their
Faith; Also to add unto her sufferings, and to make the cup more cruel, they
continued her in prison above 12. weeks; all which she did patiently bear, not
regarding the coldness of the season, her innocence preaching condemnation to
her adversaries, and for her faithfulness herein, the Lord God is her reward.

Again two of the Servants of God being moved by him to go to Salem, a town in
Boston Colonie, to seek the Son of peace, who suffered in many for want of
Information, where the true path lies that leads to his dwelling place; these
two Pilgrims having obtained mercy from God, and being baptized into his
Covenant, Christ Jesus preached freely unto them the things that they had seen
and heard, and their hands had handled, which as an engrafted word took place
in them, such as never can be rooted out, so that their hearers in short time
became their fellow sufferers, as hereafter you will understand; Satan finding
that his head was hurt, set forth his Priests and Rulers, with their Officers
to pursue these Messengers of the Messiah who accordingly fell upon one of them
with his cruel hands in his Synagogue, stopping of his mouth with gloves, and
haling him by his hair, and so thrust them out; then an Officer took them and
continued them Prisoners until the next day; then had he them to Boston
prison, it being the 21 of the seventh month 1657. and on the morrow the
deputy Governor Richard Bellingham and the Secretary, with the Elder and
Deacon of that Town, came to the Goalors house, who sent for us apart, and
examined us apart, thinking to entangle us in our words, and find us in
contradictions; but we abiding in the truth, which is but one, spoke one thing,
so that they had no advantage against us, neither could take hold of any thing
we had spoken, but said our answers were delusive, and that the Devil had
taught us a deal of subtilty; so we were put in prison again, and some hours
after we were called forth again, and was had before the Governor John
Indicot, with the Deputy Governor, and the rest of the Governors of the united
Colonies as they call them, and sevral other people, who after a frivolous
examination, made a Warrant that we should be severely whipped with 30 stripes a
piece (which was cruelly done on the 23 of the seventh month, 1657. with a
threefold cord, which if unfolded amounts to ninescore) which being so cruel
(as it is said) one woman seeing fell down as dead; and kept close that none
might discourse with us, and three days the Goalor not suffering us to have any
food, nor yet water, yet a prisoner upon compassion, conveying some water once
unto us, was much threatened by the Goalor, and all this for no transgression,
not so much as denying to work, neither could we according to their wills, so
adding to this, nine weeks cruel bonds, without fire all the cold season,
turning us forth, when so they had done; this being the second Article of their
faith sealed up to purpose.

Christopher Holder, John C^peland.

Also one Cassandra Southick, with her Husband, a grave couple, were
apprehended by their Officer, and brought unto Boston, for the entertaining the
two forementioned strangers, her husband being a Member of their corrupt body,
which they call their Church, they returned back again that he might receive
the defilement thereof, she being as a scapegoat from the scattered Tribes,
they continued her seven weeks in Prison, fining her forty shillings for
owning a Paper, which was given forth by the Spirit of truth in these its
Messengers, for which the Governor said, they deserved death (such was his
cruelty) although the thing held forth nothing but what showed how their
Priests and Rulers differed from the holy men of God of old, yet if he had not
been limited from the extent of his wickedness, he had sentenced them unto
death, such a one is the third Article of their faith.

Also Ri^hard Dowdney an innocent man, serving the Lord, in the sincerity of
his heart, having a necessity laid upon him to go to Boston, which in the
simplicity of his heart he did, having never been in that Town nor Country
before, in the way was apprehended; it seems the wicked betrayed him by his
speech, and judged him to be a Disciple, which he Peter-like could not deny, so
forthwith was carried after his Savior before the Rulers, they having not
against him the least clause or pretense of transgression, sentenced him to be
severely whipped with thirty stripes, which was done unmercifully with the cord
of their Covenant threefold, amounting to ninety, giving charge also to keep
him constantly to work, and caused him to be searched for Papers and Books, and
took from him what they would; (mark how swift they are to shed innocent blood
for all this wickedness was done to him in less then three hours after his
coming to Town) this was the entertainment of this poor pilgrim, to the
wounding of the hearts of many, to hear and see a stranger, and a blameless
man, so barbarously abused, whom they continued above twenty days in bonds, to
add unto him more at large the cup of their Covenant, which patiently he did
bear, and for which he lost not his reward, which after further threatening him,
and the other four turned them forth; thus confirming on them the fourth
Article of their faith, by reading unto them (when they were before them)
another piece of their mischief, which they called an addition to the late
Order, which they wickedly made in the strength of their pride, finding that
their former was too weak to accomplish their design, they put this string to
strengthen their Covenant-cord Thus Reader thou may see how they go on
adding iniquity to sin, not at all considering that the rod of God is lifted up
over them, who will assuredly take vengeance for all these works, therefore let
all in whom there is any tenderness, and bowels of love toward our Lord Jesus
Christ deliver themselves from this untoward generation, by turning with the
whole heart unto the Lord, that so they may be saved from the wrath which is to
come upon all these things; thus having set the righteous law behind their
back, and broken Covenant with the Lord in departing from him, and wickedly
rising up and setting themselves against him, who once tendered them, and while
they were little and lo^ in their own eyes, and walked in his fear, he
preserved them, and for his name and glories sake which then was in the eye of
many of them, did he rebuke their adversaries, and gave them their hearts
desire, providing for them a hiding place, while his indignation was poured out
on his and their enemies, who are become a desolation, and their names an
abhorring to all flesh, at which work the righteous was glad and rejoiced in
the God of their salvation, their enemies themselves confessing to it, that it
was the Lords handy work, yea that the Lord wrought this work for his people,
evidently appears, so that it shall be said from this time, it is the Lords
work, and mavelous to behold in our eyes, yea and Nations shall confess to
it, giving glory unto his name, thus has the Lord tried them and proved them;
yet how soon turned they from him? forgetting his loving kindness, and his love
wherewith be loved them while they were young and tender, who growing in years,
their hearts were hardened, their minds by degrees going into the earth, was
estranged from him whose presence thus departing, they became enviers of them
in whom he appeared, and Cain-like began to smite with the fist their fellow
servants, at which the Lords soul was grieved, yet patiently did the Lord wait
for their return to him, bearing their iniquities which were great, not only in
forsaking of his righteous law and holy Commandment (which says, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, and the Lord thy God with all thy heart) did go
on in hatred against him, and made Laws whereby to oppress the stranger,
fatherless and widow, not regarding their neighbors good, but on the contrary
their destruction, by banishing of them from amongst them, if that in all
things they did not bow unto them: Remember this O New England, New England,
and speedily repent of this and all other thy wickedness, for which the Lord
will certainly plead with thee, least it be thy portion for ever to be banished
from his presence which is a woeful condition, therefore repent; yea, let the
long forbearance and goodness of God (after thus many years deeply revolting
from him, prisoning, and afflicting the tender hearted, who could not wrong
their Consciences, so far as to join with you in these your actings) lead you
to Repentance, but still do you go on in your rebellion to provoke him to
wrath, yet for his seeds sake which is amongst you he has spared you, which
now he has visited you in his everlasting love, whose visitation of love you
have with great hatred resisted, thereby heaping up wrath unto your selves,
and gaining the plagues and judgments of God, which unavoidably will come upon
you (as your due) for resisting so great love; know this therefore that in vain
you do weary your selves in making Laws whereby to oppress the just, and keep
the holy seed in bondage. for the just God is risen, to plead its cause, who
the just will set over their heads, and deliver the innocent from under your
hands, who will confound all your works, and bring to naught all your
enterprises, making you an example unto all that should attempt to do as you
have done, whose deeds have over past the wicked that went before you, to wit,
the Bishops, upon whom his wrath is fallen to the utmost, of which you O people
of New England may take notice; for verily the righteous judgments of the God
of Jacob can you not escape; therefore think not that the crying up of his
Ordinances, (as you call them) will save you, while the cry of innocent blood
is against you, of which upon a due search you are found deeply guilty, which
he can by no means clear, whilst so you continue, although his mercy is to
thousands of them that fear him, therefore let those amongst you, who are
tender, and desires the knowledge of his vvays, be encouraged to vvait upon
him, until he fulfill his promise, who certainly vuill establish such in his
way, therefore let such not fear man, whose breath is in his nostrils, but
fear the living God, who has enlightened you with the light of his Son, by
which light you will see the evil that the world is in, which as unto it
you take heed, by it you will be preserved from the evil, to the praise and
glory of him that made you, and so is the end for which the the Lord made you
answered,

John Copeland.

Reader, The Copy of their Law here follows, which is as they say an Addition
to the late Order, but in truth may be called an Addition to their former
wickedness, which by the cruel sufferings of the innocent is crushed and broken,
and if the wisdom of God had ruled the makers of it finding it too weak, they
would have set up the ever lasting Law in stead of it, which does violence to
none, and that would have endured for ever, but in stead of doing so, they have
gone on further to show their folly.

As an Addition to the late Order, in reference to the coming, or bringing in
any of the cursed Sect of the Quakers into this Jurisdiction: It is ordered
that whosoever shall from henceforth bring, or cause to be brought, directly or
indirectly any known Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics into
this jurisdiction, every such person shall forfeit the sum of one hundred
pounds to the Country, and shall by warrant from any Magistrate, be committed
to prison there to remain, until the penalty be fully satisfied and paid; and
if any person or persons within this jurisdiction, shall henceforth entertain
or conceal any Quaker or Quakers or other blasphemous Heretics (knowing them
so to be) every such person shall forfeit to the Country forty shillings for
every hours concealment and entertainment of any Quaker or Quakers, etc. as
aforesaid, and shall be committed to prison as aforesaid, till the forfeitures
be fully satisfied and paid: And it is further ordered, That if any Quaker or
Quakers, shall presume (after they have once suffered what the Law requires)
to come into this jurisdiction, every such Male Quaker shall for the first
offense have one of his ears cut off, and be kept at work in the house of
correction, till he can be sent away at his own charge; and for the second
offense shall have his other ear cut off, and kept at the house of Correction
as aforesaid: And every woman Quaker that has suffered the Law here, that
shall presume to come into this jurisdiction, shall be severely whipped, and kept
at the house of Correction at work, ^ill she be sent away at her own charge;
and so also for her coming again, she shall be alike used as aofresaid: And for
every Quaker he or she, that shall a third time again offend, they shall have
their tongues bore^ through with a hot Iron, and kept at the house of
correction close to work till they be sent away at their own charge; And it is
further ordered, That all and every Quaker arising from amongst our selves,
shall be dealt with and suffer the like punishment as the Law provides against
foreign Quakers.

This is a true Copy of the Courts Order, made at the general Court, held at
Boston the 14 day of October, 1657. As attests, Edward Rawson Secretary.

Again the forementioned couple ( Laurence Southick with his wife, and their
son) were apprehended, and put in Boston prison on the third of the twelfth
month, 1657. receiving the infliction of their whipping, they themselves not
knovving any just cause or law they had for their so doing, as it appears by
their turning them forth in so short a space, yet prohibited them from staying
above one hour in any acquaintances house, although they were inhabitants in
the same jurisdiction, and had lived many years in the Town of Salem, being
people well known amongst them, of honest and good report.

Also one William Maston, an ancient man, an Inhabitant in Boston Colonie, was
by the Rulers thereof for two small Books which he had, fined ten pound,
which they took from him; and in the 8. month, 1658. was put in prison for
coming to see some friends there, and the Governor commanded the Jailer to
chain him.

This is in short a true Declaration according to what I remember, and what I
have felt by the unjust Rulers of

Boston, in New England, in the first Month, 1658.

After I was convinced by the light of the Lord in me, of the evil of that way
of worship I had long lived in, and had turned from it, the cruel spirit in its
instruments of cruelty speedily followed me, who brought me to their Court, and
entering in with my hat, John Indicot Governor looked upon me, and with great
disdain said, Art thou come to this, and commanded my Hat to be pulled off and
proceeded with these words, and the like; thy quakerism will not cleanse thee
from thy uncleanness, and using many such words with a furious spirit until I
answered him, so many questions were put forth by him and the rest of his
company, but I found no freedom to answer, but desired them to deal with me
according as I had given answer to those Messengers which they had sent to
demand questions of me some weeks by past; and that if I had said or done any
thing contrary to their Law, they might proceed against me accordingly; but
they said, what I had spoken before to the Constable was nothing to them, I
must now give answer to what they required of me; I then finding freedom to
answer some of their questions, John Indicot asked me what Scripture I had for
not putting off my hat, so I mentioned that Scripture which says, How can ye
believe that seek honor one of another; and I desired him to tell me, what it
was in him that should require that of me which is opposite to the faith, and
said I looked at it to be nothing else but pride in him, further declaring, to
whom alone honor does belong, even to the Lord and his Image in whomsoever it
was; but a vile person was to be contemned, and with that he hastily called the
Jailer to carry me away, saying, I judged them all to be vile persons; then
after I had been in the Jaylors house about two hours, he came with a Mittimus,
wherein he was required to put me into the house of correction, and at my first
entrance to be severely whipped, and there kept according to the Law of the
quakers, and none suffered to converse with me during the time of my
imprisonment, and after I had received the punishment of their Law, my wife
went to Richard Bellingham deputy Governor (she living in part of his house at
that time, and he being acquainted with the former condition of my family) she
asked him when I should be let out of prison, that I might have liberty to
provide for my family, having nothing to maintain them with, but what we daily
labored for, he answered her to this purpose, That she might set her heart at
rest, for I was not like to come forth till I departed the Patent, she asked
him why I might not go forth so well as others of the Inhabitants, who had
their liberty after execution; his answer was, That I had not wherewithal to
pay five shillings a week for not coming to their meeting, neither had I a
house of my own to go to; then she asked him to let me work on my own work, but
it was denied because of the Law (which was four pence out of every shilling he
earned to keep him and his family) so my family was left in a suffering
condition, and I understanding by my wife, that their wicked purpose was I
should be kept perpetually in prison, or else everlasting banishment, choose me
whether; and thereupon they had concluded to take my children to be their
servants, and my wife should work for her self, and I continue a slave to the
Jailer, which evil work and intent of theirs brought much trouble upon my
wife, and it lay heavy upon me, that I should be so bereaved of my children,
and they be kept in slavery to such an inhumane and unreasonable generation, to
whom neither I nor mine had done no wrong, neither did they accuse me with the
breach of any Law of theirs, so that had it been my self alone that had been to
bear their unreasonable stroke, I cannot say but that had been still their
slave; so I desired counsel of the Lord what to do in it, and found freedom to
depart from thence, their arm of cruelty was so great; and I sent a Writing to
the Magistrates, and the Jailer brought me word, that if I would be gone the
next day out of the Patent, I might depart the Prison; But Richard Bellingham
was not wanting to persuade my wife against me, by evil counsel, and many
lies, and before I was put in prison charged her not to hearken to me, but to
take his counsel, and not to acquaint me with what he said to her, and after I
was gone to seek out a place for my self and family, he lay urging her to
disown me, and cast me off, saying she should never hear from me more, and what
I had done was for that end, that I might be rid of her and my children, and
promised her, if she would disovvn own me, and persuade my children to it, she
nor my children should not want; two of my children he intended to keep
himself, my son being fit to keep his sheep whom he said he would take from the
place where I appointed he should abide, least he should make a prey of him.

William Shattuck.

Mark what Magistrates and Rulers here is, whose wicked endeavors is to set a
man's wife and children at variance against himself. It is said, that where the
Law granted a Bill of Divorce, the cause was the hardness of the creatures
hearts, (and not according to the mind of Moses) but here the cause was not in
the couple, I am witness of it, for such was her love that she followed him to
Road-Island with her little ones according to his desire whilst we were there,
but in Phar^oh was the fault who would have kept both mother and children in
bondage, making brick, if not a worse intent were in him toward them; I am
persuaded that the same man, has endeavored or desired; no less betwixt his
own Son and his, if the truth were published, but as for that and this also I
leave him to the God of vengeance for his reward.

Again, The Sufferings sustained by Sarah Gibbins and Dorothy Waugh, they being
moved by the measure of God, to visit the seed at Sa^em in hosto^s
Jurisdiction, it being about the thirteenth of the second month, 1658. yet
notwithstanding the storms and tempests was great of frost and snow, in which
they traveled, and lodged in the wilderness day and night, the sense of which
would have taken impression upon any simple heart, through which season they
ceased not to travel upwards of sixty miles, which cheerfully they passed
through to accomplish the will and work of God, who for their reward brought
them beyond expectation to the appointed place, where gladly they with their
message was received; After which it was required of them by the motion of the
same measure, to repair to Boston, and appear at the place of their worship,
upon the fifth day of the week being called their Lecture-day, where they found
them sitting like unto the Sodomites, puffed up in pride, and high-mindedness,
and fullness of bread, many eyes was upon them having been there before: their
Sergeants and Officers drawing about them expecting their prey. John Norton
Priest being then present and speaking, yet opened they not the^r mouths until
he had done (although the burden of the Word was much upon them) then opened
S^rah Gibb^n^ her mouth saying, the Bu^den of the Word of the Lord to the
Inhabitants of Bo^^on because of your pr^de and oppression the land mourns; in
speaking o^ which words the Sergeant laid hands upon her, and pulled her down;
(was this a noble Act? did he herein show forth the spirit of a man? Sure I am
that a man of a noble spirit would condemn it, and a man of valor or vvorth
would be ashamed of such a man) then D^ro^^y Waugh spoke, bidding them, Fear
God, and give glory to his Name, etc. Several other words were uttered as they
past out of their Synagogue in their way to Prison, multitudes following them;
where they two were shut up in a close room, not being suffered to have food
for their money; And requiring it of the Jailer, he answered, That if we
would not eat the prison food we should famish; and then he brought both food
and work and laid before them, but the Lord put a stop to it that they could
not meddle with neither, knowing the wickedness of their wills against which
they were called to stand Witnesses, but the jailer would not suffer them to
have any for eight days together, but said they should leave their carcasses
behind them (mark this expression) yet the Lord preserved them, and he found a
liar. Upon the first of the third month they were called to be examined before
John Indicot Governor, and Ric^ard Bell^^gham Deputy Governor, and several
others who wickedly seeking to ensnare them, examined them apart, yet were
they preserved in boldness and courage, and carried forth in the manner
following: Sarah Gibbins, John Indico^ asked me if I had not been in those
parts before; Answe^: It is known already whether I was yea or nay; he asked
me again, how long I had been in their Colonie? I told him it was in my breast
how long, but it is like I shall not tell thee; he said he would make me tell
him before we had done: I asked him why he sought to ensnare me, and my friends
that had entertained me, seeing you have made such a Law to oppress them
whereby to take away their goods, for so doing to hold up your oppression; and
the Governor asked us, whether we owned Christ yea or nay? Answ. Yea: He said,
D^ you own him with a humane body sitting at the right hand of God in heaven?
Ans. We own no other Christ then he that sits in heaven at the right hand of
the Father. Then Rich. Bellingham Deputy Governor asked us, If there is a
God? Answ. Yes, there is a God, which is righteous, true, and just in judgment,
which will render vengeance on all the workers of iniquity: and your actions
are recorded before him, as with a pen of Iron, and a point of a Diamond, for
the cry of the oppressed is entered into the ears of the Lord God of Sabbaths;
then like a man of unclean lips, and not one that is fit to sit in the seat of
justice, told me, I was a Witch, and said, I spoke I knew not what. Answ. I
have learned Christ so as to pass through good and evil report; then he asked
me, if I was the light which we so often spoke of? Answ. I bear witness of
Christ the light, which lights every ma^^ that comes into the world; as
says the Scripture. he pressed much on me saying, was I the light? yea or nay;
but he was shut out with all his subtilty. John Indicot asked us, Why we came
to disturb them in the face of both Town and Country? Answ. Did we disturb? or
did you make the disturbance in searching and rifling houses six days before we
came? Did not fear surprise the Hypocrites? if you were of the elect and
elected, and we deceivers, it is impossible that the elect should be deceived;
you should have let us been tried the other day in your meeting before the Town
and Country that the deceivers might have been made^ manifest and truth cleared
to the simple: Then John Indicot said he did not send for me to dispute with
me, but said, how came you by your Learning? by revelation? Answ. Not by the
will of man; then I demanded of him if it were justice or equity we should be
kept and not suffered to have food for our money, this being the third day we
have been thus kept, and have not eaten one morsel of bread; you may all see
that God is with us, and that we came well into this Town, several hundreds can
witness, and if we perish our blood will fall heavy upon you which are the
cause of it; Then ^^hu Indicot said it matters not, but if you will work you
shall want for nothing; then I told him that he had taken me from the work that
the Lord called me unto, then he said the Lords work! the devils work, and
called to the Caolor to take me away: the sentence being past upon us both to
be severely whipped, and not spared the second day of the week following, they
executed their malice upon us ten stripes a piece, cruelly laid on with a
threefold cord, having knots at ends for causing it to tare the flesh, so to
torment the creature, which being done we were moved to praise God for his
presence, at which the people was astonished; after which we was shut up and
the windows stopped whereby to prevent us from the air, and all manner of
refreshment; and so continued us for the want of paying of fees certain days in
which time God wrought their deliverance by one Robert Westcot of Warvvick in
the Collony of Road-Iland.

Also Horred Gardener, a mother of many children, and an inhabitant in. Newport
upon Road-Iland, being moved by the measure of God to go on his message unto
Weymouth, took with her the youngest babe that fed upon her breast, such a
journey that no flesh that had looked upon it with the fleshly eye, could have
expected (considering her condition) she could have accomplished, but her faith
was made strong through weakness, and according to the will of God finished her
testimony at Weymouth in Boston Collony, where the witness in the people
answered unto her words; but the baser sort hurried her away the day following,
before John Indicot Governor of Boston, who after abusing her with unsavory
language, and much threatening committed her and the girl that assisted her to
bear her child (Mary Stanton by name, with reviling language) unto the Gaolor
where they receive ten stripes a piece with the threefold cord of their
covenant; Such a barbarous article of their faith i^ this, as I have not heard
the like, as to whip a woman who bare two babes, sucking the breast at the
time, one visible, and the other invsible, who after that execution of this
their cruelty, kneeled down saying, The Lord forgive you for you know not what
you do; a woman standing by, said, Surely if she had not the spirit of the Lord
she could not do this thing; Thus they continued them in prison about fourteen
days, not suffering any of their friends to come at them; this and such as
this, puts a clear difference and demonstration betwixt their faith and ours,
each faith showing forth its fruit, the one through travels, trials, patience
and sufferings, manifesting theirs before the faces of all people; the other
through wrath, malice, cruel mockings, reviling language, scourgings and
imprisonments manifesting theirs, and whether of these faiths stands in God,
seeing there is but one Lord and one faith unto salvation, we leave it unto
that of God in all people to judge; this cruelty was acted on them about the
eleventh of the third month 1658.

A relation of the sufferings of Thomas Harris in Boston.
It came to pass that on the fifteen of the fourth month, 1658. that I with
two other friends set forth from Road-Iland toward Boston jurisdiction; and
on the seventeenth day of the same I came to Boston, and being moved to their
meeting house, there I came and stood quietly until the Priest had done
speaking, then I spoke to the people these words, The Dreadful terrible day of
the Lord God of heaven and earth is coming upon the inhabitants of this Town
and Country; then was I pulled out by two men, and soon a man came and put his
hand upon my mouth that I should not speak, and another took me by the hair of
my head, but when they let me go I spoke to the people again, that thty took
heed how they join with oppressors and cruel men, for the Lord God was risen
and their coverings were found to narrow, for their nakedness did appear unto
all them that feared God; then they carried me to prison, and after a while had
me before the Governor, where was the Deputy Governor, with several Magistrates
and many people, and coming in to the room where the Governor was, he asked me
if I knew before whom I was come, I told him yea; John Indicot, why do you not
put off your hat? Thomas Harris, I do not keep it on in contempt of authority,
but in obedience to the Lord, so one pulled off my hat, then the Deputy
Governor bid the Marshall bring a pair of shears to cut off my hair, I told him
it was against my desire if he did, but he might do what he was permitted, the
governor asked from whence I came? The. Harris, from Providence. John Indicot,
from whence there? Tho. Harris from Road Island. John Indicot, what were them
that came with you? Tho. Harris It is like I shall not tell thee. Gover. I will
make thee tell before thou do go. Govern The devil has taught thee a deal of
subtilty, and said that we were all divellish blasphemous heretics (meaning
them that were called quakers) T. H. Take heed what thou speaks, as thou will
answer it in the dreadful day of the Lord God; it is an easy matter to speak
that we are blasphemers and such like in words, but can you prove it or make it
appear? the Governor said, you are all such. T. H. it will not serve thy turn
in the day of thy account, to say we are all such, Govern. I matter not what
thou speaks, why did thou come here? T. H. In obedience to the Lord; the
Governor said, in obedience to the Lord, in obedience to the devil! why did
thou come here to trouble us? T. H. To declare against pride and oppression and
men that use cruelty. The Governor asked if he were such a one? Answer yea; the
Governor said, wherein do I use cruelty; Answer, in oppressing the innocent:
(Dep. Govern) He deserves to be hanged. Again the Dep. Governor pressed me to
tell him what they were that came with me, and said that there was murder
committed that day, and he did not know but we were the men, therefore I should
tell him what they were T. H. accuse me if thou can with it, but this was
false, for there was no such thing, neither did they know from me at all
what they were; many more questions was asked me, but seeing their intent
was to ensnare, I was kept silent; then sent they me to prison without
Warrant or Mittimus, where I was shut up in a close room, not any suffered to
come unto me, neither could be suffered to buy food for my money; the next
morning the Gaolor came unto me to know if I would work, so as to earn him
one shilling, and out of it to have four pence in such diet as he would give
me; then after a while he called me down to be whipped, I asked what law I
had broken, and read it unto me, but he refused, then pulling of my clothes,
brought me to the post where I received ten stripes with their thre^ corded
whip, then he shut me up again, where he kept me eleven days, not suffering
me to buy any thing to eat, meat he brought me, but he would not receive money
for it, neither should I eat it, except I would work (as he said) but at the
end of five days I had food conveyed to me in at a vvindovv by a friend in the
night season, or otherways by probability I had been starved to death, and in
the five days a prisoner conveyed me in a little water, for which they
threatened him, and yet the same day that I was whipped, the Gaolor came to me,
and told me that I had suffered what the law required, and if I would hire the
Marshal to convey me out of their jurisdiction, I might be gone when I would.
Answ. If the doors be set open J know no other but J shall pass, but to hire a
guard that J cannot; so on the sixth day before the sixth hour in the morning,
the Gaolor because I could not go to work at his will, laid on me twenty two
blows with a pitch rope, notwithstanding he had told me that I had suffered
what the law required before, and on the ninteenth of the fifth month 1658,
brought me again to the post with several brethren more, where J received
fifteen cruel stripes, as hereafter you will further understand.

Again William Brend, and William Leddra, who was the two which accompanied
the beforementioned Thomas Harris into Boston Pattent; having drawings unto
Salem, where they were received, and had several Meetings, with other Service
which they did for God in that Colony; but consenting to the Simplicity in a
plain man, for his satisfaction yielded to meet with their Minister so called,
( Provis^) that they might not be ensnared, knowing their Law; which was
granted unto them by way of promise: which when the said Minister came, brought
a Magistrate with him, who after conference togeeher, to cover the condition
upon which the Strangers met them, they suffered them to pass away, but before
they were gone half a mile, the Magistrate called Capt. Garish by name, pursued
them, and forthwith apprehended them, and caused them to be carried back to
Salem, and being brought to their Court there held; by their own confessing,
they found nothing that was evil in them, yet they said they had a Law against
such a people, as we owned our selves to be according to that law, they sent us
to the house of correction, but being stayed that night and the day following
in that place, they call to question several of our friends for meeting with
us, six of which they sent to Boston prison, at that same time, although
inhabitants of the same Towns, of which was Law rence Southwick and Cassandra
his wife (though aged and of an honest report) and also their son Josiah
Southwick (whom in the twelfth month 1657. they abused by whipping; this now
being the third time of their imprisonment with stripes) the other three was
Samuel Shattock, Joshua Buffum and Samuel Gaskin; before our departure from
Salem the Lord gathered us together, and we had a meeting of friends who passed
some part of the way with us, after which giving up our selves to God by prayer
and supplication, we were brought to Boston about the sixth hour in the evening
of the 2. of the fifth month 1658. being the sixth day of the week, where
through the malice of the keeper, we were separated into several rooms, one of
which the Gaolor had provided on purpose for us (as he said, to make us bow to
the law) he having stopped the windows that he left not a hole for convenient
air, neither would he suffer any to come at us, but stopped all way of
conveyances, as well as common air and diet; neither would he suffer us to
have victuals for our money, but sometimes he brought a few pottage and a piece
of bread, and we would have given him money for it, but he said he would have
nothing but work for it, but we not being ignorant of his subtilty refused that
which he brought (which was very little) and threatening us, said, if we did
eat it he would make us work for it; so he kept us locked up not suffering any
food to come at us till the fourth day of the week following, but the second
day before he called us down to be whipped, where we two with four of those that
came with us, to wit, Samuel Shattock, Joshua Buffum and Samuel Gaskin, with
Cassandra Southwick received ten stripes a piece; the other two, to wit,
Lawrence Southwick and Josiah his son was reserved for their ears (according to
the last clause of their additional law which before is written as thou may
read) after which being locked up again according to his custom, he told us we
were clear paying our fees, and hiring a Marshal to convey us, which in
conscience we could not do, and so continued upon the third day following,
early in the morning he put William Brend into irons, pretending for his not
working, one of each thigh, and another about his neck, and locked them
altogether with a horse lock, that there was no more room betwixt the irons
then the lock allowed, these irons was upon him sixteen hours as the Gaolor
confessed the next day in the morning, he came again in the same manner, asking
if he had occasion to go down, and coming into a lower room where the mill
stood, he haled me toward it, and bid me go to work; which refusing for
conscience sake, he took a pitch rope out of his pocket about an inch thick and
laid upon me (as he said) as hard as he could upon my back and arms until his
rope untwisted, it was said by the prisoners about twenty blows, so that with
them my arms were swelled, being whipped but two days before, and being locked
up in the room again; the same day he came with another rope about the same
bigness but stronger, and haled me down into the lower room again, and bid me
work, which I could not do for all the world, and began to lay on me with his
rope again, and like an unreasonable man without compassion laid ninty seven
blovvs more on me as hard as he could, and if his strength and rope had not
failed he had laid on more, and so at his going away threatened to give me as
many more the next morning; and also the friend that was with me, so he locked
us up in the room; again, but having been kept from food about five days, and
the body being weakened both for want of air and diet, the flesh and blood
mixed together with the blows, so that soon after it was laid down upon the
boards, the natural strength being much spent, and the life over powered, it was
near departing from him, so that the cry arose and fear possessed the hypocrites
and guilt the murderer, so that the prison doors was set open, and all means
used by themselves to save life if possible; but by the power of Jesus was he
raised up contrary and beyond their expectation; the Governor sent his son and
Chyrurgian to see what might be done, great fear being fallen upon them, but no
use was made of them and least they themselves should be called in question,
they cast the thing upon their keeper, and although a member of their body,
their intent was if danger he should suffer first, the generallity being much
affected with it, would not be satisfied till they dealt with their brother the
keeper for it, for which end the Governor published a foolish paper, whereby to
blind the eyes of the simple, saying they would deal with him at their Court;
but their chief Priest John Norton taking part with their Judas, and justified
him therein, saying that William Brend indeavored to beat their Gospel
Ordinances black and blew; and if he was beaten black and blew, it was just
upon him, and if they called the Gaolor in question for it, he would appear on
his behalf (Mark) if this Gospel of theirs were but a figure, and bring this
Pastor to his parable, and the byword used amongst the people, True blew will
not st^n, but this Gospel of theirs being neither substance nor figure, it will
alter its die in to any color. verily I observed it, the Priests belonging to
that office, as was the blackness of darkness that was over it, so was the
habit and covering they were clad with all, and as the gray of the morning
appeared, so changed they their coats: First, the black Monarchy from the
Bishop to the poorest Sir John, that he licenced, set forth all black; as these
removed, then the greys appeared the mingled pendant, and the outside washing
Anabaptist; thus is the black and blew Gospel beaten with every blow that God
gives unto the Kingdom of the devil, and rest he will not until he have made
the black white, and the darkness light before him; and thus of a truth J will
seal with my heart, that every peoples condition is according to their color;
therefore let John Norton, and all New England take heed of that Gospel that
can be beaten black and blew, for the color of the coat of Christ is fair and
beautiful and changes not.

Again, it came to pass that for six or seven days, a death or a cruel
suffering about Boston followed Humphery Norton, the sense of which with the
strength of the emnity against the righteous seed with weight of the burden,
then upon him, took from him the nourishment and comfort that is in the
creatures, and also the refreshment that arises from sleep, and rest; laying
his load (having freedom so to do) before his beloved brother John Rous, an
heir with him of the same promise, and a sufferer with him for the same seed,
who willingly took it upon him to draw with me in the same yoke, being sensible
of the necessities of our repairing thither, to bear our parts with the
prisoners of hope, which at that time stood bound for the testimony of Jesus,
the Word of God, which after our travel day and night to accomplish, we came
into Boston the very day following that William Brend had been laid as one dead
with blovvs; and the first relation we had was concerning him, and how they
was laboring to save his life; an inhabitant of the Town seeing us, being a
sober man and not addicted to blood, like the rest, understanding what we were,
told Humphrey Norton, he had been expected certain months, and wished him if
he loved his life to depart, or otherwise he was a dead man; but such was the
necessity, that if all that Town had been his, and he would have given it me to
depart thence, we could not, for the people lay upon us, the seed lay upon us,
and the suffering for which we were appointed with the souls of the people;
such was our load, that beside him that laid it upon us, who also took it
from us, no flesh nor place could case us, who according to his will, and in
the manner follovviag lead us into it, and through it, it being their lecture
day, so called, and also the market for the Country; after the time of their
meeting, thither we repaired after the hearing of the vvosul sacrifice of the
dead, where the earth spoke, and the grave uttered her voice, and death fed
death through the painted Sepulcher John Norton, and the seed in sorrovv
mourned and suffered under it; after the conclusion of this, Humphery Norton
stood up and said, verily this is the sacrifice which the Lord God accepts
not, for vvhilest with the same spirit, that you sin you preach, and pray and
sing, that sacrifice is abomination, such was thrir order, that before half of
the words were uttered he was haled down, yet uttered were they all before
they got him forth; that same day in the heat of their fury, they called him
with John Rous before them in the same place, for which words Humphrey
Norton (after a long and frivous examination) was charged with blasphemy, in
which time we required of them either to act according to the Law of God, or
wholesome law of the English Nation and spare us not; neither of which they
would come nigh, whereupon we required of them an appeal, and freely would
refer our cause to the chief Magistrate, or whom he pleased to appoint, this we
did once and again, whereby to leave them without excuse; this they slighted
and disregarded the Governor and Deputy with one consent, saying, no appealing
to England, no appealing to England, with other words of derision, who
forthwith after this sentenced us unto whiping, such is the confusion of their
Law, that although their charge was blasphemy, yet they sentenced us for
another thing, also tempting John Rous with flattering words seeking to ensnare
him, which he sleighting and disregarding, savouring the spirit, and knowing
the malice and cruel wickedness they had used toward others, who then some of
them were in bonds by famine and close keeping, laboring to consume or strangle
them for want of food and air, some three, four, and five days without any
manner of food; some eight, nine, and ten days without one bit of bread
allowed by them or suffered to come at them; thus laboring for their lives, or
in the least to cause them to blaspheme, from both which the innocent was
preserved: so in the nick of time John Rous in the audience of all the people
required of them convenient food for our money, or otherwise if we perished,
our blood be upon them; which there was granted, and the javves of their
wicked Laws all rent and broken: Thus were we coutinued from the fifth
until the seventh day, being the Jews Sabbath, they offered us two poor
quakers (so called) upon their Altar-stocks, after which tendered us to
depart, if we would hire their Convoy; which neither needing it, nor in
conscience we could not do it, were continued in prison the Week follovving;
such was their malice, that they called their council as they said, who gave
forth an Order for the Whipping of the quakers then in prison, (who were ten
in number) twice a Week, the first time with fiftten stripes with their
threefold cord; the second time eighteen; and so from time to time to have
three added every time till further order: [By this Law they might have whipped
us unto death, and if so, unto the grave, and there also if they had a mind.]
We asked for a copy of this Ooder, but was denied it, for it was our desire
to have it, that the variety of lies vherevvith it was filled, might have been
presented to the view of all men: But such is the subtilty of the Serpent
among them, that he will keep all he does as much in darkness as may be, lest
being brought to the Light, he should be discovered in the eyes of all, and
condemned; So calling us to the execution of the first part of this their later
Order, out of ten they choosed four vvhereupon to execute their Wrath, to wit,
John Rous, William Leddra, Thomas Harris, (whom they had Whipped once before,
as well as we, and contrary to Law beaten with above twenty strokes)
Humphrey Norton being the fourth, us four they as barbarously beat, as a cruel
man would beat his horse; the people beholding, and seeing us so used above
our old Wounds, the cry against cruelty increased, Sodom was troubled, Egypt
was afraid, and all old Jerusalem in an uproar, Blood at that Season, they
had sufficient; So that the other six they touched not, though willingly they
put off their Clothes, and tendered their backs; their adversaries slunk away
like dogs who had ouer-filled themselves with Sheeps blood, for which they
were afraid to be hanged; Who having thus satiated their cruel appetites,
turned us forth, to their shame and contempt. This was one of the main
Articles of their Faith, contrary to that command in the Law which says,
Thou shale do no murder, (theirs says, Thou shall.)

This Cruelty shortly after the former.
Again Nicholas Phelps an Inhabitant of Salem, although a weak man through the
infirmities of his body, for not satisfying their wills was called in question
by Daniel Denison and some others, and by them was committed to prison at
Ipswitch, and there was whipped three times in five days, because he refused to
work for them, which manifests that though a weak body, yet a strong faith, not
in the least beanding unto them, and when they could not overcome him by
cruelty, the shame and guilt of what they had done lying on them, they went
thus to work, agreeing with a man in the Town to do as follows: On a
certain day a man who having had former acquaintance and friendship with him
came to Nicholas and had him to his house, and after a while got him to walk
with him into his field, and after some space of time spoke to Nicholas to this
purpose, that he thought that he would be set at liberty ere long: Nicholas
not knowing which way it would be accomplished; as for to work to fulfill
their wills, he could not: So after a while the man fell to work about a
stone wall, and coming to a stone that he could not lift, it was so big,
Nicholas (being charitable) assisted him to lift the stone, and lay it in the
place where it should lie, for which doing he was released, because he did
something that they called work, although it did not tend any thing to the
fulfilling of their Law, but herein does the hypocrisy of their Magistrates
appear.

Again it came to pass, that we two Christopher Holder and John Copeland, being
moved by the Lord to go to Boston, set forth thitherwards on the third of the
sixth month 1658. and the same day came to a town in that Jurisdiction called.
Dedham; it being near evening, we turned into the Ordinary, where we lodged
that night, and early on the morning there came two Constables, with some
others, and demanded of us, Whither we were going? Our answer was, We were
passing toward Boston; then they said, they had a Warrant to have us to Boston
before the Magistrates; then we required to see it, but they would not show it
to us; so after some hours, one Constable and two men with him, had us to
Boston, and brought us to the Governors house, who when he saw us, being
perplexed in spirit, said in a rage, You shall be sure to have your ears cut
off: Then he asked us our names; so we told him: then he said, We had been here
twice before, and said, What? you remain in the same opinion you was before:
Answer, We remain in the fear of the Lord; He said, you can speak never a trne
Word; and further said, He looked upon it to be a great judgment of God to
them, that we were suffered to come so often amongst them to trouble them, and
said, We were the worst Heretics that ever he heard or read of; and asked us,
Why we came? seeing we knew they would not receive us: Ans. The Lord God has
commanded us, and we could not but com; then he said, the Lord command you to
com? it was the Devil; and urged us to prove our Call by the Scriptures: we
answered, our names are not written in the Scriptures; he said, he did believe
we spoke true; for your names is not written in the Scriptures; and he further
said, I^ was something if we could make it appear that we were sent of
God: We ansvvered, That vvhil he stood in unbelief, though we spoke never so
plain to him, yet he would not believe; then one Nathaniel Williams standing
by, spoke to this to this effect; Seeing we knevv that they would not believe
us, it must needs be out of malice that we came: Answer, The Lord God who
searches all hearts, knovves that we came not in malice; then the Governor
asked us, Whether we did believe Christ's Body was in Heaven? We ansvvered,
We know that his Body is in heaven; Then he said, he would set Humphrey
Norton on our backs, for he would not say so, (which thing is false
concerning Humphrey Norton:) So after some other words, he sent for the
Goalor, and bid him take us away, saying, You shall hear from us to morrow;
so he had us away, and put us in the house of Correction, (as they call it,
but we know it to be the house of Oppression) and on the morrow, being the
sift day, they had a Court, before which we were brought; and when we came
before them, they caused our hats to be pulled off, and thrown on the ground;
then the Governor said, You were before me yesterday, and I asked you to prove
your Call hither, but you did not, because you said I would not believe you;
therefore I ask you to prove it before this people, and it may be they will
believe you; then we asked if they would believe us when we spoke the truth?
The Governor said, Yes, if you prove it by Scripture; We answered as before, to
prove our Call hither by express words of Scripture, that we cannot; because
our names (neither this place) is not mentioned in Scripture; but that we have
examples in the Scriptures from the Prophets and Apostles, who in obedience to
the Lord traveled from place to place as we do, that we can prove: Then John
Indicot Governor, laughed and said, Are you Prophets and Apostles? Then he
asked, Whether we did believe that Christ had a Body in heaven distinct from
the bodies of his members? Ans. That Christ's body is divided from his members,
that we do not believe; then he said to the people they mean his Mystical Body;
then we said, we know no such word in Scripture as Mystical, and put him to
prove by the Scripture, that Christ has two bodies; then another man stood up
and asked us, Whether we did not believe that Christ had a body in heaven made
of sinews, flesh and bone, distinct from the bodies of his members? Then we
asked what the body of the members of Christ is? To which they gave no answer;
but asked us some other questions: but we seeing they sought to insuare us,
said to them, It is best for us to be silent; for you ask questions for nothing
but to ensnare us, for you will not be satisfied with any answer: Then the
Governor said, Sure enough we do seek to ensnare yon; then the Secretary spoke
to this effect, These men have been here twice before, and has received the
Law, and was sent out of this Jurisdiction, and now is come the third time to
sow their damnable Heresies, and to infect the hearts of this people with
their poisonous Doctrines; and wrote an Order, and delivered it to the
Governor, who delivered it to the Goalor, and bid him take us away, and keep us
according to his Order; So he had us to the same house again, and the next
morning the Goalor came to us, and asked us to work; then we required to see
his Order; so he showed it to us, which was to this effect:

To the Keeper of the House of Correction.
You are by virtue hereof, required to take into your custody the bodies of
Christopher Holder and John Copeland, and them safely keep close to work with
prisone^s diet only, till their ears be cut off, and not suffer them to
converse with any while they are in your custody.

Edward Rawson, Secretary:

Then he asked us again to work, and said as you are ratioall men, I would wish
you not put your bodies to so much suffering, saying he had an order to have us
whipped twice a week if we would not work, and showed us the order that was made
for the other friends, whereby four of them ten ws whipped, contrary to their
Law; but we gave them no answer at that time; then he said he would give us
time to consider of it till noon; so some hours after he came to us again, and
asked us as before; then we answered, that we were shut up, and were not at
liberty to work; then he pulled us and shut us up where the work was, where he
kept us till evening, and then had us into the common Goal; and in the morning
had us down again where the work was, and said he would keep us there till our
backs was slasht; so he set us bread and pottage by the work, but we had no
freedom to meddle with either. So at evening we were had in the common-goal
again, where we were shut up in a close room, in which place we remained eight
days, they not knowing of any thing that we eat; then the Goalors wife came to
us, and said, If you will have milk, you may have it bought for you, and if we
would have beer, we might buy it of her; so from that time the other friends
which were in the house of Correction, were suffered to put into us at a window
what we wanted.

Sometime after Christopher Holder and John Copeland was put into prison, I
John Rous was commanded of the Lord to go to Boston also; and as way was made,
according to the Will of God I prepared to go thitherwards; and on the 25. of
the 6 month, 1658. in the evening I came to Boston, and after I had got the
horse I rode on set up in a stable at an Inn, I went into the house, and after
some stay there, I being not desirous to be a snare to any man, I declared who
I was to the man of the house, who fetched, the Marshal, and he had me to the
Governors house, and when I was brought before the Governor, he came toward me
in a lofty manner, and said, Put off thy hat; I answered, I cannot; so my hat
at his commandment was taken off: Then the Governor asked me, Why I came to
this Town? I said, To visit my friends in prison, and if I may have liberty,
(if they want any thing) to minister to their necessities; he answered, in
derision, That is a charitable Deed; Why did not Humphrey Norton come? I
replied, Thou had best ask him the next time thou see him; He asked me,
Whether I had any Letters? To which I was silent; so he bid the Marshall
search me, who did according to his command; and the Governor took several
Papers out of my Letter-Case, and kept them; and after some questions about the
Body of Christ, to which I ansvvered him according to the Scriptures; and
after telling me, That this is no new thing that we held; and said, If he had
time, he would show me out of Books which he had in his house, That several
Heretics before us held the same opinion; To which I answered little, knowing
that the Spirit of God is pure from all Heresy, whatsoever men who are blind
may say of it: Then he bid the Marshal have me to prison; the which was done
without Warrant or Mittimus that I did see or hear of.

On the seven of the seventh month, we three was sent for from the prison
before the Court of Assistants held at Boston, who when we came, commanded our
hats to be taken off; the which being done, after some time of silence, the
Goalor asked us one by one, Whether we knew the Law against quakers? Then we
answered, We knew their Law. Then he asked, Why we came thither? We answered,
The Lord God, whose Law is just and equal, required it of us to come, and in
obedience to him we came. Then one called Major Denison asked us, Whether every
man is not Master of his own house? We answered, The Lord God is Master of
Heaven and Earth, and he can send whither he will, and whom he will. Then the
Governor said, Were you not here before, and sent away, and now are come again?
To which Richard Bellingham added, In contempt of Authority. We answered, Amos
must prophecy at Bethel, although he be forbidden. Then Major Denison said, If
a man should forewarn another man from coming into his house, and should stand
with a pike or sword at his door, and yet for all this, the other should
attempt to come in, and should be slain, Would not this man's blood be upon his
own head? Answer, If the Lord sent a man to such a man's house to forewarn him,
or any in his house to repent of the Judgment that was to come; if that man
was slain, he was innocent in the sight of God, and had cleared his conscience
twards the man, and his blood would be upon his head that slew him: Then some
words passed between us, wherein the Governor was called by his name; then
Major Denison spoke to this effect, that it was not fit for us to call him by
his name, for he has another name by which he is known, The Governor of
Massathusets Bay. Reply, Thou might have showed more wisdom; for his name is
John Indicot, and men's names is given them to be called by. Then they spoke
something of our not putting off our hats, and brought several places of
Scripture, whereby they pleaded for respect to their persons: We answered, He
that respects persons commits sin; Then one of them said, That is in Judgment.
Reply. Are ye not in Judgment? Why then do you plead for it? We further said,
If you be Magistrates of God, speak in the Majesty of God. The Governor
answered, We do I hope: Reply. Nay; for thou do often laugh: The Governor
asked, Whether Laughter is not lawful? Ans. Not such laughter as thou useft.
The Governor asked, What is the honor you would have given to men? Ans. Love is
the honor which is due unto all men: And further said, How can you believe
which seek honor one of another? If you were believers you would not seek it.
Then Major Denison spoke to this purpose, That it might be ignorant people
might wonder, that they kept so much ado about the putting off the hat, and
seeking honor to their persons, but therein lies the ground of contempt of
Authority; we put them to prove that ever any Magistrates that are spoken of in
Scripture required any to put off their Hats; then the Governor said you cannot
prove it by Scripture that any did wear Hats, the which was proved false, for
Dan 3 21. was brought by us, where it is said, These men were bound in their
coats, their hosen, and their hats; then he said there was no such word there
as Hat, we took forth a Bible, and read it to them, then they said it was
mistranslated; we said, If the Scriptures be mis-translated how can they be
taken for a rule; the Governor replied, some was and some was not: Then
Major Denison stood up being about to speak, so the Governor made way for him
saying to the deputy Governor, (who was casting forth a flood of false
accusations against us) I pray let the Major speak, who having audience spoke
to this purpose; You say you own Governors and Magistrates such as are set up
by God, but you say that all the Rulers and Magistrates that are now in the
World, are the powers of the World, and the powers o^ darkness, and you are
Judah; and because the government is to come out of Judah, therefore the ten
Tribes of Israel are ^ff^nded and divided against Judah, the Tribes of the
Presbyterians, the Independents and Prelates, etc. All these are against the
quakers, so Manasses is against Ephraim, and Ephraim is against Mana^es, and
both against Judah, and you say you shall reign, but we are the stronger, and
so look to your selves. Answ. (Mark Reader, what this mighty man has profited
by his speech) you have not heard any of us say so, but the Lord is stronger
then all and he shall reign; so one of them was saying, That we were deceived
and deluded; we said, if we were deluded and out of the way you had more need
pity us, and not do as you do; then one of them said, We pity you while we
punish you; we ansvvered, That is as if a man should set a Dog on a Sheep, and
be sorry for it while he is doing it; after some more words they called us
bold Boys and Blasphemers: The Governor said, You come in a show of love and
humility and the spirit of meekness, but you are such as Christ spoke of, who
have outwardly sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves. Answ. Christ
there spoke of a people very like your selves. After this the Governor made a
Speech to us, and said, He spoke from heaven, but we would not believe him.
Answ. Nay, we do not believe thee; so after some other words he bid the
Jailer take us away, the which he did; this being the substance of what past
betwixt us at that time, fo near as was remembered.

Again on the tenth day we were called before the Court, and when we came, our
hats were pulled off as before; then Richard Bellingham deputy Governor stood
up and spoke to this effect: These men have been here formerly, and have been
sent away, and though they knew the Law, yet are they come again in contempt to
revile Magistrates and Ministers, and to break all Order in Churches, and to
deceive the people, and so whatever comes upon you, whether loss of ears or
loss of life, your blood be upon your own heads. To which we replied, you heap
false accusations upon us, and God will heap his judgments on your heads; and
if we suffer loss of members, or loss of life your blood will be required at
your hands, for the Lord has sent us hither: To which the Governor replied,
Prove that, and said, Christ's Messengers were to pray for them that persecuted
them; but you curse us, and prophecy judgments to us. Answ. We have not done
any thing since we came hither, that deserves the spilling of one drop of our
blood; Then the Governor said, you are greater enemies to us then those that
come openly, for you come under the pretense of peace to poison the people; to
which one of us said, It grieves me to hear thee speak so many false things.
Then they urged us to prove that we were sent of God; for the same things that
Christ said should be done to his Disciples by those that are contrary to him,
have ye done unto us a whipping, etc. Then Major Denison said, Then evil doers
that are whipped suffer for Christ. To which John R^us replied, if we were evil
doers the judgments of God would be heavier on us then that which we suffer by
you; but not being evil doers we have the peace of God, and his peace keeps
us above all sufferings; to which Major Denison replied, Master Rou^ (for so I
may call, you having heard that your father is a Gentleman) what Judgment do
you look for greater then is upon you, then to be driven from your father
house, and to run about here as a Vagabond with a company of Seducers; except
you look for a halter, or to be struck with a thunderbolt? To which John Rous
answered, I was not driven from my fathers house, but in obedience to the Lord
I left it, and when the Lord shall clear me of this Land, I shall return to it.
Again, then the Governor called to the Secretary to read the Law which
concerned us three; so he read the latter part which was to this purpose, That
for coming again, having once suffered the Law, we should have each of us an
ear cut off; After the Law was read, the Governor did, as he often does, speak
very lightly, and uttered several words in derision, the which we seeing said,
More gravity would become you; To which he replied, Do you come to reprove us?
and another of them said if you should speak thus in any other Country, they
would take you and hang you up presently for this, to reprove Magistrates in
the face of the Country, does plainly tend to sedition; the Governor spoke in
derision, and said, I know you come to reprove a proud and sinful people; then
we asked whether he would say they were not a sinful people? he ansvvered, we
will not say so, though you say you are not. Answer. Then if a sinful people,
may not a sinful people be warned to Repentance? So the Governor and Secretary
called to the Marshal to have him gag Christopher Holder; then we asked
whether we were not called hither to speak, as well as to be spoken to? the
Governor said Yes, when we give you leave; then after some more words,
Major Denison said, if you could show your Commission to us as plain as we
can show to you that you are evil doers in transgressing our Law, it was
something. Answ. Whether you will believe us or not, from the Lord we have
received a command, and his Spirit is our Commission; then the Governor said,
They have nothing to prove it by but by the Spirit which is within them, and
that is the Devil; we replied and said, Take heed of blaspheming the Spirit; he
said, we came in contempt; we replied, The Lord God who knows the hearts and
reins of all men judge between us and you, whether we came in contempt; and
some other words we spoke to them concerning their Law; and said, We have seen
some of your Laws that have had many Scriptures in the Margent: but what
Examples have you in the Scriptures for cutting off ears, the Governor said,
what Scripture is there for hanging? then Major Denison said in way of
derision, yes, they would be crucified; then they hastened the Governor to
dispatch us quickly, who spoke to Edward Rawson again to read the Law to us
three, who called us by our names, and as he was going to read the Law again,
the Governor and Magistrates whispered together, and while we were expecting
to hear the Law read again, the Governor turned suddenly about, and in great
bitterness passed his sentence on us three in these words: It is the sentence
of the Court, That you three all have each of you his right ear cut off by the
Hangman; then we seeing their unjust proceedings against us, and that they
were both our accusers and Judges, and would not permit us to speak for our
selves, as we ought, but cried out for to have us silent, and to gag us if we
would not, we were stirred in spirit to appeal to the chief Magistrate of
the Commonwealth of England, and to have our cause tried and judged by him;
but they made a light thing of it, and hastened the Keeper to have us away;
the which he did, and put us into the common Prison again, So this is the sum
of what passed betvveen us the second time we were before them, as near as we
can remember.

The same day was Laurence Southwick, and Cassandra his wife, and Josiah
Southwick their Son inhabitants of Salem, who have been imprisoned in the house
of correction twelve weeks, by reason of which restraint from their house and
families, their outward estate is much wasted, it being in the time of Harvest,
where they lost a Meddow for want of reaping, wherein formerly they have had
twenty load of hay, for want of which, their cattle they must either put to
slaughter, or otherwise perish, if God provide not, seeing the enmity of their
adversaries has destroyed that which they had provided, by detaining them
under the oppression of their unrighteous wills; and yet cannot be proved
against them the breach of any Law which is according to Scripture, as the
Reader may plainly see when he reads their Examinations, who being before them,
began with them on this manner: This man was a Member, and this woman was a
Member; to which Laurence replied, that he had been a Member within this year;
and the reason why they gave me admonition was, because I entertained two men
in my house; they answered, they were Quakers: he answered it was Christopher
Holder, and John Copeland, and my soul closed with every thing they held forth;
at which they made a scorn, and said they thought so; then Josiah asked, what
error they held, they said that they did believe and hold forth, That there
was that in every man, that if he would he might be saved by it; to which
Josiah replied, that there was power in no man's will to save himself; then
Josiah called to the Magistrates that they would declare to the people what
their sin was, they said you deny Magistrates and Ministers Reply. nothing of
God in them we deny; and said you hold forth, a man was to keep his own house;
why then should we be driven out of our own houses, but to that they gave them
no answer, but haftened away to their dinner; so the Jailer had them away, and
put them into the house of correction again; and the next day Laurence, and
Josiah his Son sent a Paper to the Magistrates in which they desired that they
might have some time of liberty to go home and set things in order, and to pay
some debts which they owed, being desirous that every man should have his due;
which thing they denied them showing plainly that their intent was to ruinate
them, who set a Bond for them to sign: A Copy of which is as follows:

We Laurence Southwick, and Cassandra Southwick, and Josiah Southwick, do bind
our selves jointly and severally in the sum of 40. l. to the Treasurer of the
Country; the Condition is, That we, and every one of us will forthwith depart
the Jurisdiction of the Massathusets, or that We, or any one of us shall
publish or maintain any of the Diabolical Opinious of the Quakers, or entertain
any of that Sect that resort unto us from other parts.

The end of this Bond being considered, and that being signed it would prove a
Snare to them; for according to it they either must leave what by hard labor
they have gotten, and go where they have nothing, or else be bound to speak
nothing of God, or if they do, if it be contrary to the minds of them unto whom
they should be bound, (though not contrary to the Scripture) they would
straightwayes be made offenders; so they choose rather to suffer both in body
and estate, then to have their consciences bound to do that which is against
the law of God; and let him that is honest hearted judge whether this is not
oppression.

So on the 16. of the 7. Month, the Marshals Deputy, with a company of
blood-thirsty men, came to the prison where we were, and when they had let in
so many as they would, (who came as if they came to a sport) they made fast the
door, and did not suster any friend to come in, though some did much press for
it, especially one friend of Providence, Katherine Scot by Name, who was drawn
by the Lord to come for to bear witness against their cruelty at the time of
their executing of it upon us; for the which she also is imprisoned: So when they
had made the door fast, the Marshal came into the room where we were, and some
others with him, and read an Order, which was to this effect:

To the Marshal General, or his Deputy:
You are to take with you the Executioner, (...) repair to the house of
Correction, and there see him cut off the right ears of John Copeland,
Christopher Holder, and John Rous, Quakers, in execution of the Sentence of the
Court of Assistance, for the breach of the Law titled Quakers.

Edward Rawson Secretary.

Reader, thou may take notice that this was their Bill, and all the Charge
they laid against us; for we had done no evil: So they had us forth into
another room where was more light; then John Rous said to the Marshal, We have
appealed to the chief Magistrate of England; he said, he had nothing to do with
that; then Christopher Holder said, Such Exectution as this did use to be done
publicly, and not in private; one that stood by replied, We do it in private
to keep you from tatling. So the Executioner took Chistophor Holder, and when
he had turned aside his hair, and was going to cut off his ear, the Marshal
being of a cowardly spirit, turned his back on him, because he would not see
it done; the which John Rous taking notice of, said, Nay, turn about, and see
it done, (for so was his order) so in the strength of God we suffered joyfully,
having freely given up not only one member, but all (if the Lord so required)
for the sealing of our testimony which the Lord has given us to finish, and
said these words, They that do it ignorantly, we do desire from our hearts the
Lord to forgive them; but for them that do it maliciously, let our blood be
upon their heads; and such shall know in the day of account, that every one of
these drops of our blood shall be as heavy upon them as a Millstone. So when
they had done their bloody Work, they slunck away as a dog when he has sucked
the blood of a Lamb, and is discovered.

So here is a Declaration of the dealings of these men who account themselves
members of Christ, and the Church of God; but let that of God in all judge
whether these be the fruits of the members of Christ; Did Christ ever do so? Or
did he leave any Precept that his servants should do so? Or rather did he not
rebuke Peter for being too forward when he smote the High Priest's servant, and
cut off his right ear? Did he not tell him, They that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword? And does not the Scripture say, He that sheds man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed; and know this, that there is nothing
defiles a land or people more then the shedding of innocent blood; and nothing
brings down the judgments of God sooner on a People or Nation, then the cry of
innocent blood; therefore let not such call themselves the Church of God, for
God has no union nor fellowship with such that acts violence, and gather
themselves together, and condemn the innocent blood; as says the Scriptures;
shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee which ^rameth mischief
by a Law? They gather themselves together against the souls of the Righteous,
and condemns the innnocent blood: Let all sober people judge whether these
people are not so, who has shed our blood, against whom they could prove no
evil either in word or action, only the breach of their Law which they have
made mischievously to ensnare the innocent; but it is that they may be made
manifest to be of that generation that condemned Christ, saying, We have a Law,
and by our Law he ought to dye: But our desire is, that all in whom the Seed of
God is, may be kept clear from the guilt of innocent blood, that so they may be
hid in the day of the fierce Wrath of the Almighty God: For behold, The Lord
comes out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their
iniquity, the Earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her
slain.

From Boston prison, this 25. of the 7. Mo: 1659.
We are Witnesses of it, who suffers for the Truths sake by the corrupt wills
of men, for keeping the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, the truth
of which shall be witnessed in the day when the righteous judgments of God
shall be made manifest, when all things shall be tried by fire, even the day
shall declare it.

Christopher Holder, John Rous, John Copeland.

We are the three that sustained this abuse, who the truth of this their action
does declare unto all, that though their Law, Sentence and Order, be to cut off
the Ear, yet have they made them a lie, for they have not taken away the sixth
part of our Ears; but the member they have defaced and abused, which God had
formed and made. This and all other of our sufferings in Boston Collony, has
been done in private, by which all may easily judge what sort of people these
are whose actions are thus plainly demonstrated.

Again, Katherine Scot, an Inhabitant of Providence in the same land, a Woman
of good report, (as these her adversaries could not but in some measure
confess) having lived with an husband the space of twenty years in that
Country, no people in that nature more circumspect and blameless, seeking God
in the sincerity of their hearts, in every likeness whereinsoever he appeared,
so fraid were they to miss of him, and so ready to fulfill that Scripture, Try
all things, and hold fast that which is good; which when that which is good
came, full ready were they to receive it, and those who brought it, not
accounting any thing they had too good wherewithal to assist the Lord and his
Servants, for which they lost not their reward; for the power of God took place
in all their children, small and great, so far as capacity could receive it,
which may amount to eight or nine: And God trying the faith of this his
servant, who being both grave in years, and Mother of so many children, yea,
and the Wife of a tender Husband, full readily and willingly left she all to do
the Will of God, knowing that they who do it not, are not worthy of him; Who
being called unto Boston, and accordingly by the hand of God brought thither
upon the 16. of the 7. Month 1658. who coming to the prison when the Hangman
and some others were going to execute the cruelty upon the aforementioned
sufferers, ( to wit) Christopher Holder, John Rous, John Copeland, whom she
witnessed that the Lord of his large love had sent to gather his scattered
seed, (which had been scattered and driven away in the gloomy day of
Antichrists night) being strongly pressed in her spirit to visit them in the
time of their sufferings, and to bear forth her testimony against their cruel
and barbarous dealings, pressed toward the door amongst other people, but by
the violence of the Wicked was not suffered to enter, who thereupon uttered
these following Words, saying, It was evident they were going to act the works
of darkness, or else they would have brought them forth publicly, and have
declared their offense, that others might hear and fear: With several other
Words, declaring them and their cruelty to be worse and more barbarous then the
Doctors and Bishops; This doing all the while their ears were cutting; Which
Testimony of hers a man of a sober spirit received; and after some time
standing patiently to hear one of the prisoners minister after they had
executed their malice, where standing, the Marshal came and pulled her down,
and said that she might go before the Governor: This he did, leading her away,
although he had been her brothers servant; who bringing her before the Court
held for the 4. united Collonies, so called; the Governor asked her why she
came there. Ans. To witness against the cruel spirit that so abuses Gods
faithful Servants and Messengers whom he has sent so often amongst you. He
said, What are they, Apostles or Messengers? Answ. Yea, I have found them so to
me. He said, We will witness against your railing spirit. Ans. I deny all
railing, and have spoken nothing but the Words of Truth and soberness. He then
called for Witness, but there appeared none. The Governor asked if she did not
write to him. Ans. Do thou know me? If thou do know me, and will own it, I
did write to thee three times in love to thy soul, that thou might see the
wickedness of thy Ways, and return from it. He said, She is an old Quaker, take
her away; yet he said, Why did you come here seeing, you had written? Ans. If
Writing would have discharged me, I had not come. But why did you com from
Providence into this jurisdiction? A. Art not thou my fellow creature? Did not
that God that made thee, make me? And has he not given me as good right to
breath in his air, and tread upon his Earth, as any of you? He said, Take her
away till further Order. Ans. The Lord look upon you, and open your blind eyes,
and soften your hard hearts; so taking her away to the prison, where she was
continued until the 1. of the 8. Month, 1658. Then being brought to a private
Court, they asked her, Wherefore she came into these parts, saying her abode
was at Providence, where for ought we know you have led a blameless life? Ans.
as before, To bear witness against your cruel spirits: With more such like
queries and answers. Then one asked what I had to do to come into their ground.
Ans. You take too much upon you, you Magistrates, more then ever God gave you:
Then they cried out, She had too much tongue; the Secretaries learned speech,
(One who is a learned persecutor in the Book of Damascus, envious and
malicious, hating that which is good) you have a Family at Providence. Ans.
Yea, which I highly prize. He said, If I should come into your ground, and into
your house, and eat of your meat, and drink of your drink whether you would or
no, though you should say I should say I should not, do you think this were
well? Ans. Did I come into any of your houses, and eat any of your bread? Nay
not into the Houses of my near Relations against their minds, or by force; but
if I should make such a Resolution against thee or any one, that thou should
never come within my house or ground upon no occasion whatsoever, although thou
were my bitterest Enemy, I should show a dogged wicked spirit, contrary to the
Spirit of Jesus. Then they stopped me, complaining of my Words; then one said,
There is like to be a Law to hang you, if you come again into these parts. Ans.
If God call us, woe be to us if we come not; and I question not but he whom we
love, will make us not to count our lives dear unto our selves. He said, We
shall be as ready to take away your lives, as you shall be to lay them down:
Mark Reader, how learned their answers is. She said, Alas for your blindness!
that Di^bolical spirit that works in you, has led all the persecutors in all
ages to kill the Saints. Another stood by, and said he knew my Father, and
called him Master Morbury, and said he was sorry that I should turn Quaker in
my old age. Ans. Here is none here but I think is as old as I, and it is time
for you all to look after the things which belongs unto your peace; I have trod
all your steps -- But here again they stopped me: Then they put forth many more
queries, whereby to ensuare me: The answer was, I shall believe nothing, nor
affirm nothing but what the Scripture speaks of. So the Jailer returned her
back to the prison from whence she was brought, and the next day brought her to
the VVhippingpost, (their Altar) upon which being offered, she received ten
stripes with their threefold Whip, which being unfolded amounts to thirty;
which when they had done, the Jailer told her she might go forth paying her
Fees. Ans. If I might go forth for two pence, I am not free, though I dye here.

Katherine Scot.

This ancient and honorable woman (as she is in God, so she is) thus they used,
(although she and her Kinsfolk be of no small repute amongst men) whose
saithfulness (Reader) thou may understand, wrought no less then this effect;
for as all other sufferings in the same sort produces no less but the same
effect, (to wit) the releasement and enlargement of many prisoners that are
oppressed; so did this it is full part, there being these three whose Ears the
Adversaries had abused, and they themselves detained for the non-payment of
fees, which in conscience they could not do; she left them not until through
her the Lord God wrought the releasement of them all; so what God did by her,
for her, and through her, and them that loved her in that place, let them take
their reward into their own bosoms, which shall remain to their peace and
renown for ever: Besides all this, her testimony she finished against that
cruel spirit that rules amongst them, as she had great cause so to do, her own
sister (who lived amongst them, and had seen the end and emptiness of all their
Ceremonies) Anne Hutchinson by Name, whom they banished from our of their
Coasts, and her children coming to visit their kindred, were imprisoned a great
part of a bitter Winter, wherein the was banished upon pain of death, which
camed them to go amongst the Dutch to settle, where she and her family was
cruelly murdered by the Indians, the sense whereof has pierced me to the
heart; so that I have said, Surely God will take vengeance for these things,
for whose blood God will make inquisition, and in that day you will be found
guilty, and it required at your hands with a Voice more loud then all the rest
of your crying sins for which ye must account, ye bloody hypocrites. And thus
may all that reads, see how ancient these bloody Articles of these Professors
Faith is. So on the 7. of the 8. Month, 1658. the four before mentioned was
set a liberty.

Again upon the 29. of the 7. Month, 1658. The Constable by virtue of a Warrent
sent from Ipswitch Court, came and warned us three, Samuel Shattock, Nicholas
Phelps, and Joshua Buffum, to appear before the Court at Ipswitch, who upon
sight of the Warrant, was free thereunto, and on the next day by the Constable
and one more, we were had to Ipswitch; so the Court called for us; then going
in with our hats on, commandment was given to pull off our hats, which
accordingly they did; some Words was then spoken about the Hat, but we answered
not, waiting for what they had to accuse us of; then there was given them a
paper with our Names, and some others, for not coming to their meeting, and
meeting together contrary to such a Law as they have; but we said little to it;
they laid contempt of Authority to our charge, because we did not put off our
hats, the which we wholly disowned, and said, If it were our manner to do it
unto others, and deny it to you, it might be then so said. It was said by them,
God will have Magistrates to be honored, but you deny it; and Simon Broadstreet
(a Magistrate) said, I believe you deny us to be Magistrates, and this Court to
be a Court. Ans. We own the Court to be a Court, and that you are Magistrates
chosen by the Country; and said, Honor lies not in the Hat; for a King may be
honored by his Subjects, when it may be thousands of them have not seen him to
put off their Hats to him. William Hathorn to prove Samuel Sh^ttock one that
contemned Authority, said he denied training in a Writing to him, beginning
thus, Be it known to the, we will not follow thee in training. Then Sam.
Shattock brought the Words as they were written, [ We cannot.] We waited for a
fit time for our Cause to be heard, that at last that might appear to the
people from our own mouths, which they wanted evidence to prove. Simon
Broadstreet began to put questions to us concerning three persons, and Christ's
body; We desired liberty to speak to them in the audience of the people, and
were glad that we had such an opportunity; for at Salem Court some of us were
sent to Boston, and there sufferers; but what we were accused of, we knew not,
till after we saw the Mittimus, in which we were called Quakers, and had not an
opportunity to speak with them that sent us, until now; and finding the Law was
made against a cursed Sect of Heretics that speak and write blasphemous
Heresies, and held Diabolical Opinions, we found that we were wronged; for no
question concerning religion was put to us, to try whether we were such; they
answered, You did appear such by your hats, and company, and if we have done
you wrong you may appeal, so we desired to appeal to the general Court: They
said you must do it by Petition; we declared against the unrighteousness of
their proceedings; they asked, Whether they should sit in Judgment against
themselves; and said, We will rise up, and you shall sit down in our places,
and Judge us: (here is a loud lie told in open Court) Answ. We desire but
justice to be done, and a fair trial according to Law; they answered, You
appear to be such by your Hats; we desired that it might be recorded, that we
were thus punished for not putting off our Hats, and demanded evidences to
prove that we were such blasphemous Heretics as hold Diabolical opinions;
they ansvvered, you own such as do: We spoke to them again to bring Evidences
that we were such as the Law speaks off, but none was brought, yet they put
some questions to us, we said we are not afraid, nor ashamed to declare what we
hold, if we might have a fair hearing trial, without which we shall not
answer; then Daniel Denison put some questions to us, the which we refused to
answer, and said we will not be yea and nay, when we savv that he went
subtly to work, by questions about three persons, concluding that if we
would not answer the contrary, they would all conclude we did deny it, and
were blasphemous; we desired to be tried according to the Law, by a Jury of
twelve men, and have evidences brought against us; and said that it was most
unjust for the Magistrates to be our accusers and judges both, for upon that
account they might as well accuse us of Sodomie or murder, or any other
crime, and execute the Law causelessly upon us; Daniel Denison in derision told
us, You have left being Doctors of Divinity, and now are become Lawyers; and
your words are very plausible to take with the people, as if you were such
righteous persons, and we have done you wrong, but you are such as the Law
expresses, or else you should clear your selves; (Mark this is Tertullus their
Orator whose words are as smooth as oil; but the poison Aspes is under his
tongue) our Answer was, It is not mercy that we desire of you, but justice
according to the rigor of your own Law; and if you can prove us justly to be
such, as hold Diabolical opinions, let the rigor of the Law be executed upon
us; so without answering us, we were put into the Constables hand, and the
Court rose; and when they sat again, they called for us, and proceeded to
their sentence, which was this; Samuel Shattock and Nicholas Phelps was taken
twice at a private meeting, ten shillings, and for absence from the public
meeting ten shillings a piece, as they said is 30 s a piece; and Joshua Buffum
was once taken at a private meeting, for which he was to pay 15 s. And for
being quakers we were sentenced to be committed to the house of Correction
there to answer the Law; (compare this Reader with the account they were
released on, and you will sufficiently see their Judges confusion) so when
sentence was given, we were denied any more speech, then we desired that all
the people would take notice, that we could not have Justice done us (for we
were sent to the house of oppression;) and within half an hour the whipper was
brought at the beginning of Moonlight, and (without asking us to work)
contrary to their own Law, whipped us one by one, and while one of us was
whipped, the other two was shut up; we asked to see what Order he had, but he
would not show it us: And about the tenth hour in the night he sent us a piece
of Bread and some small Beer, the Beer we took, and sent word to pay for it,
but sent back the Bread. In the morning he came with Bread and Beer again, and
looked in at the window, and required us to work, we answered we were free to
it, if our families might have the benefit of it, the which he refusing told
us, what the Law would afford us (which was four pence in a shilling) we should
have, but we refused so to do, we desired him to let us into the yard for
easement: but he denied us and hastened away, the which actions all may judge
of to be br^tish and inhumane, and contrary to the very nature of reasonable
men; So here is a Declaration of the substance of what passed betwixt us and
the Magistrates at the Court of Ipsvvitch (in Boston Colonie) so near as we can
remember, Samuel Shattock, Nicholas Phelps, Joshua Buffum.

Again, these three with the other three (to wit) Laurence Southwick, Cassandra
Southwick, and Josiah Southwick, who being brought before their Court held at
Boston on the 27. of the 8th. Month, 1658. the old woman desiring liberty to
speak, spoke to this effect, We desire that our sin may be declared upon the
house top; which caused our sufferings with near seven Weeks Imprisonment,
twice whipped, haled out of our house in the midst of Winter, although sixty
years and upwards of age, besides the taking of our goods three times, also
making us pay 3. l. wanting 1. ^. 6. d. thus spoiling of our goods, and
ruinating our estates; knowing themselves guilty, made no reply at all, only
this afterward the General. Court had determined that they six should be sent
home not as Quakers; Mark Reader, what confusion is in Babylon, that fix who
had suffered imprisonment and whippings all of them for the self-same thing,
two of them also having laid several Months in prison upon the account of loss
of ears, yet they had neither shift nor cover more then this to cover their
shame and nakedness, That they should be sent home not as quakers; yet imagined
another lifeless Law, which if they transgressed, therewithal to threaten
them, reading it unto them, and turning them forth, (to wit) Banishment upon
pain of death, made at Boston the 20. of October, 1658.

Again Samuel Shottock an Inhahitant of Salem, in the Jurisdiction of Boston,
the 26. of the 10 Month, 1658. writes thus to Humph^^y Norton, Salem Friends
are well, and the spoyler is making a prey of us; they have seized upon half of
my House, and the ground belonging to it, in a secret way, for they did it a
month before I heard of it; and hearing of it, I asked the Marshal if it were
so, he told me it was done whilst I was in Boston, (to wit) in prison; and told
me that there had been men with him to buy it, and he might forthwith get men
to prize it, and set it on sale; (This know, that Banishment, and threatenings
to Banishment has been the least of their Rulers expressions against him and
several others of them that fears God in that place, for several Months, upon
which some both aged and decayed has been put to flight; to wit, Edward
Hornet, and his Wife, and others) and this Samuel Shattock, they judging him to
be one of the most considerable there, and one by probability which will rather
suffer Agrippa to gripe up his Estate if twice double, then once to deny his
Lord for dust, as you may perceive by his own expressions, to wit, But I
rejoice that I have something to suffer loss of for the truths sake: And as
concerning this matter, this is my thoughts, that seeing he will neither fly,
nor fall under, they will put a Viper under his roof, one which shall arise
from amongst their own sticks, which (if possible) shall sting him day and
night, to see if thereby they can weary out the righteous soul; but I question
not but in time (with patience) he may shake it off into the fire, and show
himself a man of God, there being his and their subsistence and outward
livelihood which the Lord has appointed for them, both for living and
continuing until their Testimony be finished, from whence they cannot fly
uutil he calls them, but bring themselves under condemnation; Therefore (says
the Author again) I perceive by the Marshal, that he has express (order
forthwith to strain, and take the Fines, which I believe (by that which I saw
in his hands) will amount to 100. l. and upwards, upon us at Salem: So with my
dear love to all friends with thee, I remain. Thus you may understand that
their cruelty is still continued, for this came to my hands in Barbados, in the
12. Month following, 1658.

Humph. Norton.

At a General Court held at Boston the 20. of May, 1658.
That Quakers and such accursed heretics arising among our selves, may be
dealt withal according to their deserts: and that their pe^tilent errors and
practices may be speedily prevented, it is hereby ordered as an addition tot he
former Laws against Quakers, That every such person or persons prose^sing any
of their perni^ious ways by speaking, writing, or by meeting on the Lords day,
or at any other time to strengthen themselves, or seduce others to their
diabolical Doctrines, and shall after due means of Conviction incur the penalty
ensuing, that is, every person so meeting shall pay to the Country for every
time 10. s. and every one speaking in such a Meeting, shall pay 5. l. a pee^re;
and in case any such person has been punished by scourging or whippping the
first time, according to the former Laws shall be still kept at work in the
house of Correction till they put in Security with two sufficient men, that
they shall not any more vent these hateful errors, nor use their sinful
practices, or else shall depart this Jurisdiction at their own charges; and if
any of them return again, the ^each such person shall i^^^r the penalty of the
Laws formerly made for strangers, by the Court.

Edward Rawson Secretary.

These are are the Liars; woe be unto them that makes these Laws, and binds the
burden of them upon the back of the poor, and they themselves will not touch
them with one of their fingers.

Of what herein is mentioned concerning the sufferings of the Servants of God,
moved of the Lord to New England in the year 1657. this is the Sum.
THree of which innocent persons, (to wit) Richard Dowdney, Mary Weather head,
and Mary Clark, after their other sufferings, sealed their testimonies with
their lives, by suffering shipwreck in the seas.

Richard Dowdney once imprisoned, once whipped, and once banished, (in Boston.)

Mary Weatherhead, once imprisoned amongst the Dutch, from whence banished, and
once from among the English at New Haven.

Mary Clark, once imprisoned, once whipped, and once banished in Boston.

Sarah Gibbins twice imprisoned, once her Clothes sold, once whipped, and three
times banished.

Dorothy Waugh three times imprisoned, three times banished, once her Clothes
sold, and once whipped.

William Brend, four times imprisoned, four times banished, twice whipped, once
laid in Irons, besides 117. Blows the Keeper of Boston Gaol laid upon him,
whereby he was left as one dead.

William Leddra, and Thomas Harris, two Barbados Friends, five times whipped,
three times imprisoned, three times banished.

John Copeland, seven times imprisoned, seven times banished, three times
whipped, and one of his Ears cut.

Christopher Holder five times imprisoned, five time banished, twice whipped, and
one of his ears cut.

John Rous, son to Lieutenant Coll* Rous, living in Barbados, four times
imprisoned, four times banished, thrice whipped, and one of his Ears cut:

Robert Hodshon imprisoned at the Duth, cast into a Dungeon, fined 600.
Gilders; several days chained to a Wheelbarrow, beaten with a pitched Rope
until he fell down twice as one dead, being judged to have received an hundred
blows; besides, twice tied up by the hands, and a log tied to his feet; twice
beaten with Rods until his flesh was cut, back^brests, and arms bleeding, his
stripes were innumerable and lamentable, and so banished by the Duth.

Humphrey Norton four times imprisoned, four times banished, twenty days and
nights laid in Irons, four times whipped, once fined 10. l. and once burnt in the
hand, and in malice took his right hand to hinder him from Writing.

Here is part of the Account of Cruelty, the most part of which we have
suffered and sustained in less then twelve Months space, (besides all our
Labors, Travels, Burdens, Trials, and Perils by Land and Water, the latter far
surmounting the former) several times have they endeavored to starve us to
death by famine at the Town of Boston, several times under restraint, which
herein is not mentioned; several of us lost in the Wilderness in the
Winter-season several nights, vvading deep Waters in frost, snow, and cold,
when none could be had to guide us because of the season, one of which S^rah
Gibbins by Name, lost two nights in this nature, being alone, without man or
Woman to comfort her, seized on by an Indian, which sorely attempted her, but
the Lord delivered her; the English also endeavoring to stir up the Indians
against us; all this have we born and suffered through his strength, and for
his love who has chosen us, whereby we have heaped Coals upon the heads of
our Adversaries who has thus entreated us who was sent unto them for their
souls sake, who has caused us to say, Oh how are the precious sons of Sion
comparable to fine Gold, esteemed as Earthen Pitchers, the Clay of the Potter.

H. N.

A Letter to John Indicot, and John Norton, Governor and chief Priest in
Boston, which yet is not answered.
FRiends, I heard a great noise about a litttle Note I writ to John Indicot
after the Brethrens Ears were cut; be it known unto you, that it was only unto
such as sits in counsel to shed innocent blood, with such as votes them up, and
upholds them therein, who deserves the greatest curse of all Crimes; and as for
all such into whose hands my Paper comes, let them compare it with the Laws
which they of Boston made against us as cursed Blasphemers, and Heretics, and
Adamites, etc. as if they made a Libel of their Law: And consider how much ever
any of you have seen or heard us troubled a^ it; and I having sent forth but
one few lines, wherein is laid upon them that which is but their due, and see
how the Beast roars as if he were wounded in his secret parts, and cried out
unto all the Earth for ease; and mind you Reader, whether their Curses or ours
is of more force; and whether it is they or we that lies under the power of a
plague; and whether in all ages it was the innocent or the guilty who cried
out, Help, O men of Israel, help.

Humph. Norton.

John Indicot, Cursed is that man which causes any to be dismembered of the
members that God has formed, made and given them, before he that made them
does remove them; sad will it go with thee if the loss of that member cost any
one his life. Remember that Scripture thou brought, That he that sheds man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Think not (O miserable man!) that thou
can cover or hide thy self by saying thou persecutest not, nor thou sheds no
man's blood; for in the condition thou art, none of these things can be done
without thee or thy consent, and at thy hand will all this blood and cruelty be
required; thou know that they are but Officers employed by thee, that
executes it, thou art the foreman in forging of them; of this take warning from
the Lord God, that in the day wherein thou begins with that bloody Work of
dismembering, the cry of blood will enter into thy house, and the curse of God
will be more grievous to thy heart for so doing, then all the Earth can add
thee comfort: As thou tenders pity to thy poor soul, take warning beforehand,
least thou have cause to repent when it is too late, least of these thy actions
and proceedings will be unto thee as a burdensome stone in the day of thy
account. Thou may remember that thou asked me how thou should know that I was
sent of God etc. I say, Many examples might be giveu thee if thou could
believe; As first* The Scripture is fulfilled in hurling and pulling me out of
your Affembly in such a manner as never any was out of the Church of God, and
haling me before the Magistrates, and casting me into prison, according to that
Scripture mentioned by John Norton, The Devil shall cast some of you into
prison: Does not thou believe that he prophesied what would become of us? And
is it not now as it was then, that he that lives after the flesh, persecutes
him that lives after the Spirit, so that this is no new thing; but if there be
in him any manhood for God, or love to the souls of his people, let him come
forth and give proof thereof, in performing but this reasonable request; and if
he be a Herdsman either of Abraham or Lot, (and in his thoughts has gone all
this time to the right hand, let him now turn to the left) and take his Compass
through Piymouth-Patten, Road-Island, Providence, Long Island, and else where
they have believed and received our report, whom you account and call deluders,
and I shall freely engage my body for his, unto this Patten, that he shall not
be imprisoned, whipped, nor dismembered by any of them; and the same time that
he has there, with any one or more accompanying him, let me have the like
Liberty in this Town and Collony, with my yokefellow, and let the fruit show
the effect, who is the deceiver, the false Prophet, the Earthly Epicure, or the
Worldly belly-god; if this he deny, let him be ashamed, and never more owned by
you his hearers, to be a Minister of the Spirit of truth. Let me have his, or
thy Answer on his behalf, directed unto me who is a friend to thy soul, called,
Hump. Norton, but by the scorners a quaker. Let him subscribe the Answer, and
let not these deluded Flocks (as you account them) be lost for want of his
labor.

Again, thou may remember thou charged me with Blasphe^ my against John
Norton; Whereunto I say, Had he been a Minister of Christ, and I had hit him on
the one che^k, or under the fifth rib, he should have turned unto me the other
also, and let me have had both place and time with him and the people, that he
might the more have laid me open, and not to have suffered one of his chief
members (as if it were his heart) to have cast me into prison; but this, and
such as this does but the further make thee and him manifest.

Dated from Boston prison this 16. of the 5. Month, 1658.
Another LETTER to the Town of Boston.
BOSTON is a withered Branch, the sap of the Vine is departed from it; your
profession is become barren, and your glory is become withered; ye are departed
from the Lord, and have followed your own inventions. How is thy beauty faded,
thou who was famous among the Nations for thy zeal toward God! But now thy
zeal is turned to hypocrisy, and envy has eaten you out; and malice is as a
Canker among you, and the way of peace you know not, but are following that
which makes desolate; therefore return while you have time, and let God be
truly minded by you, lest he break forth with an unresistable flood, which you
cannot be able to escape: Be not proud, for thy beauty thou have lost, and thy
glory is stained; but seek after him who is pure. whose Worship stands in the
Spirit, and no longer worship the Works of your own hands, least in the day of
your distress, your house be left unto you desolate, and your habitation waste;
and then you may wish that while you had time you had minded the things which
belongs unto your peace; and so cease from your boasting, and search your
hearts with the light of Christ, and let hypocrisy dwell no longer in them,
least being double minded, you be shut out with hypocrites in utter darkness,
where shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. So while you have
time, prize it; and while you have time, repent of your ungodliness and cruelty
acted on the Lambs of Christ, least you following the Way you now walk in, do
fall into the pit of perdition, out of which there is no redemption. And this
is written by one who sees thy withered state, and has suffered in thee for
the testimony of a good conscience, called

John Rous.

A true discovery and relation of the dealings of God with Goodworth Horndall;
Wife to John Horndall, in Newport upon Road-Island in New England; it being
written for the information of the weak, and for the help and comfort of all
such as may taste of the like distempers; and also a warning unto all such as
may strive after salvation, and the knowledge of the things of God, according
to the working of their own wills and imaginations, wherein it is not to be
obtained.
SHe being formerly a Woman of a discontented mind, and inclinable to be led
aside with a fretting earthly spirit, and of a peevish nature when therein she
was crossed, as many others in the first birth and nature are; and seeing the
trials, and travels, and emptiness of these transitory things, was disquieted
in her spirit, groaning after that which is more durable, and fades nor away;
and I being a Traveller appointed by the Father for that very end, to seek out
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and so much as in me lies, to gather
together, and bring home that seed which the Serpent in his servants has
scattered and laid as wast, and labors to destory; and I being drawn by the
Father into remote places where his seed lay hid and suffered, (according to
the seed which suffered, and that spirit that moved me forth) I preached
liberty unto the captivated Seed, and glad tidings of an acceptable day of
deliverance unto the whole House of Israel; the which glad tidings the
beforementioned Goodworth Horndall (as one distressed and oppressed in spirit)
gladly received and believed, with many more in that place; which she (as one
that had long offended a just and terrible God) would willingly have acted any
thing whereby she might have obtained his Favor, and appeased his Wrath; but
the Serpent being more subtle then any beast in the Field, overcame the
simplicity in her, his power having had place and dominion over her, and all
flesh in that first nature and birth, whereby he led her aside into the
imaginations, to act strange things, yea, even such as were beyond her natural
strength, that such as did labor to withdrawher from, did admire at; she being
convinced in her own conscience, that in and after the course of her former
conversation she had been led aside, and grievously had offended, (although in
nothing beyond what others in the same nature have been led into, which if not
repented of, they must all likewise perish) and she being fearful to offend
further then already she had done, went about to act in her own Will, and in
the same spirit whereby she had been captivated, such things as were presented
to her mind, (which by the Serpents subtilty was, and is always seemingly good)
whereby the simple has been led aside to taste, although bitter has been, and
is the end thereof) yet contrary altogether to her knowledge of the evil that
therein was, these things she did, expecting thereby to reap or merit peace and
satisfaction, but none there was to be had, but on the contrary, further
thraldom; so that after information and further advice from such as had
traveled through the like trials and temptations, she was prettily settled, and
savor began to arise in her again, so that after hearing the truth further
declared, she said we spoke the language of the heavenly Land; and it being so
that the servant of God at that present was called away into other remote
places, where he labored and suffered a certain space, in which time the said
Goodworth (being of a fretting, disconted mind, not having been exercised with
the patience and faith of the Saints in the midst of such trials) was again led
aside into a second relapse, which the wise in heart knows is the worst part of
a second sorrow; She being then in the mixture of the Powers, [I speak unto
them that are wise, let them judge what I say] the one having long had place,
and the other having now entered to take place; and she not knowing the
operation of those powers, and being too forward in acting, the simplicity
suffered a second sorrow, and withal, such coming about her as was not able to
judge of these two powers, (there being judgment due to the one, and mercy and
help to the other, which they willingly would have made help to her in this
distress, like the servants of the Lord, or householder, Matt. 13. would
willingly have been doing) dashed down the Wheat with the Cockle, which caused
the poor creature to say in my hearing, (although at that time senceless) That
the blood was spilt upon the Earth: When according to the will of the Father I
came to that place again, and she gone distracted so far that she could not
govern nor guide her self at that present, which troubled me very much; and I
would gladly have seen her, but might not without the drawings of the Father,
for which I waited, and in due time it came upon me, and I went to her, and
sat by her, waiting to minister if it were the Fathers will; but there was
nothing to receive me, the ground being barren, and altogether left desolate;
at which instant I was struck exceeding sorrowful, being made sensible what the
loss of one soul was, even as if I had lost so much ou^ of my own side; and so
in plain words from under that sense I spoke it forth, withal signifying what
a loss it was, (where the power had reached to the Seed, raised the soul out of
death which long it had laid under, and then to be deprived of it, and utterly
frustrated and lost by the wiles and subtlety of the Devil and Satan) more
then over many who had never tasted of the like power and love, and also spoke
it forth to the brethren and sisters, that she should be visited so often as
there was drawings to see if it were possible to beget a Seed where there was
none, by the virtue of that power wherein we stood, and of that Faith I was,
and am, and in it do remain, (this is as Food fetched from far to the pure and
wise in heart, and unto such only this is communicated) and told them further,
that their Image would beget, and it put me in mind of Jacobs laying speckled
sticks before his fathers stock; and at several times I gave them such figures
as these, that she was like unto a vessel heaving in the Sea, whose compass was
cast off the needle, and there was nothing to steer it by, neither could it
move, but as it was heaved to and again with the wind; for to order her self
in any thing that was good she could not, or like as over-worn ground whose
strength is destroyed, so that it was capable neither of seed nor weed; yet
after a while let it alone and it will gather strength, and bring forth
something; but as concerning her I am jealous that the evil will come forth
first, being sensible of the nature of all mankind; thus it remained a certain
space, wherein we did visit her time after time, in which time again I compared
her unto a body or carcass which the Doctors and Apothecaries of the Egyptian
world begs or buys, to anatomize or abuse, from whence to reap vvisdome to add
to their rotten art; so that the wise in heart may see that they conjure their
vvisdome and knowledge and art from amongst the dead; but we being Physicians
chosen of the Father, and by him made partakers of his nature and name, he gave
us a body whereupon to exercise our gifts which from him we had received, and
to that end was applied; and being often drawn forth in visiting of her, her
senses being lost, and filled with wind and air, her tongue running in useless
and senceless words; only in some agonies wherein she was not sensible, she
would have cried out against her self and said, I am that bloody Whore, and the
blood is spilt upon the earth, and there is no salvation for me; and sitting
waiting by her I was made to take hold of such words, and beat them back upon
her so much as she was able to bear, to bring her to the sense of them; and one
time I taxed her with a lie, for there was salvation for her; she suddenly
asked me where? I told her in God, and she being full of Scripture words, told
me, That the fool has said in his heart, there is no God; (I asked her and
said) What will you believe a fool? Nay, by no means; there is a God, and there
is salvation for thee, and beat it upon her, so much as she was able to bear,
and put it upon her to remember what had past betwixt us, until I came again,
that so she might have something of savor wherewithal to exercise her senses,
and sometimes she did, and sometimes I hastened considering the weakness of her
brain, and thus labored again to raise the dead; which after some short time
coming in this manner, Horror at times took hold upon her, and much temptation
to make her self away; in which time I coming to her, she asked me, If I could
not cast out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; I told her nay, the
Devils said so of Christ, (which was false) but I can cast out Devils through
Christ Jesus, the power of God; then said she, Cast the Devils out of me; yea,
if thou will do what I require of thee; she told me, yea, she would, but at
that time did not; but according to my expectation the weed came up first, for
when I told her that God is a meek and quiet spirit, and that she might learn
to know him within her, and to be guided by him, who taught not to speak such
foolish words as she did, and join her members to him, and I would join with
Christ both in me and her, and through his strength the Devil shall be
dispossessed, which at that time she could not bear but broke forth into foolish
laughter, which vainness continued with her a certain space; which when that
was off, her temptations straightly followed her still to make her self away,
which thing increased my confidence in her, and all who may beled into the
like; for such are they that Satan has little confidence in that they will do
him service, but if they can by any means escape his Wiles, they will follow
the example of my forerunner, and me his servant who was led of the Spirit to
be tempted in the Wilderness; which vainness she has confessed to me since,
that after my reproof, in telling her and giving the example, that she was more
vain then her child, that something in her showed her that it was not fit for
her to laugh; and was in such a sad condition; After which, she got forth a
doors, into the woods to have made her self away, having also been at the
waterside to have done it before, and both through the love and power of God
was prevented; for when she was in the vvoods with an intent to have done it,
she told me that something spoke unto her, and told her, That it was not the
destroying other self that could satisfy. God for the dishonor she had done
him; After which, she savv that it was the love and power of God that did, and
had prevented her from doing of it, and from that time she settled and amended;
and I perceived by her Sister that her earnest desire was to speak with me, and
said, That she did believe she should be restored, the which was accomplished,
and after our meeting she earnestly begged of me to tell her, Whether she had
not sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost? yea or nay: I told her nay, then she
put it strongly upon me to make it forth unto her; the which I did, and told
her, Thou have not yet received the Holy Ghost, and that there was many
Disciples who knew not whether there were any Holy Ghost yea or nay, the
which she saw and confessed; then how can thou have sinned against it:
Moreover, in that which thou have done against that which thou have received,
thou did it not wilfully, for had thou known better, thou would not have
done it, and she told me with tears that the Lord knew that she had not done
it wilfully, and if she had known better, she would not have done it, and
trusted in God that he would show mercy upon her; and the next time I came
again, she told me the same words, and was still the more settled; and her child
being lying sick by her, I asked her if she did not pity that poor child,
knowing that in her distemper, neither it, nor any other thing was regarded?
and she cried out, alas! shall I not pity my own poor child; and I was moved to
tell her, that even so the Lord had pitied her, and his bowels earned toward
her, and shortly after her child was restored unto her, as a figure unto her of
what the Lord would do for her, if she did abide in his Counsel; and often
since she has told me with tears, that she trusted that God would do good for
her and that he should be honored by her, in stead of that great dishonor
that she had done to him and us; which thing she has often declared against
her self in, and said, that we had suffered, and God had been dishonored by
her: Whereupon I told her, that insomuch as that of God had suffered in her,
therein we had suffered by her, and in her; and the wicked through that have
taken advantage to speak evil of the way of God, but thou being through the
love and power of God made sensible of thine own loss, and also of the love of
God toward thee, we are therein fully satisfied, and greatly can we rejoice in
the Lord God on thy behalf. And this I can truly say concerning her, and as a
Testimony of her, That since her Recovery, she has and does make it manifest,
that it was not for, nor through any earthly or evil end, that the sad travel
came upon her; for before that she was never a Licentious Liver; and since she
is more dead to all those things then ever she was before, and her care and
industry set how to do just and honest things unto all sorts of People, and
that which is well-pleasing unto God, that the days of her appointed Time may
be spent to his glory.

We are Witnesses unto the Truth of this, Humphrey Norton. John Rous. John
Copeland.

Some Quaeries unto all sorts whatsoever, who wants that which we have, by
which they may see themselves, and know from us where to find it.
1. WHERE the Hand is which can help one out of Hell?

2. Where is the Arm that can deliver one up thither, and there bind him until
his flesh be destroyed, and in the day of the Lord can fetch his soul from
thence, and set it upon his Throne?

3. Where is the first and second death, the lowest, highest, and nethermost
Hell, seeing the Scripture speaks of the lowest Hell, and the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone, etc. and Tophet of old, which yet remains to the
Wicked? Show us where these Hells are, and in, or under what Climate, Circle,
or Planet, or in Earth, or Air, or where.

4. What is that that torments the Wicked there? And whether it is the Devil
that torments himself, yea or nay?

5. When, or how with safety a soul may be delivered up thither? To wit,
Whether before God has left striving with him? or after? Or at what time or
instant? Answer expressly?

6. Whether Christ and all these that have followed him from death to life,
have not past through all these deaths and Hells, yea or nay, seeing it is
said, He can save to the utmost? And whether they have seen the utmost (yea or
nay) that have not past through all these things? And let none say that they
may not be dived into, for it is truth that the spirit searches all things,
etc. and the hidden things of Esau must be sought out; if any say, Nay: let him
tell me what it is may be searched into, and seen, and what may not?

7. And whether the eye of God sees not, and searches all things, yea or nay?
And whether every man ought not to see with this Eye, yea or nay? If not,
Whether he may not be blind in many things, yea or nay? As for example, Adam
gave Names to every Creature that stood in Covenant, and seeing that there are
Names, and Creatures, and Members, with bloody Oaths and Actions which Adam in
innocence named not, therefore show me how one shall discern and know the
innocent Names and Nature of every Member, Creature, and created thing, and
also that bloody spirit that invented all these bloody Oaths, and beastly, and
filthy, and unclean Words and Actions. Answer expressly, for so speaks the
Spirit?

8. If any man being a Preacher, (so called) and know not these things,
Whether he be able to judge of what he speaks, yea or nay? And if so, Whether
he may not speak amiss, and preach and speak that which he ought not, and give
Names to Creatures and things which are not? If he be one that says he knows
the things that differ, and has been led into Visions and Revelations, and
things of the highest, (lawful and unlawful to be uttered) let him answer all
these things both former and latter.

9. What may be preached and published upon the house top, and what may uot?
and what things are lavvful, and what not? And seeing there is a time wherein
all things are lawful, and a time wherein all things are not, distinguish each
time with its sign, that all people may learn to know the signs of the times,
and the difference between all things that are, and are not; if any may say
that it will bring in doubtful questions, and may drive them to dive into
things which may strick them distracted or mad; I say, Nay, that is man's Will
that drives him thither, the light leads him to see the ground and rise of
every time and thing, (and this is the Word of the Lord God) and shows him the
Spirit which must be divided from the soul, from that which must not; (Mark,
the Eye of God shows and sees a Spirit) and he that sees not with God's Eye,
sees not that which must be divided from the soul, nor the soul which the Word
reaches and searches betwixt it and the Spirit.

10. The mysteri^ of godliness having been hid from ages and generations, and
this being now the day, and age, and generation, wherein God is revealing, and
revealed in, and unto his people, and is leading them through all Lands, the
Land of darkness, sin and death; the Land of light, life, and peace; and having
queried something concerning the former, and seen also the situation of the
latter, let us stretch forth into the deep, and so fathom the whole circuit of
Heaven and Hell, Earth and Air, and all that therein is; Come up hither, and I
will show thee the place where his Honor dwells, come and see.

11. Seeing the Scripture speaks of the third Heaven, it thence appears that
there are three; my query is, Where are they? In what place? Under what Planet?
Or above in what Circuit? Or below in what Region? and the infallible Way to
it? Which is the easiest query of all.

12. And seeing that there is War in Heaven betwixt Michael and the Dragon, it
seems then that the Dragon (that old Serpent the Devil) is there? I say, Where
is that Heaven that he is in? Answer expressly.

13. And seeing that the Serpent was in Paradise, and deceived Eve, (before
ever I heard of Hell) Tell me how he came there, and what Heaven that is, and
where it is?

14. And seeing it is written that Adam was made of the dust, etc. and that he
and she (to wit, Eve) was in this innocent place called Paradise, tell me
infallibly, (the wisest of you Wizards) How, and what way they came there? He
who can do this in truth, can preach salvation without Book.

15. And seeing that a Heaven there is of a truth, whereinto nothing that
defiles can enter, tell me expressly where it is, the entrance in, and how it
may be obtained, and by whom?

16. What the Key of the Kingdom is? Seeing Christ is the Door, who the
Keepers, seeing I have heard both David and Peter was?

17. And what the Gates of Hell is, which shall not prevail against this Door?
And what the Keys of these Gates is, seeing it is written, He has the Keys of
Hell and Death? And who that He is, seeing it is called an Angel? My query is,
What the nature of an Angel is, seeing it is written concerning Christ, That he
took upon him the nature of Angels, etc. and concerning the Saints, that they
shall judge Angels?

Thou who sees not with the Eye that surrounds these things, and comprehends
Death and Hell, and is in distress concerning thy salvation, and at a loss, not
knowing the truth, nor who it is that lives in it, the cries are so many and
various; this know of a truth, whatsoever is wanting in thee of any of these
things, or any other that tends to salvation, we have it, and with us it is;
Therefore sit not in darkness, nor say not with the multitude, Who will show us
any good thing? but come unto us, and suffer not thy soul to be lost for want
of a Savior; for the place of his presence is with us witnessed:

By Humphre^ Norton.

The Secrets of the Lo^d are with them that fear him.
WHat herein is mentioned, is now freely recommended to the Commonwealth of
England, with all who seeks the good and welfare of the Seed of Israel, that
as they love the liberty and redemption thereof, they will endeavor after
doing Justice and Righteousness toward all herein mentioned, (and in the like
case concerned without respect of persons) that it may manifestly appear that
you act for God, and that in righteousness, and not according, but contrary to
the minds and wills of corrupt men.

The End.

