NEW NEWS OF A Strange Monster FOUND IN STOW WOODS NEAR BUCKINGHAM, OF Human
Shape, with a Double Heart, and no Hands; a Head with Two Tongues, and no
Brains.
THere is a Letter lately printed, said to come from an assured Hand, in Answer
to a Letter from a Freeholder in Buckinghamshire, concerning the late Election
of the Knights of the Shire of the County of Bucks; which because some False
Passages in it should not abuse you and the World, I shall give you a true
Relation of some things upon my own knowledge.

Sir R.T. now much better known, and equally trusted by the Name of Sir Timber,
in the time of the late Usurper, cut a Chip out of his own Block, and made a
Trencher of it, (he began early to deal in Timber) and with it waited upon the
Usurper with great Diligence and Observance; and when any Fovours did appear
ready to drop from his Highness's Bountiful Nose, he was always in readiness
with his Obsequious Instrument to intercept the falls, and with great Care did
pocket up those Pearls, not doubting but with them to piece up his broken
Fortunes, and not be forced to Compound with his Creditors at Six Shillings the
Pound, as afterward he did: But his Master dying, and his hopes thereby
disappointed, and the King returning, to Sir Richard's great Grief and
Amazement, he quickly shifted the Scene, and being well trained up by his old
Master, he took up his Principle Hypocrisy. And let the World go how it would,
he thought that a fruitful Ingredient to a thriving Trade. The first Trial of
Skill he made was this: The Convention being dissolved, he thought it his
Interest to fall in with the King's Party, and to ingratiate himself with a
worthy Gentleman of it, Sir William Teringham. Sir Richard went in his behalf
to the Duke of Buckingham, (with whom he had some little Acquaintance when the
Duke was in his Troubles) and did procure a Letter from the Duke to the Town of
Buckingham, in the behalf of Sir William Teringham, to be chosen Burgess of the
Town for the ensuing Parliament, and promised to deliver it himself, and
negotiate with the Town in the behalf of the said Sir William; and because he
would make his Addresses more acceptable, he did procure on Mr. Burton, a
Creature of his own, who then lived in the Town, to let the Burgesses know he
would build them a Town Hall; and that they might have good Evidence of the
truth of that Promise, great store of Timber was sent into Mr. Burton's Yard,
and all hands were set at work for this Castle in the Air. After this Prologue,
down came the Doubty Knight to Act his part, with the Duke's Letter in his
Pocket, as his Credentials; but finding that Sir William Smith's Loyalty had
engaged all the Burgesses for him, and that Sir Timber (for now you may so call
him) was like to hew out no Burgeship for himself, in case he delivered the
Duke's Letter in the behalf of his Friend Sir William Teringham, he pocketed up
the Letter (as he had done the Vsurper's Pearls) which, as if it had been
spirited into some Foreign Plantation, was never heard of more. Let us observe
his proficiency in Hypocrisy as we go, from a Servant to, and Rebel with the
Usurper, without any Recantation he immediately turned Cavalier, procured the
Letter for Sir William Teringham: but when he found that would not promote but
destroy his Design, he as quickly deserted and betrayed his new pretended
Friend, and hocust the Letter into his Enchanted Castle.

And yet finding that his Timber would not build up his Interest in that Town,
unless he could prevail with Sir William Smith, to drive a Pin for him, he made
use of diverse of Sir William Smith's first Wives Relations (who was Sir
Alexander Denson's Daughter, and thereby Sir Timber's near Kinswoman) to
importune Sir William not to join with any other, but to permit Sir Timber to
be his Partner; but all this would not have done, Mr. Dormer would have been
too hard for him, if the Timber Argument had not prevailed above the 300 l
pretended to be deposited by Mr. Dormer, and 300 l more promised by Sir William
Smith. This Pamphleteer must needs deal with the Devil, or one of the lying
Spirits of Ahab's Prophets was crept into him, otherwise, he could never have
forged so notorious a Lie, both of the Dead and the Living: And I am persuaded
Sir Timber himself, who wants neither Deceit nor Impudence, has not Brass
enough to face so wooden a Lie, which has as little Sense as Truth. Six
Hundred Pounds is such a Sum as would easily have broken his Timber Engine!
Fallible Men seldom let go such Birds in hand. Well, upon this wooden Horse our
Knight rides to Parliament, and that he might have some color to appear there,
he procured a Red Ribon to make him a Knight Errant; but when he found it did
in flame the Reckoning, although he went by Chearing, he returned by Weeping
Cross: But he was resolved, per fas and nefas, to pick up his Crumbs. When he
came first into Parliament he was much to seek, but a he had pretended to be,
so he set up at first for a Royalist, but quickly perceiving his Error, and
that that poor Party was like to get nothing, he betook himself to his old
Friend the Trencher, and that Venom which he had sucked from his old Master the
Usurper, or licked up under his Table, he threw about the House of Commons for
NUISANCES; and never left vomiting his Poison until he got an Antidote of Place
in the Customhouse.
How he came by it to this day is not known, but most People think he got it by
Enchantment, and that Satan, who was his Devil Father, when he was named
Timber, helped him to it. This Potion was no sooner down, but it wrought as
vehemently the other way, and he befoul'd the House with such stinking Matter,
that they were forced to throw him out, otherwise they had all been in great
danger of being poisoned. You have heard of some who have been possessed by the
Devil, have vomited up Ink-horns, Pins, and Stones, etc. but this wooden Knight
has outdone them all. By virtue of the said Potion he has shit out a mighty
Fabric, by the help and assistance of a new sort of Sacrilege; for he has
stolen away the Parsonage-House that the Enchanted Castle might be all of a
Piece, and that as the Foundation was laid by Treachery, it might be covered by
Sacrilege. But this Potion has served him as the Devil serves Witches, gives
them great Gifts, but they are still Beggars: So this has given him a great
House, but taken away his Understanding. For never since he took it has he
spoken either Sense or Truth. If any other can be found like him, the Devil may
take them both, and he shall find them more accomplished, and like himself,
than any who have ever yet arrived at his Palace. I cannot close my Letter,
until I have told you a little Story. Sir William Smith had a Tenant who owed
him about 200 l this Tenant had a Sister who usually did lie in Sir Timber's
Chamber, and when the said Potion wrought, and made his Belly ache, she came and
laid a Plaster of warm Guts to the place, and after a while it gave him ease,
and he lay very still and quiet all the Night. At other times she gave him a
Clister, and when she was out of Order, he gave her another: This kind
interchange procured some advantage to the Brother. For Sir William Smith
coming kindly to visit Sir Timber, being his Neighbor, immediately after he
was married, and having some discourse with him in private, about the Tenant's
Debt, the said Sir Timber, contrary to all Humanity and the Rules of
Hospitality, swore in Court (I was by and heard, otherwise could not have
delivered it) that Sir William Smith should tell him, At that time when he came
to visit him, that for 50 l he had released the whole Debt; this I have heard
Sir William protest, and I believe it was notoriousty false; but had it been
true to betray the private Discourse of a Neighbor, who in kindness came to
visit him, could have been done by none but a Man who had taken the Devil's
Potion. Let every one beware of him, for it is safer coming into a Pesthouse
than his.

This Narrative is known to Hundreds of People, and needs no other Evidence,
but the Declaring of it, which I held my self bound in Conscience to do, for
the vindication of Truth; but I will be deposed I never heard Sir William Smith
speak one word of it but this, That he had no such Discourse with Sir Timber in
private, as he swore in public.

FINIS.

