A NEW DECLARATION OF THE CITIZENS OF LONDON TO THE LORD General Monck IN
SCOTLAND, Sent Post to his Excellency, by Order from the Common Council.

With his Excellencies Answer, and further Resolution, brought Post on
Saturday last to the City; And Proposals to the people, touching the Parliament
and Nation.

LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, 1660.

A DECLARATION OF THE City of LONDON:
THe Lord General Monck having received a Letter from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen
and Common Council of the City of London, wherein they declared their cordial
Concurrence with his Honor, in disowning the Authors of that Force, who
interrupted the Parliament, and ravished the Birthright of these Nations, by
daring to null and make void Acts of Parliament, hoping to contribute somewhat
(by Gods blessing) in their Councils, and Actions, to the preventing of the
said consequences of that exorbitant presumption. Declaring further, That they
fully and entirely comply with his Honor, in asserting the Authority and
Freedom of Parliament; a National Ministry, for the enlightening of the
ignorant, and suppressing of Atheism; and the peoples just Rights and
Liberties; Resolving by Gods Assistance, to persist faithfully and rigorously
in this good Cause. This was communicated to his Excellency on Wednesday last,
by the City Sword Bearer, who went Post with it, by Order from a Common Council
held at Guild Hall, London; And upon reading thereof, his Excellency the Lord
General Monck, returned Thanks to the City, for their pious and noble
Resolutions, to appear at such an E^igent, to be instrumental with him, to
assert and vindicate the greatest Interests of these Nations, both Religious
and Civil. And that he is resolved to acquiesce and center with the Parliament,
and stand by them in their just Rights, Liberties, and Freedom^.

Thursday Jan. 5.
Ordered, That a Letter be written to Lieut. Genesis Ludlow, Col. John Jones, and
Mr. Miles Corbet, forthwith to give their attendance on the Parliament (as also
unto Col. Tomlinson) and to give the Parliament an account of their management
of the affairs in Ireland, and ordered that the Letter be signed and sealed by
the Speaker.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Council of State, to consider how the
Civil and Authoritative power in Ireland may be settled.

Ordered, That the Council of State do consider how the Army in Ireland shall
be governed, and what Commissioners are fitting for the government thereof, and
to report their opinion therein to the Parliament.

Resolved, That this House does approve of what has been done by Sir Hardresse
Waller, Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Theophilus Jones, and other the Officers of
the Army in Ireland for the service of the Parliament, and that a Letter of
thanks be sent unto them for their good service done for the Parliament.

Resolved, That upon the whole matter of the report touching absent Members,
the Parliament does adjudge and declare, that the Members who stand discharged
from voting or si^ing as Members of this House, in the years 1648, or 1649, do
stand duly discharged by Judgment of Parliament, from sitting as Members of
this present Parliament, during this Parliament: And it is ordered that Writs
do issue forth to Elect new ones in their places.

Ordered, That the several cases of the Lord Fairfax and Sir Anthony
Ashley-Cooper, be referred unto the Committee unto whom absent Members was
referred, to examine matters of Fact, with power to send for witnesses, and to
examine them touching the same; and to make their report with their opinion
touching the respective cases to the Parliament. And also ordered, that the
cases of Mr. Nathaniel and Francis Bacon, be referred to the same Committee to
examine, etc. and report the same to the Parliament forthwith.

From York, Jan. 2.
Yesterday morning Major Smithson and the Irish Brigade did meet the Lord
Fairfax, and several of the Gentry of these parts at Hessen-Moore, where
several persons which had been in Arms against the Parliament, and then
protested against, were dismissed: as the Duke of Buckingham and several
others: after which they marched toward York, and drew up before
Mickle-gatebar, demanding the Rendition thereof to them. Col. Lilburn and some
Forces who were within, having consulted of the message, agreed the following
Declaration, and sent it to the Forces without, with this proviso, that such as
would sign it, should be admitted: which being done, the City was delivered up,
the Irish Brigade marching in, the rest retiring to their several places of
abode.

THE DECLARATION.
We do declare to adhere to this present Parliament, as it consists of the
Members that sat the tenth of October now last past, against a King or any
other single Person whatsoever: and that this City of York shall be preserved
for, and delivered to whomsoever the said Parliament shall Authorize, and
appoint to keep it for their use.

Subscribed ROB. ^ILBURNE etc.

In the next place, I shall proceed to offer some few Queries to the
consideration of all Parties, that take themselves to be concerned in the peace
and prosperity of England, and submit all to the consideration of the
unprejudiced Reader.

I. Whether it be by any rational man supposed, That the Kings of England, as
single persons, had their power and magistracy by the immediate designation of
God?

II. Whether (if not by Gods immediate appointment) it was not attained by
force or fraud, or conferred upon them by mutual compact and agreement for
society and safety sake?

III. Whether (if so conferred) the people conferring was not the supreme
Authority?

IV. Whether it can, upon any principles of Reason, be imagined, That the
people, thus sensible of the benefit of Society, and in order thereto making
choice of such a form of command and subjection, did not also by some equal
rules balance the power, to prevent Tyranny in their King, and slavery to them
and their posterities?

V. Whether (if the power were attained by force or fraud, although for a time
the people for necessity sake do submit) may they not throw off that Yoke, and
recover their freedoms if by any means they can?

VI. Whether, in case of compact, the King taking upon him the Government, upon
Condition of performance, and that upon oath solemnly taken in the presence of
the people, he shall notwithstanding, act according to Will and not Law,
thereby rendering that which was intended for the common good, a common
mischief; I say, whether in this case the people are tied up to a slavish,
servile Obedience, and left without all manner of remedy, either of divesting
him of that Authority, or of calling him to an account, or judging him by the
said compact and agreement; and if so, upon what principles of Reason or
Prudence could they submit to such a slavery?

VII. Whether, if the people may call their King, or supreme Magistrate to an
account, they may not elect another, or choose and establish any other form of
Government, to them appearing most conducible to their safety?

VIII. Whether any Government be more likely to answer the great ends of the
people, than when their Laws are made by their Representatives equally elected
and limited, as to the exercise of that power, so that he that commands this
year, shall taste of subjection the next, and therefore will be careful how he
entails slavery upon himself and posterity; the Law binding all alike, and not
saying, Thou shall not kill but I may, but whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; and so in all other cases?

IX. Whether the present Parliament be not the most likely persons to establish
a Government upon the most equal Principles of Freedom, that have so frequently
declared for it, so zealously contested against Tyranny, even unto the blood of
the Tyrant, and remain so solemnly engaged to God and man, both by their own
Declarations, Promises and Principles, according to the best of their
judgments to accomplish it, and that as a testimony of their thankfulness for
the eminent deliverances that God has given them in their endeavors to obtain
it?

X. Whether the discontents of the people, and endeavoring to bring in a
Family, that, it is to be feared, God has set his face against for evil, may
not only provoke God to deal with England as with Israel of old, and give them
a King in his wrath, but also bring a judgment of war upon this Nation, with
the miseries accrewing; and then, when it is too late, men will wish for that
peace, which now is so irksom and troublesome?

XI. Whether, if the present Parliament had a desire (as is pretended) to
perpetuate their Power, the hair-braind actions of the generality of the
present Generation, does not treat a real occasion, it not being safe to trust
unskilful riders with such Wild Asses?

XII.Whether, (if notwithstanding) the present Parliament, through the blessing
of God, shall attain the dessred end of peace and freedom, by the settlement of
successive Representatives, and make due provision for the equal distribution
of Justice, and having established this Nation upon a sure basis or form of
Government, as a Commonwealth, shall in some convenient time dissolve
themselves; whether, I say, most persons in England will not have just cause to
take shame to themselves for the slanders, reproaches, interruptions and hard
Thoughts they have harbored against their faithful Patriots, who, maugre all
difficulties, have been supported in their spirits to prosecute their work,
resting upon the righteous judgment of God, and not valuing the threats or
tumultuary disturbances of contrary minded men?

FINIS.

