HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT


The Humble Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Freeholders, of the County of
York, who have subscribed hereto: presented to His Majesty at York, April 30.
1642. Desiring a happy Union betwixt the King and Parliament.
Humbly Shows,
THat at the last Assizes, they with all loyal duty presented a Petition to
your Majesty, and another to the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
containing their Humble Requests, for the Declaration of such means, as might
take away all distances, and produce a blessed Union, most necessary to this
afflicted Kingdom, which then was, and we are confident yet is the earnest
Prayer and desire of all in this County, who are well affected to your Majesty,
the true Protestant Religion, and the Peace of your Dominions.

And since by a Letter from the Speaker of the House of Commons, directed to
the Sheriff, we are assured that they are accordingly framing their humble
desires to your Majesty, such as chiefly tend to the Honor of God, the
greatness and prosperity of your Majesty, and the public good of the Common
Wealth.

Yet since, most gracious Sovereign (with much sorrow of heart, we understand
that a few Gentlemen of this County, have taken upon them to anticipate those
Demonstrations of duty which both Houses are preparing, and your Majesty's
gracious Resolutions thereupon: in the Name of the Gentry and Commons of the
County of York, whereas indeed they were a very small part of the Gentry,
only as we are informed in a Petition to your Majesty, directly opposite to
the Petition of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Removing of the
Magazine at Hull, tending to the foment devision betwixt your Majesty, your
great Council the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament. We therefore
encouraged by that expression from your Majesty's own mouth concerning other
Petitioners that you had not gone about to discourage them from petitioning in
an humble way, and being most assured that our loyal affections to your
Majesty, your Crown and Dignity are not inferior to any of your Subjects
whatsoever, and that we have better ground and warrant to represent the sense
of the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire, then those Petitioners had; yet are we
not possessed with so much arrogance as to believe that a few amongst us, or
all the County together can judge of the fitness where to dispose that
Magazine, or of the State and safety of this Kingdom and of your Majesty's
Person so well as your great Counsel, whose judgment we are bound to prefer
before all private Counsels, and whose endeavors have given us much assurance
of their careand fidelity to the public, which we doubt not will tend to the
honor, satisfaction, and greatness of your Sacred Majesty and Royal
Posterity.

And that your Majesty would graciously apply your self to all good means of
Union, that those duties which by the Laws of God and men we owe (expressed in
our late Protestation) may not become a divided Proposition since the defense
of your Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, the power and Privilege
of Parliament, and the lawful Right and Liberties of the Subject taken
jointly, do all serve to strengthen each other, which we shall equally labor
to preserve to the utmost of our Lives, power, and Estate.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray for your long and prosperous Reign.
London Printed for John Wright. 1642.


