^ew Letter from Londonderry: Giving a farther Account of the late Good
Success, obtained by the Protestants in Ireland, Against the French and Irish
Papists: WITH THE SPEECH OF THAT (...) Divine, and Protestant Champion, Mr.
Walker, (...) Soldiers of that Garrison, before they made that last Great Sally
upon the Enemy.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

(...),

(...) our last Fortunate and truly ^ictorious Sally upon the Enemy, (...)
Action that must ever resound (...) of our Valiant and no less Pi^^^mander,
that truly Christian (...), Mr. Walker our Governor, (...) little of present
Moment more to (...), by Reason that the (...) of the French and Irish from
(...) Walls, with the entire Ruining (...) Works, and indeed the whole (...)
(which God be praised) we have (...) them, has so disabled them, that (...) at
present in great Quiet and Rest, (...) all our Business now is only our (...)
Preparation for the welcome (...) of Major General Kirk, with his gallant
English Succors, whose Approach is here the Subject of Universal Joy within
our Walls of Londonderry, and possibly of as much Terror without them.
However, Sir, as the Glory of that Heroic Action, and indeed the whole
Conduct, Courage, and Gallantry of this small, but Formidable Town, will remain
a lasting and Recorded Monument to the Fame of our Valiant Leader; so his
Generous and Noble Speech to the Soldiers, that not a little contributed to our
Conquest, by animating that Resolution that gained it, will be no disacceptable
Present to you, which I have here sent you, being as faithfully taken, as the
Hurry at the Delivery of it would permit.

THE SPEECH.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers,
AS so extraordinary an Occasion has at this Time invited me to Summon you
together, I shall not consult the ordinary Methods of Ancient or Modern
Gene^^ls, so much to instruct you in all the Criticisms (...) Marshal
Discipline, as to inflame your Hearts to a cheerful Resolution, and to
encourage Humility, Vigilance, and Constancy in your Undertakings; and being by
several late Proofs, convinced of your steady Inclinations to live and die for
that Cause, which by God's signal Providence, and our Endeavors, we have with
advantage hitherto maintained, I thought it a double Duty incumbent on me, both
as your Pastor and Captain, to lay before you those Motives that might at once
enlighten your Understanding, and excite your Perseverance. How far we are
obliged by the common Principles of Nature, and Self-preservation, to defend
our selves against all manifest and intended Injuries against our Persons and
just Interest, I need not here repeat: (the meanest Beast either by flight or
resistance demonstrating their fixed Aversion to all manner of hurt, and
injurious dealing;) but when persons that are circumscribed, and ought to be
protected by the just Institution of Laws, and the Solemnity of Oaths,
Promises, and Conditions, are enchroach'd upon, and marked out as Sacrifices to
an Arbitrary and unlimited Power; then I say, the Laws of Nature and of God, do
warrant our Resistance, and not only our Country, but our Consciences exact our
utmost Resolutions. What? are we Christians, Protestants, and Englishmen, and
shall we doubt to defend our Religion, our Country, and our Liberties? See how
our numerous Foes insult, and laugh, and please themselves with our
Destruction: Hark! how they divide our Lands, and cast Lots for our proper
Habitations: Mark but their Faith to our distressed Countrymen, and see what
usage we are like to trust to; England was scarce secure, though Ten to one
against them; Can we then trust their Power, being now not one to an hundred;
they broke through the Sacred Ties that could be m^de by Man to them; and can
we hope for Faith in their performance? What, has their new French Piety, mixed
with their Irish punick Faith and Clemency, encouraged us to wear their
well-known easy Yoke? Are we so destitute of honest Morals, as that we need to
be Dragoon'd into Civility? No, dear Countrymen, we know their ways, and are
not now to be Cajoled into Destruction; scarce Forty Years are yet expired
since we had pregnant Proofs of their Humanity: some Mothers even in this Town
are living yet that now afresh lament the loss of Fathers, Husbands, Brothers,
Children, not killed in heat of Battle or Assault, but in cold Blood, and upon
Quarter given. Possession of an Horse, a Cow, a Coat, a piece of Money, was
Crime enoug^ exact the poor Offenders Life; Nay, when (...) Avarice could ask
no more, Tortures and (...) have been applied for Sport, and Infants (...) from
their lamenting Mothers Breasts, have (...) seen dangling on their Cowards
Swords (...) make the Brutes Diversion: Cowards, (...) Countrymen, we well may
term them, (...) they stood an equal Combat, (or (...) now our great
Encouragement) maintained a (...) and rightful Cause: It Is truth, they boast
(...) Numbers and their Strength, but we have (...) and Justice on our sides:
God, that with (...) small handful of Men, has baffled all their Co^^sels and
their Force.

Let us therefore with Courage and Constan^ Dear Brethren, go on and make
answerable (...) turns to that peculiar Providence that has hith^^to protected
us: Let us now raise the glory this little Town, and prove it the worthy (...)
of our great Patroness: England will ^^^tainly, and with speed Assist us, nor
will (...) gracious Sovereigns forget us, their Goodnes^ (...) well as Interest
are engaged for us, and they (...) soon make us rejoice in our Deliverance;
(...) wants as yet are no way desperate, and we (...) hitherto rather seen than
felt the Miseries (...) hard Seige; when we think, fit we beat th^^ from our
Walls, and often in our Sallysclear (...) Trenches; we have looked their
Bugbear Ge^^ral in the Face, and broke their boasted (...) into pieces; we have
laughed at their (...) Grenades; their pretended Almighty Bombs (...) not
affright us; our Consciences are clear in (...) we do, and the Almighty God
will to the (...) defend us; keep up your Valiant Hearts (...) dear
Fellow Soldiers, if you have any (...) for your Wives, your Children, your
(...) your Liberties: but above all, if you have (...) hope to enjoy that holy
reformed Religion you (...), take Courage: it is for that chiefly we (...)
hunted and persecuted; and it is for that (...) we shall, to the last, Glory to
suffer, and (...) in the mean time, to the last drop of blood, ma^^tain and
defend.

So Help us God.

At which, all the Garrison, wit^ loud Acclamations, Cried

AMEN
LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, 1689.


