A True and Perfect RELATION Of the late and dreadful INUNDATION Which happened
in HOLLAND On Sunday November. 3. 1675. at 4 of the Clock Afternoon, Saturn being
then in Opposition to Mars.

By which lamentable Accident all the Land is set under Water from Amsterdam to
Leyden, Vtrecht, Woorden, Tergow, all South-Holland, and a great part of
North-Holland, about Hoorn, etc.

TOGETHER With an Account of those further Miseries and Calamities that
followed thereupon, as the drowning of Men, Women and Children, and multitudes
of Cattle.

As also a brief Account of a dreadful Storm with Thunder and Lightning on the
same day at Antwerp and Gent, to the loss of the Lives of diverse porsons.

Licenced

Nov. 12. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1675.

A True and Perfect. RELATION Of the Late INUNDATION OF WATER That happened in
Holland, by which all the Land is Overflowed from Amsterdam to Leyden, Utrecht,
Woorden, Tergow, all South-Holland, and a great Part of North-Holland, etc.
My good Friend,
I Have not been able to omit making known to you those sad tidings which
lately happened here; namely, that all our fruitful Northernland (except that
of Keeren and Swaagdijke, and that farther Eastward of Hoorn, as far as
Enckhuysen) is so miserably overflowed, that it is like a great Pool of Water,
which came to pass on this wife:

Upon Sunday the third of this Instant November, S. N. the North-west Wind did
so drive in the Sea upon us, that you would have thought that the Waves thereof
would have overwhelmed the whole Country; and the Water was d^^ven in so
vehemently by the Storm, that it flowed higher here at this time, than was ever
seen by any man living before; for in the Night it was risen to that height,
that it stood an Inch above the lower Lintel of our High Houses, and the Stream
can through all our Low Houses.

The next day in the Evening, there was a great floing in of the Water at the
Sluice of the Eastgate; also it broke through the Dike at the Eastgate, where
the Spanish Cavalry stood; so that the water began to flow exceeding high in
that place, but was stopped by the powerful assistance of men, that brought
with them Sails and Weights for that purpose; also they brought two great
Schuyts, and placed them upon the Sails, and filled them full of water, so that
by that means they might bear down the Sails with the greater weight.

About Two a Clock in the Morning the Bells of the Brant and State-house began
to ring, which occasioned a great Alarm in the City; at that time News was
brought, That the Dike to the Westward of Hoorne was broken through between
Scharwoude and the Swarte Church; and about half an hour after there came
likewise News that there was another great breach made in the said Dyke before
Carbalius Wieltie, so that the Burghers came too late thither. But to prevent
farther danger, and to turn the water back as much as was possible. The next
day in the Morning they beat the Drums, to give notice, That if there were any
that would work at the Breaches of the Dykes for Wages, they should repair to
Keeren, where they should he civily enterained, (there being already great
Companies of Volunteers at work both before and behind the Water, and had
brought Earth and Stones thither to make a crooked Ba^^ ^hinking thereby to
turn off the water along by (...) Somerdyke, to hinder it from flowing more
Northwards; but this proved unsuccesful, for in the Evening the Somerdyke was
broken through in two or three places, and had overflowed that good Land as far
as Medenblick.

But it pleased God to bless the endeavors of the people at Keeren, so that
their work was not wholly in vain there, for by that crooked Bank which they
had made they forced the Water to run over as far as Swaagdyke; and being
supplied with Earth, they made a Dyke by which they could the better stop the
Water there, and hinder it from breaking farther into the Polder, which has
hitherto succeeded well, and it is hoped will so continue, by the blessing of
Almighty God, and the great care and vigilance of our Magistrates, who have
quitted themselves extraordinary well in this Affair.

My Dear Friend, This day being Wednesday, I went to the great Church with my
Father, (which was the first time of my going forth since Monday* the Waters
being so high) where Mijn Here Newstadt made a good Sermon; his Audience was
but 25 men, all the rest being gone to work at Keeren. The Sermon being ended,
we also went all of us thither, and found all things in the dreadfullest
condition that can possibly be expressed with a Pen; For they tell us, that some
of the poor Boars were come thither with their Goods in Schuijts: That others
had filled their Schuijts with drowned Cattle, and brought them thither to
sell, (they being forced to eat the drowned Beasts or starve.) They tell us
also that some Vagabond Rogues have ^ke Throats of their Hoggs and Sheep, and
carried ^^em away in Sacks to sell to others: That some are gone away with
pieces of dead Cows, which they carry here and there to the Inhabitants that
are fled from the Waters. Others are fled with Wagons full of Household Goods,
and Schuijts laden with Cheese, and left their Cattle behind them. Also they
say, that others are fled with their Wives and Children, having lost all their
Cattle, and whatsoever they had besides. In general, the Calamity is so great,
it cannot be expressed by any person alive.

The 7th Instant in the Morning (the Bells having rung, and the Drums beat all
the night) all the men came to Keeren to assist in stopping the Water.

It is now also commanded by the States, that all the Women should come forth
(that are able to work) to help the men to lade Stones in Ships, that they
might be carried and sunk before the Breach: The Women in all parts of the
Country are so forward in complying with this Command, that they pass by here
in Thousands toward Luydendijke having their Baskets with them to carry
Stones; so that it is with us (you may think) as if we were in a Beleaguered
City, the which is dreadful to behold. If you your self were here at this
time, you would see a thousand times more than I can write to you.

There are of those poor Inhabitants that lie in Hundreds upon Planks and
Boards, and in open Houses, without Fire or Victuals, that must (if things so
continue) be starved with Hunger and Cold, for no Boats can come at them to
fetch them off. Herewith I take my leave at present, praying to God to preserve
us from further Inundations, and remain,

Your very loving Friend N. N.

Another Letter from Amsterdam.
SIR,
BY reason of an extraordinary Storm of Wind, the Dike between this City and
Haerlem is broken down, so that there is no passage between us and them, nor
has been for these five days. The Storm and Flood has done a great deal of
mischief, insomuch that it is impossible to relate all the misery we daily
undergo. Among many wonderful Accidents take these following; The Island Mark
(which is an Island that lies about two Leagues from this City, in the Mouth of
the Zuijder-Zee) is altogether washed away, nothing is remaining but the
Churches. Also a great part of the Island Urk is washed away.

Some Ships which are lately arrived here from the Texel, tell us, That they
have met several pieces of Houses driving at the Sea, and people upon the tops
of them, which is almost incredible, yet it is related here for a Truth.

Sir, Not only the Dike between Haerlem and Amsterdam is broken down, but all
the Land is set under Water from Amsterdam to Leyden, Utrecht, Woorden, Tergow,
all South-Holland, and a great part of North-Holland, and it is to be feared we
shall hear of more damage shortly in other parts of this Country. By the next
Post you shall have an Account of the number of Persons and Cattle drowned.
Having no more at present, I remain,

SIR, Your Loving Friend, Stephen Swaert.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have since received an Account, that at Antwerp from Sunday till Teusday
there was such extraordinary bad weather from the Northwest, which drove the
Water very high, and has done much damage to some Pack-houses: But at Gent on
Monday in the Evening, about 8 or 9 of the Clock was a most dreadful Storm of
Wind, accompanied with Thunder and Lightning, insomuch that it set Fire to two
Towers, Belfort and St. Peter, and the people being forward to put out the
Fire, there was many persons killed and wounded, whereof two were killed
outright by the Thunder, and many destroyed in the Rubbish.

FINIS.

