A SERMON Preached in the PARISH CHURCH OF ALDENHAM In the County of HERTFORD,
ON Thursday, April 16. 1696.

BEING The Day of Thanksgiving to Almighty God for Discovering and
Disappointing a Horrid and Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists and other Traiterous
Persons to Assassinate and Murder His Most Gracious Majesty's Royal Person; and
for Delivering this Kingdom from an Invasion intended by the French.

Published at the Request of the Inhabitants of the said Parish.

By PETER NEWCOME, M. A. and Vicar of Aldenham in Hertfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

TO THE INHABITANTS Of the PARISH of ALDENHAM, Who were Hearers of this
Discourse.
IT was no little Surprise to me, after I had Preached the following Discourse
to you, to meet you all drawn up in a Body in the Churchyard, so importunately
requesting this Publication, so much befides either my Inclination or Judgment.
But, as hereby you seemed willing to manifest your zealous Loyalty to the
present Government, and offered me an Opportunity of testifying the Sincerity
of my Affection to you (who am wholly this Governments and Yours) so have I
turned my Back upon all Objections (which I then urged upon you, and found
afterward multiplying very fast and thick upon me) to comply with your Desires.

If this Publication may contribute any Service to the Government, and find as
kind an Acceptance from the Press as it did from the Pulpit, (which is what I
know better how to Wish than Hope for) To God be the Glory, to You the Thanks,
and to my self I own nothing more due, but the Charity of Prayers; which I
desire none of my Readers to refuse or neglect, for the Success and
Encouragement of the weak Endeavors of an Unworthy and Obscure

Labourer in Christ's Vineyard, P. N.

NEHEM. IX. 17. -- And in their Rebellion appointed a Captain, to Return to
their Bondage --.


UPON a Solemn Day of Humiliation, as the Remembrance of God's Mercies is
thought, here in this Chapter, a proper Introduction to a more humble
Confession of the Peoples sins; so upon a solemn Day of Thanksgiving, a
sensible Reflection on sin, can prove no less proper Introduction to a more
grateful praising of God for his Mercies. For as the greatness of Mercy
aggravates the guilt of Sin, so the greatness of Guilt inhaunces no less the
greatness of Mercies. And therefore, as the Jewish Levites, on their Fast Day,
help forward their Humiliations by their Praises; so is it not improper for us
now, on this our Day of Thanksgiving, to promote our Gratitude by our humble
Acknowledgments. And as they introduced their Confession of Sin, by recounting
God's Mercies to them; so we may fitly introduce our Gratitude by reflecting on
our Sins against God.

And to this Argument does the Text referr; containing an Acknowledgment of
their Forefathers Guilt in an Instance that our present Age has appropriated,
and occasioned these our Thanksgivings for its no less remarkable
Disappointment.

The Passage refers to the Story we read in Numb. 14 2, 3, and 4th Verses. The
People of Israel (having been miraculously delivered out of Egypt, and provided
for in the Wilderness, and ready to enter into Rest, the promised Land) upon
the return of the Spies, and their false Report, they fall a murmuring, and not
only fall out with the Providence of God toward them, but Plot Rebellion
against the Government God had in Mercy placed over them, and in a wonderful
manner made instrumental for their late Deliverance: For all the Children of
Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron; and the whole Congregation
said unto them, Would God that we had died in the Land of Egypt, or would God
we had died in this Wilderness. And wherefore has the Lord brought us unto
this Land, to fall by the Sword, that our Wives and our Children should be a
prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt? And they said one to
another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt. And (accordingly
our Text tells us, that) in their Rebellion they appointed a Captain [at least,
purposed to do so, which in the Eyes of God is as criminous as if they had done
so] to return to their Bondage.

This was the Plot by them contrived, but by God graciously disappointed in
their own Ruin and Destruction.

So that it hence appears to be no new thing (though very unreasonable and
wicked) for a People eminently saved and rescued from Bondage, to oppose
Themselves their complete Deliverance, and to be weary of Mercies before
perfected to them: In their Rebellion* desiring and endeavoring to Return back
to their former, already forgotten, Miseries they groaned under.

A Case no more Unreasonable and Impious than too exactly parallel to our own
of this Nation; whom God has, in like manner, but just saved From rather than
Out of a Bondage (which surely inhaunces the Mercy) and too many of us have (in
no less aggravated a Rebellion) been plotting to return, and undo our selves
therewith more irrecoverably again.

A most Prodigious, Unreasonable, Horrid and Impious Folly, and Madness to a
Proverb! Prove. 26.11. and 2 Pet. 2.22.
( The Dog that returns to his Vomit, doing but what those Rebels proposed to
do, who greedily longed after their nauseated and disgorged Oppressions) which
as it stands upon Record to the reproach of the Israelites, so will it
doubtless be Chronicl'd to the shame of such of this Age, with all that shall
come after.

Concerning it therefore (that such as have any ways shared in the Guilt may be
truly Humbled, and such of us as have been blessed in its Defeat may be truly
Thankful, and all of us do what lies in our Power to prevent the like for the
future, by a more unanimous and steady perseverance in our Loyalty) I shall
insist upon these Three things; Considering,

I. The Evil and Folly of the Sin. II. The Inducements that may be accounted
for thereto. And, III. The Duty incumbent on us for its present Disappointment.
I. I am to account for the Evil and Folly of the Sin: Which in the Text, was,
That in their Rebellion against God's Government by Moses the Israelites
appointed (or plotted so to appoint) a Captain to return their Bondage they had
so lately and wonderfully been thereby rescued from* And in its Parallel
(wherein we are concerned) is, That some, in like manner, of this Nation have
in Rebellion, both to the Providence of God and the best of Governments, been
Conspiring to overturn both, and in the most lawless and base Methods
desperately to involve all in Misery we have so miraculously hitherto been
preserved from. The Evil and Folly of both which Instances is apparent in the
very Attempt, much more in the the Fact, and most of all in the Consequences
thereof.

1. The Attempt was Unreasonable and Impious: As opposing the Design of God's
Providence and presuming upon its Assistance to contradict it self. For as He
was effecting and carrying on Deliverance, so were the Israelites here
contriving again for Bondage, in confidence to succeed by the frail Inventions
and Endeavors of Man, so as to overthrow what had been effected by the
miraculous Power of the Omnipotent God: And what could not be done without so
many Miracles, they attempt to undo by their own Contrivance: As if God would
work Miracles to make them again Miserable, who had but just been at that
expense to deliver them from Misery! For how otherwise could the Israelites
hope to get into Egypt, who got not thence without Manna to feed them, a Cloudy
Pillar to conduct them, and a Sea divided and dried up to procure them a
Passage through it; which were all Miracles wrought immediately by God for them,
and were necessary for their Deliverance, and without which (or some other such
Assistances from God) their Return would be impossible. For they could not hope
to get back without God, who were so much obliged to him to get thither, where
they now were. And what an impious and unreasonable Attempt was this in the
Israelites, to propose to do as much by their own Skill and Power, as God had
done for them by Miracle!

Nor is the Rebellion of the Malcontents in our Israel short of a Parallel
herein, who is Attempt was not only to overthrow a Revolution that was visibly
effected by an Overruling Providence, but to bring about another in opposition
to it, wherein they must hope either to do as much and great things as God,
without him, or presume upon him to contradict himself, and to show himself as
signally to help their Return into Slavery, as he had done to assist their
escape and deliverance from it; Both alike impious and vain to expect from God.
For as Man is not a Match to oppose God in his designs, so is he not able to do
any thing without his Assistance, nor can he reasonably expect this in any
thing that is not according to his Holy Purpose.

Our late Deliverance was visibly the work of God (impossible to have ever been
effected, in such a manner without an Overruling Providence) and is it not
impious folly to Attempt the Undoing of it (as it were) in spite thereto; or
to hope that God would so far contradict himself as, only for the gratification
of a few unreasonable Murmurers, to go back with his own work and be ready to
show himself as visibly in another Revolution to Slavery, as he did in that for
our Deliverance from it; And what then is this in the Attempt, but a fighting
against God? as being dissatisfyed with his Providence toward us, and
presuming upon his subjecting his Councils to ours; or else venturing to Act
without and against him, by undermining and defeating the declared Purposes of
his Will?

What the final Council of the Lord is, in this or any other Providential
occurrence, none can tell; But what he has discovered, and we can tell, it is
not for us to oppose or be discontented with: much less to wrest the work out
of his hands, and of our own heads plot to return whence he has brought us;
which is to Oppose our Councils and Power to His; or rather to oppose him to
himself, and is Illegal in the very Attempt both to the Israelites and to our
Conspirators. And much more then,

2. The Fact it self was Wicked: Being designed in an Illegal Manner, to an ill
End, by Unjust Means. For it is said to be done in Rebellion, contrary to Faith
and Allegiance engaged to the Government ordained by God, in opposition to
Authority owned and accepted of by themselves, and which was the Crime as of
those Israelites, so of our Delinquents. For as they had groaned under their
Bondage, and longed for freedom before Deliverance came, and thanked God for
the same after they had it, and submitted themselves to the Authority by which
God wrought it out for them; so no less did These; whom no remembrance of their
former fears, nor sense of their late Joy in the Revolution, nor Obligation to
the present Government (by Fealty sworn or Protection accepted) could contain
in due Obedience; But, in their Rebellion against Heaven and Earth, Interest
and Duty, Vows and Obligations) they Conspire the Disturbance and overthrow of
the present Settlement; not to Reform and Amend, or to proceed in our
Deliverance, But (Oh strange Madness!) to return to their Bondage; Resolving to
be Miserable if they may not be just as themselves would be! To so ill a
purpose do they do so ill! (and indeed an ill thing cannot be done otherwise)
and so unreasonable are the Projects of men, that regard not, or oppose the
Council of the Almighty!

And then to bring about this; what is it such stick at? The Israelites indeed,
in their Rebellion, the Text tells us, appointed a Captain to return to their
Bondage: They would no longer submit to Governors of Gods appointment; but
would choose for themselves, as more able and wise to do so (after all that had
been done for them) to provide for their better Settlement. Which certainly,
had Folly and Sin enough in it! But yet herein the Parallel seems to outrun the
Original. For our Conspirators have not only done this, but more. Intending not
only to appoint a New Captain, and forsake and depose whom God had appointed
for them, but Treacherously and Cowardly in cold blood, to Murder and
Assassinate their old one (whom they had no fault to find with, but that he was
not of their own appointment) whom alone God had made the Instrument of all
their Blessings, and only from whom they could expect the continuance thereof
to them.

A Villainy that no pretense, whatever, can be able to justisy! That is not
consistent with the Principles of Humane Nature, much less of true Religion!
And therefore henceforward the pretenses of Conscience must surely be stifled
in a Cause that espouseth so unconscionable Designs.

It is the Apostle s Doctrine that we must not do evil that good may come
thereof, Romans 3.8.
[the most blessed consequences not being sufficient to Authorize or Justify a
wicked Deed] much less design evil for evil's sake, and attempt a sin in a
sinful manner, and Rebel for Ruin: And therefore this also further illustrates
and compleats the Evil and Folly of this Conspiracy (both in the Rebellious
Israelites and our own Contrymen) That

3. Lastly. The Consequences thereof were unavoidably Ruinous and Miserable
both to themselves and the whole Nation: Because it was not only a frustration
of Deliverance, but a return to Bondage that was aimed at. Egypt and Slavery
was to be the Consequence; and a subjection to a Government, whence neither
Liberty, nor Religion, nor Reward (which are the Dearest things men have to be
fond of) but only a Divine Displeasure and Vengeance might reasonably be
expected.

1. The loss of all Liberty was the certain consequence of such a Return. Exodus
20.2.
For Egypt was the House of the Israelites Bondage; the most grievous state of
their Affliction, where they found no Mercy, no Compassion; But were treated as
Enemies and Slaves, and subjected to as many Tyrants as they had Governors; And
therefore it was in vain for them to hope to be more at ease there, than where
they now were, among men of their own Nation and Profession, and under the
Conduct of that Government whereby God had wrought Deliverance for them, and
designed them Rest and Liberty; and whose service was nothing to the drudgeries
of a Brick-kiln, or confinements of Prisons which they under went, and must
again expect, if ever they returned into Egypt: Which of all Places, (having
experienced its Cruelty) ought to be dreaded, and least of all aimed at by
them. So that Slavery must necessarily have been the Consequence of returning
thither.

And no better, in Analogy of Reason, was our Return designed to have been in
(in respect to the Liberty we have recovered and now enjoy) from a Government
that exactly observes the Liberty of the Subject, to a Government that we
experienced woefully Arbitrary, and under which we could foresee nothing but
Ruin and Slavery. And therefore the Consequence of this, must necessarily have
been infinitely for the aggravation of our Grievances and increase of our
Complaints; who, if we cannot be content to submit to an easy and limited
Government, that suffers and encourages every Man to sit under his own Vine,
and to possess and enjoy what he has without Jealousy or Disturbance, should
be very unable to bear up under the Insults and Oppressions of the Despotick
Power of an irritated conquering Enemy. Therefore does God threaten such a
Slavery as this as a Judgment to his People; Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou
servedst not the Lord thy God, with joyfulness of heart, for the abundance of
all things. Therefore shall thou serve thy Enemies which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all
things, and he shall put a yoke of Iron upon thy neck until he have destroyed
thee. From which, good Lord, continue evermore to deliver us!

2 Nor is there more of Religion than Liberty to be expected in Egypt: Exodus
8.26.
Where the Sacrifices of the Israelites were an Abomination, and for which
therefore they expected to have been stoned, should they have offered them
before their Eyes; and insisted hereupon for the necessity of their removing
thence into the Wilderness, for their Liberty in Religion, which the Egyptians
abominated and persecuted them for; and to whom therefore to return now again,
was to give up their Religion, or themselves to suffer for it.

Nor is the Malignity of our Adversaries (from whom we are delivered, and have
been conspiring to return) less to be dreaded by us, than was this of the
Egyptians by the Children of Israel, toward a Profession for the true
uncorrupted Service of God. We have had long and repeated Instances of the
implacable Malice and Cruelty of Popery against Protestantism; which authorizes
Princes to Dragoon their own Subjects (yea, and dignifies them with the Title
of Eldest Son of the Church for encouragement to do so) and will dispense with
all the most sacred ties of Oaths and Promises, for the propagation of their
Faith and Suppression of the Northern Heresy* (as they Devilishly Nickname
true Religion) If therefore we have any kindness for our Profession, it will be
impossible to be fond of those that hate it, and once began to enslave us for
it; and from whom no Indulgence is to be expected there, any longer than it
shall not lie in their Power to hurt.

It was the certain prospect of the impending Ruin to our Religion, that made
us seek for security in a Deliverance; and therefore to Conspire a return to
our former (and much worse) estate, is to betray this Security, and to
Sacrifice our Religion to our Indiscretion. For we cannot hope to be received
with this which is an Abomination to the State we would return to: Nor can they
be thought but to be weary of their own Religion, who would have the Government
in the Power of its worst Enemies, and subject themselves to those that have
espoused the Interest of another Religion.

However, could it probably be thought that Egypt and Arbitrary Government
would remit of the Slavery of their former Servants, and indulge a Religion
they abominate (which is an odd Supposition to venture much on) yet after such
an Escape and Deliverance, it can very hardly be hoped,

3. That a Return would be able to secure a Welcome, but rather expose to
Revenge and greater Misery. For the Israelites escape cost the Egyptians dear
(by which they suffered both in their Estates and Lives) and would doubtless
render it the harder for them to forgive; and if ever they had got them into
their Hands again, have provoked them to have made them pay dearly for it;
never trusting whom they had been so great sufferers by; keeping a more strict
and jealous Eye to prevent the like escape again; suffering it no more to be in
their power ever to hurt them again, than they would be sure to take care of
ever encouraging them thereto by connivance or kindness. A provoked Enemy can
never make a good Friend. And therefore Israel s return into Egypt could no
more secure themselves, than it would oblige their Enemies.

And yet Israel might as reasonably think to make Peace with Egypt as we with
France and Popery, whose Designs We (and God for us) have hitherto so
vigorously opposed, and successfully broken all their Measures. Into whose
Power could we, upon any Terms, but be once reduced (which God forbid!) both
Revenge and Inclination would quickly break all to work our final Destruction.
For Tyranny and Persecution is the very Genius of Popery. It is Egypt's
Constitution to oppress; neither is it altered since we were delivered from it;
nor would our Return thither change or abate its Temper to Us, especially, who
have so provoked it. It Is not safe trusting to a reconciled Enemy, who will
continue reconciled but till he can have an opportunity to do Revenge. And this
present French King, that was set in his Throne by his Protestant Subjects, did
therefore, it is said, make this his Argument for their Destruction, That they,
who had power to set him up, might not be in a capacity to use it to pull him
down again: And should then the present Discontents and Malignity among us have
took effect to have restored us to our Egyptian Bondage, to be sure it would
quickly have been taken out of our Power ever to have delivered our selves
again; and so our Return must necessarily have been to far greater Miseries
than we escaped from. Besides,

4. Lastly, The Displeasure and Vengeance of God, that undoubtedly follows, and
falls justly upon such perfidious Revolters. For the False Spies (who were the
chief Conspirators) died by the Plague presently, and God cuts off by degrees
all the murmuring Israelites, and delays the National Mercy forty Years, till
they were all dead that despised it, and raises up a new Generation to inherit
the Blessings they had forfeited.

Mercies despised are seldom perfected; and a Rebellious Ingratitude of a
present Age, may render themselves unworthy of Blessings designed and begun for
them, and deferr them to Posterity.

God will not let one of those enter into the Promised Land of Canaan, that had
been any ways consenting to a Return into Egypt. He will neither bless them
with what he purposed, nor gratify them with what they desired, but dooms them
Vagabonds, to wander out their Lives in a Wilderness: Or had he permitted their
Return, and Egypt had received and cherished them, yet even there could he have
sent after them, and have destroyed them for their backsliding, and have made
them more miserable in the Success, than he did in the Disappointment of their
Conspiracy.

It Is fatal to throw off the safe and wise conduct of Providence, which we
never oppose or direct, but to our own loss. God will not endure to be
controuled by us; neither will he suffer such Presumption to escape some mark
of his heavy Displeasure. No Age is without its Monuments of Sufferings for
turbulent rebellious Discontent. And that in ours, such are now erecting, is
but the usual and just Reward of the same Sin.

Upon which Accounts, so great is the Madness, so grievous the Guilt of
Opposing or Rejecting the Councils of the Lord by the Rebellious Devices of
Men! which is so unreasonable in the Attempt, so wicked in the Fact, and so
very pernicious in its Consequences; that tends to the loss of Liberty, the
extirpation of the True Religion, the merciless Revenge of an insulting Enemy,
and the unavoidable Judgments of a Provoked, Just, and Jealous Deity! And yet
such was the Guilt and Folly of the Israelites, in Conspiring to return to
Egypt, after their escape from their Bondage in it; and such, no less, of our
present Age, in its unreasonable Murmurers under the present Government, and
the Rebellious Attempts that have been now discovered and disappointed of their
Conspiracy, to return to their Bondage they had so lately been set free from.

Nor is the Folly more Parallel than the Inducements in both thereto. For as
their Sin seems too much alike, so is the Occasion of it. And therefore
consider we also now (which is our next Particular proposed, viz.)

II. The Inducements that may be accounted for that betrayed to such Villainy.
For the greater the Sin, the greater the Wonder what should draw Men into it.
That so Hellish a Motion should meet with so ready a Reception, and gain to it
self so strong a Party, with so much consent among a People so highly favored,
so lately delivered, so signally protected, by wonderful Providence! A People
that saw all God's Judgments against Egypt, and the Overthrow of Pharaoh and
all his Host, for their Succor, and without their help! Who found themselves
secured (by the Defense and Conduct of a Cloud and Fire, by the plentiful and
wholesome provision of Manna from Heaven, and the miraculous Water from a Cloven
Rock) from all the inconveniences of a barren and perilous Wilderness, and
were just ready to enter the promised Land, and within ken of a most desirable
Settlement; and yet, after all this, to frustrate and dash at once, what had
been so long, and with so great Expense and miraculous Success adoing toward
their Felicity, and to attempt, in so rebellious a manner, to return to Misery:
As incredible as this seems, yet so it was, and so it may be again, if it may
not be said (upon too like Inducements) that so it now is; (the like Account
being to be given for the like Rebellion now as then) for thus it seems to have
happened,

1. From the falseness of the Spies; who by an evil Report discourage the
People, and prejudice them against the Truth and Encouragements that they were
employed to have laid before them. For they are sent into the good Land, to see
the goodness thereof, and to make their Report according to what they saw. And
Joshua and Caleb (who were of their number, and knew as much as any of them)
accordingly make their Report faithfully; but the rest falsifying, conceal
their Encouragements, and raise Difficulties, and propagate Lies to serve their
own Design, and frustrate the Mercies designed for them.

Nothing usually does more mischief in a State, than the spreading of false and
evil Reports in it; and were it not from the falseness of Spies, there would be
no color for Conspiracies; (all Rebellions against a Government being founded
on its misrepresentations.) It Is an evil Report that makes Men evil minded; and
it is the officiousness of designing Spies, that prejudices the People. Had all
Men spoke as they had found, and regarded Truth more than Passion and
Self-interest in their Representations, it would not have been likely for any
to have desired so sudden a change of a Government to which all have been so
very much beholden. But we have had False Spies among us, who have made it
their business to raise and propagate evil Reports; (magnifying the Strength
and Advantages of our Enemy, and lessening that of our own; meeting to murmur
in their Tents; showing themselves glad at our Losses, and disturbed at our
Advantages; insisting upon Difficulties to make them Impossibilities; working
underhand to obstruct and betray Affairs, and then making it a prejudice to
the Government, that things succeed no better, and urging the People to grumble
at their Circumstances, which themselves industriously do all they can to
hinder from being amended:) Such are the evil Instruments of our public
Disturbances, that draw off the Minds of Subjects from their Duty of
Allegiance, and run them upon the most desperate and ruinous Attempts to cross
the Providence of God, and contrive for the disappointment of Blessings
designed for them. From the evil Reports that are falsely spread, by some
discontented designing Spies of Canaan, arises the unreasonable Conspiracy to
return into Egypt. And which is also promoted,

2. From an evil Heart of Unbelief. A mistrust of God's Power and Goodness to
make good his Promise, utterly incapacitating for the benefit of its
Completion. Heb. 3.19.
For so the Israelites entered not in because of Unbelief: God being provoked to
leave them who first leave him, and to suffer them to fall by their own
Councils, who have not Faith to depend on his. God is able and willing to carry
on his own work, and Man is never necessitated to his own shifts. But Unbelief
is full of Suspicion, that makes Men uneasy and restless to lean to their own
Understandings, though never so infirm and deceitful, rather than to the Conduct
of a wise Providence, though never so Omnipotent and Faithful. Therefore when
Difficulties arise, which may be designed to try and exercise Faith (which,
standing trial, is certainly the most prevalent engagement of Omnipotency to
overcome such Difficulties for us) then Hope is deserted, and Faith made
shipwreck of, and Unbelief begins to argue against all Reason: He that has
done That, can do This; so Faith argues; Ps. 78.19, 20.
but Unbelief says, He has indeed done That, but can he do This also? Can God
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Behold he smote the Rock, and the Waters
gushed out, and the Streams overflowed. Can he give Bread also? can he provide
Flesh for his People? Such is the Logic of Infidelity, that never wants
Objections against Providence, and renders every Objection insuperable, to the
littling of God upon all occasions. To its Carnal eye, the work gloriously
begun, can never be perfected. As if God that had done, could do no more; or
that any thing that was to be done, was greater than what had been done! As if
God, who had Plagued Egypt, Overthrown Pharaoh with all his Host, and so
miraculously rescued the Children of Israel; Could not as easily drive out the
Canaanites before them; But that they were now come to their Ne plus Vltra, and
had already advanced as far as God could conduct them, and were necessitated to
shift at last for themselves, and appoint them a Captain to return to their
Bondage! As if the strength of the People that dwelt in the Land, Number. 15.28.
was too great for God to conquer for them; or their Walled Cities more
impossible to be scaled, than a Sea to be walked through on foot dryshod! Alas!
What are the Children of Anak more in God's hands, than the Egyptians! who can
as easily and speedily squeeze their Grand Monarch, as we have heard they have
insultingly a poor Orange. As if it were a greater thing for God to Settle a
Nation than to Deliver it! And finally, as if He that had broken so often the
Designs of France upon us, could not, in the end, break the Power of France for
us; But we must now shift for our selves; And, to atone for what has been
done, endeavor to undo all again; and return our selves into Bondage (through a
mistrust that our Deliverance cannot be secured to us) in opposition to God's
Providence and our Duty: Wresting the disposal of affairs out of his hands:
Commiting our selves no longer to his Conduct; but in Rebellion, in Treachery,
Violence and Villainy, force our way back, as not believing we can go any longer
prosperously forward.

Hence it is men make so many difficulties and grievances to themselves, and
then run upon so many unreasonable extravagances to avoid them. To him that
believes, Mar. 9.23.
all things are possible; and to them that once begin to mistrust God nothing
seems probable. So that it is evidently Infidelity that makes men restless and
murmuring under their present circumstances, and runs them upon such impious
and foolish Designs, as are Unreasonable in the Attempt, Wicked in the Fact,
and Destructive in the Consequence.

A further (and no less justifyable) account of the sin before us, may also be
given,

3. From an unreasonable Prejudice, Envy and Spite against the Person God has
made, here, both Deliverer and Governor. A wicked People cannot heartily love
a good Governor; not for any evil they fear from such, but because of the good
they malign in them. They envyed Moses in the Camp, Psalm. 106.
and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. They will not be saved by those they hate,
whose successes increase their hatred; and are all for returning to the Tyranny
of Pharaoh, rather than be obliged to their greatest Benefactor, and submit to
the Government of God by Moses, the Meekest of Men. Thus Themistocles and
Aristides were both driven out of their Country, Plutarch.
only for their eminent service for it. The Praedominancy of Vice cannot endure
the Opposition of Virtue. The Israelites would hardly ever have thought of
Egypt for their Asylum, were it not for good Moses, whom they cannot love
because he is holy and good and would have them be so too, and will not suffer
them in their badness. Therefore to gratify Revenge and indulge Spite, is
Slavery to the worst of Tyrants preferred to Security and Liberty under the
most gentle Government that seeks our Good, and would make us Good. And this
further suggests another Reason of so Unreasonable an Attempt; Even*

4. Lastly. From an Impious malignity and seeming dread of being Reformed from
our Vices. For Egypt, though an House of Bondage to their Bodies, was yet a
Freedom to their Lust's; Where no religious Restraints were laid upon them; but
so they performed their Duty to their Taskmasters, they had not only Liberty
but Encouragement to neglect and despise the service of God: Whereas the
present Government they were under had procured them strict Laws and Holy
Statutes, and put them in Execution for the promotion of Piety and Religious
Exercises; and tho it had freed them from Bodily Slavery, yet it restrained
them sinful Liberty; And if ever they were come to be settled in their Land of
Rest, they knew they were to expect more strictness and severity in Religious
matters; which was very ungrateful to corrupt Nature, and made them willing to
turn their backs on Canaan rather than on their Lusts, and prefer Slavery in
Egypt before the service of God in Canaan.

How much this impious Motive may have influenced the Revolters in our Israel*
(though it be not Charity to judge, yet) it is too apparent not to be took notice
of, from the professed looseness and vicious Lives of the Majority of those who
have all along appeared most disaffected to this present Government. All may
pretend Conscience, but few of them have afforded us the testimony of a good
Life for their regard to any.

God be Thanked! The Rebellion is not so General among us, as it was among the
Israelites; But one cannot but observe those who have been concerned in it, to
be the very worst of Men ( Papists and Atheists; Men of the worst, or Men of no
Religion) and therefore most likely to be induced thereto, from their hatred to
Virtue and fears of Reformation.

Such then is the Impiousness of the Villainy, and the Unreasonableness of the
Inducements which may be supposed to lead to it. We are next of all to consider
(as briefly as may be)

III. Lastly. The Duty now incumbent on us for its present disappointment. And
that surely is,

1. To detest and disclaim the Guilt of such Sin. Because the more malignant
the Plague, the further distance will every man in his wits endeavor to flee
from it. No Wise nor Good man but would be unwilling to be defiled by his too
near approach to such filthy Practices. A Villainy of such grosness can not be
decry'd nor declaimed too much against. The very occasions of it should
henceforward be more abominable to us. Neither can it become us now to sit
Neuter, much less to approve, but to oppose our selves to the Cause that needs
or countenances such unjustifyable Courses. And since there is such Villainy
among us, it concerns us the rather to distinguish our selves, by readily
Associating with those that disclaim it; by sedulously clearing our selves from
all suspicions that we may formerly have lain under; and entering our
Protestations against approving or abetting, or any way being concerned in so
foul a Crime. And yet, though we never so much Detest the Crime, we should hence
be moved also

2. To Compassionate and Pray for such as are involved in it. Because the more
heinous the Guilt, the more wretched the Sinner, and the more an object of our
Pity and Intercessions to God for him. That Humane Nature should be so stained,
is Deplorable: That any of our Fellow Creatures should so abuse Reason and
Conscience is more so: But that our Fellow Subjects and Christians should be so
devoid of Grace and Humanity is most of all sad and miserable. In such, we see
the Misery Sin exposes to, and the Weakness of Nature to preserve it self, and
the great dependence we have continually on the preventing and assisting Grace
of God; And if others fall while we stand, it is not becoming such as we are to
be high minded, but the rather to fear.

Such sins therefore of others ought to make us more careful over our selves,
and to compassionate their Miscarriages to which we were so obnoxious our
selves. No man's Misfortune deserves our Insults, though the Occasion may justly
our blame. His Sin that made him miserable is to be detested, but the Misery it
makes him suffer deserves our Pity.

It now therefore becomes us to Compassionate the Guilt and Sufferings, which
the unbridled Madness and Blindness of these Sinners has ensnared them in; and
to recommend their Misfortune to the God of Pity, to open their Eyes to a due
sense of their Error, and to break their Hearts into a sincere Contrition for
their Guilt, and to fit them for, and support them under, and sanctify to them
the sufferings they have procured to themselves in this World, so as to avoid
those eternal Torments they have reason to expect, otherwise, will await them
in the next World.

Neither, while we are thus concerned for Their Sin, ought we to be unmindful
of our own. And, therefore, further, hence it becomes us also

3. To be Humbled for our own sins, which have threatened us with such a
Judgment from other men's. For it is for Those that God permits These to
threaten or afflict us with an Injury; He designing our Punishment by their
Guilt. And therefore now we see the Danger and Ruin we were brought just upon
the Brink of, by others Treachery; it should make us reflect upon our own Guilt
that has provoked God to raise up such turbulent and false Rebels among us,
and permitted them to design and carry on their Conspiracy so far, as to
endanger our Liberty, Laws and Religion thereby. The Fault is theirs, but the
Warning is ours. And though our Reprieve is obtained, yet nothing but an
unfeigned Repentance can secure us a Pardon.

The Danger we were in is graciously discovered to us, to let us see our
demerits, and to provoke us to a Reformation, which is the only Terms upon
which we may promise to our selves safety; without which God can easily reduce
us into the like or worse danger, and deny us any more such Deliverance. Our
Enemie's Disappointment then, must be our Warning; lest our continued
impenitency may give them Success against us, for the Punishment of our Sins
which their Disappointment could not warn us to Reform. Therefore it is not so
much the Injury they designed us, as our Sins, that provoked God to permit them
to design any against us, that (upon such Discovery and Disappointment) we
ought chiefly to oppose our selves, and be humbled for.

God will preserve us, if we will not be wanting to preserve our selves from
Sin; which is the only Enemy we need to fear; and which we have a great deal of
Reason to fear, even from an Apprehension of the Miseries it so lately
threatened us with, and had certainly executed upon us, had not God stepped in
between, to save us yet longer from long since deserved Destruction. It Is fatal
to persist in such Provocations. And, having received yet another Deliverance,
it the more concerns us, now at length, to be more wary of presuming to weary
out Divine Patience to no purpose, and to Sin now no more, lest a worse thing
come next unto us. And hence, then, how can we but own our Obligation further,

4. To be truly Thankful to God for our present Deliverance. It being only his
Mercy and undeserved Forbearance toward us, that has granted us a longer
Respite (who have long since deserved Ruin) and continues his Warnings, when
our Punishment was so ready to fall down on our heads, and which nothing but
the watchful eye of Providence could have rescued from! 'Twas only God (in
whose hands the hearts of all men are to turn as the Rivers of Water) that
turned the hearts of some of the Conspirators themselves to become our
Deliverers: Fetching Good out of Evil; and, by a miracle of Providence,
securing both our Church and State in the Trust only of those, that were
pitched upon as fittest to be entrusted with the perpetration of the worst of
Villainies!

For what greater Evil could men contrive, or have we to fear, than the
Assassination of his Majesty's person, to make way for a foreign Invasion,
whereby to enslave both our Bodies and Souls! Yet this is what was designed for
us, and what God has shown himself so signally in the Discovery of what we are
now Assembled here to return him Thanks for.

To Him therefore be rendered all the Praise, and our heartiest Thanks for this
his infinite Goodness to us! That he still shows his Almighty Hand in our
Defense, by which he wrought out, at first, our Deliverance! That he has
hitherto prevented our Return to Bondage, and still continues us on the Borders
of the Land of Rest, and has not yet, after all, taken from us our Hopes of a
seasonable entrance and happy settlement therein! That He has preserved to us
his own Anointed, the Breath of our Nostrils, and the Light of Israel,
continuing the same miraculous Providence that has shown it self in so many
wonderful Deliverances, through the whole course of his Life, to encircle still
his Head, both as an Ornament and Helmet, bespeaking him no less the Darling
and Care of Heaven, than exposing him to be the Envy and Wonder of Earth! Oh
that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders that he does for the Children of Men! That he does for his Anointed!
And has now once more done for Us in preserving him from those bloody Designs
which nothing but his own Infinite Wisdom and Power could have discovered and
defeated! Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name be ascribed all
Honor, Glory and Praise, with most humble and hearty Thanks in all Churches of
the Saints: Even so, Blessed be the Lord our God, who only does wondrous
things; and blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever!

This surely is our Duty hence to Heaven, whence our Mercy comes; and which, if
duly performed, will influence our Behavior here toward his Vicegerent on
Earth, to whom it more immediately was directed. For this, finally, instructs
us,

5. Lastly, To Confirm and Strengthen more our Loyalty to the present
Government for the future. For to this end God seems to have brought it into so
Eminent Danger, and to have so eminently rescued it therefrom; to let us see
its Worth, and how dear it is to Him, and to endear it hereby to us. For the
true worth of a Mercy is never valued, we say, till lost: And therefore, though
we have not yet lost ours, yet by the Danger it was in to be lost, God has
made us very sensible of the Evil it would have been to us; and hereby has
taught us the more to value it.

Let us therefore, at last, persuade our selves not only to be reconciled to
the Government God has put us under, and would do us good by; but to endear it
to us, and unite and firmly Associate our selves to defend and support it,
since God appears so eminently for it, and calls to us by such repeated
Providence to do so too. Let us look up to God, and take our measures from
him; to submit to his Councils, and quietly to permit him to govern the World
and Us, by the Captain of his own appointment: Laying aside our Prejudices and
Passions, Rancor and Rebellion; let us, at least, hearken to the seasonable
Advice of Gamaliel, Act. 5.35, 38, 39. Ye Men of Israel, take heed to your
selves what ye intend to do as touching these Men. -- Refrain from these Men,
and let them alone; for if this Council or this Work be of Men, it will come to
naught: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God.

If ever Prince in the World was owned to be of God, then surely is Ours; by a
continued Succession of such Providence to Preserve him and Disappoint his
Enemies. And may God still continue the same Miracle of Protection of him to
us! And add One more, in uniting all the Hearts and Affections of this whole
Nation to him! that so he may henceforward, without any Discouragement or
Interruption go on to perfect the Deliverance he is engaged in for us; and not
only secure us from ever returning again in Rebellion, to Bondage; but speedily
bring us into the Land of Rest (our Sins hitherto have only delayed our
entrance into) and secure to us, inviolably, our Religion and Rights by a
lasting advantageous Peace; and after a long and happy Reign on Earth, be late
admitted to a Glorious and Everlasting Kingdom in Heaven! And let all the
People say, Amen.

FINIS.

