A New-Years-Gift FOR TOWZER.
Being a Strange and Monstrous Beast sent from Pluto by his Ambassador
Belphegor to R. L. S. having Twelve Heads, and on every Head a Thousand Horns;
With a Description of the Beast, and an Explanation of the several Names of the
Heads of the Monster.
UPon the intimation of Belphegor, at a grand Consult held in Pluto's Infernal
Palace, the Black Hall of Erebus, of the great and many Services, a certain
instrument of his black Highness had done for the good of his said Highness,
and for the benefit and advancement of the Affairs of his Kingdom, in
disturbance of the peace, tranquillity and unity of the People where he dwells,
by Talking and Writing; it being now a time, in which his sooty Highness used
to gratify his ready Servants, he caused Belphegor to take a certain Beast out
of his own Stable, for a Present to be sent to R.L.S. his dearly beloved
instrument, to show his gratitude, and to encourage his said Instrument and
Operator to proceed; and an Order was, by the said Counsel, drawn up, for a
Pass for Belphegor, to go as Pluto's Ambassador, to present this Strange
infernal Hobbyhorse (on which Pluto sometimes used himself to ride, when he
went a Maggot-hunting) on the upper Stage of the World, to his beloved R.L.S.
which rare beast was received, by the said useful instrument of his infernal
Highness, with great respect, at the hands of his Ambassador Belphegor,
acknowledging the high honor done him by many humble Remonstrances, promising
to continue, to the utmost of his power, his most humble Servant. And having
feasted Belphegor with the fumes of Cit and Bumpkin, and some other the like
Regalio's, and returned as a Present to his dark Highness, 3000 Observations in
82 Volumes, with an humble Petition for a Licencers Place in Tartarus, and a
promise how diligent he would be in his Office, he dismissed Belphegor to his
satisfaction, and he caused his Strange Beast, or 12 headed Monster to be
locked up in his Aviary or Bird-Cage, in which he used to keep his harmonious,
airy Notions, against whose Wires he used to rub the St. Gyles's cat's Noses,
and where he causes him to be daily fed with Dissenters Livers, and Protestant
Hearts, and where he is to be seen by all the World for a Penny a time, twice a
Week, but on Holy Days at a Groat or Six Pence.

This Beast is of a Motley Breed being begot by Cerberus on Pope Joan; it has
much the shape of his Father, somewhat bodied like a Dog, but spotted like a
Leopard, with the Claws of a Lion, and Tail of a Bear; instead of Three Heads
he has a whole Jury of Twelve, on one great Neck like a Bulls. He has somewhat
of his Dam in some of his Heads, having a Masqued Face, and a kind of a Romish
Voice, belonging to most of them. He is perpetually in motion, almost night and
day, and ever since the Squire has had him, he flies about his Cage like a
Squirrel: He desires very much to have some of the Breed, and has sent to the
Tower, by Madam Celiers, for some of the Monsters there kept, that they may
copulate to have Issue, and that he might have something new to show his
infernal Highness, when he shall appear before him. The conditions of this
Beast are somewhat Strange, for he will fawn on his Master like a Spaniel; but
if he sees a Whig or Protestant Dissenter, he grows outrageous, and so
turbulent and restless, barking, roaring and chattering, that he is enough to
affright one that does not know him; his heads sleep by turns, some of them are
ever on the Watch, making faces and grimaces, turning themselves into several
mimical postures and shapes. He is very cruel where he can fix his Paws, and
will devour 10 men at a Meal, if he could come at them. He hides his Claws like
a Cat, till he can seize his Prey, and then he seldom lets go without drawing
Blood. Do but whistle the Tune of a Parliament, he pricks up his Ears,
stretches out his Tail, his hair stands Tail up an end, he ruffs the Wind like
a Wild Bull, and runs about as if he were mad; but if you name Ignoramus, being
some Spell that works upon him, he falls a farting, that you may hear him from
the upper end of Holborn as far as Wapping: He has several other Qualities too
tedious to rehearse: but when he is best pleased, he runs butting with his
12000 Horns against every object; show him but a Pamphlet, and he runs at it
with might and main, his Heads are harder than a Roman Ram, and for a Wakeman
Bribe he has promised the F. Ambassador to lend it to his Master to beat down
the Walls of Luxenburgh; but he is first, as an Essay of his Strength, to
overthrow a thing called Government at home, which is very strong and well-set
and at which he is continually butting, tho as yet he has been able to effect
little; some having exposed against his Horns whole Reames of Paper, defended
by Charms wrote in Ink, and Printed upon them, which oftentimes sets him on
his Tail, to observe another opportunity. His general name is Towzer, (some
call him Trinkelo): some say he is a Mungril, some a Mastiff, some a Bull-Dog,
others that he is but a Whiffling Cur, but I have already told you his
Extraction, tho I cannot tell you who first gave him the name of Towzer. His 12
Heads have 12 several names, and are of several Natures, which I shall explain
to you, belonging to the Dog Towzer, under which name all are comprehended.

The first Head is called Hodg, and he no sooner hears himself called upon, but
he presently opens his Mouth, and belches out Rogue, Rascal, Villain, Traitor,
Whig, Dissenter, Rebel, with a thousand the like Names: This Head Towzer made
use of to invent Cit and Bumpkin to abuse both City and Country; it is a
Clownish name under a gentle garb, and seems as full of Courtship as of ill
manners; can when he pleases, give good words, as well as ill speeches; this
Head has the face of a Buffoon on one side, and of a Statesman on the other,
and has a double row of Teeth in his mouth, with which he chews Plots, till
they come out of his Mouth all Mealy, as if they had been in the Meal-Tub.
Speak of a Popish Plot and he seems mealy mouthed, and licks the Five Jesuits
Speeches into the Shape of Innonency; speak of a Presbyterian Plot, and Hodge
gapes and shows you on the Top of his Tongue in great Letters branded Forty
Eight, and slaps a Pottle of Foam on your Face, enough to poison you.

The second Head of Towzer is named Don Rugiero Knight of the Lying Oracle: It
is a long name, having one of the Seven deadly Sins for his Godfather: This is
a most useful Head, for without it Towzer could do nothing. He much admires
himself in this virtuous Head, and values himself much upon his ingenuity; it is
a kind of a Gygantine Head, erected with as much Pride and Gravity as a Bon of
Spain: he is still belching out Lies, Stories, Untruths mixed with many Fables,
Romances, De Quevedoes, with some Blasphemies intermixed. There is in it a
great Talkative Devil which will not leave chattering from one end of the Week
to the other, and yet hardly speaks one word, of truth in all that time.

The next head is called Observator, (near of Kin to the Knight of the Craving
Fob, which is a far more cogent argument for plaguing the world with his
Pamphlets than all the Loyalty he boasts of) and this I assure you the Beast
Towzer is not a little proud of, carrying it alof in the air, tho it has but
the brains of a Butter-fly. Twice a week this head speaks, he has not spoken
above 82 times in all his life, but then he claws away the Whiggs, and the
Protestant Dissenters, and is almost continually crying between whiles Bew Waw,
Waw, 41, 41 have a care of 41. This Observator has very little, but sharp
eyes, he can see through a Millstone, and spy a mote no bigger then the claw of
a Flea, in a Dissenters Conscience. This head has a Divelish swallow, ten
thousand Non-conformists will not fill his Gorge, and swarms of Presbyterians
are no more to him then a few Sprats in a Whales belly. He keeps a continual
Watch upon the motion of a Whigs tail: they can scarce piss for him, and
nothing can be done in Town or Country but he observes it: he holds this head
sa high as the Dragon on Bow, and is something like him, often varying his
point, yet hard as Iron, not to be wrought upon by sense or reason. Old Nick
allows this head a pension of Silver Sops, to make him long winded, or else
they say he had long since lest yelping. Upon his Tongue lies a thick foame of
Malice and Revenge, which is a kind of Man-bane, and is as poisonous as
Aconite. There is a certain laughing fellow, with his two men Jest and Earnest,
that with sponges wipes it from his mouth, which they squeeze into a Dialogue
to poison the people.

The name of the next head is Puss Flogger, he seems to be somewhat younger
then the rest, yet some say it is at least 40 years old, and that it was given
him by the women; but of late Towzer having worried the St. Gyles's Catts, who
came a Catterwawling to him, when he was grown past Action, they give him that
name. It has a very Tyrannical look, and something like Bonner, when he whipped
the man in his Coal hole: Speak to him and he presently spits in your face,
and shows a row of sharp teeth like sawes, and cries, Put the Laws in
Execution, whip the Dissenting Catts, Claw' um away with Ropes and Halters,
Fire and Faggot: Against the Popish Successor come he has got a petition drawn
and ready printed by N. T. to be general Whipmaster of the Heretics.

The next head was named by Towz^rs own self, all the other heads put on it the
title of Guide to the i^feriour Clergy: This has a kind of a Pedants face, very
proud, self conceited, foolish, and ridiculous, and upon it a square Cap; he
nods gravely if he sees a young Gown man, speaks sentences, and if he be a
Tantivy, gently lickes him over the face: He draws Rules with his mouth, and
barks continually of the Church of England, but when he gapes he shows Rome in
his Throat, and a Pope and Cardinals in Procession;

Then the 6th. head eminently shows it self above the rest, called the Popish
Masquerader. This is a very Devil in a Dublet, with a black Mask before his
face, with a Cankered tongue: ^olling out of its mouth, with a thousand little
State flies sucking its venom, which they disperse buz^ng in Sam's Coffee
House: on his forehead is writ in Capital Letters, A Church of England
Christian: he has a great Roman nose which snoute he thrusts out of his Masque.
If he sees a Jesuit he barks, A Divine. If he sees a Nonconformist Minister he
falls a howleing Rebel, Traitor, and Devil, with such Hellish and hideous
roars, that he out does Cerberus: He has three forked Tongues, one p^a^e in
Mode and Figure of the Church of England established by Law: The other hisses
with a gentle note, against Rome hardly to be heard; the other howles, curses
and Banns Calvin, and his adherents: He is often given to belching of
Presbyterian Plots, and the sight of a certain Doctor makes him disgorge, I
know not how many things called Shams, to cover a Popish Plot. He is still
slavering at the mouth, and they say he wants wormeing, which none dares
undertake, unless the Devil would hold his Tongue with a pair of pincers, for
it cuts like a saw, being harder then a file, sharp as a razor, with this he
licks up a Man's good name, and grinds it with Slander. He often chews the Cud
like a clean beast: and ruminates on a word till it becomes trite:
True-Protestant he sends up with Hyckups, and g^pes sometimes as if he had the
Pip: He has six sets of Teeth, with which he grinds the Protestant Pamphleteers
to powder: A set of Protestant Bookselle^s and a packet from Rome with a
Protestant Observator in sippits is an Oglio he much feeds on till he surfeits,
and then the next day he is sure to vomit nothing but Ink gall, and vinegar:
Sometimes he grins, but it is always at some unlucky accident, or at a Lie of
the Loyal Intelligences making; which he will with his foreteeth dissect most
artificially. His mouth is as good as a Microscope, it will magnify a gnat to
the bigness of a Pegasus, and shred you out an Address, till it is heardly to be
fathomed. He is apt to bark in his sleep, and if any body awakens him, he falls
on howling and disturbs the whole Town again. Nothing will quiet him but the
name of a Parliament, and then he shrinkes his head into his belly, and turns
into the Netherlands.

The next is a Pe^t-head with a whimsical face, something like that usually
Car'vd at the end of a Violin, or a base Viol, and he is called Fiddler: he is
always making of mouths in Symphony; he observes his Crochets, and sometimes
sings a Santas beyond Ela. He pricks up his ears, and shakes his horns, if he
hears the name of old Nol. He is given to play too much of one Time Forty One
which he squeeks out with a hideous noise and turning up his nose like a Bull
after he has smell to the tail of a Cow. He has all the motions of a Jack
pudding, and his Chaps make as good Music as the gridiron and tongs. He loves
to be a ^ir^d and pointed at, tho his voice is grown very hearse of late, in
singing Absalom and Achitophel. He loves much to have a Fidleing Dialogue in
his Mouth, and naturally whisles Questions and A^swers.

The Title of the next is Cr^c^ fart, and is ever making a noise like a Cart
wheel that wants greasing. He has an horrible stinking breath, and smells
worse than a Jakes that is new emptied. His Chap are blown up like a bladder,
out of which he squeezes Papistical farts, to blow away the Protestant cause,
and now and then he poures out whole peales against an Ignoramus Jury: He is
like Boreas ever blustering, and looks as big at a Criminal Printer, as Aeolus
himself. At first at the Cracking of his farts the people were afraid, thinking
at thundered, but since they have been used to it, they are no more concerned
then at Hooting of an Owl. The Hawkers (a certain kind of squeeking Animals)
adore this head and worship it like the golden head of Daniels Image, gathering
his farts together in paper sheets, which they vent for brass fa^things.

The next Head, once glorious and brisk, now hangs on o^e side, as if listening
for the coming of S. George on Horseback out of the North; This Head is called
the Press-Inqu^sitor. He has been very sick of late, being given over by the
State-Quacks; dying Yexes appearing: But this Head being shaven by a Jesuitical
Razor, and a Cap of quilted Hops put Plaster wise upon it, the poor thing
begins to leer a little on one side. The Name of a Protestant Pri^ter, or a
private Press makes him start: One Mad ^n Joan is now his best Nurse since he
could do no good on the Printers Wife, for she denied him a Sop in the Pan
which he longed for. He has made a League with the Pope's Printer, and both
sometimes drink together out of the Hoof of an Ass: He is apt to dream, and
then in his sleep acts the part of a ^ust-asse among the Printers, but when he
awakes and finds it a Dream, he grows sick and falls a spewing.

The next is an indefatigable Head that never winckes, and is called the Popes
Secretary. He writes Dialogues, Appeals, Histories, Observations, and a
thousand other things -- with his Tongue; at the end of which he carries a
Goose-quill, like the sting of a Wasp; this he dips into a hole in his nether
Chap, filled with Infernal Ink, mixed with Venom of Toads, Spiders, and Asps,
and then draws Characters, Satyrs, and Observations on Dissenters. He is an
Head of Dispatch; and will do more in an hour, than Coleman could in three
months. He was born with his Goose-quill in his mouth, which is perpetually
wagging, and writes faster than he who wrote with his feet. He is to dictate
for the Secretary of State, when the Pope sets up his Throne in the Western
Island, and till then he is fain to write for a small Pension. He employs
several under-Scribes that are lodged in a certain Office called N^wgate, who
sometimes turn his Railing into Dogril.

The next Head of this Monster is of Kin to the last, and is called the
Dissenters Register. He is a very filthy Beast, and has a very black Tongue,
foul with licking of Sinks, Dunghills, Jakes, and Leistals; He lives upon
Carrion; and is so greedy, that with his Teeth he d^gs persons out of their
Graves: He seeks after Rottenness; and a wicked or unclean saying makes him
laugh again; He has an excellent memory, and can quote you all the abominations
since Adam. He has them by rote, and can sing them Dialogue-wise: It Is a
snarling Cur, and snaps at every Body. He understands the Language of the
Beast, and would have Obscenity to be placed among the Liberal Sciences; he has
for all that but an hanging look, and begins to be troubled with a Lethargy.

The last Head looks almost like an Irish Evidence, and squints as bad upon the
Peace of the Government; It Is a bold, saucy, impudent, malepert Head; and is
called Tory: He makes a rumbling noise like a Wheel-barrow: his mouth is full
of Oaths and Curses; and God dam me is his hourly Letany; He has a prodigious
mouth, and a great head, which is stufft with Rodomontadoes; Whig is his
Eternal Enemy which he hates as much as Cain did his Brother, and whom he would
devour if he could come at him. He is a very carnivorous Canibal; and would
make an Irish Meal of all the Whigs in Christendom. Name Geneva and he grows
mad, and troublesome to all his Brother-Heads: Rome is the only Antidote for
his Distemper, which he adores as the Elephant does the Moon. He loves neither
Parliaments, nor Juries; and cries out, the King is as Absolute as the great
Turk. He is of a Torrid and cruel Aspect, yet they say he is a mere Coward. He
loves not Magna Charta. The Names of Property, Rights, and Privileges of the
People, will put him into a fit of yelling not A. P -- t. for Sr. R. Knight. and
Bt. cause that is to be kept private until a meet season to divulge it (which is
not to be stopped by any means, but by slinging a Sirreverence into his mouth,)
and then he falls on sputtering as if you had done him an injury. He loves to
gulp down Healths, and then to belch up Faction: There is a flame steaming from
his mouth, which he calls the Bane of Heretics. He makes a great noise, and
looks always as if he was drunk: He would be thought to roar like a Lion, but
his Voice resembles the Braying of an Ass: He loves noise and confusion, and
greedily desires to set the World together by the Ears; He cries up the
Bishops, and the Church of England, but secretly receives Sops from Jesuits
and Priests, and hopes only in the Pope and a Popish Successor.

This TOWZER is, who is a Monster grown;
Has now Twelve Heads, who once had half a one:
At first appeared like a Cub of Bear or Ape;
But now you see's licked himself to shape:
Sure, It Is monstrous or it is STRANGE at least,
So many Heads should stand upon one BEAST.
One Halter once he broke, and ran away,
Two Halters now will hardly make him stay;
Take up the Protestant Puss, and safely house her,
For on hot scent runs the Hell hound Towzer.
POSTSCRIPT.
That we may fully inform the Reader how Suitable this great present is in
Humors and Qualities to the Person which the Beast is presented unto; I have
recited this following description which was sent after him, during the Session
of the last Parliament, that sat at Westminster.

A HUE and CRY
AFter a Strange old Yorkish-Tike, full of Black and Blew, Red and Yellow
Spots, of a Motley, Dun, Brindle, Ill-livered Color, neither Mastiff, Mungrel,
Tumbler, Lap-Dog, nor Setter, Bull-Dog or Bear-Dog, Woolf-Dog or Sheep-biter,
But all of them: Of a Strange amphibious Nature, lives on land or on water, in
Court or in Kennel, run away from his Master about the twenty sixth -- seen on
Saturday last behind a Coach between Sam's Coffe-house, and Madam Celliers.
Whoever has or shall take him up, have especial care of him, (unless you know
his ill qualities) for he has a thousand Dog-tricks (viz.) to fetch for the
Papists, carry for the Protestants, whine to the King, dance to Noll's fiddle,
fawn on the Courtier, leap at their Crusts, wag his tail at all bitches, hunt
counter to the Plot, Tongue-Pad the Evidence, and cringe to the Crucifix; but
above all this, he has one damned old trick of slipping the Halter: If there be
any that can give notice of this dangerous Cur, to the men in Authority (who
has been several days in Grand Quest after him) or bring him (if he be not
already) to the sign of the Popes Demi-Culverin, next door to the Masquerade
Committee, in the Street of St. Lud. or to the Tantivy Abhorrers, at the
Levitical-Club-house, in Ave-Mary-Alley, so that he may be tied up from his
meat, for the good of the Public, he will do his Country good service, the
Protestants Right, the Law Justice, the K. a kindness, undeceive the Church,
and himself a mighty favor in obtaining the marks Royal, of a Loyal true
English man, a right good Protestant, and a hearty lover of his K. and Country;
all which shall be paid him down (on the spot) for his honest care and pains.

LONDON: Printed for E, Harrison, 1682.


