HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE (...) ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms
Acts made the 5th Assembly, 4th Session.
Beginning the 15th day of O^tober, and ending the 3d Day of November,
following, Anno Regni Regis Guielmi Tirtia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, Octavo.
An ACT to vicate a Deed of Trust executed by John Robinson and Margaret his
Wife, for the Land now in the Tenure and Occupation of Cornelius Barneson, and
for the Confirming of the same unto him, his Heirs and Assigns forever.

A^ ^CT for the R^ising One Hundred Men, to be listed in his Majesty's three
Companies posted at Albany, for the Security of the Fronteers, and for the
raising of Twelve Hundred Pounds for the encouraging such as shall List
t^^^selves in the said Companies, and for the defraying of other contingent
^o^^ges at the said Fronteers.

WHereas the Provision that was lately made for the Re-inforcing and
strengthening the Fronteers of this Province at Albany, has not had that
effect that was designed, many of the Soldiers that were listed (...) his
Majesty's Companies, and posted there, having deserted the said ^^^vice,
whereby the said Fronteers are much weakened, and his Excellence being pleased
in his Speech to Recomend that one hundred men (...) forthwith raised, to be
added to the two hundred and twenty one (...) that are in his Majesty's three
Companies there, as a necessary Force for the Defense of that place, The
Representatives convened in General Assembly, taking the same into their
serious Consideration, and being willing on all Occasions, out of their dutiful
and Loyal Affections unto his most Excellent Majesty, to join with and assist
his Excellency in the great and prudent care he has always taken, and does
daily take for the Security of the said Fronteers, Humbly pray that it may be
Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency the Governor and
Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority
of the same, That the Sum of six hundred Pounds current Money of this Province,
be laid, assessed raised and levied upon all and every the Inhabitants,
Residents, Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province, to be employed
by his Excellency for the raising one hundred effective men, to be listed ^n
his Majesty's said three Companies, now posted there for the necessary Defense
of the said Fronteers, and there to continue and remain from the first day of
November next, until the first day of May then next following. And for the
better enabling his Excellency to raise the said one hundred effective Men, the
said six hundred Pounds is to be distributed in manner following, that is to
say, The Sum of five Pounds to be given to such Persons as shall voluntarily
list themselves in the said Companies, and Twenty shillings to such Person or
Persons for each man he or they shall procure to be listed in the said
Companies in manner aforesaid.

And whereas the Enemy by their late Incursion into the Indian Country has
destroyed the two Castles of the Onondages and Oneydes, and also wasted and
destoyed their Indian Corn, by which means the laid two Nations of Indians are
constrained to disperse themselves, and their Wives and Children likely to
perish if Provision be not made for their Relief and Subsistence this ensuing
Winter,

Be it further Enacted therefore by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum two
hundred Pounds be also laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the
Inhabitants, Residents, Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province, to
be employed by Major Peter Schuyler, Major Derick Wessels, and Mr. Killian van
Ranslaer, for the procuring of Corn and other Necessary Provision, and the same
to be Distributed by them among such of the said Indians as shall want Relief,
as to their discretion shall seem meet and Convenient, they keeping a true and
exact account thereof.

And whereas the many false Alarms that have lately happened in this Province,
have occasioned great Charge and discontent among the Inhabitants, To the end
that the same may for the future be prevented, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That there be the Sum of two hundred Pounds also laid,
assessed, raised and levied upon all and every of the Inhabitants, Residents,
Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province, to be employed by the said
Major Schuyler, Wessels and Ranslaer, in the sending of Scouts of Christians
and Indians to the Lake or elsewhere, to discover the motion of the Enemy,
which are to be continually in the said Service from the first day of November
next, until the first day of May next following, and also for the payment of
those that were lately sent out, and are now in pursuit o^ the Enemy.

And whereas his Excellency was necessitated to raise some Money upon the
Credit of the Government, for the defraying of the Extraordinary Charge at the
time of the late Invasion of the Enemy into the Indian Country, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of two hundred Pounds be also
laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the Inhabitants,
Residents, Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province, for and toward
the payment of the Money raised upon the said Credit, and the defraying of the
extraordinary Charge.

And whereas the Money agreed to be raised by this Act will be now presently
wanting for the payment of such men as shall voluntarily list themselves, as
aforesaid, and the supplying the other Necessities hereby granted, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of One Hundred Pounds,
like current Money aforesaid, be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and
every the Inhabitants, Residents, Sojourners and Free-houlders of and in this
Province to be employed for the payment of the Interest of Ten per Cent. for
the Money that shall be advanced by any Person or Persons for the purposes
aforesaid upon the Credit of this Act All which several and respective Sum and
Sums of Money, to be laid and assessed in manner aforesaid makes in the whole
the Sum of Twelve hundred Pounds current Money aforesaid, which said Sum shall
be laid, assessed, raised and paid unto his Majesty's Receiver General for the
Time being, at the City of New York, at or before the 25th day of March next,
which shall be is the year of our Lord 1697. for the end and purposes
aforesaid, and to no other end or purpose whatsoever, according to the several
and respective Quotas, and Proportions following, that is to say, For the City
and County of New York, three hundred sixty five Pound. For the County of
Westchester, sixty nine Pound twelve shillings. For the County of Richmond,
thirty seven Pound four shillings. For Kings County, one hundred ninety four
Pound eight shillings. For Queens County, one hundred ninety three Pound
sixteen shillings. For Suffolk County, two hundred sixteen Pound. For Vlster
and Duchess County, one hundred and eight Poun^ For Orange County, twelve Pound.


And for the due and better assessing, Levying and paying the aforesaid Sum of
1200 l. current Money aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the Justices of
the Peace for the Time being, for the several respective ^ounties af^resaid,
for the several Counties respectively, for the which they shall be Justices of
the Peace, do within forty days after the Publication hereof, assemble and meet
together in the Court houses, for the several and respective Cities and
Counties, or such other place or places as they shall agree upon among
themselves, and shall there order, that the Assessors and Collectors for the
City of New York, and the several and respective Towns, Manors or Liberties
within their several Jurisdictions for the assessing, collecting and receiving
of the Public Rates, for the defraying of the public Charge of each
respective City and Country aforesaid, be the assessors and Collectors, for the
assessing, Collecting and receiving the Sum or Sums of Money herein but one me^
(...) according to the Proportions before expressed, (...) to the said (...)
and Justices shall (...) meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Towns, Minnors and Jurisdictions within
the respective Counties aforesaid, who refuse, neglect, or do not elect
annually or once every year Assessors or ^ctors, whereby the intent of this and
other Acts heretofore made and published, may be evaded and frustrated, Be it
therefore Enacte^ by the Authority aforesaid. That if any of the respective
Towns, Manners or Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid, shall
refuse, neglect delay or deny to choose or elect Assessors and Collectors for
the assessing of their several and respective Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions,
and for the Collecting the same according to the true intent, meaning and
directions of this and the other Acts, in such case made and provided, then and
to such case it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the Peace, or any
two of them in the Counties where such Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions are,
who are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors for such Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions as shall refuse, neglect,
delay or deny as aforesaith or heretofore have refused, neglected, delayed or
denied, which Assessors and Collectors, so nominated and appointed in manner
aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be deemed and esteemed the
Assessors and Collectors of the said Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions, and
observe and execute the Directions of this and other Acts, under the Pains and
Penalties in the said Act contained and mentioned.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayor and
Aldermen, the Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities and Counties,
Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions, have and shall have, by virtue of this Act
full Power and Authority, each of them by himself to administer to such
Assessor Assessors that shall be elected or nominated and appointed in manner
aforesaid, That they shall Well and Truly execute the Office of an Assessor,
and Well, Truly, Equally, impartially and in due proportion assess and rate the
Estates of the Inhabtants, Residents, Sojourners and Freeholders of the
respective places for which they shall be chosen, elected, nominated and
appointed Assessors, according to the best skill and knowledge, and therein
they shall spare no Person for favor nor affection, or grieve any Person for
hatred or ill will. And the said Assessors are hereby required to deliver one
Copy of their Assesment fairly written and subscribed by them, unto the said
Justices, or to the Office of the Clerk of the Peace of the respective County
to which they belong. And the said Justices for each respective County, or any
two or more of them are hereby ordered and required to cause the said several
and respective Assesments to them delivered, to be fairly written, and to sign
and seal several Duplicates or Copies of the said Assesment, and one of them so
signed and sealed, forth with to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
re^pective (...) within the several and respective Cities and Counties
aforesaid, and shall likewise deliver, or cause to be delivered another fair
Copy, so signed and sealed, unto the Clerk of the Peace of the respective
County to which they shall belong, there to be filed, and remain upon Record
And the Clerk of the Peace of each County is hereby required to transmit the
Sum of the Assesment of each Town unto the Receiver General at New York for the
time being.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen, elected, nominated or appointed, in manner
aforesaid, Assessors or Collectors, shall deny neglect, refuse or delay, or
unequally and partially shall assess, as by this, and the other Acts are
required ^^o shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to collect any Sum or Sums of
Money, in form beforementioned, assessed, that then in such case it shall and
may be lawful for any two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the City
and Counties where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by
virtue of this Act are required and empowered to do the same by Warrant under
Hand and ^eal, to commit such Assessors or Collectors, so denying refusing,
neglecting or delaying, or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to
collect, as aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or
Main-prize till he or they shall make fine and Ransom to his Majesty, for such
his Contempt, as aforesaid. And upon such Commitment the Justices are speedily
required to nominate and appoint other Collectors and Assessors in their stead
and room

And whereas there are several Persons that have shut their Doors, and refused
to pay the Rates assessed by virtue of several Acts of Assembly heretofore made
and provided, whereby he intent of the said Acts seemed to be frustrated, Be it
^urther ^nacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons shall
longer neglect or refuse to pay the several Rate, and Assesments wherewith they
were formerly charged by several A^ts of General Assembly heretofore made and
provided, or hereafter shall neglect or refuse to pay the several Rates and
Assesments wherewith he or they are charged with this Act, for or in respect of
his or their Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements, shall be neglected or
refused to be paid, then upon demand of the Collectors that shall be chosen or
appointed to receive the same, or within Ten days next and after the said
Demand, it shall and may be lawful to and for such Collectors and they are
hereby required, for Non-payment thereof, by Warrant under the hand of two
Justices of the Peace, to distrain the person or persons so refusing or
neglecting to pay by his or their Goods and Chattles, or distrain in and upon
the Messuages, Lands and Tenements so charged, and the Goods and Chattles then
and there found, and the Distress so taken, to carry away, and the same to
expose to sale in the Town or County where such Distress is made, and for want
of buyers, to carry the said Distress unto any other place in the Province for
the sale of the said Distress accordingly, for the payment of the said Rate or
Assesment, and the Overplus coming by the said sale, if any be over and above
the Charges of taking and carrying away the said (...) if any be over and above
the Charges of taking and carrying away the said Distress, to be immediately
returned to the Owner thereof. And moreover, it shall and may be lawful to
break open in the day time any House; and upon Warrant under the hand and seals
of any two or more of the said Justices, any Chest, Trunk or Box, or other
things, where such Goods are, and call to their assistance the Constables, or
any other Persons within the respective Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors and
Juri dictions where any refusal, neglect or resistance shall be made; which
said Officers and Persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the
Premises.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care that this Act, and every
Article and Clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent and
meaning thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to do, perform, fulfill
and execute all and every the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered by him or them to be done, performed, fulfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Excellency, the Governor
and Council, or before any of his Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Province, he or they shall suffer such Pain by Fine and Imprisonment, as by the
discretion of his sa d Excellency, the Governor and Council, and the Justices
of the said Courts shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Plaint, Bill or Information shall be brought, moved or prosecuted at any time
hereafter, against any person or persons, for any matter, cause or thing done
or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such person or persons so sued
or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue,
Not Guilty, and give this Act and the special matter in Evidence. And if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer Dis-continuance or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or
Defendants shall recovor tribble Costs, for which they shall have the like
Remedy, as in case where Costs by the Law are given to Defendents.

Provided always, That no Mayor, Alder-man or Justice of the Peace shall be
troubled, sued, prosecuted or molested for any Omission, Offense or Neglect by
virtue of this Act, but within the space of one Year after such Omission,
Offense or Neglect, and not at any Time hereafter, any thing contained herein
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding


