Ultimum Vale: OR, The Last FAREWELL of a Minister of the Gospel to a beloved
People.

By MATTHEW NEVVCOMEN, M. A. late Preacher of the Gospel to the Church of
Christ at Dedham in Essex: Now to the English Church at Leyden in Holland.

Coelum non Animum.
Coelum ne Animum.
Non Animum ne Coelum.
Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.

2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the
present Truth.

Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance.

London, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Ultimum Vale: OR, The Last Farewell of a Minister of the Gospel to a Beloved
People.
Acts 20.32. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them
that are sanctified.


THe blessed Apostle Paul being from all Eternity intended and designed by God
to be a glorious President of the Riches and Almightiness of his Pardoning
Mercy and Converting Grace, (as the Apostle tells you, 1 Timothy 1.14.) God did
therefore cause his Grace in the Conversion of Paul not only to abound, but to
super-abound; As it is there expressed, (...). He that was a Blasphemer, and
was a Persecutor, and was Injurious, being now by the rich and powerful Grace
of God converted to be a Believer, to be a Preacher, to be a Martyr.

So the Lord Christ, tells him at his first appearing to him, as himself
records it, Acts 26.16. I have appeared to thee, to make thee a Minister, and a
Martyr; (...).

Non cuivis competit. Every Saint of God is not called to such a degree of
Honor, as to be made a Minister and a Martyr the first day, and that of their
conversion. No more than every King has the honor to be a King as soon as he
comes into the World. But this was the exceeding abundant Grace of God toward
Paul, above all others.

Paul had now spent about some eighteen years in the painful and laborious
discharge of his Ministry, though not without some intermixtures of bitter
Sufferings, Drops of that great Martyrdom, whereby he was to close and seal up
his Ministry at last, and glorify God.

And having it now revealed to him, that the time was drawing nigh wherein he
must be offered up unto the Sacrifice and Service of that Faith which he had so
long preached, having visited several of the Churches planted by his own
Ministry, he now makes have to Jerusalem, though he knew that was the place
where the Tragedy of his Suffering was to begin, v. 22, 23.

Having therefore for the more expedition, determined to slip by Ephesus (for
so the word (...) signifies) and not to touch or enter there, for fear of being
too long detained among them, and yet not willing Insalutatos praeterire, to
pass by his Christian Friends and Brethren there, without so much as saluting
them.

Therefore from Miletus, he sends to Ephesus, and calls the Elders of the
Church thither, to Miletus, to him, ver. 17.

Ephesus was the Metropolis, the chief City of the lesser Asia, where Paul had
spent at several times three years, in the preaching of the Gospel, and by the
blessing of God upon those labors, had gathered there a Famous, and a Glorious
Church unto Jesus Christ, and had there, as in other Churches, Acts 14.23.
constituted and ordained Elders, to whom he resigned the whole Care and
Government of those Churches, and that by the direction and appointment of the
holy Ghost himself.

It is observed by many (and is indeed very obvious, and easy to observe) that
though here be mention of a Metropolis, or chief City, Ephesus, and mention of
a Church in that City: The Church of Ephesus, yet here is no mention of a
Metropolitan Bishop, or any Bishop at all, as certainly there would have been,
if there had been a Biship or Superintendant over that Church; but the
Holy Ghost plainly tells us, that that Church was governed by a Consessus
Presbyterorum, by a company of Elders, who did govern Communi Consilio, and all
and every one of those Elders were equally (...), and that Jure Divino: Not one
Bishop, and the rest of them Elders of an inferior order.

To these Elders thus assembled Paul gives his Ultimum Vale, in this pathetical
parting speech. Wherein

First, He looks back to the course of his Ministry already past among them,
ver. 18.21.

Secondly, He looks forward to his approaching Suffering and Martyrdom, ver.
22, 23, 24. Where he shows that he was a Martyr. Animo, Voto, and Proposito,
already.

Thirdly, He tells them this is the last time that ever they shall behold him,
ver. 25. And as Samuel when he was laying down his Office of Magistracy,
appeals to the People concerning his integrity in the Magistracy, 1 Samuel 12.3.
So Paul here appeals to these concerning his uprightness, and faithfulness in
the discharge of the Ministry. Happy are those Magistrates, and Ministers that
when they are leaving their Office and Employment can make these appeals.

Fourthly, He exhorts them unto a due care, First of themselves, and then of
the Flock committed to them, upon a twofold account. First, because it was the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseeres. Secondly, Because it
is the Flock which God has purchased by his own Blood, ver. 28.

Fifthly, He enforces this care and diligence further, by a prediction of the
danger which he saw threatening the Church, and the Flock of Christ among them,
v. 29, 30.

Sixthly, He resumes the Exhortation again, and presses it under another term,
of Watching, and urges it by his own example, ver. 31.

Seventhly, He fairly and piously takes his leave of them in ver. 32. And
afterward propounds his own example again unto them for imitation; and so the
action concludes on his part with Prayer, ver. 36. on their parts with Tears,
ver. 37, 38. A solemn and sad parting. In the words of the 32. verse. you have,

First, The Agent, I Paul, by the appointment of God a Minister, once your
Minister, now no longer like to be your Minister, nor a Minister unless in
bonds. I Paul] There is the Agent.

Secondly, We have the Act [Commend] Our English word, commend, is ambiguous;
sometimes it signifies to praise a person or thing, so 2 Cor. 3.1. Do we
commend our selves? or need we, as some others, Epistles of commendation to
you, or Letters of commendation from you? Sometimes our English word, Commend,
signifies to resign, or deliver up, or commit a person or thing to the care or
trust of another; so Luke 23.46. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. But
in the Original there is no ambiguity, the word that signifies to commend by
way of praise, is either (...), as Luke 16.8. or (...), 1 Cor. 8.8. or (...),
Romans 5.8. and 16.1. or (...), 2 Cor. 3.1. and 5.12. but the word used to
signify commending, by way of trust is (...), as Luke 23.46. Acts 14.23. and
that is the word here used in the Text, I commend you, that is, I resign you
over, I deliver you up, I commit you to the Trust of God. That is the second
thing, the Act.

The Third thing is the Subject of this Act, or the persons thus commended
[You] amplified by their relative compellation, Brethren, [Brethren, I commend
you to God] It is clear that this relates to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, and it is probable that some of the Vulgar, some of the Plebs might be
there also; especially if they understood that Paul now sent for the Elders to
take his last leave of them, doubless some of the Brethren and Church Members
would willingly put themselves to the trouble of so small a journey to be
present at this solemn parting: and if you consider well the words of the 20,
25, and 27 verses, methinks it is more than probable that there were present
upon the place some of Paul's ordinary hearers, and ordinary members of the
Church, as well as the Elders; therefore we may safely conclude that this, you
Brethren, includes both Elders and People. Brethren, I commend you.

The fourth thing considerable, is, the Person to whom he does thus commend
these Brethren, and that is, first, to God, the Wise, the Gracious, the
Faithful, the Almighty God: The same God, to whom with my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, I would commend my spirit if I were now a dying, into his hands I
commend you. I commend you principally, and in the first place to God; and then
secondly, and subordinately, to the Word of his Grace, as a powerful means and
nstrument of God unto you; Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his
Grace.

Fifthly, You have here the Eulogie of this word, which is able to build you up,
and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified] which clause may
either refer to God, I commend you to God who is able to build you up, and give
you an inheritance among them that are sanctified; or to the Word of hic Grace,
I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up
etc. and so in the Original, (...); that is, God is able by his Word to build
you up, and bring you to Heaven: Or, The Word of God is able to build you up in
Grace, and bring you to Glory.

Lastly, You have the time when Paul does thus studiously and solemnly commend
the Brethren to God, and to the Word of his Grace, and that is, Now, Now that I
am departing from you, never to see your faces more; Now that after my
departure grievous Wolves shall enter among you. Now, Brethren, I commend you
to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give
you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Which words will afford variety of Observations.

First, For the term of Compellation, [Brethren.] This term, Brother, or
Brethren, says Hierom, quadrupliciter accipitur, is taken four manner of ways.

1. First, For those that are born of the same Parents. 2. Secondly, For those
that are of the same Lineage, though not of the same immediate Parents; those
whom we call Cousins, are usually in Scripture called Brethren and Sisters. 3.
Thirdly, For those of the same Nation. 4. Fourthly, For those of the same
Religion and Profession. 5. To which we may add, fifthly, For those of the same
place and co-habitations: Thus Lot calls the men of Sodom, Brethren, Genesis 19.7.
6. Sixthly, They are called Brethren, that are of a like quality and
disposition: so Prove. 18.9. He that is slothful in his work, is [Brother] to
him that is a great waster.
Here it is used upon no other but upon a Religious Account. The Apostle calls
these Persons here present, Brethren, because he and they, had one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father; therefore Brethren.

If we suppose this Compellation used to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,
then we may read in it the exceeding great humility and condescension of the
blessed Apostle Paul, who though he was advanced to an Office and Dignity of
highest Eminency of any that ever Christ instituted in his Church, even the
Office of an Apostle; which is another manner of Title and Dignity, than that
either of Bishop or Archbishop, or Patriarch, or Cardinal, or Pope: And though
the Apostle sufficiently understood how to magnify this Office of his, when
necessity or occasion required it, Romans 11.13. yet so modest and humble is the
Apostle, that he does not disdain to give unto a company of poor plain
Presbyters or Elders of the Church, that were in Office, and (questionless) in
Gifts and Graces many degrees inferior to the Apostle, yet I say, he does not
disdain to give unto them the title and respect of Brethren.

So that other Apostle Peter, whom the Papists forsooth would fain have to be
the Prince of the Apostles, and Head of the Church, see what modest language he
uses to the Elders of the Church, 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders that are among you I
exhort, who am also (...), a fellow-Elder with your selves. One would think it
would have sounded better, and more like the Prince of the Church, to have
said, We will and require you, We Peter by divine dispensation, Prince of the
Apostles, Head of the Church, the Vicar of Christ, to whom the Keys of Heaven
are given, WE will and require, We charge and command the Elders that are among
you to feed the Flock of God. This indeed is more according to the language and
genius of those that pretend to be the Successors of Peter, and of the
Apostles. But those Primitive and purer times knew no such distance betwixt the
Ministers of the Gospel; nor no such Lordliness of the one over the other; the
highest Officer in the Church looking upon the lowest, as Brethren and
Fellow-Elders.

These gracious and holy Souls had not yet forgotten the Words of their Lord
and Master, Luke 22.25. The Kings of the Gentiles [(...)] lord it over them,
and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called (...), Benefactors.
(...), But as for you it shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you,
let him be (...), as the younger, (...). And he that is, Ruler or Governor
among you, (...), as the Deacon, or Minister, or Servant. The Servants of
Christ had not yet forgot these Words of their Lord and Master, Necdum effusum
erat venenum in Ecclesiam. But the Apostles of Christ walked in the steps of
their Lord and Master, being meek and lowly of heart, Matthew. 11.29. and thereby
approving themselves to be the true Ministers of Christ. Whereas Pride and
disdain of others, is a property and badge not of the Servants of Christ, but
of Antichrist.

It is a notable Story, that which Beda tells in the second Book of his
Ecclesiastical History and the second chapter, that when Austin the Monk, whom
some are ambitious to make the Apostle of England: When he was sent by Pope
Gregory the great to preach to the Angles or Saxons that dwelt in this Land, he
found a considerable company of the Britans, the ancient and native Inhabitants
of this Country, professing the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, and living
religiously and devoutly, only differing from the then Church of Rome in some
Circumstances, as in point of the keeping of Easter and some Ceremonies used in
Baptism, and the like; whereupon he called a Council, or a Synod, and invites
the Britans thither, and accordingly diverse of the most Learned and Religious
among them applied themselves to the journey; but in the way they judged it
convenient to take the advice of one that was of great Eminency for Prudence,
and Holiness of life, et Anachoreticam ducebat vitam, and to enquire of him
whether they should be persuaded by Austin to leave their ancient Customs, and
follow his, or no. His answer to them was, Si Homo Dei sit, sequimini eum; If
he be a man of God, follow him. But say they, How shall we be sure of that.
Why, says he again, Our Lord says, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly of heart. If therefore, says he, this Austin be meek
and lowly of heart, it is a sign that he has taken the Yoke of Chrict upon
him, and offers no other yoke to you; but if he be superbus and immitis, if he
be haughty and proud, Constat eum non esse de Deo; it is manifest that he is
not of God, neither are ye to regard what he says. But, say they again, How
shall we know this, how shall we know whether he be proud or lowly? Why, says
he, order it so, that He and his Party may come first to the place of meeting,
and if when you come in, he rises up to you, know that he is the Servant of
Christ, and hear him obediently. But if he despise you, and will not so much as
rise off his seat to you, do you despise him. Fecerunt ut dixerat. They did as
he directed them; and Austin not rising up to them at their coming in, they
concluded him a proud man, and set themselves the more to oppose him.

But if we enlarge the Persons, and take in not only the Elders, but the rest
of the Church, supposing them present upon the place, as I have showed before,
we have probable cause to do, than the term Brethren, may afford unto us this
Observation.

Obs. That there is a near relation, even the relation of Brethren, between
Preachers and People, founded upon the account of Religion and Grace.

This near relation is sometimes expressed under the notion of Father and
Children. I speak unto you, as unto my Children, 2 Cor. 6.13. My little
Children, with whom I travel in birth, Gal. 4.19. I have no greater joy than to
hear that my Children walk in Truth, 3 John 14. Sometimes this near relation is
expressed under the notion of a Nurse and Children; so 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. But we
were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children. But most
ordinarily and frequently it is expressed by this notion of Brother, or
Brethren; this is the Compellation wherewith the Apostle and other Ministers of
the Gospel do ordinarily salute their People, both in their Preaching and in
their Writings to them, as is obvious to all that read the Acts of the
Apostles, and their Epistles. Ministers and People they are Brethren, and that
upon the account of Religion and Grace. They have the same Father, even God,
who is pleased to own the one and the other for his Children. For we are all
the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.26. They have all one
Mother; not Rome, nor Antioch, nor any other Church upon Earth, but the
Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. They have all sucked
the same breasts, Isa. 66.11. That you may suck and be satisfied with the
breasts of her Consolation. They all feed at the same Table, they eat the same
Spiritual Bread, and drink the same Spiritual Drink; 1 Cor. 10. They all are
Heirs of the same Promises, and wait for the same Inheritance; I say, Ministers
and People that are true Believers in all these respects therefore are
Brethren. Only look as it is in a Family where there are many Children, many
Brothers and Sisters, one of these is the firstborn, and he, though a Brother,
yet he is an Elder-Brother, and he has some Privileges above the rest. So it
is here.

In the first Ages of the World the Privileges of the firstborn consisted in
these three things.

1. That the Public and Solemn Worship of God was administered in the Family,
and for the Family, by the Firstborn; he was Priest and Prophet of the Family.
2. That next unto the Father himself the Firstborn was the Prince and
Governor of the Family. 3. That a double Portion of the Estate went to the
Firstborn, as his Inheritance.
And all these Privileges were founded upon that claim which God made unto the
firstborn, as his right, upon which they were consecrated and set apart to
God, Exodus 13.

Afterward, all these Privileges in the Church of the Old Testament were
devolved upon the Levites, whom God took instead of all the firstborn of
Israel, Numb. 3.12. And now in the Church of the New Testament this Honor and
these Privileges are conferred upon the Ministers of the Gospel, whom God has
set in the place of the Levites under the Law, Isa. 66.21. I will take of them
for Priests and Levites, says the Lord. So that now the Ministers of the
Gospel they are as it were the firstborn Brethren.

Now the Use of this may be,

First, To inform us, that the Authority and Power of Ruling, which Ministers
have in the Church of God, which is the House of God, it is not Despotical or
Lordly, or Magisterial, such as Superiors have over those that are absolutely
and every way their Inferiors; but it is rather Social, such as one Brother
has over another, importing rather a Priority of Order, than an Imparity of
Degree. The Apostle disclaims all such Power, (...), 2 Cor. 1.24. We are not
Lords over your Faith, but Helpers of your Joy.

Secondly, That Ministers and People, Preachers and Hearers are all Brethren:
this shows what endeared affections Ministers and People ought to bear each to
other. How dearly ought every Minister of the Gospel to love the People to whom
he is sent; they are his Brethren, and how dearly ought the People of God to
love and reverence every Minister of God that is sent among them! he is their
Rrother, their Elder Brother.

As it is in the Conjugal Relation, so it is in this. There are some duties
proper to the Husband, some proper to the Wife, but Love is a duty equally
incumbent upon them both. So it is here. There are Duties indeed proper to the
Preacher as a Preacher, some proper to the People as Hearers; but Love is a
Duty equally incumbent upon them both, as they are Brethren; the Preacher must
love the People dearly as his Brethren. So Paul professes abundance of Love to
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2.4. And so to the Philippians, Phil. 1.8. God is my
Record how greatly I long after you all, in the Bowels of Christ Jesus. So
acknowledging their love to him, 2 Cor. 8.7. -- Ye abound in your Love to us.
And Col. 1.8. -- Who also declared unto us your Love in the Spirit.

I am not come hither this day to justify, or commend my self, for my Love to
you of this place, though I think I might with modesty say, I nave given some
proof of my Love unto you, not only by my constant Ministry among you, but by
denying so many and so great Preferments as I have done for your sakes; neither
is it my design to commend you, or to praise you to your faces, for your Love
to me, for that mutual and reciprocal Love that has been between us, blessed
be God; for what has been wanting on either side, let us be humbled.

Thirdly, This may let us see, that where there is this Brother-like, mutual
affection between Minister and People, there the taking away of Minister and
People one from another cannot but be very grievous. What a lamentation does
David take up over Jonathan upon this account, 2 Samuel 1.26. I am greatly
distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; there is the root and bottom of his
grief, his brother Jonathan was snatched away from him by death: I am greatly
distressed for thee, my Brother Jonathan; very pleasant wast thou unto me:
there was David's love to Jonathan, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the
love of women, there was Jonathan's love to David, there was no love lost
between the one and other; and where there is such love there cannot but be
grief at partting. Methinks I hear some Congregations (though it may be, not
many) in England thus bewailing their Ministers, that are now civilly slain, We
are greatly distressed for thee, O Brother, very pleasant were thou to us, thy
words were pleasant words: for the Preacher sought to find out acceptable
words, and that which was written was upright, even words of truth, Eccles.
12.10. They that have had such Preachers, may well say, very pleasant have thou
been unto us; and some may add further, Thy Love was wonderful, passing the
love of Women; and here certainly there must be a heavy parting.

Fourthly, If Preachers and People are Brethren, Here then behold how good and
pleasant a thing it is for Ministers and People to dwell together in Unity; As
it is said of Brethren, Psalm. 133. and therefore must be true here. And on the
contrary, how unprofitable, how unpleasing, and how unbecoming Jarrs and
Divisions between Minister and People are. Their contentions are like the bars
o sa Castle, says the holy Ghost of the contentions of Brethren, Prove. 18.19.
what then are the Contentions of Ministers and People?

Fifthly, That Ministers and People are Brethren, only Ministers they are the
Elder Brethren, they are the first born of Brethren. This may serve as a glass
to let us see the sad aspect of the present Judgment that is upon this Nation.
There are two thousand Ministers in England smitten and stain at once, as to
their Ministerial Office, and Relation: Methinks this Judgment seems to be like
the last and sorest Judgment that God brought upon Egypt, when He slew all the
first born in Egypt in one night: so here, God has slain not one or a few, but
many indeed of the Firstborn in England in one day, there God did it
Immittendo, here Permittendo, there by way of Immission, here by way of
Permission: upon this occasion, says the Text, there was a great cry in Egypt,
Exodus 12, 30. And methinks, there should be no small cry in England at this
time. And yet behold, and remember. -- But I forbear, and go on.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God.] Paul being now to take his last leave
of these precious People, making account never to to see them, nor speak unto
them more, what does he do? He commends them to God. And now, Brethren, I
commend you unto God.

Whence observe, That it becomes Ministers, especially when they are to leave
their People, and foresee they shall leave them in danger of Wolves, to commit
and commend them unto God.

It is true, it is the Duty of Ministers to be always commending their People
unto God. So Paul, Romans 1.9. God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit, in
the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my
prayers. So Ephesians. 1.16. I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of
you in my prayers. So 1 Thessalonians. 1.2. We give thanks unto God always for you,
making mention of you always in our prayers. Thus Ministers must always do;
but especially when they are leaving of them, and know withal they shall leave
them in danger of Wolves. If there were no other proof of this in Scripture,
the Practice and Example of the chief Shepherd and Bishop of souls, the Lord
Jesus Christ, is enough to enforce this unto us; for you find that when Jesus
knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the
Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them to the end,
Joh. 13.1. and, as the last act of his Love, he commends them to the Father at
his departure, in that comfortable and heavenly Prayer of his which we have
recorded, John 17.11. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the
world; Holy Father, keep through thine own Name those whom thou have given me.
And so again, ver. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou should keep them from the evil, or from the evil one.
Thus we see our Savior commended his Disciples to his Father; and so should we
do. And that, First, To testify our faithfulness to God. Secondly, To testify
our love to the People.


First, To testify our faithfulness to God, and that for two Reasons.

1. Because they are primarily and originally God's Flock, His peculiar People,
and by him committed to our Trust and Care. To whom therefore should we commit
them when we leave them, rather than to him to whom they do belong, and from
whom we have received them? This our Saiour points at in John 17.6. Thine
they were, thou gave them me. So again ver. 9. I pray for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine. and ver. 11. Keep through thine own Name,
them which thou have given me. The interest that God has in them, and our
receiving them from God, that is one Reason why we Ministers should commit and
commend unto God the People we have received from him, before we leave them.

2. It becomes Ministers, especially when they are to leave their People, and
foresee dangers threatening them, to commit and commend them to God: Because,
they are accountable to God for their Peoples souls, Heb 13.17. They watch for
your souls as they that must give an account. As Jacob was accountable to Laban
for all the Sheep that were under his hands, if any were stolen, or torn, or
lost by going astray, Jacob must answer for it; so it is with Ministers, they
are accountable to God for their Peoples souls: And therefore it is fit, that
when they leave their People, they should commend them to God, to whom they are
accountable for them.

Secondly, It becomes Ministers when they are leaving their People to commend
them to God, that so they may testify their love to their Peoples souls. This
being the best, and indeed the only provision they can make for them, because
God is every way able to keep those that are thus committed to him, He is
infinite in Wisdom, in Power, in Watchfulness, in Tenderness, in Faithfulness,
therefore it becomes Ministers when they are leaving their People, thus to
commit them to God. Now this may serve,

In the first place, by way of apology for those many Ministers that at this
time have been forced to leave their stations, I know there want not some that
blame them, and think they have not showed that love to the souls of their
Flocks that they should have done, methinks I hear some ready to take up the
Ministers of Christ, as David's elder brother took up him, 1 Samuel 17.28. I know
thy pride, and the naughtiness of thy heart, And with whom have thou left those
few Sheep in the Wilderness? here poor David stands arraigned at the Bar of his
angry brother, of pride and naughtiness of heart, and wilful neglect of the
Flock committed to his care; when he, poor man, had done nothing but by the
command of his father: And is not this the censure passed upon many of God's
faithful Ministers in their sufferings at this time? It is (say some) their
pride, and the frowardness and peevishness of their hearts, and what do they
think shall become of their Flocks, when they thus leave their charges? when we
have done nothing but by the appointment and commandment of God, who has
commanded us not to do evil that good may come of it. And to them that demand
with whom we have left those few Sheep? We answer, We have commended them to
God, his they were, he gave them us; and now he having no more need of us, we
have resigned them up again unto him. But,

In the second Place, This may support and comfort the People of God under this
present dispensation of God toward them, even the taking away of their
Ministers, which cannot but be very grievous unto them. You see here how full
of grief the People were at the thoughts of Paul's being taken from them, they
all wept sore, ver. 37, 38. and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing
most of all for those words which he spoke, saying, that they should see his
face no more. That was it wounded them to the heart, that Paul was now taking
his last leave, never to see their faces more. The like you find Acts 21. the
Church in Cesarea, when they heard that Paul was going to Jerusalem, and that
Bonds and Trouble were there appointed for him, they fell a dissuading him from
his Voyage, and that with abundance of tears, in so much that Paul was feign to
shake them off with a kind of anger, saying, What mean ye to weep, and to break
my heart, I am ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus. Methinks I hear those good Souls mourning to one another
thus in secret: Alas, that ever we lived to see this day! That ever by our own
unthankfulness, and unprofitableness under such a Ministry, as Paul's, we
should provoke God to take such a blessed instrument from us, and from his
Churches! That our not walking worthy of the Light should provoke the Lord to
let such a Light be taken out of the Candlestick, and put under a Bushel; it is
our not walking worthy of the Gospel that imprisons this precious Servant of
God, more than any crime of his, or the malice and rage of his adversaries the
Jews; they could have no power to touch him, if we by our unfruitfulness had
not made our selves unworthy of him, and of his Ministry, Methinks I hear them
thus bemoaning themselves, methinks I see a company incircling Paul, as in a
Ring, and pleading with him, Good Sir, consider, if not your self, yet consider
us; if you go up to Jerusalem, and there be laid in Prison, as the holy Ghost
foretells you will, what do you think will become of us? Who shall carry on
that Work, which you have been the happy Instrument under God to begin in us?
You are our Father, you have begotten us again to God by his Gospel; if you
leave us, what will become of us? never were poor fatherless children left in a
more miserable condition than we are left in; If you leave us, who shall
instruct us, who shall encourage and carry us on in the ways of Grace and
Holiness? who shall arm us against the temptations of Satan, against the errors
and snares of Seducers? Who shall quiet our troubled Consciences, who shall
build us up in Faith, and in the comforts of the holy Ghost, if you leave us?
Besides, we have Children that are yet in their sins, and what will become of
their souls, what means is there for their conversion, if Paul, and such as
Paul be taken from us?

Talibus atque aliis in quae dolor ipse desertos fecerat. With these, and such
like things, did these Christians set upon Paul, to persuade him to stay among
them, but you see all in vain.

And some such pangs as these possibly may be upon the hearts of some of God's
People at this time in England, there may be here and there one that may sit
solitary and sorrowful, bewailing their Minister, as he did the Prophet, O my
Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

But stay, my Brethren, we are not your Fathers. Matthew. 23.9. Call no man your
Father upon Earth; for one is your Father, which is in Heaven. Alas, Brethren,
we Ministers are not your Fathers, it is too honorable a title for us to take:
truly, and properly, and in a spiritual sense, God only is your Father, he it
is that begets you of his own good will by the Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. Though
indeed that Word be dispensed by us as instruments, and when he has thus
begotten you, he is pleased to trust and honor us so far, as to make us
Foster-Fathers and Nursing-Fathers to you, and this cannot but beget some kind
of Affections and Respect in us to you, and in you to us, as there is between
Nurse-Fathers and Nurse-Children, and a lothness to part. But I beseech you,
consider, If a King that has had a Child at Nurse some years in a private
house, judge it convenient to part the Child and Nurse one from another, and
the Nurse-Father upon notice given of the King's mind, carries the Child home,
and delivers it up into the King's own arms, who is the true and proper Father,
and is a thousand times better able to provide for the Child than the
Nurse-Father, and more engaged to do it too: has this poor Child any hurt, or
any cause to complain, or to cry after the Nurse-Father, I will go home to my
Father again? Think, my Brethren, the case is the same here. We have been
Nursing-Fathers to you for some time, God sees it fit to make a change, who
are we that we should murmur, or find fault? or, what cause have you to
complain? We resign you up into the hands of your Father, and our Father, your
God and our God, Why should you cry after us, are you not well enough? can you
be better than in the arms of your dear, gracious and merciful Father?

Obj. But what shall we do for Ordinances? how shall we live? who shall feed
and nourish our poor souls?

Ans. You that do indeed love, and prize, and hunger after the Ordinances, I
will say to you, as Abram did in another care, My son, God will provide. As for
the rest of you, you that neither loved the Ordinances while you had them, nor
have been at all quickened by the withdrawing of them, what God will do with
you I cannot tell. But you that love and prize the Ordinances, I say to you
concerning your souls, as our Savior concerning your bodies, Take no thought
what you shall eat, and what you shall drink, nor how your poor souls shall
live in a time of straitness and scarcity. That God, that when Israel were in
such a place as they could neither sow nor reap, fed them with bread from
Heaven; that God, if he bring you into such a condition, as you can neither
enjoy Word nor Sacraments, will feed you too with hidden Manna, that shall be
better than Word and Sacraments; that God, who multiplied the Meal in the
Widows barrel, and the Oil in her cruse; that though her stock was little, yet
it served turn, and lasted as long as the famine lasted. So I dare confidently
say it shall be with you that fear God in Truth, and love his Ordinances in
sincerity, the less your stock of Grace in your own eyes be, be it very little
and small, it shall hold out till you come to Heaven, your handful of Meal and
your cruise of Oil shall not fail. As for the rest of People in this Place and
Nation, what God will do with them I know not, I am loath to speak what I see
cause to fear, even concerning this very place; But I shall commend you to God,
after I have spoken a little of what follows.

And the Word of his Grace.] Mark here, the Apostle does not say, I commend you
to God, and the impulse of his Spirit; or, I commend you to God, and the Light
within; or, I commend you to God, and the Traditions of men; or, I commend you
to God, and the Customs and Orders of the holy Church: No, these are some of
them uncertain, others of them unprofitable things. But we have a more sure
Word, 2 Pet. 1.19. A profitable Word, a Word able to make wise to Salvation,
even the Holy Scriptures, and to this, next under God, and in joint
cooperation with God, for the good of their souls, does the Apostle commend
these Christians: I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace.

From thence observe, That the Word of God, it is the Word of God's Grace. So
we find it styled, not only here, but in Acts 14.3. They gave testimony to the
Word of his Grace. So in chap. 20. ver. 24. it is called, The Gospel of the
Grace of God. And the Word of God is the Word of his Grace, upon this fourfold
account.

Reas. 1. Because it comes from Grace. It was the mere Free Grace of God that
moved him to reveal, and give forth this Word of his, as a Revelation of
himself unto the children of men. Adam was at first created in such a condition
as he needed not a word without to lead him into the true knowledge of the true
God. He was created after the Image of God, in Knowledge, Righteousness and
Holiness, he had the Law of God written in his heart: And as the High Priest of
old having the Vrim and Thummim upon his breast, needed but cast his eye upon
that, and he might presently kmow any thing, that he had a mind to know of God.
So Adam in his innocence it was for him but to reflect upon himself, to cast
his eye inward, and presently he might know of God, and of his Mind and Will
that which he did desire. But as the Vrim and Thummim being lost in the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, God was pleased, as the Rabbis
tell us, to favor his People with a vocal answer from the Oracle, which they
called (...) Bathcol, a voice without them, instead of inward light and
inspiration. So this innate light of the knowledge of God being extinct and
lost by that universal ruin which the sin of Adam has brought upon all
mankind, and all mankind now being nothing but blindness and darkness,
alienated from the Life of God through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians.
4.18. able at the best but to feel and grope after God, as the Apostles
expression is, Acts 17.27. even as the men of Sodom when they were struck with
blindness groped to find the door of Lot's house til they wearied themselves,
but were never able to find it, Genesis 19.11. So it is with all men now by
Nature, therefore the Lord who is said to dwell in Light inaccessible, 1 Timothy
6.16. and who is a Fountain of pure Light inexhaustible, (1 John 1.5.) has
pleased to display unto his poor creatures some beams of his own Light, and
that in such a refracted way, as their weak nature may be capable of, without
being overwhelmed and swallowed up with that Glory. And to this end has
treasured up those Beams of Light in his holy Scriptures, from whence they dart
forth unto us, not all at once, and in their fullness, but gradatim, and by
little and little, as we are able to bear them, and take them in. And because
this Discovery which God makes of himself to sinful and fallen man, by his holy
Word, is an Act of mere Grace, which Man had no ways merited, not could merit,
nor God could no ways be obliged or engaged to; therefore this Word of God is
called the Word of his Grace, in respect of the original of it, it came forth
from God, it was the Grace of God that first revealed it.

Reas. 2. It is the Word of Grace materially, because the Grace of God toward
sinners in Jesus Christ is the principal, proper, and specific matter and
subject of it. True it is indeed, that (...). All-that can possibly be known of
God is revealed in the Word. The simplicity, unity, perfection of his Essence,
the glorious Mystery of the Trinity of Persons, the Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
Justice, Holiness of God, all these are made known to us in his Word, wherein,
as in a glass, we behold the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. But that which the
Word does principally and chiefly reveal, it is the Grace of God toward
sinners in Jesus Christ, this was the substance of that (...), that first Word
which God revealed immediately after the Fall of Man in Paradise, The Seed of
the Woman shall break the Serpents head. This was the substance and scope of
all the Old Testament, all the Sacrifices, Laws, and Ordinances, concerning
holy Persons, and holy things, they all tended to this. And this is more
clearly and fully the scope of the Gospel and New Testament, to make known the
unsearchable Riches of Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3.8. And therefore
of all the parts of the Scripture, the Gospel, the New Testament, is, (...),
and (...), called the Word of Grace, and the Gospel of Grace, because the whole
design and scope of that, is, to reveal and make known unto sinners the Grace
of God in Christ, and that, and that alone reveals it: Men may talk what they
please of those Universal Preachers, the Sun, Moon and Stars, and tell us that
they preach Christ. The creatures indeed do sufficiently reveal God, so as to
leave all the World without excuse, for not fearing and serving of God who made
Heaven and Earth, but worshipping the work of their own hands in his stead; but
Christ, and the Grace of God toward sinners in Christ, is the proper,
peculiar, sole Revelation of the Gospel, which therefore is called the Word of
Grace.

Reas. 3. The Word of God is the Word of Grace effectively, because it works
inherent qualitative Grace and Holiness in them that hear it, not indeed in
all; the Word does not work Grace in the hearts of all, nor never did. No, but
wherever Grace is wrought in the hearts of any, there ordinarily it is the
Word that works; and therefore it may be justly and duly called the Word of
Grace. So the Apostle, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God. So Gal. 3.2. Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or
by the hearing of Faith? So our Savior, John 17.17. Sanctify them through thy
Truth, thy Word is Truth. So then the Word works Faith and Sanctification in
the hearts of God's Children, and therefore it is the Word of Grace.

Reas. 4. The Word of God is the Word of Grace; because it not only begets
and begins Grace, and lays the foundation of it, but it maintains, and
increases, and carries on the work of Grace unto Glory. As it follows here in
the Text, The Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you
an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Now this in the first place, should teach us to bless God for the enjoying of
his Word, more than for any other our Enjoyments whatsoever. It is true, we
have cause to bless God for any thing, for every thing we enjoy; that we have
bread to eat, though never so course; that we have raiment to put on, though
never so mean; we have cause to bless God, that we live in a Land of Hills and
Valleys, that is watered with Springs, and with the Dew of Heaven, in a
fruitful and plentiful Land; but that we live in a Land whither God has caused
the Word of his Grace to come: this we have cause to bless God for infinitely
more, than for Corn, and Wine, and Oil in greatest abundance.

Had God enriched this Nation with all the Mines and Treasures of both the
Indies; were all the Hills, and Highways in England as full of Gold as they
are of Sand; were all the Rivers as full of Pearls as they are of Pebles; did
Cinnamon and Cassia grow in England as thick as Bulrushes; were all the Riches
and Glories of the World laid up here as in Natures Storehouse; yet if God had
hid the Word of his Grace from us, what a miserable Nation had we been! all
this our Wealth would have exposed us to the cruel covetousness and rage of
other Nations, as it has done the poor Indians, and have sent us down to Hell
certainly and unavoidably without any help or remedy.

But blessed be God for the Gospel of Grace, for this Word of Grace blessed be
God; blessed be God for the Word of Grace bestowed upon England, he has not
dealt so with every Nation: In England is God known, his Name is great in
England; in England is his Tabernacle, and his Dewlling Place in England: He
has not dealt so with every Nation, he has not dealt so with any Nation.
Praise ye the Lord. Psalm. 147.20.

In the second place, This should teach us above all things, to fear and
deprecate the taking away the Word of Grace from us, or from our posterity
after us. It was a sore Judgment which the Lord threatened against Judah, Jer.
16.5. I have taken away my Peace from this People, says the Lord, my
Loving Kindness and Mercy.

O my Brethren, when God takes away the Word of his Grace from a People, then
is this direful Judgment come upon them, then has God taken away his Peace
from that People, even Loving Kindness and Mercy; then is that People left,
Regnum Cyclopicum, in the Region of Darkness, and the shadows of death, an
habitation for Dragons and Devils. Take the Sun out of the Firmament, and what
would the World be but a Chaos of Confusion, a Land of Darkness? And, satius
esset Solemn e Colo, said the People of Constantinople of that famous Preacher
Chrysostom, Better the Sun should be taken out of the Sky, than Chrysostom out
of the Pulpit. Chrysostom, and an hundred Chrysostoms may be taken out of the
Pulpit, and yet the Word of Grace not taken away: but if once the Word of
Grace be taken away, then VVo, Woe, We to that Place, and to that People.

Brethren, you may remember, I am sure you ought to remember, that upon the
13th of October, 1658. from those words, Amos 8.11. I showed you what a heavy
Judgment it was to have the Word of God taken from you. I told you then, it may
be some of you thought too peremptorily, God would bring this Judgment upon
this Nation, and this Congregation in particular, I did bid you write it in a
book, the Year, and Month, and Day when I spoke it, therefore you may remember
it. God after this prediction, waited the term of his Patience, mentioned Luke.
13.7. even three years, and then soon after God began to inflict this Judgment:
O my Brethren, had that warning been believed and improved to Humiliation,
Repentance, closer Walking with God, higher prizing the Word and Ordinances, a
study to walk worthy of the Gospel and Grace of God; assuredly, the evil
threatened might have been prevented: but where God has sealed a Decree for his
Judgments, there Warnings do but harden the heart and hasten the Judgment. When
God had a purpose to destroy Ahab, Micajahs words shall bear no sway with him.
When God had a purpose to destroy Jerusalem, there Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and all
the Prophets shall be mocked, despised, slighted, laughed to scorn. O that it
had not been so with us! Well Brethren, you were told of this before, you would
not believe it then, Will you believe it now? Now you begin to feel it, will
you believe what you feel? will you lay it to heart? will you give glory to
God? if not I tell you what you feel is yet nothing to that you are like to
feel. The first year of the Famine in Egypt was nothing so bad as the second,
nor that as the third, nor the third as the seventh, every year the Famine grew
sorer, and pinched harder and harder: Believe it, so it will be with you, you
are not yet put to wander from Sea to Sea, and from Coast to Coast, to seek the
Word of the Lord; but believe it, if these beginnings be not laid to heart, you
will once, before God has done with you, be brought to this; So the Text there
says plainly, They shall go from Sea to Sea, and from Coast to Coast, to seek
the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it. This Threatening God fulfilled
upon the Church and People of the Jews, taking away the Spirit and gift of
Prophecy from that Church, from the time of the Prophet Malachi, unto the birth
of John the Baptist, which was between three and four hundred years; which is
the thing pointed at in Psalm. 74.9. We see not our Signs, neither is there any
more any Prophet. And withal, at the same time God laid them under the forest
Persecutions for their Religion, that ever that Church and People met withal.
The same Judgment has once been upon this Nation, and upon the Christian World
already, God grant that our sins do not bring it a second time upon us. But,

In the third place, Is the Word of God the Word of his Grace? Then this
reproves all those that have lived under the continual dispensation of this
Word of Grace, and yet have got no saving Grace, no saving good by it; but
continue blind, ignorant, impenitent, hard-hearted, secure, unbelieving,
unholy, and that under the constant preaching of the Word. O that such would in
the fear of God consider, First, How dangerous their condition is. Secondly,
How great their Condemnation will be.


First, Consider how dangerous your condition is. All you that live under the
Word of Grace, and get no saving Grace, no saving good by it. Read that one
Text, Heb. 6.7, 8. For the Earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, (that is,
answerable to their gift, and labors, and continuance) is blessed of God. But
that which brings forth briars and thorns, is near unto cursing, (How near,
and unto what cursing in this life, God only knows, but to be sure their end
will be sad) whose end is to be burned. A fearful end, and such as should make
the heart of every one who is guilty of being unfruitful under the Word of
Grace, tremble to think or hear of it; especially considering how little hope
there is for such a one to escape this curse, and to escape this dreadful and
dismal end: for if the Word of Grace, that is the power of God himself unto
Salvation, if that can do no good upon thee, what can? if that cannot work upon
thy blind, ignorant, profane hard heart, no not in ten, twenty, thirty, or
forty years, what can? I tell thee, if thou art past getting good by the Word
of Grace, thou art past getting good by any thing at all. Luke 16.31. If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they hear though one from the
dead were sent unto them. If what thou hear from the Word of Grace, of the
Wrath of God against impenitent sinners, and the Grace and Mercy of God
toward poor repenting sinners; if what thou read and hear in and from
the Word of the torments of Hell, and of the joys of Heaven; if what thou
read and hear from the Word of these things do not bring thee to
Repentance, and Faith in the Lord Jesus, nothing else will. No, though one
should come immediately out of Hell, with Hell-flames about his ears, and
burning brimstone dropping down at his heels, to warn thee, and fright thee
from those torments; or, if an Angel should come from Heaven, clothed with the
Sun, and crowned with Stars, to allure thee to Holiness by those glorious
Rewards; neither the one or the other will work upon thee to any purpose, if
the Word of Grace has not wrought upon thee; for that is the Instrument that
God has appointed and ordained, and made fit and able to work Grace in the
Soul; and therefore if that do not work upon thee, what can thou think will?

And if thou continue still in this condition, not profiting by the Word,
without any saving work of the Word upon thee, O consider how inexcusable, how
intolerable thy damnation will be. Why does our Savior tell Chorazin and
Bethsaida, and the rest of the Cities where he had gone up and down preaching
the Word of Grace, that it should be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah,
for Tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment, than for them, Mat. 11.22, 24. But
because Sodom and Gomorrah never had the Word of Grace preached among them, as
these Cities had had. Turks and Heathens, Sodomites and Gomorrahns, yea the
Devil and his Angels shall have more to plead in excuse of themselves in the
day of Judgment, than those that have lived under the Word of Grace, and never
did get any saving good by it.

Turks and Heathens, Sodomites and Gomorrahans will be able to say, Lord thou
never sentest Prophets, or Apostles, or Ministers among us, to tell us of the
danger of sin, or to call and summon us to Repentance; to make known to us thy
Will and the ways of Grace and Holiness; if thou had, we should never have
gone on in our sins and impenitencie, we would certainly have laid hold upon
the offers of Grace, and ways of Life. The Devil and his angels will be able
to say, Lord, thou did never provide nor propound for us a way of
reconciliation and recovery since we first sinned against thee, as thou did
for man after his transgression; if thy Son had taken our nature as he did the
nature of man, and had provided for us such a Covenant of Peace and
Reconciliation as he did for man, and the glad Tidings thereof had been
published to us by the Gospel as it was to man, possibly we had not persisted
so obstinately in our rebellion against thee. These and the like pleas may even
the Devils have for themselves in the day of Judgment, wither true or no, that
is not our question. But now thou who have lived all thy days under the Word
of Grace, and never got any saving good by it, but live and die an
ignorant, profane, impenitent, unbelieving creature, as the Lord knows too
many do: When thou shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, thou will
not have this nor any thing else to plead for thy self. If Christ should say to
thee, as Judges here upon the Bench to Malefactors, What can thou say for thy
self why sentence of condemnation should not pass upon thee? Poor creature,
thou will not have one word to say, but must be as that man in the parable,
Mat. 22. Altogether speechless. When the Judge shall say to you, How is it that
you appear here in the guilt of all your sins? were you never told of these
sins of yours? were you never exhorted to repentance? were you never directed
the way to get your sins pardoned? were you never invited, persuaded, entreated
that you would be saved? did I not send my Ministers, and did not they in my
Name, and in my Stead, beseech you that you would be reconciled to God? and did
not they tell you what you must do that you might be reconciled? did you not
live under the dispensations of that Word of Grace that was able to work Grace
in you, that did work Grace in others, and was as able to work it in you? why
then are ye found in a graceless condition this day? O when Jesus Christ shall
in the presence of all his Saints and Angels thus expostulate with the souls of
such as live and dye without any saving good, how inexcusable, how intolerable
will their condemnation be!

O think of it, and as you desire to escape the confusion of that day, and the
condemnation of Hell, O labor yet to get Grace wrought in your hearts by the
power of this Word of Grace.

In the fourth place. Is it so that the Word of God is the Word of Grace; O
then study this Word of Grace.

Secondly, Love this Word of Grace.

Thirdly, Cleave close to this Word of Grace; make that the Man of your
counsels, Psalm. 119.24. make it the Rule of your lives, Gal. 6.16. But these
and the like Duties I have heretofore spoken largely of, both in my Sermons
upon James 1.25. as also when I showed you, how the Word of God is the only
true and adequate Rule of Godliness. And lastly, in my Catechistical Sermons,
wherein I handled largely the Divine Original Authority and Perfection of the
holy Scriptures: I pass by these things therefore now,

And go on to the Eulogie or Praise which the Apostle here gives: The Word of
Grace, which is able to build you up.] A Metaphor taken from Builders, where
you know first, men lay the Foundation, and then by degrees set up the whole
Frame of the Building, one piece after another: to this Paul alludes here, as
if he should say, as to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.10. According to the Grace
given unto me, I as a wise Masterbuilder have laid the Foundation. I have by my
Ministry settled you upon the rock Christ Jesus. Indeed the work is not yet
finished, and yet I must leave you; but I resolve to leave you in a sure hand,
who is able to carry on what I have begun. I commend you to God, and the Word
of his Grace, which is able to build you up.

Three things we may observe from these words for our instruction.

The first is this; That true Believers, those that are in the state of Grace,
have need to be further edified and built up.

Secondly, That true Believers have need of the Word of God for their building
up, and edification.

Thirdly, That the Word of God is able to build up true Believers.

First, That true Believers, those that are in the state of Grace, have need to
be further edified, and built up. And this I prove to you,

First, By those places of Scripture that do enjoin the edification, or
building up of the Saints as a Duty: so 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Wherefore comfort your
selves together, and edify one another.

Secondly, By those places that suppose it the practice of the Saints, as in 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Edify one another, as also you do; so Jude 20. But you Brethren,
building up your selves in your most holy Faith, Praying in the Holy Ghost,
keep your selves. Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk in him, rooted and built up in him.

Thirdly, This is proved by those places that propound the edification, or
building up of the Saints, as the end and scope of Gospel Ordinances and
Church-Administrations, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. All the Officers that Christ has
given to his Church, and all Ministerial gifts bestowed upon those Officers,
what is the end and scope of them? The perfecting of the Saints, the edifying
of the Body of Christ: So the power of Censures in the Church, what is the end
and scope of them? see 2 Cor. 13.10. According to the power which the Lord has
given me to edification; this ought to be the end and scope of all
Church-Administrations. 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to edifying.

Fourthly, This is that, that ought to be the end and scope, not only of all
Public Administrations, but of all a Christians private actions. Romans 14.19.
Let us therefore follow the things that make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another. So again, Romans 15.2. Let every man please his
neighbor, for his good to Edification. Where,

First, We have the Duty enjoined; pleasing our neighbor.

Secondly, We have the universality of this Duty: Let every man please his
neighbor.

Thirdly, You have the restriction and rule of this Duty; for his good to
edification: Let every man please his neighbor for his good to Edification. It
is not simply said, Let every man please his neighbor; it would please the
Drunkard well to have other men go to the Alehouse with him; the Heretic and
Superstitious person would like it well to have every one speak, and do as they
do: but we must not please others in these things, but only so far as may be
for their real and true good, and for their Edification; so far we are bound to
please them, and no further. So that Edification you see here is the rule, and
scope, and boundary of all our compliance with, and complacency to, in other
men.

And so it is of all the actions of our lives. 2 Cor. 12.19. We do all things
for your edifying. Yea, this ought to be the scope and end of all our words as
well as actions. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your
mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying. Not a word should come
out of a Christians mouth, but what is good for Edification. Now would God,
think you, thus enjoin upon Christians the care of edifying one another? would
the Lord Jesus Christ make Edification the end and scope of all
Church-Ordinances and Administrations? would the Holy Ghost teach us to
propound it, and make it the scope and end of all our sayings and doings, next
to God's Glory? would these things be, if God, who is infinitely wise, did not
know that the Saints while they are in this life, have need of building up more
and more?

Now the Reasons why true Believers, those that are in a state of Grace, have
yet further need to be built up and edified, are,

First, Because God has appointed a certain measure and proportion, and
height of Grace, which all his Elect shall arrive at before they be taken up
into Glory. As a wise Builder who when he is about to build a house, he
resolves beforehand how many foot high he will raise it, to such a measure, to
such a height, and then he will cease: So God from all eternity has decreed
concerning every particular Believer, to such or such a degree of Grace he
shall attain, and be built up, before he come to Heaven; this the Apostle calls
a Perfect man, and the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4.13.

Secondly, God does ordinarily promove and carry on his People to this measure
and degree, whereunto he has appointed them, gradatim, by little and little.
He does not in the first instant and moment of their Conversion and
Regeneration, make them perfect in their measure, and fit for Heaven: Indeed
here and there one, God, to show his Power, is pleased to convert and fit for
Heaven, in one and the same moment of time, as the Thief upon the Cross, but
ordinarily it is not so. I have read of some Children that have been born with
hair upon their head and beard, as if they had arrived at their virilis aetas,
as soon as born, but these are inter rariora and anomala Naturae; Here Nature
steps out of her ordinary course, ordinarily it is not so. So it is here;
Sometimes it falls out that a man is converted upon his Deathbed, or upon the
Gallows, as the Thief was upon the Cross; here now Grace is wrought and
perfected all at once, but this is inter rariora Graciae: I will not say it is
anomalous, for Grace is free, and bound to no rules; but this rarely comes to
pass, except in elect Infants, dying in their infancy; but ordinarily God does
carry on the work of his Grace in his People to its appointed measure by
degrees: Hence it is compared to Leaven that diffuseth it self through the Lump
by degrees, Matthew. 13.33. to Light, that diffuseth it self through the Air by
degrees, Prove. 4.18. to Corn, that is first the green blade, then the ear, then
the ripe Corn, Mark 4.28. to a Building here, to which a man is every day
adding something, and carrying on more and more to Perfection.

The Use of this shall be,

First, To reprove those that dream of a Perfection they have attained already;
that boast themselves they are perfect, and free from sin, and consumate in
Grace and Holiness; as perfect as ever they shall be, as perfect as the Saints
in glory; yea, as perfect as Christ, as God himself. Would these men content
themselves to say, they are as perfect as ever they shall be? that were bold,
and bad enough, though possibly it might prove too sadly true of some of them;
but to say they are as perfect as the Saints in glory, as perfect as Christ, as
God himself; this is to open their mouth against the Heavens, and to blaspheme
not only the Saints of the most High, but the most High himself. How far was
the wisdom and humility of Paul from this, Philip. 3.12, 13. Not as though I
had already attained, or were already perfect, but I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I
count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things that are behind, and reaching forward to those things that are
before; I press toward the Mark for the price of the high Calling in Christ
Jesus. Blessed Paul that had been wrapped up into the third Heavens, and had
heard things unutterable, yet he does not count himself perfect, nor reckons
that he had attained all that Grace which he must attain before he comes to
make his eternal abode in Heaven; therefore he forgets, overlooks what he has,
and considers what he wants, forgetting that which is behind, and reaching
forth to that which is before, he presses forward.

Had some of those self-conceited, self-deluded poor souls, that dream so much
of their own perfection, and talk of it as some men do in their dreams, had
they I say been wrapped up with Paul into the third Heavens; they might have had
some shadow of Reason to boast of their own perfection; but alas, poor
creatures, they carry their own confutation about with them in their crazie
bodies, and distempred spirits. O Brethren, take heed of this delusion, take
heed of saying you have enough, you are perfect: I never read nor heard of any
that said, I am rich and increased in goods, and lack nothing, but Christ
answered them on the contrary, Thou art poor, and blind, and naked, and
miserable. He that says he has Grace enough before he come in Heaven, it is
to be feared he has none at all, nor will never come there.

In the Second Place, therefore be exhorted; Seeing that true Beleivers have
need of further building up, O be exhorted to make it the great business of
your lives, to build up your selves and one another toward perfection more and
more. You have heard this is that the Holy Ghost enjoins: Edify your selves,
and edify one another. And let this, I beseech you, as you love your souls, be
the main business of your lives; do not make it a business of the By, as many
do, whose main design and business they drive, is for the world, and the things
of the world; as for edifying themselves and one another, that is laid by for
spare hours, when they have nothing else to do: but O my Brethren, make the
edifying of your selves, and one another, the main design and intendment of
your lives, make it your daily task and work, if you would not have the whole
work of Grace in your souls decay, and run to ruin. If any of your now have a
house in building, and had laid the foundation, begun to rear up the building,
and so let it stand by, contented that your workman should finish at his
leisure, when he could spare time, when he had nothing else to do, Would not
all the world condemn you as very improvident men, and negligent of your own
concernments? O that men were but as wise for their souls, as they are for the
world! O why should you neglect your souls? why should you suffer the building
of Grace, which God has begun to rear up in your souls, to decay and run to
ruin, as it will certainly do? for, Non progredi, est regredi, Not to go
forward, is to go backward, O therefore be adding daily, and doing something in
your souls daily. Could the Heathen Painter be so intent and industrious upon
his trade of Painting, that he could say, Nulla dies sine linea, and all, that
he might excel in that Art? And shall not Christians be more intent upon, and
more industrious in their attendance to the work of Grace in their souls? shall
any day pass them without something done for their edification, and for the
carrying on of the work of Grace in their hearts unto more perfection? O far be
it, far be it from every true Christan. You Brethren, building up your selves
in your most holy Faith, and praying always in the Holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the Love of God.

But you will say; How shall we do that? What can we do toward the building up
of our selves? Why the following Doctrines will tell you that, the next whereof
is this;

That the best of Christians have need of the Word of God for their edification
and building up. Therefore the Apostle here commends even the Elders of
Ephesus, who were themselves Officers of Christ, and Builders in the Church of
Christ, the Apostle commends them to the Word of Grace: so the Apostle exhorts
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13. Till I come give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation,
to Doctrine. Give attendance to reading; to reading what? certainly the holy
Scriptures, the Word of God. Timothy was one that had known the Scriptures of a
Child, 2 Timothy 3.15. and that had received extraordinary Gifts of the holy Ghost
by the laying on of the Apostles hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. that was an Evangelist, a
Preacher of the Gospel to the Gentiles; yet even this Timothy, though thus
qualified, gifted, and employed, must still give attendance to reading; not
only read now and then a chapter, but give attendance to reading, if he means
to build up others, or to be himself built up in Grace and Holiness: So that
you see the best of Christans have need of the Word of God for their building
up, and edification.

That this was the design, and scope of God in causing his Word to be committed
to writing, is clear, in 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration
from God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works: There is the end why all Scripture was given,
that the man of God may be built up unto perfection. And that this is the end
why Christ has instituted in his Church a public Ministry, for the opening
and applying of these Scriptures, is clear out of Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. Now if the infinite Wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ did not
know that the best of his Servants would need his Word for their edification
and building up, He would never have committed his Word first to writing, and
afterward have appointed a continual preaching of it in his Church, in season
and out of season, as a means properly subservient to their edification. We may
conclude therefore; That the best of Christians have need of the Word for their
edification and building up.

And this, first, condemns the Impiety of the Pope, I say of the Pope rather
than of the Papists; for the poor People suffer under this Impiety of the Pope
and his Clergy, who deprive their Laity, as they call them, of the use and
benefit of the Scriptures, making it a Capital crime for any of them to have
the Scriptures in any common or ordinary language, Italian, French, Spanish, or
the like. Satan himself could never have invented a more speedy and effectual
way for the destroying of souls that this is.

They pretend indeed for this wickedness of theirs, reverence to the
Scriptures, and care of souls; they would not (they say) have the Scriptures
polluted, and profaned, by being made common, and handled with unwashed and
unholy hands, therefore they suffer none to deal with the Scriptures but men in
holy Orders; and they are afraid lest by putting the Scriptures into vulgar
hands, they should but put a knife into the hand of a child or madman,
wherewith to wound and destroy themselves, wresting the Scriptures to their own
destruction. But O how foolish is the wisdom of man, when it would exalt it
self above the Wisdom of God! Did not God know how to provide for the Honor
and Majesty of his Sacred Word, and for the good and welfare of poor Souls,
if the Word were exposed to the view and use of the meanest, and lowest of
People? Why then were the Scriptures of the Old Testament written to the Church
of the Jews in the Hebrew tongue, which every man, woman and child spoke, and
understood? and why where the Scriptures of the New Testament written to the
Churches of the Gentiles in the Greek tongue, which was the proper and maternal
language of most of the Churches we read of in the New Testament, and
generally understood by all to whom the Gospel was at first preached? and what
mean all those Commandments both in the Old and New Testament, for reading,
meditating and searching the Scriptures, and those promises of Blessing to them
that so do, made and given promiscuously unto all, if all may not, yea ought
not to read the Scriptures? And why did the Apostles, guided by the Spirit of
God, direct and entitle their Epistles, not to Bishops, and Church Officers
only, but even to the whole Church, the Plebs and all, if the Plebs might not
read the Scriptures? And why does John write his Canonical Epistle to the
Elect Lady, and to Gaius a private Christian, if Ladies and private Christians
might not read Canonical Scripture? And why do Chrysostom, Hierom, Austin, and
others of the glorious Lights of the ancient Church, so vehemently exhort their
People and Auditors to the reading and study of the Scriptures? had these men
no care of the Honor of the Scriptures, or the good of the Soul? Apage. Away
with these pretenses: the true reason why the Pope and his Accomplices do so
studiously smother the Scriptures from their People, is that, rendered by our
Savior John 3.20. For every one that does evil hates the Light, neither
comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved. And their doom shall be
with those, Luke 11.52. Woe unto you Lawyers, for you have taken away the Key of
Knowledge; you entered not in your selves, and them that were entered in you
hindered.

In the second place; This reproves the Impiety of the Papists, who under
pretense of honoring the Scriptures, shut them from the commom people: So this
(on the other side) reproves the blasphemy of those that think themselves too
good to stand in need of the Scriptures, the Word of God. The Papists think the
Scriptures too good for the vulgar people to have any thing to do withal; these
think themselves, though God knows they are poor ignorant people, yet they
think themselves too good to have any thing to do with the Scriptures, or to
stand in need of any instruction or direction from the Scriptures, the Word of
God; they think they have the Word of God within, the Light within, and that
is sufficient for them. Indeed they will grant you, that the Prophecy of Isaiah
and Jeremiah, it was the Word of God to Isaiah and Jeremiah, and the People
that lived in their times; and so the Epistles of Paul and Peter, they were the
Word of God to Peter and Paul, and to those to whom they wrote them; but as
for themselves, they have (they make account) the same infallible Spirit that
Peter and Paul had, and the dictates and motions of that Spirit are the same
infallible Word of God to them, that it was to the Prophets and Apostles,
binding them, and others to whom they are sent, to speak it as infallibly as
the Revelation of God to the Prophets and Apostles, and their speaking them to
others did bind them. O Pride! O Blasphemy!

Supposing it to be true which they say, that they have the same infallible
Spirit which the Apostles and Prophets had; Yet, first, it will not follow that
they have it in the same Operations and Manifestations that the Prophets and
Apostles had; it is a certain Truth, that all the Elect of God that are
sanctified have but one and the same Spirit, quickening all, guiding all: As it
is written, There is one Body, and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. But, says the
Apostle, there are diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and diversity of
Administrations, and diversity of Operations, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. And all these
works one and the same Spirit, ver. 11. Thus it was in the Apostles days,
all that had the same Spirit that Peter and Paul had to renew them, and
sanctify them, and work all Grace in them needful to Salvation, had not the
same infallible Guidance of the Spirit to enable them to deliver things that
should be infallible, and (...). Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? 1 Cor.
12.29. much less then can it be said now. And it is highest presumption for any
one that thinks he has received, and has indeed received the Spirit unto
sanctification, to think that therefore he has the Spirit in its infallible
guidance and direction.

Secondly, Suppose that these People had the Spirit of infallible guidance and
direction, and were indeed inspired Prophets, yet that does not give them a
supersedeas from attending to the Scripture, the Word of God. Daniel was a
Prophet, immediately, infallibly inspired, yet he studied the Scriptures. Dan.
9.2. I Daniel understood by Books the number of the years, whereof the Word of
the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet. So did David, though an inspired
Prophet, Psalm. 119. So did all the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which the
Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace
that should come unto you, searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of
Christ which was in them did signify; when it testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow. So that, were they what
they would pretend to be, which they are not, Prophets, yet they are not too
good to attend still upon the Scriptures, the Word of God. Methinks I hear the
God of Heaven speaking to these poor but proud ones, as sometimes he did by way
of holy sarcasm to the Prince of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.2. and so on, Because thine
heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a God; (He that says, he is
godded with God, and perfect as God is, does he not say, I am a God?) Behold,
thou art wiser than Daniel, ver. 3. ( Daniel was such a simple man, as though
he was a Prophet, and had glorious Visions and Inspirations, yet he, like a
simple man, would hang upon the Scriptures, the written Word of God: but thou
art wiser than Daniel, thou regardest not the Scriptures, thou have as sure and
infallible a Light within thee as that Word is) Thou sealest up the sum, full
of wisdom, and perfect in beauty, ver. 12. Thou have been in Eden the Garden of
God; every precious stone was thy covering, ver. 13. Thou art the anointed
Cherub; thou have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire, ver.
14. Thou wast perfect in thy ways, from the day that thou were created, ver.
15. All this is spoken, (...), according to the opinion that the Prince of Tire
had of himself, God does but speak his own words and thoughts. And truly such
are the thoughts of this proud generation, they think they are so perfect, and
so full of wisdom, they have no need of the Scriptures, the Word of God.

In the third place; Let this that you have heard, That even the best have need
of the Word; O let it teach every one of you to labor to maintain in your
heart an humble sense of your continual need of the Word, an holy hunger after
the Word, a ready closing with every Opportunity of attending upon the Word, a
lothness above all things to part with the Word, to be left without the Word;
better part with the Light of your eyes, with the Bread that is the staff of
your lives, yea, with the Life of your bodies, than part with the Word, which
is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among them that are
sanctified.

And so I come to the third Doctrine, which is this; That the Word of God is
able to build up the Saints. Therefore says Paul here, I commend you to God,
and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up.]

Yea (might they think) it is true, if we had such a one as Paul for to preach
the Word of God still unto us, then indeed we should hope to be edified and
built up.

Nay, says the Apostle, though I shall preach no more to you, and though you
shall see my face no more, whatever becomes of me, yet the Word of God is able
to build you up. The Word of God is able to build up the Saints: it is able to
convert them, which is the greater, therefore it is able to build them up,
which is the lesser; it is able to save their souls, Jam. 1.21. which is the
end, therefore it is able to build them up, which is but in tendency to that
end.

Hence it is that the Word of God is compared to tools or instruments wherewith
men build, to an Ax, Mat. 3. to an Hammer, and to Fire, Jer. 23. And here, It
is able to build up, but how? not of it self, no more than an Ax, or an Hammer
can build a House of it self; but God working with the Word, and by the Word,
as an Instrument: The Word is able to build up the Saints: The weapons of our
warfare (says the Apostle, speaking of the Ministry of the Word) are mighty
through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. Therefore the Apostle here joins God and the Word
together; I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace, which is able. God
by the Word of his Grace is able to build you up, not the Word alone without
God.

Now this building up imports two things.

1. Preservation from decay. 2. Progress and carrying on unto Perfection.
Now the Word is able to do both these.

First, It is able to preserve and keep the Saints from decaying in their
Graces, from decaying in Faith and Holiness.

Secondly, It is able to carry them from Grace, and build them up to more
perfection.

Let this then be a comfort to all the upright-hearted People, who it may be
are now full of fear that they shall decay and wither away, and come to
nothing, especially when there is such a great and visible decay of Preachers
and Preaching in the Land, who (alas) when they had the Word constantly and
instantly preached and pressed upon them, in season and out of season, had yet
much ado to hold on their course then; and now so many of their faithful, able
Teachers are removed from them, are ready to think, What shall they do now?
what will become of them? they shall never be able to hold out. Well
Christians, fear not, as long as God lives, and as his Word lives, and you are
commended to them, and resigned up to them, you are safe enough, well enough,
God is able, and the Word of God is able to keep you from falling away. Jude
24. He is able to build you up, and he will do it; assure your selves God will
never suffer it to be said concerning him, as of that man in the Parable, This
man begun to build, but was not able to finish, Luke 14.30.

-- Which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all them
that are sanctified.

Qu. This Inheritance here spoken of, what is it?

Ans. That which the Apostle speaks of, Col. 1.12. and calls an Inheritance
among the Saints in Light; And which the Apostle Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and calls an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved for us in the Heavens. So that this state of Happiness, and Glory in
the Life to come, is it which the Apostle means by this Inheritance, An
Inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Several Doctrines are observable from hence.

First, That Heaven and the Happiness of it, is an Inheritance. Secondly, That
this Inheritance of Heaven, it is a Gift. Thirdly, That God gives this
Inheritance by his Word, -- which is able to build you up, and give you an
Inheritance. Fourthly, That Heaven is only for sanctified Persons; It is an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified. Fifthly, That Heaven is for all
sanctified Persons. It is an Inheritance among ALL THEM that are sanctified.
First, Heaven is an Inheritance. So Ephesians. 1.11. In whom also we have obtained
an Inheritance: and v. 14. Which is the earnest of our Inheritance. Col. 1.12.
Heb. 925. and in many other places.

Hence it is that the Saints in Scripture are so often called Heirs, Heirs
according to Promise, Gal. 3.29. and Heirs of Grace, 1 Pet. 3.7. Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1.14. Heirs of the Kingdom; James 2.5. Heirs of God, yea
Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. where I pray mark, that Believers are said to
be joynt-heirs with Christ, not joynt-purchasers with Christ, no, Christ is
Sole-Purchaser of Life and Glory: but he is pleased of his Free Grace to admit
the Saints into partnership with him of that Inheritance which he has
purchased: They are therefore said to be Heirs of God and joynt-heirs with
Jesus Christ.

They are said to be Heirs of God in respect of the Person whose Heirs they
are; as a man is said to be such a man's Heir.

They are said to be joynt-heirs with Christ in respect of the Person in whose
right the Inheritance falls to them.

They are said to be Heirs of Life and Salvation, in respect of the Matter and
Substance of the Inheritance. They are said to be Heirs of Grace and Promise,
in respect of the way and means whereby they come for to have claim to this
Inheritance.

Haereditas, says the Civil Lawyer, est Successio in universum jus defuncti.
When a man dies, and leaves his whole Estate, House, Lands, Money, Goods, and
all he had to another, he that there succeeds in his whole Estate, is Haeres
exasse, his sole Heir. Now, truly, Believers cannot in this sense be said to be
the Heirs of God, nor can the happiness, and glory of the Life to come, upon
this account be said to be an Inheritance; for God is Immortal, and therefore
this Inheritance is not Successio in jus defuncti. And yet nevertheless the
happiness of the Saints in the Life to come is called an Inheritance, and the
Saints are said to be Heirs of God.

First, Because as an Heir entering upon the whole Estate of all that, that was
that man's, whose Heir he is, he enjoys it all: So the Saints being the Heirs
of God, possess and enjoy all the good things that are in God; they have Right
to them here in this life, but they possess and enjoy them in the Life to come.

Secondly, Because as ordinarily men make their children their Heirs, natural
children if they have any, or if they have none, they adopt some into their
family, and make them first their children, then their Heirs; so it is here,
all that are the Heirs of God, they are the Children of God, not by Nature, but
by the Grace of Adoption. Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and
Joynt-heirs with Jesus Christ: Jesus Christ is the Only Son of God by Nature
and He is the Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. Believers being by Faith united and
joined to Christ, they become thereby the Adopted Children of God, and
Joynt-heirs with Christ; and this Grace of Adoption and Co-heirship, Jesus
Christ himself has purchased for them with his own Blood.

Thirdly, Because as an Inheritance it is Largissima Compensatio, a large and
abundant recompense of all that Love and Obedience which the Son yields to the
Father: So the Hapiness and Glory of the Life to come is not only a sufficient,
but a superabundant Recompense of all that the Saints of God either do or
suffer for him.

Fourthly, Because often in Scripture, the phrase, or denomination of an
Inheritance, is used pro quavis regrata et accepta; So Psalm. 16. The lines are
fallen to me in pleasant places, and I have a goodly Heritage: Now the Hapiness
and Glory of the Life to come may be called an Inheritance because it is the
most acceptable, desirable, delightful thing that God himself could bestow upon
the Creature.

Fifthly, An Inheritance it is a free gift. No Son can claim the Inheritance at
his Fathers hands by way of merit; indeed a man may by his demerit forfeit his
Inheritance, and deserve to be disinherited, but no child can challenge the
Inheritance of men, but must receive it of free gift: And the Child yet ows all
love, and all service, and all duty to his Father though he have never a penny
of Inheritance to leave him; and though he has, and should not leave it to
him, but leave it to some other, yet still the child ows all Love and Duty to
his Father; and the Inheritance that is left him, it is his Fathers love and
good will, and not his desert: So the Happiness and Glory of the Life to come
(though as I said before in the third Particular, it is a sufficient
super-abundant reward of all the Love, Duty, Service, and Sufferings of
Believers) yet it is not the wages of their Service, but it is the Grace of
God, the free Gift of the good Will and Pleasure of God. And that leads me to
the second Doctrine.

That the Heavenly Inheritance it is a Gift.

So Scripture expressly speaks, Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good Pleasure to
give you the Kingdom. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God
is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Death indeed is due wages,
deserved wages, but eternal Life, the Heavenly Inheritance is a Gift, a free
gift, a mere gift, so in many other places; and needs it must be so. I will but
use the Apostle's disjunction, Romans 4.4. Either it must be of Grace, or of
Debt, of debt it cannot be, And therefore it must needs be of Grace.

That the Heavenly Inheritance, or Reward, cannot be of Debt, I prove,

First, That what ever it be that makes another indebted unto me, it must be in
debitum unto him: For by doing that which is a due debt in me, and which I am
obliged to do, I can never make him for whom I do it indebted unto me: Now all
our Service and Obedience to God it is but due debt in us unto God, it is that
we are obliged to, and therefore all our Service can never oblige God or make
him indebted unto us. Upon this account it is our Savior teaches us, Luke
17.10. When ye have done all these things which are commanded you, say: We are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.

Secondly, This cannot be of debt, because there must be a proportion between
the Work, and the Reward to make the Reward due of debt. A man that works in
your Fields for you a day, why he may come at night and claim twelve or
fourteen pence for a days work as a due debt, but if he should challenge an
hundred or a thousand pound for one days work, you would look upon him as
unreasonable and impudent: There is infinitely more difference between all our
Service, and the heavenly Inheritance, than there is between a pound for a
days hedging or ditching in your Fields: It cannot be, that Heaven should be a
debt, it must then be a Gift, not of Debt but of Grace.

Seeing then, that Heaven is an Inheritance, and therefore of Gift, not of
Merit, because an Inheritance. Let this teach us to abhor that proud Popish
doctrine of Merit, and admire, and adore the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ.
The Reward of Heaven and Glory it is not a Purchase, but an Inheritance. Among
men there is a great deal of difference between a Purchase, and an Inheritance.
For a Purchase a man lays down a valuable price, but an Inheritance comes to
him freely, it costs nim nothing; possibly it might cost another man much that
purchased it for him, but if it descend unto him by Inheritance, it costs him
nothing. O my Brethren! Heaven, the Happiness and Glory of the Life to come, it
is not our Purchase, but our Inheritance, we pay nothing for it; indeed it cost
Christ, our elder Brother, dear to purchase it, not for himself, for He was
Heir by birth; but to purchase this Inheritance for us it cost him dear, but it
cost us nothing, Christ bequeathed it unto us of free Gift: it is to us not of
purchase, but Inheritance; therefore it is not of Merit, but of Grace,

Yea, Heaven is not only said to be our Inheritance, but we are said to be made
Heirs: So Tit. 3.7. We are not born Heirs of Heaven, but born Heirs of Hell,
but we are made Heirs of Heaven by the Grace of Adoption; yea we are not only
made Heirs of Heaven by the Grace of Adoption, but we are made fit for Heaven
by the Grace of Sanctification, unto Acceptance. So that here all is of Grace:
The Inheritance of Grace, our Right and Tittle to it is of Grace; our Fitting
and Preparing for it, is of Grace; all of Grace, nothing of Merit; all of God,
nothing of our selves.

Secondly, this, That Heaven is an Inheritance which God freely gives. This
should teach all of us,

1. To set our minds upon this Inheritance. A man that has but possibilities,
or expectations of an Inheritance to befall him by the death of such or such a
one, though it be but a poor, slender, paltry matter, yet how hardly can he
keep his mind from running upon it, from thinking long till he come to the
possession of it, from even almost wishing sometimes the party dead whose the
present possession is.

Filius ante diem Patrios inquirit in annos. Many a graceless Child is even
weary of his Father, and sick of his Mother, only because his mind runs so much
upon the Patrimony, the Inheritance, and he thinks so long for it. Pupillumice
utinam quem proximus Haeres Impello ex pungam -- says another. O my Brethren!
did we look upon the state and happiness of the life to come as an Inheritance,
as our Inheritance, it would be so with us, we could not keep our minds from
running out upon the happiness and glory of the life to come, our thoughts
would be running upon it, our hearts would be longing and wishing for the
possession of it; and here we may give our thoughts and desires line and scope
to the utmost. Indeed in our thoughts of, and desires after earthly
inheritances, we had need set bounds to our thoughts, and watch our selves,
lest we should sin and transgress the Commandments; but in reference to this
Heavenly Inheritance we may let our thoughts and desires run to the utmost
bounds and extent of their capacities. Many sin in thinking of Heaven too
little, or desiring Heaven too little; few, if any, sin in minding and desiring
Heaven too much: that therefore is the first duty this should teach us, To set
our minds upon Heaven, as upon a rich Inheritance.

2. This should teach us to labor to get Evidences, that Heaven is our
Inheritance, and when we have got them, to keep them. You know among men, if a
man lay claim to an Inheritance, and has nothing to show for it, he does but
befool himself in it; or, if a man has a right and title to an Inheritance,
yet if he has not good and sufficient Evidence to show for it, he will have
but little quiet and peace in the enjoyment of it. Any wrangling litigious
fellow may shake his freehold, and create to him a great deal of trouble and
molestation, if not put him quite out of possession: So here. A man does but
befool himself in laying claim to Heaven, if he has no Evidence to produce for
that claim of his. And this is the commonest, and greatest folly in the World.
Men can deride the folly of those that do thus, in reference to earthly and
temporal Inheritances, and yet themselves do the same things in reference to
this glorious Inheritance, reserved in the highest Heavens, claim it, and have
nothing at all to show for it. O take heed of this, get Evidence to show for
this Heavenly Inheritance, else never lay claim to it. If a man has a true
right and title to Heaven, yet if he has no Evidence to show for that Title of
his, he will have little quiet and peace in his Claim. Every Christian has to
do with a most subtle, and quarelsome adversary, the Devil, who will be
continually shaking thy Freehold, and though he cannot dispossess thee, nor
rend away thine Inheritance, yet he will continually vex and molest thee; and
no way to stop his mouth, but by getting good Evidence that this Inheritance is
thine. Now there are three grand Scripture-Evidences of our Right to this
Inheritance, which we find in the Rolls and Record of Sacred Writ.

The first is, The In-being of Christ in the soul. Col. 1.27. Christ in you the
hope of Glory. The second is, Our Adoption, or being the Children of God. Romans
8.17. If Children, then Heirs. The third is, Our Sanctification. Here in the
Text, An Inheritance among them that are sanctified.
Now it is true, these three are inseparable; he that has any one of them,
has all of them. Though possibly one may be more evident than another shall,
yet where one is, they all are. Labor therefore to get evidence of these:
either the Evidence of the Inbeing of Christ in you, or the Evidence of your
Adoption, or the evidence of your Sanctification. Never leave taking pains with
your hearts till you have got these Evidences.

And when you have once obtained them, prize them, keep them, as you would keep
the Apple of your eye, as you would keep your Life, your Soul. You know how
careful men are to keep their Deeds and Evidences; In time of War and Plunder,
they will let twenty things be seized, plundered, and carried away, rather than
their Evidences: In times of Calamity and Fire, let all they have be lost and
burnt rather than their Writings and Evidences. So, my Brethren, should it be
with us, in reference to our Evidences for Heaven, we should keep them with
exactest care and diligence; whatever Satan plunder us of, never let us suffer
him to plunder our Evidences for Heaven, never suffer him to steal or rend away
the Evidences of Christ's inbeing in us, of our being the Sons and Daughters of
God, of our Sanctification; labor to hold and maintain these to the utmost.

Thirdly, This should teach us to improve our right to this Inheritance, to
make that Use of it, and get that Benefit by it that we ought. As namely,

First, To conclude from thence that being an Heir, an Heir of Heaven, thou
can not but be well provided for in the mean time, till thou come to the
actual and full possession of thine Inheritance. We see how great Heirs are
well and honorably maintained, even in their minority, their Fathers being
rich and kind, will not suffer them to want any thing that is needful and fit
for them. If thou can upon good Evidence conclude thy self an Heir of God,
thou may from thence conclude thou shall want nothing that is for thy good.
And therefore,

Secondly, In the want of any thing, thou may, thou ought with boldness
to go to God, and make thy wants and requests known to him, with full assurance
that thou shall speed in thy request which he sees fit for thee. God will be
so far from denying thee, that it will be the joy and rejoicing of his heart to
see that thou can discern what is needful and convenient for thee, and it
will be a prevailing motive with God; O this is my Heir, I may not deny him
that which is good for him, now that he asks it of me.

Thirdly, In the evidence and assurance of this Inheritance, comfort thy self
in all other losses and wants whatsoever: whatever thou losest thou can not
lose thine Inheritance, thou may lose thy Liberty, thy Living, thy Friends,
thy Ministers, God's Ordinances, thy Life, yea the sweet and comfortable sense
of God's Love, which is better than Life; but comfort thy self in this, thine
Inheritance thou can not lose, that is reserved for thee in the highest
Heavens; thou may sooner cease to be a Man than to be an Heir: this was that
caused the Saints of God formerly to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods.
In Heb. 11.34. Knowing that they had in Heaven, a better and a more enduring
Substance.

Fourthly, Under sharpest dispensations of Divine Providence still comfort thy
self with this, thou art a Child, thou art an Heir still; thy Father may frown
upon thee, chide thee, buffet, scourge thee, turn thee out of doors for a few
nights, all this is sad, but He will never disinherit thee. Other fathers
indeed sometimes out of their passion and displeasure, and sometimes upon the
misdemeanors of their sons, disinherit them, but God cannot, will not do thus
to any of His Children; For the Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he
cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
Mercies, Lam. 3.31, 32. and John 8.35. The Servant abides not in the House for
ever, but the Son abides for ever: A mercinary may be turned off for ever, but
a Son never shall. Psalm. 89.32, 33. I will visit their transgressions with a
Rod, and their iniquities with Stripes; nevertheless my Loving Kindness will I
not take from them, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail.

Fifthly, From the consideration of this, that thou art an Heir of Heaven, arm
thy self against the sears of Death; let Death be terrible to those whose
portion is solely and wholly in this life, whom Death separates from all the
good they have, and hope for: As for thee who art a Child of God, an Heir of
Heaven, why should thou fear Death, that does but put thee into the actual
possession of thy Inheritance. Ejus est mortem timere qui ad Christum nolit
ire; ejus est ad Christum nolle ire, qui se non credit cum Christo incipere
regnare, says Cyprian, Let him fear Death that is unwilling to go to Christ;
let him be unwilling to go to Christ, that does not believe he is a Joynt-Heir
with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven. The same Cyprian speaks of a man that
when he lay a dying, with some unwillingness and lothness to dye, had a Vision
of one like the Son of Man appearing by him, saying to him with some kind of
indignation, Pati timetis, exire non vultis, quid faciam pro vobis? You are
afraid to suffer, you are not willing to depart, what shall I do for you? O
think what a shame it is for those who when they do hope for this Inheritance,
to be so unwilling and loath to die, as that Jesus Christ should have occasion
thus to speak unto them.

A fourth Duty we should learn from hence, is, To walk worthy of this
Inheritance. And so,

First, Far be it from those who profess, and believe themselves to be Heirs of
Heaven, to be eager and covetous, and greedy of earth and earthly things.
(...), etc. If a King, says Chrysostom, should take a Beggar from the Dunghill,
and make him the Heir of his Crown, and be after this should go up and down a
begging from door to door, and be as solicitous about his rags and patched
clothes, as he was before he was adopted to that Inheritance; would not this be
a disgrace to himself and to the King that had adopted him? and would not all
the World condemn him as a man of a base and dunghill spirit, unworthy of that
Honor, and that Inheritance that was cast upon him? For thee that art a
Christian, whom God has taken from the Dunghill, and made an Heir of Heaven,
for thee to be as greedy of the world, as gripple of a halfpenny or a penny, as
if thou were one of the Worlds beggars still, this is a base ignoble thing,
unworthy of such an Heir as thou do pretend thy self to be. Therefore abhor
it, away with it.

Secondly, If thou be an Heir of Heaven, labor to be content with thy present
condition, whatever it be, in expectation and assurance of that Inheritance
thou hopest for. There is many a great Heir, when he is in his minority lives
in a pretty mean condition, and makes nothing of it, bears it all with
patience, he knows it will be better with him one day when he comes to Age,
there is a fair Estate coming to him, and in the thoughts of that he comforts
himself in his present condition. So thou that art an Heir of Heaven, though at
the present thou live barely, and go near the wind, yet content and
comfort thy self with this, Thou have a rich and glorious Inheritance reserved
for thee in the highest Heavens, when once thou come to the enjoyment of
that, thou shall be full and want nothing. This was it which made the
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob content with a poor pilgrim life and
condition, a wandering state and condition, because they looked for a better
Country; and when this took up their hearts, then they could cheerfully sit
down in their Tents, they could dwell in strange Countries, they could go on in
obedience to God, what way soever he called them, readily: and so should we.

Thirdly, Never fret nor repine at the happiness and prosperity of the Wicked.
When we see them swimming and bathing in all that affluence of good things,
which Job or David expresses, Job 21. and Psalm 73. They have Corn, and Wine,
and Oil, and Gold and Silver, and House and Lands, and Children to inherit
them; Thou, poor thou, have none of these things: but have thou Heaven, though
but in reversion? never trouble thy self, thy portion is an hundred thousand
times better than theirs. Was it any grief of heart, think ye, to Isaac, to see
the sons of Keturah have great gifts bestowed upon them by Abraham; one of
them, it may be, so many thousand Yoke of Oxen, another so many thousand Sheep
and Camels, a third so many Talents of Gold and Silver? as long as Isaac had
the Inheritance this was no grief of heart to him. Much good may it do them,
thinks he, as long as the Inheritance is mine. So say thou, Much good may it do
the World with all their Wealth and Riches, as long as Heaven is mine I envy
them not. Thus much for the two first things. Heaven is an Inheritance. This
Inheritance is a Gift.

I come now to the third, and that is this; That God gives the Inheritance of
Heaven to his Children by his Word. Therefore the Gift of this Inheritance is
in part ascribed to the Word. -- Which is able to build you up, and give you an
Inheritance.] A Father gives such or such an Inheritance to his Child by
Testament, or by Instrument in writing: The Word of God it is Testamentum, it
is Instrumentum, whereby God conveyeth the Inheritance of Heaven to his Saints
and Children.

First, God reveals by his Word that there is such an Inheritance reserved in
the Heavens; which were it not that God had revealed it in his Word, the weak
heart of sinful and fallen man could have no true notions or conceptions of:
For eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of
man to conceive, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The
poor Heathens did stumble upon the Notion of Eternal rewards and punishments,
but alas, fell as far short of the true Notion of those rewards and punishments
as Earth is of Heaven; But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, 1 Cor.
2.10. that is, by his Spirit in his Word.

Secondly, As God reveals this Inheritance to us by his Word, so, secondly, God
makes offer of this Inheritance to us in his Word, and invites and calls us to
the participation of it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen
you to Salvution, whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of
the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, As God reveals this Inheritance, and calls and invites to the
participation of it; so God in his Word specifies who, and what manner of
persons they are upon whom he will bestow it. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, -- which the righteous Judge shall give;
and not to me only, but to all that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Fourthly, God by his Word begets those that are by his appointment and
nomination, the Heirs of this Eternal Salvation, God by his Word begets them
again to a lively hope of this Glory. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God who has
begotten us again to a lively hope, to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved for us in the highest Heavens. And that this
begetting again is by the Word of God, see afterward, ver. 23. Being born
again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the Word of God.

Fifthly, God by his Word does not only beget his People to a lively Hope of
this Inheritance, but he prepares and fits them for the possession of it; and
makes us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col.
1.12.

Now this, that God gives the Inheritance of Heaven by the Word, this in the
use of it, still bespeaks our greatest affections for, our highest esteem of,
our constant, conscientious attendance upon the Word of God, as that which is,
Patris nostri Testamentum, Haereditatis nostrae Syngrapha, and Instrumentum,
The Will of our Heavenly Father, the Deed of Gift, and Instrument, whereby he
conveyeth over unto us our Heavenly Inheritance. How Sacred and Inviolable do
men count their Father's Will and Testament? what honor do they put upon it,
what trust and confidence do they repose in it? Such, and infinitely more than
such, should be our honor for, and our trust in the Word of God. How precious
do men count the Writings and Evidences whereby they hold their Inheritances?
So, and infinitely more than so, precious ought the Word of God to be unto us,
It being that Instrument, whereby Heaven it self is passed over to us for our
Inheritance.

-- Which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance, among all them
that are sanctified.

In which words you have the proper and distinguishing Character of those to
whom this Inheritance belongs, and they are the Saints, or Sanctified ones, It
is an Inheritance among ALL THEM that are Sanctified. Where mark, 1. The
Restriction of this Inheritance, it is limited only to them that are
Sanctified. 2dly. The Extent of it, it is in common, to ALL THEM that are
sanctified, An Inhertance among all them that are sanctified.

I shall for the better dispatch put both these Particulars into one Doctrine,
namely,

That Heaven is the Inheritance of all Saints, and only of Saints. Or,

Heaven is only for them that are Sanctified, and for all them. Or thus,

No unsanctified person shall ever enter into Heaven: Nor no Sanctified Person
shall ever miss of Heaven.

The Negative, That No unsanctified person shall ever enter into Heaven. This
is proved by clear and express Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterors, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, etc. shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God. Rev. 21.27. It is said
of the heavenly Jerusalem, there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; therefore no
unsanctified person shall ever enter into Heaven.

And for the second Branch which is Affimative. That every Sanctified Person
shall inherit Heaven: That no Sanctified Person shall miss of Heaven. This is
as clear in Scripture: Therefore it is called the Inheritance of the Saints,
Col. 1.12. because all, and every of the Saints, the least as well as the
greatest, have an equal share in this Inheritance. And indeed, Sanctification
is but the earnest, the first fruits, the infancy of Glory, and can no ways be
separated from it, and it is as impossible that any one that is truly
Sanctified should miss of Heaven, as it is impossible for any unsanctified
person to enter into Heaven. For,

First, Sanctification and Glorification, Holiness and Heaven are joined
together in the Appointment and Decree of God. Whom God has predestined to
Heaven, he has predestined to Holiness; and whom he has predestined to
Holiness, He has predestined to Heaven. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According as he has
chosen us in him before the foundations of the world, that we should be holy,
without blame before him in love: Having predestined us to the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ unto himself, etc. Mark, whom God has predestined
to be Children, and so Heirs of Heaven, he has chosen to Holiness. Heaven and
Holiness are joined together in God's Decree of Predestination.

Secondly, Heaven and Holiness are joined together in the Purchase. Look how
many Christ has purchased Heaven for, so many he has purchased Holiness for.
Heb. 13.12. Jesus, that he might sanctify the People with his own blood,
suffered without the gate. Mark, Jesus Christ shed his blood, not only that he
might Save his People, but that he might Sanctify his People; and not one
Person more will be saved by the blood of Jesus, than are sanctified by the
blood of Jesus. Heaven and Holiness are joined together in the Purchase of the
Son, as well as in the Purpose of the Father.

Thirdly, As Heaven and Holiness are joined together in the Purpose of the
Father, and in the Purchase of the Son, so they are joined together in the Work
of the Spirit. None are called effectually by the holy Ghost to the
participation of Heaven and Glory, but such as are first called by the same
Spirit unto Sanctification and Holiness: nor none are effectually called by the
Spirit unto Sanctification and Holiness, but are called at the same instant
unto Heaven and Glory. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. We are bound to give thanks always to
God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning
chosen you to Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief
of the Truth, whereunto He has called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of
the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. Mark, whom God calls by the Gospel to
Glory, he calls by the same Gospel to belief of the Truth, and Sanctification
of the Spirit: So that you see, Heaven and Holiness are joined together in the
Purpose of the Father, in the Purchase of the Son, in the Operation of the
Spirit: And therefore it is not possible that ever any that are not holy should
obtain Heaven; and as impossible that ever any that are truly holy should miss
of the Heavenly Inheritance.

Now this, that no unsanctified person shall ever enter into Heaven, nor no
Sanctified Person shall ever miss of Heaven; this in the use of it may be as
terrible to all unsanctified ones, as comfortable to all the Saints.

First, This may be a sound of Fears in the ears and hearts of all unsanctified
ones. Is it impossible that ever any unsanctified one should enter into Heaven,
as you see it is? O then think, O then think of this, and tremble, you that
despise Holiness, you that mock and jeer at Holiness think of this; you, all
you, who ever you be that are unholy, though you have not yet arrived at that
height of Diabolism, as to mock and jeer, and hate Holiness, yet you do not
love it, nor regard it, nor care to be Holy, but are content to continue in
your sinful and unsanctified estate. In the fear of God, I beseech you,
consider with your selves; you know you must not live in this world always;
you see many dye before you, old and young; and it is impossible but you should
think, though few of you consider it, yet it is impossible but you should
think, that you your selves must die, and you do not know how soon: Now think
of it in the fear of God, I beseech you, whenever you die, be it sooner or
later; whenever you die, if you be unsanctified, think what will become of you:
Whither shall ye go when you go from hence, think you? Do you think to go to
Heaven, to receive this Inheritance in Life and Glory? Alas, poor creature, it
is impossible, how ever thou have flattered thy self, it may be this many a
year, with hopes of going to Heaven when thou die, it is impossible, unless
it be possible for God the Father to alter his purpose and decree: And whereas
he once decreed that none should be saved but those that were first sanctified;
now to make a contrary Decree, for the saving of those that never were, nor
would be Saints: It is impossible for thee that art unsanctified to go Heaven,
unless it be possible for the Son of God to become incarnate and suffer Death
again, to purchase Heaven for those whom he never sanctified, nor never
intended to sanctify by his Blood; it is impossible for thee to go to Heaven,
unless it be possible for God the Holy Ghost to alter his method, and separate
those things in his working, which God has joined together in his Word.
Therefore flatter not thy self, deceive not thy self with hopes of Heaven; but
know that Heaven is everlastingly shut against thee, whatever thou be, if thou
be not sanctified and holy; though thou have carried thy self never so
justly and squarely, though thou give much Alms to the Poor, though thou be
baptized, and profess to believe in Christ, though thou read the Scriptures,
and pray in thy Family, though thou come to the Church, and hear the Word, and
receive the Sacrament, yea though thou have some fits of sorrow for thy sin,
yea though thou confessest and leavest thy sin, and be sorward and frequent
in Christian Society, and in the Duties of Religion; yet if thou be not
sanctified throughout, there is an utter impossibility of thy ever entering
into Heaven. Heaven is a most holy place, and it is impossible for any but
those that are truly and really holy, to find entrance and abode there. And if
it were possible for any unsanctified wretch to creep and steal into Heaven,
Heaven would either spue him out again, and deliver it self of such an unsavory
burden, or break in pieces under him, and let him sink down to Hell, his own
place, for ever. There is, they say, such a repugnancy in some kind of Glass,
and Earth, as your Venice-Glass, and Porcellane or China Dishes, that if a
Spider or a Toad, or any such venomous creature be put into them, they would
break in pieces presently. Truly so would Heaven if an unsanctified sinner
should enter there. There is such a Repugnancy between Heaven the most holy
place, and the most unholy heart of every unsanctified sinner, that Heaven
would even rent and break in pieces if such a creature should appear there;
yea, if an unsanctified sinner should get into Heaven, he would be weary of
Heaven, as well as Heaven would be weary of him; he would even wish himself out
again; the Place is no ways fit for him, the Persons that are there no company
for him, the Actions that are done there no employment for him; God will never
admit any into Heaven, that shall be a burden to Heaven, and to whom Heaven
also shall be a burden: Heaven would be to the unsanctified sinner but as the
dry land is to the Fish; therefore no unsanctified person shall ever enter into
Heaven.

Think therefore, O thou that art unsanctified, think whither thou art going;
if thou die this night, as for any thing thou know thou may die this
night, think what will become of thee, whither thou shall go: to Heaven thou
can not, it is impossible; whither then? whither must thou then go? O might
thou die, as does the Ox and the Ass, whose soul perish whith their body; and
as it is educed e potentia materiae, so it perishes with the matter and
substance of the body: if thy soul might do so too, O how happy should thou
be, in comparison of what thou shall be if thou die in an unsanctified
condition! but alas, poor creature, thy soul is immortal, thy soul must have a
being for ever; therefore there must be some place, some ubi, in which thy soul
must be for ever. And what, is that This Inheritance among the Saints in Light?
Ah! No, No, there is another place, and another inheritance appointed for thee.
Read thy portion in Revel. 28.1. But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and
Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars shall have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the Second death; thy portion is everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his angels. Thy portion has been with the Devil and his
angels in sinning here; thou have cast in thy lot with them in sin here, and
thou must, whether thou will or no, receive thy portion and take thy lot with
them in suffering hereafter. But,

In the second place; This is as comfortable to them that are Sanctified, as it
is terrible to the Unsanctified. For, as it is impossible that any Unsanctified
person should enter into Heaven; so, it is as impossible that any Sanctified
one, truly sanctified, should miss of Heaven. Thou that art a Saint, how mean
and poor soever, how weak soever thy Grace be, how imperfect soever thy
Sanctification be, yet if thou be one that is truly sanctified, though thou
be never so little and low in thine own eyes; though, with Paul, thou look
upon thy self as one that is less than the least of all Saints, as the least in
all thy Father's Family; yet I assure thee from the Lord, thou shall surely go
to Heaven; yea, thou shall not only go to Heaven, and have some little corner
of Heaven for thine, (though, O what cause of joy and triumph would that be to
some poor soul, if they might but be sure of the least corner in Heaven) but I
tell thee, whole Heaven shall be thine; for thou art an Heir, the Inheritance
belongs to thee, as much as to Abraham, or Isaac, or David, or Peter, or Paul,
or any the most glorious of Saints that ever was upon the Earth, or that is in
Heaven.

For this know, in the first place, That though men de not make all their
children Heirs, yet God does. Men usually settle the Inheritance upon the
firstborn or eldest, and turn all the rest off with small portions. But God
does not so; all his Children, Sons and Daughters both, they are all Heirs; not
only Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, who were (as I may say)
God's eldest Sons; not only they are his Heirs, nor only the Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the firstborn of every creature; not only He is an Heir, but even thou,
who ever thou be, though the poorest, weakest Saint, thou art an Heir of
God, and Joynt-heir with Christ.

Secondly, As thou art an Heir, so the whole Inheritance is thine. If a man had
ten or twenty Sons, and were resolved to make them all his Heirs, he could not
give the whole Inheritance to every one of them, but must divide it into so
many parts, as he had Sons, and give to every one but his piece of the whole
Inheritance. But now thou that art a Saint, thou art an Heir, and the [whole
Inheritance is thine] All the Glory of God, all the good things of God are
thine, entirely thine, as if thou had them to thy self alone, and there were
none to share in them besides thy self: Haec Haereditas non imminuitur copia
possessorum, nec fit angustior Haeredum Numerositate; sed tanta est multis,
quanta paucis, tanta singulis, quanta omnibus, says Augustine; this
Inheritance is not lessened by the Multitude of those that possess it, nor made
narrower for the Numerousness of Heirs; but it is as great to many, as if they
were few, as large to every single person as it is to all. This is very
significantly expressed by the Apostle Paul, Col. 1.12. where he calls it an
Inheritance among the Saints in Light. You know Light is a thing of that nature
that it cannot be divided: If there be twenty, or an hundred men in a Room, and
there be but one light among them, that light is not parted into twenty or an
hundred pieces, but every man enjoys the benefit of the light, as fully and
wholly to himself, as if there were none but he in the Room. Or as it is with
the light of the Sun, or the Heavens; all the men in the world that have eyes
in their heads to see, they have all a like share in, and a like benefit by the
light of the Sun, and they do as fully enjoy it, as if every man had it to
himself alone. So it is with the Inheritance of Heaven, all that are in Heaven
do possess it every one fully, and entirely, it is wholly the enjoyment of
every one in Heaven, even as the light of the Sun is the enjoyment of every one
upon Earth.

Thirdly, Thou that art a Saint, how mean and weak soever, as thou art an Heir,
and the Inheritance is wholly thine; so, thirdly, this Inheritance is certain
to thee, thou can no ways miss it. Indeed, Inheritances that are left, or
given men, many times prove great uncertainties. Many an Heir is cozened or
baffled of his fair Estate; and many a young Prodigal quickly squanders away
that Inheritance which his Father with a great deal of toil and care had got
for him: But this Inheritance is subject to no such mischance, the Devil
himself cannot cozen thee of this Inheritance, he cannot wrest it from thee
neither by force nor fraud; not can thou mortgage, or forfeit, or any other
ways imbezel thine Inheritance. It is an Inheritance reserved for you in the
highest Heavens: and as this Inheritance is reserved for you, so you are and
shall be reserved unto it; as it follows in the very next words, Who are kept
by the Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Fourthly, As thou art an Heir, and as the Inheritance is thine, and wholly
thine, and surely thine; so in the fourth place, This Inheritance is a most
rich and glorious Inheritance. If a man were an Heir, and had the whole
Inheritance to himself, and were sure that he could not lose it; yet after all
this it may be but a poor and slender Inheritance, far from any sufficiency for
a livelihood. But now this Inheritance it is a sufficiency, and not only a bare
sufficiency, but amplius, something more. Therefore the Apostle, speaking of
it, calls it, (...). The Riches of the Glory of this Inheritance. Mark, the
Apostle speaking of this Inheritance, speaks not only of the Riches of this
Inheritance, nor only of the Glory of this Inheritance, but of the Riches and
Glory, yea, of the Riches of the Glory of this Inheritance; to show, that it is
indeed an Inheritance most rich and glorious. This Inheritance is so rich, so
glorious, that Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man to conceive of it. Now thou that art a Saint, this
Inheritance, this rich and glorious Inheritance, it is thine, wholly thine,
surely thine. O then what cause have thou to be comforted and rejoice in this
thy portion, to sing David's Song of Praise, Psalm. 16.6. The lines are fallen
to me in pleasant places, I have a goodly Heritage.

In the third place. Is it so, that not one that is unsanctified shall ever
enter into Heaven, nor no one that is sanctified shall ever miss of Heaven;
Then all you that desire Heaven, that hope for Heaven, labor to be holy; for,
without Holiness, you hope for Heaven in vain: For though Holiness be not Causa
Coeli, yet it is Via ad Coelum; though it be not the moving or meriting cause
for which God gives Heaven and Happiness to us, yet it is causa sine qua non,
as is clear in that Text, Without Holiness none can see the Lord. And the truth
is, Holiness is that life and state begun upon Earth, which is perfected and
perpetuated in Heaven to all Eternity: And that man never is nor shall be a
glorious Saint in Heaven that is not first a gracious Saint upon Earth. A man
must be an Infant before he be a Man: Grace is the Infancy of Glory. O
therefore, every one of you, desire Holiness, seek Holiness, pray for Holiness,
strive, labor after Holiness, as you would desire, seek, pray for, strive,
labor after Heaven it self. Holiness being that intrinsecal qualification,
which though it do not make you (...), yet it makes you (...); though it do not
make you worthy of Heaven, yet it makes you meet, and fit to be partakers of
that Inheritance which is amongst the Saints in Light.

Now the God of Peace sanctify you throughout; and I pray God your whole
spirit, soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

I Am now by the Providence of God upon the point of leaving, not only you, but
the Land, and I know not whether ever I shall see the face of this Assembly
any more; and I would fain before wepart [commend you to God,] and leave you in
the [Arms of His everlasting Mercy, and the Bosom of his infaite Love] And O
that I could do this with comfort, and with confidence concerning every one of
you. Concerning some of you, I profess I can, and that upon the same account,
that the Apostles commended the Churches unto God, in Acts 14.23. They
commended them to the Lord on whom they believed. Well might the Apostles, and
with holy boldness, commend these Christians to the Lord, whom they knew to be
Believers, whom they knew not only to have given up their names to Christ in an
open and visible profession, but to have believed in him by a true and lively
Faith, and to have received him for their LORD and KING, as well as for their
Priest and Prophet. A Minister may deliver up such a People to God with as much
confidence and assurance, as a man can deliver up his child into the arms of
his own dearest, and most indulgent father. And such are some of you, and
through Grace many of you, Believers not in name only, and profession, but
indeed and in truth, and in power: Such I can heartily, confidently, and
confortably commend unto God, and leave with him, in full assurance that He
will never leave you, nor forsake you; in full assurance that however things go
in Dedhaw, however things go in England, however things go with your selves as
to the concernments of this life, it shall be well with you to Eternity.

O that I could think thus, and speak thus, and hope thus of you all. But are
there not with you, even with you also, sinners against the Lord! are there not
some among you, whom if a Minister should deal with according to Gosple Rule,
he should rather deliver to Satan, than commend to God? Are there not some
among you whose Crime and Character, if not Name, may be found in that black
Bill of men excommunicate in Heaven, and from Heaven? which the Apostle
presents you, 1 Cor. 6.9. where he reckons up ten several sorts of sinners that
are excluded from the Kingdom of God. Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Coveteous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God: And are there not some such as these amongst you?
Are there not some that walk, of whom I have told you often, and now even tell
you weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ? whose end is
destruction, whose belly is their god, whose glory is their shame, who mind
earthly things, Phil. 3.18. Do you think a poor Minister, after above twenty
years spent amongsuch a People, in fruitless and unsuccesful labors, can with
confidence commend such unto God? O Sirs, what shall I say to you? what shall I
do for you?

Parents when they lie a dying, and are about to commend, as their own souls,
so their children to God, put a difference between good and bad, between
gracious and graceless children. Look over Genesis 49. and you shall and that good
old Jacob does not commend Reuben, Simeon and Levi to God in such a manner, as
he commends Judah, Joseph and Benjamin, and some other of his children. And I
have heard of a Godly Parent, that having several children, whereof one was
notoriously wicked and profane; when the Parent lay a dying, all the Children
were called together to attend at his death, and there the Parent gave several
Prayers and Blessings to the several Children, commending them to God, But as
for you, (says the Parent, to one that was wicked and graceless) Child, as for
you, I can look for no other but to glorify God in your just condemnation to
Hell, at the Day of Judgment. A sad speech for a dying Parent to leave at his
last words to a poor Child, which yet God in infinite mercy turned to good.

Should I speak thus concerning any of you, it would be more grievous to my
self, than to some of you, it may be. But the Lord knows this will be the
portion of many of God's Ministers in that Great Day; the Lord grant it be not
mine. But many of God's Ministers will be called out as bitter witnesses in
that Day against their Peoples souls; and God will say unto them, Did not such,
and such, live under your Ministry? did you not warn them of their sins? of
their drunkenness, fornication, uncleanness, lying, swearing, worldliness,
security, neglect of holy Duties? Did you not remonstrate to them the evil of
their ways? did you not call them, invite, exhort, perswaede them to
repentance? did you not foretell them of this Day, and of the Wrath and
Vengeance prepared for sinners? did you not acquaint them with my Name? did you
not promise them Pardon and Forgiveness, Heaven and Happiness upon condition
of. their Repentance, Faith, and new Obedience? O my Brethren, when God in the
presence of his holy Angels and Saints shall put these interrogatories to-us
his poor Ministers, that have spoken to you in his Name; What shall we say,
what can we say? Must we, can we, dare we, think you, to excuse, or extenuate
your wickednesses, lie against the Truth, and to our own souls, and say, we
have not warned you, we have not admonished you, exhorted, persuaded you, when
our consciences know we have, and your consciences know it too? We must say,
Lord, thou know all things, and thou know we have in some measure of
truth, through Grace, though with much human infirmity, sought and desired, and
endeavored the salvation of these men's souls, as of our own: We have many and
many a time warned them, and that with tears; but they would not be warned: We
have persuaded them with all the arguments our reason, helped by thy Grace,
could invent, but they would not be persuaded; we have entreated them with all
the most urgent and affectionate importunity we could use, but they would not
be entreated.

Then will the Lord say unto us, his poor Ministers, I pronounce you pure, and
innocent from the blood of these men. O blessed, O joyful Word for us! But as
for you, He will say unto you, Your destruction be upon your own heads, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels. O doleful
word for you to hear! and doleful for us now to think of, while we are in this
flesh. But let me tell you, all creature relations and affections shall in the
Saints be so swallowed up in the Glory of God, and in the joy of their own
Salvation, that Saints and Angels shall rejoice in the condemnation of all
wicked and ungodly men; and with loud acclamations shall sing Hallelujahs,
Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God; for True and
Righteous are his Judgments.

But Ah Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer, is for you all, that you may
all be saved. Shall I therefore be bold with you, yea Brethren, let me be bold
with you in the Lord. I have heard of a very holy and eminently learned and
pious man, that lying upon his deathbed, and having his Children about him, Mr.
Bolion.
among other things, he used this remarkable expression; I charge you, says
he, that none of you dare to appear before me in the Day of Judgment, in an
unconverted condition. Intimating that if they did, he should be one of the
first that should stand up as a witness against them.

Give me leave to use a like expression unto you. I a poor unworthy Minister of
Jesus Christ, yet his Minister unto you, I hope for good, that have often
heretofore admonished, and charged you in his Name, being now by His Providence
to leave you, never more to see you faces, nor to speak to you in His Name any
more; I charge you all from the highest to the lowest, from the least to the
greatest; I charge you before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at His Appearing, and before all the holy Angels, who
are present, and Witnesses to these words, I charge you, That none of you
appear in the Day of Judgment, in an unconverted condition; lest even these
words of mine, be brought in on that Day as a Witness against you.

And now, Brethren, I commend you to God; having thus admonished you, thus
warned you, thus charged you; you that are yet in your sins, I now commend you
to God. O that God would make this last Warning, this last Admonition, this
last Charge, these last Words more effectual, than a thousand others have been:
That as Sampson slew more Philistines at his death, than in all his life, so I
might be the happy Instrument, to save more Souls now at my departure from you,
than in all my life before. I can do no more but commend you to God, that God
who gives being to things that are not, who is able to raise the dead, who is
able even of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. That great, and mighty,
and almighty God show his Saving Power to you, and in you. Those that are dead
in their sins and trespasses, God Almighty quicken you; you that are yet
hardened in your sins, God Almighty humble you, soften you, change you, make
you of stones the sons and danghters of Abraham. And as for you, my dearly
beloved Brethren, that are converted, and in the state of Grace already, I
commend you to God, as unto a gracious, reconciled, tender, merciful,
indulgent, alsufficient Father; he will be unto you a little Sanctuary, Ezekiel.
11.16. He will be unto you a place of broad Rivers, and Streams, Isa. 33.21. He
has begun a good Work in you, and will perform it to the Day of Christ, I am
confident, Philip. 1.6. Be not anxiously careful what you shall do, what shall
become of you; take heed of Security, Luke-warmness, leaving your First-Love;
Remember former Times; Do your first Works; strengthen the things that remain,
that are ready to dye. And God he is able to keep you, and he is faithful, and
will keep you from falling, and present you faultless before the presence of
his Glory with exceeding joy.

Jude 24, 25. Now to Him that is able to do this, to GOD only Wise, be Glory,
Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

