A NEW METHOD, AND Extraordinary Invention, TO DRESS HORSES, AND WORK Them
according to NATVRE: AS ALSO, To Perfect Nature by the Subtilty of Art; Which
was never found out, but by THE Thrice Noble, High, and Puissant PRINCE William
Cavendishe, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Newcastle; Earl of Ogle; Viscount
Mansfield; and Baron of Bolsover, of Ogle, of Bertram, Bothal, and Hepple:
Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber; One of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy-Councel; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; His Majesty's
Lieutenant of the County and Town of Nottingham; and Justice in Air
Trent-North: Who had the honor to be Governor to our most Glorious King, and
Gracious Sovereign, in His Youth, when He was Prince of Wales; and soon after
was made Captain General of all the Provinces beyond the River of Trent, and
other Parts of the Kingdom of England; with Power, by a special Commission, to
make Knights.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, in the Year 1667.

To His most Sacred MAJESTY Charles the Second, By the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
MY First Book of Horse-manship, Printed in French, had the honor of Your
Patronage; and I presume again, to Dedicate this Second, in English, to Your
Majesty; who being not only the greatest Monarch in Christendom, but a King
that loves Justice and Truth, can best judge of Books, which contain, I dare
say, the perfect and only Truth of Horse-manship. My Duty, and particular
Affection to Your Person, are sufficient Motives to me, to consecrate, not
Books only, but my self, and mine, and all that belongs to us, to Your
Majesty's service: But besides that, Your Favors to me are so many, and so
great; That what I am, and have, ought justly to be sacrificed to Your Will and
Pleasure, as Yours; wherein I joy more, than if it was mine. Your Wisdom, Sir,
Valor, and Conduct, makes all Your Neighbors confess, That Your Majesty is
the most Glorious King that ever Reigned; And that God will prosper You, in all
Your great Actions, and give Your Majesty an happy and long Reign, to the joy
and comfort of all Your Loyal Subjects, is both heartily Wished, and fervently
Prayed for, by

Your Majesty's most Obedient Creature, William Newcastle.

TO THE READERS.
HAving past the greatest part of my long Exile at Antwerp, one of the finest
Cities in the World, whose Inhabitants are deservedly Famous, for their
extraordinary Civilities to Strangers, of which I must acknowledge to have
received a great many from them: I did, during that time, Publish, in French, a
Book of Horse-manship; and having again, since my Return to my Native Country,
had much leisure, in my solitary Country Life, to recollect my Thoughts, and
try new Experiments about that Art; I now, for the more particular Satisfaction
of my Countrymen, Print this second Book, in English; which being neither a
Translation of the first, nor an absolutely necessary Addition to it, may be of
use by it self, without the other, as the other has been hitherto, and is
still, without this; but both together will questionless do best.

I cannot mention Antwerp, upon the score of my Book, but I must also take
notice of the Honor I have received there, from many Noble great Persons, who
did me the favor to see my Manage; and of the things they was pleased to say,
upon occasion of what they saw there; which will be in lieu of Encomiums, in
the behalf of Horses, and of Horse-manship, very proper in this place.

When I had the honor to wait on Don John of Austria, at Antwerp, brought to
him by my Lord of Bristol, his Highness was pleased to use me extreme Civilly;
and to ask both then, and at several other times, for my Book of Horse-manship,
before it was Printed; and to receive it with great Satisfaction, when I
presented his Highness with One: But he did not see my Horses, which, in above
20. Coaches, all the Spaniards of his Court, went to my Manage to see; with
many Noblemen of Flanders, as the Duke of Ascot, and others, before whom I Rid
my self, three Horses, and my Esquier, five. Being returned to Don John, He
asked them, Whether my Horses was as Rare, as their Reputation was Great: To
which they answered, That my Horses was such, that they wanted nothing of
Reasonable Creatures, but Speaking. And the Marquess of Seralvo, Master of the
Horse to his Highness, and Governor of the Castle of Antwerp, told his
Highness, That he had asked me, What Horses I liked best: And that I had
answered, There were Good and Bad of all Nations; but that the Barbes were the
Gentlemen of Horse-kind, and Spanish-Horses the Princes. Which Answer did
infinitely please the Spaniards: And it is very true, That Horses are so as I
said.

The Marquess of Carasena was so civilly earnest to see me Ride, that he was
pleased to say, It would be a great Satisfaction to him, to see me on
Horseback, though the Horse should but Walk. And seeing that no Excuses would
serve, (though I did use many) I was contented to satisfy his so obliging a
Curiosity; and told him, I would obey his Commands, though I thought I should
hardly be able to Sit in the Saddle. Two days after he came to my Manage, and
I Rid first a Spanish-Horse, called Le Superbe, of a Light-Bay, a beautiful
Horse; and though Hard to be Rid, yet when he was Hitt Right, he was the
Readiest Horse in the World: He went in Corvets forward, backward, sidewayes,
on both Hands; made the Cross perfectly upon his Voltoes; and did Change upon
his Voltoes so Just, without breaking Time, that no Musician could keep Time
better; and went Terra a Terra Perfectly. The second Horse I Rid, was another
Spanish Horse, called Le Genty; and was Rightly named so, for he was the finest
Shaped Horse that ever I saw, and the neatest; A Brown-Bay, with a White-Star
in his Forehead; No Horse ever went Terra a Terra like him, so just, and so
easy; And for the Piroyte in his Length, so just, and so swift, that the
Standers by could hardly see the Rider's Face when he went; And truly, when he
had done, I was so Dizzey, that I could hardly Sit in the Saddle: He went also
so exactly in Corvets forwards, as no Horse can go better, and yet he had no
great Strength; whence it appears, That a Horse of Agility, Lightness, Spirit,
Well-tempered, and of a good Disposition, is much better than a Horse that has
only Strength; And that a most mighty and great Dutch-Brewer's Horse, wanting
Spirit and Agility, can never go well in the Manage. The third and last Horse
I Rid then, was a Barbe, that went a Metz-Ayre, very High, both Forward, and
upon his Voltoes, and Terra a Terra. And when I had done Riding, the Marquess
of Carasena seemed to be very well satisfied; and some Spaniards that were with
him, crossed themselves, and cried, Miraculo.

Many French Gentlemen, and Persons of the greatest Quality of that Nation, did
me the favor to see my Horses; and the Prince of Conde himself, with several
Noblemen, and Officers, was pleased to take the pains to go twice to my
Manage: And though the French think, That all the Horse-manship in the World
is in France; yet one of them, and he a very great Man in his Country, was
heard say, directing his Speech to me: Par Dieu (Monsieur) il est bien hardi
qui monte devant vous: And another said, at another time: Il n'y a plus de
Segnieur comme vous en Angleterre.

Among many great Persons, of which the vast Country of Germany affords
abundance, who, for the most part, delight to travel; the Landgrave of Hesse,
did not only do me the honor to Visit me, and see my Horses; but, being
returned to his Country, was pleased to show, by a very kind Letter, That he
had not forgotten me, nor the Love he had observed I have for Horses; being
pleased to promise, He would send me two of his own Breed; but soon after, he
was Killed in the Wars the King of Swede made with the King of Poland.

As poor as I was in those days, I made shift to buy, at several times, four
Barbes, five Spanish-Horses, and many Dutch-Horses; all the most Excellent
Horses that could be; and among them a Gray Leaping-Horse, the most beautiful
that ever I saw; and who went exceeding High and Just in Leaps, without any
Help at all; as also upon the Ground; and Terra a Terra, beyond all other
Horses; and he did look as if he had been above the Rate of Horse-kind. The
Duke of Guise hearing of him, Two Gentlemen, a French-Rider, and an Englishman,
wrote to me, That if I would part with him, the Duke of Guise would give me
600. Pistolls for him; but he was Dead three days before I received their
Letter; and had he Lived, I would not have taken any Money for him; for he was
above Price: And besides, I was then too great a Beggar, to think to be made
Rich by the Sale of a Horse: I have bestowed many Thousands of Pounds in
Horses, and have given many; but never was a good Horse-Courser; Selling being
none of my Professions.

The KING Himself, who is an Excellent Judge, both of Men, and Business; of
Things of Use, and of Recreation; of Necessity, and of Ornament; did like that
Horse very well: And having had the Honor, when I was His Governor, to be the
first that Sat Him on Horseback, and did instruct Him in the Art of
Horse-manship; it is a great Satisfaction to me, to make mention here of the
Joy I had then, to see, That His Majesty made my Horses go better, than any
Italian, or French-Riders (who had often Rid them) could do; And to hear Him
say, That there are very few that Know Horses; Which was Knowingly said, and
wisely judged of His Majesty: It being very certain, That all Men undertake to
Ride them, but very few Know them, or can tell what they are good for.

It would fill a Volume, to repeat all the Commendations that were given to
Horses, and to Horse-manship, by several worthy Gentlemen, of all Nations, High
and Low Dutch, Italians, English, French, Spaniards, Polacks, and Swedes, in my
own private Riding-House, at Antwerp; which, though very large, was often so
full, that my Esquier, Capt. Mazin, had hardly Room to Ride; But these few
already spoken of, will serve very well instead of all: And after I have given
an Account, That I have divided this whole Book in four Parts, and every Part
in many Sections, and Paragraphs, wherein I never intended to observe any exact
Method; I beseech my Readers, to take in good part, That I have however set
down, as clearly as I could, without the Help of any other Logic, but what
Nature has taught me, all the Observations about Horses, and Horse-manship;
which I have made, by a long, and chargeable, though I must needs say, very
pleasant, and satisfactory, Experience: And so

Farewell.
THE NEW METHOD, AND Extraordinary Invention TO DRESS HORSES. THE FIRST PART.
Of the several Authors that have Written of Horse-manship, both Italians,
French and English.
THis Noble Art was first begun and Invented in Italy, and all the French and
other Nations went thither to learn; the seat of Horse-manship being at
Naples: The first that ever Writ of it was Frederick Grison a Neapolitan; and
truly he Writ like a Horseman, and a great Master in the Art for those times:
Henry the Eighth sent for two Italians that were his Scholars, to come to him
into England; and of one of them came all our Alexanders; and their Scholars
filled the Kingdom with Horsemen.

Sir Philip Sidney brought an Italian Rider, one Signior Romano, to teach his
Nephew William Lord Herbert, afterward Earl of Pembrook; and the same Sir
Philip Sidney brought also over an other Italian Rider, called Signior
Prospero: The old Earl of Leicester, sent for an Excellent Rider out of Italy,
called Signior Claudio Curtio, who writ a Book of Horse-manship, and is quoted
by several Italian Writers; but I think, that very much of his Book is stolen
out of Grison. Laurentius Cussius is another Author, none of the best, with
Horrible Bitts. Then there is Caesar Fieske, who has writ a Book much out of
Grison too, where he meddles with Music. There is another Book of
Horse-manship, called Gloria del Cavallo, with long discourses, and much out of
Grison. There is another Italian Book of Horse-manship, called Cavallo Frenato
de Pietro Antonio, a Neapolitan; much stolen out of Grison: But his Book
consists most of Bitts, to little purpose; though they seem to be Great
Curiosities. But the most Famous man that ever was in Italy, was at Naples, a
Neapolitan, called Signior Pignatel; but he never Writ: Monsieur La Broue Rid
under him five years: Monsieur De Pluvinel nine years: And Monsieur St.
Anthoine many years. The Liberty, which is the best for Bitts, at this Day, we
call A La Pignatel.

These three aforementioned Frenchmen that Rid under Signior Pignatel, filled
France with French Horsemen; which before were filled with Italians. Monsieur
La Broue, I believe, was the First that ever Writ of Horse-manship, in the
French Language: and the first Frenchman that ever Writ in that Art; His Book
is very Tedious, many Words for little Matter; and his first Book is absolutely
all Stolen out of Grison; and his second Book from Signior Pignatell's Lessons;
But La Broue, to seem wiser than he was, and to make up a Book, divides a
Circle into so many parts, to bring a Horse to a whole Circle, that it
confounds a Horse more, and is harder for him, than to Work him upon a whole
Circle at first: And for La Broue's third Book of Bitts, there is no great
Matter in it. As for Pluvinel, no doubt but he was a Good Horseman; but his
Invention of the Three Pillars, of which his Book Pretends to be an absolute
Method, is no more than an absolute Routine; and has spoiled more Horses, than
ever any Thing did; for Horses are not Made to the Hand and the Heel at all
with them; nor will they go from the usual place where they are Ridden, nor
well there neither. But my Book is stolen out of no Book, nor any man's Practice
but my own, and is as True as it is New; and if any Man do not like it, it is a
great Sign he understands it not: for there is no way for Dressing Horses like
it; If it be not Good, I am sure it is the Best that has been Writ yet; what
will be Writ hereafter I know not.

I must tell you that the Italian Writers are Tedious, and write more of Marks,
Colors, Temperatures, Elements, Moon, Stars, Winds, and Bleedings, than of the
Art of Rideing; only to make up a Book, though they wanted Horse-manship.

There was one Signior Hannibal a Neapolitan that came into England and served
the Lord Walden.

Monsieur St. Anthoine a Frenchman, was a very good Horseman, and sent over
by Henry the Fourth of France, to teach Prince Henry; Monsieur La Cost was his
Page, and Ridd excellently well, especially Leaping Horses. Monsieur Boycler
Ridd under him too, and was an excellent Horseman; Monsieur Founteney, which
was either his Nephew, or his Natural Son; for he gave him All when he Dyed,
was also a very good Horseman, but none of these ever Writ any thing of
Horse-manship. And the Best Horseman, that ever I knew, is one of my own
Breeding, and Rides by my Method, which is Captain Mazine, now a Query to the
KING.

That it is a very Impertinent Error, and of great Prejudice, to think the
Manage Useless.
MAny say, that all things in the Manage is nothing but Tricks, and Dancing,
and Gamballs, and of no Use: But by their Leave, whosoever says so, is very
much Deceived; for a Horse that is well settled upon the Hand, and firm and
Obedient to the Hand and Heels, Gallops the Field, and Changes as often, and
just as you will, either without the Circle, or within the Circle, Serpiger,
Terra a Terra, the Piroite, or what you will; and all is this upon the Ground,
and every thing and Particle of it Useful; and so Useful, that a Good
Horseman, upon such a Horse, would have too much Advantage, in Conscience, of
him that Talks against it, either in a single Combat, or in the Wars; for A
Ready-Horse will Run, Stop, Turn, go Back; and if he Rise, he knows how to come
Down again, and is so well on the Hand, as you cannot pull him Over with both
your Hands; and so Obedient, that I will Run him on Fire, Water, or Sword, and
he shall Obey me: And all This cannot be done but by the Art of Rideing, and
that in the Manage.

But, What makes these Men speak against it? The first Reason, is, Because they
are Ignorant, and so speak, as the Wisest men in the world must do, when they
will speak of any thing they Know not, and think that Talk will carry it: But
the Main Reason is this; They find they cannot Ride well; nay, indeed not at
all, A Horse of Manage, and they would be the Finest men in the world, for All
things, though they will take Pains for Nothing; and because, forsooth, they
cannot Ride by Inspiration, without taking Pains, therefore it is worth
Nothing, and of no Use: But if every thing was Naught that they cannot do,
there would be very few things Good in the World.

The next thing, is, That they think it a Disgrace for a Gentleman to do any
thing Well. What! Be a Rider. Why not? Many Kings and Princes think themselves
Graced with being Good Horsemen.

Our Gracious and most Excellent KING, is not only the Handsomest, and most
Comely Horseman in the World, but as Knowing and Understanding in the Art as
any man; and no man makes a Horse go Better than I have seen some go under His
MAJESTY the first time that ever He came upon their Backs, which is the Height
and Quintescence of the Art; and yet I dare say the KING takes it for no
Disgrace to be so Excellent a Horseman: The Duke of YORK is also a very Good
Horseman, and Both take it for an Honor, and no Disgrace; and think it a most
useful and noble Quality for Princes.

The Duke of Mommorancy, Conestable of France, and the first Gentleman of
Christendom, was the Best Horseman in the World, and to this day the best
Branches for Bitts was of his Invention, called A La Conestable; and so he
Devised the Best Spurrs; and never any Esquier Ridd like him, being certainly
the Best Horseman in the World, which he thought a Grace to him: The Prince of
Conde, his Grandchild by the Princess his Mother, is an Excellent Horseman,
and thinks it no Disgrace to him.

Most of the Princes in France highly Esteem it, and are good Horsemen: nay,
their King, at this present time, highly Esteems it, and is a Good Horseman;
nor is any Gentleman in France Esteemed that is not a good Horseman.

The great King of Spain Deceased, did not only Love it, and Understand it, but
was absolutely the Best Horseman in all Spain.

I may therefore desire These men to be more Merciful, and to think it no
Disgrace, to Them, to be Horsemen; but still the Old business will stick with
them, which is, They cannot do it, and therefore it is Naught: A very good and
senseless Reason! He that will take Pains for Nothing, shall never do any thing
Well; for Arts, Sciences, and good Qualities, come not by Instinct, but are
got by great Labor, Study, and Practice; wherefore These Men will none (I
thank you) till they be as Easily learnt, as the Seven Deadly Sins, Railing,
and wearing Fine Clothes and Feathers.

But let us see now, how These Men are on Horseback, and what their Horses do
under them. This Cavalier Seats as far Back in the Sadle as he can, his Legs
stretched as far Forward before the Shoulders of the Horse, with his Toes out,
that he may Spur him in the Shoulders; and Stoops in the Back, which they call
a Comely Seat; not Knowing how to hold the Bridle in his Hand, nor Ghess at any
Helps at all; and appears on Horseback as if he were three quarters Foxt, so
Ridiculous is that Seat: and having Sent to a Sadler, or a Bitt-maker, to Bitt
his Horse, all is Well.

Being Mounted thus, as I tell you, you shall see his Ready Horse of Use, and
his Horse-manship: When he would Turn him on the Right Hand, the Horse does
Turn on the Left; and when he would Turn him on the Left Hand, the Horse does
Turn on the Right: When he would Stop him, the Horse runs Away: When he would
Put him Forward, the Horse runs Backward: When he would Put him Back, the Horse
Rises, and comes Over with him, and there the Good Horseman Lies, and must
send for a Surgion, or a Bone-Setter, if he be not Killed: Nay, his Horse shall
neither come near Drum, Trumpet, or Colors, Pistol, or Sword; but he fetches
Forty Figaries to Endanger him and his Horse: And this is the Excellent
Horseman, and the Ready Horse of Use. How is it Possible to be Otherwise, when
the Horse knows not how to Obey either Hand or Heell, and the Horseman is as
Ignorant as he? Whence it follows, That there is Nothing to make a Sure Horse,
but the Manage.

I would have every Horse (that wears a Bitt) Gelding, or Nagg, wrought in the
Manage, to be firm on the Hand, both for Readiness, and Safety, were it for a
B: B: Judge, or Lady: For without settling of the Hand, they are very Unuseful,
and Dangerous.

I wonder how men are so Presumptious, to think they can Ride as Horsemen,
because they can Ride forward from Barnet to London, which every body can do;
and I have seen Women to Ride Astride as well as they: They do not think of
any Art, or Trade, as they do of Horse-manship, where they are all Masters:
Which does not Prove so, when they Ride.

I think I have Proved sufficiently their Error, and Ignorance; and as fully
Proved, That there is no Useful Horse but those that are Made in the Manage.

The next thing, is, to tell you, That Corvets, and other Airs, settles a
Horse very well upon the Hand; makes him Leight before, and puts him upon the
Hanches, which are all Useful for a Soldiers Horse; and makes him Stop upon
the Hanches, which is very Useful for a man in Arms; for, did the Horse stop
upon the Shoulders, he would give his Rider (being Armed) such a Shock as would
make his Bones Ache, was he never so Sound: Nay, to make a Horse go in Leaps,
firms him on the Hand, which is Good for a Soldiers Horse.

But, says a Gallant, when I should have Use of him in the Field, then he will
be playing Tricks: That Gallant is Deceived; for, the Helps to make Horses go
in Airs, and to make them go upon the Ground, are Several; and Good Horsemen
have much ado to make them go in Airs, with their best Helps; so that, if you
let them alone, they will not trouble you; besides, two or three days March
will make them, that they will not go in Airs, if you would have them; and
they are much the Readier to go on the Ground: Whereby you see, that there is
no Horse whatsoever can be a good and useful Horse, in any kind, with a Bitt,
but what is Wrought in the Manage.

And therefore I advise you, for your Safety, and Use, to Ride all Horses in
the Manage, and you will find it very True, That there can be no Horse else
Safe and Useful; nor can any Horse go well in a Snaffle, except he be formerly
Ridd with a Bitt.

As for Pleasure and State, What Prince or Monarch looks more Princely, or more
Enthroned, than Upon a Beautiful Horse, with Rich Foot-clothes, or Rich Sadles,
and Waving Plumes, making his Entry through Great Cities, to Amaze the People
with Pleasure and Delight?

Or, What more Glorious or Manly, than, at great Marriages of Princes, to Run
at the Ring, or Tilt, or Course at the Field? What can be more Comely or
Pleasing, than to see Horses go in all their several Airs? and to see so
Excellent a Creature, with so much Spirit, and Strength, to be so Obedient to
his Rider, as if having no Will but His, they had but one Body, and one Mind,
like a Centaur? But above all, What sets Off a King more, than to be on a
Beautiful Horse at the Head of his Army?

Thus it is Proved, That there is nothing of more Use than A Horse of Manage;
nor any thing of more State, Manliness, or Pleasure, than Rideing; and as it is
the Noblest, so it is the Healthfullest Exercise in the World. In Hunting,
Hawking, Bowling, Shooting, Cocking, Cards and Dice, and many such things,
there is no Use at all, but merely Pleasure: But in A Horse of Manage, both
Use and Pleasure. It is True, that if there was nothing Commendable but what is
Useful, strictly Examined; we must have nothing but Hollow Trees for our
Houses, Figg-leaf-Breeches for our Clothes, Acorns for our Meat, and Water for
our Drink; for certainly, most things else are but Superfluities and
Curiosities.

I find Fault with no man's Delights, and do only Vindicate (with Truth) my own,
since I have been so Pressed to it with odd Discourses; but I leave every one to
his own VVayes, and his own Delights, desiring they will do the like by Me,
which I shall take for a great Favor: But if it Chances they will not be so
Gracious, and Just to me, it will Grieve me so Extremely, that, in my
Conscience, I shall Sleep never the Worse.

That a Good Horseman may be Thrown-Down Off his Horse, without Disparagement
to Horse-man-ship, contrary to the Vulgar Error.
MOst People are very much Deceived, when, if a Horse throws Down his Rider,
they not only Laugh at Him, but think to have Reason so to do; Saying of the
Best Horseman in the World, to whom such a Mischance should happen, That he
is a Fine Horseman indeed! For they can Swear, that they knew a Horse Threw
him. But they must Learn, That a Good Horseman may be Thrown Down sooner than
Ill ones; because Good Horsemen little think of Sitting, and so may be
Surprised, their Thoughts being all how to make their Horses go Well, and never
doubt Throwing; whereas an Ill Horseman thinks of nothing but Sitting, for
Fear he should be Thrown, and never thinks how to make his Horse go Well; for
he Knows not how to Do it: But Holds by the Main, and the Pomel, and his Head
at the Horses Head, ready to Beat out his Teeth, and his Legs holding by the
Flank; and is so Deformed on Horse Back, as if he were a Strange African
Monster; and the Horse so Disordered, that to see him Sit in that Manner, is
the most Nauseous Sight that can be, and the most Displeasing to the Beholders;
and were much Better for the Spectators to see him Fall, and for his
Reputation, so he received no Hurt by the Fall.

Thus you see, That any Groom, or Tinker, may Sit, and yet be no Horseman,
which is a Greater Business than only Sitting; for a Jackanapes in Paris
Garden, when he is Baited with Musled Mastiffs, the Gentleman Sits very Sure,
but not very Comely, and in my Conscience is no Excellent Horseman* Sitting is
but One thing in Horse-manship, and there are Thousands of things in the Art.

So if a Good Horseman be Thrown by Chance, Has he Lost all his
Horse-manship, because he was once Thrown? And is an Ignorant Fellow inspired
presently with Horse-manship, because he can Ill-favouredly Cling to the Horse,
and Hold on? No, sitting Fast is the meanest thing in Horse-manship, which
Comprehends many more of greater Consequence.

But yet I must Tell you, I never knew in my Life, a good Horseman Thrown, but
I have known many Presumptuous ignorant Fellows get Falls; but, as, if a good
Horseman by Chance be Thrown, he does not Lose all his Horse-manship with that
Fall, if he be not Killed; so an Ignorant man, if he Sits, is not Presently
infused with Horse-manship: For it is a Mistake as Ridiculous as it is Common,
to take Sitting Fast on Horseback for the whole Art of Horse-manship.

Old Grison, and his Translator Mr. Blundevile, ANATOMIZED
OLd Grison, and many Italian Authors, would have a Bardel, which is a Straw
Saddle, set first on a Colts Back, and nothing but a Rope Cavazon on his Nose;
which is to no Purpose in the world, but Loss of Time: Then they will Trot him
two or three Years up Hills, and down Hills, to Stop him; which is to Less
Purpose, and more Loss of Time.

They would have a Circle; or Ring, as they call them, of an Acre of ground in
Plowed Land, to make a Horse go a Hundred Turns in it, which is worse than to
Ride a Journey of Thirty miles; and I wonder what Horses they had in those
Days; for I am sure, Those we have now, are not Able to do it.

They Teach to Ride one Horse two or three Hours at a time, when one may well
Ride half a Dozen at least in an Hour, and give them sufficiently Enough.

For their Single Turns, and Double Turns, called Radopiare, they are
Ridiculous, and so is the Repolone, which is to Gallop him Half a mile, and
then Turn him Ill-favouredly and False: And their Several Mannages of Metzo
Tempo, Tutto Tempo, and Contratempo, are no Better.

For a Resty Horse they Raise a whole Town with Staves to Beat him, with many
Curious Inventions, with Squirts, Fire, Whelps, Hedg-hoggs, Nails, and I know
not What. And the same they do Before a Horse that Runs Away, as well as to the
Resty Horse Behind.

Then for Spurring, the Bunching Stroke, and the Clinching Stroke; and if he
will not Endure the Spurs, Boots stufft with Straw, and Spurs at them, to Hang
at his Sides, (which is not worth a Straw); and the Chambetta, which signifies
nothing.

For a Horse that is Afraid, and Starts, they appoint Whirlegiggs of several
Colors, which will make him Ten times Worse. And to lay Stones in his Way, and
a Hollow Ditch to Ride him in, are Lamentable businesses in Horse-manship: And
they have as many Foolish Ways for the Credensa, which shall never Cure him of
that Vice.

They Bid us take Heed, by any Means, Not to make the Horse too Weak-Neckt;
which is a Prime Note! But Mr. Blundevile did not Know, that all Horses are a
Stiff-necked Generation.

Mr. Pagano would never Use his Horse to any thing but a Walk, or a Trot at the
most; wherewith (I am sure) he shall never Dress a Horse perfectly; and yet
(says Mr. Blundevile) it was a Wonder to all Beholders, to see, That in Eight
Days, he would make him Run a Carreer perfectly, which I will Undertake to
have done the First Morning that ever he Ran.

Speaking of his Capriole, he mistakes the Air, as well as the making of the
Horse.

For Corvets, Mr. Blundevil did not Understand it (nor his Master Grison
belike) when he says, The Spaniards take Delight to make their Horses go in
Corvets, which never Spaniard yet could do; but he takes Trampling, and
Prauncing, for Corvets, wherein he is much Deceived; for Corvets is the Hardest
Air in the World, which no Horse can go, unless he be perfectly within the
Hand, and the Heels, and upon the Hanches; which is not Trampling.

To Ride Short, he calls after the Turkish Fashion, wherein he is Deceived; for
it is A La Genette, which is the Spanish Fashion too; and to Ride Short in
Corvets is his Mistake, for I would Ride Longer in Corvets than any other Air.
He is also Mistaken, when he says, He would not have above Two Horses in Her
Majesty's Stable to go in Corvets; for it is of no Use (says he) and such
Delighting Toys of Prauncing up and down they will do, when they should go
upon the Ground: For first, There is nothing makes a Horse Better upon the
Hand, than Corvets, and that is Useful; then, there is nothing puts a Horse so
much upon the Hanches, and Firms him there, as Corvets, and that is Useful
too; and Mr. Blundevil is mightily Deceived, to think, that he will go in
Corvets, when he should go upon the Ground; for the Helps are several: And let
a Horse be never so Apt, or Perfect in Corvets, and made upon the Ground too,
(which is the First thing must be done) I dare say he shall never offer at
Corvets with me, but go just upon the Ground as I would have him; because the
Helps are several.

He says, That in five or six Months he can make a Horse to Gallop the Field,
(a Necessary thing for a Soldiers Horse); which is no more, as he Understands
it, than in an Acre of Ground to Gallop and Change, still upon a Gallop; and
that I will Undertake to make a Cart-Horse do in three Days.

Besides, they Dig out Rings, and Entrench themselves (which is a Horrible
Folly); but I desire no more for Stopping than a Plain place, without Hills, or
any such Toys; and will Dress any Horse perfectly there, by the New Method of
my French Book: which I Refer you to.

For Mr. Blundevils Bitts, The are very Ridiculous; the Eyes are Naught, the
Cheeks as ill, and the Mouths Worst of all; with Catts Feet, Up-sets, Ports,
and Broken Ports; Catts Feet, and Up-sets, with a Revet Nayl; and his Complete
Bitts, are completely Abominable, with their Water-Chain and Trench, the Mouth
of the Bitt too being as Bigg as my Wrist, and the Branches as Long as my Arm;
and the Curb as Bigg as a Chain for a Horse Nose, with Stories flying Trench,
which is a Snaffle tied to the Bitt, and such other Tormenting ignorant
Follies: The Legs of it are (...) be so Loose, as if they were Broken, in the
Knees, and are to Help up and down, as if they were Wind-Mill-Sayls.

He would have Us to Strike a Horse with a Cudgel, or a Rod, between the Ears,
and upon the Head; which is Abominable, though he thinks it a Rare Secret. And
thus much of Mr. Blundevils Riding, which is Grison Translated into English.

Mr. Blundevils Breeding, To turn the Stallion loose to the Mares, is
indifferent Well, but not Right; and to put him to them again at Holland-Tide,
stark Naught. To Cover in Hand is Unnatural, and you shall not have half of
them (so Covered) prove with Fool.

To have a Horse-Fole, or Mare-Fole, by Tying his Right, or Left Stone; to
Observe the Moon, and the Wind, to sail to Procreation, or get a Fool by the
Almanac, is very Ridiculous, and to put Painted Clothes before the Mares, to
make the Foles of what Color you would have them, is no less Ridiculous.

That, if the Horse, as soon as he has Covered, come Down on the Right Side,
it is a Horse Colt; and if of the Left Side, it is a Filley: And if, so many
Days after the Mare is Mounted, her Coat look Sleek, and Shines, then she has
Conceaved; if it do not Shine, she has not Conceaved, are all Tales to Tell to
Children, rather than to Men of Reason and Discretion; all Mountebank-ship and
Fooleries: and to make the Horse Lusty, and the Mares, there is little or
nothing in it.

Mr. Blundevil Reasons thus: That for as much, as all Mares do Fool Standing.
Wherein certainly he took his Note out of some Learned Author, as Aristotle, or
the like; for I will Assure you, That never any Mare in the World did Fool
Standing: If she did, the Fool would break his Neck; For, he comes into the
World with his Head first, and his two Feet on both sides of his Head. No! The
Mare is in too great Pain to Fool Standing, and therefore she Lies Down, and
Foles so.

Mr. Blundevil says, There is a thing Grows in the Foles Forehead like a
Figg, which the Mare commonly Bites off, which is called Hippomenes; and if it
be Taken, it does Miraculous Things in Love-Matters, which he was Loath to
Write of. Truly he was Over-careful, with all his Old Writers; and, in my
Conscience, if it could be Got, it would do Miraculous Things, not only in
Love, but in every Thing else. But the Truth of this Business, is, That never
any such thing did Grow upon any Foles Forehead; and therefore could never be
Bitt off by the Mare. No doubt but that Mistake is caused by the Secondine, or
Clean, or Bagg, in which the Fool Lies, whereof all the Strings meets at the
End, which looks like a little Knot, and that hangs Loose upon the Foles Head;
but when the Fool is Foled, That, and the Bagg, goes together; for it is all
one Thing.

Mr. Blundevil bids us take Heed, That the Mare do not Eat that Bagg, or
Secondine, Because the Country Wives Kye do so. But I have Enquired of the
Countrymen, and they say, Not one Cow in a Hundred does do it: And for Mares,
I will assure you, They Never do it: And if you Ask, What they do with it? I
say, They let it Lie there, and trouble themselves no more with it.

Mr. Blundevil condemns those that Take the Foles, to be taken Off at
Martlemas; Because, according to his old Learned Authors, he would have them
Suck two Years at least: That is, he would have them Heavy, Flaby Jades,
besides the Loss of the Fruitfulness of his Mares; wherein his old Authors are
very much deceived.

Then he says, That the Foles Legs are as Long when they are Foled, as ever
afterward; wherein he is very much Deceived: Does he think, that the Body only
Grows, and the Legs not at all? A very Ridiculous Opinion! For, look at the
Foles Legs, and the Mares, and you shall find the Mares Legs are Longer a
great deal. Can any man think, That a Gray-Hounds-Whelp, as soon as he is
Whelpt, has his Legs as Long as when he is a Dog? It is Ridiculous.

To know, Which Fool will have the Best Spirit, by Running fore-most, and
Leaping of Hedges and Rayls; is quite contrary to the Experience I had once of
a Colt, that Nothing would keep in, Leaping over all things he came near; and
when he came to be Ridd, the Dullest Jade that could be.

To know by their Feet, and much of White, That they are not Long-Lived, is as
false a Rule, as any He has set down.

His Reckoning Horses Teeth, is beyond the Number of what ever any Horse had;
and that every Horse has two Tushes Below, and two Above, is, I assure you,
True. Some Horses (say they) have no Tushes at all, and they commonly
ill-natured, being something of the Mare; but as there is not One in a Hundred
but have Tushes, so there is not One Mare in a Hundred that have Any; and those
that have, are ill-natured, participating too much of the Horse; and both are a
kind of Hermaphroditical Compositions. Thus you see, how Learned People (with
their old Authors) are Deceived.

To Know the Disposition of Horses, by the Elements, and their Marks.
MR. Blundevil says, The Sorrel is of the Element of Fire, and therefore is
full of Mettle, Hot, and Fiery; but I assure you, I have Known more Sorrel
Horses dull Jades than of any other Color.

That White Horses are Phlegmatic, and so participate of the Element of Water,
and therefore are Dull and Heavy Jades: But I assure you again, I have Known
White Horses to be fuller of Spirit, and Livelier, than of any other Color;
and so his Elements are Wrong in Every thing: Your best Way is, To Try your
Horse; which Philosophy will hold to Know him best.

Mr. Blundevil speaks also of the Marks of Horses, That there are Four good,
and Seven bad; such a Foot of the Far Side, and such a Foot of the Near Side,
and which Fore-foot, and which Hinder-foot; and not too much White in his Face,
nor his Legs to be very high White; and Feathers, and I know not what a kind
of Conjuration: All false and ridiculous Lies.

When once I hear a Man talk of Marks and Elements, I have done with him, and
Know no other Philosophy but Trying; for, there are Good and Bad of all
Colors, and of all Marks; but there are more Badd Horses than Good of any
Color or Mark, as there are of any thing Else, even of Men in all Things:
Therefore Marks and Colors are foolish and false Toys, only to abuse simple
People withal.

Of the Perfect Shape of a Horse.
MR. Blundevil speaks so of the Perfect Shape of a Horse, That such a Horse as
he Describes, was never of Gods, and Natures Making, but of his Own, or of some
Foolish Authors he has Read; for he takes several Parts of several Horses, and
Puts them Together, which is a Horse of their Own making; for there was never
such a Horse Foled.

Every Country has a several Shape of Horses; As the Turk, the Neapolitan, the
Spanish Horse, the Barb, and the Duch Horse; All very Fine in their Kinds.

In a Word, I will show you the Ridiculousness of Setting down the Perfect
Shape of a Horse. For Example, Who can set down the Perfect Shape of a Dog? A
Mastiff is not a Greyhound; nor a Gray-Hound, a Lancashire-Hound; nor a
Lancashire-Hound a Little Beagle; and yet all very Fine Dogs in their Kinds:
And so of Horses: Which shows the Impossibility to set down the Perfect Shape
of a Horse.

Mr. Blundevil says, a Spanish Horse is Pinn-Buttockt, narrow and slender
Behind: I believe he would have a Spanish Horse to have a Dutch Horses Buttock;
which would indeed be very Correspondent to the Rest of his Shape: Some Spanish
Horses have Oval Buttocks, which is the Finest Buttocks of all.

He says they have ill Feet: It is true, some have, and so have Horses of all
Countries; Dutch the Worst, and some of the English very Bad: He says also,
Spanish Horses are Weak; but there are more Weak Dutch Horses than Spanish.

I have Had many Spanish Horses with good Buttocks, good Feet, and Strong; and
if some should be Weak, yet their Spirits make them go much Better, than any
other Horses that are Stronger.

He says, They are Gentle in their Youth, and grow Vicious in their Age: But I
assure you, there is no such thing; for they are as Gentle in their Age, as
they are in their Youth, and very Loving Horses: So Mr. Blundevil is very much
Abused by his old Authors whom he Reverences so much.

He says, The Gennet has a Comely going, like the Turkish, which is neither
Amble, nor Trot. I would Know of Mr. Blundevil, What strange kind of Going that
is, which is neither of those Two: But I will assure him, That there is no
Horse, that has Four Legs, can go, but it must be the Action either of an
Amble, or of a Trot; for Galloping, and Running, is another thing, and so are
all Airs in the Manage. Mr. Blundevil appears by this, to be a Better
Scholar, than a Horseman: and was indeed a fine Gentleman, Well Traveled, an
Excellent Scholar, a Good Translator, and puts things into an Excellent
Method, but Tied himself too much to Old Authors, who knew as little as he in
Horse-manship; and so Authority Abused him, having no Knowledge himself in the
Art, and totally wanting Experience in it.

His Treaty for Dyeting of Horses, is as Learned as any Physician can Write;
but yet is nothing as it Ought to be; for he wanted Experience.

His Cures of Diseases are most Admirable; and indeed, he is the Father of all
that Business, and the Rarest that has Writ upon that Subject. Markham is but,
Blundevil with other Names, and will not Acknowledge it: He has many new
Medicines, but they are worth Nothing; as his Oil of Oats. Nor was he a
Horseman at all, but only took Notes of Medicines, and set them down
Methodically.

After him comes De La Gray, which is but, Blundevil, with some New Medicines
that are but Indifferent: And for his Breeding of Horses, it is the most
Ridiculous thing that ever was known Writ.

The Best Medicines of Mr. Blundevils, are those of Martine, who was Prime
Marshal to Queen Elizabeth; And, as I take it, an Alman, and an Excellent
Farrier: Yet, even he, was extremely Mistaken about the Glaunders, and Mourning
of the Chine, as by my Woeful Experience in Horses I know, and will better
Inform you, when I set out my Book of Marshalry, and Shooing.

Mr. Blundevil says, That Barley makes a Horse Piss Red, like Blood; but he
did not Understand it perfectly. It is True; In Italy, Spain, and Barbary, they
Feed their Horses all with Barley; which is, Because they have no Oats: For,
certainly Excellent Oats is the best Feeding for a Horse in the World. But you
must Know, that of Barley there are Two kinds; The Common Barley, that they
make Beer of, which makes a Horse Piss a little Red; and of that Barley they
never Give to their Horses in Spain, but of the other Barley, which is called
by the Name of Bigg, and that never makes them Piss Red, and is the best
Feeding for Horses, where there Wants Oats: Rye Scoure's too Much, and Wheat is
too Fatning, and Good Bread too Pursey, and Foggy. In Spain they give
Barley-Straw, (as my Lord Cottington told me;) but first; they Tread it with
Oxen, and then it is as Soft as Silk. And thus for our English Authors, of whom
I have told you the Truth.

The Opinion of a GREAT MASTER.
A Great Master, held the most Excellent Horseman beyond the Sea, being Bred
four or five Years under the Best Horseman there, and had Practiced this Art
from his Childhood, did me the Honor, To come to Antwerp of a Visit to me
from Bruxels, and Brought with him four or five Horses: I Treated him the Best
I could, and showed him my Horses, both Led Out, and Rid.

He had a Young Man with him (his Nephew) who had Ridd under him for the space
of Seven Years: And though he had seen Rid, before him, the Day before, Three of
the Readiest Horses that ever I had; yet when he Ridd them, he could not
Encounter them, or make them Go at all; and truly, to my Thinking, (I might say
to my Knowledge) he had neither Hand, Heel, nor Seat, as he should have had;
and so it was impossible to make them Go Right.

His Master told me, He had found a New Method for Dressing of Horses: Which
was; first, Never to Trot a Horse, (that was his Maxim:) Next, Never to Use the
Cavezon, nor pull the Horses Head into the Turn. This is, What he would Not
have Done: And, What he would have Done, is; To put the Horse to the Single
Pillar, with a Long Rope, and there Pinch him with the Spurs, which, says he,
Puts him upon the Hand: Then to Whip him About with the Shambriere, to make him
Go half Terra a Terra, and half in Corvets, and then to make him Go in Corvets;
which settles him on the Hand: And this is the New Way of Dressing; Indeed, of
Not Dressing Horses.

To take in Pieces, and Anatomize this New Way: And first, of what he will Not
have Done; which is, Never to Trot a Horse, and Stop him; which is certainly
the Foundation of all Things in the Manage, either to settle him on the Hand,
or to put him on the Hanches. Next, Never to Use the Cavezon, without which no
Horse can be Dressed, for many Reasons. Then, Never to Pull the Horses Head into
the Turn: By which means the Horses Legs, and Body, shall never go Right, or
supple either to Hand or Heel.

Now, of what he will have done to Work his Horse: First, To put him to the
Single Pillar, with a Long Rope, and there Pinch him with Spurs; which will do
Bravely with a Colt, that never knew the Spurs; he will surely Throw him rather
than be put upon the Hand: Nay, a Horse that knows the Spurrs, will never be
put upon the Hand with that Invention.

Then to Whip him about with the Shambriere, to make him go half Terra a
Terra, and half Corvets; which is impossible, for they are two several Actions
with his Legs: Besides, this excellent Lesson is in Pluvinels Book; which he
never used, but to a Horse that was Almost Dressed; and it is Naught, then: Put
him in Corvets, to settle him on the Hand, says he, which is in La Broues
Book, only for a Horse that is near Dressed, and not for a Colt: Besides, some
Horses will never go Corvets, do what you can: So this Method may Spoil Horses,
but shall never Dress them, I assure you; and you may take my Word for it. He
will (by his New Method) never Trot, Gallop, or Walk a Horse; but no Horse in
the World can be Made without These Three, nor without a Cavezon, Stopping, and
having his Head Pulled into the Turn.

A strange Conceit of a GREAT MASTER.
THere was a Great Master, that would Ride his Horses Twice a Day; saying, That
if he could Dress a Horse in Six Months, Once a day Riding of them, he was sure
he could Dress a Horse in Three Months, Riding them Twice a Day; Wherein he is
much Deceived: For a Horse being Flesh and Blood, cannot endure perpetual
Travel with little Rest; and no Exercise is more Violent for a Horse than in
the Manage. Nay, of Necessity, Riding so much One Morning, he will not Recover
it of a Day or Two: And if a Horse Oppose the Man, which all Horses will do at
First, and are Vicious, one must Correct him Soundly; and, How will you Ride
him in the Afternoon again? Dull him you may, and take off his Spirit, make him
Hate the Manage, and make him like a Vaulting Horse, rather than like a Live
Horse. Nor can you ever Give him his Meat, Water, or Rest, in Order; the Want
of which must make him Sick, and subject to many Diseases; and Shortly after,
Death will follow: and there is your Twice a day Riding him, which Makes him
fit for the Hunts-Man to Dress him for his Dogs.

Some say again, That they will Ride no Horse Twice a Day, but Horses that are
very Vicious, and of great Strength: I have seen many Horses that are Vicious,
but few of such great Strength. For, if the Horse be very Vicious, you must
Correct him Soundly, and Ride him so Long until he Obey you, in some small
Measure; and then I am sure you have Ridd him so Violently, and so Long, as he
will Hardly be to be Ridd the next Morning; and Less, to be Ridd any more that
Day: And if the Horse be so Docil as to Obey you in Every Thing, certainly the
Best way is to take but a Little of him that Morning, to Encourage him to do so
again; and the more to Encourage him, not to Ride him until the next Morning
again: so he will be Pleasant, Lively, and in Lust, and take Pleasure in you,
and the Manage; and Learn more Thus in a Months Riding him but Once a day than
he shall in three Months, Riding him Twice a day.

Have not all Scholars Play-dayes? and certain Hours of Rest in their days of
Study? All Tradesmen, Holy Days to Rejoice themselves in? Statesmen,
Divertisments from Business? And Good Preachers Preach not every Sunday? Have
not Lawyers also their Terms, and Vacations; and even Carriers Horses Rest
Christmas, and other Holy Days; and so Cart-Horses, Brewers Horses,
Coach-Horses, Hackney-Horses, Running-Horses? And shall only Horses of Manage
be Galley-Slaves? There is no Reason for that. No, not Dogs can Hunt every
day, or Gray-Hounds Course every day, or Spaniels Range every day; or Hawks Fly
every day; there are hundred Examples of it, but These are Sufficient to let
you see the great Folly, and Ignorance, of those that will Ride their Horses of
Manage Twice a Day.

Just like the Polander, being Sick, whose Physician gave him Nine Pills to be
taken, Three every Night, for Three Nights together; who very Wisely
considered, That if Three Pills every Night, for Three Nights together, would
Recover him; That then, taking All the Pills One Night, would Make him Well
Presently. And so did, and had Almost Purged himself Out of this World.

So any Horseman that will Venture to Make a Horse as well in Three Months,
with Two Lessons a Day, as another in Six Months with One Lesson a Day, may be
sure to Kill his Horse, sooner than Teach him, and to show himself Ridiculous
in his Undertaking.

How I found Out my METHOD in the MANAGE; And that it is The only WAY to DRESS
HORSES.
THere is but One Truth in any thing; and that my Method is True, cannot be
better Demonstrated, than by Experience, which will clearly show, That Mine
never misses its End, as All Others do; and so Proves Mine True, and Theirs
False. For, to say that some of them come Near the Truth, is neither
Commendation, nor Excuse: A Falsehood within an Inch of the Truth, being as Bad,
as if it were an Hundred Miles off.

I have Practiced, and Studied Horse-manship ever since I was Ten years old;
Have Rid with the Best Masters of all Nations, heard them Discourse at Large,
and Tried their several Ways: Have Read all their Italian, French, and English
Books, and some Latin ones; and in a Word, All that has been Writ upon that
Subject, Good and Bad; And have Bestowed many Thousands of Pounds in Horses,
have Spoiled many, and have been very Long learning of this Art of
Horse-manship.

But all that while I thought still, All was Labor in Vain; and that there was
something, not Found out, which They and their Books Mist: Whereupon I began to
consider so Seriously, and Study so Earnestly, all the Particulars that concern
the Manage; that at last I Found this Method, which is as True, as it is New,
and is the Quintescence of Horse-manship: For which I have Left all Others, as
I had great Reason so to do, Making with it all manner of Horses whatsoever, of
all Nations, and of all Dispositions; Strong, Weak; Full of Fire, Dull and
Lazy; even Mares, Geldings, and Bidets; and all that ever comes to my Hands.

I follow not the Horses Disposition, as most do; but I Make the Horse follow
my Ways, and Obey me: I seldom Beat them, or Punish them with either Rod, or
Spur, but when I meet with a great Resistance, and that Rarely: And yet I must
tell you, that I use Force, which they Obey willingly, for the most part; and,
however, all Yield, and Render themselves at last, with much Satisfaction to
me; which I wish others may find in following their Ways.

But says One, Does your Lordship think, that both your Books would Make me a
Horseman? I Answer; That they are Written as plainly, and as clearly as
Possibly can be: There is in my French Book, Circles, and the Prints of Horses
Shoes, to show How his Legs should Go; there is also exact Figures of all
Postures, and of all Actions, both of Man and Horse, and more cannot be. But
whether my Books will Make you a Horse- man or no, though they do as much as
Books can do, I cannot Tell; for you must have it all in your Head; and it may
be you will not Understand it. But put the Case you do, yet Wanting the
Practice, you cannot Ride Well; and yet no Fault at all in my Books, but in You.

There are some Nations that Think they can see Nothing, but they can do it;
which must be by Inspiration, by which I never saw any Ride, though many
Pretend to Preach by it. It is a Long Study, and Diligent Practice; a Long
Habit and Custom, which does All Things in the World, and Nothing done without
it: For there is Cunning in Daubing.

Do you think, that an Ignorant Schoolboy can be as Learned as a Doctor? Or,
let a Skilful Musician Write the Rarest Book in the World, for Composing, or
Singing; Can you Imagine, that as soon as you have Read his Book, you can Do
what he Teaches? No truly; and yet not the Book's Fault, but Yours, in being
so Partial to your Self, as to think you can do Any Thing at the first Sight,
without Practice or Study; which would be a Miracle I never saw, or any Body
shall ever see.

In the same Manner, if a Lutenist should Write a Rare Book, Can you Expect,
that as soon as you have Read it, you can Play on the Lute; because, it may be,
you can Jangle the Strings?

But you say, You can Ride: Truly, just as you Jangle the Lute-Strings, and no
otherwise. You have learnt in Italy and France; that is something indeed: So
many Crowns a Month, and the Horse did not Throw you, and that is all.

Mr. Spenser, the Best Scholar in all the Academy where he Learned, and a fine
Gentleman, who had been Two Years there; when he came to Ride one of my Horses,
he could not make him Go: His Brother-in-Law being present, said to me; My
Lord, you must Excuse him, he has not Ridd a great while. But Mr. Spenser said
(with a great Oath) Brother, you are Deceived; for I know now, I could never
Ride.

God knows how many Young Gallants comn newly out of Academies; English,
French, Irish, and Dutch Gentlemen, that were Famed for good Horsemen, and
truly no Piece of a Horseman, and Ridd the Wofullest that could be; and so did
before me some Masters of Academies: And once two Frenchmen Riding (God knows
very meanly) were strangely Laughed at, and that very Worthily, by two other
French Riders that stood by.

But says One, I can Ride a Ready Horse; wherein he is Deceived; for a Ready
Horse is the Hardest of all to Ride, because the Least motion is an Absolute
Command unto him, and an Ignorant gives him such Counter-times, as he puts him
quite Out.

Mr. Germain, a Fine Gentleman, and the Best Scholar Du Plessis had in all his
Academy, knew well the Difficulty of Riding a Ready Horse: For, to Persuade him
to Ride one of Mine, which he would not Do; I told him, If you will but Sit
Still, I warrant you the Horse will go Well with you. But a Man (said he, with
a great Oath) cannot Sit Still. Which was said Knowingly, and like a Horseman;
for, to Sit Still, belongs only to a Great Master.

Another, because he has Ridd a Hundred Miles in a Day, (which a Post-Boy can
do) thinks Himself a Horseman; or, Because he can Run a Match with his Groom,
or Leap a Ditch, or a Hedge, in Hunting, and Hold by the Main, he thinks he is a
Horseman; but his Hunts-Boy does as much. And my Lord Mayor when he goes to
Weigh Butter, sits a Leg of either side the Horse very Gravely; An excellent
Horseman! And I have seen many Wenches Ride Astride, and Gallop, and Run their
Horses, that could, I think, hardly Ride a Horse Well in the Manage.

Are they not, in All Trades, bound Apprentices Seven and Nine Years; and Many
Bunglers of them too? And, in Higher Professions, Twenty and Thirty Years is
not too much, before they are Great Masters in any One of them: And though
Horse-manship be the Hardest of All, yet Many a Gentleman will Ride the First
Day as well as the Greatest Master; but he is Deceived, as well as those that
think to Buy, with their Money, any Quality: For if Good Qualities could be
Purchased with Money, every Rich Citizen would be a Fine Gentleman. Of which
Opinion that French Cavalier was not, who told me, commending my Method; Par
Dieu, Il est bien hardi qui monte devant vous, that is, He is very Bold, that
dares Ride before you. And to the same Purpose, Signor del Campo, an Italian
Rider at Bruxels, after he had seen my Horses, said; Il faut tirer la Planche,
that is, The Bridge must be Drawn up; for no Horseman, so Good as You, can
come After.

There is no Horseman but shall Make my Horses go, for his Use, either in a
Single Combat, or in the Wars, better than he shall any bodies Horses else; and
that is Sufficient: for, to make them go in Perfection in all Airs as I can,
were too much, and too great a Miracle: But let My Method be what it will,
since every Man does what he can; if any Pleases himself with his Own Opinions,
though he Dislikes My Way never so much, and should Censure a thing he
Understands not; and say, That the Manage is a Foolish thing: It shall not
Displease me at all.

OBSERVATIONS OF HORSES.
OF THE SPANISH HORSE.
YOu must Know, that of All Horses in the World, of what Nation, soever they
be, Spanish Horses are the Wisest; far the Wisest, and strangely Wise, beyond
any Man's Imagination; but I must Tell you, they are not the Easlier Dressed for
that: Because they Observe too much with their Eyes, and their Memories are too
Good, and so Conclude with their Judgments too soon, without the Man, Reckoning
without their Host; whereas they should Follow, and Obey, his Hand and Heel;
and that not by Roat neither, but by Art, which is an Habit got by many Lessons
Methodically Taught.

If he be Well Chosen, I assure you, He is the Noblest Horse in the World:
First, There is no Horse so Curiously Shaped, all over from Head to Croup: He
is the most Beautiful that can be; For he is not so Thin, and Lady-like, as the
Barb; nor so Gross as the Neapolitan; but between Both. He is of great Spirit,
and of great Courage, and Docil: Has the Proudest Walk, the Proudest Trot, and
Best Action in his Trot; the Loftiest Gallop, the Swiftest Careers; and is the
Lovingest and Gentlest Horse, and Fittest for a KING in a Day of TRIUMPH to
Show himself to his People, or in the Head of an Army, of any Horse in the
World.

Therefore no Horse so fit to Breed on, as a Spanish Horse; either for the
Manage, the War, Ambling for the Pad; Hunting, or for Running-Horses:
Conqueror was of a Spanish Horse, Shotten-Herring was of a Spanish Horse,
Butler was of a Spanish Horse, and Peacock was of a Spanish Mare: And These
Beatt all the Horses in their Time, so much, as No Horse ever Ran near them.

I say, He is Absolutely the best Stallion in the World, for all those several
things I have formerly Named, if you do Wisely appropriate such Mares to him,
as shall be fit for such Uses as you would have your Breed; and so he is fit
for all Breeds, but to Breed Cart-Horses.

The King of Spain has many Races, but his Best is at Cordoua in Andalozia,
where he has above Three Hundred Mares and Colts, as my Lord Cottington told
me; and, besides those of his Majesty, there are other most Excellent Races,
not only of Noblemen, but also of Private Gentlemen.

For the Prices, the Earl of Claringdon, now Lord Chancellor of England, told
Me, That when he was Ambassador in Spain, Sir Benjamin Wright, a Merchant there
that Loves Horses, sold a Couple of Little Spanish Horses for a Great Price:
And he says, (and many others Confirm it for a great Truth) That Three
Hundred, and Four Hundred Pistols for a Horse, is a common Price and Rate, at
Madrid; And the Marquess of Seralvo told me, That a Spanish Horse, called Il
Bravo, sent to the Archduke Leopold, his Master, was held Worth as much as a
Manner of a Thousand Crowns a Year, and that he has known Horses at Seven
Hundred, Eight Hundred, and a Thousand Pistols.

A Gentleman told me, that he knew a Cavalier in Spain, who offered another
Three Hundred Pistols, but to let him Ride his Horse one Afternoon; and the
Owner had Reason to Refuse it: for it was to go to the Juego de Toros, where he
might have been Killed: many of the Finest Horses in the World being Killed at
that Sport, which is the greatst Pity that can be.

You see that a Spanish Horse is Dear Ware; and then Reckon his Journey from
Andalozia to Bilbo, or St. Sebastien, which is the next Port for England, and
is Four Hundred Miles at least; and a Horse cannot Travel above Ten Miles a day
with your Groom, and your Farrier at least, besides the Casualty of Lameness,
Sickness, and Death; so that if he come Safe to you, yet he will be a very Dear
Horse, I assure you: And These are great Truths of the Spanish Horse.

Of the BARB.
THe Barb is next to the Spanish Horse for Wisdom, but not near so Wise, and
that makes him much Easier to be Dressed: Besides, he is of a Gentle Nature,
Docil, Nervous, and Leight.

He is as Fine a Horse as can be, but somewhat Slender, and a little Lady-like;
and is so Lazy and Negligent in his Walk, as he will Stumble in a
Bowling-Green; he Trots like a Cow, and Gallops Low, and no Action in any of
those Actions: But commonly he is Sinewy, and Nervous, and has a clean
Strength, is excellently Winded, and good at Length, to Endure great Travel;
and very Apt to Learn, and Easy to be Dressed, being (for the most part) of a
good Disposition, excellent Apprehension, Judgment, and Memory; and when he is
Searched, and Wakened, no Horse in the World goes Better in the Manage, in all
Airs whatsoever, and Rarely upon the Ground in all Kinds.

The Mountain-Barbs, they say, are the Best; I believe they are the Largest,
but, for my part, I rather desire a Midling Horse, or a Less Horse, which are
Cheap enough in Barbery, as I have been Informed, both by many Gentlemen, and
many Merchants; for they say, that in Barbery you may Buy a very Fine Barb for
Twenty, Twenty Five, or Thirty Pounds at the most; but then your Journey is
somewhat Great; not by Sea; for, from Tunis, to Marselles in France, is no
great Voyage; but from Marselles to Calais by Land, you go all the Length of
France, and at Calais they are Shipped for England.

You must have an excellent Esquier, a Farrier, and one Groom, and Hire other
Grooms as you Go; but take heed, That those Mean Rogues Run not Away with some
of your Horses; and because there is no Trusting of them, your English Farrier,
and your English Groom, must always Lie in the Stable, and none of those
Fellows; but the Gentleman of your Horse, which ought to be a Good Horseman,
must order that Carefully.

If you would go another Way to work, and a Shorter Voyage, then send into
Languedoc, and Provence, where many Gentlemen Buy Barbs of two, three, and four
Years old at Marselles, and Keep them two or three Years, and then Sell them;
which Barbs you may Buy for Forty or Fifty Pistols a Piece, and as Fine Horses
as can be: But he whom you Send, must be very Skilful to choose Well, and to
take heed that They be Right Barbs; For I have Heard, that many in those
Countries, about Marselles, when many Barbs come out of Barbery, thrust in
Colts of their own Breed amongst them for Barbs, and so Sell them.

When I was at Paris, there came Twenty Five Barbs (as they said) nothing but
Skin and Bones, and they were Sold for Twenty Five Pistols a Horse: My Lord
Viscount Mountague bought Nine, as I Remember; for I was with him, and helped to
Choose some for him, and one of them did Win Many Matches: But truly, if I had
had a Million, I would not have Bought one of them, for they were very Ordinary
Horses; Nor do I think they were Right Barbs, neither by their Shape, nor
Price, but Bred in some Islands there-abouts; for, if a Man be at Great
Charges, I would either have an Extraordinary Horse, or None.

I had lately a Letter from a Horseman at Paris, a Frenchman, that gives me
Intelligence of Horses, That a Merchant at Paris had two Barbs, the Finest that
ever he saw, Six Years old a piece, but not Dressed at all, and held them at Two
Hundred Pistols a piece: By which, you may see, that Right Barbs, and Fine
ones, are very Dear, as all Good Things are.

The Barb is not so Fit a Horse for a Stallion for the Manage, as for
Running-Horses; for he Gets Long and Loose Horses, therefore do not Breed of
him for the Manage, except he be a Short Horse from the Head to the Croup,
strong Ramase, and Racoursy, and of a Superfluity of Spirit, which few Barbs
have; and therefore Breed of a Spanish Horse, with Choice English Mares; and if
you have a Delicate well-chosen Dutch Mare or two, that makes an excellent
Composition for the Manage.

I am of Opinion, and Believe, that there never came out of Barbery, The best
Horses that Country affords; not but that they may be had: But the Case is
this; Those that bring Barbs out of Barbery, are either French Horse-Coursers
that Trade in Barbery, or Merchants.

To begin with the Horse-Coursers, They always Buy those Horses that are
Cheapest for their Advantage: For if they Bought of Great Prices, it would not
quit Cost, and so they Buy the Worst, and Meanest, of Barbs: And as for the
Merchants, They want Skill; Besides, they will Buy the Cheapest too, for their
Advantage, because they know not Well, how to put off Horses of Price; and so
they Buy but the Worst and Meanest of Barbs; which makes me Believe absolutely,
that the Best Barbs do not come Over: For, did not I see daily at Antwerp the
Horse-Coursers of Brabant and Flanders, that go into England every Year to Buy
Horses, that they bring Over the Meanest and Worst Horses and Geldings that are
in the Kingdom, and merely to Buy at Easy Rates, that they may put them Off
with Advantage? For, if they should Buy in England Horses of One Hundred, One
Hundred and Fifty, and Two Hundred Pounds a Horse, which Price has been Given
both at Malten and Pankrich Fayres, those Great Prices would not go off there,
where Money is so Scarce; and so they would be Undone; and therefore they Buy
of Small Prices.

Of The ENGLISH HORSE.
THe English Horse is Less Wise than the Barb, Fearful and Skittish, for the
most part; and Dogged and Rebellious to the Manage, and not commonly so Apt to
Learn: But those they call English Horses, are so Compounded of Horses of all
Countries, that they always Participate something of their Sires; and so, that
may somewhat alter the Case.

Certainly English Horses are the Best Horses in the whole World for All Uses
whatsoever, from the Cart to the Manage; and some are as Beautiful Horses as
can be any where, for they are Bred out of all the Horses of all Nations: But
if you would Buy for the Manage at Fayrs, you must go to Rowel Fair, Harborow
Fair, and Melton Fair, to Northampton and Leichestershire; but Northampton,
they say, is the Best.

You must Buy such Horses as they Sell, for the Cart and Coach, which are the
best for the Manage: Do not think to Buy Delicate Shapt Horses, like the
Spanish Horse, Barb, or Turk; but they are Handsomer Horses than commonly Dutch
Horses are; Choose a Short trust Horse, with Good Feet and Legs, full of Spirit
and Action, and Lively; and if he Leap of himself, so much the Better. If your
Horseman has Skill to Buy you such, they cannot do Amiss for the Manage, and
will prove most Admirable Horses, both in all Airs, and upon the Ground, but I
would not Breed of them by no Means.

At Molten Fair, for the most part, they are young Stone-Horses, and some
Geldings, but fitter for the Padd, and Hunting, than for the Manage; Rippon
Fair is but the Remnant of Molten Fair, and commonly but Geldings and Naggs;
those Fayrs are in Yorkshire; Lenton Fair is in Nottingham-shire, and is a
great Fair of all Sorts of Horses, but especially Geldings and Naggs, Fitter
for the Padd, and Galloping, than for the Manage; you may also find some
Stone-Horses there.

In Staffordshire there is a great Fair at Pankridge; but it is, for the most
part, of Colts, and Young-Horses, though sometimes (by Chance) there are also
Others. The other Fayrs in the Northern Parts, which are many, are not Worth
naming.

I am very Ignorant of the West-Country, where my Lord Pauletts Ancestors had a
good Breed of Horses; and by Chance, now and then my Lord of Pembroke did
Breed, but I never heard of any Rare Horses of his Race.

In Worcestershire, and in the Vale of Esam, there is good Strong Cart-Horses;
in Cornwall there is good Naggs, and in Wales excellent good Ones; but in
Scotland the Gallawayes are the Best Naggs of them all.

There were, before the Wars, many good Races in England, but they are all now
Ru(...), and the many New Breeders of Horses comn up presently after the Wars,
are (I doubt) none of the Best; for, I believe, their Stallions were not very
Pure, because the Men that did Govern in Those Days, were not so Curious as
the Great Lords, and Great Gentry were Heretofore, neither would they be at the
Cost; and besides, they have not Knowledge of Horses as in other Countries:
For, though Every man Pretends to it, yet, I assure you, there are very Few
that Know Horses, as I have heard the KING say: Since whose RESTORATION, the
Probability of getting Good Breeds again, is very Great.

For English Mares, there are None like them in the World to Breed On; but then
you must Choose them fit for such Horses as you would Breed; As for Example, If
you would Breed for the Manage, the Mares must have Fine Fore-hands, but not
too Long Necks; Fine Heads, and well Hung On; and their Necks rightly Turned;
Broad Breasts, Good Eyes; and Great Bodies, that the Foles may have the more
Room to Lay their (...): They must have Good Hooffs, short and bending
Pastorns, and are to be Short from the Head to the Croup, and Stuffy. This
Shape fits the Manage Best; and if your Mares be thus Chosen, it makes no
matter what Color they are of, nor what Marks they have, nor what Tails and
Manes, so they be full of Strength, and of a superfluity of Spirit, and not
above Six or Seven Years Old. But I must Tell you, That if you had Two or Three
fine Dutch Mares, Shaped as I formerly told you, it Makes a fine Composition
with a Spanish Horse, for the Manage; and a Spanish Horse with such English
Mares as I have Told you Now, are not only for the Manage, but in a manner for
all Uses.

If you would have Mares to Breed Running-Horses of, then they must be Shaped
thus; As Leight as possible, Large and Long, but well Shaped; a Short Back, but
Long Sides, and a little Long-Legged; their Breast as Narrow as may be, for so
they will Gallop the Leighter and Nimbler, and Run the Faster; for the Leighter
and Thinner you Breed for Gallopping is the Better. Your Stallion, by any
means, must be a Barb, and somewhat of the Shape that I have Described the
Mares to be of: For a Barb that is a Jade, will Get a better Runing-Horse, than
the Best Running-Horse in England: As Sir John Fennick told me, who had more
Experience of Running-Horses than any Man in England; for he had more Rare
Running-Horses than all England besides; and the most part of all the Famous
Running-Horses in England that Ran one Against another, were of his Race and
Breed.

Some Commend the Turk very much for a Stallion to Breed Running-Horses; but
they are so Scarce, and Rare, that I can give no Judgment of them: And
therefore I Advise you to the Barb, which, I believe, is much the Better Horse
to Breed Running Horses.

Of The FRISON.
THe Frison is Less Wise than the English, but no Horse goes better in the
Manage, either upon the Ground, Terra a Terra, or in all Airs; and no Horse
is of more Use, either for a Single Combat on Horse Back, or in the Wars for
the Shock.

He is Hardy, can Live of any Thing, and will Endure either Heats or Colds; and
on no Horse whatsoever does a Man Appear more a Sword-Man, than on this Horse,
being so Quiet, so Bold, and so Assured.

He is also Manly, and Fit for Every thing but Running Away; though he will Run
fast for a while, yet, I doubt, not Long; because his Wind is not like that of
Barbs: Yet a Heavy man Well-Armed upon a Barb, and the same Weight upon a
Dutch-Horse, the Dutch Horse's Strength is so much Above the Barb's, as,
Compared thus, I believe the Dutch Horse may Run as Fast, and as Long as the
Barb; for the Barb's Wind serves to no Purpose, when his Strength is not able
to Carry his Weight: And thus the Barb will want his little Light Jockey on
him, with a couple of Trenchers for a Saddle, and Lute-Strings in his Mouth for
a Bitt.

OF THE DANEMARK and HOLLAND HORSE.
THe Denmark-Horse is an Excellent Horse, in the same Kind, and commonly Apter
to Learn, and Leighter: There are more Leaping-Horses of those Countries and
Kinds, than of any Horses in the World.

But now, to make more Profit, they Geld all in Holland, for Coaches, and to
keep the Trade, sending Five Thousand every Year into France, and diverse other
Places, that you can hardly get a Stone-Horse worth any thing; their Colts at
two Years old Springs their Mares, and then they Geld them; so, Avarice spoils
their Breed. A Town will Join, and give above Two Hundred Pounds for a
Stallion; but then he Covers all the Mares that belong to that Town, like a
Town-Bull.

OF THE ALMAIN, or GERMAN HORSE.
THose that Write, That they are like Flanders Horses, are much Deceived; they
mean the common Country Cart-Horse: But let me Inform them; there are few
Princes in Germany, but have Excellent Races, and Breeds of Horses; and their
Stallions are always either Coursers of Naples, Spanish Horses, Turks in
Abundance, and Barbs; and Breeding of these Stallions, their Mares come to be
very Fine, like their Sires, and very Pure Breeds.

I had one, no Neapolitan in the World like him, for Shape, Stature, Color,
Strength, Agility, and Good Nature; He would make Thirty two Capriols, the
Highest that ever I saw, and the Justest, without any Help in the World; and
then upon the Ground, to Gallop and Change, and go Terra a Terra, it was
another Action than ever any other Horse did, being in some Manner above the
Rate of Horse-Kind: This was a German Horse, but his Sire was a Courser of
Naples.

I had once two Horses of the Count of Oldenburg's most Excellent Breed, as
Fine Horses as ever I saw, and One was the Hopefullest that could be seen. That
Prince was Pleased to Present those Horses to me, and said, If I Liked them
not, he would send me Others; which was like a Prince, and most Generous. The
Prince of West-Friesland did also Send me a very Fine Horse.

Of The COVRSER of NAPLES.
I Have not seen Many of them; but, La Broue, in his Book, says, That the Race
was mightily Decayed; and that was almost a Hundred Years ago: And Pluvinel, in
his Book, says also, That we have not now such Neapolitans as we have had; for
all the Races are Bastarded, and Spoiled.

The Archduke Leopold, when he Governed the Countries of Flanders, Brabant,
etc. sent into Italy for Eight or Ten Coursers whilst I was at Antwerp, which
Cost him above Three Hundred Pounds a Horse, Journey and all. They were Great
vast Horses, with Huge Heads, and Thick Necks; Heavy, with no Spirit in the
World, nor any Strength; Dull heavy Jades, fitter for a Brewers-Cart than the
Saddle: And the Marquess De Carasene, a Spaniard, that Governs all those
Countries, a little Man, but both Witty, and Wise; an Excellent Soldier, both
for Conduct and Courage, and a Good Horseman (which Few Spaniards are) and my
very Noble Friend, told me, That the last Wars in Naples has Ruined the King
of Spain's Race of Horses in that Kingdom; but that they Began now to Repair
it, and that he Hoped within Fourteen Years it may be Established as formerly
it has been.

Thus you see Things do not Stand at a Stay: for what has been Formerly, is
not so now; as in the Neapolitan, and in all the rest of the Races of Italy,
which are Decayed. The Duke of Florence has the Best Race at this Time in
those Parts.

OF THE TVRKISH HORSE.
I Have seen very Few of them; but, Two Merchants brought Three Turkish Horses
to Antwerp, very Fine Horses, but Oddly Shaped; their Heads were very Fine, but
like a Camels Head: They had Excellent Eyes, and Thin Necks, excellently Risen;
somewhat great Bodies; the Croup like a Mules; Legs not Great, but mavelous
Sinewy; good Pastorns, and good Hooffs; and their Backs risen somewhat like a
Camel.

I had a Groom, a Heavy English Clown, whom I set Upon them, and they made no
more of him, than if he had been as Leight as a Feather.

They appeared not so Fit for the Manage, as for to Run a Course, which, I
believe, they would have Scoured; they Trotted very Well, and no Ambling at all.

The Horses about Constantinople, Mr. Blundevil says, Are very
ill-favoured-Jades; but he was mightily Deceived with his Old Authors: For, I
have Spoken with many Gentlemen that have been There, as likewise with diverse
Merchants that came from Thence; who all Agree, That there are There, the most
Beautifull-Horses in the World; saying, That in Soyl-Time, there are many
Hundred Teddered, and so Shift Places when they have Eaten that Bare: Every
Horse has a Man to Look to him, and every Man a little Tent to Lie in; and
they say, That it is one of the most Glorious Sights to see those Horses that
can be; and the most Beautiful Horses in the World. And certainly they are
Brave Horses!

The Price of One of these Horses, is about a Hundred, or a Hundred and Fifty
Pounds a Horse; and there is great Difficulty to get a Pass; for the Grand
Signor is very Strict, in not Suffering any of his Horses to Go out of his
Territories.

When that Difficulty is Over; there is Another; which is, If you have not a
Turk or Two, for your Convoy, they will be Taken from you by the Way: There is
also the Difficulty of a Long Journey, and the Danger of Sickness, or Laming;
For, you must come Through Germany, which is a Long Way; and you must have very
Careful Men to Conduct them, a good Groom, an Expert Farrier; and by no Means,
to suffer any to Shoo them but Him; for when they perceive there is a Fine
Horse, they will Hire a Farrier to Prick him, or Spoil him, that they may have
him: Which is Practiced daily.

OF THE ARABIAN HORSE.
HE is Nursed with Camels-Milk; there are the strangest Reports in the World of
those Horses; for I have been Told by many Gentlemen of Credit, and by
Many-many Merchants, That the Price of Right Arabians is, One Thousand, Two
Thousand, and Three Thousand Pounds a Horse, (an Intolerable, and an
Incredible Price) and that the Arabs are as Careful, and Diligent, in Keeping
the Genealogies of their Horses, as any Princes can be in Keeping any of their
own Pedigrees.

They Keep the Genealogies of their Horses with Medalls; And when any of their
Sons come to be Men, then their Fathers give them Two Suits of Arms with Two
Cymeters, and one of these Horses, and Prays to God to Bless them; That is
every ones Portion, and his Horse Lies always in the Next Room to him, (I
believe, not Above Stairs). They Talk, they will Ride Fourscore Miles in a
Day, and never Draw the Bridle: When I was Young, I could have Bought a Nagg
for Ten Pound, that would have done as much very Easily.

I never saw any but one of These Horses, which Mr. John Markham, a Merchant,
brought Over, and said, He was a Right Arabian: He was a Bay, but a Little
Horse, and no Rarity for Shape; for I have seen Many English Horses far Finer.
Mr. Markham Sold him to KING JAMES for Five Hundred Pounds; and being Trained
up for a Course, when he came to Run, every Horse Beat him.

OF THE HVNGARIAN HORSE.
THey are not Worth speaking of; but if you will Believe those of that Nation,
they will Magnify them Extremely; and so will all Nations whatsoever Mightily
Commend their Own Horses: But I have Seen Hungarian Horses, and They are not
worth Commendations, I assure You.

OF THE POLANDER HORSE.
WHen the King of Poland Sent an Extraordinary Ambassador, with Many of his
Nobility and Gentry of Poland, to Conduct the Princess Mary, Eldest Daughter to
the Duke of Nevers, from Paris, to Poland to be his Queen, I was then at Paris,
and Saw his Entry; which was one of the most Glorious, and Manly Sights that
Ever I saw, after the Polack Way, with very Rich Clothes, Polack Capps, and
great Feathers; and all the Masters of Academies were Commanded to Wait on the
Ambassador, with All their Scholars, and Horses, in their Rich Clothes and
Saddles, all A la Mode, their Manes full of Ribbons.

I Protest, in Comparison of the Polacks, they Looked like Hobby-horses; not but
that their Horses were Better; the Difference was merely in the Manly Habit of
the Polanders, who were also very Rich.

But their Horses I do not like at all; for they are, for their Shape, just as
the common and ordinary Horses and Geldings in England; and the Bitts they Use,
are just like our Snaffles, and have only Rings for the Bridle to be Fastened
to, as Ours are, wanting those little Crosses that ours have: But if you will
Believe the Polanders, they will tell you, That their Horses are the Bravest
Horses in the World, which I have not Faith to Believe: For, when we say, (and
it has been an Old Saying) That the Poland Horse is the Best Horse in the
World; we mean the Men to Fight on Horseback, and not the Horses.

OF THE SWEDISH HORSE.
I Had the Honor to Wait on the Queen of Sweden when she was at Antwerp, and
she used me very Graciously, and Civilly; and an Extraordinary Lady, I assure
you, she is in All things: But for the Swedish Horses she had for the Saddle,
there was no Great Matter in Them; She had Eight Coach-Horses, large and
noble-Shap't, of the Count of Oldenburg's Breed, which were Beyond any Coursers
that ever yet I saw: their Colors Isabels, with long White Manes, Tails and
Toppings; and these she sent into Spain, for a Present to the Catholic King:
And it was a Kingly Present, fit for such a Queen to Present, and for so Great
a King to Receive.

OF WHAT STATURE A Horse is Best, EITHER FOR The WAR, or for a SINGLE-COMBAT,
OR FOR ANY THING ELSE.
THere are Great Disputes amongst Cavaliers about this Business: I will not
trouble you much about their Arguments, but only Deliver unto you my Opinion.
Those that are for High and Large Horses, say, They are Strong for the Shock:
But they must Know, that all Large Horses are not Strong; nay, for the most
part they are not only the Weakest Horses, but commonly of no Spirit or Action.

Put the Case, a Great Horse were Strong, yet he is so Tall, and his Strength
Diffused, and indeed so out of his Strength, that a Midling Horse ( Enter deux
selles) or rather a Less Horse, being Under him, and in his Strength, would
certainly Overthrow him: So that a Midling Horse, or a Less, is Best for the
War, or a Single-Combat, without all Doubt.

Midling-Horses, and Less Horses have, for the most part, both Strength,
Spirit, and Agility, and not one in an Hundred but proves Well; when of Large
Horses not one in a Thousand does: Nay, the Midling, or Less Horse, is Best for
All Things; for the Padd, Buck-Hunting, Hawking-Naggs, or Geldings; for
Hunting-Horses, Horses for Winter-Gallopping on the Highway many Miles; for
the Coach, for the Cart, for Any Thing. And if they should Fall, a Little Horse
would do the Rider Less Hurt than a Greater Horse, to Lie upon him. Geldings,
and Gelt-Naggs, are fitter for Great Journeys, or Hunting, or Hawking in
Summer, than Stoned Horses; for their Heat, with the Heat of the Weather, soon
Heats their Feet, and Founders them; whereas Geldings are Colder, and so Travel
Better, and not Tire so soon in the Heat of Summer.

THAT THERE ARE FEW GOOD HORSES.
NOw I must Tell you, That there are Good and Badd Horses of all Countries in
the World; but there are more Badd than Good, as there are of Men: And though
there be Millions of Painters, yet there was but one Vandike in many Ages, or,
I believe, shall be: The like in Music, in Horse-manship, in Weapons, and in
Horses; for a Rare Horse in any Kind, is a Difficult business to find, I assure
you: It is a Hard thing to find Fit Horses for the Manage, either upon the
Ground, or in Airs. It is true, Art does much, but Nature is the Ground for
Art to Work on; for, without it, Art can do but Little.

I dare Undertake to Make a Cow go Just in the Manage, but when I have Done
that, it is but a Cow: And so a Jade that is Dressed, he is but a Jade when you
have done all you Can.

I assure you, it is a very Hard thing to find a Good Padd-Nagg, or a Good
Padd-Gelding, to Amble finely upon the Hanches, and from his Amble to his
Gallop, or from his Amble to his Trot, and firm on the Hand: Upon the Bitt I
have seen very Few worth any thing, and as few Good Buck-Hunters, or
Hawking-Naggs, or Winter Hunting-Geldings, or Horses to Gallop or Run surely
upon All Grounds, Plowed Lands, Moors, Parks, Forests, and every where, with a
Snaffle, and a Scotch Saddle, the Rains slack in his Neck, which makes him very
much the Safer for his Rider, because he Gallops upon the Hanches.

Let me Tell you, That Running-Horses are the most Easily found, and of the
least Use; commonly they Run upon Heaths, (a Green Carpet) and must there Run
all-upon the Shoulders, which in Troublesome Grounds is ready to Break ones
Neck, and of no Use; Though I Love the Sport of a Running-Horse very Well, and
think I am as Good a Jockey as any, and have Ridden many Hundred Matches, and
Seen the Best Jockeys, and Studied it more than, I think, they have Done.

You see how Difficult a thing it is to Have a Good Horse in any Kind, for Any
thing: Therefore I conclude, That a Knowing Horseman is not so Happy for
Horses, as a Citizen of London, that knows Nothing, more Than to Buy a Horse in
Smithfield, for Eight Pound Ten Shillings, or there-abouts, to Carry him to
Nottingham, or to Salisbury; and let him have never so many Faults, his
Ignorance finds none: Wherein he is very Happy.

MORE OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING HORSES.
THe Turks are the most Curious in Keeping their Horses of any Nation; and
Value them, and Esteem them most: They have all the Ways of Dressing them, and
keeping them Clean, that can be Imagined. They Cloth them first with a Fine
Linen Cloth and Hood next their Skin; then with a Hair-Cloth and Hood, Lined
with Felt, over their Linen Cloth and Hood: And all these are made so Fit, as
to Cover their Breasts, and to come pretty low down to their Legs. There
cannot be a Better Way than this for their Clothing.

The Spaniards are also very Curious about their Horses in all things; and
their Grooms so Diligent, as they never Stay long Out of the Stable, but are
Always doing something about them; and especially are Curious about their
Manes, Toppings, and Tails, making them Clean diverse Ways; Washing them, and
Pleating them. They esteem Highly their Horses, and no Nation Loves them
Better. The Master is Continually in the Stable, to see the Grooms do their
Duty; but, for all that, the Spaniards and the Turks are none of the Best
Horsemen; they Ride Short, have Strange Spurrs, and Saddles, especially Bitts,
which are most Abominable.

The Italians are very Careful and Neat about their Horses; but they have of
late Lost their Latin in Riding, or else they never Had it; and our Ignorance
made us Think they did Rarely.

Some of the French are Curious in Keeping and Dressing their Horses; but, for
the most part, Not: They highly Esteem Horses, and will give great Prices for
them. But French Grooms never Rub a Horses Legs well.

The Almains, or High-Germans, Love Horses well: Some say, They are very
Curious, but Methinks not. They Commend their Grooms Extremely, but I think
they do not Deserve it. Certainly the Best Grooms are English Grooms; but no
Grooms are Good, Except the Master looks strictly after them; for, The Masters
Eye makes the Horse well Dressed, as according to the Proverb, The Master's Eye
makes the Horse Fat.

Denmark, Swede, Poland, Transylvania, Hungary, and all those Countries, are
much like the Almains, for Little Curiosities, in Keeping and Dressing their
Horses; and all their Riding alike: No man in Germany will Ride without a
Cavazone, though he Knows not the Use of it at all, nor what to do with it. In
Flanders, Brabant, and those Parts; as also in Holland, and those Parts, they
are much like the Germans.

The Emperor of Muscovy, I have Heard, has a Stable of Horses, and a French
Rider: He has some Horses come out of Tartaria, and Turkey, but none Good in
his own Country. A Rider is of no great Use there, except he could Dress, and
make a Ready Bear; of which there is Plenty, and they have Noble Races of those
Beasts.

In the Mogul's Country there is nothing to Dress, except you would Dress
Elephants; and the Best Horses they have, come out of Persia.

Sir Walter Rawley told me, That in the West Indies there were the Finest
Shaped Horses, and the Finest Colors in the World, beyond all Spanish Horses
and Barbs that ever he saw; and they knew there so Little the Use of Horses,
that they Killed them for their Skins.

In Denmark there are Excellent good Horses; and in Norway little Strong
Horses, but not so Purely Shaped. I saw Six Norway Horses in a Coach, very
little Horses, Isabells, with White Manes, and White Tayls; some of their Heads
are a little too Bigg; but very Fine little Horses, and Strong.

For Iseland Horses, they are all Curlled like their Dogs, and so Curled, that
no Curry-Comb can Dress them, nor any thing Else: And they are but Dull Jades.

WHAT STALLION Is Best for the MANAGE, The Ordering of him before he Mounts
the Mares, What Kind of Mares, When, and How, they should be put Together for
GENERATION.
THe Best Stallion in Our Island, is, A Well-Shapt Spanish Horse, with a
Superfluity of Spirit, and Strength, Docil, and of an Excellent Disposition,
and good Nature, which is the Chief thing in a Stallion; for if he be of an ill
Disposition, Vicious, or Melancholy, all his Offsprings will Participate of
it, and will Never be Dressed, or made Perfect Horses as they should Be.

He Ought to be of a Good Color, to give the Race a good Dye; and Well-Markt,
to Agree with most Men's Opinions: Though Marks and Colors be Nothing at all to
Know the Goodness of a Horse, nor Shape neither; but, the Abundance of Spirits,
and a Strong Chine, be the most Considerable: Yet, by any Means, I would have
him Perfectly Shaped, for the Beautifying of your Race; for a Handsome Horse
may be as Good as an Ill-favored Horse; and an Ill-favored Horse as Good, as
a Handsome Horse.

I would have you Feed him four or five Months before he Covers, with Good
Oats, Pease, and Hull'd Beans, (and Bread if you think Good) with Sweet Hay,
and good Wheat-Straw, and some Barley now and then for Variety; and Ride him
out to be Watered every day Twice, and keep him Out some Little time, only to
Walk him; but not too Long, for that will Weaken him too much.

Why not Breed of a Neapolitan? They are too Gross Horses; and we Breed too
Bigg Horses in England, by reason of the Moisture both of Air and Ground.

Why not Breed of a Barb? They are too Slender, and too Lady-like, for the
Manage, though themselves the Best in the World for it; but their Offspring,
are commonly Loose and Weak Horses, fitter for Running-Horses, than the
Manage; so the Spanish Horse is in the Middle, (where Virtue lies) neither too
Gross, nor too Slender, and the finest Shaped Horse in the World: And
therefore, Have no other Stallion.

The fittest Mares for the Manage, must be Short from the Head to the Croup;
Curious Forehands, but not too Long; Fine Heads, and well Hung on; Good Bodies,
Short rather than Long; Short and good Legs; Short Pastorns, and Bending; Good
Feet, short Backs, full of Spirits, and Strength; and good Natures.

No where Better Mares than in England, if they be Well Chosen. Yet, I must
Tell you, I could Wish you to have a Couple of fine Shaped little Dutch Mares,
which is a fine Composition, with a Spanish Horse, for the Manage.

For their Colors; Let them be such as most Men Like; though I value not that
at all.

Their Age; five, six, or seven Years Old; and the Stallion not to be too Old,
except necessity otherwise force you.

The time of the Year; in May, about the Middle of that Month, that the Foles
may Fall in April, because else they will have no Grass.

Put the Stallion to the Mares, thus: Take off his Hinder Shoes, and bring him
Near where the Mares are, and there let him Cover a Mare in Hand Twice, which
will make him Wise; and instantly Pull off his Bridle, and put him to the
Mares: Which Mares must all be put in a Convenient Closse, that may Feed them
Well for six Weeks at least.

Put those Mares that have Newly Foled, and those that are With Fool, and those
that are Barren, all to him; for there is no Danger in it. This Way is so
Natural, as they are all Served in their Height of Pride; for, the Horse never
Mounts them until they Woo him to it Extremely.

When he has Covered them All, then he Tryes them all Over again, and those
that will Take the Horse, he Covers them; and those that will Not, he lets them
Alone: And when he Knows he has Finished his Work, he Beats the Pale to be
gone, which is Time for him; then you must take him Up, and you shall find him
Lean enough, nothing but Skin and Bones, and his Mane and Tail will Moot Off:
If you give him too many Mares, then he will Serve you the Less time; be so
Lean and Weak, that you will very hardly Recover him against the next Year, or
Covering-time. Therefore ten or twelve Mares is Enough.

I had Forgot to Tell you, That you must have a Little House with a Manger, to
Feed him with Corn, and Bread, during the Covering-time, to Defend him from the
Heat of the Sun, and Rain, which would much Infeeble him: And you must have a
Man always to Attend him and the Mares; and for that Purpose he must have a
Little Hutt built, to be there Day and Night; not only to Tell you how they are
Served, but that no other Horse comes to the Mares, or other Mares put to the
Horse; and for many other Accidents wherewith he is to Acquaint you. And when
you have taken Up the Stallion, then Remove the Mares into a good and fresh
Pasture.

This is the True Way for Covering the Mares; for, Nature is Wiser than Art in
the Act of Generation; and by this Way, I dare say, there shall not, of a Dozen
Mares, Two fail.

I must Tell you, That you must Never have a Stallion of your Own Breed,
because they are too Far removed from the Purity, and Head, of the Fountain,
which is a Pure Spanish Horse: Besides, should the Stallions be of your Own
Breed, in Three or Four Generations they would come to be Cart-Horses; so
Gross, and Ill-favored would they be: or at least, just such Horses as are
Bred in that Country, so soon will they Degenerate: Therefore, have still a
fresh Spanish Horse for the Stallion.

But you cannot Breed Better, than to Breed of your Own Mares that you have
Bred; and let their Fathers Cover them; for there is no Incests in Horses: And
thus they are Nearer, by a Degree, to the Purity, since a fine Horse Got them,
and the same fine Horse Covers them again.

If any Man will Dispute against this Truth, (if he be not Obstinate in his
Errors) let him Read my First Book of Horse-manship in French, where I Treat
of Breeding; and there are Reasons that may Convert him, if he considers my
Great Experience.

FOR The Housing, Feeding, and Ordering of COLTS.
YOu must Wean the Foles, and Take them from their Damms, when Cold Weather
comes in, which is about Martlemas; and have a Convenient House to Put them in,
with a Low Rack and Manger fit for them: For the first Year, put the
Horse-Colts, and Fillies, all together; and have always good and fresh Litter
for them, good Sweet Hay, and Wheat-Bran, and good Oats; the Wheat-Bran makes
them Drink Well, and gives them good Bodies.

In a Fair Day, let them now and then go Out in some Enclosed Yard, to Play,
and Rejoice themselves; and then put them Up again carefully, that they be not
Hurt.

The next Summer, when Grass is Plentiful, put them Out in some Dry Ground,
where the Grass is Short, and Sweet; for if a Colt fills his Belly, once in
Twenty Four Hours, it is Sufficient; and good Water they must have. The Colts
must be by themselves, and the Fillies by themselves, Separated.

The next Winter, at Martlemas, then take Up again the Colts, bring them into
the Stable, and Use them, in all Kinds, like the Older Horses; doing the same
Thing every Summer, and every Winter, until the Colts be Three Years old, and
Vantage; and then take them Up for altogether, and Back them. Yearings must be
Abroad together; so Two-Years-old together, and Three-Years old together; for
thus they will Agree best: as we see that Little young Boys, and Greater old
Boys, never Agree, or Play well together.

The Fillies you may Better put Together; Yearings, and Two-Years-old, and
Three. But I would wish you to take Up the Filleys at Two Years old, and
Vantage; then Back them, and make them Gentle, and then Cover them at Three
Years old: For, being thus Gentle, they will Never spoil Themselves, nor their
Foles; and if They, or their Foles, be Sick, or Hurt, you may Easily take them
Up for the Farrier to use his Skill to Recover them.

But, Why this Housing every Winter? You must know, There is nothing indures
Cold worse than Horse-kind. For Example; Is there any Thing in the World Looks
so like a Bear, and so Ill-favouredly, as a Colt in Winter upon a Common, and
stands as if he had neither Life, nor Spirit? and certainly, Warmth, and Dry
Feeding, is the Quintessence, and greatest Secret in the World for Breeding. To
Prove it; The Spanish Horse, that is so Fine, is Bred in Spain, a Hot Country,
and has Dry Feeding; for there is not much Grass in many Places. Barbery is
very Hot, and little Grass. Turkey is very Hot, and Dry Grounds. Naples is very
Hot, Mountainous, and Dry; and in all those Countries, the Horses are Purely
Shaped, with Heat, and Dry Feeding: Therefore you must Help it, as well as you
Can, in Cold Countries; which is Done with Housing, and Dry Feeding. To Prove
it, Take the Finest Shaped Spanish Horse you can, and let him Cover Two Mares,
of Equal Beauty; and if they have Two Horse-Colts, let One run Abroad, until he
be Three Years and a Half old, and let the Other be Housed every Winter; and
Fed, as I have Told you. That Colt that has gone Abroad Three Years and a
Half, shall have a great Fleshy-Head, and Thick and Full Neckt; Fleshy
Shoulders; Flabby and Gowty Legs; Weak Pastorns, and ill Hooffs; and shall be a
Dull, Weak, Fleshy Jade, by Reason of the Humidity of our Country, both Above
and Underneath: when the Colt that is Housed every Winter, that is Kept Warm,
and Lies Dry, and is Dry Fed, shall have as Fine a Forehand, as Sinewy-Leggs,
as good Hooffs, Spirit and Strength, and in all things will be as purely
Shaped, as any Spanish Horse can be.

So you see, That to have the Finest Stallion, and the Beautifullest Mares, is
Nothing, if you do not Order them as I have told you. (See Dutch Horses, how
Gross they are, being Bred in Cold Countries.) This is a great Secret for
Breeding, believe me, that have Tried all Manner of Ways; and according to my
great Experience, there is Nothing but This.

FOR THE BACKING OF A COLT.
IF you have used the Method of Housing your Colts every Winter; and, after the
First Winter, used them in the Stable, as you do any other Horse; and that they
will Lead, and be as Quiet as any Horse: You need not Fear their Plunging, and
Leaping, nor a Hundred Extravagancies more; Neither need you Tyer him in a
Bogg, or a Deep Plow'd-Field, to take Off his Spirit, to Break his Heart, or at
least, his Wind, before you dare get Upon him. For, being Ordered as I have
formerly Told you, you may Safely Back Him, and find him as Quiet as a Lamb,
and never Drive him into Faint-Sweats, which will bring many Diseases upon him.

You need not then a Cavezone of Cord, which Mr. Blundevil calls a Head-Strain;
nor a Padd of Straw; but such a Saddle as you ordinarily Ride Horses of Manage
in, with Stirrups; and on his Nose, an ordinary Cavezone, as you Ride other
Horses with; but it must be well Lined with double Leather, as the Rest are:
and if you will, you may put a Watering-Bitt in his Mouth, without Rains on,
only the Headstal, and this but for a few Days; and then to put such a Bitt as
I would always Ride him withal, of which we shall Speak hereafter, and so give
him the Lessons, which you shall have Perfectly set down in the Second Book.

But if you light on an Older Colt, and Unruly, then put him to the Single
Pillar, and Trot him, and Gallop him on both Hands, until he be very Quiet, and
will Peaceably suffer you to Take his Back; which he will not Fail to do within
four or five Days at the most, if you Use this Method: And I do not know, that
the Single Pillar, the Old way, is good for any thing, but this. At first you
must Ride your Colt without Spurrs. And thus much for Backing of Colts.

OF THE SPANISH MVLES.
I Have seen the Finest Shaped of them in the World; the Finest Shaped Heads,
and the Best set On; the Finest Turned Necks, and the Thinnest, and Well Risen;
Excellent Backs, good Bodies; their Legs Clean, and Sinewy; Admirable Hooffs;
their Croups a little Slender: And in a Word, No Horse in the world Finer
Shaped, and only their Ears are a Little Long, which, methinks, is a Grace to
them. They are of all Colors, as Bays, Dapple-Grayes, and so forth. Extremely
Strong, as Strong as Two Horses; very Large, some as Large as any Horse
whatsoever, and of great Prices; as three, and four Hundred Pistols a Mule. The
King of Spain has Beautiful, and Large ones in his Coach; they Use them very
much for the Saddle; for they Amble most Curiously, and Easily; they seldom
Stumble, but when they Do, they never Fall further than their Knees.

They are very Safe and Sure to Ride on; there be some very Little ones, and
Fine ones, like Gallowayes; and those Commonly great Generals, and Commanders,
Ride on in the Trenches, and about Fortified Castles, to View them: The Grosser
sort they Use for Sumpters, Wagons, and Carriers for many things. They also
Ride Post on them; and Don John de Borge, who was Governor at Antwerp, told
me, That they would Amble as fast as Any Horse could Gallop.

They Live Long, and Sound, Thirty Years at least: There are Males and Females
of them, and very Hot they are in the Act of Generation, but never produce any
thing, with any thing; either to Get, or Bring Forth.

They say, One is never assured of them from Biting or Striking though the
Groom has kept them Twenty Years; But I perceive no such Thing in them: And I
have seen a Mule go in Capriols, excellently well. They say, They have Ill
Mouths; but that is because they Spoil them with Horrible Bitts: For they use
both Other Bitts, and other Saddles and Furniture to them, than to Horses;
wherein they are very much Mistaken. To those that are for the Saddle, I would
use the very same Bitts and Saddles, as for Horses, and no otherwise. It Is
true, that for Sumpters, there be Proper things that they use for Them only,
and not for Horses, which is very Comely. And in Spain, they use in their
Coaches, Ropes for the Mules (and the Horses also) to Draw the Coaches withal.
They are Excellent to Ride on in Stoney-Wayes, none like them; they are so Sure
of Foot.

The Stallions that Get these Mules, are Asses, upon very Fine Spanish Mares.

Sir Benjamin Wright, being a Merchant at Madrid, Writ to me once, That a
Stallion Ass would Cost, at the least, Two Hundred and Fifty Pistols; but
others Tell me of Greater Prices that They are at: and great Reason, since
Mules are of so great Use to them in Spain.

My Lord Cottington told me, That the Asses in Spain, are Greater and Larger
Beasts, than ever he saw of Horses in all his Life, and almost of Any other
Beast; and are so Furious, and full of Spirit, That there is Men, that Live
only by the Ordering of them, and no Other Men can do it, but those men which
make a Trade of it; for Others would be Killed by them. And These Men Hood the
Asses when they Cover any Mares, that they may not See them; for otherwise they
would Pull the Mares in Pieces, and Kill them. When they Bray, it is a most
Loud and Horrid Noise, beyond any Lion in the world.

Now you see, There is great Reason, why they should be of Great Prices; but
one that Thinks they should be just such Little dull Asses as are in England,
of Twenty or Thirty Shillings a Piece, would Laugh to hear this Tale told;
Because they think there is Nothing more in the World than they have seen: As
in such a case, Sir Walter Rawley said well, That there are Stranger Things in
the World, than between Stains and London. The Asses in France, are just like
the Asses in England; Little, Lazy, Dull, and Woeful things, and of as Small
Price; only in those Parts of France that are next Spain, there the Asses are
Large, but nothing in Comparison of those in Spain.

The Shee-Asses in Spain, are very Fair, and Large; For else, How can you
Imagine such huge, large, and great Puissant Beasts should be Produced?

THAT TRYING Is the Only Way to KNOW HORSES.
I Told you, That Marks, Colors, and Elements, are Nothing at all to Know a
Horse by; for they are but Philosophical Mountebanks that Talk of such Toys.
Nay, Shape is nothing to Know the Goodness of a Horse; and therefore the best
Philosophy is to Try him: And you may be Deceived then, if he be a Young Horse;
for Colts alter extremely, both in Spirit and Strength. What Judgment can one
give of a Little Boy, what Kind of Man he will Prove? No more can one give a
Judgment of a Colt, what Kind of Horse he will Prove. But still Ride him, and
Try him; and that is the Best Philosophy to Know him by.

Some say, If a Horse have a Great Head, a Thick Neck, and Fleshy Shoulders,
that he is Hard on the Hand: You must Know, That if he have any Imperfection in
his Legs or Feet, but especial Before, the Horse must be Hard on the Hand;
for he Leans on the Hand, to Ease the Grief of his Legs, as a Gowty-Man does
Use his Staff. And let him be finely- Shaped, or ill- Shaped, if he have any
Imperfection in his Legs, he must be Hard on the Hand; and then the Farrier
must Cure him, and not the Horseman; for the Art of Riding will not make a
Lame Horse Sound.

Our Great Masters, and Best Authors, say, That when a Horse is Sound, if he
have a Great Head, Thick Neck, and Fleshy Shoulders; that then, of Necessity,
this Horse must be Hard on Hand; and give many Rare Lessons, as they Think, to
make him Leight on the Hand: And they also say, That a Horse that has a fine
Thin Forehand, must be Leight on the Hand, wherein they are Infinitely
Deceived; for I have Known more Thick Heads, Necks, and Shoulders, Leight on
the Hand, than I have Known fine Shaped, and Slender Forehands. But it is
neither the One, nor the Other, that makes it, but merely the Strength of his
Chine. For, if a Horse, that has a Great Head, Thick Neck, and Fleshy
Shoulders, has a Good Chine, he will be Leight on the Hand; and if he have a
Weak Chine, he will be Hard on the Hand. And so a Fine Forehand, if he have a
Weak Chine, he is Hard on the Hand; and if he have a Strong Chine, he is Leight
on the Hand: So it is, not having a Gross, or a Fine Forehand, that makes him
Hard or Leight, on the Hand; but all Consists in the Strength of his Chine.

The Reason of that, is, Because if he has a Strong Back, he can Suffer
without Grief or Pain, to be put upon the Hanches: And no Horse is upon the
Hanches, but he is Leight on the Hand; and if his Chine be Weak, the putting
him upon the Hanches, does so Pinch him, as he Presses upon his Foreparts to
save the Pain on his Back; and sometimes will Run away, rather than to Suffer
it; and will Leap, rather than to be Pincht of his Weak Back: and yet I must
Tell you, The Strongest Horses are not Fittest, or Properest, for the Manage,
nor for a Soldiers Horse; for you must Gallop him an Hour before you can take
him Off his Fury; and such Counter-times of Leaps, do In-commode the Rider, to
no Purpose: And when you would make him Go, he shall not Go so Well, as a Horse
of Half his Strength: and though he Leaps in such a Manner, that will Disorder
an Armed-Man; yet the Best Horseman in the World shall not make him a
Leaping-Horse: Therefore the Best for the Manage, and the War, is a Horse that
has so much Strength as to Endure a Stopp, and no more, to make him Easy for
an Armed-Man. And Certainly a Weak Horse with Spirit, Docil, and of a Good
Disposition, is much Better, and will go Beyond a huge Flanders Horse, of a
Dutch Brewer, that has no Spirit: And I must Tell you, That the Greatest and
Largest Horses are not commonly the Strongest, but for the most part the
Contrary; for that which makes them Draw, is their Weight, and not their
Strength, nor their Spirit; for they have none. I dare say, I can take a little
English Cart-Horse, that shall Draw Twice as much as their Great Flanders
Horses: Commonly those they Use in Flanders are Geldings.

HOW TO KNOW the AGE OF A HORSE.
MR. Blundevil says, Some seek to Know a Horses Age in this Sort: They Pull
his Skin with their Hand from his Flesh, holding it so a Pretty while together,
and then let it Go Again, Marking whether the Skin Returns immediately to his
Place, or not, without leaving any Sign or Wrinckle where it was Touched: And
then they Judge the Horse to be Young. But if the Skin will not Fall down
quickly again of its own accord, they take him to be Old, and to lack that
Natural Heat, and Warm Blood, which should Nourish his Outward Parts. These are
the very Words of Mr. Blundevil.

Let us see the Probability of it, and the Certainty of the Rule, in a Horse
whose Mark is Out of his Mouth; for many Horses that are many Years Older, if
they be Healthful, and Sound, and in good Case, Wanton, and full of Blood,
their Skin will Return to the same Place again Presently, when a Younger Horse
by many Years, that is Sickly, Lean, and Faint, his Skin will not Return so
soon; and then your Old Observation Deceives you, and is a great Folly. And
when he will Know a Horses Age by his Tail, he begins at the Wrong end; which
is most Ridiculous.

Mr. Blundevil says also, That when a Horse Waxes Old, his Temples will wax
Hollow, and the Hair of his Brows Hoar and White, etc. This is, for the most
part, somewhat Probable. But yet I have Known a young Fellow of Seventeen all
Gray; Why may it not be so in Horses? Nay, I have Known some so. But though I
Grant, That Gray Hairs shows Age, for the most part; yet, I believe, you do
not know How Old a Horse is for all that Observation, but only in general, That
he is Old.

So that there is no Sure way to Know his Age, but by his Teeth; and that is a
certain Rule, but Lasts no longer than Seven years Old. Captain Mazine says,
That a Horses Years may be Known until he is Fourteen, by his Upper Teeth; but,
because it does not Hold in all Horses, I forbear to Write it. There is some
Difference between Horses and Mares, to Know their Age.

For any Man that would have a Horse of Use in his ordinary Occasions; as for
Journeys, Hawking, or Hunting; I would never Buy a Horse until the Mark be Out
of his Mouth; and if he be Sound of Wind, Limb, and Sight, he will last you
Eight or Nine Years with good Keeping, and never Fail you; when a Young Horse
will have many Diseases, as Children have, and you must leave him with your
Host at Harborow, or Northampton, or some Inn, and Hire another Horse for your
Occasion, and have your Host's Bill, and the Farriers, which will come to more
than your Horse is Worth; and there is your Young Horse; but your Old Horse
shall never Fail you. I am always ready to Buy for such Purposes, an Old Nagg
of some Hunts-Man, or Falconer, that is Sound, and that is the Useful Nagg; for
he Gallops on all Grounds, Leaps over Ditches, and Hedges; and this will not
Fail you in your Journey, nor any where; and is the only Nagg of Use, for
Pleasure, or Journey, but not for a Soldiers Horse, nor the Manage: For every
Horse must be Appropriated in his Kind, and put to what he is Fittest.

WHAT EQUIPAGE IS PROPER for the HORSE, AND MOST COMMODIOUS for the HORSEMAN
Before the Horse is MOVNTED.
FOr the Saddle, Bitt, Cavezone, Stirrups, and Spurrs, in my first Book of
Horse-manship you shall see the Figures of all These, most Lively Represented.

For the Girthes, I must Advise you to have one Girth as Broad as two, only at
each End separated, as if they were Two, though it is but one Girth; and an
Italian Surcingle over them; which is so excellent a thing, that if the Girths,
or Straps, should Break, yet the Surcingle will not fail to Hold.

You must fit your Horse with a Bitt proper for him; that is, a Cannon, or a
Scatch, A la Pignatel, and Branches A la Conestable; and the same Bitt I will
always Ride my Horse with I give him at first; for they are Ridiculous with
their Pistol Cannons, and not to fit a Horse for two Years, and then to Bitt
him up. But I will always Bitt and fit my Horse at the first, with what he
should always Wear, or such Another when that is Broke, or is worn in Pieces.

Your Horse should be Girt as Hard as you can; for the Italian says, He that
Girds well, Rides well. But a Groom may Gird well, and yet not Ride well. But
they Mean, No Man can Ride well, that does not Gird well: For, How can he Ride
well when the Saddle turns Round? Horses of Manage force the Girths much with
Violent Airs, which an Ambling Horse does not. But I must Tell you, That you
should never Gird your Horse up Hard and Straight, but just before you Ride
him; for, being Hard Girt in the Stable Long before you Ride him, I have Known
them grow very Sick. Why do they not so when they are Ridd, say you? I Will tell
you why; Because the Violence of the Exercise makes them put Out their Bodies,
and so Stretches the Girthes, and makes them Easier.

But I will Tell you a great Truth in Horses that are used to be Girt Hard:
When the Groom comes to Gird them up, the Horses will so Stretch their Bodies
and Bellies Out, with holding their Breath, that the Grooms have much ado to
Gird them: And this is Craftily done of them, that they may have Ease after
they are Girded, and then they let their Bodies Fall again. And yet, says the
Learned, Like to the Horse that has no Understanding.

Another thing I am to Advertise you of; and that is, To make the Nose-Band as
Straight as possible you can; because it Hinders him, as they say, to make
Sheeres with his Mouth, or to Gape to Disorder the Working of the Bitt, or to
Bite at the Rodd when you help him, or to Bite at your Feet. But the Nose-Band,
being very Straight, makes the Bitt lie in his due Place, and Works orderly, as
it Ought, both upon the Bars, and the Curb, and firms and settles his Head:
And I assure you, there is nothing Better than this, for many things; and
therefore I would have also the Cavezone as straight as you could, for many
Reasons; and Remember that your Cavezone be never Sharp; but always Lined with
double Leather at the least, for fear of Hurting him: Though the Old saying,
is, A Bloody Nose makes a good Mouth; I would neither Hurt his Mouth, nor his
Nose, nor any thing else about him, if I could Help it; and then I am sure he
will have a Better Mouth, when his Nose is not Hurt.

Sakers, Dockes, or Trouse Ques, (which is all one) is a great Grace for a
Leaping-Horse; for it makes him appear Plumper, and more Together, Racoursi,
and makes him appear to go Higher too; therefore I would use Sakers for all
Kinds of Leaping-Horses, whether for Croupadoes, Balotadoes, or Caprioles; but
then the Horses Tails must be Tied short Up, upon the Saker.

For Horses that go the Manage de Soldat, Terra a Terra, in Corvets, or
Demy-Ayres, there is nothing Handsomer, than to see a Horse with a good Tail
Down, without any thing; no Quinsel, or any thing, but Naturally; and to see
him Lay his Tail on the Ground, is Graceful, and shows that he Goes upon the
Hanches; which is the Perfection of the Manage.

To Beautify their Manes before great Princes, or Persons of Quality, there is
nothing more Graceful, than to Tie their Manes with several Colored Ribbons,
or all of One Color, in many several Ways; either Pleating their Manes, or
letting them be Loose.

I never saw any Horse Go so well with Rich Saddles, as with Plain Leather
Saddles, and Black Bridles: The Leather Saddles should be plain White Spanish
Leather, stitcht with Silk; with Silver Nails, and a good Black Leather
Slap-Cover over it, and the Bridle Soft black Leather, and Small; by no means
too Great: Two Girthes in One, to part at both Ends, like Two Girths; and a
good Italian Surcingle, which is Worth both the Girthes for sure Holding.

You must be very Careful, to see that nothing that is about the Horse should
Hurt him; as his Saddle, Bitt, Cavezone, or any thing else: For, I assure you,
as long as any thing Hurts him, he will never go Well.

No Horse goes Well in a Wind, it does so Whisk about him, and in his Ears, and
makes such a Noise, as it Diverts him from the Manage; and so does any new
Help, or any new Thing that they are not Accustomed to: Horses are very
Sensible, and Tickle; and no Strangers must come near them.

There is one Thing that is the most Uncomly, and the Disgracefullest thing a
Horse can do; and that is, To Whisk his Tail in all the Actions that he makes.
The common Remedy they Use, is, To Tie his Tail with a Quinsel; which does
Remedy that Vice, as long as it Holds: But the Best thing in the World, is, To
Cut Cross the great Nerve that is under his Tail, and then he shall never Whisk
or Shake it again; and it will do him no Hurt in the World, more than when it
is Cut. There is no Remedy like unto this.

A Very True PARADOX.
I Will never Put my Horses of Manage to Soil after they are Five Years old. I
had a Barb that had a Cold, and I was Persuaded to Put him to Soil; but when I
took him from it, he was Broken-Winded. Though I never Put them, but Six or
Seven days, to Soil, yet I ever found them the Worst for it, both for Colds,
and their Flesh being Flabby. Does not every Body say, when you Take a Horse
from Grass, That you take him Up with a Grass-Cold? And it is very True. Then
these Horses of Manage, which are extremely Heated, and often must, of
Necessity, Melt their Grease. If you give them Grass to Cool them, and Purge
them (as they say) to bring it away, it being Hardened like Tallow, Grass is too
Gentle to do it Effectually: But I Confess it Dissolves some small part of it,
which it does not Bring away; and that which is Dissolved, runs into their
Veins, and Arteries, and makes them remain Sick Horses, so that they will never
Thrive. Therefore, at the time of Soil, let them Blood once or twice, and give
them Pills of Alloes Sicatrina two Ounces, lapped up in Fresh Butter; and after
that, give them Cooling Julips twice or thrice a Week, for a Fortnight, or
Three weeks together; and let them Rest, or but Walk gently out, and no Grass
at all: During the great Heats, ride Moderately, by no means Violently.

Horses of great Exercise must have Dry Feeding; for Moist Feeding spoils them,
and fills them full of Diseases and Corruption; therefore never give them
Grass, and but very little Hay. The Method thus: Before their Water, give them
but a Handful of Hay, only to make them Drink; and after their Water, another
Handful of Hay, to be a Barricado between their Water, and their Oats, that
they should not Shoot their Oats too soon; and then give them their Oats; and
all the rest of the Day, and Night, nothing but Wheat Straw. As the Italian
says, a Horse that is Fed with Hay, is a Horse for a Cart, he is so Foggy and
Pursey; but they say, Cavallo de Palla, Cavallo de Batalla; and thus his Flesh
will be as Hard as a Board, in great Lust, Wind, and Strength, and as Nervous
as possible can be, and in great Health.

Excellent Clean Oats is the Best Feeding in the World; sometimes you may give a
few Pease, or Hul'd Beans, which is very Good; but never any Bread, for that
makes them Pursey, as we know very well by Running-Horses. I never give above
Two Bushels of Oats a Week to every Horse, and it is Enough; for they Look
extraordinary Well with it.

A Horse must ever be Empty before you Ride him, and stand some three or four
Hours, both Morning, and Afternoon, upon the Watering-Bitt, to turn him from
the Manger, to get him a better Appetite; which is excellent Good.

Wheat is Strengthening, but it makes a Horse Fatt at the Heart, and Out of
Wind; Barley they give in Italy and Spain, but it is not our Common Barley; but
that which we call Bigg: which is not an ill Feeding, but not Comparable to
good Oats: But in Italy and Spain, they give Barley, because they have no Oats:
Pease-Straw will make a Horse Piss red like Blood. If you follow this Method,
you will ever have your Horse Well, and Sound.

I must Tell you, It is not Much Meat, but the Ordering of the Diet, that Makes
Horses in Health: Nay, to some Great and Ready Feeders (as they call it) you
must give but a little Wheat-Straw; for else they will be as Pursey and Fatt,
as Stall-Fed Oxen: Nay, some again will Eat their Litter, which is very Foul
Feeding. And then the Jockeys use to put their Horses upon the Muzzle, which I
like not by any Means; for many Horses grow very Sick upon it, because it does
almost Smoother them; therefore, in that case, I put on a Cavezone, and Tie it
so Straight, as he cannot Eat, and then he has his Nostrils clear for Breath,
and is never Sick.

Be sure, That you never Dress your Horse until he be Cold; for until then, he
will not Dress; though I have seen many Foolish Grooms offer at it, to Dispatch
their Work: Nor Turn them to the Manger to their Meat, after their Exercise,
until they be Cold; for, though you give them no Water, or but to Wash their
Mouths, yet Eating, whilst they are Hott, makes Ill Digestion.

There is nothing Conduces more to the Health of Horses, than to Keep them
three or four Hours before they be Rid, on the Watering-Bitt; and after they
are Ridd, so long again on the Watering-Bitt, until they be Cool; and in the
Afternoon Turned again on the Watering-Bitt three or four Hours.

For Worms, it is good to give them Brimstone in their Oats, and to put
Bay Salt by them, which they will Lick apace; and Fenugreek, and sometimes a
Spoonful of Sweet-Sallet-Oyl mingled with their Oats. But the most Sovereign
Thing that ever I knew, is Honey mingled with their Oats.

Horses of great Exercise, that have often great Heats, as Horses of Manage
have, must be Let Blood often, and have Dry Feeding; for, Moist Feeding, and
Exercise, breeds great Corruption: Cooling-Julips, and Cooling-Glisters, (which
I will set down hereafter) are very Needful to Preserve their Health.

TO MAKE A HORSE HAVE A FINE COAT.
THere are but these Four things, viz. Feeding Well, Clothing Warmly, Many
Sweats, and Dressing Well.

For Dressing, there are these Things; The Curry-Comb, which only fetches out
Dust; the Dusting-Cloath, that takes away the Loose Dust; the Brush, that takes
the Dust from the bottom of the Hair; the Hard Wisp, a little moistened, that
takes out More Dust yet from him; and the Felt a little moistened, that takes
out More Dust from him afterward; but the Wett Hand, which should be last,
takes not only More Dust, but a great deal of Loose Hair, which is much Better
than any of the Former: After this, a Linen Cloth to Wipe them over, and then
a Woollen Cloth, and so Cloth him Up.

But, the Best of all is the Knife Heat, which is the Scraper; for, when he is
Hot, Scraping of him gets all the Sweat, and Moisture, out of him, so that he
is Dry presently after, and all that Wett would turn to Dust, so there is so
much Labor saved: Besides, it gets abundance of Hair from him, which the rest
does not; so that it is the most Excellent thing I Know, both to Cool a Horse,
and to Make him have a Good Coat.

You must Wash his Hooffs first Clean, and then Dry them; and when they are
Dry, then Anoint them; and when his Feet are Picked, then Stopp them with
Cow Dung.

In Summer he must be Leightly Clothed in the Heats, and his Legs and Feet
all Washed, and his Codds, and his Sheath, made Clean; for there will be a
great deal of Dirt in those Places else; and his Yard made Clean, and either
Washed with Water or White Wind; his Temples, Eyes, Nostrils, and Mouth, Bathed
with Cold Water in a Sponge, which will much Refresh him: Nay, to be Washed all
Over, and Scrap't, is excellent, both for his Coat and Health; and sometimes to
be Washed with Soap: His Mane to be Washed and kept Clean; and sometimes to be
Washed with Soap will make it Grow; and if the Hair should Fall, then Wash it
in Lee, but not too Strong, for that would fetch it Off: Dress his Mane Clean
every day, and Pleat it up again, which will make it Grow very much: You must
Wash his Tail very Clean, up to the very Dock, Dock and all; and often Wett his
Dock with a Sponge, not only to make his Hair lie Close, but to make it Grow;
and also it does Refresh him very much, and keeps him Cold handsomely.

But if your Horse has a White Tail, wash it never so clean, yet he will Dye
it in his Dung and Urine, that it will be Yellow, and therefore you must Wash
it very Clean with Water and Soap; and when it is Dry, put it in a Bagg, and
Tie it up, and that will keep it Clean, and White.

Clip his Ears; and no more of his Mane, than for the Head-stall to Lie there;
and Cut his Tail a little above his Fetlock, and Cut it every Month to make it
Grow. You may Dress him in as many Various Sorts with Ribbons, as there are
Colors, which Beautifies him much.

He must be well Littered with fresh Rye-Straw every Night, and to have
Pasterns on his Fore-Feet keeps him from much Hurt; but one Pasterne on his
Hinder Foot, tied to the Pillar behind him, with a Leather Rein at such a
Length as he may Lie Down, does Avoid more Mischief than you can Imagine: The
Woollen Cloth must always be laid upon his Buttock under his Housing Cloth;
You must always have your Horses to have Hoods, and both they, and their
Housing-Cloathes Lined with Cotton, or Baies, to keep them Warm.

Have good Collers, Surcingles, and Padds, and a little Rein to Tie them up to
the Wall or Rack; and good Wattering-Bitts, which, as I told you before, are
very Useful. And be careful, after a great Heat, that you give him no Water
till Night, except only to Wash his Mouth: for it is very Dangerous, and may
Spoil him Utterly; for, a Horse will be Cool Without, when he is not Within:
and the Worst is but to forbear his Meat a little, or to have a Small Body,
which is much Better than to have No Horse.

OF SHOOING.
THe old Saying, is, Before behind, Behind before. That is; Before, the Veins
lie Behind: For, you see of his Fore-feet, there is a great Space on both
sides, where there is no Nayls at the Heel: And Behind, before; for you see in
his Hinder-feet, there is a great Space between the Nayls at the Toe; because
the Veins lie Before, at the Toe; and the Veins lie Behind, at the Heel: and
this is done for fear of Pricking him. So that the Saying, Before behind,
Behind before, is very True.

You must Fit the Shoo to the Foot, and not the Foot to the Shoo, as they do
in Flanders, and Brabant; and Open his Heels as much as you can, Straight, and
not Side-wayes; for that will Cut away all his Heels in two or three Shooings;
and the Strength of the Heels, is the Strength of the Foot. You must Cut the
Thrush handsomely too, and Pare his Foot as Hollow as you can, the Shoo may not
Press at all upon his Foot: The Shoo must come Near to the Heel, and sit a
little From it, and a little Wider than the Hooff on both Sides, to enlarge the
Heel; and that the Shoo may bear his Weight, more than his Foot.

The Webb must be indifferent Broad; not too Thinn, least it should Beat into
his Foot; nor so Thick, either to Tire him, or with the Weight to Pull out the
Nayls.

When the Shoo is set On, there will be much Hooff to be Cut off at the Toe;
for, it must be very Thick at the Toe, if you do not Pare him but as I have
told you; and when you have Cut it Off, then Smooth it with a File, or Rape,
and thus your Horse will stand so Firm, as if he had a little Polonia-Heel; and
his Foot so Strong, as not only to go Boldly upon Stones, but to Break them,
and never to Hurt his Feet, or Feel them: For, you will easily Imagine, A Man
can go much Better upon Stones with Three-Soal'd-Shoos, than with Pumps. Paring
a Horses Foot so Thin as they Use, is Pumps, and makes him Go upon his Heels,
as Pumps does a Man; and my Way, as I have told you, is, Three-Soal'd-Shoos,
and a little Polonia-Heel.

The Nayls should be Cast in a Mould, with Round and Flatt Heads, for fear of
Crossing one Leg of another to Hurt him. This for the Fore-Feet.

The Hinder-Feet are to be Shod just in the same Manner as the Fore-Feet was,
both for Opening the Heels, Cutting the Thrush, and Cutting off at the Toe, to
leave it Thick; only the Hinder Shoes must be made Answerable to the Form of
his Hinder-Feet: The Webb somewhat Broad, but the Nayls of his Hinder-Feet
should be ordinary Nayls, and the Heads a little Bigger and Sharper, for
Stopping, to take hold of the Earth, lest he might, with Sliding, Incord
himself; the Nayls ought to be so, because a Horse of Manage goes on the
Hanches, which is most of his Hinder-Feet; and Wears his Hinder Shoes twice as
Fast as his Fore Shoes: And this is the Right Way of Shooing a Horse of
Manage.

A Traveling Horse must be Shod after the same Manner, but a little
Straighter; for otherwise, in Ill Ways, he will Pull Off his Shoes; the Webb
must be a little Narrower.

A Hunting-Horse must also be Shod after the same Way, but much Narrower than
the Travelling-Horse, eeven with his Foot, and the Webb much Narrower, or else
he will Endanger to Lame himself, upon Ill Grounds, and to Endanger you with
Falling; besides Pulling Off his Shoes.

A Running-Horse's Shoes are so Narrow at the Webb, and so Thin, as they are
called Plates, rather than Shoes; it is not only for Leightness, but that the
Fresh Nayls, being Newly Shod, may take Better hold of the Earth, to prevent
Slipping: For, could the Nayls be put in without Shoes, as Eeven, and
Regularly, it would do as Well; but that cannot be, and therefore you must have
Plates for that end, which is the only end of Plates.

WHAT Is to be Done, when THE HAIR from the MANE and TAIL FALLS AWAY.
SEarch both Mane and Tail well with your Finger, and Anoint the Place with
this Unguent. Take Quicksilver, and Tried Hoggs Grease; the Quicksilver being
first Mortified with Fasting-Spittle: Incorporate them very well Together, till
the Hoggs Grease be of a perfect Ash Color, and Anoint the Sorrance therewith,
every day; holding a Hott Bar of Iron near, to cause the Ointment to Sink in,
and in three or four Days thus carefully Dressing him, he will be Well.

This is a very good Receipt, and I have often used it: But I would Advise you,
First to Let him Blood, a good Quantity, both in the Neck and Tail.

TO CAUSE the HAIR TO GROW AGAIN.
TAke the Dung of a Goat, newly made; ordinary Honey, Allom, and the Blood of a
Hogg; The Allom being first made into Fine Powder. Boil all these Together, and
Rubb, and Anoint the Places therewith every day, and it will Cause the Hair to
come Again apace. This is special Good.

I use to Preserve my Horses Manes, making them very Clean from all Filth and
Dust with the Brush; then Wash them with a little Soap: And having Washed out
the Soap, Pleat them Up in great Pleats, and Undo them every Day, Pleat them
again; and this will make them Grow wonderfully: For, their Manes being Loose,
they are apt to Break, especially when they are Ridd, by Reason of the Bridle,
Cavezone Reins, and Hand, that Rubbs against them: Therefore, but upon High
Days, let their Manes be always Pleated.

Their Tayls should be always kept Clean, and Washed with Soap sometimes, but
washed Clean every day; and when they are Dry, Combed out carefully, for fear
of Breaking the Hair: Let his Dock be Wetted with a Sponge often in a Day,
which will both make it Grow, and make the Hair to lie Eeven; and his Tail Cut
every Month, which will both make it Grow, and grow Thick. To Observe the time
of the Moon, is but an old Foppery; but to Let him Blood in the Tail, is very
Good.

Now you must Understand, That what you take many times for Dust in his Mane,
are little Worms, which Eat the Roots of the Hair away: This is easily Known
from Dust; because, if the Hair Falls, you may be very Sure they are Worms.

The Cure is thus: Make a pretty strong Lie, and Wash his Mane with it once a
Day, and he will be Cured; but you must take heed, that the Lie be not too
Strong; for, if it be, That alone will Burn all the Hair of his Mane off: So
the Cure will be Worse than the Disease.

RARE RECEIPTS, JVLIPS, GLISTERS, and POTIONS, For Cooling a HORSE OVERHEATED
BY VIOLENT EXERCISE: Promised Before.
FOr a Horse that has a Cold, Take Half a Pound of Honey, Half a Pound of
Treakle, mix these together: Then take an Ounce of Cumminseed, beaten into
Powder; an Ounce of Liquorish Powder, an Ounce of Bay Berries beaten into
Powder, and an Ounce of Anniseeds in Powder: Then mix all these Powders
together, and put so much of them as shall make it Thick as a Hasty-Pudding.
After the Horse is Ridden, give it him with a Stick to Lick Off; and if he have
a Cold, give him of it, both before, and after, he is Ridden; for, no Better
Medicine there is not.

When a Horse is OVER-RIDDEN, TO COMFORT HIM.
TAke a Pint of Sweet Milk, and put three Yolks of Eggs beaten into it; then
make it Lukewarm, and then put in three Pennyworth of Saffron, and one
Pennyworth of Sallet-oyle, which is Two or Three Spoonfulls, and give it the
Horse, in a Horn: You may give him near a Quart of Milk. This is an Excellent
Drink.

Honey is the most Excellent Thing in the World, both for the Lungs, a Cold,
and to Open all Obstructions, putting one good Spoonful into his Oats, and so
to continue this Medicine for a pretty time. I have Known it Recover a very
Pursey Horse.

Horses of Great Exercise, or that are Overheated, and have great Fire in
their Bodies, must be Let Blood often; nay, twice or thrice within a few
Days, one after another; and still Let Blood, until you see Good Blood
comes: To Let such a Horse Blood in the Mouth, and then Rubb his Mouth with
Salt, and let him Eat his Blood, is an Excellent thing: But you must Purge him
Well, that his Grease may come away; for, Horses of Great Exercise would else
be always Foundered in the Body, and then they will never Thrive until that
Melted Grease be brought Away.

The Best Purge, is two Ounces of Aloes Sicatrina, Lapt up in Butter, and made
into two Pills, and so give it your Horse after he has Rested awhile; then
give him this Following and Refreshing Drink, which is the best Julip in the
World:

Take Mel Rosatum, or Honey of Roses. Conserves of Damask-Roses. Conserve of
Burrage. Sirrup of Violets. Of each four Ounces.

Burrage Water. Endive Water. Suckory Water. Bugloss Water. Plantine Water. Of
each Half a Dutch Pint, which is near as much as an English Quart.

Then you are to Use both these Conserves and Waters, Thus:

Put all the Conserves into a Mortar, and Beat them, or Pownd them together,
and then Mix them by Little and Little, with the Waters, till they be well Mixed
together; and then give them all together in a Horn, to the Horse, without
Straining: Do not give it Cold by any means. Hott Sirrup of Lemmons added to
it, is very Good: Give it twice or thrice a Week for a Fortnight at least, and
let the Horse Rest afterward.

Feed your Horse all the time of this great Heat within him, with Wheat-Brann
amongst his Oats, and Wash them in a little Beer, if he Likes it. This Brann is
the Best thing in the World to get-Out his Belly, and to Moisten him, because
it Dries up all Superfluous Humors which Heat him: In his Water, when you
Water him, put also Wheat -- Brann into it, and let him Eat of that Brann also.
This is most Excellent; and will not only Cool him, and Moisten him, but also
Loosen his Skin, if he be Apt to be Hide -- Bound, which all Heat does.

Lettises are very good to Cool him; Suckory Roots, or Endive Roots, are all
one. To boil Suckory Roots in his Water is very Good; and Purslane, to give it
him now and then to Eat, is also very Good: To Sprinkle his Hay with Water, and
to give him Radishes to make him Piss, will Cool him. And let him have no
Violent Exercise, until he be Recovered, but gentle-Walking.

This is the most Excellent thing in the World; beyond all the Printed Books of
Receipts.

TO COOL and REFRESH a HORSE.
GIve him Carrots with his Oats, or upon his Watering -- Bitt; Apples is
Excellent, and so Muskmellons, or the Skins of them: To Wash his Oats in Small
Beer, is also very Excellent.

A Receipt of the Cooling-Julip, or Diet-Drink, that Doctor Davison does give
in Fevers
TAke Barley Water two Pints: Of Sirrup of Violets two Ounces: Of Sirrup of
Lemmons one Ounce: Mix them together, and use this Water to Quench their Thirst.

A Julip for Fevers to Bind the Body, if it be Loose.
TAke one Ounce of Ivory, and one Ounce of Hearts -- Horn; Raspe them, and put
them in three Paris -- Pintes of Water, and let them Boil together, until the
Half be Consumed; then Strain it through a Cloth: And put to this Liquor, four
Ounces of the best Juce of Barberies, and one Ounce and a half of Sirrup of
Pomgranets. This is to be Used to Cool.

These are Excellent for Fevers in Horses as well as Men: only you must give a
Third, or a Fourth Part more to Horses, since they have Stronger Bodies; else
the Disease is all one, and the Remedy is all one: And this Method will Cure
both Man and Horse; and all other Ways are Pernicious to them Both, which is
either Physic that Purges, or Hott-Cordials; only when he is Cured, then a
Purge, as I said before, to take away the Dreggs that Remain; and no more.

A Cooling-Potion which is most Excellent.
TAke a Quart of Whey, and four or five Ounces of Sirrup of Violets, and four
or five Ounces of Cassia, and a little Manna; and this will both Cool, and
Purge Gently, and is a most Excellent Remedy for Horses of Great Exercise.

To take the very same at the other End, will do much Good to Cool the Bowels;
and is a very rare, and sovereign Cooling Glister.

All these Cooling things are most Excellent for Horses of Great Exercise,
which are Overheated, and Surfeited with Riding, so you give them First the
Purge of Aloes, to bring Away their Grease.

Here Ends the First Part.
THE SECOND PART. Of Riding, and Dressing Horses upon the GROUND.
THere is no Man can Make or Dress a Horse Perfectly, that does not exactly
Understand all the Natural Paces, and Actions of a Horses Legs, in every one
of them; and all the Actions of his Legs, made by Art.

It is a General Rule, That Art must never be against Nature; but must follow
Nature, and set Her in Order.

OF THE NATURAL PACES.
FIrst. Of a Horse upon his Walk. The Action of his Legs in that Motion, Is,
Two Legs in the Air, and Two Legs upon the Ground, at the same Time moved
Cross, Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg Cross, which is the true Motion of a Slow
Trott.

Secondly. In a Trott. The Action of his Legs, is, Two Legs in the Air, and
Two Legs upon the Ground, at the same Time moved Cross; Fore- and Hinder Leg
Cross; which is the Motion of Leg a Swifter Walk: For, in a Walk, and a Trott,
the motion of the Horse's Legs are all One, which his Legs makes Cross, Two
in the Air Cross, and Two upon the Ground Cross, at the same time; Fore- Leg
and Hinder-Legg Cross; and every Remove Changes his Legs Cross; as those that
were in the Air Cross, are now set Down; and those that were upon the Ground
Cross, are now pulled up in the Air Cross. And this is the Just Motion of a
Horse's Legs in a Trott.

Thirdly. For an Amble, he Removes both his Legs of a Side: As for Example;
Take the Farr-Side, he removes his Fore-Legg, and his Hinder-Legg, of the same
Side at one time, whilst the other Two Legs of the Near-Side stand still; and
when those Legs are upon the Ground which he first Removed, at the same Time
they are upon the Ground the other Side; which is, The Near-Side removes
Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg on that Side, and the other Legs of the Farr-Side
stand still.

Thus an Amble Removes both his Legs of a Side, and every Remove Changes
Sides; Two of a Side in the Air, and Two upon the Ground at the same time. And
this is a Perfect Amble.

Fourthly. A Gallop is another Motion: For, in a Gallop he may Lead with which
Fore-Legg you Please; but then the Hinder-Legg of the same Side must Follow it,
I mean when he Gallops Straight Forwards; and then this is a perfect Gallop.

But to Understand what is Meant by his Fore-Legg Leading, and his Hinder-Legg
on the same side Following; that Fore-Legg is thus. As for Example: If the
Farr-Fore-Legg Lead, by that Fore-Legg Leading, is meant, That Fore-Legg must
be Before the other Fore-Legg always, and the Hinder-Legg to Follow it on the
same Side; which Hinder-Legg must always be Before the other Hinder-Legg: And
this is a True Gallop.

But now to Show you, that the Motion of a Gallop is thus: The Horse Liffts
Both his Fore-Leggs Up at a Time, in that Action that I told you, which is one
Leg before the other; and as his Fore-Leggs are Falling, I say before they
Touch the Ground, his Hinder-Leggs in that Posture I formerly told you, Follow
his Fore-Leggs, being once All in the Air at one Time; for as his Fore-Leggs
are Falling, his Hinder-Leggs Moves at the same Time, and then he is All in the
Air: For, How is it Possible else, that as a Horse is Running, he should
spring Forward twice his Length, were not the Motion of a Gallop a Leap froward?

And this Description is most True both in the Motion and Posture of a Horses
Legs; when he Gallops: In a Soft and Slow Gallop it is hardly Perceived,
though it be True; but in Running, where the Motion is more Violent, it is
easily Perceived: for there it is Plain; you shall see all his Four Feet in the
Air at one time, ( Running being but a Swift Gallop;) for the Motion and
Posture of his Legs are all one. But you must Remember, that Galloping upon
Circles, the Horse always ought to Lead with his Two Legs, within the Turn;
Fore-Legg, and Hinder-Legg within the Turn. And this is a True Gallop.

Fifthly. When a Horse Runns, the Motion he makes, and the Action of his Legs,
are all One with a Gallop; only a Swifter Motion, which you may call a Swift
Gallop; and a Gallop a Slow Running: And this is the Truth of the Motion of
Running.

Now I must Tell you of that which every body Speaks of, and no body Tells what
it is: For, they say, A Horse may Gallop with the wrong Leg Before, which is
Impossible. For, if the Hinder-Legg of the same side Follows, it is a Right
Gallop; so that rather it is the wrong Leg Behind. But that which they call
the wrong Leg Before, is Thus a True Gallop, if that Leg which Leads Before,
is Followed by the Hinder-Legg of the same Side; and as the Horse Falls with
his two Fore-Leggs, his Hinder-Leggs Follow them, before his Fore-Leggs touch
the Ground; so that at that very time all the Horses Four Legs are in the
Air, and it is a Leap forward. That which they call the Wrong Leg Before, is
this, When the Horse is upon the Motion, in the Swiftness of a Gallop, he
Changes his Legs Cross; which is the Action of a Trott, two Legs in the Air,
and two upon the Ground; and that is so Contrary to a Gallop, and is such a
Cross Motion, as makes the Horse ready to Fall: and this is one Way of that
which they call, The Wrong Leg Before.

Another Way is this, That when the Horse is upon the Action of a Gallop; as I
told you before, in the Swiftness of a Gallop, where he should keep always Two
Legs of a side Forward, he Changes Sides every time, Fore-Legg and Hinder-Legg
of a Side; and Changing Sides every time, that is the Action of an Amble, which
is Two Legs of a Side in the Air, and Two Legs of the other Side upon the
Ground at the same Time, and Changing Sides every Time. This Action of an
Amble, upon the Swiftness of a Gallop, Differs so much from the Action of a
Gallop, as it makes the Horse ready to Fall: And these two, the Action of a
Trott, and the Action of an Amble, upon the Swiftness of a Gallop, is that
which their Ignorance calls, The Wrong Leg Before.

It is True, that though a Horse do Gallop Right, which is his Hinder-Legg to
Follow his Fore-Legg on the same Side; yet if he be not Accustomed to that
Side, he will Gallop neither so Nimbly, nor so Fast, as with that Side he is
Accustomed to Lead withal: For, it is Just as a Left Handed, or a Right-Handed
Man; Custom having a very great Power over Man and Beast: Else, when the Horse
Gallops Forward, never so little a Gallop, his Hinder-Leggs go beyond the Print
of his Fore-Leggs, and that Leg that he Leads withal. For Example; If the
Inward Fore-Legg Lead, the Inward Hinder-Leg Follows; so those are Pressed, and
his Outward Legs at Liberty: So that in the Action he makes, his Outward
Fore-Legg is set to the Ground first, and is at Liberty; that is one Time: And
then his Inward Fore-Legg, which is Pressed, and Leads, makes a Second time;
that is Two: And then his Outward Hinder-Legg, which is at Liberty, is set Down;
that is Three times: And then his Inward Hinder-Legg, which is Pressed, and Leads,
is set Down; and that makes a Fourth time. So that a Gallop Forward is 1, 2, 3,
and 4. which is the just Action and Time of a Gallop Forward, and is a Leap
forward. Now upon Circles, his Croup Out upon a Gallop, he must always Lead
with his Inward Legs to the Turn, and strikes Over but sometimes; not so much,
but that the Action of the Gallop is all One; which is 1, 2, 3, and 4. and a
Leap forward.

OF A TROT.
A Trott is the Foundation of a Gallop: The Reason is, A Trott being Cross, and
a Gallop both Legs of a Side; When you Trott him Fast, beyond the Power of a
Trott, it forces him when his Inward Fore-Legg is Up, to set Down his Outward
Hinder-Legg so suddenly, as to make his Inward Hinder-Legg to Follow his Inward
Fore-Legg, which is a True Gallop. And thus a Trott is the Foundation of a
Gallop.

A Gallop is the Foundation of Terra a Terra, for the Actions of the Horses
Legs are all one; Leading with the Fore-Legg within the Turn; and Following
that Leg with his Hinder-Legg within the Turn; only you Stay him a little more
on the Hand in Terra a Terra, that he may go in Time.

An Amble, being a Shuffling Action, I would have Banished the Manage; for the
Horse Removes both his Legs of a Side, and Changes sides every Remove; which
is so Contrary to the Manage, as can be: But if you make him to Gallop;
whereas upon a Trott, you Trott him Fast to take his Gallop, you must upon the
Amble Stay him upon the Hand to take his Gallop.

A TRUE DESCRIPTION Of all the NATURAL and ARTIFICIAL MOTIONS a Horse can Make.
FIrst, for Terra a Terra, the Horse always Leads with the Legs within the
Turn, like a Gallop; his two Fore-Leggs Up, and as they are Falling, his two
Hinder-Leggs Follow; and at that time, all his Four Legs are in the Air; so
that it is a Leap forward; the same upon Demy-Vaults; for it is all but the
Action of Terra a Terra. Now when the Horses Croup is In, whether upon a little
Gallop, or Terra a Terra, here his Hinder-Leggs are always Short of his
Forelegs, because his Croup is In; but if it be Le petit Gallop, his Action is
still 1, 2, 3, and 4. because it is a Gallop. But in Terra a Terra, the Action
is but two, a 1 and 2 pa: ta: like a Corvet, but only pressed Forward: A Corvet
is a Leap Upward, and Higher; and Terra a Terra a Leap Forward, and Lower; and
his Inward Legs that Lead more before his Outward Legs, being another Action
than a Corvet.

Secondly, Corvets, a Demy-Ayre, a Groupado, a Balatado, or a Capriol, are all
but a Leap Upward; for all his Four Legs are in the Air, as his Fore-parts
are Falling. And there are no more ARTIFICIAL MOTIONS than These two; Terra a
Terra, and these Airs last-mentioned.

The Ordering of the CAVEZONE MY WAY, And the Operation and Use of it.
TAke one of the Reins, which must be Long, and a little Ring at one End, and
put the other End into that Ring, and so put it about the Pommel, and then put
the rest Down by the Fore-Bolster of the Saddle under your Thigh; and the rest
of the Rein put through the Ring on the same Side of the Cavezone, and so bring
it Back again, either to be in your Hand, or Tie it to the Pommel Straight; and
do the same with the other Rein in All things, as I told you with This.

The Cavezone is to Stay, to Raise, and to make the Horse Leight; to Teach him
to Turn, to Stop, to Firm his Neck, to Assure and Adjust his Head, and his
Croup, without Offending his Mouth, or the place of the Curb; and also to
Supple and Help his Shoulders, and his Legs and Feet Before.

Therefore I would Use it to all Horses whatsoever; for they will go much
Better with the Bitt alone, having their Mouth preserved, and made so Sensible,
as they will be Attentive to all the Motions of the Hand: So that there is
nothing for the Exercise of the Manage like it, with a Canon A la Pignatel,
the Branches A la Conestable, and the Cavezone together: But then the Cavezone
must be My Way, as I Told you; and that does so Supple them, and is so Right,
as it makes All Horses whatsoever, if you Work them upon their Trott, Gallop,
Stopping, and Going Back, with Passeger, and Raising them as you Ought, and
according to the Rules of Art: For this makes them Subject to the Sense of
Feeling, which is the Sense we ought to Work on; to Feel the Hand, and to Feel
the Heels, which is All; and not to the Sense of the Sight, which is the Routin
of the Pillars, or the Sense of Noise, which is the Routin of Hearing, but only
the Sense of Feeling, and only of those two Places, which is the Mouth and the
Sides. Seeing is all the Art when they Teach Horses Tricks, and Gambals, like
Bankes's Horse; and though the Ignorant Admire them, yet those Persons shall
never Teach a Horse to Go Well in the Manage. There are many Things in the
Sense of Feeling, which are to be Done with so great Art, Wit, and Judgment,
and require so great Experience of the several Dispositions of Horses, that it
is not every Man's Case to be an Horseman, as it is to make a Dog or a Horse
Dance: But I am Contented to let the Ignorant Talk, and Think what they will,
for I am not Concerned with their Folly.

The Cavezon's inward Rein tied short to the Pommel My Way, is Excellent to
give a Horse an Apuy, and Settle him upon the Hand, and make him Firm, and his
Head Steady: So it is Excellent for a Horse that is too Hard on the Hand; for
the Cavezon's Rein being always within the Turn tied very Straight to the
Pommel, keeps him from Resting too much on the Bitt, which makes him Leight,
and Firm on the Hand. The Inward Cavezone's Rein tied short to the Pommel, is
Excellent also to Supple a Horse's Shoulders, which is the Best thing that can
be; for it gives Apuy where there is none, and where there is too much Apuy, it
takes it away, and Supples his Shoulders extremely, which is an Excellent
thing; it also makes a Horse Gallop very Right, with his Legs, as also his
Legs very Right for Terra a Terra; for it Lengthens his Legs within the Turn,
and Shortens his Legs without the Turn, which is Right as it should be. So it
is Good for Working his Shoulders in all Kinds, and his Croup last, Leg and
Rein of a Side, as also to Work Leg and Rein Contrary, in all Kinds of several
Lessons. And this is the Rarety of Tying the inward Cavezone's Rein short to
the Pommel.

The Cavezone (My Way) works Powerfully upon the Nose, and so has the greater
Pull to give the Horse the greater Ply and Bent, being the part the Farthest
off from your Hand. And this Ply, or Bent, is from his Nose to his Withers,
which is to Bend his Neck, and Works too on the Shoulders, this is to Bent into
the Turn; it Pulls his Head down too, and makes him Look into the Turn; his
Head being pulled Down when he is Pressed, puts him more upon the Hanches. This
is done with the Inward Rein of the Cavezone pulled Hard, and Straight, and so
Tied to the Pommel, which keeps it at a Stay, and is Stronger than ones Hand,
and has the same Operation as I told you Before; but when it is Tied to the
Pommel, it still keeps the Right Bent of the Horse, and then I Work upon the
Bitt, either with the Reins Separated with Both my Hands, or else in my Left
Hand only when he is thus Bent: When I would Passeger him, his Croup in, Large
or Narrow, then I Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle; because it is upon
the Action of a Trott, and that is Cross; and therefore must have his Legs
Free without the Turn, to Lap over his Inward Legs; and when he is thus Tied
with the Inward Cavezones Rein, if I would have him to go Le petit Gallop, his
Croup In, or Terra a Terra, then I Help with the Inward Rein of the Bridle, my
Hand on the Outside of his Neck, and my Knuckles toward his Neck, to put him
on the Outside of the Turn: but Le petit Gallop sometimes on the Inside,
because it is a Gallop, as the Outward Rein puts him on the Inside of the Turn;
all this is with his Croup In. If to Trott or Gallop D'une piste, Large or
Narrow Circles, the Inward Cavezone's Rein still Tied to the Pommel, then I
Help with the inward Rein, and inward Leg, or outward Rein to Narrow him
Before: If the Piroite, with the outward Rein; if Demy-Voltoes upon Passadoes,
the outward Rein; For all Leaps, the outward Rein; for Corvets and Demy-Ayres,
the outward Rein; for Corvets Backward, the outward Rein; for Corvets Forward,
the outward Rein; for Terra a Terra, in his Length, the inward Rein: And so
Passadoes, the inward Rein. So, Stopping, and Going Back, the inward Rein. All
these with the Inward Rein of the Cavezone Tied straight to the Pommel, which
is the Best thing in the World, and then Help with the several Reins of the
Bridle, as Occasion offers you, and as I have Told you for all these several
things. So that the Inward Cavezon's Rein Tied to the Pommel, or else in your
Hand, is, For All things whatsoever; Croup, In or Out; Trott, Gallop, Passager;
all Airs, Stopping, Going Back, Passadoes; or any thing in the World that is
in the Manage: For without it no Horse can be Perfectly Dressed, in any Kind, to
have the Ply of his Neck, and to Supple his Shoulders, to Look into the Turn,
to have his Legs go Right, as they Ought to do in all Actions; his Body
rightly Bent, to be part of the Circle he goes in, and Bent that Way. So it is
All in All for every Thing, every Air, and every Action the Horse can make.

The Cavezone being upon the Nose, preserves the Horse's Mouth, and Bars, and
place of the Curb; and it is so Effectual, as it will Dress a Horse without the
Bitt, which the Bitt shall never Do without the Cavezone; for the Bars and the
Curb are too Tender: Besides, the Reins of the Bitt can never give him the Ply,
nor Bend him Enough, nor Supple his Shoulders, because it is so Near you, and
Works upon the Bars and the Curb; which cannot Bend him possibly so, as that
upon his Nose, because the Branches of the Bitt are so Slow, and the Bars and
the Curb so Low, that there is not Room enough to Pull as with a Cavezone, that
is so much Higher; and has so much Room to Pull, and pulls and Plyes him, all
from his Nose to his Shoulders, when the other can do little more than Pull his
Musle, and his Head, and goes no further: The Cavezone's Rein within is for
every Thing, the Bitt otherwise.

To Supple his Shoulders, you must Help with the Outward Rein, and to Stay his
Outward Shoulder with the Inward Rein; which has not near the Force the
Cavezone's Rein has for every Thing: Therefore Use it in All things, and with
all Horses, Colts, Half-Drest Horses, Ready Horses, Young, Middle-Age, Old, and
every Horse, and all Horses; for there is no Dressing Horses Without it, and
with it you will Dress all Horses whatsoever, and of what Disposition soever;
Weak, Middle-Strength, or Strong, and Reduce all Vices with it; and when you
Use the Bitt, they will go much the Better, for having been wrought Continually
with the Cavezone.

Observations about the Cavezone, about the Ply, or Bending the Horse's
Shoulders into the Turn;
And in What Place the Cheeks of the Bitt then Are, or Where they Rest.
WHen the Inward Rein of the Cavezone is Tied Hard to the Pommel, and you Pull
the Inward Rein of the Bridle, his Neck Bends so much into the Turn, whether
upon Large Circles, his Croup Out, or his Croup In, as then the Cheek of the
Bitt, that is next the Turn, is Beyond the Inside of his Neck or Shoulder, and
the Outward Cheek, removed according to the distance of the Cheeks, which is
much more than the midst of his Neck: and this Ply Supples his Neck and
Shoulders Extremely, makes him Look into the Turn; Head, Body, Legs, and all
going most Justly, as they Ought to Do, whether his Croup In, or Out. And this
is the Quintessence of the Manage; and without this no Horse can be Dressed
Perfectly, or can Go Justly in any Kind, either upon the Ground, or in Airs;
nor possibly do any thing Right upon the Circles, or Voltoes without it.

I Told you this was, with the Cavezone, the inward Rein Tied so short to the
Pommel, as Pulls in his Head and Neck so much, that it makes the inward Cheek
of the Bitt very much within his Neck, on the Inside of the Turn; because the
Cavezone Works on his Nose, and not on his Bars, or Curb, at all; and that is
the Reason the Inward Cheek of the Bitt comes so much beyond his Neck on the
Inside of the Turn.

OF THE OPERATION OF THE CAVEZONE.
THe Cavezone is another Business than the Bitt; for the Bitt Works upon the
Bars, and the Curb, and has two Cheeks whereunto unto the Reins are Fastened
on both Sides the Horses Neck; and the Bitt is in his Mouth, and the Curb is
under his Chin; and these Low, especially the Branches: But the Cavezone is
upon his Nose, which is much Higher, and Works only there, without Mouth or
Curb. Well then, the Cavezone being Tied according to My Fashion, though it be
to the Girths, if you Pull it Cross his Neck, with an Oblique Line, your Hand
on the Outside of the Turn, your Knuckles toward his Neck, it Pulls his Head
Up a little, and Works the same Effect, for the Bending his Neck, as the Bitt
does, but much more; because you have a greater Pull, the Cavezone being upon
his Nose; and, being further off you than the Bitt, he is Bent the more;
because you have more power to Pull.

Consider, that when the Inward Rein of the Cavezone is Tied to the Pommel, it
is the same Oblique Line that the other was, when you had it in your Hand, only
a little Shorter, and has the same Operation in every Thing, and pulls up his
Head a little; but now, if you have it in your Hand, and hold it on the Inside
of the Turn, and pull it Hard, and Low, then you pull Down the Horses Head, and
he brings in his Outward Shoulder, which is good in Large Circles, either upon
Trotting, or Galloping, or upon Passager, for the Reasons I Told you before; so
that the Cavezone, and the Bitt, Differ so much in their Operative Working,
that when you Pull the Cavezone a little High, it puts Up the Horses Head; and
when you Pull the Bitt High, and Hard, it Pulls Down his Head; and when you
hold the Cavezone Low, and on the Inside of the Turn, and pull it Hard, it
Pulls Down the Horses Head; and if you hold your Hand Low with the Bridle, it
gives his Head Liberty, for the Reasons aforesaid.

Now you see, that the Cavezone, and the Bitt, Differ in their Working very
much; so great is the Difference betwixt the Nose and the Mouth. It is True,
that the Inward Cavezone's Rein tied to the Pommel, is so Rare a Thing, and so
Effectual, as you may almost Work as you List, with the Bridle; the Cavezone
still doing the Business; and when one comes to Work with the Bridle alone, one
may Easily be Deceived; except he has all those Considerations, the Excellency
of the Cavezone, thus Tied, may Deceive him, when he comes to Work with the
Bitt alone.

There are Three several Helps with the Inward Cavezone's Rein in your Hand:
The first Help, is, To pull In his outward Shoulder; the second Help, with it,
is, To pull in his inward Shoulder; and the third Help, with it, is, To Stay
his Shoulders.

Curious and True Observations about the Working of the Bitt Alone, which being
not Truly Considered, no Man can Work with the Bitt as he Ought to do.
BUt to Work only with the Reins of the Bridle, which Work upon the Bitt, is
another Business; for now I consider what the Bitt is, which is another Engine,
that Works upon the Horses Bars, and the Curb; and the two Branches are like
Leavers to Work on those two Places: as the Reins pull the Cheeks, either the
inward Cheek, or the outward Cheek; The Bars, and the place of the Curb, is
much Lower than his Nose, on which the Cavezone Works; and the Rings where the
Reins of the Bridle are Fastened, at the Ends of the Cheeks, are much Lower than
the Bars, or the Curb; but as the Cheeks are pulled by the Reins of the
Bridle, so does the Bitt Work upon the Bars, or the Curb, accordingly.

As for Example; On the Right Hand, the Reins separated in both your Hands, if
you pull the inward Rein from his Neck on the inside, then you pull the Inward
Cheek into the Turn, and then the Mouth of the Bitt goes Out, and Presses the
Horse on his Bars, without the Turn; and makes the Horse Look Out of the Turn,
and Presses the Curb on the Outside, and must of Necessity do so; for when the
Cheeks are pulled In, the Mouth of the Bitt must go out: For of what Side
soever the Cheeks are pulled, the Mouth of the Bitt goes still contrary to the
Cheeks, and must do so in all Reason; the Bitt being an Instrument that is Made
so to do, and it cannot be Otherwise.

The same Operation it has for the Left Hand: if you pull the Inward Rein from
his Neck, the Mouth goes still Contrary to the Cheek; the Cheek goes Inward,
and the Mouth goes Outward, and the Horses Legs are Pressed on the Inside of the
Turn; therefore in Terra a Terra, the Reins Separated in both my Hands, I pull
the Inward Rein beyond his Neck, my Knuckles toward his Neck, which pulls the
Inward Cheek to me, and then the Mouth goes Contrary; that is, The Cheek is put
from the Turn, and the Mouth bends into the Turn, and the Horse Looks into the
Turn as he should do, and the Horses Legs pressed on the Outside of the Turn, on
the Left Hand: The Inward Rein pulled thus, has the same Operation; your Hand
being on the Outside of his Neck, and your Knuckles toward his Neck, pulls the
Inward Cheek from the Turn, and the Mouth of the Bitt goes into the Turn,
always Contrary, and cannot be Otherwise; it Presses the Horse on the Inside
of the Bars, and on the Inside of the Curb, and so Looks into the Turn; and
his Legs are Pressed on the Outside of the Turn, which is Proper for Terra a
Terra. And thus Working with the Bitt, Produces many Excellent things, for
Terra a Terra, as I have particularly set down before.

OF THE Working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle.
NOw let us Consider the Working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle, What
Operation that has on the Bars, Curb, and Cheeks; Which Cheeks Governs Bars
and Curb: As for Example; Going on the Right Hand, I turn my Hand on the Inside
of his Neck, this pulls the Outward Rein; pulling the Outward Rein, pulls the
Outward Cheek to me; then of Necessity it must put the Mouth of the Bitt From
me, and Presses the Horse on the Outside of the Bars, which is on the Outside
of the Turn, and so presses him on the Outside of the Curb, and so the Horse
must Look on the Outside of the Turn; and all this is, Because the Cheeks are
pulled to you on the Outside; therefore the Mouth of the Bitt must go From you;
still Contrary, and never Fails, nor Cannot: For, it is impossible it should
work Otherwise; but it is True, That it Supples, and brings in his Shoulders.
The Reason is this, The Horses Legs are Pressed on the Inside of the Turn, and
then he must needs bring in his Shoulders, though he is Pressed to Look Out of
the Turn. The same Thing is for the Left Hand, and the same Reasons for every
Thing, working with the Outward Rein of the Bridle. Thus the Bitt and Reins are
truly Anatomized, which never was before: The Outward Rein does Well for the
Piroite, and so for Demy-Voltoes upon Passadoes.

OF THE The Working the Bitt when the Horse goes Straight Forward.
WHen the Horse goes straight Forward, either Trotting, Galloping, or upon
Corvets, if you Hold your Hand Low, it Presses more upon the Bars, than the
Curb, because the Cheeks of the Bitt are not pulled so much to you, or to the
Neck of the Horse; and therefore the Curb is not Straightned so much, and so
the Horse is at more Liberty, and his Head a little Higher: But when you Hold
your Bridle-Hand a little Higher, and pull it up to you, then the Curb works
more, and pulls Down the Horses Head; the Reason is plain; for when you pull
the Cheeks Hard, and Up, then you pull the Mouth of the Bitt Down; and so the
Horses Head, because it works hard on the Curb: For it is most True, That when
the Cheeks of the Bitt are pulled Up, the Mouth goes Down, and Straightens the
Curb, the Hand being High; and when the Cheeks are not pulled Hard, then the
Curb is Slackt, and the Horses Head at more Liberty; for the pressure of the
Bars and Curb, Depends upon the Cheeks; for when the Cheeks go Up, the Mouth
of the Bitt goes Down; and when the Cheeks of the Bitt go Down, the Mouth of
the Bitt goes Up. This is the Operation, and the Effects, of the Bitt.

Of Another Operation of the Bitt.
I Must tell you, That the Cheeks lie Slope to you, and the Reins more Slope,
before they come to your Hand; so the Bitt cannot Press very much on the Horse,
being so far from the Perpendicular-Line: and as the Cheeks are pulled Up, the
Mouth goes Down; and as the Cheeks go Down, the Mouth goes Up; always
Contrary.

The Perpendicular-Line, is, When you Thrust your Hand Forward just
Perpendicular, to the End of the Cheeks, and so pull it up Hard, and it Works
extremely upon the Curb, which is to pull his Head Down. This I never Use; but
thought fit to Tell you what it is, and the Effects of it.

OF THE Operation of the two Reins Separated in both Hands.
I Told you, the Inward Rein pressed the Horse on the Outside of the Turn, and
made him Look into the Turn. And I told you, the Outward Rein pressed the Horse
on the Inside of the Turn, and made him Look out of the Turn; and for Passager,
he must be pressed on the Inside, and therefore to be Helped with the Outward
Rein: But to make him Look into the Turn, I Help with the Inward Rein too; So I
Help with both Reins in Passager; the Inward Rein to make him Look into the
Turn, and the Outward Rein to bring In his Outward Shoulder, and to Press him
on the Inside, for many Reasons that I have already Expressed.

TO Work with the Bridle in the Left Hand Only.
YOur Little Finger Separating the Reins, the Left Rein lies under the Little
Finger, and the Right Rein lies above the Little Finger; so that for the Left
Hand, the Hand on the Contrary side of his Neck, the Knuckles toward his Neck,
you pull the Little Finger to you, and that Straightens the Left Rein: And for
the Right Rein, because that lies above the Little Finger, your Hand on the
Outside, your Knuckles toward his Neck: Here you must Bend your Hand Inward,
and then your Little Finger Slacker; and this Works the Right Rein, as the Left
Rein the Little Finger Straightned, and the Ring-Finger Slack't; and because
the Horses Body should not Rise too High, keep the Bridle-Hand Low, and that
will put him upon the Hanches: And this is the Truth and Quintessence of the
Bridle-Hand, for the Inward Rein of either side.

OF THE Operation of the Outward Rein of the Bridle.
FOr the Right Hand, you must turn up your Little Finger; and as you put it up,
put it a little on the Inside of the Turn; but you must bring in your outward
Shoulder at the same time: And for the Left Hand, turn up your Little Finger,
and your Thumb down. as you did before; and at the same time put it on the
Inside of the Turn, and bring in your outward Shoulder moderately.

THE Reins being both in your Left Hand, HOW To Work them Both at One Time for
PASSAGER.
FOr the Right Hand, Put your Hand on the Outside: and for the Left Hand, put
your Hand without his Neck on the Inside of the Turn, and that Pulls and Works,
the outward Rein. So now you see, on both Hands, How you can perfectly Work
both Reins at one time, which is the Quintessence of Passager; the Reasons I
have told you before.

OF THE Use of the Two Reins of the Bridle.
YOu must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle in the Piroite, because his
Fore-parts are Straightned, and his Hinder-parts at Liberty; so you must Help
with the Outward Rein of the Bridle for Demy-Voltoes, and in Passadoes by a
Wall; because his Fore-parts are Straightned, and his Hinder-parts at Liberty,
being but Half a Piroite; so you must Help with the Outward Rein of the Bridle,
in Corvets Backward upon a Straight Line, his Fore-parts being Straightned; and
his Hinder-parts at Liberty, because they Lead: So you must Help with the
Outward Rein of the Bridle, in all Leaps, Croupadoes, Balotadoes, and Capriols;
either Forward, or upon Voltoes; because his Fore-parts are Straightned, and
his Croup at Liberty, or else he could not Leap.

For Terra a Terra, you must Help with the Inward Rein of the Bridle; because
then his Hinder-parts are Straightned, and his Fore-parts Enlarged; so with the
Inward Rein for Demy-Voltoes, because his Hinder-parts are Straightned, and his
Fore-parts Enlarged: But in Corvets upon Voltoes, the Outward Rein, because his
Hinder-parts are Subjected, and his Fore-parts Enlarged, and so forward; in
Corvets with the Outward Rein, because there his Hinder-parts are Subjected,
and his Fore-parts are Enlarged, and at Liberty to go Forward, because they
Lead.

Observations How to Hold the Reins of the Bridle.
Whenever you Hold your Hand Even with the Pommel, it Slackens the Curb; if
in the Middle of the Pommel, it is Slackened more; if upon his Neck, it is
Slackned most, because it is Farthest from the Perpendicular Line; and the
Higher you hold your Bridle-Hand above the Pommel, the Curb is Straightned the
more; because you can pull Harder, and go Nearer, by that means, to the
Perpendicular Line. The Hand should never be above two or three Fingers above
the Pommel, a little Forwarder, and Easy, but Firm; for there is nothing makes
a Horse go more of the Hanches, than a Light Hand, and Firm; for when he has
nothing to Rest on Before, he will Rest Behind; for, he will Rest on something;
and when he Rests Behind, that is upon the Hanches: A Leight Hand is the
greatest Secret we Have; but there is no Horse can be Firm of the Hand, except
he Suffers the Curb, and Obey it.

Here ends the Quintessence of Working with the Cavezone, and the Bridle.
MY OPINION for SPURRS.
THe Spurrs ought rather to be Long-Neckt, than Short Neckt; because with
Long-Neckt Spurrs, the Rider makes less Motion, either in Correcting, or
Helping his Horse, which a good Horseman should always Do; for he that is the
Quietest on Horseback, is the Greatest Master; for ill Horsemen cannot sit
Still on Horseback.

The Fashion of the Spurrs should be A la Conestable, the Wansnot too Long, and
Compas'd, and Black Sanguine; the Buckles and Rowels of Silver, not Burnisht;
because they do not Rust as Iron, and therefore Ranckles not a Horses sides so
much. The Rowels should contain Six Points, for that Hits a Horse Best; Five
Points are too Few: And the Rowells should be as Sharp as possible can be; for
it is much Better to let him Bleed Freely, than with Dull Spurrs to raise Knobs
and Bunches on his Side, which might give him the Farsey; but Bleeding can do
him no Hurt, when Dull Spurrs may: Besides, there is nothing does a Horse so
much Good, as to make him Smart, when you Correct him: There is, therefore,
nothing like Sharp Spurrs, being used Discreetly, to make all Horses whatsoever
Know them, Fear them, and Obey them; for until they Suffer, with Obedience, the
Spurrs, they are but Half Horses, and never Dressed.

The Shambriere is too Dull a thing; and so are all Whips, Hand-whips, and all;
Whips of Wyre fetch Blood, but not in the Right place, as Spurrs do. A
Bulls-Pisle is good for a Colt, before you wear Spurrs, but afterward it is too
Dull; a Smart Rod is much Better than any of them; but the Spurrs beyond all.

Of the Several CORRECTIONS, AND HELPS with the SPURRS.
FIrst, the Correction of the Spurrs being a Punishment comes After a Fault is
Committed, either to put In his Buttock or Croup, when he puts it Out; or else
to put it Out, when he puts it too much In, when he should be Entier; this is
to be done with one Spur, and sometimes with both Spurrs: He is to be Corrected
with both Spurrs when he is Resty, and will not go Forward; or to Settle him on
the Hand, when he Joggles his Head, then both the Spurrs will do him Good; or
when he is Apprehensive, and Ombrageux, the Spurrs may do him good; or that he
offers to Bite or Strike, then the Spurrs will Divert him; or that he Rises too
High, or Boltes, then give him the Spurrs; when he is falling Halfway down,
then the Spurrs will Cure him; but if you give him the Spurrs, just when he is
Rising, then it may bring him Over, if he will not Advance, which is to Rise
before; then a good Stroke with both the Spurrs, will make him Rise; if he be a
Dull Jade, then smartly to give him the Spurrs is good; or that he is Lazy, or
Slack of his Manage, then to give him the Spurrs Quickens him.

And so the Spurrs are for many things as a Correction, and therefore you must
give them as Strongly, and Sharply, still as you can, with all your Strength;
and have very Sharp Spurrs too, that he may Feel them to the Purpose, so that
Blood may follow; for otherwise it is not a Correction: You must Strike the
Horse always some three or four Fingers behind the Girthes, and sometimes
toward the Flancks, if it he be to put In his Croup: And, believe it, there is
nothing like the Spurrs; for, What makes him Sensible to the Heel, but the
Spurrs? Therefore Use them, and Use them until he Obey you; for no Horse can be
a Ready-Horse, until he Obeys the Heel.

But, Remember you do not Dull him with the Spurrs; for then he will not Care
for them no more than a Stone, or a Block; therefore you must give them
Sharply, when you give them; but give them but Seldom, and upon Just Occasion.

When he Maliciously Rebell's against What you would have him Do, leave not
Spurring of him, and Soundly, until he Obey you: And when he Obeys you in the
least Kind, Leight off, and send him to the Stable, and the next Morning Try
him again; and if he Obey in the least Kind, Cherish him, and make Much of him;
and Forgive him many Faults the next Morning, that he may see you have Mercy as
well as Justice, and that you can Reward, as well as Punish.

And now you see, Corrections are Better than Helps, and of what great Efficacy
the Spurrs timely and discreetly given, are for the Dressing of Horses; for
there is but the Hand and the Heels, and so the Spurrs are Half the Business in
Dressing Horses; only the Hand has the Pre-eminence: Though there be two
Spurrs, and but one Bridle, because the Horse has but one Mouth, and two
Sides; yet, if the Horse be not Settled upon the Hand, you cannot make him
Subject to the Heels. But the Correction of the Spurrs is so Necessary, and
Effectual, as no Horse can be made a Ready-Horse without them; and therefore
Esteem them Highly, next settling a Horse upon the Hand; which must be First.

All Helps are to Prevent Faults, and to go before Faults; as Corrections come
after Faults, to Punish for Offending. The Spurrs are to be used as a Help
thus; When the Horse goes Terra a Terra, your outward Leg close to him when he
Slacks, turn your Heel to him to Pinch him with the Spurrs; which you may
easily do, even to Blood, and no Body perceive it; for that ought to be done
Neatly, and Delicately, because the Spurrs are a Neat, and most Excellent Help,
and the Quintessence of all Helps in the Manage; and if the Horse Suffer and
Obey this, whilst you stay him on the Hand, you may say, He is an Excellent
Horse.

This Quickens him, and puts him Forward; but yet let me Tell you, Though this
is an excellent Help for Terra a Terra, yet it is not so good a Help for Terra
a Terra, as it is for all Airs; either to Pinch him with both the Spurrs, or
but with one: And the Reason, is, Because it makes him Croup more, and puts him
Together on his Hinder-parts, than puts him Forward; and therefore more proper
for all manner of Airs, than for Terra a Terra, though very good for both.

And thus much for that Excellent Help with the Spurrs, called Pinching.

There is another Help with the Spurrs, which I call a Help, because it is not
so Violent as a Correction, and is not so Pressing as Pinching; but between
Spurring and Pinching; And that is thus: When the Horse Gallops his Croup In,
or Terra a Terra, if he Obeys not the Leg enough, being close to him, or very
near it, then make the Motion with your Leg, as if you did Spurr him, and Hit
him with your Spurr, with as gentle a Touch as can be; and no more than to let
him Feel it a little; and this is the Gentlest of all things, with the Spurrs,
which makes him Obey the Spurrs, and puts him Forward, and is excellent for
Terra a Terra, or Le petit Gallop his Croup In, and much Better than Pinching;
for it puts him Forward, and makes him Obey the Spurrs at the same time; but it
is not good for Airs; for there he should Leap Upwards, and go Forward, but
very Little; and therefore Pinching is Best for Airs, because it Raises his
Croup, and therefore goes not Forward; and that little Touch with the Spur,
like Spurring, is good for Terra a Terra, and Le petit Gallop his Croup In,
because it puts him Forward, and makes him Obey the Spur.

If your Horse understands this Correction, and the two several Helps with the
Spurrs, being made Sensible to him, you may be well Assured he will Need none
of them after a while, but be so Sensible, as he will go Freely, and Obey you
Willingly, only with the Calf of your Leg; for the Help of the Thighs is a
Ridiculous conceit: for indeed, there is no Helps but the Spurrs, and the Calf
of the Legs, that the Horse can possibly Feel.

OF THE SECRET HELPS OF THE CALF of the LEG and SPVRRS.
WHen you are Stiff in the Hamms, which is putting Down your Heel, then the
Calf of the Leg comes to the Horse, but the Heel is removed from him. When you
Bend in the Hamms, which is to put Down your Toes, then the Calf of the Leg is
removed from him, but the Heel comes to him. These are as great Truths, as they
are Secrets.

There is nothing in the world makes Horses Resty and Vicious many several
Ways like the Spurrs, given out of time; and nothing in the world Dresses
Horses perfectly, like the Spurrs given in time.

Now you have the Perfection of the Hand and the Heels, which is the only thing
to Dress Horses perfectly withal, and nothing else.

OF THE ROD.
THe Rod we Use seldom for a Correction, but for Helps, and that many times
more for Grace, than Use; for one Rod will serve us half a Year: It Is the Hand
and the Heels that Dresses Horses, and nothing else.

The Helps with the Rod, are not so good for Soldiers Horses, for they should
go only with the Hand and the Heel; for the Sword must be in your Right Hand,
and not the Rod: But you may Use it, to Show it still on the contrary side on
which he Goes, or hold it up with a Grace at every Change.

For Terra a Terra with the Rod.
On the Right Hand, hold Up your Rod High, with a Grace, and give him sometimes
a Blow on the Shoulders, if there be need; and sometimes a Blow over the
Shoulders upon the Croup, if he Requires it.

For Terra a Terra on the Left Hand, hold the Rod up High, or put it to his
Flanck, with a Grace, and hold it there during his Voltoes, or give him a Blow
with it on the Flank, or on the Shoulder, if he requires it.

Use the same Helps with the Rod, upon Demy-Voltoes, or Passadoes: For the
Piroite, hold it on the Contrary side still.

For Corvets with the Rod.
On the Right Hand in Voltoes, hold the Rod somewhat Short, and Help him cross
the Neck, with a Grace, sometimes Touching him, and sometimes not; and a good
Blow now and then, if he Requires it: On the Left Hand in Corvets, Help him on
the Right Shoulder, with a Grace, and a just time.

Another Help with the Rod in Corvets, is, To hold the Rod a little Long, and
to Whisk, and Shake it Forwards and Backwards, with your Arm up, but not
Straight, rather Bowing a little in the Elbow: When you go Forward, the Horse's
right side to the Wall; there is no Help with the Rod more Graceful, than to
Strike the Wall perpetually with the Rod.

TO Help with the Rod in all Manner of Leaps.
TO Whisk the Rod Forward, and Backward, is a Graceful Help, but it Forces a
Horse a little too Forward, until he be Used to it.

To Help the Horse with the Rod, not Over your Shoulder, but Over the Bent of
your Arm, your Arm from your Body, and a little Bowed, so that the Point of the
Rod falls in the middle of his Croup, is a graceful Help, but somewhat
difficult to do.

But the best and surest Help, though not so Graceful, is, To turn the Rod in
your Hand, the Point toward the Horses Croup, and Help him so every time, and
in time, one Stroke only; but if he Raises not his Croup enough, then Help him
De tout temps, which is with two or three Strokes together, in Time: And this
is the Surest Help.

If your Horse be very Leight Behind, which few are, then Help him only before
with the Rod, and in Time.

If you would make your Horse only Croup with his Hinder-parts, and not strike
out, then Help him on the middle of his Croup; if you would have him strike
Out, then Help him with your Rod, on the setting on of his Dock: And if you
would have him put both his Hinder-Leggs under his Belly, then Strike him with
the Rod a little above the Gambrels. So these three several Helps with the Rod,
makes your Horse to Croop, to Strike out, and to put his Hinder-Leggs under his
Belly.

But there is no Help with the Rod, like Helping him with two Rods; one to
Raise him before, and the other Rod to Help him under his Belly; which puts him
so much upon the Hanches, as nothing is like it, or near it, upon Corvets, when
he is Tied Short, my New Way, at the Single Pillar.

OF THE VOICE.
THe Voice is Used three manner of Ways; Either as a Correction, by Threatening;
or as a Help, to Encourage the Horse; or as a Courtship to him, by Flattering
of him; which all Three, we seldom or never Use: For it is not the Sense of
Hearing, or Sight; but the Sense of Touch, and only the Hand, and the Heels,
that Dresses Horses perfectly.

OF THE TONGUE.
THe Help of the Tongue is an Excellent Help to Encourage, and put a Horse
Together, either in Terra a Terra; but especially in all Airs, nothing Better.

How Horses are to be REWARDED and PUNISHED: AND THAT FEAR does Much; LOVE,
Little.
IT is Impossible to Dress any Horse, but first he must Know, and Acknowledge
me to be his Master, by Obeying me: That is, He must Fear me, and out of that
Fear, Love me, and so Obey me. For it is Fear makes every Body Obey, both Man
and Beast; and therefore see that he Fears you, and then it is for his own sake
he Obayes you; because else he would be Punished: And Love is not so sure a
Hold, for there I Depend upon his Will; but when he Fears me, he Depends upon
Mine; and that is a Ready-Horse: But if I Depend upon his Will, that is a
Ready-Man. Therefore Love does no Good, but Fear does All: And so let them Fear
you, which is the Ground of Dressing all Horses whatsoever. And this is the
Counsel of a Friend.

Pluvinel, and most of the Great Masters in Horse-manship, Praise always
Gentleness, and Flatteries, and making much of Horses, either by Clapping,
Stroking them, or speaking Flatteringly unto them, or giving them some Reward
to Eat: And Pluvinel says, One ought to be a Prodigal in Caressing, and making
much of them, and a Niggard in Corrections, and careful not to Offend them; and
that there is no other way to Dress Horses but this. But some Horsemen Never
make much of them, or very Rarely; neither Abroad, before they get Up, when
they Ride them, nor when they Light, nor in the Stable; and yet these Horses go
Well. They do not Threaten them with the Voice, or ever Speak to them, and no
doubt but they do it on Purpose to keep them in Subjection, and Fear of them:
For Familiarity breeds Contempt; and Courtesy does no Good, but makes them
Presume; and makes them Diligent still to Obey.

Neither do they Use the Rod at all; no more do I; for one Rod will serve me
almost a Year; nor Use the Voice, but a good Hand, and good Heels, which only
Dresses Horses; and seldom lets a Fault escape without Punishment. When they
have Corrected them one Morning, it may be they will Spur them the next
Morning; but otherwise never Correct them without a Fault; and if they make
none, they are not Punished; and there is their Reward. Certainly this may be
good for Dressing of Horses.

For my part, when they do Well, I Cherish and Reward them; and when they do
ill, I Punish them; for, Hope of Reward, and Fear of Punishment, Governs this
whole World; not only Men, but Horses: And thus they will Choose the Reward, and
Shun the Punishment. They are Punished with nothing but the Spurrs; for all
Whipps, even of Wyre, Chambrieres, or Bulls-Pisles, are Toys. The Rod is more
for Grace than Use; but Reward, or no Reward, is nothing at all in Comparison
of the Art of Riding: For, let an Ignorant Fellow (which most are for any thing
I can perceive) Flatter his Horse, and not Punish him; or Punish him, and not
Flatter him; or Punish and Flatter him; yet I will not Flatter the Rider, but
will tell you, He shall Spoil your Horse, let him do what he will; because he
wants Art.

Opposition in Horses AGAINST the RIDER, A Sign of STRENGTH and SPIRIT.
BE not Discouraged if your Horse do Oppose you, for it shows Strength, Spirit,
and Stomach; and a Horse having all those, cannot choose but be made a
Ready-Horse, if he be under the Discipline of an Understanding Hand, and
Knowing Heels.

When a Horse does not Rebel, it shows Weakness, and faintness of Spirit, and
no Courage; and where Nature is so much Wanting, it is Hard for Art to Supply
it: But truly I never knew any Horse in my Life, but before he was perfectly
Dressed, would Rebel, and Extremely too, and a great while before he would go
Freely; but a little still, against his will, until he be perfectly Dressed.

Certainly there is no Horse but will Strive at the first in the Dressing, to
have his own will, rather than to Obey your will; nor does any Horse love
Subjection, nor any other Creature, until there is no Remedy, and then they
Obey; and the Custom of Obedience makes them Ready-Horses: They will Strive all
the Ways possibly they can, to be Free, and not Subjected; but when they see
it will not be, then they Yield, and not before. So they Deserve no Thanks for
their Obedience.

No man in the World, no, not the Wisest, if he were put in the Form of a
Horse, with his Supreme Understanding, could possibly find out more subtle
Ways to Oppose a Man, than a Horse will; nay, nor near so many, I dare say:
Whence I conclude, That the Horse must know you are his Master; that is, He
must Fear you, and then he will Love you for his own Sake: Fear is the sure
Hold; for Fear does All things in this World: Love, little; and therefore let
your Horse Fear you.

What makes a Horse go by ROTE, or ROUTINE.
THat which makes a Horse go by Rote, or Routine, is absolutely his Eyes; and
therefore I would Advise you, to have as few Marks as you can in the Manage:
That is, No Pillars but in the Outside, and there but one for My Way upon
Airs, and that will not Fix his Sight; so that then he will Attend the Hand
and the Heel: Nor too near the Walls, for then his Eyes will Attend them; Nor
to make him go in One Place Always; for there his Eyes will make him go by
Rote again: but several places will make him Attend the Hand and the Heel. And
this way, and no other, will Cure him of going by Rote.

THAT A Horse of Three Years Old is too Young for the MANAGE.
A Young Horse of Three Years Old, is but a Gristle, and easily Spoiled; and
besides, his Understanding is not comn to him; so that Wanting Understanding,
and being so Weak, you must have Patience to stay Three Years more at the
Least, until he has Both: Stops, and going Back, will Strain his Back, and
Spoil him: so that I would rather have a Horse of Six, Seven, or Eight Years
old, so he be Sound and not Vicious, than a Horse of Three Years Old; for I can
force him, and make him a Ready-Horse in three Months.

But some will say Boys learn Best, and so Coltes: I Answer, No; For if men
could be Beaten to it, as Boys are, they would Learn much Better, and Sooner:
but I can Force my Horses of those Years; and having both Understanding, and
Strength, they will and must of Necessity learn much Sooner and Better.

How a Man should SIT PERFECTLY ON HORSEBACK.
BEfore he Mounts his Horse, he must see every Thing in order about the Horse;
which is done in an Instant, without Peering and Prying about every thing; as
they say, Pour Fair l'entendu.

When he is in the Saddle, (for I suppose most Men know how to get Up) he must
Sit down in the Saddle upon his Twist, and not on his Buttocks; though most
think Nature made those to Sit on, but not on Horseback.

Being Placed upon his Twist, in the middle of the Saddle, advancing toward
the Pommel of the Saddle, as much as he can; leaving a handful of Space between
his Hinder-parts and the Cantle, or l'Arson of the Saddle, his Legs being
straight Down, as if he were on Foot, his Knees and Thighs turned inwards to
the Saddle; holding both of them Fast, as if they were Glewed to the Saddle,
(for a Horseman has nothing but those two with the Counterpoize of his Body
to keep him on Horseback) his Feet planted firmly upon the Stirrups; his Heels
a little Lower than his Toes, that the end of his Toes may pass the Stirrups
half an Inch, or a little more, and Stiff in the Hamms, or Jarrets, his Legs
not too far from the Horse's Sides, nor too near, that is, not to Touch them;
which is of great Use for Helps, that I will Show you hereafter.

The Reins of the Bridle are to be in the Left Hand, his little Finger
separating the Reins, and grasping the rest in his Hand, with his Thumb upon
the Reins, his Arm bent Close to his Body, but not constrained; his Bridle-Hand
some three Fingers Above the Pommel, and some two Fingers Before the Pommel,
that the Pommel may not hinder the Reins in their Working, and just over the
Neck of the Horse.

In the Right Hand, he must have a Whistling Rod, not too Long, like an
Angle-Rod; nor too Short, like a Poinson; but, if either, let it be (...) for
there are many Graceful Helps with a Short Rod, that a Long Rod will not Admit
of: you must Hold it a little off, from that End beyond your Hand; not only to
make much of your Horse with it, but to Hold it the Faster. The Right Hand,
where the Rod is, ought to be a little before your Bridle-Hand, and the Right
Arm a little Looser, than your Left Arm; but not too Far from your Body, the
point of the Rod bending a little Inwards, your Breast out.

You must Look a little Gay, and Pleasantly, but not Laughing; and Look
directly between the Horses Ears, when he goes Forwards: I do not mean, you
should be Stiff, like a Stake, or like a Statue on Horseback, but much
otherwise; that is, Free, and with all the Liberty in the world, as the
Frenchman says, in Dancing, A la negligence; and so I would have a Man on
Horseback, En Cavalier, and not Formal; for that shows a Scholar, more than
a Master; and I never saw any Formality, but me-thought it Looked something of
the Simple and Foolish.

The Seat is so much, (as you shall see hereafter) as it is the only thing that
makes a Horse go Perfectly; and the very Manner of Sitting is beyond all other
Helps: Therefore Despise it not, for I dare Boldly say, He that is not Bell
homme de Cheval, shall never be Bon homme de Cheval.

For, the Reins both of the Bridle and the Cavezone, I have showed you that
which was never yet Known before: And so this is enough for the Seat of the
Cavalier.

THE SECRET HELPS OF THE HORSE-MANS BODY.
YOu must Sit Straight upon the Twist, and always keep your Self so, what
Action soever the Horse makes; and to that End, you should always go to that
which comes to you, which is a Contrary Action. As for Example; The Horse Rises
Before, then you must put your Body a little Forward to him; for, did you go
along with the Horse, you must put it Backward.

If the Horse Strikes Behind, or Raises his Croup, you must put your Body
Backwards, which is Contrary to the Horses Motion; for, did you Follow the
Horse, you must put your Body Forward, and be Thrown: But the Best, is, To Sit
Straight, and the Action of the Horse will keep you on your Twist.

You must Understand, That the Body on Horse -- Back, is Divided into three
Parts, two Moveable, and one Immovable: The Moveable is the Body to the Waste;
the Immovable, from the Waste to the Knees; and the other Moveable from the
Knees to the Foot.

The Bodies -- Helps are to be Gentle Helps for all Horses; for, to Sit Strong
on Horseback, Astonishes the Weak Horse, makes the Strong go Counter-times,
and forces him too much; makes a Furious Horse Madd; makes a Resty Horse more
Resty; and a Horse Hard on the Hand, to Run away, and Displeases all sorts of
Horses. You are not neither, to Sit Weak on Horseback, but to Sit Easy;
Gentle Helps being Best: For they Fit all Horses, and Please all Horses.

The New and True Method of Working at first, either Colts, Young Horses, or
Old Ignorant Horses, upon Large Circles D'une piste.
NOw that you are on Horseback, Know how to Sit, and Know all your Helps; I
will show you How to Dress your Horse Perfectly: Which is in the Manner
Following.

The Cavezone, being My Way, the Reins in your Hand, the Inward Cavezone's Rein
pulled Hard, and Low, on the Inside of the Turn; Leg and Rein of a side that
is within the Turn; which brings In the Horses outward Shoulder, the
Bridle-Hand Low, and a little on the Outside, or Inside, as you see Occasion:
This gives the Horse a good Apuy, Working more on the Bars than on the Curb,
though it Works on both.

The Horses Croup being Out, and pulling In his outward Shoulder, presses the
Horse on the Inside, and fits him to Gallop large, D'une piste; as also for a
Trot, to Supple his Shoulders, being pressed.

The Inside puts him upon the Shoulders, which gives him an Apuy, and Supples
his Shoulders extremely, which is the first thing you must Work on; for,
without Suppling a Horses Shoulders extremely, he can never do any thing; for
that is the First and Principal business, and nothing does it like the Cavezone
(my Way.)

Give him no other Lesson than this, until he be very Supple on the Shoulders
upon his Trot; for that is the Foundation of all things in the Manage, to
Supple him, and make him Leight; and never Gallop him until he be so Leight, as
he offers to Gallop of himself; and this Trotting, and Galloping large, as they
call it, D'une piste, though his Croup be Out, and the Horse Lean's so much on
the Inside, as you would think he would Fall, he goes the Surer for it.

Stop him but seldom; and when you do, Stay him rather by Little, and Little,
than with a Sudden Stop; for that Weakens a Young Horses Reins, and Back very
much; and when he is on the Hand, then put your Body Back to put him upon the
Hanches, and give him Harder Stops; but then your outward Leg is to put In his
outward Leg, or else he cannot Stop upon the Hanches, your outward Hanch being
out.

OF LARGE CIRCLES Upon A TROT.
WHen you Work your Horse upon Large Circles D'une piste, upon a Trott, with
the Cavezone (my Way) in your Hand, Leg and Reyn on the Inside, either upon
Large or Narrow Circles, D'une piste, upon his Trott, where his Legs in that
Action are Cross, you must know how they Ought to Go; Which is thus:

His Hinder-Legg on the Inside of the Turn, and his Fore-Legg on the Outside
of the Turn, are Lifted up together at a time; and his Hinder-Legg on the
Inside of the Turn, when it is set Down, is set a little beyond his outward
Hinder-Legg, and a little Forwarder; and his Fore-Legg without the Turn, is set
Down at the same time, a little Forwarder than his inward Fore-Legg, and both
Circularly; and when he Changes his Legs Cross, then his outward Hinder-Legg
is set before his inward Hinder-Legg, and his inward Fore-Legg before his
outward Fore-Legg, and beyond it, and both Circularly.

His inward Hinder-Legg being set down Thus, must of necessity Bend, and Supple
his Shoulders, and the Cavezone's inward Reyn being Wrought, as I told you
before, the inward Leg must of necessity put Out his Croup, and Supple his
Shoulders; and thus he is Bent and Suppled extremely, and can never be Entier;
and his Legs always go Right and Truly, which is the most excellent Lesson
that can be.

OF GALLOPING UPON Circles D'une piste.
TO Work your Horse D'une piste, upon Large, or Narrow Circles, the Cavezone's
Reyn in your Hand, Leg and Reyn on the Inside, and the outward Reyn of the
Bridle, if need be, to Supple his Shoulders, pulling the inward Reyn hard to
bring In his outward Shoulder, upon a Gallop; I will tell you How his Legs go,
for a Gallop is another Action than a Trott; for a Trott is Cross, and a Gallop
is both of a Side, always Leading with his Legs within the Turn, and makes
Four distinct Times, with his four Legs, as I have showed you before.

Well then, his Fore-Legg within the Turn Leads Circularly, and is set Down
before, and beyond his outward Fore-Legg, and his Hinder-Legg within the Turn
follows; but is set Down a little before his outward Hinder-Legg, and a little
(...) beyond it, which Supples his Shoulders; and (...) Hinder Parts being put
Out thus, makes him Gallop Right, and nothing like it.

This is a most Excellent Lesson, and (...) Foundation of All Things in the
Manage: To Trott and Gallop thus, his Fore-Parts come (...) the Center, and
his Hinder-Parts flies it, being pressed more upon the Shoulders than the Croup:
But when he is thus Pressed, and Supple in the Shoulders, the Croup is easily
Wrought afterward.

I must Tell you, in these Lessons the Horse is Pressed, and Leans extremely on
the Inside of the Turn, which is Rare: To Supple his Shoulders, to Walk him
thus too, and Stop him with your outward Leg, is very good.

ANOTHER EXCELLENT LESSON to Supple a HORSES SHOVLDERS.
GO as if the Horse's Head was to the Pillar, (though you have none) and on the
Left Hand, and pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you; and though he goes
on the Left Hand, his Shoulders are Suppled for the Right. Then go on the Right
Hand, and pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you; though the Horse goes on
the Right Hand, yet his Shoulders are Suppled for the Left.

This is an Admirable Lesson to Supple a Horses Shoulders; and thus he shall
never be Entier.

Another Lesson for Suppling a HORSES SHOULDERS Upon LARGE CIRCLES.
UPon Large Circles, his Croup Out; to all the Helps, both with the Cavezone,
Bridle, Reyns, Legs, and Body, as I told you before; only this is to be Added,
for a while, till the Horse is Accustomed to it.

I would have you Trott him without Stopping of him upon his Trott; but from
his Trott to Gallop him, Le petit Gallop Gently; and from his Gallop to his
Trott again; and though of the same Hand still, yet Change him from Trott to
Gallop, and from Gallop to Trott, until you think it Sufficient, and then Stop
him, either upon a Trott, or Gallop, which you please: This is a most Excellent
Lesson; not only to Supple his Shoulders, but to make him Attend, and Obey the
Will of his Rider; having no continued Rule to Fix his Mind on, to go by Rote,
either in Trotting, or Galloping, but still to Obey the Man, as he Helps or
Commands him to either; and not Knowing when it is, he must absolutely Obey
both the Hand and the Heel; and so Stopping sometimes upon a Trott, and
sometimes upon a Gallop; not Knowing when he should be Stopped, nor where he
should be Stopped, makes him still to Obey the Man's both Hand and Heel; and
therefore a Better Lesson cannot be in the World; and therefore Use it: For,
all our End, is, To make a Horse Obey the Hand and the Heels; And this Lesson
does it, as much as any Lesson can do.

If the Horse Retain his Forces, then Gallop him Fast, and Quick; and then
Softly again, and then Fast again, as Occasion serves: And this Softly, and
Quick, upon his Gallop, (not Knowing when he must do Either) makes him Obey
both his Riders Hand, and Heels; which is the End of our Work, and the
Quintessence of the Manage.

When you have Suppled the Horse sufficiently on the Shoulders, and find him
Hard on the Hand, in not being upon the Hanches; then Trot him Large D'une
piste, and Stop him Often, and good Hard Stops with your outward Leg; and pull
him down, your Body back, and when he least Thinks of it; but if he would Stop
of himself, put him Forward without Stopping of him, and Stop him when he
Thinks not of it, and do the same upon a Gallop: Stop him Often, and Hard, and
put him Back sometimes, and you will find him very much upon the Hanches. This
is an Excellent Lesson, both to Settle him on the Hand, and to put him upon the
Hanches: But when you have done that, you must not Continue this Lesson long,
for it Pinches a Horse very much on the Back; besides, it makes him Fearful to
go Forward, and so may make him Resty, and many Inconveniences may come of it;
therefore your own Judgment must Work according to Occasion, when you do Stop
him (as I formerly have Told you:) You must Stop him upon a Walk too, as well
as upon a Trott, or a Gallop.

All these Lessons are only to Supple a Horses Shoulders; and see that you Use
no other Lessons than These, until the Horse be extremely Supple of his
Shoulders, and be Firm on the Hand: These are Rare Lessons, To settle a Horse
upon the Hand, to Supple his Shoulders, to make him Look into the Turn, to
Trott and Gallop Right, (as he should do) both Legs, Head, Neck, Body, and
all: And, besides these, if you Work, as I have Told you, the Horse shall never
be Entier; which the Italians call the Credenza, which is the Worst Vice a
Horse can have, and the most Dangerous. And these Lessons, with the Cavezone
(My Way) has these Rare Operations.

You must always Use these Lessons, until the Horse be extremely Supple of his
Shoulders, being the Principal Thing in Dressing Horses, and the First of our
Work: Horses does nothing but by Custom, and Habit, with often Repetions to
Fortify their Memories; and by good Lessons, and Methodical; and so do all Men
in all Things that they do, Good or Bad: Therefore give these Good Lessons, and
Repeat them Often to your Horse, and you will find by them Benefit, and
Contentment: And Remember, that I Work upon the Understanding of a Horse, more
than the Labor of his Body; for I assure you, he has Imagination, Memory, and
Judgment; Let the Learned say what they Please: I Work upon Those three
Faculties; and that is the Cause my Horses go so Well.

Here is now the End of all my Lessons, in Working a Horse to Supple his
Shoulders; which if you can do, according to those Lessons, then I will Assure
you, you have done the better Half of the work, in Dressing, and Making up a
perfect Horse.

The next Lessons are the other Half, and the Easier; which is, To make him
Sensible to the Heels; and those shall follow, after some certain Maxims, which
I will Insert here, and pray you to Mark, and Remember them.

The most Certain means to Unite a Horses Forces; to Assure, and Settle his
Head, and his Hanches; to make him Leight on the Hand; and to make him Capable
of all Justness and Firmness in all sorts of Airs, and Mannages; Depends
absolutely on the perfection on the Stop (as I have Told you;) but first he
must be Loosened and Suppl'd upon the Trott.

Going Back is a Remedy, to put him upon the Hanches; to Accommodate, and
Adjust his Hinder-Feet; and Settle him on the Hand; and to make him Leight
Before; to Stop Leightly, and in just Proportion.

You must never Gallop your Horse, until he be so Leight upon his Trott, as he
begins to Gallop of himself: For the Exercise of the Trott, is the first, and
most necessary Foundation to make him Leight; and is the Ground of every
Lesson, which can make the Horse Adroit, and Obedient; and on which must be the
Foundation of all sorts of Mannages.

The Property of the Gallop, is, To give him a good Apuy, and to Settle his
Head; and if he have too much Fougue, or Fire, Le petit Gallop will Appease
him, and give him Patience; and if he Plays too much on the Back, it will take
it off: but all upon Large Circles: It Tempers his Spirits, makes him
Well-Winded, and takes away his Too-violent Apprehensions, and Diverts him from
Evil designs of Jades Tricks; of Restiness, and Double-Heart, and Supples all
his Members.

EXCELLENT NOTES To make an END of the WORKING OF THE HORSES SHOVLDERS.
HAving showed you, How you should Work, and Supple the Horses Shoulders, with
the Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand, and not Tied to Pommel, which is the better
Half of our Work; I will Show you the other Half; which is, To make him Obey
the Heels, and Work both Shoulders and Croup together; the Cavezone's Reyn
still in your Hand, and not Tied to the Pommel.

To Work the Horses Croup and Shoulders together, is, With the Inward Reyn, and
Outward Leg; the inward Reyn of the Cavezone in your Hand, and pulled on the
Inside of the Turn, to bring In his Outward Shoulder, and to Press the Horse on
the Inside of the Turn, that his Legs without the Turn may be Free, and at
Liberty, to lapp over his inward Legs; which we call Passager, or En-Cavalier,
his Croup In. This Passager, though it is the Action of a Trott with his Legs,
yet it is less Violent than a Trott, and more than a Walk; which is the best
Action to Teach a Horse any thing of a Short Trott, and Together.

The first Lesson therefore that you must give him, upon this Action, is, His
Head to the Wall, pulling the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you, on the
Inside, and Helping at the same time, with your outward Leg, the Horse to go
Byas, his Shoulders before his Croup; which makes him Narrow behind, and so
upon the Hanches; because he is upon the Action of a Trott, his Legs being
Cross.

If he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr gently on that side; when the
Horse goes thus, he is then Pressed on the Inside of the Turn; if this be on the
Right Hand, then it is but Changing your Bridle-Hand into your Right Hand, and
the Left Cavezone's Reyn in your Left Hand, and pull it Hard, on the Inside, to
you, and your outward Leg; and make him do as much on the Left Hand, Leg and
Reyn Contrary; and if he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr with your
outward Leg. Continue this Lesson until you find him Obedient to your Heels:
You may make him go Byas in an open Field, the same Way, with the same Helps.

OF THE VOLTOES in PASSAGER.
WHen he Obeys perfectly the Heel, upon this Lesson of Byas in Passager, then
put him upon his Voltoes, or Circles, upon Passager, pulling the inward
Cavezone's Reyn on the Inside of his Neck, hard to you, to bring in his outward
Shoulder; and your Contrary Leg, Leg and Reyn contrary, bending his Neck
extremely; and if he do not Obey the Heel, give him the Spurr with your outward
Leg, and then do as much on the other Hand; and when you find him very
Obedient, upon Passager, a little Large, his Croup In, which puts him upon the
Hanches; Because his Croup is In, and because it is upon the Action of a Trott,
and the Less Circle, he is always the most Pressed, and therefore upon the
Hanches.

I say, When he is perfectly Obedient to your Hand and Heels, upon his Voltoes
somewhat Large, then make him go upon his Passager, in little more than his
Length; and if he be Obedient to your Hand and Heel there, on both Hands, he is
Advanced very Far toward a Ready-Horse: For, if a Horse Obey my Hand and Heel
upon Passager, which is a gentle Motion, and therefore proper to Learn a Horse,
because it makes him Patient, and fortifies his Memory the Better. I say, if he
be Obedient to me upon this Action, which is the Quintessence of Dressing
Horses, then I can make him do Any thing, that his Forces will permit him.

When the Horse is Perfect in the aforesaid Lessons, then put him upon his
Voltoes, his Croup In; upon Le petit Gallop, thus: Pull the Inward Cavezone's
Reyn hard to you on the Inside of his Neck, and your outward Leg to Help him,
Poysing more on the outward Stirrup, than on the Inward; and Bend his Neck
extremely, that he may be Pressed on the Outside of the Turn, which is proper
for Le petit Gallop his Croup In; and Help him with your Tongue, and he will go
presently very Perfectly; and giving him good Stops, he is advanced very far
toward a Ready-Horse. There is no Difference here between Le petit Gallop, and
Terra a terra.

When your Horse Obeys all these Lessons perfectly; which is, To obey your
Hand, and the Heels, Teach him to Advance; which is, to Rise Before; without
which no Horse can be a Ready-Horse: You may do it when you Stop him, or upon
Large Circles, staying him upon the Hand, helping him with your Tongue, and
your Legs, and Rodd, if there be cause; and put him Forward still after it,
and Raise him again. But if he Rises of himself, put him Forward, and let him
not Rise, but when you would have him; and he will very soon Obey you.

When he Rises perfectly (when you would have him) upon Large Circles, then put
his Croup In upon his Voltoes, and Raise him so; and then Feel him upon the
Hand, and Stay him a little when he is Up; and this will both put him upon the
Hand, and upon the Hanches.

Why I would not have you Raise him before now, was, Because it would Disorder
his Mouth, and put him Off of the Hand, and make him Resty; for many Horses
Rises Restily, because they would not go Forward, nor Turn; for, until they
Obey the Hand, and Fly the Heel, there is no Raising of them.

I would have you always begin upon Large Circles his Croup Out, and then put
In his Croup afterward; and so End.

When the Horse is perfect in all these former Lessons, then I would have you
Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to the Pommel, and Work him upon all former
Lessons so, with the inward Reyn, and inward Leg; and the outward Reyn, if
need be, his Croup Out. Upon Large Circles, his Croup In, the inward Cavezone's
Reyn Tied to the Pommel, and Helped with the inward Reyn of the Bridle, to
press him on the outside of the Turn, for Passager: But when you Raise him in
Passadoes, then the inward Reyn; when the inward Cavezone's Reyn is Tied to the
Pommel, then you Work most on the Bitt; for you have nothing else in your Hand.

To Help, with the Bridle alone, upon Large Circles, his Croup Out, inward
Reyn, and inward Leg; or outward Reyn and inward Leg, if his Shoulders come
not In enough; but upon Passager, with the Bridle alone, the inward Reyn, and
outward Leg, for the Reasons I have told you.

It is an Excellent Lesson to Gallop a Horse forth Right, and to Stop him, and
to Raise him only with the Bitt, and then to Turn him, helping with the outward
Reyn, which will prepare him for Passadoes; of which we will Talk hereafter.

There is an Excellent Lesson, the inward Cavazone's Reyn Tied to the Pommel,
which is this: To Gallop D'une piste a Narrow Circle, and so Four of them, and
still put him Forward to take the other Circle; and afterward to do the same
upon every Circle, his Croup in, Le petit Gallop, or Terra a terra; and put him
Forward to take the next Circle, and so as often as you think good to Repeat
all the Four: And this makes him Attend the Hand and the Heel, and most
Obedient to both.

The inward Reyn puts the Horse on the Outside, indeed all his Body, and Leans
on his outward Hinder-Legg, and Weighs his Fore-Parts up; and therefore on the
Hanches.

The outward Reyn puts the Horse on the Inside, and Weighs him down; and
therefore on the Shoulders.

You must have a Method to be often Repeated in all these good and Excellent
Lessons; Lesson after Lesson, or else you will never Dress any Horse perfectly
for Terra a Terra.

Needful OBSERVATIONS.
NAturally whenever a Horse's Shoulders come In, his Croup goes out; and when
his Croup is put In too much, his Shoulders go out. As for Example; Upon Large
Circles his Shoulders come In, his Croup goes out; and when his Head is as to
the Pillar, ( Leg and Reyn of a side) his Shoulders come In, and his Croup
goes out: Nay, in the right Terra a terra, his Shoulders going before, his
Croup shuns the Center, which is a little out, though you think his Croup is In.

But you will say, How is it then in Passager when his Croup is In? I say, that
is another Action than a Gallop, or Terra a terra; because then he is upon the
Action of a Trott, which is Cross, and may better admit to be Pressed within the
Turn, and his Legs at Liberty without the Turn; but yet (if his Shoulders go
before his Croup, and is Byas as he ought to be, in respect of his Shoulders)
his Croup is a little Out.

But now for Le petit Gallop, or Terra a terra; if his Croup be In, and you
pull in his outward Shoulder, at the same time, it is a great Force, and
Unnatural, so as the Horse goes Cross with his Legs, and can go no otherwise,
and is pressed on the Inside. It is True, it puts the Horse upon the Hand, and so
of necessity upon the Shoulders, and gives him an Apuy, which all the former
Lessons do; so that his Croup In needs it not, and besides, it is False.

For Terra a terra, He should be Pressed on the Outside, to have his Legs at
Liberty within to Lead; and that they call Le petit Gallop, if his Croup be In,
which is indeed Le petit Terra a terra: For being Pressed on the Inside, his
Croup In, it is hard to go, because he is Bound up; and it is unnatural, both
to bring In his outward Shoulder, and to put In his Croup at the same time.

To Press him on the Inside, and to go on the Inside, his Croup In, is a great
Pressure, and False; for indeed, he is Pressed for the other side, and would Look
out of the Turn, did not the Inward Cavezone's Reyn keep In his Head; howsoever
he is on the Shoulders, and his Legs go Cross; that is, his inward Fore-Legg
leads, and his outward Hinder-Legg follows, and continues so, and is False, and
his Croup Bunches out: If his Croup goes before his Shoulders, his Legs are
Wide behind, and off of the Hanches, and therefore upon the Shoulders, and
False, and goes Cross with his Legs. That is, his inward Fore-Legg leads, and
his outward Hinder-Legg follows, and continues so.

For the Piroite, his Croup goes a little out, though almost in a place; and
therefore he ought to be Pressed within the Turn; but he goes upon the Shoulders.

So upon Demi-Voltoes upon Passadoes, which is but Half a Terra a terra, he
ought to be Pressed without the Turn, because it is Terra a terra; but his Croup
is In a little, and is upon the Hanches.

To Work a HORSE upon PASSAGER, Either with His Head to the Wall, or upon
Circles; either with the Cavezone in your Hand, or the Cavezone Tied to the
Pommel; or the Bridle-Reyns separated in both your Hands, or the Bridle only in
your Left Hand.
UPon Passager, the Cavezone in your Hand; pull the inward Reyn of the Cavezone
hard within the Turn, to pull the Horses outward Shoulder In, and to Press him
on the Inside, that his outward Legs may be at Liberty, to Lap over his inward
Legs; and Help him with your outward Leg, (Leg and Reyn contrary) and let
the Horse go Byas.

Upon Passager, the Cavezone's Reyns in your Hand another Way, and that is this:
Pull the inward Cavezone's Reyn Cross his Neck, not too High, your Knuckles
toward his Neck, and Help him, with the outward Leg, and Reyn contrary; and
Bend your Body to be Concave within the Turn, which will Press him without the
Turn, and give his Legs Liberty within the Turn, to lap over his inward Legs,
but not so much, and let the Horse go Byas. By the way, this oblike Line, with
the inward Cavezone's Reyn, if you press the Horse on the outside, will make
him go Rarely upon Terra a Terra.

Upon Passager, the inward Cavezone's Reyn Tied to the Pommel, (having nothing
in your Hand but the Bridle to Work withal) you may safely work with the
outward Reyn of the Bridle, because the Horse cannot Look on the outside, and
that because the inward Cavezone's Reyn being Tied to the Pommel pulls in his
Head so much, and the outward Reyn will press him on the inside, which is
proper for Passager, as I have told you: If you press the Horse on the outside,
though the Reyn be Tied to the Pommel, he will go Terra a Terra Rarely, if he
goes Byas.

Upon Passager, the Bridle Reyns separated in both your Hands, you must Help
with the inward Reyn, to make him Look into the Turn; and Help also with the
outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder, to press him within the Turn,
for the Reasons I have told you: But if you press the Horse on the outside with
the inward Reyn, he will go Rarely Terra a Terra.

Here you have all the Ways of Working a Horse upon Passager, and I insist the
more upon it, because it is the Quintessence of Working Horses in the Manage,
and the Elixer in Horse-man-ship; for if a Horse Obeys me perfectly in
Passager, being Obedient to my Hand and Heels, I will make him go Terra a
Terra, or in any Air whatsoever most perfectly, or any thing that his Forces
will permit him to do; and therefore Esteem Passager above all things in the
world for the Manage, and for Raising the Horse in Passadoes, his Croup In, or
D'une piste, or Byas, or his Head to the Wall; and for pulling him Back, and
Raising of him. For these Rare things will not Fail to make a Ready-Horse, if
they be Applied rightly.

A GENERAL RULE.
WHatsoever Leads, Fore-parts, or Hinder-parts; that which still Leads, tends
to the Center, and the other parts of the Horse fly the Center: For it is a
General Rule, and true; That whatsoever is the greater Circle, before or
behind, that which is the greatest Circle, is most Wrought; for it goes most
Ground, and is at Liberty, whether it tends to the Center, or from it; and the
Less Circle, most subjected, and pressed: For, his Head to the Pillar (the Pillar
on the outside of his Head) his Fore-parts Lead, and therefore tend to the
Center, and his Hinder-parts fly the Center; yet his Hinder-parts are most
wrought, because it is the greater Circle, and therefore his Fore-parts more
subjected, and upon them, which is upon the Shoulders; so the Horse's Croup to
the Pillar, the Pillar on the Inside of his Croup, his Croup In, his Fore-parts
Lead, and therefore tend to the Center, and his Croup flies the Center; but his
Fore-parts are more Wrought, because it is the Larger Circle; and his
Hinder-parts more subjected and pressed, because it is the Narrower Circle; and
so upon the Hanches; so in his Length the same; and upon Passager, he Laps his
Legs over but every Second time, because they are Cross, and upon the Action
of a Trott.

MORE OBSERVATIONS.
IF a Horse goes Forward too much, pull him Back; if he goes Back, put him
Forward; if if he goes Side-ways on the Right Hand, put him Side-ways on the
Left Hand; if he goes Side-ways on the Left Hand, put him Side-ways on the
Right Hand. If he puts Out his Croup, put it In; if he puts In his Croup, put
it Out. If he goes on the Shoulders, stop him, and pull him Back; if he goes on
the Hanches, continue him so; if he Rises when you would not have him, keep him
Down. All this upon a Walk; for thus he must Attend both your Hand and your
Heel, and follow your Will, and so of Necessity must Obey you, because thus he
is put from his Will, to Yours. And this must make him a perfect Horse; It is a
most Excellent Lesson.

Never put a Horse upon any Air, nor Press him much, until you find him very
Sensible, and Obedient, both to your Hand, and to your Heel; and extremely
Supple: But Young Horses must never be much Pressed, nor Stopped too hard; for if
you do, you will give them such a Crick, and Taint in their Back, as they will
never Recover it.

The Horse's Head to the Pillar, (or an Imaginary Center) the Pillar without
his Head; and the Horse's Croup to the Pillar, the Pillar on the Inside of his
Croup. And thus the Horse shall never be Entier.

I never Work a Horse's Head to the Pillar, ( Leg and Reyn contrary;) because
his inward Hinder-Legg goes so much before his Shoulder, which is False; but
Leg and Reyn on a side, as I showed you before.

To Work a Horse upon Quarters, is to no purpose; for, it Confounds a Horse
more, than a whole Circle; but upon Demy-Voltoes, or half Turns, is very good
sometimes.

To put a Horse Byas on one Hand, and then put him Forward; and then put him
Byas on the other Hand, and then put him Forward; and so from Hand to Hand; and
Forward, makes him Attend, and Obey both the Hand, and the Heel, and is an
Excellent Lesson: But, as you put him Byas, his Fore-parts must always go
before his Hinder-parts.

There is no Lesson comparable to Passager, his Croup In, to make him Obey the
Hand, and the Heel; and to Raise him in Passadoes, and Passager him again,
still Raising and Passager; and if you find he is not upon the Hanches, then
Walk, or Trott him upon Large Circles, and Stop him Hard, and Raise him. All
these Lessons are upon a Walk, and Passager; therefore you may see what a Rare
thing Walking, and Passager is, to Make, and Dress all Horses perfectly.

Nay, when a Horse is a perfect Dressed Horse, you must not make him go above
Once a Week at the most, but Work him every Day upon his Trott, Gallop,
Passager, Raising of him, and Tuning of him Thus, and with the Cavezone, he
will go Rarely, when you would make him go upon any Air, or Terra a Terra. I
say, a Horse is thus to be Tuned; for, a Horse having Four Legs, is like a
Fiddle of Four Strings; and if a Fiddle be not Tuned, the Musician can never
Play Salengers Round upon it: So, if a Horse's Legs be not rightly Tuned, he
will never Dance his Round right.

Again, if you always Play upon a Fiddle, though Well-Tuned at the first, it
will soon be out of Tune by continual Playing on it; so a Ready-Horse, if you
make him go perpetually, he will be soon out of Tune; and therefore you must
Tune him still, as I have told you.

THE JUST and EXACT WAY FOR TERRA A TERRA.
TO go upon a Square for Terra a Terra, is Good, but not the Best Way; for, it
constrains a Horse too much; so that he cannot go with that Freedom that he
should; and is in great Danger, that his Inward Hinder-Legg will go before his
Shoulder, and then it would be very False: therefore the True, Easy, and Best
way is this that follows.

You must Sit Straight in the Saddle, the poise on the outward Stirrup, but not
to Lean down upon it too much; but only the outward Leg is to be a little
Longer than the inward Leg; and the inward Leg to be a little Before it, but
very little; and Sit you must all upon the Twist, and Stirrups, and as Forward
to the Pommel as you can; the outward Leg close to the Horse, and the Knee
turned inwards; and Stiff in the Ham, to bring the Calf of the Leg to the
Horse. Then for the Bridle-Hand; on the Right Hand put your Hand on the outside
of his Neck, or turn the Knuckles toward his Neck, pulling your little Finger
up straight without turning your Hand, which pulls the inward Reyn lying above
your little Finger, your Arm a little from your Body oblike, your Left Shoulder
coming a little In, and your Neck behind, removed a little on the Left side,
and your Buttons a little on the Right side: This makes the Horse necessarily
to go Byas. But now I must tell you where you must Look, or Turn your Head;
which must be on the inside of the Turn, to the Inside of the Horses Head,
which keeps your Hand steady; for did you Look to your inward Shoulder, it
would remove your Bridle-Hand too much within the Turn; and did you Look just
between the Horses Ears, your outward Shoulder would not come In enough; and
neither it, nor you, nor the Horse would be oblike; your Hand must go
Circularly with the Horse, and Steadily; and but to feel him.

Thus the Horse being Byas, the inward Reyn pulled thus, inlarges the Horse
before, in pulling his inward Fore-Legg, from the outward Fore-Legg; which puts
his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, which Narrows him Behind,
makes him Bow in the Gambrels, especially on his outward Hinder-Legg, which he
Rests on, and Thrusts his inward Hinder-Legg under his Belly; which (with all
these things) makes him very much upon the Hanches; the Horse is pressed on the
outside, and therefore of necessity must Look within the Turn, and his
Fore-parts being Enlarged, must embrace the Turn the better; his Hinder-Leggs
being within the Lines of his Fore-Leggs, he must needs be upon the Hanches;
and his Inward Fore-Legg being pulled from his outward Fore-Legg, (being
Circular) his inward Fore-Legg of necessity must be Longer than his outward
Fore-Legg to Lead, which is Right, and so makes the Largest Circle; and his
outward Fore-Legg the Second Circle; and his inward Hinder-Legg the Third
Circle; because it is thrust so much before his outward Hinder-Legg, and under
his Belley; and his outward Hinder-Legg makes the Fourth and Least Circle,
because he Rests so much upon it, and Bows in the Gambrels. Thus the Horse
makes Four perfect Circles, about the Pillar, or Center, as I have Told you,
and given you the Reasons of it.

Thus does the Horses Fore-parts go always before his Hinder-parts; that is,
half his Shoulders within the Turn, before his half Croup within the Turn;
which is his Fore-Legg within the Turn, before his Hinder-Legg within the Turn:
And thus the Horse can never go False, but most exactly True, with Head, Neck,
Body, Legs, and all.

For the Left Hand, every thing must be as for the Right, and the same way,
changing Hand, Body, and Leg; only for the Bridle-Hand, it is necessary, That
when you go on the Left Hand, you should put your Hand on the contrary side of
his Neck; your Arm close to your Body, and the Knuckles of your Bridle-Hand
turned toward his Neck, which pulls the inward Reyn for the Left Hand; because
that Reyn lies under your little Finger; and this makes you Oblike, and the
Horse Oblike: And every thing for the Left Hand works as truly, in all those
several things, as I told you for the Right Hand.

And thus the Horse is within your Hand, and your Heel; and so you Drive him,
and make him go as you List; Slower, or Faster; Higher, or Lower: But remember,
That your Hand be not too High, but that the Horse may go Low, and Pressed; for
if your Hand be Low, the Horse goes Low; and if your Hand be High, the Horse
goes High: For the Horse always goes according to the height of the Hand; and
Terra a Terra should always be Low, and Pressed.

Now I must tell you, That the inward Reyn Presses the Horse on the outside,
Weighs him up, and puts him upon the Hanches, especially on his outward
Hinder-Legg, so that all his Body Leans on the outside, and he cannot bring In
his outward Shoulder; for it is Bound up, and his Legs within the Turn to
Lead: You may know by his Neck, whether he Leans on the Outside or no; for if
he does, his Neck will Lean all on the Outside, and your Body must be Concave
on the outside, and Unequal within; for being Concave on the Outside, makes the
Horse so, and puts In his Hanch, (being Pressed on the Outside) and has three
Legs in the Air, his two Fore-Leggs, and his inward Hinder-Legg, with a Leap
forward Low, and Pressed. And this is most Exactly the truth for Terra a terra,
and all the delicate and subtle Helps that can be for it in the World.

OF CHANGING UPON TERRA A TERRA.
YOur Body is to be Oblike, your Knuckles toward his Neck, and on the Outside
of his Neck, on which Hand soever you go; and as he is going Terra a Terra on
the Right Hand, let his Shoulders come In a little before you Change him, and
then Help him with your Right Leg, and hold him Up with your Hand, and on the
outside of his Neck, which is now Changed to the Left side. Why his Shoulders
are to come In, a little before you Change him, is, To fix his Croup that it
should not go out; and so the Hand on the contrary side of the Turn, for the
same Reason; and put him always a little forward upon every Change.

Now you are on the Left Hand, before you Change him, let his Shoulders come In
a little to Fix his Croup, and then Help him with the Left-Legg, and put him
Forward a little, and then hold him Up with your Hand, and on the Outside of
his Neck, on the Left side. I begin with my Leg to Change him, for the same
Reasons I told you: But you must Remember, to be Stiff in the Hams, and your
Heels down, to bring the Calf of the Legs to him; and the same for
Demy-Voltoes. And this is Exactly the truth for Changing upon Terra a Terra.

OF CHANGING UPON Demy-Voltoes, Terra a Terra.
UPon Demy-Voltoes, your Hand on the outside, your outward Leg close to him,
you Sit Oblike, the Knuckles of your Bridle-Hand toward his Neck; and when he
makes his Demi-Voltoe, let him go a little more than half a Turn, to fix his
Croup before you Change him; and when you do Change him, Help him with the
inward Leg first, and then hold him Up with your Hand, and a little on the
outside of his Neck: This from the Wall is best, but by a Wall it cannot be;
for you cannot go through the Wall, and therefore by a Wall it can be but a
just Half Turn, or Demy-Voltoe, which you may either Help with the inward, or
outward Reyn at your own Pleasure, so you keep his Croup to the Wall, that he
may keep the Line, and not Falsify the Demy-Voltoe. This may be done with
either Reyn, so it be done with Art, and Skill, like a Great Master; for
otherwise nothing is Right in the Manage.

OF GALLOPING, AND Changing En Soldat.
WIth the outward Reyn, and the outward Leg, put him always Forward; If his
Croup goes out too much, then your Bridle on the outside of the Turn, or of his
Neck, to Help with the inward Reyn, to keep In his Croup, otherwise not, but
Help with the outward Reyn, and outward Leg. Thus much for Changing upon
Circles D'une piste, which must always be either Half a Turn, or a Quarter of
a Turn, Terra a terra.

TO PREPARE A HORSE FOR PASSADOES.
FIrst Walk him Fore-right, either by a Wall, Hedge, or otherwise, and at the
end Stop him, and Raise him two or three Passadoes, and then Turn him gently,
Helping with the outward Reyn, and outward Leg, and see that he does not
Falsify his Demy-Voltoe, upon Passager, either in his Shoulders, or his Croup;
but both to be Just, when he is Turned.

Do as much on the other Hand, and then Trott him upon the Straight Line; Stop
him, Advance him, and Turn him as you did before; and when he is Perfect in
this, then Gallop him Le petit Gallop, upon the Straight Line; Stop him,
Advance him: But now let him go a Demy-Voltoe upon his Air, and when he is
Perfect in this, then let him make a Passado, upon Le petit Gallop, without
Stopping, or Advancing, which he will do perfectly; but you must put his Head a
little from the Wall, that his Croup may be to the Wall, to keep the Line, that
he may not Falsify his Demy-Voltoe; and before he Turns, to make two or three
Falcadoes, to firm his Hanches the better, to Turn with the better Grace: If
you would Run him A toute Bride, keep his Head a little from the Wall, to keep
his Croup to it, slacking the Reyns a little, and pressing him with your Legs,
and to make two or three little Falcadoes before you Turn him, and then close
him with your outward Reyn, and outward Leg, for the Demy-Voltoe; and so on
the other Hand the same for the Passadoe, some Five times the Horses Length.
And thus the Horse will go perfectly in Passadoes, which is the Touchstone of
a Ready-Horse, obeying Hand and Heel in every thing.

If your Horse go in Corvets, or a Demy-Ayre, then make his Demy-Voltoes upon
his Passadoes, upon his Air, which is very Graceful. The French calls this
Passadoe, Releve; which methinks, is not a proper Term for it: A Demy-Voltoe
must be Helped in all Kinds like Terra a Terra, for it is but a half a Turn Terra
a Terra; that is, the inward Reyn, and outward Leg, and your Body, and every
thing like Terra a Terra.

Of the PIROYTE.
THe Action of the Horse's Legs in the Piroyte, is very Strange; your Hand on
the outside of his Neck to Look into the Turn, and working Violently with the
outward Reyn of the Bridle, Straightens his Fore-parts, and puts his
Hinder-parts at more Liberty, helping with no Leg; so the Action of his Legs
are thus: On the Right Hand, when he lifts up both his Fore-Leggs at the same
time, he lifts up his Hinder-Legg without the Turn; so he has three Legs up
at a time, and Rests only on the inward Hinder-Legg; and when those three Legs
come to the Ground, his outward Shoulder coming In so Fast, his inward Hinder
Leg removes at the same time almost in a Place, to keep the Circle; and I say,
that at the same time those three Legs are set Down, his inward Hinder-Legg
removes, to go along with the Circle; but in a manner in a Place: So that
indeed the inward Hinder-Legg is the Center, though it removes in the place
Round; and when the Horse is so Dizzey as he can go no Longer, (for fear of
Falling) then he sets his inward Hinder-Legg forward, to Stop himself.

These are Exactly the Helps, and the Motions of the Horses Legs in the
Piroyte, or else he could not go so Swiftly as he Ought: He is upon the
Shoulders, because he is Pressed on the Inside; so is a Passadoe, being but Half
a Piroyte, because both of them is Helped with the outward Reyn.

One of the GREATEST SECRETS IN The MANAGE that ever I found out.
THe inward Hinder-Legg to the Turn always put Out a little, Is in all things
the Quintessence of the Manage, whether his Croup Out, or In; the Knuckles of
the Bridle-Hand toward his Neck, his Croup In, does well in Terra a Terra; and
always your Horse to go Byas, upon his Voltoes, or his Head to the Wall, does
it Best; for his Shoulders going before, his Hinder-parts put out his inward
Hinder-Legg, which is the greatest Business in the Manage; for so his
Hinder-Leggs are near together, and so upon the Hanches.

The inward Reyn of the Bridle does it, pulled, as I have told you, and so does
the inward Reyn of the Cavezone; for it puts out his inward Hinder-Legg,
Narrows him behind, and Inlarges him before; because it pulls his inward
Fore-Legg from his outward Fore-Legg, and therefore Inlarges him before; and at
the same time, it puts his inward Hinder-Legg out, to his outward Hinder-Legg;
and therefore Narrows him behind, and so must of necessity be upon the Hanches.

And thus his inward Fore-Legg must always be before his inward Hinder-Legg, so
that half his Shoulders goes always before half his Croup, by which means he
can never go False; and his Fore parts always Embracing the Turn the better,
and the outward Hinder-Legg being kept In a little, with your outward Leg,
makes his two Hinder-Leggs within the Lines of his Fore-Leggs, which makes him
upon the Hanches, and his Fore-parts to Lead, as Horses always should do: For,
they do not Work with their Arses first, but with their Heads, and Fore-parts.

Remember, That no Horse can be upon the Hanches, but those that Bend in the
Gambrels, and Bow there; and the more their Hinder-Leggs go under their Belley,
the more they Bow in the Gambrels. Remember also as a certain Truth, That no
Horse can be upon the Hanches, except his Croup, or Buttock, be thrust out
Backwards: As for Example; When you give a Horse a good Stop, his Hinder-Leggs
go under his Belly, and his Croup, or Buttocks, are thrust out; he Bows in the
Gambrels, and so is upon the Hanches: When he goes Le petit Gallop, his Croup
In, his Hinder-Leggs are thrust under his Belly, then his Croup goes out; he
Bows in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches: So in Terra a Terra, his
Hinder-Leggs are thrust under his Belly, and his Croup goes out; he Bows in the
Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches.

When you pull a Horse Back, one of his Hinder-Leggs goes always under his
Belly; he puts out his Croup, bends in the Gambrels, and is upon the Hanches:
So in Passadoes his Croup is thrust out, he Bows in the Gambrels, and is upon
the Hanches; but if he be Raised too High, it puts him off of the Hanches, for
then he is Stiff in the Gambrels, because his Croup goes In; which puts him
upon the Hand, but off of the Hanches: Therefore you must never Raise him too
High in Passadoes; if his Croup must go out, be Bowed in the Gambrels, and so
be upon the Hanches.

My Way, at the Single Pillar in Corvets, puts out his Croup, makes him Bow in
the Gambrels, and so to be upon the Hanches, because he cannot Rise High, and
therefore puts out his Croup, and is upon the Hanches; so all that puts a Horse
upon the Hanches, is before, either with the Cavezone's Reyn, or Bitt, and
nothing behind.

The inward Hinder-Legg, and inward Cavezone's Reyn, is the Quintessence of the
Manage, with thrusting his Croup out, which makes him Bow in the Gambrels, and
so be upon the Hanches; which is the End of all our Work and Business in the
Manage. I do not mean his Croup to be put out in a Circle, or put out upon a
Straight Line; but be thrust out Backwards, and then he is upon the Hanches,
because he Bows in in the Gambrels.

I must Remember you again, that to put him on the Hanches, is all Before; so
that when his Head is pulled Down, and In, then he is upon the Hanches; for his
Croup goes out, and he Bow in the Gambrels, and therefore is upon the Hanches:
That is, the Horse must be a little Higher behind than before; for then his
Croup goes out, and he Bows in the Gambrels, and therefore is upon the Hanches.
As for Example; A Horse goes down a Hill, then his Croup is Higher than his
Fore-parts, and his Croup goes out, and then he bows in the Gambrels, and is
extremely upon the Hanches.

So if he be turned in the Stable, his Croup is Higher than his Fore-parts, and
puts his Croup out, bends in the Gambrels, and therefore is very much upon the
Hanches. So in plain Ground, where there is no Hills, you must Supply it, with
pulling his Head Down, and In, as much as you can, to make him Higher behind,
than before, which puts out his Croup, makes him bow in the Gambrels, and puts
him upon the Hanches; as Stopping of him, pulling Back, Passager, Le petit
Gallop, and Terra a Terra: All these pulls him Down, and puts out his Croup,
which puts him upon the Hanches.

If the inward Cavezone's Reyn be Tied to the Pommel, or pulled Hard in your
Hand, it puts him upon the Hanches, because it puts his inward Hinder-Legg out
to his outward Hinder-Legg, that it shall not come In too much, nor at all; and
that puts him upon the Hanches; so in Passadoes, or Corvets, the inward
Cavezone's Reyn tied to the Pommel, puts the inward Leg out, which puts him
upon the Hanches, because it thrusts his Croup out: But when you have nothing
but the Bridle, What then? Then the Inward Reyn of the Bridle does the same in
all things; but Passager his Croup In, is with the outward Reyn, because it is
the Action of a Trott, which is Cross, and so it will suffer it, because his
Legs are Byas; so it is right for Passager, to be Pressed within the Turn, and
at Liberty without the Turn, or else his outward Legs could not Lap over his
inward Legs: But if you have nothing but the Bridle, he will Look out of the
Turn, if you do not Help with both Reyns; but whenever you Raise him in
Passadoes, his Croup In, or Out, you must Help with the inward Reyn, to put out
his inward Hinder-Legg, which makes him Bow in the Gambrels, because his
Hinder-Leggs are made like our Arms, and therefore must Bow in the Gambrels, if
it be thrust out.

But I must tell you for a great Truth, That whenever, upon Large Circles
D'une piste, the Horse's inward Hinder-Legg is put out, and bows, it puts him
not upon the Hanches, but very much upon the Shoulders; for the more his
Buttock does go out, the more still he is upon the Shoulders; for that Lesson
is not to put him upon the Hanches, but to Supple his Shoulders; for if you
would put him upon the Hanches, you must put In his Croup; for the Larger
Circle is wrought most, because it goes the most Ground; yet his Hinder-parts
are the most pressed, because in the Narrower Circle, and therefore upon the
Hanches.

Some are of Opinion, That the more you put In his Croup, the more he is on the
Hanches; which I do not Think, because his inward Hinder-Legg goes before half
his Shoulder, and so he is Wide behind, and off of the Hanches, and goes
Backward: But if his Croup be In, and you put out his inward Hinder-Legg, then
he bows in the Gambrels, his Hinder-Leggs Narrow behind, and so upon the
Hanches; and the more upon the Hanches, if the Horse goes Byas, because by that
means the Horses Hinder-Leggs are nearer together, and so Narrower, and
therefore upon the Hanches; and this is most true: For if the Horses
Hinder-Legg (within the Turn) goes before his inward Fore-Legg, he does not
only go Backward, but his Hinder-Leggs are stiff in the Gambrels, and therefore
not upon the Hanches; but when you put out his inward Hinder-Legg, then he Bows
in the Gambrels, and therefore upon the Hanches, because his Hinder-Leggs are
made like our Arms; only he has a Joint more, which is the Stifling-Joynt.

You see plainly, now, What an excellent, and most Rare thing it is, to keep a
Horses inward Hinder-Legg out in all manner of things that are in the Manage;
and in whatsoever you Work him, it is the absolute Quintessence of the Manage;
and without it is nothing Right, but most False, because of abundance of
Irreparable Errors; whereas with it all things are Right, and most True.

This has been Studied to the Purpose, and no Horse but is perfectly Made with
it, and all is to put his inward Hinder-Legg out in all things; and being put
out thus, he must bow in the Gambrels, because his Hinder-Leggs are made like
our Arms. And this is that which none either Knows, or have Thought of; and
therefore Mark it, Remember it, and Practice it if you can; and if you cannot,
do not find Fault with a thing, because you cannot do it: For, certainly no Man
is Born to all Professions, by Inspiration, but with great Study, Diligence,
Care, Patience, and long Practice: No Man being Born with so Supreme a Wit
above others, as to do (as soon as he sees it) any thing that has been so many
Years another Man's Study.

To put a Horse UPON the HANCHES: On which I insist the More, because it is the
End of all our Work and Labor in the Manage; For, Without it, no Horse can
Possibly go Well.
A Horse can never go Well upon the Hanches, but his Fore-parts must be
Wrought; for, in that Manner, when you Stop him, you pull his Fore-parts, and
that puts him upon the Hanches, because you pull his Fore-parts Down, and In:
When you pull him Back, you put him upon the Hanches, because you pull his
Fore-parts Down, and In; When you make him go Terra a Terra; when you Work the
Inward Reyn, on which Hand soever he goes, so you Press him on the outside, and
put In his outward Hanch, then you put him upon the Hanches, because you pull
him Down on the outside, with the Inward Reyn of the Bridle, on either Hand.

So (My Way) with the Cavezone Tied to the Pommel, or Tied to the Girthes, if
he be Pressed on the outside, and his outward Hanch put In, puts him upon the
Hanches, because the Cavezone pulls Down his Head, and In. And believe me, The
Cavezone thus, puts him more on the Hanches, than any thing; but if you Press
him on the Inside of the Turn, (though you do pull Down his Head) he is off of
the Hanches, because his outward Hanch goes out, and therefore puts him on the
Shoulders.

You see then, That whatsoever pulls a Horse Head Down, and In, puts him upon
the Hanches; or that Naturally he puts his Head Down. As for Example; a Horse
that goes In Caputiato; which is, To Arm himself against the Bitt, is easily
put upon the Hanches; and being upon the Hanches, he is Leight of the Hand.

To Strike a Horse on the Knees with your Rodd, when he Rises before, pulls him
Down, and In, and therefore puts him upon the Hanches. There is no Horse that
holds Up his Head, but he is off of the Hanches; nor any Horse that Rises High
before, but is off of the Hanches; nor any Horse in Terra a Terra, when his
Head is pulled Down, and In, but goes on the Hanches, if he be Rid as he Ought
to be. The Reason is this; No Horse can go on the Hanches, that does not Bow in
the Gambrels, or Hinder-Houghs: Whenever a Horse Rises High before, he is
Stiff in the Gambrels of necessity, and therefore off of the Hanches; nor does
a Horse hold Up his Head very High, but it Stiffens his Gambrels, and therefore
off of the Hanches; nor can any Horse go Low before, but of necessity he must
Bend in the Gambrels, either going Down a Hill, or Turned in the Stable, which
makes his Hinder-parts Higher than his Fore-parts; but he must Bend in the
Gambrels, and therefore must be upon the Hanches, and so his Croup In: But if
his Croup be out, he is upon the Shoulders, though his Head be Down.

So many a Horse (as also Hunting and Traveling Geldings) go horribly upon the
Shoulders, though their Heads be Down; but indeed they are all upon the
Shoulders except in the Manage. For Example; A Horses Forelegs are made like
our Legs, the Knees outword; but a Horses Hinder-Leggs are made like our Arms,
just contrary: So that whenever a Horse is Raised High before, it Stiffens
him in the Gambrels; and when he holds Up his Head, it Stiffens him in the
Gambrels. So on the contrary, whenever his Head is pulled Down, of Necessity
he must Bend in the Gambrels; for he cannot do otherwise, if he be Pressed,
otherwise not.

I labor this Point the more, because you shall clearly see what puts him on
the Hanches, and what puts him off of the Hanches; that so you may Shun the
one, and Take the other, which is, to put him on the Hanches, because that is
the End of all our Labor, and the Quintessence of our Art; for, without a
Horse be upon the Hanches, he can never be a Ready-Horse, or Leight on the
Hand; but there is no Rule without an Exception, and that is, you may pull Down
a Horses Head, and yet not upon the Hanches; which is, when you Work his
Shoulders D'une piste, Leg and Reyn on the Inside, though his Head be pulled
Down, he cannot be on the Hanches, because you put it out, and Press him on the
Inside: No more when his Croup is In, if he be Pressed on the Inside, his Croup
goes out a little, and therefore cannot be upon the Hanches, though his Head be
pulled Down, because you put his Hanch out: This is good to give him an Apuy
upon the Bars, and Supple his Shoulders; but it cannot put him on that which
you put away, that were too great a Miracle, indeed an Impossibility.

Pulling Down his Head, and In, puts him upon the Hanches, at a Stop; and
pulling Down his Head, and In, when you make him go Back, puts him upon the
Hanches; and when you pull Down his Head and In, and Raise him, it puts him
upon the Hanches; and when you Press him on the outside of the Turn in Terra a
Terra, it puts him upon the Hanches; when you pull Down his Head and In, either
with the Cavezone, or the Bridle; and so pulling Down his Head, and In,
pressing him on the outside of the Turn, puts him upon the Hanches in Terra a
Terra, or upon his Walk in Passager: And this (I am sure) is sufficient to put
a Horse upon the Hanches, which is the Elixir of the Manage, and is done when
his Head is Down, and In, and Pressed; that is, when you pull Down his Head, that
you press him with the Heels, or Legs, otherwise not; for, if a Horse holds
Down his Head to Drink, he is not on the Hanches, for then he Bows rather
Before, than Behind, and is on the Shoulders; therefore he must be pressed; so if
he holds Up his Head, it Works nothing on the Hanches, but the contrary.

A short Trott puts a Horse upon the Hanches, so a short Trot D'une piste, Leg
and Reyn on a side, puts a Horse upon the Hanches, because his inward
Hinder-Legg is put out; his Head to the Wall puts him upon the Hanches; and
nothing puts him more on the Hanches than a Leight Hand; for when he has
nothing to Rest on Before, then he will rest Behind, which is upon the Hanches.

There are many Reasons why we Work a Horse so much, to put him upon the
Hanches, which I have showed you before; but there is one Reason more, and that
is this: A Horse's Croup, or Hanches, bears nothing but his Tail, which is very
Leight; but his Shoulders has his Neck and Head to Bear, which is more; and
therefore we put him upon the Hanches, to Poyse him, and to Relieve his
Shoulders, and to make him Leight on the Hand.

Thus much for Dressing all manner of Horses upon the Ground, to make them Obey
Perfectly both Hand and Heel, and to put them upon the Hanches, which is the
Masterpiece of our Art.
Here Ends the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART, For Dressing and Making of Horses in all SEVERAL AIRS, MY NEW
WAY.
YOu must in all Airs follow the Strength, Spirit, and Disposition of the
Horse, and do nothing against Nature; for Art is but to set Nature in Order,
and nothing else: But to make a Horse Gallop and Change, and to go Terra a
Terra, is for the most part Forced; and in Passadoes the like: For, if a Horse
be Impatient, he will hardly go well in Passadoes.

No other Airs are to be Forced, but every Horse is to Choose his own Air,
unto which Nature has most Fitted him, which you may easily see, when he is
Tied Short to the Single Pillar My Way.

For Corvets, a Horse ought to have a great deal of Patience: And the Air of
Corvets gives a Horse Patience with Discreet Riding, (as they say) but I have
seldom seen that Discreet Riding; I doubt there is a Mistake in it, which is
this: First the Horse has Patience, and then that Horse goes in Corvets; but
seldom Impatient Horses are made Patient by Corvets: So seeing most Horses that
go well in Corvets, to have Patience, they think Corvets gives them Patience,
when it is Patience that gives them Corvets. But there is no Rule without an
Exception, yet I doubt I am in the Right; for, though some Young Horse may (by
Chance) go in Corvets, yet I assure you, for the most part, Horses must have a
great deal of time, with the Custom of often Repetitions; to be in some Years,
and to have Gray-Hairs in their Beard, before they will be Settled, and Firm'd,
to go certainly in Corvets, both Forwards, and upon their Voltoes; therefore it
is an Error in those that think they can force Corvets, if the Horse's
inclination be not to go in that Air; for I have known many Horses, that all
the Force in the world would never make go in Corvets; their Disposition being
against it: Corvets is an Air, built only of Art; for if the Horse be not
perfectly in the Hand and the Heels, and upon the Hanches, he will never go in
Corvets: Yet I must Tell you, This New Way of Mine will make Horses go in
Corvets, which by no other Way would have been brought to it, and it seldom or
never Fails me.

For Leaping Horses, there are Four several Airs, which are Croupadoes,
Balotadoes, Capriols, and a Pace and a Leap; the Height of these may be all
alike, but not the Manner; though the Horse that goes the Longest time, must
needs go the Highest.

Croupadoes is a Leap, where the Horse pulls up his Hinder-Leggs, as if he
drew, or pulled them up into his Body.

Balotadoes is a Leap where the Horse offers to Strike out with his
Hinder-Leggs, but does not; and makes only an Offer, or Half strokes; showing
only the Shoes of his Hinder-Leggs, but does not Strike, only makes an Offer,
and no more.

Capriols is a Leap, that when the Horse is at the full Height of his Leap, he
Yerks, or Strikes out his Hinder-Leggs, as near, and as eeven Together, and as
far out as ever he can Stretch them; which the French call, Nouer
l'Esquillette, which is, To tie the Point.

A Pace and a Leap, is, as it were three Airs; the Pace Terra a Terra, the
Raising of him a Corvet, and then a Leap: These Airs can never be Forced to go
Well in them, in spite of their Poynsons, but what Nature ordains them; for,
they are called, Well-Disposed Horses.

What belongs to Leaping Horses (according to the Old Opinion) are these
things: A Horse of huge and vast Strength, an excellent Mouth, perfect good
Feet; in which last they have not said Amiss, for good Feet are very Requisite,
else the Horse dares never Leight on them, for fear of Hurting them (no more
than a Man that has the Gout, dares Leap) and so will never Rise.

I could wish a good Mouth, (which is a good Apuy) neither too Hard, nor too
Soft, but to suffer a good Apuy upon the Bars, and so to suffer the Curb,
which is to be understood a good Mouth: yet I must tell you, the rarest Leaping
Horse that ever I saw, or Rid, went not at all upon the Curb, but only upon the
Bars of his Mouth, which I do not Commend; but it is better to have him Leap
so, being so rare a Horse, than to be so Overcurious as not to have him Leap
at all, because he went not upon the Curb.

That they must be very Strong Horses to be Leaping Horses, is a very great
Error; for, it is not the Strongest Horses that is fittest for the Delight of
the Manage, and especially not for Leaping Horses; for I have seen many Strong
Horses, that must be Galloped very long before you could Abate the strength of
their Chines; and all that while they would do nothing but Yerk, and fetch
disordered Counter-times of False Leaps, and the best Horsemen in the World
could never make them Leaping Horses: So it is not Strong, but Well-disposed
Horses; for the best Leaping Horses that ever I Knew, were the Weakest Horses I
have seen.

Take one of the Guard, the Strongest Fellow that is, and I will bring a Little
Fellow that shall Out-Leap him many a Foot; yet that Strong Fellow would Crush
that Little Fellow to Death in his Arms: So it is not Strength, but Disposition
fits Horses for Leaping. But some will say, That a little Man's Strength is
above his Weight, and the great Man's Weight is above his Strength; but that is
not so; for the great Man's Strength shall be more above his Weight, than the
little Man's Strength above his, and yet the little Man shall Out-Leap him.
Nay, two Little Men of Equal Strength, the one shall Leap excellently, and the
other not; and more, a Weaker little man shall Out-Leap the Stronger, and
sometimes a Weak slender slim Fellow will Out-Leap a Knit strong Fellow; so
that it is nothing but Disposition, which Nature gives, and not Art: Sometimes
a Strong great Fellow will Out-Leap a little Man, but that is seldom, because
their Spirits are more Dilated, Assunder, and Diffused, than in little men: The
like I will assure you in Horses, as I have told you of men; there may be a
Strong Horse disposed for Leaping, and that no doubt is an Excellent Horse; but
for the most part they are but Weak Horses, that are disposed for Leaping;
sometimes a Horse finds himself so Pincht with Corvets upon the Hanches, being
Weak, that he finds Ease in Leaping.

Thus you see, that Leaping Horses are disposed by Nature, and not Art, being
full of Spirit, and Leight; so that Horsemen has nothing to do in making
Leaping Horses, but only to give them the time, which is all the Art ought to
be used to a Leaping Horse; and he that thinks to show more Art in a Leaping
Horse, will but show his Ignorance and Folly.

A Pace and a Leap is an Air, in which Horses commonly go when they have not a
good Apuy; for the Pace puts him upon the Hand, and gives him a Rise to Leap
like one that Runs before he Leaps, and so may Leap Higher than he that goes
every time a Leap. Thus I have showed you these Airs, Corvets, Croupadoes,
Balotadoes, Capriols, and a Pace, and a Leap, which Nature must do more than
Art: Two Paces, and three Paces, and a Leap, are not comely, and are indeed
rather a Gallop Galliard, than can be called an Air.

My New Way at the SINGLE PILLAR, Which is Most Effectual and Operative for the
Dressing of all Horses in all Airs whatsoever.
FIrst bring the Horse Sadled, and Bridled, and put him under the Button, and
then let a Groom take the inward Cavezone's Reyn for the Right Hand, and Lap it
about the Single Pillar, and make it very short, (but where he Holds it Higher
than where it is Tied to the Ring of the Cavezone) and let another Groom hold
the Long Reyn of the Cavezone on the other side, in his Hand, with a Poinson in
the other Hand, to Prick him if he should put out his Croup too much; and one
behind him with a Rod, to keep him from going Backwards; and then let the
Cavalarizzo Raise him De firm a firm, which is in a place: A little at first
must satisfy you, for, Rome was not Built in a day. Thus Tying him short, he
cannot Rise High, and therefore to find his Ease, he goes upon the Hanches; for
he is forced to it: After he is Used so a little, two Rodds is the best Help,
one upon the Shoulder, and the other under his Belley, which puts him upon the
Hanches.

Tie him so still with the same Reyn, and when he is perfect De firm a firm,
then make him go upon his Voltoes with two Rods in your Hands, Helping Before
with one Rod, and the other under his Belley; and be you on the outside of the
Horse, and he will go upon his Voltoes perfectly.

Tie him so still with the same Reyn, and Help him with both your Rods as
before, and be on the outside of him, and then go forwards, and Face the Horse,
and he will go in Corvets upon his Voltoes Backwards perfectly; which I never
saw but this Way.

Tie him with the same Reyn still, and you may make him go Side-ways in Corvets.

Now Tie the Left Reyn (as you did the Right) short, which does the Business;
and do in all things as I told you for the Right Hand; and thus the Horse goes
perfectly on both Hands, in Corvets in a Place, upon his Turns, Backward upon
his Voltoes, and Side-ways, without any body on him, which was never Known or
Seen before.

When the Horse goes perfectly thus, then get upon him, the Reyn still Tied
very short, and make him go as you did before in every thing, and you may make
him go in all other Airs the same Way.

HOW TO DRESS A HORSE PERFECTLY In Corvets without Pillar, which is the surest
Way.
WHen you Work a Horse upon Corvets, before you do that, you must make a Horse
to Rise perfectly in Passadoes, which is High Before, and to stay upon the
Hand, using the Cavezone still; and this Forward, and not upon Circles at the
first by any means: Then to make him go in Corvets, Tie the Cavezone's Reyn
from the Wall, to keep that Hinder-Legg to his other Hinder-Legg that is next
the Wall, and begin with two or three Corvets, and then Walk him again, and
then Corvet him again; and if you Feel him on the Hand, and he goes forwards
with it, he will Quickly be Dressed; and if he goes Forwards too much, let him
make his Corvets in a place, and pull him Back, and then make him go in Corvets.

When your Left Shoulder is to the Wall, you must Tie the right Cavezone's Reyn
to the Pommel, which does not only keep Back his Hinder-Legg on the same side
the Cavezone's right Reyn is Tied, but it also Supples his Shoulders extremely,
and prepares him; nothing like it to go upon Voltoes on the right Hand.

When your Right Shoulder is to the Wall, then you must Tie the Left Cavezone's
Reyn to the Pommel, for the same Reasons, and work him in Corvets, as I told
you before; and this will prepare him, and make him go upon his Voltoes on the
Left Hand; and no Lesson better at the First.

There is another rare Lesson for Corvets, which is this; Tie the Right
Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, and let him go on the Left Hand, Leg and Reyn
on a side, as if his Head was to the Pillar; and Raise him so in Corvets, two
or three times, his Croup out; and then Walk him, and then Corvet him in the
same Manner: This keeps out his Inward Hinder-Legg, and so Supples him to the
Hand and Heel, that there is nothing like it; but though he goes on the
Left Hand, he is Suppled for the Right Hand.

The Left Hand is the same; you must Tie the Left Cavezone's Reyn to the
Pommel, and go on the Right Hand, his Croup out, and help Leg and Reyn on a
side, and so do in all things else, as you did before; and thus he shall never
be Entier, but most Supple both to Hand and Heel.

To put him upon Corvets on his Voltoes, the inward Cavezone's Reyn must still
be Tied to the Pommel, and his Croup must not be In too much; but rather D'une
piste, for teaching of him, and to keep out the inward Hinder-Legg is the
Business: Help a little with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and make him go
three or four Corvets, and then Walk him, and then Corvet him again; and so
Diminish your Walk, and Augment your Corvets, until he makes a perfect Turn in
Corvets; and when he is Perfect, then let the Horse go upon his Voltoes Byas in
Corvets, and that is the Perfection in Voltoes: You must always (in Corvets)
help with the outward Reyn, not only to keep him up, but to give him the Ply,
and to make him go Byas, and not help with your Legs at all.

If you find he Hastens too much, then Raise him High in Passadoes, and keep
him upon the Hand, and Help him with the Rod upon the Shoulders and Legs, to
make him bend them; which is the only Grace in all Airs whatsoever: This, and
thus Working of him upon his Voltoes, either D*une piste, or his Croup in upon
Passadoes, will make him go Rarely in Corvets.

To make a Horse go Side-ways in Corvets, help only with the Bridle, and put
his Head to the Wall; and on the Right Hand, help with the outward Reyn, and
let the Horse go Byas; that is, his Shoulders before his Croup; and let him go
three or four Corvets Byas, and then Walk him Byas; and then Corvet him Byas
again, and so Walk him, and Corvet him; and by little and little Diminish his
Walking, and Augment his Corvets, until he goes all in Corvets, which he will
soon do, and very perfectly.

For the Left Hand, using the outward Reyn, and the Horse being Byas, do in
every thing, as I told you before for the Right Hand; and the Horse will very
soon go Byas, and very Perfectly.

To make the Horse go in Corvets Backward, Pull the Horse back, and then make
him go three or four Corvets in a place, and then pull him back again, and then
Corvet him in a place again; and thus pulling him back, and Corvetting him in a
place, Diminishing the pulling Back, and Augmenting the Corvets, he will at
last go Backward in Corvets as perfectly as can be.

To go Forwards in Corvets, you must always Help with the Reyn to the Wall; to
Enlarge him Before, and to Narrow him Behind; because he Leads with his
Fore-parts, and his Hinder-parts follow to keep the Ground that his Fore parts
has got; his Fore-parts being at Liberty, and his Hinder-parts Pressed.

To go Backwards in Corvets, you must always Help with the Reyn to the Wall; to
Narrow him Before, and Enlarge him Behind, to be there at Liberty, because he
Leads with his Hinder-parts, and his Fore-parts follow, to keep the Ground that
his Hinder-parts has got; his Hinder-parts being at Liberty, and his
Fore-parts pressed, your Hand is to be Low, that the Horse may not go too High,
and your Body a little Forward, to give his Hinder-parts Liberty to Lead, and
not Help with the Legs at all, but with the Hand every time to pull him Back,
as he Falls to the Ground.

For Side-wayes in Corvets, you must Help with the outward Reyn and outward
Leg; that is, you must pull that Reyn on which Hand soever he goes, and your
contrary Leg; and that is right for Side-ways.

Knowing how to Help him Forwards, Backwards, and of each Side, in Corvets, put
those together, and then you may make him do the Cross when you please, without
any Difficulty.

For the Saraban in Corvets, it must be with the outward Reyn, which is to be
pulled first on one Side, and then on the other Side, in every Corvet, from
side to side, Helping only with your Hand; your outward Shoulder following it,
and not Helping with your Legs at all.

All Airs must be quick from the Ground, and are to Stay upon the Hand; that
is, to Soutenir, or hold him there, but it must be Gently; a leight, and a firm
Hand, Helping every time.

If a Horse beats upon the Hand, it is, because he does not Obey the Curb; and
in that case, you must Raise him very High in Passadoes, and hold him there,
which puts him upon the Curb; and if this will not do, then Gallop him upon a
straight Line by a Wall, or otherwise; and from his Gallop stay him upon the
Hand, and let him go in Corvets; or let him Gallop forward Le petit Gallop, and
Stop him, and then Raise him three or four Passadoes very High, and hold him on
the Hand when he is Up, and this will cure him; if not, then Trot him, and Stop
him good hard Stops; and pull him Back: And upon the same Circles D'une piste,
Gallop him, and Stop him, and pull him Back, and this will Settle him on the
Hand, I warrant you; your Stirrups being of an equal Length, except one of your
Legs was Shorter than the other, and rather a Hole shorter than too Long; but
still that you may Sit straight; not so Short as the Italians, or the
Spaniards, but that you may Sit upon your Twist, and Straight upon your
Stirrups.

THE TRUE WAY FOR CORVETS.
THe Seat is to be just as in Terra a Terra, but not so Stiff, nor so Oblique;
the Bridle-Hand eeven with his Neck, the Knuckles toward his Neck on which
Hand soever he goes; but the Hand still eeven with his Neck, two or three
Fingers above the Pommel, and a little Forward, and no Help but Soutenir, and
in good time, according to the Horses time; for every Horse takes his own time.

Quick it must be from the Ground, and to stay in the Air upon the Hand, your
Body always Going to that which Comes to you; that is, To Bend a little to him
as he Rises; but so Insensibly, that the Beholders cannot perceive it.

You are to Sit as Forward to the Pommel as you can, being straight, and your
Thighs and Knees as close as if they were Glued to the Saddle, but your Toes
down, that you may be Weak in the Hams; that is, to have your Nerves Weak from
the Knees down-wards, and Strong from the Knees upwards, and not touch your
Horse with the Legs, nor Help with your Legs at all; but to leave his Croup
free to follow his Fore-parts that Leads.

For when the Horse is between the Pillars, or at the Single Pillar My Way, and
no body on him, yet he goes as just as can be, and yet there is no Legs that
Helps him, therefore you must not Help with your Legs at all; for, if you Help
with your outward Leg, he thinks he must go Terra a Terra; and if he does go
in Corvets, he goes all Awry, and Leans on the outside; and if you Help with
the inward Leg, then he puts out his Croup, and Leans all on the inside; and
if you Help with both your Legs, it Presses him too much, and makes him go too
quick a time; therefore the Right way is not to Help with your Legs at all.

This is for a Horse that goes Perfectly; but if a Horse puts In his Croup too
much, you must put it out with your inward Leg; and if he puts out his Croup
too much, then you must put it In with your outward Leg: But Remember always,
that your Horse goes Byas upon his Circles, his Fore parts always to Lead,
which is Oblique: And this is the Exact way for Corvets.

OF CORVETS upon VOLTOES, AND To Change upon them.
SIt straight, a little Oblique; help not with the Legs at all, until you
Change; the Toes down to unbrace your Nerves, and your Hand eeven with his
Crest, or Neck, and only Soutenir, and not help every time, but (in Musical
time) according to the time of the Horse, for every Horse takes his own time;
though all Airs should be quick from the Ground, and to stay upon the Hand,
and help with the Rod in a just time, either Cross his Neck, or on the inside,
which you please, as you find occasion: And as the Horse is thus going upon his
Voltoes in Corvets on the Right Hand, when you would Change him, put your
Right-Legg gently to him, and then hold him Up with your Hand a little, on the
inside of his Neck, the Knuckles always toward his Neck, on which Hand soever
you go; and as soon as he has Changed, then take your Right-Legg from him, as
before, and help not with the Legs at all, only the poise is to be a little on
the outside.

Now you are on the Left Hand, when you would Change again, put your Left-Legg
gently to him, and your Hand to hold him up a very little on the inside of the
Turn, and then take away your Left-Legg as before, and help not with the Legs
at all. The Reason why (upon his Changes) I begin with the Leg, and not the
Hand, is this: If I began with the Hand, he would Stop; and if I did Turn my
Hand, his Croup would go out, and be Lost, and therefore I begin with the Leg;
but instantly I hold him up with my Hand, when they are so near together, that
none can perceive it: If his Shoulders do not come In enough, you must Turn
your Hand, to help with the outward Reyn. And this must be done so Neatly, and
Gently, and with so much Art as possibly can be, which is the Quintessence of
Changing upon Voltoes in Corvets: For Demy-Voltoes in Corvets, the same way,
and the same Helps; and so for a Demy-Ayre, the same Helps.

A Horse that retains his Forces, and is Pareseus, and toward Resty, Corvets
is an Air that will not agree well with him; and Horses of great Fire, and
Fougue, that are Impatient, are very Improper for all Airs, as Corvets,
Demy-Ayres, and Leaps; but they are more proper to go upon the Ground; for, as
to Furious Horses, and Impatient, all Airs augment their Collers, and deprives
them of Memory and Obedience.

I would have the first Lesson in Corvets to be made leasurely, and high
Before, which is Passadoes; for that (long time before he brings his Fore-Leggs
to the ground) does give him means to assure his Hanches, and to firm his Head,
and to bend his Fore-Leggs, and to Divert him from Apprehensions, and
Unquietness, and to hinder him from Trampling, which is Trepigner.

Here I will show you, How to Dress LEAPING HORSES.
WAlk a Horse forward, and then make him make one Leap, and presently Raise him
High; a Passadoe, or two; and stay him, and keep him upon the Hand, and then
Augment your Leaps, and Diminish your Passadoes, and so by little and little he
will Leap perfectly; and after he is perfect upon a right Line forward, then
you must put him upon Voltoes, or Circles, and continue the same Method; but
the Circles must be a little Large at first.

You must Remember, when you Raise him to Leap, That you Help him with your Rod
behind, either one Stroke, or more, as you please, so it be in time; and that
is, when the Horse is Raised, then Help him, but always high Passadoes after
he has Leapt.

Remember to Sit Straight, your Stirrups a little shorter, a hole, or so; for
too Short would throw you out of the Saddle, and to Long would disorder your
Seat, and make you lose your Stirrups; your Toes down, to slack your Nerves
from the Knees downward, or else the Horse would Bolt forward too much; for a
Leaping Horse should never go Forward above a Foot and a Half at the most; and
when you Raise him, instantly put your Breast out, which makes your Shoulders go
a little back (though insensibly) to the Beholders; for, did you not so when
the Horse Rises, it would be too late when he Yerks behind, or Raises his Croup.

Now I must tell you, that your Knees and Thighs must be as Close as if they
were Glu'd to the Saddle; and for your Bridle-Hand, you must always Help with
it the outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder, to Narrow him Before,
and Enlarge him Behind, to Press him on the inside of the Turn, and to be at
Liberty without the Turn, that his Croup may go a little Out, and be Free; for
else, How should he Leap, if his Croup were Subjected, or Bound up? Therefore
the outward Reyn is to be Used for all Leaps whatsoever, either Forward, or
upon Circles.

Here I will Tell you a Secret for the Hand, concerning Leaping Horses; and
that is this: The Bridle being a little Longer than ordinary, Raise him well,
and every time put your Hand a little Forward, to Soutenir, and stay him there
upon the Hand, as if he hung in the Air; and in every Leap help him so, and
take a just time, like a Ball at the Bound.

All Leaps are made upon the Hand, and nothing else; therefore see that the
Horse be well Settled upon the Hand, before ever you make him Leap; for nothing
disorders a Horse's Mouth more than Leaps: For, a Pace and a Leap, it must be
done the same way.

Thus ends the Method for teaching Leaping Horses.

A TRUE OBSERVATION IN RIDING.
THere is no man, that has not a Musical Head, that can be a good Horseman,
because all Horses ought to go in a just and Musical time, though the time
Varies in every Horse, some Slower, and some Quicker; and besides, as no man
Plays on the Lute, but the same Strings that he Stops with his Left Hand, he
always Strikes with his Right Hand, or else it would be Ill Music: So in
Riding, whatsoever you Touch, or Help with your Left Hand, you must Strike with
your Heel, or Calf of your Leg, or else it will be Ill Music on Horseback:
And therefore a good Horseman should never Fail to have Hand and Heel to go
together, no more than the Musician his two Hands together.

Here Ends the Third Part.
THE FOURTH PART, Which Contains all the FAULTS and ERRORS THE HORSE Can
commit; with the Vices, and Horse's Sins in the MANAGE, And the ways How to
Rectify him, and the Medicines How to Cure him.
NO Horse makes a Fault, but it is either in his Shoulders, or his Croup;
either Before, or Behind: That is, He does either Disobey the Hand or the Heel.

If you Work Horses, as I have told you, in the first Lessons, he can never be
Entier, which is, Not to Turn; for, Entier is to put In his Croup, and put Out
his Shoulders; and those Lessons puts Out his Croup, and In his Shoulders,
which is contrary to Entier: So that Suppling a Horses Shoulders thus, a Horse
can never be Entier; for indeed, it is the Stifness of his Shoulders, more than
his Croup; and Working as I have told you, he shall never be Entier: But, if he
be very Obstinate, pull the Inward Cavezone's Reyn hard to you, and Spur him on
the inside, and that will Cure him.

If the Horse does not Obey the Heel, but puts Out his Croup, then his Head to
the Wall (Leg and Reyn contrary) will Cure him; if not, then upon his Circles
put his Head from the Turn, and Help him with your outward Leg, and Spur him,
(if there be cause) then bring In your inward Shoulder, which puts In his
Croup; but his Legs go False: If this will not do, then pull the outward
Cavezone's Reyn to the Turn, which Infallibly will put In his Croup, but Falser
than the other; because now he is pulled to Look out of the Turn, and his Croup
before his Shoulders, and his Legs very False; but what is good for the
Stomach, is ill for the Liver, and one must not Rectify to many things at
once; but when you have Cured the Vice, fall to the True Way of Riding again.

When a Horse goes False upon his Terra a Terra, in bringing in his Shoulders
too much, and taking too much Ground with his Fore-parts, there is no way to
Remedy it, like Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn as Straight as possibly you
can to the Pommel; for then he has not so much Room to bring In his Shoulders,
though it appears otherwise; but thus he takes shorter Steps, and less Ground;
and then he is Cured.

TO Work only with the Bridle, a Horse that has the Vice of bringing In his
outward Shoulder too much.
THis Vice is Disobeying both the Hand and the Heel; but more the Hand: For, no
Horse can bring In his Shoulders too much, but he must put Out his Croup; and
no Horse that brings In his Shoulders too much, but he comes into the Turn,
and keeps not his Ground; and if he Rise too High, he has more Liberty to
bring In his outward Shoulder: Then the Business to Recover him of that Vice
is, To keep him Low, and to make him go Forward Truly, both with his Legs and
Body, you Sitting in the right Posture as you should, and with true and right
Helps for Terra a Terra, as I have showed you before. Then to Cure him is thus;
sit Oblike as I have showed you, pulling the inward Reyn, your Hand on the
outside of his Neck, your Knuckles toward his Neck; and to keep him Down, that
he shall not Rise too High, your Bridle-Hand as low as his Neck, and that will
keep him down; and there is half his Vice Cured, that he cannot come In so
much. And now to keep him from coming In at all; because his coming In is by
reason of his not going Forward: Therefore to make him go Forward, you must
Help with both your Legs; and as the outward Leg keeps In his Croup, so the
inward Leg puts him Forward; so the Hand Low keeps him Down, and both Legs
puts him Forward, and then he is Cured with right Helps, and goes Truly. This I
have tried, and find it to be most true; where all the other Helps may do, but
they are False, both for the Man's Sitting, and the Horse's Going; therefore I
set down none but this, because you should not Use them: Doing Voltoes may be
good sometimes, for this Vice may fix his Croup.

OBSERVATIONS.
MAny Horses, though they can do nothing but Trott, yet when they are Pressed in
the Manage, they will make a shuffling Amble; nay, they will perfectly Amble,
which is the worst Action for the Manage that possible can be; and therefore
to hinder them of that Action, there is nothing better, than to pull in their
Heads into the Turn as much as possible you can, and to put them upon as Narrow
Circles as you can; and this will hinder them from Ambling: And to give them
the Spurrs soundly, when they Amble, will also put them from Ambling: Many
strong Horses will Amble when they are Pressed in the Manage, but commonly
Horses Amble out of Weakness, either by Nature, or that they are almost Tired:
As soon as Foles are Foled, we see that they all Amble at first, because they
are so Weak; and after they come to a little strength, then they Trott.

There are many Horses, that whenever they are Pressed, they will put up their
Heads; it may be to shun the Pressure of being put upon the Hanches; for,
holding up their Heads puts them off of the Hanches. To Remedy this, Tie the
Cavezone, My Way, to the Pommel; for, that pulls down his Head, and therefore
must put him on the Hanches: But the Horse, to hinder that, will Strive still
not to be upon the Hanches, by putting out his Croup; then you must Spurr him
on that side until he Obeys you: It may be he casts up his Head, because he
does not Obey the Curb; then you must Trott him, and Stopp him; and Gallop him,
and Stopp him, and pull him Back; and this upon the Shoulders, and then he is
Cured.

Whenever a Horse goes too much on the Back, and fetches disordered Leaps,
there is no way better to Hinder him, than to Hold him well and fast on the
Hand; for, a Slack hand gives him liberty to Leap, when a Stiffer hand hinders
him from Leaping.

When a Horse uses to go Low in Corvets, and that by much Rest, and many
Holly-daies, or but little Riding, the Horse goes too much on the Back; there
is nothing takes him off more, than to put In his Croup, and his outward Hanch,
for that subjects his Hinder-parts so much, as he is hindered, and tied up from
Crouping, or going upon the Back: But before you come to that, it were very
good to Trott and Gallop him so long upon Large Circles, D'une piste, until you
find that you have totally abated his Chine, and taken him off of his Back, and
then put In his outward Hanch, to subject his Croup again, that he may go on
the Hanches, and not to go on the Back.

For there is nothing in the World puts a Horse more upon the Hanches, than the
Cavezone My Way, tied to the Pommel, and to Press him on the outside of the
Turn, that he may Lean on the outside; that is, to Lean on his outward Leg,
that is, on his outward Hinder-Legg, which is done by the inward Reyn cross his
Neck, or tied to the Pommel, to put him on the outside.

If a Horse will not Trott right, but wrangle in his going, between a false
Trott, and a false Gallop; then tie the inward Reyn of the Cavezone very
straight to the Pommel, and put out his Croup very much upon Large Circles; and
if he still does gumble, and falsify his Legs, give him the Spurr, within the
Turn; or both Spurrs soundly, and good Stops; and this Infallibly will make him
Trot right, and go just upon his Trott, or Gallop, as he should do.

OF A RESTY HORSE.
A Resty Horse is he that will not go Forward; the Way then is, To pull him
Backwards, and then he will go Forwards: It seldom Fails; but if it do Fail,
then use your Spurs to the purpose; and though he Rebels a great while, the
Spurs will persuade him at last, being the best Argument you can use to him, if
they be given Sharply, (soundly, and in time) and are continued until he does
Yield, which certainly he will do at last; for this Remedy never fails; all
other Remedies are Foolish; you were as good Apply Rose Water and Sugar Candy
to him: Therefore the Spurs does the Business. For all our Old Writers were
mightily deceived in it.

For a Horse that is Retenu, Paresus, or Contre-Coeur, which is all but a spice
of Restiness, be sure to use the Spurs.

For a Horse that Falls down upon the Ground, or in the Water; Bites, or
Strikes; nothing better than the Spurs. But I must tell you, for Vicious
Horses, that indangers the Company by Biteing, and Striking, there is no better
way than to Geld them; for that will Cure them, or nothing. But I assure you,
that Vicious Horses are very hardly Recovered, or never; so dangerous a thing
it is to have such a Jade, and the Worst, if he be Spoiled by an Ignorant
Rider: And more Horses are Spoiled by ill Riding, and are made Vicious, than by
Nature.

OF A RUNAWAY HORSE.
FOr a Runaway Horse, you must have a gentle Bitt, the Curb slack, a gentle
Cavezone, that nothing may Hurt his Mouth, or his Nose; for, certainly sharp
Cavezones, and cruel Bitts, hard Curbed, made Horses Run Away heretofore,
making them Desperate. You must also have a Gentle Hand, offend him no way; and
Walk him first without Stopping, but staying of him by little and little; and
then Trott him; and from his Trott, to his Walk; and so by little and little
stay him: And always make much of him when he Obeys you. And from his Trott,
you must Gently Gallop him; and from his Gallop, to a Trot; and from his Trot,
to his Walk; and from his Walk, by little and little, stay him, and always with
a Gentle Hand. This is to prevent him from Running away.

But put the case he does Run away, What is to be done then? It is certain,
that the more you pull the Cavezone, he will Run the Faster to Oppose you; and
the more you pull the Bridle, and straighten the Curb, hurting him, the more
you Pull, the more he will Pull, and Run the Faster; for Pulling does no more
good, than if you pulled a Wall: Then if you have Field-Room, when he begins to
Run, give him the Spurrs continually, sharply, and soundly, and slack the
Bridle, and Spurr him until he begins to slack of himself, and to be contented
to stay; and as often as he begins to Run, use the same way, and at last I dare
undertake he will be Cured: For this is the best way in the World for a
Runaway Horse.

But if you have not Room, and are Circumscribed in a Narrow place, then let
him Run Circularly, until he is Weary, with a slack Hand: But if you have not
Room, the best is, To put him to the Single Pillar, with a good strong Rope;
both which will hold him, and there he can Run but Circularly, and Round; and
give him the Spurrs soundly, until he be weary, and contented to stay; and this
at last, no doubt, will Cure him.

Of a Horse that RETAINS his FORCES.
WHen a Horse Retains his Forces, you must Gallop him fast, and so Terra a
Terra, to put him from thinking; for it is his Resty thinking, that makes that
Vice: And let me tell you, that ill Riders, and Bunglers, at the first, makes
(for the most part) all these Faults, and Vicious Horses, by ill Riding,
correcting them out of time, or else in letting them have their wills too much.

Let me tell you for a great Truth, that the worst natured Jade in the world by
Nature, is much easier Dressed, and reduced to Obedience, than a Horse that has
been Spoiled, and made Resty by ill Riding; so much worse is an ill Custom
continued, than an ill Disposition by Nature: For, a customary Drunkard is
hardly Reclaimed, which is not by Nature; and if Men be so, Horses may well be
so too.

TO Assure Horses for the Wars.
AS when a Horse is Skittish, and apprehensive of Noise, there are many
Inventions, and none of the Best. To stop the Horse's Ears with Wool, that he
should not Hear; that is, to make him Deaf, and to change the Vice for the
disease of Deafness; but the Vice remains still. What if the Wool should fall
out? Then you would find he was not Cured. But you may also be deceived, for it
may be it is another Sense; that is Sight: And being afraid of Fire, when the
Guns are Fired, Would you put Spectacles on him to make him both Deaf and
Blind? They are great Follies. Therefore you must use him by little and little,
to Shot, both to the Noise and Sight of the Fire; to Drums, Trumpets, and
Colors; and the Custom of them will make him endure it, and go constantly upon
any of them; Sword, or any thing; for Custom does all things with Men, and so
with Horses. You should teach him to Leap Hedge, Ditch, and Rail; for all these
are the Useful things for a Soldiers Horse; as also to Swim well is very
necessary.

OF VICIOUS HORSES.
WHen a Horse Bites at his Shoulders, and at his Bitt, and at his Riders Legs,
and Rises, and turns Round, ready to come Over: The best Remedy that I know,
is, To Ride him without a Cavezone, to Offend him as little as may be; and to
Tie the Nose-band as straight as you can; as also to have another Nose-band
below, where the Bitt is tied; and to tie that as straight as possibly can be;
so straight, as he cannot open his Mouth: And when the Horse finds that he
cannot Bite, he will Leave those Jadish Tricks in a little time. And because
the Spurrs, given him out of time, appear to be the cause of his Vitiousness,
and Restiness, therefore do not give him the Spurrs of a great while, but only
Trot him upon Large Circles, and Walk him Quietly, and Peaceably; and when you
have gained him to this Point, upon a peaceable and little Gallop, you may then
touch him with the Spurrs, but very gently, only to make him Feel them, and no
more; and this way will Cure him, or else nothing.

THE Old way for Trench and Martingal.
THis Way is to no purpose at all to Dress a Horse, since the end of Riding is,
To go with the Bitt; for, with the Trench and Martingal, you must use both
Hands, and you have not a third Hand for the Sword; but with the Bitt, your
Left Hand governs the Horse, and your Right Hand is free for the Sword: But I
will let you see, that to use the Trench and Martingal, is just so much time
lost, as you Ride Horses with it, and no preparation at all for the Bitt: For
first, the Trench has no Curb, therefore they will not understand the Curb by
it, because it has none. Then Secondly, there is no Trench in the world, or
Snaffle, that ever wrought upon the Bars of a Horse, but upon his Lips, and the
Weeks of his Mouth. So, what preparation is there in the Trench for the Bitt,
when the Trench can neither make him understand the Curb, nor the Bars? And the
Bitt Works only upon those two places, Curb, and Bars; and without those two,
no Horse can be a Ready-Horse. Nay, pull down the Horses Head as much as you
can with the Martingal, or the Trench, it shall never work upon his Bars; the
Snaffle is the same; for the Trench is but a great Snaffle: Then for the
Martingal, use it never so long, the Horse shall not be settled one jot the
better when you take it off.

So now you may see how unuseful a folly the Trench and Martingal is, for the
Dressing of Horses; merely so much time lost to no purpose, and labor in vain,
and disordering the poor Horse; so that I wonder at the Horsemen, that had no
more Wit than to use it.

It is the Bitt, with the Cavezone, and the true Art of Riding, that Makes, and
Dresses Horses perfectly, and not the Trench and Martingal; no, nor the
Martingal with the Bitt, if it be tied to the Arches of the Bitt, for then the
Curb never Works; no, nor the New-fashioned Martingal, that is tied to the
Cavezone, for it hinders the operation of the Bitt.

OF THE FALSE REYNS.
TO work Horses with False Reyns, is very False working; for, being tied to the
Arches of the Bitt, and pulling it, that slacks the Curb; and so no Horse shall
be firm, and settled with it; for, that Horse that does not suffer the Curb,
shall never be a Ready-Horse; so it makes the Bitt like a Snaffle.

There is no way but the Cavezone, and the Bitt, to Settle and Dress Horses
withal perfectly; and when a Horse is perfectly settled upon the Hand, (then
being put upon the Hanches) he will go so perfectly, and Easily, as you shall
hardly feel him upon the Hand, the Bridle will be so slack, and he will go so
just.

If you Work, as this Book Instructs you, you shall never have any Horse
Vicious in any kind, if no body else have Rid him; and after he is Dressed to
that Perfection, he will hardly make you a Fault, if you Work as you should do.

Of the Follies of some People, thinking they can Make Leaping-Horses.
THere are many presumptuous Fellows, as Ignorant as they are Presumptuous,
that Laughing, say, They will make any Horse a Leaping-Horse. Why? Because they
will make him Leap over a Stick, like a Jack-anapes, or a Dog; or make a Horse
Leap over a Barrel, a Rail, Hedge, or Ditch. If that were all, we should have
many Leaping-Horses; for, I know hardly any Horse but will do it, without any
great Art: God help their Ignorance, poor Fools! For, a Horse to Leap so, is
not the same Leaping, as a Horse Leaps in the Manage.

First, for their Horses that Leaps over Hedge and Ditch, and of their fashion;
they lay the Reyns in his Neck, and puts him Forward, which is a Leap of their
Fashion, but not a Leap in the Manage: And where they give him the Reyns to
Leap, we hold him, and help him up with the Hand to Leap; and so with our
Heels, if it need, at the same time: And thus the Horse Obeys both the Hand and
the Heels, at the same time; has an excellent Mouth, and a good Apuy, both
upon the Bars, and the Curb.

A Gentle-mans Hunts-Boy, though he can Leap his Masters Gelding over a Hedge,
will not make him Leap upon the Bars and the Curb with his Snaffle; since his
Snaffle has no Curb, and his Snaffle never works upon the Bars, but upon the
Weeks, and Lips of his Horses Mouth: Besides, our Horses will Leap so in a
place, and not at Leap-Frogg, as their Horses, or at Barley-break, to Leap two
or three Yards forward without feeling of his Mouth. Thus does Ignorance Talk
of things they do not Know: Nay, some Horse men has been so foolish, as to
think they could make a Leaping-Horse, with laying Fur-bushes for him to Leap
over, which is the same as a Hedge; so foolish they have been: And now you see
the truth of this, truly Anatomized to you.

OF A Horse that goes Incaputiato, which is, when he Arms himself against the
Bitt.
OUr Learned Authors are mightily mistaken about this Vice, as they call it,
saying, A Horse is at no Command, and hard on the Hand, because the Branches
rests upon his Neck, or Shoulders, and you cannot pull, or help him with your
Hand at all; wherein they are horribly deceived: For, I have had Horses that
have Armed themselves against the Bitt, as much as any Horse could do, and yet
were as sensible to the Hand, and as leight on the Hand, as any Horse in the
World; so they are mightily mistaken: For, if the Horse goes perfectly upon the
Hanches, he must be leight on the Hand, let him Arm, or his Head be never so
Low; and therefore they are Deceived that thinks otherwise.

This should have been put in the Second Part.
FOr Terra a Terra, you must Help with the Inward Reyn; Press him on the
Outside, and your Outward Shoulder a little Down; and then his Outward Shoulder
cannot come In, as it does with the other Way beforementioned: And thus the
Horse is Pressed all on the Outside of his outward Hinder-Legg, and so upon the
Hanches; which in the other is upon the Shoulders, and the Horse being Pressed on
the Outside, his Legs are at Liberty, to Lead on the Inside, and so he goes
Eeven, and not Cross; which is the exact and right Terra a Terra.

AN EPITOMY OF HORSE-MANSHIP.
In all Airs you must Help with the Outward Reyn.

FIrst for Corvets; you must Help with the outward Reyn, and if the Horse be
not on the Hanches enough, you must Soutenir more, not give him a time, but
hold him up more upon the Hands: And if his Croup go Out, you must put your
outward Leg a little to him; and if he put his Croup In too much, you must put
your inward Leg a little to him, and turn your Hand a little more, just over
his Neck, and only turn it up, but not within his Neck.

You must help with the outward Reyn to bring In his outward Shoulder; for if
that did not come In, he could not Turn upon Voltoes; and so his Croup is a
little at Liberty, which makes him go the easier, freer, and at more Liberty to
go straight forward.

To go Byas, on either Hand, you must still help with the outward Reyn, and
Soutenir; that is, hold him up, without giving him a time: For, the Horse gives
himself a time better than you can, and you must help with the outward Leg;
that is, Leg and Reyn of a side, but both on the outside still.

To make him go Back in Corvets, use the outward Reyn; but here you must give
him a time with your Hand every cadance that he makes, and your Hand closer to
your Body; not to pull him Back, but to give him a time; and as he Falls, that
time is to be a little Back, but not above a Straw breadth: Let your Body be a
little Forward, your Legs a little Back, and Sit not too Strong.

OF DEMI -- AIRS.
YOu must use the very same Helps, as in Corvets, in every thing: For, when his
Croup is within the Voltoe, if you Help, as I have told you, (so you put him
forward) he will go easily, and just, as a Horse should always go forward, in
every thing, but when you will pull him Back.

OF LEAPS.
USe the outward Reyn still, but you must Soutenir more; that is, to hold him
up Harder, and not to give him a time, but still to hold him up, for the Horse
gives himself the best time; and do not Help with your Legs, but only Hands
and Rod; and the Rod under Hand, and Help him in time, and as much upon the
Dock as you can, to make him Strike Out.

Upon Voltoes use the outward Reyn; but here his Croup must be a little out, to
give him Liberty, for else he could not go, if his Hanches were subjected; and
he must go Larger upon his Voltoes, as if he went forward with all the Liberty
that may be; for this is a forcible Air.

OF PASSADOES.
STill use the outward Reyn, to bring In his outward Shoulder; and so in
Demy-Voltoes.

So in the Piroyte, with the outward Reyn; but not to Turn the Hand on the
inside of his Neck, and keep him Low.

To Gallop and Change, with the outward Reyn still.

OF TERRA A TERRA.
HEre you are to use the inward Reyn, for now you must keep the outward
Shoulder Back, and give his inward Shoulder Liberty, that he may look into the
Turn, rest upon his outward Legs, and his inward Legs at Liberty, which you
may know by his Neck leaning on the outside.

You must know, that the outward Reyn brings In his outward Shoulder, presses
him on the Inside, and gives his outward Legs liberty, and so his Croup goes a
little out.

Use the outward Reyn in Passager; for, if his outward Shoulder comes not In,
How shall he lap one Leg over another, which they call Incavelar in Italian,
and Passager in French?

Now, whatsoever makes his Croup go out upon a Trot, or Gallop large, it works
his Shoulders; so his Croup going out ( Leg and Reyn on a side) works his
Shoulders, because his inward Leg goes out as upon Large Circles, his inward
Leg being wrought: This working his Shoulders is an excellent thing for a
Young Horse, or an ignorant Horse at first; for without his Shoulders be
Supple, he shall never go: Besides, it keeps him from being Entier, or have the
Credenza, which is, Resty in Turning, and is the worst Vice a Horse can have.

TO WORK his CROVP.
Leg and Reyn contrary, his Head to the Wall, Works his Croup, so the inward
Reyn be pulled.

Cross his Neck, Leg and Reyn contrary, his Croup In, works his Croup, so the
inward Reyn be pulled Cross his Neck; his Croup in, the inward Reyn pulled hard
on the outside, so that his Neck may Lean on the outside, Works his Croup.

In his Length the same, and Raise him in Passadoes his Croup In, works his
Croup; and all this puts him upon the Hanches to Boot, which is all our
business.

Now, as you are Working his Croup, you must give him the Spur now and then, to
make him Fly; for he never Obeys it, until he Flies it; it is not a Correction
with the Spurr, but a little Touch; which may be given him upon Large Circles
too; that is, he must Fly it, and yet be upon the Hanches: This touch gently
with the Spurr, may be upon any thing; to thrust him like a Carreer, to stop
him, and thrust him away presently again, makes him Obey the Heel perfectly;
Stoping, and going Back, and Raiseing of him, puts him upon the Hanches.

You must understand, that a Horse having two Hinder-Leggs, when his inward
Hinder-Legg is put out, by the outward Reyn, then his outward Shoulder is
wrought, and his Croup out, and not upon the Hanches; is pressed within, and at
Liberty without.

But when his outward Leg is pressed by the inward Reyn, and your outward Leg;
then his Croup is wrought, and he is upon the Hanches; so the outward Reyn
works the Shoulders, and the inward Reyn (with the outward Leg) works the
Croup, and puts him upon the Hanches; and the more, if you Raise him in
Passadoes.

To work his Fore-parts, and his Hinder-parts; to press him on his Legs,
without the Turn, and at Liberty within the Turn; to Press him on his Legs
within the Turn, and at Liberty without the Turn; to Obey the Hand and Heel,
and to be upon the Hanches, is all that can be done: And this that I have
Written does it perfectly.

Until he be Supple on the Shoulders, and Stop perfectly upon his Trott, and is
perfectly settled upon the Hand, he shall never be a Ready-Horse: The way to
Supple his Shoulders best, is the Cavezone My Way; and to pull the inward Reyn
to your Knee, which brings In his outward Shoulder; Galloping puts him upon the
Apuy; but never Gallop him until he Stop perfectly upon his Trott, and that he
is so Leight as he offers to Gallop of himself. The Stop upon a Trott, must be
hard, and on a Sudden; the Stop upon a Gallop, with two or three little
Falcadoes; and never Stop and Raise him together, but Stop first, and Raise him
afterward.

To Work his Croup, you must use the Cavezone's Reyn Cross his Neck; which puts
him so on the Outside, that you may feel his outward Hanch to go In, and his
Neck to Lean on the Outside.

So that pulling the Cavezone to your Knee, brings In his outward Shoulder, and
Supples his Shoulders; Presses him on the Inside, and puts him at Liberty on
the Outside. So pulling the inward Cavezone's Reyn Cross his Neck, works his
Croup; that is, his outward Hanch being put In, ( Leg and Reyn contrary) he
Leans all on the Outside, and makes him Obey the Heel; Presses him on the
Outside, and gives him Liberty within the Turn: Never Stop him, but put your
outward Leg to him; or else he cannot be upon the Hanches.

AN EFFECTUAL DISCOURSE OF HORSE-MANSHIP.
CErtainly the Foundation of all Airs in the Manage, and the Ground of every
thing, is, Trotting, and Stopping, with Looking into the Turn; a gentle Stop,
not too Hard, which puts a Horse upon the Hanches, and settles him upon the
Hand; because it pulls him Down before; but too Hard a Stop pulls him Up
before; and therefore puts him off of the Hanches.

To make him Look into the Turn, the Cavezone, My Way, and pulling the inward
Reyn to your Knee, low, or beyond it, brings In his outward Shoulder, and Bends
him into the Turn very much; Supples his Shoulders, Presses him within the
Turn, and leaves his Legs at liberty without the Turn; and pulling him Down
before, makes him Stop well: But see still, that his outward Shoulder comes In,
and then he shall never be Entier; which is the greatest Vice a Horse can have.

To Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, puts a Horse on the Outside,
and presses him there, except your inward Leg puts Out his Croup; therefore I
would have you Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girths below, which
Presses him within, and gives Liberty to his Legs without the Turn, and brings
In his outward Shoulder: And thus Tied to the Girths, is more powerful, than if
you held it in your Hand; for, many Horses may force your Hand, which they
cannot do, when it is Tied to the Girths; and pulling him Down thus, makes him
Stop well. Going Back sometimes, is an excellent thing to put him on the
Hanches, to put him on the Hand, and to make him Leight on the Hand, and to
make him Advance.

For Passager, there is nothing better, than Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn
to the Girths; for it brings In his outward Shoulder, to lap one Leg over
another, and Supples his Shoulders.

Passadoes is a rare thing to put a Horse upon the Hand, and prepare him for
all Airs; it puts him on the Hanches too; and especially is excellent for
Leaping Horses; and all this with the inward Cavezone's Reyn Tied to the
Girthes; upon a Trott, or Le petit Gallop, it is an excellent thing to give him
a little touch with the Spur, to make him Fly it, and Obey it; but then it
must not be abandoned upon the Shoulders, but upon the Hanches, when he feels
the Spur.

The Cavezone is the Rarest thing in the world for Dressing of Horses; not only
to Preserve their Mouth, but to give them the Ply, which is to Bend them into
the Turn, to make them Look into the Turn, to work their outward Shoulder, to
bring it into the Turn: And thus to Supple their Shoulders, either upon a
Trott, or Gallop D'une piste; or Passager the Croup In, or Leg and Reyn on a
side; and all this to Supple the Shoulders, which is a prinpal thing.

The Cavezone again, ( Leg and Reyn contrary) works a Horse's Croup; his Croup
out, as if it were to the Pillar, or his Croup In for Passager, or to the Wall;
for Leg and Reyn contrary, works his Croup; for it puts him on the Hanches,
because it Presses him on his outward Legs, and makes him subject to the Heel;
for he cannot get from it, so Leg and Reyn contrary works his Croup, as the
former wrought his Shoulders; Pressed him within, and gave him Liberty without:
So this Leg and Reyn contrary Presses him without, and gives him Liberty
within. But when you work Leg and Reyn contrary, I would wish you to have the
Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand; for so you will Help him the better.

Thus you see how Powerful the Cavezone is to Work Shoulders, or Croup, or any
thing for the perfect Dressing of Horses; so that I will undertake to Dress a
Horse better, and more perfectly, with a Cavezone without a Bitt, than with a
Bitt without a Cavezone; therefore use the Cavezone; but then it must be My
Way, or else it is of little effect.

Since Trotting, and Stopping upon the Trott, is the Foundation of all Airs in
the Manage, therefore highly Esteem of it, and Practice it most; that is,
Never do any thing with your Horse, until he Stop perfectly upon his Trott;
for, if you do, you will perfectly Spoil him for ever.

Whether upon a Large Circle D'une piste his Croup Out, upon a Trott, or his
Croup In, or straight by a Wall: When you Stop, be sure you put your Body Back,
and pull In your Bridle-Hand, but not too Suddenly at first; and be sure you
pull the inward Reyn hard, to put him on the Outside, to rest on his outward
Hinder-Legg, which puts him upon the Hanches; so that you may be sure, at the
same time, to Help him with your outward Leg, which certainly will put him
Effectually upon the Hanches, which is our main Business, and Work: And
therefore do this perfectly, and it will pull Down his Head.

ANOTHER LESSON TO Put him upon the HANCHES, which is very Effectual.
TO put a Horse upon the Hanches, Tie the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the
Girthes, and then Walk him D'une piste, or a short Trott, your inward Leg to
him, and be sure he neither puts his Croup Out, nor In; for if he does either,
this Lesson is of no Force; but if he does not, there is nothing puts him more
on the Hanches.

It is very Material, for the Dressing of Horses in the Manage, to Know the
several Operations of the Inward Cavezone's Reyn (My Way) Tied to the Girthes,
or Tied to the Pommel.
WHen the Inward Cavezone's Reyn is Tied to the Girthes, it Works his outward
Shoulder, Presses his Legs within the Turn, and leaves his Legs at Liberty
without the Turn.

It is Excellent to Trott him Large or Narrow D'une piste, or Gallop him Large
on Narrow D'une piste, for this Supples his Shoulders, his Croup a little Out,
which brings In his outward Shoulder more.

It is good also, Leg and Reyn on a side, his Croup Out, to Supple his
Shoulders.

It is Excellent in Passager, his Croup a little In, to Lap one Leg over
another, because his outward Shoulder comes In; but if you Press his Croup too
much In, it is impossible he should go; because the Reyn, being Tied to the
Girthes, Works his outward Shoulder; and putting his Buttock In too much, puts
his outward Shoulder back; and two Contraries is impossible to be Wrought at
once.

It is Excellent for Le petit Gallop, his Croup a little In, and proper for it,
because it works his Shoulders.

The inward Reyn Tied to the Girthes, is proper and excellent for Corvets,
because it brings In the outward Shoulder, and so consequently gives a little
Liberty to the Croup.

In all these Lessons, if his Shoulders come not In enough, you must turn your
Bridle-Hand a little, which Works the outward Reyn, and so consequently the
outward Shoulder.

This Working of the Shoulders, makes all Horses easy; and thus Wrought, they
shall never be Entier.

This Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girthes, is an Oblike Line within
the Turn, and therefore works his outward Shoulder.

The inward Cavezone's Reyn, Tied to the Pommel, is an Oblike Line cross his
Neck, and this Line puts Back his outward Shoulder, and puts Forward his Inward
Shoulder; Presses him on the Outside, and gives his Legs Liberty within the
Turn, and is most proper for Terra a Terra, which never any found out but my
self; but it is Naught for Corvets, because it subjects his Croup too much; but
this Works his Croup mightily, either Leg or Reyn contrary, his Croup Out; or
Passager, his Croup In; either in his Length, or a little Larger; and so to
Raise him in Passadoes; and makes him Infinitely subject to the Heel.

But this Oblike Line cross his Neck to the Pommel, is not so powerful, as when
I have it in my Hand, and pull it to my outward Shoulder, because the Line is
then longer, then when it is Tied to the Pommel.

When his Head is to the Wall, (if you would Work his Shoulders) then pull the
Inward Cavezone's Reyn to your Knee; if you would Work his Croup, then pull the
inward Cavezone's Reyn to your outward Shoulder.

There is no doubt, but that, though the inward Cavezone's Reyn be Tied to the
Pommel, to Trott him upon Large Circles, or to Gallop him Large, it Works his
Shoulders; but the Reason of that is, because his Croup is out, and then of
necessity his outward Shoulder must come In.

If you can Work, according to these Precepts, and Apply these Excellent
Lessons to the Horse, and see perfectly where the Fault lies, either in his
Shoulders, or his Croup, you will Infallibly Make all Horses that ever comes
into your Hands; which I wish you may do, and not find Fault with it, because
you cannot do it.

For Corvets forward, you must Help with the outward Reyn; your Hand not on the
Inside of his Neck; but just upon his Neck; your little Finger turned Up, which
pulls the outward Reyn; and the Hand a little Forward, which Works upon the
Curb, and to Soutenir, which is to hold him Up: Thus the Curb pinches him a
little; and to give himself Ease of the Curb, he is forced to go upon the
Hanches, and that is as I would have him.

Which way soever the Branches of the Bitt goes, the Mouth goes always
contrary; you pull the Bridle, and that pulls the Branches Up; then the Mouth
goes down, which puts him upon the Hanches; for no Horse can be upon the
Hanches when his Head is up.

This is the Truth in Corvets; and in all Airs whatsoever, you must still Help
with the outward Reyn, and never give a time with your Hand, but only Soutenir,
which is, to Hold him Up; for the Horse will give himself a better time than
you can: But going Backward, you must Help him every time, and with the outward
Reyn, your Body a little Forward, and your Legs a little Back; and Sit easy
upon him, and not too hard.

Upon Voltoes in Corvets, use the outward Reyn, and in every thing as I told
you before; only let the Horse go Forward, as if he did not Turn, which ought
to be upon all Circles whatsoever, except the Piroyte; and commonly you are not
to Help with your Legs at all; but if you do, it must be the outward Leg a
little to him. This is the perfection of all Airs whatsoever.

THE QUINTESSENCE OF HORSE -- MANSHIP.
IF your Horse will not Bend his Shoulders, which is the principal thing, then
Tie the Cavezone (My Way) to the Girthe, the inward Reyn as strait as you can;
but then you must Work upon nothing but Large or Narrow Circles, his Croup out,
either upon a Trott, or a Gallop; or Leg and Reyn on a side, his Croup out:
And this Infallibly will Supple his Shoulders, and he shall never be Resty, nor
Entier.

But should you put In his Croup when he is Tied so hard, it is so much against
Nature, and such a Forced thing, as it is impossible for him to go; and so, to
get what Ease he can, where you think to work his outward Shoulder In, you put
it Back, and work his Inward Shoulder; for the poor Horse has no other way to
Ease himself. and thus Horsemen are deceived; work against Nature, and Spoil
the Horse.

But if you would Work his Shoulders, and put In his Croup, then you must take
the Inward Cavezone's Reyn in your Hand, and pull it to your Knee, and Help
with the outward Leg; this is not so great a Force as the other, and therefore
brings In his outward Shoulder with Ease, and gives a little Ease to his Croup,
being not so much In; and therefore is proper for Le petit Gallop, his Croup
In, and for Passager his Croup In; most proper for a Gallop, but not at all for
Terra a Terra; for there is none for Terra a Terra but my way, which I wonder
how I found out, it is so Rare and True: For there the outward Shoulder is kept
Back, and the inward Shoulder Forward, and the Cavezone's Reyn to your Knee;
the outward Shoulder comes In, and the inward Shoulder is kept Back. This is
the true difference betwixt Le petit Gallop, and Terra a Terra, upon Circles.
This you should get by Heart, for it is the Rarest thing in the world, because
it is a subtle Truth.

To Know the Degrees of Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn, either to the Girthes
or the Pommel of the Sadle, which is the Life or Soul of the Manage, never
found out but by My Self.
I Begin with Tying the inward Cavezone's Reyn to the Girthes, which works his
outward Shoulder, presses him within the Turn, and leaves his outward Legs at
Liberty; is fit for Gallopping large, or narrow, D'une Piste; as also for
Passager, either large, or in his length; and for the Piroyte.

No Horse can go, or be made a Ready-Horse, until his Shoulders be extremely
Supple; and therefore this is the best Lesson in the world to Supple his
Shoulders: But you must take heed of putting his Croup in too much, for it is
impossible to put in his Croup, and put out his Croup all at one time; for the
Cavezone's Reyn tied to the Girthes, puts out his Croup, and at the same time
you will put in his Croup with your Heel, which cannot be: And when the Horse
finds your Ignorance, working impossibilities, then he grows Impatient and
Resty, as he has great reason to be so. Therefore you must not Tie the
Cavezone too strait; for if you do, the Horse cannot go forward, but turns
Round, and so grows Resty again, as he must needs do, which is your Fault, not
his. You should Tie the Cavezone no straiter than to make him Look into the
Turn, and no more; that is, so strait, that he cannot Look out of the Turn: And
thus he may go Forward, and be pleased; which is Natural, and no Impossibility.

The inward Cavezone's Reyn tied to the Pommel is another Business; for, this
presses the Horse on the outside of the Turn, and leaves his Legs within the
Turn at liberty; keeps back his outward Shoulder, and works his Croup, and his
outward Hanch, and makes him subject to the Heel, because he cannot get from
it; so he Obeys it, and Flies it. This is proper for Terra a Terra, and
Demi-Voltoes upon the ground; but the inward Cavezone's Reyn must not be tied
too strait; for if it be, then the Horse cannot go forward, no more than the
other way, and will grow Resty: So the inward Cavezone's Reyn must be pulled no
harder, than just to make him Look into the Turn, and no more.

To pull the inward Cavezone's Reyn to your Knee, or beyond it, works the
Horse's outward Shoulder, presses him on the Inside, and leaves his Legs at
liberty without the Turn, supples his Shoulders, and gives a little liberty to
his Croup; and the inward Cavezone's Reyn tied to the Girthes has the same
opperation.

You are to know, that the Invention of the Pillars is a mere Routine; that is,
by Rote; because it works by the Eyes, and not by Feeling the Hand, and the
Heels, and being obedient to them: So that this Method of the Pillars, has
spoiled more Horses than any thing in the world, working upon the Eyes, by
looking at the Pillars; and never any man wrought Horses well at the Pillar,
but Pluvinel, that Devised them.

My Way is a Method of the Cavezone, and there he goes not by Rote; his Eyes
do nothing here, nor the Voice; but the Horses merely obey the Hand and the
Heel, which makes them all Perfect, of what nature or condition soever they be,
and never Fails me.

OF THE Bridle and Bitt without the Cavezone.
YOu must know, that the Bitt is a strange Engine; for, wheresoever you pull
the Cheek, the Mouth always goes contrary: When you turn up your little Finger,
it pulls the outward Reyn, which works his Shoulder on the outside, and gives
liberty to his Croup on the Left Hand: Your little Finger a little more turned
up, and a little on the left side, works his outward Shoulder, and gives his
Croup a little liberty, which is fit for Corvets, Trotting, and Gallopping
D'une piste; so in Pasadoes, excellent for Passager, so for the Piroyte. Here
the Horse is Pressed within the Turn, and at liberty without the Turn.

For Corvets upon Voltoes, if his Croup be at the Center, put your outward
Leg a little to him, and turn your Hand a little, and Soutenir, and he will
go perfectly upon his Turns if he goes forward, which is the main business, and
the Reason of that is, because he goes a little Byas; This is all with the
Reins, in your Left Hand. And this makes him also go perfectly, Le petit
Gallop.

For Terra a Terra, it is another thing, the Reins being in your Left Hand;
Here you must pull the inward Reyn, to press him on the outside, and leave
his Legs at Liberty, within the Turn; and you must turn your Fist inward, and
turn it to your Left-Shoulder, close to it, which pulls the inward Reyn, and
your outward Leg close to him; Thus he is pressed on the outside, and his
Legs at liberty within the Turn; But for Terra a Terra on the Left Hand, your
Bridle still in the Left Hand, you must turn your little Finger up, and pull it
close to your Right-Shoulder, helping with the outward Leg.

If the Reins be separated in both your Hands, then you must pull the inward
Reyn, and your Right Hand close to your Left-Shoulder, turning up your little
Finger, and your Leg gently on the outside. But for the Left Hand, the Reyns
separated in both your Hands, you must pull the inward Reyn close to your
Right-Shoulder, holding up your Left-Finger gently, helping with the outward
Leg: And so you see there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Reins
separated in both your Hands, and when you have the Bridle only in your
Left Hand, (for the help is with your Hands:) This is perfectly for Terra a
Terra, and Demi-Voltoes.

I have told you a Bitt is a strange Engine; for, wheresoever you pull the
Cheeks, the Mouth goes contrary; If you work the outward Reyn, you pull the
outward Cheek to you, and the Mouth goes contrary, but in Corvets, and then it
works in the middle of the Curb: For Terra a Terra, when you pull the Cheeks to
you, then his Mouth goes contrary, and looks into the Turn as he should do, and
then the Curb works on the other side, contrary to the Cheek, of what Hand so
ever you go: If you pull the Cheeks strait, the Mouth goes down; but when you
put your Hand, as far forward as you can, to the perpendicular Line, then that
works hardest on the Curb. If you pull the inward Reyn to your Knee, or from
your Body, Tribacato, that it lays the Cheek even to the Eye of the Bitt, then
it works not at all upon the Curb, so great a difference there is betwixt the
Cavezone and the Bit; For Terra a Terra, when you pull the inward Reyn to your
outward Shoulder, then the Reyn is a great deal within the Pommel, which Hand
soever you go on; but whenever you help with the outward Reyn, then your Hand
must be three Fingers above the Pommel, and as many Fingers before it: This is
certainly the Truth of the Bitt and Bridle. When I work the outward Reyn of the
Bridle, I find his Croup is lost, although I help with the outward Leg,
because it is Leg and Reyn both of a side; but Leg and Reyn contrary works
his Croup, and keeps back his outward Shoulder.

The Cavezone being upon his Nose, is contrary to the Bitt; for if you pull up
the Cavezone's Reyn, you pull up his Head; and if you pull it down, you pull
down his Head.

As for the false Reyns, It is a very false thing; for the Reyns being tied to
the Arches of the Bitt, when you pull the Reyns it slacks the Curb, and never
works on it, like a Snaffle; nay, it is so much worse than a Snaffle, for a
Snaffle will go to the Weeks of his Mouth, or Lips; and though the Curb be
slack, yet it will not suffer it to go so high, and therefore gawles all his
Bars. And this is the Truth of the false Reyns.

OF THE Perfection of Dressing Horses in the Manage, brought into so Narrow a
Compass, that if it be learned by Heart, and punctually Practiced, it is
impossible to fail Dressing any Horse whatsoever.
Suppling and Working a Horses Shoulders being the principal Thing of all, I
therefore begin with it.

To Supple a Horses Shoulders upon a Trott, or Le petit Gallop.
THe inward Cavezon's Reyn tied to the Girthes, or in your Hand, pulled to your
Knee, Supples his outward Shoulder, on the Right Hand at liberty without the
Turn; and pressed within the Turn, his outward Shoulder comes in, and his inward
Shoulder is kept back: But how does this Supple his inward Shoulder for Terra a
Terra; for there the inward Shoulder is put forward, and his outward Shoulder
kept Back? I will tell you Perfectly how it is: On the Right Hand his outward
Shoulder is brought In, and Suppled, and his inward Shoulder kept Back. Now,
what was on the Right Hand Suppled, (which was his outward Shoulder, and
outward Leg for Terra a Terra) on the Left Hand is the same Leg, and the
inward Reyn there, and outward Leg puts back his outward Shoulder, and brings
in his inward Shoulder and Leg. So it is the same Leg still, that was on the
Right Hand his outward Leg, and is now his inward Leg on the Left Hand in
Terra a Terra; and that is the truth of it, for thus he is Suppled. It is the
very same of the other hand, and no difference at all. This I only Write to
let you see how Working his Shoulders prepares him for Terra a Terra, but we do
not yet declare what Works his outward Shoulder.

You must know, that upon a Trott, or a Gallop, upon large or narrow Circles
Dune piste, his Croup must be a little Out, to Work his Shoulders more, and the
outward Reyn of the Bridle also to Work it yet more; with a short Trott, and a
short Gallop, that he may not be too much upon the Shoulders; the Cavezones
Reyn tied thus, he never can go Terra a Terra, because his outward Shoulder is
wrought.

Trotting and Stopping is the Foundation of all things in the Manage, for it
Firmes the Horse upon the Hand, and puts him upon the Hanches: For Stopping,
you must pull him down; that is, pull your Hand close to your Body, your Body
back, and your inward Leg to him, to put his inward Leg to his outward. Going
back is an excellent thing, both to Firm him on the Hand, and make him Light of
the Hand; as also to put him upon the Hanches, and to make him the apter to
advance before.

The Petit Gallop pacifies Furious Horses, and gives them an Apuy; Stopping
upon a Gallop must be at two or three Falcadoes by a Wall strait forward, your
Right-Shoulder or Left-Shoulder to the Wall, either forward or backward: There
it is with the inward Reyn, and inward Leg; or not to help with your Legs,
but as you see Occasion.

Another excellent Lesson to make Horses Supple on the Shoulders.
THere is nothing like Leg and the inward Cavezones Reyn on a side, as if his
Head were to the Pillar, his Croup out; For, though he goes on the Left Hand,
he is Supple on the Right Hand: This Lesson makes him that he can never be
Entier, which is the Worst Vice a Horse can have. Entier is to be Resty in
Turning, which is very dangerous for the Man by coming Over; for to oppose
Turning, he puts in his Croup with all the force he can, and so puts out his
Shoulder craftily and maliciously, to hinder from Turning. So this excellent
Lesson is as if his Head were to the Pillar, Leg and Reyn on a side, he puts
out his Croup, where before he put it in, and that hinders him from being
Entier; and when he puts out his Shoulder, this brings it in, which hinders him
more from being Entier; so that it cures him perfectly of that Vice: And going
on the Left Hand, Leg and Reyn on a side, it Supples him more on the
Right Hand: So going on the Right Hand, Leg and Reyn on a side, Supples his
Shoulders for the Left Hand; and a better Lesson there is not.

For all Airs whatsoever thus upon Voltoes.
FOr all Airs, it is with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, that his outward
Shoulder may come a little in, that he may turn, which gives a little liberty
to his Croup, and so turn the Easier; and if the inward Cavezones Reyn be tied
to the Girthes, it will bring in his outward Shoulder the better; and your
outward Shoulder being a little in, and higher than your inward Shoulder, will
bring in his outward Shoulder the better; your Hand must be in this manner, on
the Right Hand your Bridle-Hand just over his Neck, turning up your Little
Finger, which pulls the outward Reyn, as it should do, and Soutenir, which is
to hold him up; for that puts him on the Hanches: The reason is, that it
Presses him on the Curb; and he, to give himself ease on the Curb, goes on the
Hanches, and then the Curb is a little Slack. You must not put your Hand within
his Neck, and bend him, for that puts him upon the Shoulders, and you must
always keep your Horse upon the Hanches.

Now for the Left Hand, you must do thus, the Bridle-Hand a little within the
Neck, and hold up your Little-Finger, and Soutenir, and it will work the same
effect as on the Right Hand: With your Leg help not at all, and he will go
perfectly well. If he puts out his Croup, put your outward Leg to him; if he
puts in his Croup too much, put your inward Leg to him, and still Soutenir, to
keep him on the Hanches; and remember, there is nothing makes Horses go well
but the Seat; for he that has not a good Seat, cannot have a good Hand: And
there is nothing Dresses Horses but the Hand and the Heels; and remember, the
only thing in Airs upon Voltoes, is to make your Horse go forward still, as if
he did not Turn; for so he goes easily and just; for if you turn your Hand too
much, his Croup would go out.

And for all Airs, your Bridle-Hand must be a little before the Pommel; and
for the Piroyte, you must help with the outward Reyn, your outward Shoulder
being a little higher than your inward Shoulder, and a little in toward his
Left-Ear on the Right Hand, and toward his Right-Ear on the Left Hand; for the
outward Reyn brings in his outward Shoulder, and so consequently puts out his
Croup: For, you must understand, that in Trotting, one Leg is before another;
so in Galloping, one Leg is before another; in Terra a Terra, one Leg is
before another; in the Piroyte, one Leg is before another; but in Corvets, or
any other Air, it is not so, but much contrary, as thus: In Corvets his Legs
are even, and not one before another; and though his Hinder-Leggs seem Wider
than his Fore-Leggs; yet his Hinder-Leggs are within the Lines of his
Shoulders, which makes him go upon the Hanches.

When a Horse is perfectly Obedient to the Hand, and the Heels; then put, in
Corvets, your inward Leg a little to him, and help with the outward Reyn of
the Bridle, and Soutenir a little, and help gently with the inward Leg; that
is, put the Calf of the Leg to him, and he will go perfectly upon his Air, in
Voltoes: For Groupadoes you must give his Croup a little more Liberty, and not
constrain it so much as in Corvets; and in Capriols not constrained at all, but
rather Even, or a little Out; for a Horse in Capriols, if his Croup be
subjected, it is impossible he should go; Therefore in Capriols you must give
his Croup all the Liberty that can be; and when you help with the Rod, it must
be when he is Falling, and not when he is Rising, for else his Croup cannot
Rise.

FOR PASSEGER, or INCAVELAR, Which is To Lap one Leg over another not Every
time, but every Second time.
IN this Passeger, the Action is not so much as a Trott, but more than a Walk;
an Action the fittest in the world to make a Horse understand the Hand and the
Heels; Because it is Gentle, and puts him into no Fury: And if he Obeyes my
Hand and Heels upon Passeger, I can make him do any thing that his Forces will
give him leave to do. Here the inward Cavezon's Reyn must be Tied to the
Girthes, or Pulled to your Knee; for that Works his outward Shoulder, which is
most proper for Passeger, to make him Lapp his outward Legs over his inward
Legs; and to make him do it the better, you must help with the outward Reyn of
the Bridle: And thus ends this Excellent Lesson.

FOR PESATES.
THe inward Cavezones Reyn tied to the Girthes, or pulled to your Knee, you
must help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle; in Passeger, raise him as high
as you can, and Hold him there Gently, and without Fougue, and Walk him away
again, and Raise him again, and do this all along the Volto, and this is a
right Pesate. This puts him upon the Hand, and prepares him for all Airs
whatsoever; for without this, no Horse can go in any Air. Therefore this must
be your first Lesson, before you ever offer to put him upon any Air: There is
nothing more Graceful in all Airs, then for a Horse to bend his Fore-Leggs up
to his Body; but there is more in it than that, for, what Horse soever that
goes in Airs, if his Fore-Leggs be stiff before, or that he Paws with his
Fore-Leggs, necessarily he is on the Shoulders, for that puts him upon the
Shoulders; and if he Bend his Legs up to his Body, it puts him upon the
Hanches; for it puts him Backward, as being Stiff Before puts him Forward, and
so upon the Shoulders. Your Horse must always go Forward except you pull him
Back.

You must Remember, that the inward Cavezones Reyn tied to the Girthes, or
pulled to your Knee, works his outward Shoulder; with the outward Reyn of the
Bridle; and all this is for Le petit Gallop, and not for Terra a Terra: And to
facilitate Le petit Gallop the better, put your outward Shoulder higher than
your inward Shoulder, which infallibly Works his outward Shoulder, as the
outward Shoulder down infallibly subjects and works his Croup. Your Legs must
be as near to the Horse as you can without touching him, that your Helps may be
the more Secret: Spurring is a Correction, but Pinching is an excellent Help,
and it must be done thus: First put your Leg as close to him as you can, and
then turn your Heel to him and Pinch him Delicately; if his Shoulders come not
in enough, the inward Reyn being Tied to the Girth, then Bend his Neck with the
outward Reyn of the Bridle, as much as possibly you can, as if you would Brake
his Neck, and that shall Supple his Shoulders sufficiently.

Here Ends these most Excellent Lessons for Suppling of a Horses Shoulders,
which is the Principal Business.
OF THE Perfection, and Exact way of making Horses to Obey the Heels.
IT is the inward Reyn absolutely that makes him Obey the Heel, and nothing
else; for it puts him on the outside, which puts in his outward Hanch, so that
he cannot get from the Heel, and therefore must necessarily Obey it.

The inward Reyn being to your outward Shoulder, or the inward Reyn of the
Cavezone to your outward Shoulder, and giving the Horse a little touch with the
Spur now and then, does admit of a Corvet when you go, the inward Reyn to your
outward Shoulder, the Horses Head to the Wall, because it is Side-wayes, and
not upon a Circle; for the inward Reyn (as if his Head were to the Pillar in
Corvets, and his Croup out) subjects his Croup: The inward Reyn in Corvets
strait by a Wall, whether your Right-Shoulder, or Left-Shoulder be to the Wall,
subjects still his Croup.

Nay, it is also the inward Reyn, when he goes in Corvets Backwards, whether
your Right-Shoulder, or Left-Shoulder, be to the Wall. And if you go in Corvets
strait by a Wall, it is still the inward Reyn; But if you make a Demy-Volto in
Corvets, then it is the outward Reyn, for else he cannot turn in Corvets; and
you may easily change from the inward Reyn to the outward Reyn, and not brake
his time at all: But by no means his Croup In in his Air upon Circles, because
it keeps out his outward Shoulder, keeping his outward Shoulder back, and then
he cannot go in his Air upon Circles, because he cannot turn; for it is the
outward Reyn in all Airs, that brings in his outward Shoulder, that he may
Turn, and his Croup a little at Liberty, that he may Turn the Easier.

But the inward Reyn for Passeger, his Croup out, makes him Obey the Heels; so
the inward Reyn for Passeger, his Croup in, makes him Obey the Heel, but not
upon Circles, there it is the outward, for else he could not Turn; but in
Pesates he may do it, but not upon his Air, and in Pesates easily; for there
he Rises but once or twice, and goes in Passeger again: This is the exact way
to make a Horse Obey the Heel perfectly.

OF TERRA A TERRA.
IN Terra a Terra you must use the inward Reyn, and the outward Leg; the
inward Reyn pulled to your outward Shoulder, presses him on the outside on his
outward Hanch, makes him lean on the outside, and look into the Turn; presses
him on the outside, and at liberty within the Turn; his Fore-Legg within the
Turn leading, and his Hinder-Legg on the same side following, and his outward
Leg short.

Thus his inward Shoulder is put Forward, and his outward Shoulder kept Back
with your Hand: You must Soutenir as you do in Airs: But this is with the
inward Reyn, and your Bridle-Hand within the Pommel, looking into the Turn,
poising upon your outward Stirrup a little, your outward Shoulder down, and in,
which subjects his Croup: Thus you cannot put in his Croup too much; for
leaning on the outside, his Croup can never go before his Shoulder; and thus he
is forced to Terra a Terra in spite of his Teeth, and to go a time Pa Ta, Pa
Ta, which is but two times; And this was never found out but by My Self.

But I must Remember you of one thing; which is, that if you tie the inward
Cavezone's Reyn to the Pommel, it works his Croup, and puts him on the outward
Hanch, and makes him Obey the Heel, but is not so powerful as the inward Reyn
to your outward Shoulder, because the Line to the Pommel is the Shorter, and
therefore not so Powerful; but if he presses too much, so that you cannot hold
him, then Tie it to the Pommel, and that will hold him sufficiently.

OF PASADOES by a Wall.
THe exact way of Pasadoes by a Wall, is with the inward Reyn both strait
forward, and upon his Demy-Voltoes, for that subjects his Croup, and makes him
go just, and look into the Turn, whether upon Le petit Gallop, or a Toute
Bride, it is all one, being a Demy-Voltoes, and is but half my Terra a Terra,
and therefore must have my helps, which is the inward Reyn, and the outward
Leg. And all the other ways are False and Senceless.

Remember, every Horse must take his own Air, and you are not to give him his
Time, but to follow his, and so he will go exactly; For if you offer to give
him your Time, he will never go; for Nature has given him one time, and you
will give him another, which shall Spoil him for ever.

TO Give you more light to Understand the Difference betwixt the Working of the
Outward Reyn, and the Inward Reyn in Corvets.
WHeresoever the Horses Croup is out, or strait by a Wall, either sideways in
Corvets, or forward in Corvets, or backward in Corvets, or his Head to the
Pillar in Corvets, it is all with the inward Reyn, to subject his Croup, to put
the inward Shoulder forward, and to keep the outward Shoulder back, which
ncessarily subjects his Croup, and the same when his Croup is out, or strait by
a Wall.

But now in Corvets, when his Croup is in upon Voltoes, or Demy-Voltoes upon
Circles, there you must help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and inward
Leg, for else he could not Turn; besides, here his outward Shoulder must be
brought In, and his inward Shoulder kept Back, that he may turn the Easier
being narrowed before, and enlarged behind, as the other was pressed behind, and
enlarged before; and with the outward Reyn, his Croup has a little Liberty:
And here is the true difference betwixt the outward Reyn, and the inward Reyn,
in their several workings. But when you help with the outward Reyn, you must
help with the inward Leg Gently.

FOR Terra A Terra ( My Way) upon Voltoes.
HEre I subject his Croup, and enlarge his Fore-parts; put forward his inward
Shoulder, and his outward Shoulder is kept Back; This is done with the inward
Reyn, and the outward Leg, the same helps serve for Pesadoes; for a
Demy-Voltoe is but half a Terra a Terra my way; and therefore the same Helps; I
said upon Circles the outward Reyn, but that was in Corvets, and that is clear
another action, than Terra a Terra: So I would have you understand Precisely
what they are; For it is the outward Reyn and inward Leg, which is the
perfection of Corvets upon Voltoes; And if you Change, put him forward one
Corvet, and then help with the outward Reyn and inward Leg, which is the
perfection of Corvets upon Voltoes. I must Remember you, that when a Horse goes
in Corvets his head to the Wall, it is with the inward Reyn and your outward
Leg, but the Horses Fore-parts must go a little before his Croup, for so he is
more on the Hanches; for if his Croup went before his Hanches, it is False. So
if he go, as if his Head were to the Pillar, it is with the inward Reyn and
outward Leg, his fore-parts being a little before his Croup. But strait by a
Wall whether forward or backward, it is with the inward Reyn and inward Leg:
All this is in Corvets. But upon Voltoes in Corvets it is with the outward
Reyn, and inward Leg; and to go forward still as if he did not Turn.

OF A RARE WAY To Dress A Horse Perfectly.
IT is to make him Narrow Behind, which is to put his inward Hinder-Legg to his
outward Hinder -- Leg: As for Example, you pull the inward Cavazon Reyn to
your Knee, or tie it to the Girths; This Works his outward Shoulder, and puts
his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, if you help him with your
inward Leg, and the outward Reyn of the Bridle; and thus he is Narrowed
Behind. This is upon large or narrow Circles Dune Piste upon a Trott; and upon
large or narrow Circles Dune Piste upon a Gallop, which makes him narrow
Behind, with the same Helps formerly spoken of.

In that Excellent Lesson of Leg and Reyn on a side, as if his Head was to the
Pillar, his inward Hinder-Legg is put to his outward Hinder-Legg, to narrow him
Behind.

In Paseger (which is to Lapp his outward Legs over his inward Legs) the
inward Cavezon's Reyn tied to the Girthes, or pulled to your Knee, does not
only Work his outward Shoulder, but puts back his inward Hinder-Legg to his
outward Hinder-Legg, to narrow him Behind; and to Narrow him more, you must
Help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle, and Help with your outward Leg
gently.

In the Petit Gallop upon Circles the inward Cavezone Reyn tied to the Girthes,
puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, and the more, if you
turn your Hand to Help with the outward Reyn of the Bridle; the Petit Gallop is
one, two, three, and four, which is a right Gallop.

In Corvets upon Turns, the inward Cavezon's Reyn tied to the Girthes; or the
outward Reyn of the Bridle, with the inward Leg, puts his inward Hinder-Legg
to his outward Hinder-Legg, Narrows him Behind, and puts him on the Hanches: So
all this is the inward Leg put to his outward Hinder-Legg, which is the
Effectual business.

In Stopping, the inward Cavazon's Reyn tied to the Girthes, or pulled to your
Knee, with your inward Leg, narrows him Behind, makes him bow in the Gambrel,
and puts him upon the Hanches, with pulling your Hand in.

As for the inward Reyn, and outward Leg, it subjects his Croup, and puts his
inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg, and Narrows him Behind: So
side-wayes to the Wall, the inward Reyn and outward Leg Narrows him Behind:
Putting his inward Hinder-Legg Leg to his outward Hinder-Legg Narrows him
Behind, and puts him on his Hanches; so his Head to the Pillar, the inward Reyn
and outward Leg puts his inward Hinder-Legg to his outward Hinder-Legg,
narrows him Behind, and puts him on the Hanches; and so forward by a Wall of
either side does the same, and so Backwards; but here it is with the inward
Reyn and inward Leg, both on a side, to put his inward Hinder-Legg to his
outward Hinder-Legg, whch is the All in All for Dressing of Horses.

OF A most effectual way TO DRESS HORSES, And so true and certain, that
whosoever shall Read it, Mark it, and Understand it, and carefully Practice it,
will infallibly Dress all manner of Horses to a great perfection.
To Supple a Horses Shoulders.
I Have given you many Lessons for it, but I will let you see it clearer than
ever; You must pull the inward Cavezon's Reyn low, and from your body, to bring
in the Horses outward Shoulder, which is the business, and makes him bend like
a hoope, and then you are right; Upon Passager his Croup must not be above a
quarter in, at the most, for if it be, it pulls back his outward Shoulder,
which is false; and he will look out of the Turn, pull the Reyn what you will,
so pernicious is putting a Horses Croup in, when you would work a Horses
outward Shoulder; but the other way makes him supple, and easy, to do any
thing you would have him, with great facility, and never to be Entier, but to
go always Byas.

For Terra a Terra releve, the time, one, two, pa, ta, is done with the inward
Reyn pulled to your outward Shoulder, and with your outward Leg; so here you
cannot put in his Croup too much; and thus he is straightened behind, and enlarged
before, and indeed goes upon a Square, his inward Shoulder being put forward,
and his outward Shoulder kept back.

Terra a Terra determine, is another business; for this is, as if a Horse did
run a Careere upon a Circle, where he cannot run in his length, and therefore
his Voltoe or Circle must be larger, because it is but a Gallop; running being
but the action of a Gallop: Here you must help with the outward Reyn, and
outward Leg, to narrow him before, and Enlarge him behind, and to go Byas, and
this is determine, Bias in Corvets, as if he did not turn, and so in le petit
gallop upon Circles; the outward Reyn is used for both, and so in Passager, the
outward Reyn and Leg being Bias.

It is a great truth in Horsemanship, that both in Terra a Terra, Demy-Voltoes,
and Passadoes, as also in Passager, whenever a Horse is straightened before, he
is Enlarged behind; and whenever he is straightened behind, he is enlarged
before.

The exact way to make a Horse go perfectly, is a Square, and not a Circle,
which Subjects his Croup extremely.

In Corvets upon a Circle, it is impossible to help with the inward Reyn,
because the Horse cannot turn; but the inward Reyn upon a Square, is excellent,
with the outward Leg, so he goes a little forward, every time a little: So
excellent is the Square.

For Terra a Terra, there is nothing like a Square, with the inward Reyn and
outward Leg; so upon Demy-Voltoes, in Passadoes the same, in Passager the same
still, upon a Square; His head to the Pillar it must be a Square: The Square is
the quintissence of the Manage, and all this subjects his hinder parts.

The inward Reyn pulled to your outward Shoulder, with the contrary Leg,
Subjects his Croup upon a Square, and makes him obey the Heel perfectly,
because he cannot get from it.

But when you begin to Dress a Horse in Corvets, Pesates is the ground of all
Ayrs; a Pesate is to raise Him high, and hold him there. But when you put him
in Corvetts, it is with the outward Reyn, and inward Leg, to be D'une Piste;
and to let him go three or four Corvets in a place, and Walk him away again,
and Corvet him again as before; and, in a little time he will make a Turn
perfectly in Corvets.

But when he is Perfect, then you must help with the outward Reyn, and outward
Leg, and Soutenir, and put him forward always a little, as if he did not turn,
and then he will go perfectly in Corvets.

FOR THE BRIDLE-HAND; WHICH Deserves to be well Observed, being the Sole of the
Manage, and the most Effectual thing that can possibly be.
IN Corvets on the Right Hand, the Knuckles of the Bridle-Hand must be from his
Neck, and on the Inside of his Neck, and Soutenir.

On the Left Hand, in Corvets, your Bridle must be on the inside of the Neck,
your Knuckles from his Neck, and Soutenir; for this pulls the outward Reyn.

For Terra a Terra, the inward Reyn pulled to your outward Shoulder, your
Knuckles are to be toward his Neck, and Soutenir for the Right Hand, and your
outward Leg.

For the Left, the inward Reyn pulled to your outward Shoulder, your Knuckles
are to be toward his Neck, and Soutenir; and this pulls the inward Reyn, your
outward Leg being to him.

You see, that in Corvets, you work the outward Reyn, and in Terra a Terra, you
work the inward Reyn, which is not to be done any other Way than as I have set
down.

But in Croupadoes, Balotadoes, and Capriols, there it is with the outward
Reyn, to give his Croup liberty, or else he could not Leap, and, if there be
cause, help him with the inward Leg a little, to give his Croup more liberty.

OF BITTS, and of the USE OF THEM.
THe Writers of Books, and the Horsemen now Living, that think themselves
Wise, and great Masters, by the diversity of Bitts, show themselves full of
Ignorance, and Simple People, to imagine, That a piece of Iron in a Horse's
Mouth can bring him Knowledge; no more than a Book in a Boys Hand can, at
first, make him Read; or, a pair of Spurrs, planted on Ignorant Heels, can make
one Ride well.

There is however, a Propriety to fit every Horse, according to the Turn of his
Neck; shorter or longer, wider or narrower; the Mouth, the liberty, wider or
narrower; the Eye longer or shorter; the Eye straight, or more bending; the
Branches stronger, or weaker; the Curb equal; the Hooks according to the just
measure of the Bitt; the Curb three good round Esses, with one Ring, where it is
Fastened; and two Rings, or Malions, where it is Curbed, handsomely furnished
with Bosses, not too bigg; richer, or poorer, according as you please: Not two
Rows of little Chains, tied to the Bitt, within his Mouth, only One at the
most.

And this Rule must ever be Observed, to have as little Iron in your Horse's
Mouth as possible you can: If his Tongue be too bigg, the Liberty must be the
wider; if his Tongue be too little, the Liberty the less; but you must take
heed, that the Apuy, or Resting place of the Bitt, be never made upon the
Liberty, for it will Gaul him; but the Apuy must be made in the True place,
where it ought to be, which is about Ones Little Fingers breadth beyond the
Liberty, on both sides of the Bitt; and the Bitt to be Ones Fingers breadth
above his Tushes: The Branches are strong, when the Reyns are slackt; those
Branches that comes Back to his Neck most, are Weak; those that go Forward from
his Neck, are Strong; and good reason, for you have the greater Pull.

You must measure with a little String, or a piece of a Riding-Rod, from the
Eye of the Bitt, strait Down; and if the Cheeks be within that Line, they are
Weak; and the more they are within that Line, they are still the Weaker: If the
Cheeks be without that Line, they are Strong; and the more they are without
that Line, they are the Stronger.

You must consider another Thing, which is, That the Cheeks are like a Lever,
the Longer it is, it has the more Force, and the Shorter it is, the less
Force; for a Boy, with a long Lever, will Lift up more than the Strongest Man,
with a short Lever: And so in a Bitt, the Longer the Cheeks are, they have the
more Force, and the Shorter they are, the less Force: For that which is the
furthest from the Center, has the most Force for Lifting or Pulling; and that
which is nearest the Center, the least Force: So very short Cheeks, make them
as Strong as you will, cannot have that Force that longer Cheeks have.

If a Horse hold Up his Head, and Out, then they have shorter Branches, and
stronger, to Pull him Down, and In; wherein they are half Right: So if a Horse
holds his Head too Low, and brings it In too Round, so that he Arms himself
against the Bitt, which is, To rest the Branches upon his Breast, so that you
have no Pull, or Command of him at all; because this Vice is Contrary to
holding Up his Head, and Out; for which Vice they had shorter Cheeks, and
stronger, to bring it In: So Arming against the Bitt, being the Contrary Vice,
they think they must have the Bitt made Contrary; they must have a Long One to
put it Up; and since a strong Branch pulled him Down, they must have a weak
Branch to put Up his Head; wherein they are mightily Deceived: For when a Horse
Arms himself against the Bitt, certainly Long Branches will sooner come to his
Breast, than Short Ones; and it is as certain, that a Weak Branch will come
sooner to his Breast, than a Strong Branch; therefore they are so much Deceived.

As for a Horse that Arms himself against the Bitt, you must have a Short
Branch that will not touch his Breast, and a Strong Branch to keep It yet
further from his Breast: The Hooks of the Curb ought to be made a little
Longer, and so Just as not to Hurt, or to Offend the sides of his Cheeks; and
if the Curb do not lie in his right Place, two little Iron Rings fastened close
to the Top of the Hooks, to keep them Steady, and Fast, is the best Remedy; All
other Devices in Bitts or Curbs, are Idle and Ignorant things.

THE BITTS that follow are the BEST.
1. A Plain Canon, with Branches A la Connestable. 2. A Plain Scatch, with
Branches A la Connestable. 3. A Canon A la Pignatell; which is a gentle falling
and moving Up and Down, and so Low as not to hurt the Roof of the Horse's
Mouth; which is the Best, certainly, for all Horses that have Tongues, which I
am sure they would not have Pressed; therefore I Recommend that Liberty above all
Things in Bitts, and the Branches A la Connestable.

To Discharge a Horses Lips, I would have Olives with the Liberty A la
Pignatell; those Olives coming short a little of the Bitt, with some little
Rings, gives Liberty for his Lips, and Discharges them; and the Branches, A la
Connestable.

But indeed, I would have but two sorts of Bitts, which is, 1. The Canon A la
Pignatell. 2. And the Olives A la Pignatell, to Discharge his Lips, if need be;
but the Branches always A la Connestable.

Thus you have the Truth of Bitts brought into a narrow Compass; there is
little in them to bring a Horse to Understanding, on which we must Work, and
that is, his Reason, by the Favor of the Logitians Distinction of Reasonable
and Irreasonable Creatures; for were they as good Horsemen as Scholars, they
would have made another Distinction.

Well then, it is not a Piece of Iron can make a Horse Knowing; if it were, a
Bitt-Maker would be the best Horseman. No! It is the Art of appropriated
Lessons; fitting every Horse according to his Nature, Disposition, and
Strength; Punishing, and, with good Lessons, Rectifying his Vices; Rewarding
him, and Preserving him in his Horse-Vertues; and not trusting to an Ignorant
piece of Iron called a Bitt: For, I will make a perfect Horse with a Cavezone
with a Bitt, better than any man shall with his Bitt without a Cavezone; so
highly is the Cavezone, rightly used, to be esteemed; For I had a Barbe at
Antwerp, that went Perfectly with the Cavezone without a Bitt, which was true
Art, and not the Ignorance and Folly of Bitts.

The famous Pignatell at Naples, never used but simple Bitts; which made the
Ignorant wonder how he could Dress Horses so Perfectly, with no more sorts of
Bitts: But he told them, it was their Ignorance made them wonder at his Art.
And so that great Master, in this Art, Monsieur de Pluvinel, did the same: For,
he had always a plain Cavezone, and not too sharp; and to make it Gentler, did
always Line it with double Leather at the least; for a Horse, to Wry his Head,
or suck up his Bitt, or put his Tongue over the Bitt, it never happens in my
Manage, or Method; because the Liberty A la Pignatel hinders his Tongue for
going over the Bitt; and working with the Cavezone, with truly Slacking the
Bitt, those things never happens, or do ever Horses put out their Tongues.

OF THE IMPERFECTIONS OF A HORSE'S MOUTH.
ALL our Writers in Horse-manship, the great Masters, in that Profession, (as
well Old as Modern) are mightily Troubled and Concerned, about the Vices and
Imperfections of a Horse's Mouth. As for Example; The first, when a Horse
pulls, and sucks up his Tongue: The second, when he puts his Tongue over the
Bitt: The third, when he doubles it about the Bitt: And the fourth, when he
hangs his Tongue out of his Mouth, either Forward, or of one side of his Mouth:
For all, and every one of these Vices, our great Doctors in Horse-manship, has
taken a great deal of Pains, with many curious Devices, and many Inventions,
with Bitts, to Cure them; and take great Pains, and much Labor about it; so
much, as their several Writings, about these particular Vices of the Mouth,
would make a great Volume; when the truth is, Most of their Bitts, to Remedy
these Imperfections, are much greater Vices than those they would Remedy; and
their Physic the greatest Disease, and brings more Inconveniences with it,
than the Vices they go about to Cure.

The truth is, in short, I wish a Horse had none of those Faults; but put the
case he has, As putting out his Tongue, or putting his Tongue over the Bitt,
or sucking or drawing of his Tongue up, or doubling of it: All these I wish
were not; but if they be, the Horse is not prejudiced at all by them, for he
will have as good an Apuy with them, as without them; and will be as firm and
steady of his Head, and as sensible of the Bars, and the Curb, as if those
Vices were not; for the Bitt rests, and works still, upon his Bars; and the
Curb works in his due Place, where it ought, in spite of his Tongue, let it be
where it will, or not be; for when a Horse's Tongue is Cut off, Does that
hinder the Bitt, for working on the Bars, or the Curb, for working in his due
Place? Not at all: Nay, I have known a Horse's Tongue quite pulled out by the
Roots, and yet he went as well as ever he did in his Life; so that is nothing;
for the Bitt still works upon the Bars, and the Curb, where it ought: And a
Horse with a Tongue, and put it where he will; or a Horse without a Tongue, is
no hinderance to a Horse that has a good Apuy, or is well settled on the Hand;
no hinderance in the world: So that now you see, What vain Curiosities, to no
purpose, Our great Masters has troubled themselves about, and pusled many of
their Readers, and tormented the poor Horses to boot, to no End in the world.

FINIS.
Excellent NAMES for HORSES of MANAGE.
ITALIAN and SPANISH.
BElla Donna Bell in Campo Desperato Argentino Dorato Gatto Gatino Rondinello
Felice Lampo Soura Speransa Capitano Lupo Mahaumilia Mala testa Melancholia
Genette Corsiero Neapolitano Rubicano Signiore Delitia Nobilisimo Dolce Bona
Natura Bellissimo Bonissimo Mill Fiore Almenara Nuntio Dracone Arogatillo
Diamante Arrogante Il Bravo Cavallo Imperiale Emperatore Grandissimo
Illustrissimo
FRENCH.
FAvory Mignion Balott Galliard Bonit Perle Roussin Sans Pareil La Perfection
Le Delicat Isabelle d' Espagne Monsieur Le Hober Le Petit Barbe Le Grand Barbe
Le Turc Le Petit Boutton Le Superbe Le Bouffon La Mervelle Le Miracle Le
Courtau Le Fripon Le Larron Le Mechant L' Emerillon L' Admirable Le Diligent Le
Parangon Le Loyal Le Sensible L' Enrage Le Fougeux Le Malitieux L' Endormy Le
Country Coeur L' Amor La Maitresse Le Roy Le Prince Le Duc L' Empereur Le
Colonel Le General Le Cardinal Le Pape La Tempeste Le Compagnion Le Comarade
L' Amie L' Ennemy Le Philosophe La Vielle Le Diable Le President Le Juge Le
Capritieux Le Quereleux Le Piqueur L' Yurogne Le Fantasque Le Tenez-ferme Le
Jeteur Le Rude Le Vilain Le Coquin Le Poultron Le Pour Le Courageux Le
Desprise Le Hardi Galliardon La Mouche Le Troumpeur La Rencontre Le Mouton Le
Janti Le Lion Le Renard L' Elefant Le Pegase Le Volant Via Lactea Le Determine
La Grenouille Le Gallant Le Cavalier Mon Roy Le Soldat Le Conquereur Le
Conselier Le Terrible La Batalle La Beauty L' Estoile L' Enioue Mars Jupiter
FOR DUTCH HORSES.
LE Pisante Le Swiss Mine Hear Frison Younker Vrselino

