A NEW-YEARS-GIFT FOR PROTESTANTS, With the true Cause of the Diversity of
RELIGIONS.

Being a New Discovery of the Essence and Foundation from whence all Religions
is derived, for the Salvation of all Mankind through Christ, which from the
beginning of the World, was but one and the same that is now, and will be to
the end thereof, whereby to lead all into Truth and Unity of Religion without
Controversy.

By a Person of Quality.

LICENSED, December. 20th. 1691.

London, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1691.

A NEW-YEARS-GIFT FOR PROTESTANTS; With the true Cause of the Diversity of
RELIGIONS.
IT must be undeniably granted, That there never has been from the Creation
but one Religion for the Salvation of all Mankind through Christ; and by which
Religion, and no other, some of every Nation have been, and will be saved to
the end of the World; for without Christ and Faith in Him, no Man can possibly
be saved.

The Groundwork, Foundation, and Cornerstone of which Religion, must be
derived from the Second Person of the Trinity, the Lamb's Spirit of Christ,
which was destroyed by Adam in himself, from the Foundation of the World; whose
Soul was the perfect Image and Likeness of God, having in him the perfection of
the Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in one Spirit.

But Adam made his Spirit an imperfect Spirit of God, by eating the Forbidden
Fruit, which killed in himself the said Lamb's Spirit of Christ in Love to God;
by which Love only Man is saved, and without which Spirit of Christ in Love to
God, no Man can possibly be saved.

For God is said to be Love, and it is the Word that was with God, and the Word
that was God, and the Word that was made Flesh in Christ, which was begotten
from all Eternity in God, the Fathers Spirit of Life; and from which Spirit of
Life and Love, does proceed the Holy Spirit in Wisdom, a Trinity of Spirits;
and but one Spirit inseparable from Gods Spirit, which was breathed into the
Nostrils of Man, and was perfect in Adam till he desiled it in himself, and in
all his Posterity; by which means they were all after him Born in Sin: For the
First Born Spirit of Life, being without Christ's Spirit of Love, does vary from
the Spirit of God, and is naturally of it self (being without Love) a sinfully
inclined Spirit. Therefore, as Christ said, Ye must be born again, or ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Which makes it plain and most apparent, That the Lambs Spirit of Christ in
Love to God (which Adam killed and destroyed in himself,) must be begotten, and
born again in all Mankind, whereby to complete the Defects of the Spirit of
Life, that it may become the true Image and Likeness of Gods Spirit, as at
first in Adam.

Which Spirit of Life, is an imperfect Spirit of God, without Christ's Spirit of
Love; for without Love in the Life, there can no Wisdom proceed from Man:
Therefore, there can be no Salvation for Man, without His Spirit be made
perfect, as God the Fathers Spirit is perfect, a Trinity in Unity, with Life,
Love and Wisdom. For the First Born-wordly Spirit of Life in Man, has a
natural love to the World, and cannot enjoy the Kingdom of God without it be
born again with Christ's Heavenly Spirit, in love to God more than to the World.

So that all other things, in the Duties, Rites and Ceremonies of several
Religions, are but Circumstances, Forms and Pertainances, to the gaining,
preserving, nourishing, and increasing this Spirit of Christ in love to God,
whilst Man is in the World, (He being born into the World only with a worldly
Spirit,) whereby the Soul of Man before he goes out of the World, may become a
Heavenly Spirit, refined, fitted, and prepared for the Heavenly Kingdom.

Therefore it is a false Conception, That Religion is only for the Service of
God, and that Man by it can do God any Service, but through his Obedience to
Gods Commands, for his own proper advantage; being it is only for the
increasing Christ's Spirit in him for the good of himself (which Adam destroyed)
whereby he may be capable of living to Gods Honor and Glory; for without that
Spirit of Christ, Man is only a sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

On which Spirit of Christ in love to God, and love to Man, hangs all the Law
and the Prophets, Mat. 22.40. And in which is the Fulfilling of the Law, Romans
13.10. And the Gentiles which have not the Law, are a Law unto themselves,
which shows the Works of the Law written in their Hearts, Romans 2.14. For all
Nations and different Religions throughout the Universe, do all agree from
their Hearts in this one main Principal Point of Religion, That none can be
saved without love to God, (tho they know not the spiritual Reason for it,) and
they do all naturally know in their Hearts what is Good and what is Evil, their
Consciences bearing them witness, and their Thoughts accusing or excusing one
another, verse. 15.

So that to the Christians, it is demonstrated by the Scripture the true
Principle of Religion, how to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, (which can
only be by the true Spirit of Christ in love to God;) And unto the Gentiles, it
is demonstrated from the Law written in their Hearts; they naturally
worshipping God, with the Spirit of Christ in love to God, having a Belief in
God, (wherein consists the Faith in Christ,) by whom they are saved through
Christ. For whom God will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy. And
doubtless, those Greek and Roman Heathens, Socrates, Plato, and Seneca, etc.
who lived up to the strictness of Virtue, and did serve God (in the only true
Religion) with the true Spirit of Christ, in Spirit, and in Truth, in Love to
God, tho they could not then define what God was, as has been since by
Scripture revealed.

Therefore Christians (though they be in the Right and True way, with a
sufficiency for their Salvation through Scripture) do extremely err in the
understanding for what Religion was ordained, and also in the Principle and
true Essence from whence it is grounded, whereon hangs all the Law and the
Prophets, and in which is the fulfilling of the Law in the love to God and Man,
(and in the observing of which, Mankind are most inconsiderately defective,)
for without true Obedience in the keeping God's Commands, and in strictness
thereof to the Love of Man, there can be no Love to God, nor no Salvation, nor
the Spirit of God in that Man, or in his Religion, where there is a breach of
Love against either God or Man, or their Laws and Commandments; For he that
loves God will keep his Commandments, and he that loves not God will not keep
his Commandments, John 4.23, 24. The same may be said of Man; he that loves Man
will keep his Commandments, actively or passively; and he is a liar that says
he loves God, and does not love his Brother, for he who loves God, does love
his Brother also, 1 John 4.20.21. For Man is the representative of God's
Spirit, and God in Trinity does dwell in Man, who never was, nor can Personally
be seen Transacting in any thing, but by, and through Christ, Angels, or Men;
therefore it is said in the 1 These. 4.8. Whosoever despises Man, despises not
Man but God.

For all Mankind are Members of Christ, and are created from one and the self
same Spirit of God; he deviding his Spirit to every Man severally as it
pleases him, 1 Cor. 12.4, 11. Or it may be said God transforming his own
Spirit into the several shapes of Mankind like himself, so that had all Men one
Trinitarian Spirit in Perfection (as Adam at first had,) they would all
unanimously agree together with one Spirit, in Life, Love, and Wisdom, as one
Man, after the likeness of God, and live according to his Will and Pleasure.

But by Adam's destroying himself and Posterity, Christ's Lamb's Spirit in love
to God; it has brought variance and strife into the World, for want of the
true Light of Christ's Spirit of Love (which is the light of the World) to
regulate them; For without which, their Spirits will be no more fit for Heaven
than the Spirit of Devils, who have only the Spirit of Life, without Love or
Wisdom.

Therefore God of his mercy and compassion to Mankind, did from the beginning
spread forth his Commandments into all the hearts of Men; and in a more
particular manner, by express word to his Elect, that they should be unanimous
in keeping those Commandments, whereby to increase and inflame their Spirits in
Love of God and one another; to become one, as God and Christ are one; and to
live a peaceable, quiet, heavenly life on Earth, as if they were even in
Heaven: It being the main end for which Religion was propagated, to restore Man
to the first Purity of his Father Adam.

So that all Religion through the Commands of God, and the President and Precept
of Christ by Scripture (wherein lies Man's Service to God) are but to admonish,
put, and keep us in mind of our strict Obedience and Duty toward God and toward
Man; that Man may recover the lost Spirit of Christ, to become the perfect
Image and Likeness of God, as at his first Creation, thereby to redeem him from
the Captivity of Satan, who was the Original cause of Loves Destruction in Man,
to Entail Man unto himself, to become like himself, who has no Love at all in
his Spirit, to God or Man.

Therefore the true Visible Church, is only to be found in Legal Places of
Worship, where God has Recorded his Name, by Magistrates, with the Supreme
Power in Love and Unity; for without the Consent of the Magistrates, and
Supreme Power, in Love and Unity; For without the consent of Magistrates and
Sumpreme Powers, God does not record his Name any where; for wheresoever he
(who is called Love) does Record his Name, it must be done with Love, and not
in opposition to Love: It being said by God, Exo. 20.24. In all places where I
Record my Name, I will come unto them, and I will bless them. Therefore God's
Blessing cannot be expected in that Assembly or Congregation, (where he does
not record his Name) that destroys his Spirit of Love, by being in opposition
to the legal Power of Magistrates, as all Religions do act against the Legal
Power that are in England, excepting the Church of England, where only decent
Order, with necessary Ornaments and Cetemonies are used without any
Superstition, and that has kept it self in Purity (throughout all Sufferings
from the Apostles time) the nearest the Scripture Rule and Method, and the
clearest from any breach of God's and Man's Laws, whose Doctrine tends chiefly
for the incitement to the love of God and Man, through obedience to their
Commands, with Praying, Preaching and Teaching in a known Tongue; for the
Edification of all Men, good and bad; and for living with each other in Unity,
Peace and Quietness; following Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord.

Yet for all which undeniable Truth, there are those who extremely vary
therefrom, under pretense of being Christ's Vicar or Vicegerent on Earth, do
(contrary to his President and Precept) usurp to themselves the Temporal and
Spiritual Power over all Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes, and Bishops,
excommunicating and dethroning them; with absolving Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance, and Cursing all that believe not in their Erroneous Principles of
Faith; whereas from the beginning it was not so throughout all the Patriarchs
unto Moses, who was the Supreme Head over God's High Priest, and to whom the
decent Order of Religion was first Ordained by God himself, for the unanimous
Government of his Select People, till Christ; who assumed no such power unto
himself, nor gave any President or Precept for it to any one else throughout
all the Scripture; nor also St. Peter, (from whence they derive their main
Authority,) who desires for the Lords sake to submit your selves to the King
the Supreme Head, and to fear God, and honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.13, 17. whose
Doctrine they have converted to the making Kings and Princes fear and honor
them, and are in direct opposition to (the Fundamental Principle of Religion,)
Christ's Spirit, in love to God and Man; and the designed intention thereof to
follow Peace with all Men, by gaining, preserving, nourishing, and increasing
the said Love toward God, and toward Man, whereby Christ's Spirit may reign
upon Earth, in Love and Unity, Peace and Quietness; that Gods Will may be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven.

And there are others who run whoreing after their own inventions, to find out
the Purity of Religion, one for Paul, another for Apolos; and that makes all
places alike for the Service of God; and that pretends to obey God rather than
Man; although the Duty toward God does chiefly consist in the Duty toward
Man: These he they who separate themselves, Sensual, having not the Spirit,
Jude 19. who have a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.5, 7.
who are all gone astray from Christ's Spirit of Love, the Light that enlightneth
the World, which must lead all into Unity of Religion before the end thereof.

For the Spirit of Christ's Love, is the White-stone in Rev. 2.17. which no Man
knows, saving he that receives it; that is, when it arises, and is received
in Man, he will know, and find in himself an unexpressible Joy, far above all
worldly Affections,) with extraordinary great Delight and Pleasure in the
contemplation of Heaven, and in the service and love to God more than to the
World: And it is the Cornerstone from whence the Structure of the true
Religion must be derived; and it is also the only true Test to prove the
Spirits of all Men and all Religions, whether they be good or bad. Therefore
whatsoever is Transacted by any Man, or by, and from the Doctrine of any
Religion, that destroys Love, Duty and Obedience, either against God, or Man,
or their Laws and Commands, it does murder, kill and destroy the Spirit of God
in that Man, or in his Religion, from serving God in the true Religion, in
Spirit and in Truth, viz. with Christ's true heavenly Spirit in love to God and
Man; for without that Spirit of Love, (it being quite extinct in Man,) ^o Man
can possibly live in the Body from distraction and destroying himself, if left
to himself; and it is as impossible that any Man can be saved out of the Body;
for without Christ's Spirit of Love, no Man can possibly be saved; it being the
Trumpet that must, and will sound in the Ears of all Mankind, to call, and
awaken them from Death to Life, whose Spirits being Dead with Adam's decayed
Spirit of Love, must be revived with Christ's quickening Spirit of Love, or else
of all Creatures, Man is the most miserable.

Therefore I beseech you for the Lord's sake, have a serious Consideration to
Examine and try your selves by the above said Test, whether there be in your
Souls Christ's true and sincere heavenly Spirit, in love to God and Man without
any defection; and let every one repent and be converted to the Knowledge of
the Lord; For it is said, the time comes that every one shall know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest, viz. that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, a
Trinity in one Spirit shall be found out, as certainly known in every Man's own
self by the Spirit of Truth, which shall lead you into all Truth: The Spirit of
the Comforter, Christ's Spirit of Love which is in you, and is the only Spirit
that will, or can save you, and the only Comfort that none can take from you;
and the only undeniable Spirit wherewith to serve God in Spirit and in Truth.
Therefore make haste to the gaining the said Spirit of Christ, through earnest,
violent and fervent Prayers; for nothing else can preserve your Souls from
everlasting Ruin, in perpetual darkness, in the horrid torturing Flames of Hell
Fire, with the Devil and his Angels; and nothing can be more dreadful and
terrible for the rouzing up every one from their stupidly acquiessing in the
uncertainty of their own Salvation, and with all speed to make their Calling
and Election sure, by the infallible certainty thereof through Christ's Spirit,
herein (by divine Inspiration) plainly demonstrated for the fulfilling of
Scripture, and that all Mankind concerned, delay not to redeem themselves out
of the Captivity of their confused Babel; and that no Man beguile you in a
voluntary humility and Worshipping of Angels, which things have indeed ^ show
of Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility: Col. 2.1.23. And give (...) heed to
their seducing Spirits, who teach the Doctrine of ^evils, and are known by
forbidding to Marry, and to abstain from M^ats, ^im. 4.3. making Godliness
great gain: From such turn away, and turn unto the Lord; For why will ye die,
O ye House of Israel? says the Lord.

Therefore I must again beseech you for the Lord's sake, for the saving your
own Lives, that every Man would Attract to himself a self-denial, from the many
dissentions in the various Opinions about Religion; and that all would (with a
fixed Resolution by Prayer,) Center their Hearts in that one only Word, that was
with God, and was God, and was made flesh in Christ, (Love) For all Men were
made from one Spirit of Love, and all should (by the Christian Religion) live
as Brethren in one Spirit of Love, wherein the perfection of all Religion does
wholly and solely consist in gaining, increasing and preserving the said Spirit
of Love to God; which Law of God (in which are all the Commandments) has from
the beginning, is, and will be written to the end of the World, in every Man's
Heart, (all naturally concluding without Conversie) that none can be saved
without Love to God; which (being Christ's Spirit) does fulfill all the Law and
the Prophets, and all God's Commands; and does contain in it the whole Body,
Soul, and Spirit of Divinity. Wherefore then should there be so many Divisions,
with the bitter envyings and strife amongst Christians, when it is earthly,
sensual, and devilish, with confusion and every evil work, James 3.14. And when
nothing else but love can passify Wrath, and cover a multitude of Sins, and
cleanse from all Iniquity, and save the Soul from an irreyocable Ruin; which
that it may Reign in all your Hearts, to center all into the one only Religion,
in Unity, Peace and Purity, being the perfection of Religion: The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

