THE CHARTER OF THE City of New York.
Thomas Dongan Lieutenant Governor and Vice Admiral of New York and its
Dependencies, under his Majesty James the second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defendor of the Faith, supreme
Lord and Proprietor of the Collony and Province of New York, and its
Dependencies in America, etc.

To all to whom this shall come, sends Greeting. WHEREAS the City of New York
is an ancient City within the said Province, and the Citizens of the said City
have antienly been a Body Politic and Corporate. And the Citizens of the said
City have held, used and enjoyed, as well within the same, as elsewhere within
the said Province, diverse and sundry Rights, Liberties, Privileges,
Francheses, Free Customs, Preheminences, Advantages, Jurisdictions, Emoluments
and Immunities, as well by Prescription, as by Charter, Letters Patents, Grants
and Confirmations, not only of diverse Governors and Commanders in Chief in the
said Province, but also of several Governors, Directors, Generals and
Commanders in Chief of the Nether-Dutch-Nation, whilst the same was or has been
under their Power and Subjection. And whereas diverse Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments Jurisdictions, Liberties, Immunities and Privileges have
heretofore been given and granted, or mentioned to be given and granted to the
Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City, sometimes by the name of Schout
Burger masters and Schepens of the City of New-Amsterdam, and sometimes by the
Name of Mayor, Alder-men and Commonalty of the City of New York; sometimes by
the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriff of the City of New York; sometimes
by the Name of the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, and by diverse
other Names, as by their several Letters Patents, Charters, Grants, Writings,
Records and Minuments amongst other things may more fully appear. And whereas
the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City have erected, built and
appropriated, at their own proper Costs and Charges, several public Buildings,
Accommodations and Conveniences for the said City, That is to say, the
City-Hall or Stat-house, with the Ground thereunto belonging, Two
Market-houses, the Bridge into the Dock, the Wharffs or Dock, with their
appurtenances and Conveniences, and the New Burial-place without the Gate of
this City, and have established and settled one Ferry from the said City of
New York to Long Island, for the accommodation and convenience of Passengers,
the said Citizens and Travelers.

And whereas several the Inhabitants of the said City and of Manhattans Island,
do Hold from and under his most Sacred Majesty respectively, as well by several
respective Letters Patents, Grants, Charters and Conveyances, made and granted
by the late Leiutenants, Governors or Commanders in Chief of the said
Province, as otherwise, several and respective Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments upon Manhattans Island, and in the City of New York aforesaid,
and that as well the said Mayor and Aldermen, and Commonalty of the said City,
and their Successors, as also the Inhabitants of Manhattens Island and City of
New York aforsaid, as their Heirs and Assigns respectively, may hold, exercise
and enjoy such and the same Liberties, Privile^ges and Franchises, Rights,
Royalties, free Customs, Jurisdictions and Immunities, as they have anciently
had, used, held and enjoyed, but also such public Buildings. Accommodations,
Conveniences, Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Hereditaments in the said City
of New York, and upon Manhattans Island aforsaid, which as abovesaid, have
been by the Citizens and Inhabitants erected and built, or which have, as
aforsaid, been held, enjoyed, granted and conveyed unto them, or any of them
respectively.

Know Ye therefore, That I the said Thomas Dungon, by virtue of the Commission
and Authority to me given, and Power in me residing, at the humble Petition of
the now Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of New York, and for
diverse other good Causes and Considerations me thereunto moving, have given,
granted, ratified and confirmed, and by these Presents, for and on the behalf
of his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, do
give, grant, ratify and confirm unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty
of the said City, All and every such, and the same Liberties, Privileges,
Franchises, Rights, Royalties, Free Customs, Jurisdictions and Immunities,
which they by the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, or otherwise,
have anciently had, held, used or enjoyed. Provided always, That none of the
said Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Free Customs, Jurisdictions or
Immunities be inconsistent with, or Repugnant to the Laws of his Majesty's
Kingdom of England, or any other the Laws of the General Assembly of this
Province. And the aforesaid public buildings, accommodations and Conveniences
in the said City, that is to say, the aforesaid City Hall or State-House, with
the ground thereunto belonging* two Market Honses, the Bridge into the Dock,
the Wharffs or Dock, the said New Burial-Place, and the aforementioned Ferry,
with their, and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, together with
all the profits, benefits and advantages, which shall or may accrue or arise at
all Times hereafter, for Dockage or Wharfage within the said Dock, with all and
singular the Rents, Issues, Profits, Gains and Advantages, which shall or may
arise, grow or accrue, by the said City Hall or state-House, and ground
there-unto belonging, Market Houses, Bridge, Dock and Burying place, Ferry, and
other the abovementioned premises, or any of them. And also all and every the
Streets, Lanes, Highways and Allies within the said City of New York and
Manhattans Island aforesaid, for the public use and service of the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, the Inhabitants of Manhattans Island
aforesaid, and Travelers there; together with full Power, License and
Authority to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, and their Successors
forever, To establish, appoint, order and direct the establishing making,
ordering, amending, repairing and laying out of all Streets, Lanes, Alleys,
Highways, Watercourse, Ferry and Bridges in and throughout the said City of
New York and Manhattans Island aforesaid, necessary, needful and convenient for
the Inhabitants of the said City and Manhattans Island, and for all Travelers
and Passengers there. Provided always, that this said License, so as above
granted for the establishing, ^a^^ing and laying out of Streets, Lanes, Alleys,
Highways, Ferry and Bridges* be not extended, or be construed to extend to
the taking away of any Person or Persons Right or Property, without his, her or
their Consent, or by some known Law of the said Province.

And for the Considerations aforesaid, I do likewise Give, Grant, Ratify and
Confirm unto all and every the respective Inhabitants of the said City of
New York, and of Manhattans Island aforesaid, and their several respective
Heirs and Assigns, All and every the several and respective Messuages,
Tenements, Lands and Hereditaments situate, lying and being in the said City
and Manhattans Island aforesaid, to them severally and respectively granted,
conveyed and Confirmed by any of the late Governors, Lieutenants, or
Commanders in Chief of the said Province, or by any of the former Mayors or
Deputy Mayor and Aldermen of the said City of New York, by Deed, Grant,
Conveyance, or otherwise howsoever, To hold to their Several and Respective
Heirs and Assigns forever.

And I do by these Presents Give and Grant unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City of New York, All the Waste, Vacent, Unpatented and
Unappropriated Lands, lying and being within the said City of New York, and on
Manhattens Island, as aforesaid, extending and reaching to the Low-Water-Mark
in, by and through all Parts of the said City of New York and Manhattans
Island, as aforesaid; To gether with all Rivers, Rivolets, Coves, Creeks,
Ponds, Water, Watercourse in the said City and Island, or either of them, not
heretofore given or granted by any of the former Governors, Lieutenants or
Commanders in chief, under some of their hands and Seals, or Seal of the
Province, or by any of the former Mayors or Deputy Mayors and Aldermen of the
said City of New York, to some respective Person or Persons, late Inhabitants
of the said City of New York, or Manhattans Island, or other parts of the said
Province. And I do by these presents Give, Grant and Confirm unto the said
Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of New York, and their
Successors forever, the Royalties of Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, Hawking,
Mineral and other Royalties and Privileges belonging or Appertaining to the
City of New York, and Manhattans Island, aforesaid (Gold and Silver Mines only
excepted) To Have, Hold, and Enjoy all and singular the Premises to the said
Mayor, Alder-men and Commonalty of the said City of New York, and their
Successors forever, Rendering and paying therefore unto his Most Sacred Majesty,
his Heirs, Successors or Assigns, or to such Officer or Officers, as shall be
appointed to receive the same yearly forever hereafter, the annual Quit-Rent or
Acknowledgement of one Beaver Skin, or the value thereof in Current Money of
this Province, in the said City of New York, on the 25th day of March yearly
forever. And moreover, I will, and by these presents do grant, appoint and
declare, that the said City of New York and the Compass, Precincts and Limits
thereof, and the Jurisdiction of the same, shall from henceforth extend to
reach it self, and may and shall be able to reach forth and extend it self, as
well in length and in breadth, as in Circuit, to the furthest extent of and in
and throughout all the said Island Manhattans, and in and upon all the Rivers,
Rivolets, Coves, Creeks, Water and Water Courses, belonging to the said Island,
as far as low water mark. And I Do also for and on the behalf of His most
sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, firmly enjoin and Command,
That the aforesaid Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City aforesaid, and
their successors, shall and may freely and quietly Have, Hold, Use and enjoy
the aforesaid Liberties, Authorities, Jurisdictions* Franchises, Rights,
Royalties, Privileges, Exemptions, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Premises aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, according to the tenor and
effect of the aforesaid Grants, Patents, Customs and Letters Patents of Grants
and Confirmation, without the Let, Hinderance or Impediment of me or any of my
Successors, Governors, Lieutenants, or other Officers whatsoever. And also I
do for, and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and
Successors, Grant to the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of
New York and their Successors, by these presents, That for the better
Government of the said City, liberties and precincts thereof, There shall be
forever hereafter, within the said City, A Mayor and Recorder, Town Clerk, and
six Aldermen, and six Assistants, To be appointed, nominated, elected, chosen
and Sworn, as herein after is particularly and respectively mentioned, who
shall be forever hereafter called, The Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
City of New York.

And that there shall be forever one Chamberlain or Treasurer, one Sheriff one
Coroner, one Clerk of the Market, one High Constable, Seven Sub Constables, and
one Marshal or Serjant at Mace, To be appointed, chosen and Sworn in manner
hereafter mentioned. And I do by these presents, for and on the behalf of his
Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, Declare,
Constitute, Grant and Appoint, That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and
Assistants of the said City of New York for the time being, and they which
hereafter shall be the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen and Assistants of the said
City of New York for the time being, and their Successors forever hereafter, be
and shall be, by force of these presents, one Body Corporate and Politic, in
deed, fact and name, by the name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
City of New York; and them by the name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of
the City of New York one Body Corporate and Politic in deed, fact and name, I
do really and fully create, ordain, make, Constitute and Confirm by these
presents. And that by the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
said City of New York, they may have perpetual succession, and that they and
their Successors forever, by the Name of Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
City of ^ew-York, be and shall be forever hereafter, Persons able and in Law,
capable, to have, get, receive and possess Lands, Tenements, Rents, Liberties,
Jurisdictions, Franchises and Hereditaments to them and their Successors in see
simple or for term of Life, Lives or years, or otherwise; and also Goods and
Chattels, and also other things of what nature, kind or quality soever, and
also to give, grant, let, set and assign the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditamants, Goods and Chattles, and to do and execute all other things about
the same by the name aforesaid. And also, that they be, and forever shall be
hereafter, Persons able in Law, capable to plead and be impleaded, answer and
be answered unto, defend and be defended, in all or any the Courts of his said
Majesty, and other places whatsoever, and before any Judges, Justices and other
person or persons whatsoever, in all and all manner of actions suits,
complaints, demands, pleas, causes and matters whatsoever, of what nature, kind
or quality soever, in the same, and in the like manner and form as other People
of the said Province, being Persons able, and in Law capable, may plead and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended by any lawful
ways and means whatsoever. And that the said Mayor Aldermen and Commonalty of
the said City of New York, and their Successors shall and may forever
hereafter, have one common Seal to serve for sealing of all and singular their
affairs and businesses, touching and concerning the said Corporation. And I
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of
the said City of New York, and their Successors, as they shall see cause to
break, change, alter and New make their said Common Seal when and as often as
to them it shall seem convenient.

And further, know ye, That I have Assigned Named, Ordained and Constituted,
and by these presents do assign, name, ordain and constitute Nicholas Bayard
now Mayor of the said City of New York to be present Mayor of the said City,
and that the said Nicholas Bayard shall Remain and continue in the Office of
Mayor there, until another sit Person shall be appointed and sworn in the said
Office, according to the usage and Custom of the said City, as in and by these
presents is hereafter mentioned and directed. And I have assigned, named,
ordained and Constituted (...) by these presents do assign, name, ordain and
Constitute, Create and Declare James Graham, Esquire to be the present Recorder of
the said City, To do and execute all things which unto the Office of Recorder
of the said City does or may in any wise appertain or belong. And I have
assigned, named, ordained and constituted, and by these presents do assign,
name, ordain, constitute create and declare John West, Esquire Town Clerk of the
said City, To do and execute all things which unto the Office of Town Clerk may
any wise appertain or belong. And I have named, assigned, constituted and made,
and by these presents do Assign, Name, constitute and make Andrew Bown, John
Robinson, William Beakman, John Delavall, Abraham Depyster and Johannes Kipp,
Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City of New York, to be the present
Aldermen of the said City. And also I have made, assigned, named and
constituted, and by these Presents do assign, name, constitute and make
Nicholas Demeyer, Johannes van Brugh, John de Brown, Thenniss de Key, Abraham
Corbit and Wolfert Wobber, Citizen and Inhabitants of the said City, to be the
present Assistants of the said City. And also, I have assigned, chosen, Named
and Constituted and by these presents do Assign, Choose, Name and Constitute
Peter Delanoy, Citizen and Inhabitant of the said City to be the present
Chamberlain or Treasurer of the City aforesaid. And I have Assigned, Named,
Constituted and Appointed, and by these presents do assign, name, constitute
and appoint John Knight, Esquire another of the said Citizens there, to be present
Sheriff of the said City. And have assigned, named and appointed, and by these
presents do assign Name, Constitute and appoint Jarvis Marshall, another of the
said Citizens there, to be present Marshall of the said City. And I do by these
presents Grant to the said Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of New York
and their Successors, That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the
said City, for the time being, or the Mayor, Recorder, or any three or more of
the Aldermen, and any three or more of the Assistants for the time being, Be
and shall be called, The Common Council of the said City; And that they, or the
greater part of them, shall and may have full power and authority, by Virtue of
these presents, from time to time, To call and hold Common Council within the
Common Council house, or City Hall of the said City, and there, as occasion
shall be, to make Laws, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions in writing, and to
add, alter, diminish or reform them, from time to time, as to them shall seem
necessary and Convenient, not repugnant to the Prerogative of his most Sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, or to any of the Laws of the
Kingdom of England, or other the Laws of the General Assembly of the Province
of New York, For the good Rule, Oversight, Correction and Government of the
said City and Liberties of the same, and of all the Officers thereof; And for
the several Tradesmen, Victuallers, Artificers, and of all other the People
and Inhabitants of the said City, Liberties and Precincts aforesaid; And for
the better preservation of Government, and disposal of all the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of the said Corporation; which Laws,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions shall be binding to all the Inhabitants of
the said City, Libertyes and Precincts aforesaid; And which Laws, Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions, so by them made as aforesaid, shall be and remain
in force for the space of three Months, and no longer, unless they shall be
allowed of and confirmed by the Governor and Council for the time being. And I
do further, on the behalf of his Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and
Successors, appoint and grant, that the said Common Council of the said City
for the time being, as often as they make, ordain and establish such Laws,
Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, as aforesaid, shall or may make, ordain,
limit, provide, set, impose and tax reasonable Fines and Amerciaments against
and upon all persons offending against such Laws, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, as aforesaid, or any of them to be made, ordained and
established, as aforesaid; and the same Fines and Amercements, shall and may
require, demand, levy, take and receive, by Warrant under the Common Seal, To
and for the use and behoof of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said
City, and their Successors, either by distress and sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the Offenders therein, if such Goods and Chattles may be found
within the said City, Libertyes, and Precincts thereof, Rendering to such
offender and offenders the overplus, or by any other lawful ways or means
whatsoever. And I do by these presents, Appoint and Ordain the assigning,
naming and appointment of the Mayor, and Sheriff of the said City, that it
shall be as follows, viz. upon the Feast day of St. Michael, the Archangel,
yearly, The Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief, for the time being, by
and with the advice of the Council, shall nominate and appoint such Person as
he shall think fit, to be Mayor of the said City, for the year next ensuing.
AND one other Person, of sufficient Ability and Estate, and of Good Capacity in
understanding, to be Sheriff of the said City of New York, for the year next
ensuing. AND that such persons as shall be named, assigned and appointed Mayor,
And such Person as shall be named, assigned and appointed Sheriff of the said
city, as aforesaid, shall on the fourteenth day of October then next following,
take their several and respective Corporal Oaths Before the Governor and
Council for the time being, for the due Execution of their respective Offices,
as aforesaid. And that the said Mayor and Sheriff, so to be nominated, assigned
and appointed, as aforesaid, shall remain and continue in their said respective
Offices until another fit Person shall be nominated, appointed and sworn in the
place of Mayor, and another person shall be nominated and appointed in the
place of Sheriff of the said City, in manner aforesaid. And further, that
according to the now usage and Custom of the said City, the Recorder, Town
Clerk and Clerk of the Market of the said City, shall be persons of good
Capacity and Understanding, and such persons as his most Sacred Majesty
aforesaid, his heirs and successors shall in the said respective Offices of
Recorder, Town Clerk and Clark of the Market, appoint and commissionate;
and-for defect of such appointments and comissionating by his Most Sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors. To be such Persons' as the
Lieutenant Governors or Commanders in chief of the said Province, for the time
being, shall appoint and commissionate; which Persons, so Commissionated to the
said Offices of Recorder, Town Clerk and Clerk of Market, shall have, hold and
enjoy the said Offices according to the tenor and effect of their said
Commissions, and not otherwise. And further, that the Recorder, Town Clerk and
Clerk of the Market, Aldermen, Assistants, Chamberlain, High Constables, petty
Constables, and all other Officers of the said City, Before they, or any of
them shall be admitted to enter upon and execute their respective Offices,
shall be sworn, faithfully to Execute the same, before the Mayor, or any three,
or more, of the Aldermen for the time being. And I do by these presents, for
and on the behalf of his Most sacred Majesty* his Heirs and Successors, grant
and give Power and Authority to the Mayor and Recorder of the said City, for
the time being, to administer the same respective Oaths to them accordingly.
And further, I do by these Presents, grant, for and on the behalf of his Most
Sacerd Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, that the Mayor and Recorder
of the said City for the time being, and three or more of the Aldermen of the
said City, not exceeding five, shall be Justices and Keepers of the Peace of
his Most Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; And Justices to hear and
determine matters or Causes within the said City, and Libertyes, and Precincts
thereof; and that they, or any three or more of them, whereof the Mayor and
Recorder, or one of them, for the time being, to be there, shall and may
forever hereafter, have Power and Authority, by virtue of these presents, to
hear and determine All and all manner of Petty Lacernyes, Riots, Routs,
Oppre^^^ons, Extortions and other Trespasses and Offenses whatsoever, within
the said City of New York, and the Liberties and Precincts aforesaid from time
to time arising and happening, and which arise or happen, and any ways belong
to the O^^^ces of the Justices of the Peace, and the Correction and punishment
of the Offenses aforesaid, and every of them, according to the Laws of England,
and the Laws of the said Province; and to do and to execute all other things in
the said City, Liberties and Precincts aforesaid, so fully and in ample manner,
as to the Commission assigned, and to be assigned, for the keeping of the
Peace, in the said County of New York, does or may belong. And moreover, I do
by these Presents, for and in behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his
Heirs and Successors, appoint, that the Aldermen, Assistants, high Constables
and Petty Constables, within the said City, be yearly chosen on the Feast day
of St. Michael, the Arch Angel forever viz. one Alderman, one Assistant and one
Constable for each respective Ward, and one Constable for each Division in the
out Ward, in such Public place in the said respective Wards, as the Aldermen
for the time being for each Ward, shall direct and appoint. And that the
Aldermen, Assistants and petty Constables be chosen by the Majority of Voices
of the Inhabitants of each Ward. And that the High Constable be appointed by
the Mayor of the said City, for the time being. And that the Chamberlian shall
be yearly Chosen on the said Feast day, in the said City-Hall in the said City,
by the Mayor, Aldermen and Assistants, or by the Mayor, or three or more of the
Aldermen, and three or more of the Assistants of the said City for the time
being. And I do by these presents Constitute and appoint the said John West to
be the present Town Clerk, Clerk of the said Peace, and Clerk of the Court of
Pleas, To be holden before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen within the said
City, and Libertyes, and Precincts thereof. And further, I do by these
Presents, for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs
and Successors, require, strictly charge and Command, That the Sheriff,
Town Clerk, Clerk of the Peace, High Constable, Petty Constables, and all other
Subordinate Officers in the said City, for the time being, and every of them
respectively, jointly and severally, as cause shall require, shall attend upon
the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said ^ity for the time being, and
every and any of them, according to the duty of the respective places, in and
about the execution of such the Commands, Precepts, Warrants and Processes of
them, and every of them, as belongs and appertains to be done or executed.
And that the aforesaid Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen and every of them, as
Justices of the Peace, for the time being, by their, or any of their Warrants,
all and every Person or Persons, for High Treason or Petty Treason, or for
Suspicion thereof, or for other Fellonies whatsoever, and all Malefactors and
Disturbers of the Peace, and other Offenders, for other Misdemeanors, who shall
be apprehended within the said City or Libertyes thereof, shall and may send
and Commit, or cause to be sent and Committed to the Common Goal of the said
City, There to remain and be kept in safe Custody, by the Keepers of the said
Goal, or his Deputy for the time being, until such Offender and Offenders shall
Lawfully be delivered thence. And I do by these presents, for and on the behalf
of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, Charge and
Require the keeper and keepers of the said Goal, for the time being, and his
and their Deputy and Deputyes to receive, take and in safe Custody keep all and
Singular such Person and Persons, so apprehened, or to be apprehended, sent and
Committed, to the said Goal, by Warrant of the said Justices, or any of them,
as aforesaid, until he and they so sent and Committed to the said Goal, from
thence shall be delivered by due course of Law. And further, I do Grant and
Confirm, for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs
and Successors, That the said Mayor of the said City, for the time being, and
no other according to the usage and practice accustomed in the said City of
New York, in the time of my Predecessors, the several Lieutenants, Governors
and Commanders in Chief of this Province, shall have Power and Authority to
give and Grant Lisences annually, under the public Seal of the said City, to
all Tavern keepers, Innkeepers, Ordinary-keepers, Victuallers, and all Public
Sellers of Wine, Strong Water, Syder, Beer, or any other sort of Liquors, by
Retail within the City aforesaid, Manhattaus Island, or their Liberties and
Precincts thereof. And it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor of
the said City, for the time being, to ask, demand and receive for such Lisence,
by him to be given and granted, as aforesaid, such sum or sums of Money, as he
and the Person to whom such Lisence shall be given and granted, shall agree
for, not exceeding the sum of thirty shillings for each Lisence. All which
Money, as by the said Mayor, shall be so received, shall be used and applied to
the public use of the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of
New York, and their Successors, without any account thereof to be rendered,
made or done to any of the Lieutenants or Governors of this Province, for the
time being, or any of their Deputies.

AND Know ye, that for the better Government of the said City, and for the
wellfair of the said Citizens, Tradesmen and Inhabitants thereof, I do by
these Presents, for and in the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, Give and Grant to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
said City, and their Successors, That the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, or the
Mayor and any three or more of the Aldermen for the time being, shall from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, have full Power and Authority, under the
common Seal, make free Citizens of the said City and Libertyes thereof, and no
Person or Persons whatsoever, other then such free Citizens, shall hereafter
use any Art, Trade, Mystery, or manual Occupation, within the said City,
Libertyes and Precincts thereof, saving in the time of Fairs only. And in case
any Person or Persons whatsoever, not being free Citizens of the said City, as
aforesaid, shall at any time hereafter, use or Exercise any Art, Trade,
Mystery or manual occupation, or shall by himself, themselves or others, sell
or expose to sale any manner of Merchandise or Wares whatsoever by Retail in
any House, Shop, Place or Places, or Standing within the said City, or the
Liberties or Precincts thereof, no Fair being then kept in the said City, and
shall persist therein, after warning to him or them given or left by the
appointment of the Mayor of the said City for the time being, at the place or
places where such Person or Persons shall so use or exercise any Art, Trade or
Mystery, or manual Occupation, or shall sell, or expose to sale any Wares or
Merchandise, as aforesaid, by Retail, then it shall be lawful for the said
Mayor of the said City, for the time being, to cause such Shop Windows to be
shut up, and also to impose such reasonable Fine, for such Offense, not
exceeding five Pounds for every respective Offense; and the same Fine and
Fines, so imposed, to levy and take, by Warrant under the common Seal of the
said City, for the time being, by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the person or persons so offending in the premises, found within the
Liberties or Precincts of the said City, rendering to the Party or Parties the
overplus, or by any other lawful ways or means whatsoever, to the only use of
the said Mayor, Alder-men and Commonalty of the said City of New York, and
their Successors, without any Account to be rendered, made or done to the
Lieutenants, Governors or Commanders in chief of this Province, for the same.
Provided, That no Person or Persons shall be made free, as aforesaid, but such
as are his Majesty's natural born Subjects, or such as shall first be
naturalized by Acts of General Assembly, or shall have obtained Letters of
Denization, under the hand of the Lieutenant Governor or Commander in chief for
the time being, and Seal of the Province; and that all Persons to be made free,
as aforesaid, shall and do pay for the Public Use of the said Mayor, Aldermen
and Commonality of the said City, such sum and sums of Money as heretofore has
been used and accustomed to be paid and received, on their being admitted
Freemen, as aforesaid, provided it is not exceeding the sum of five Pounds.
And further, I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, Grant to the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonality of the said City, That they and their Successors be forever Persons
able and capable, and shall have power to purchase, have, take and possess in
fee simple, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and other Possessions within or without
the same City, to them and their Successors forever, so as the same exceed not
the yearly value of One Thousand Pound per annum, the Statute of Mortmain, or
any other Law to the contrary notwithstanding; and the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, or any part thereof to demise, grant, lease, set
over, assign and dispose at their own will and pleasure, and to make, seal and
accomplish any Deed or Deeds, Lease or Leases, Evidences or Writings, for or
concerning the same, or any part thereof, which shall happen to be made and
granted by the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, for the
time being.

And further, I do by these presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the said Mayor, Aldermen
and Commonalty of the said City, That they and their Successors, shall and may
forever hereafter, hold and keep within the said City, in every Weck of the
Year, three Market days, the one upon Tuesday, the other upon Thursday, and the
other upon Saturday, weekly forever.

And also, I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty, aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the Mayor, Alder-men and
Commonalty of the said City, That they, and their Successors and Assigns, shall
and may at any time or times hereafter, when it to them shall seem fit and
convenient, take in, fill and make up, and lay out all and singular the Lands
and Ground in and about the said City and Island Manhattaus, and the same to
build upon, or make use of, in any other manner or way, as to them shall seem
fit, as far into the Rivers thereof, and that encompass the same, as
Low-water-mark aforesaid.

And I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most Sacred Majesty,
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, give and grant unto the aforesaid Mayor,
Alder-men and Commonalty of the said City of New York, and their Successors,
That they and their Successors shall and may have, hold and keep within the
said City, and Liberties and Precincts thereof, in every Week, in every Year,
forever, upon Tuesday, one Court of Common Pleas, for all Actions of Debt,
Trespass, and Trespasses upon the Case, Detinue, Ejectment, and other Personal
Actions, and the same to be held before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or
any three of them, whereof the Mayor or Recorder to be one, who shall have
Power to hear and determine the same Pleas and Actions, according to the Rules
of the common Law, and Acts of General Assembly of the said Province.

And I do by these Presents, for and on behalf of his most sacred Majesty
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the said Mayor, Alder-men and
Commonalty of the said City of New York, and their Successors, That the said
Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, and their Successors, shall
have and enjoy all the Privileges, Franchises and Powers that they have and
use a^t^^r^ohany of their Predecessors at any time within the space of twenty
years last past, had, took and enjoyed, or ought to have had by reason, or
under any pretense of any former Charter, Grant, Prescription, or any other
Right, Custom or Usage, although the same have been forfeited, lost, or have
been ill used, or not used, or abused, or discontinued, albeit they be not
particularly mentioned. And that no Officer shall disturb them therein, under
any pretense whatsoever, not only for their future, but their present enjoyment
thereof. Provided always, That the said Privileges, Franchises and Powers be
not inconsistent with or repugnant to the Laws of his Majesty's Kingdom of
England, or other the Laws of the General Assembly of this Province, as
aforesaid. And saving to his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, and the Lieutenants, Governors and Commanders in
chief, and other Officers under him and them in Fort James, in or by the City
of New York, and in all the Liberties, Boundaries, Extents and Privileges
thereof, for the maintenance of the said Fort and Garrison there, all the
Rights, Use, Title and Authority which they, or any of them have had, used or
exercised there, and also one Message or Tenement next the City Hall, and one
Message by the Fort, now in the Possession of Thomas Coker, Gent. the piece of
ground by the Gate, called, The Governors Garden, and the Land without the
Gate, called, the Kings Farm, with the Swamp next to the same Land, by the
fresh Water. And saving the several Rents and Quit-Rents reserved and due, and
payable from several Persons inhabiting within the said City and Island
Manhattans, by virtue of former Grants to them made and given. And saving to
all other Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, all such Right, Title and Claim, Possessions, Rents, Services, common
Emoluments and Interest in and to any thing which is theirs, save only the
Franchises aforesaid, in as ample manner as if this Charter had not been made.

And further, I do appoint and declare, That the Incorporation to be founded by
this Charter, shall not at any time hereafter do or suffer to be done any
thing, by means whereof the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Stock, Goods or
Chattles thereof, or in the hands, custody or possession of any the Citizens of
the said City, such as have been set, let, given, granted or collected to and
for Pious and Charitable Uses, shall be wasted or mis-imployed, contrary to the
Trust or Intent of the Founder or Giver thereof, and that such, and no other
Construction shall be made thereof, than that which may tend most to advantage
Religion, Justice and the public Good, and to suppress all Acts and
Contrivances to be invented or put in use, contrary thereunto. IN WITNESS
whereof I have caused these Presents to be entered in the Secretary's Office,
and the Seal of the said Province to be hereto affixed this 27th day of April,
in the second Year of the Reign of his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, and in
the year of our Lord God, 1686.

Thomas Dongan.

May it please your Honor;
THe Attorney General has perused this Patent, and finds nothing contained
therein prejudicial to his Majesty's Interest.

Examined, April 27. 1686. Ja. Graham.


Recorded in the Secretary's Office for the Province of New York, in Lib. No.
1. Book of Patents, begun 1684. from page 278. to 309.

J. Spragge, Secry.




