A LETTER TO Dr. FOWLER, Vicar of St. GILES CRIPPLEGATE.

IN ANSWER TO HIS Late Uindicatory Preface.

By

WILLIAM NEWBERY, and WILLIAM EDMVNDS.

Yspys y dengys y din,
O ba radd y bo ei wreiddyn.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1685.

A LETTER TO Dr. Fowler, etc.
Reverend Pastor,
UPON Perusal of a Preface to a Sermon upon Slander, under your Name, We the
Subscribers of this Paper found you as hard upon us in the Press, as you use to
be in the Pulpit. And therefore for the Satisfaction of the World, and the
Discharge of our Selves, we have resolved upon the Publishing of this Address.

You are pleased to mention a Certificate given us, and your Repentance for it.
Let it not trouble you, Sir, for the Certificate has done you no harm, and us
no good: For a Great Man told us, That it would shake the Credit of our
Loyalty; and so we laid it aside, as a Thing we were not Proud of. The Words
were, That we were Peaceable, and Christian like tempered Men. And truly, when
your Hand was in upon Certifying, we had a mind to Try, If you would do it for
Loyal Men, as well as for Others.

Your Opinion of us, we perceive, is much altered since you gave us that
Character; though the World will witness the Justice we have to the Title of
it, and stand in Admiration at us, for Bearing from your Self, and your
Assistant, all the Satyrs, Invectives, and Comminations against us, that have
been vented in the Pulpit, without praying the Justice of the Law to hold your
Hand.

Besides this, It has been your Practice to Discourse of us both, with Great
and Small, as Monsters of Spite and Malice; which is a Charge, that we shall
in Charity divide betwixt your Self and your Assistant.

And for our own Vindication, We do Appeal to All that know us, and our
Consciences do bear us Witness, that we never opposed you out of any Ill Will
to your Person; but only to put a stop to some of your Latitudinarian Designs
and Practices, by a Due Course of Law.

And since we are forced upon this Way of Clearing our Selves, we must Impute
the Cause now Depending, to your own Irregular and Unwarrantable Proceedings in
your Office, which have Engaged us to Appear, as we do, for the Honor and
Defense of our Mother Church. And if this be an Act of Spite and Malice, then
we are Guilty; and our Crime is, the Service of the Established Church.

Your Preface goes on in the Praise of Mr. R. W. and Mr. S. The former of these
you Represent for a Truly Loyal Conforming Man, and our Proceedings against him
to be Spightful and Malicious.

We shall not Reflect upon his being a Soldier under Colonel Hacker, and so
continuing till near the Kings Restoration; A noted Conventicler, and one of
Doelittles Congregation, till he came to be Churchwarden of Cripplegate.

We shall not Reflect upon his Rude, Trifling, Antic Gesture, at the Church,
in the time of Divine Service, which appeared no other to the Congregation,
than a Ridiculing of the very Office, as well as the Performance of that Holy
Duty.

We could tell you, Sir, That since his Certified Conformity, which we account
upon, as the Date of his Conversion, we never heard, that he ever gave the
Church Service one good word, or ever Attended to it with that Reverence as he
ought to do.

We presume you are no Stranger, Sir, to a Passage of His at a Ward-Moot
Inquest. Where a Motion was made to begin the Work, with Reading the Morning
Prayers. Your truly Loyal and Conforming Mr. W. opposed it, Calling it an
Innovation. I hope, Mr. W. (says one) you will not call the Prayers an
Innovation, I mean, says Mr. W. the bringing of them into the Quest is an
Innovation. To which one Replied: That it was generally used in all the Quests
in London, and had been used in Cripplegate too before Mr. W. was born.
Whereupon Mr. W. flew from the Table, crying, They that will have a May Pole,
shall have a May Pole. And as the rest were Rising to go to Church to Prayers,
Mr. W. got him to the Fire in the Chamber, saying; You that are so hot in Zeal,
that can be warmed by Prayers, may go into the Church; As for my part, they
never warmed me in all my Life; I Will stay and warm my self by the Fire. And if
I had thought this, that you would have had Prayers, I would have bespoke some
Fiddlers this Morning, that I saw at Tom Charnley 's, (an Alehouse-Keeper); For
Prayers without Music does not do well. And during the whole Session, he never
went with the Quest to Prayers, though he was a Member of it.

The Report of this Scandalous Rudeness being told in the hearing of Mr.
Recorder, he was pleased to examine the Matter, and to appoint the Reporters of
it to come to the Sessions at Guild Hall, and there to Deliver their
Information upon Oath; which accordingly they did. And the Recorder Ordered an
Information to be Exhibited against Mr. W. for Depraving and Ridiculing the
Church Service. But by great and powerful Solicitation on his behalf, there
was a Noli Prosequi granted, before the next Term; not for the Baseness of the
Cause, as you would have People believe, but for other Reasons, not so proper
for this Occasion.

Another Instance of Mr. W's Affection to the Church may be this. The Alderman
of the Ward Ordered the Presenting of all Conventicle Houses. In pursuance
whereof a Motion was made in the very same Quest. Upon this up starts Mr. W.
and called it, A Spiteful and Malicious Motion: For who could prove the
Proprietors of Conventicle Houses. To which it was replied, That they would be
easily found out. Why then, aith Mr. W. make what Presentiments you will, For my
part I will never set my Hand to them.

A Word more now, with your Favor, to his Loyalty, He was as Active a Stirrer
in the Tumultuous Elections at Guild Hall as any Man; and Polled always on the
Factious side. He was All in All with his Friend Bateman (at present Prisoner
for the Conspiracy) to get Hands to a Seditious Petition. And whoever refused
it, he Branded him for a Papist; Particularly Mr. Newbery, now Deputy of the
Ward. And this must be no part of the Quarrel you are pleased to Mention.

The Steeple was so Crazy it seems, that on the 29 th of May, Mr. W. would not
let the Bells be Rung, for fear it should fall. And yet upon Shaftsburie's
Ignoramus Jury, the Steeple was strong enough to bear it. He himself, as
Churchwarden, ordered the Bells to be Rung, and made a Bonfire at his Own Door,
for Joy, at the Deliverance. Its very true, Sir, that he was Tallow-Chandler
also to your Good Lord and Master, and that we hope was the Ground of your
Certifying Mr. W. to be a truly Loyal Conforming Man.

As for Mr. S. Your Commendations are well bestowed on him; For he is your
Grand Informer, a Talebearer betwixt you and your Parishioners, a very
Busy-Body in other Men's Offices and Affairs. And for his Reputation, There is
not a Curate in England, that either Studies less, or Usurps more upon his
Neighbors.

We do not dislike him indeed, Sir, for his Sermons upon Restitution, as you
would be thought to Imagine; For they were Preached before we ever bore Office
in the Parish. And so we could not be Instruments of Wasting the Poors. Stock,
which most Untruly, as well as Invidiously, you intimate in your Preface But if
you will allow a Falsehood to bring Truth to light, we shall now tell you the
Story of those Sermons.

It was Mr. S's Hap one Day to be chopping of Logic with a Pawn Broker in the
Parish, who Reproving Mr. S. for some Ill thing he had done, Mr. S. was much
Offended at him, insomuch that he fell upon the Man's Calling the next Sunday in
the Pulpit, with the Doctrine of Restitution; where he Denounc't Damnation,
against Usury, Extortion, and Oppression.

But this Treatment is no News from Mr. S. to our Parish and Officers, and our
Great Slander and Damage. For by these Calumnies, He has diverted the Charity
of diverse of our Good Benefactors, and gotten the Money into his own Hand,
whereof he gives no Account.

He makes a great Noise indeed, how much the Poor are obliged to him, and yet
by your Favor and His, the Number is much increased, and the Taxes
considerably raised, since he came amongst us.

He had once a Project of setting up a Nursery in the Parish to lessen the
Charge, and bring poor Children up to Learning. To this end he got the
Benevolence of several Good People, and Eighteen pence a Week of the Parish for
every Child he took, being the very Price they were kept at before. He stockt
his Nursery with about twenty of these Children, who as they went every Sunday
Morning to Cornhill Lecture, gave the Spectators to understand, that they were
Mr. S's Charity-Children But instead of being Taught, these Poor Children were
let out to Cooks Shops, Spinning-Wheels, or the like, at Twelve pence or
Eighteen pence a Week, and were so scantly fed, and nastily kept, that the
Churchwardens or Overseers, took them away to their old Maintenance, and some
of them dying, it was not thought convenient to give the Searchers the View of
their Bodies.

This shall be made good (whenever Mr S. pleases) to any Court of Justice,
without any need of his Profaning the Pulpit with Ribaldry, and Scandal
against his Neighbors.

And therefore, Sir, as you value your own Credit and Ours, be no longer led by
Mr. S. into these uncharitable Mistakes; Curates do not behave themselves thus
in other Parishes. And its hard for Cripplegate, to be the only Curate-Ridden
Parish in London.

Many of his Sermons are not only Personal Invectives, but some of them so
Broad and Course: That the Men he Intends, are Pointed at by the Congregation.
But its well* if he does not play the Muggleton, and pronounce them Damned.

We have born these Indignities thus long, more out of Respect to the Holy
Function, than to the Curate; and we do jointly desire you would keep him to
his Text, and advise him to Preach Jesus Christ as becomes a Minister of the
Gospel. But the main Business is yet to come. The Cause depending in Doctors
Commons, betwixt your self and One of us.

The Sum of your Preface on that Matter, is partly Accusation, partly Excuse.
And the Printing of it might have bin spared, after so many Private Discourses
and Public Preachments upon that Subject, wherein you have made us, and some
others of our Neighbors, a Parcel of Lewd, Vicious, Profane, Scandalous,
Debauched Fellows. Wherein the whole Parish, and all that know us, and will
speak Truth, will appear to our Vindication. Sir, you should do well, to lay
your Certificate and your Sermons together, and Reconcile this Character to the
other. In the mean while deal with us as a Gentleman, a Christian and a
Minister. You are pleased to Insinuate, That we are Netled at your Preaching
Impartially against certain Vices, which make Loyal Conformists a Disgrace to
the King and the Church. Now the Truth is, Those Vices are rather chargeable
upon your sort of Loyal Conformists, than upon any of the King's and Churches,
that we know of. And the scope of your Present Design is this, There is a Heavy
Charge sworn against you at Doctors Commons; And one of us is the Fair and Open
Prosecutor of it. So that if you can either Blast us in our Credit, or disable
us in our Fortunes, from going thorough with it, you do a great part of your
Work. And upon this Consideration, you have not left a Stone unturned to Defame
us with Persons of Honor, and to Disparage us in our Dealings with our
Customers and Tradesmen, to say nothing of your Reflection upon the Alderman of
the Ward for choosing so Vile, Scandalous, and Debauched a Creature, as you have
Represented his Deputy to be. Who is so sensible of these Indignities, that he
is resolved in the first place to acquit himself, and afterward to Resign on
St. Thoma's Day next Ensuing.

For the best Words you can bestow on him and others are these; Enemies,
Malicious Enemies, Implacable Spirited Men, Wretched Liars, Vile-Slanderers,
Vicious Debauched Men, not known whether Papists, Contrivers of Mischief,
Depraved, Forsaken of Divine Grace, etc. And whoever compares the Doctrine of
your Sermon, with the Practice of the Preface and Conclusion, will hardly
believe one and the same Wise Man to have bin the Author of them. Or that the
Design of Christianity and of your Preface, had one and the same Father.

The first Visible Change of your Countenance and Carriage toward us was (as
we have Good Cause to Remember) just upon our Suppressing six or seven
Conventicles in the Freedom Part of the Parish; And after that, upon our
Endeavors to Purge the Vestry of some very Ill Men, (which by your and Mr. S's
Artifice had bin lately Introduced) your Countenance seemed to be further
altered toward us. The one of these was an Anabaptist; Another, an Anabaptist
Preacher; the Third an Elder of Griffith 's Congregation, and a Conspirator;
and the Rest of the same Leaven, and who could never be Admitted by your
Predecessor the Bishop of Gloucester.

It Is, Sir, you know, a Populous Parish, and we thought it our Duty to the
Government to do what we did. We Petitioned His Majesty in this Affair, and
obtained a Gracious Reference to Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Recorder: And you
your self were present, with a great many more of the Parish, at a full Hearing
before Mr. Recorder and the Alderman of the Ward; where you were urged again to
clear the Vestry of those Men. Your Reply was, That they were New Converts, or
upon Coming over, and sober Men; and that you thought in time hey might prove
useful Persons to the Government. To which the Alderman made Answer, Truly
Doctor, if they are such, you should have made six or seven years Trial of them
before you brought them into the Vestry* But at length* after much struggling,
you desired them to withdraw themselves from the Vestry in such a manner, that
every Body saw your Heart went along with them, even when you parted with them.

You speak of Articles Exhibited against you, and you say, That the First (for
Obstructings Presentiments) had nothing like* a Proof of it Produced in Court;
but in this we Remit our selves to the Law.

You cannot but remember, Sir, how Fierce you were upon the Deputy in Doctors
Commons, Exclaiming, What had a Deputy of a Ward to do to meddle with
Presentiments? and Threatening him, That if the Churchwardens Presented those
whose Names he had given, you would Present the Churchwardens for Perjury, and
Him for not coming to Church on Holy Days.

We must mind you likewise, Sir, of your Suppressing the Order appointed to be
Published for the Presenting of all People that did not come to the Sacrament;
and of your calling it, A Device to make the Clergy Odious.

You told the Churchwardens (you say) That, they should Present Impartially,
and not gratify any Man's particular Pique or Disgust. If your meaning was,
They must Present All, or None, there must then be no Presentiments at all: For
how should they take Cognizance of at least Thirty thousand Souls in that
Parish? So that since All could not be taken notice of, why might not the same
Prudent Course serve in Cripplegate, as well as in all other Parishes; that is,
to Single out the Heads and Ringleaders of the Faction, which would probably
bring the Inferior Sort of Dissenters into better Order? This Course was
commended by Dr. P. in Eighty two and Eighty three, and in several places had
good Success.

We need say no more to Prove the Good Will you had to the Obstructing of
Presentiments: So that now we shall briefly set before you the Inconveniences
that followed upon your Backwardness to Present.

The Warmth which you were pleased to express toward the Covering and
Protecting of Phanaticks, presently made Cripplegate a Sanctuary for the
Dissenters, and brought them out of other Parishes into Ours, as if they had
Fled from Persecution into a City of Refuge. They themselves owning and
declaring, That they should not be Molested with us, for any Church Matters or
Sacraments.

As for the Second Article, concerning your Administering the Sacrament to
Excommunicated Persons, there needs no farther Proof, than your own Answer to
the Libel in Court, and your own Confession and Declaration in your Preface.

It Is something however, that the Excommunicates were Notorious Dissenters, and
chosen (by your Interest and Influence) Churchwardens in the Lordship part of
the Parish, contrary to the Liking of the Loyal Men in that Vestry. Nay, there
are some that say, You were resolved they should be Churchwardens, for this
very Reason, That they would make no Presentiments.

After this they were Cited to take the Churchwardens Oath, which they
peremptorily refused to do; and thereupon a Sentence of Excommunication was
Pronounced against them in the Court, in Form: And an Instrument for Publishing
the same in the Church was sent to you, which for some time you laid by,
according to Good Advice, (as you say) and afterward Admitted these Person's
to the Sacrament, being Actually Excommunicated and before they were Absolved;
though after they had Received, you did your Best to have them Absolved. Let
any Man make an Excuse for this Usurpation, if he can. No, say you, there is no
need of it; for I have made a sufficient Apology for it my self in these Words
of my Preface.

I had leave to defer the Publishing of that Excommunication; and the Sacrament
was given them before it was Published: And I had then great Assurance, that
Excommunications can take no Effect till they are Published: And what I did,
was done upon the Best Advice I was capable of Having; and I relied upon the
AUTHORITY OF MORE THAN ONE ECCLESIASTICAL JUDGE. And the same Article had been
Exhibited against many other Divines besides my Self, had they been so unhappy,
as to have had in those Parishes any People of such Venomous Spirits as I am
Infested with: So that, if this were a Fault, it was a Fault of most Excusable
(if I may not say) Invincible Ignorance.

You must now give us leave, Sir, to make some Remarks upon your Apology.
First, We find that Doctors Commons and Dr. Fowler are divided upon the
Question: They are positive that it is a Fault, and the Doctor is doubtful; for
you say, If it be a Fault.

Secondly, It seems not to stand with the Honor of your Dignity in the Church,
to pretend Ignorance in a Point of the highest Nature in our Church Discipline.

Thirdly, Your Defense is only Crimination, and you should not have brought
your Advisers upon the Stage; but rather have kept that Secret behind the
Curtain.

Fourthly, You should have spared them for the sake of the Ten Pounds Cost you
boast of, and some other Reasons: For it is a New thing, for a Criminal, who
Confesses the Fact, to be Cleared; and the Accuser, or Prosecutor, that makes
Good his Charge, to be Punished.

Fifthly, The Many Divines you speak of are Men that we never yet heard of.

Sixthly, We will leave the World to Judge, whether the Fault lies in the
Venomous Parishioners, or in the Peevish Minister.

Seventhly, We take your Slanders the less ill, because you make no Bolder with
us, than with Our Ecclesiastical Judges, and many of our Divines, nay, with our
Mother Church it self, in giving the Church of Rome the Advantage of Throwing a
Reproach upon us, which we believe She never had before, since the Blessed
Reformation.

For what will they say, to see such a Doctrine so Authorized, and a Parochial
Minister in the Church of England take more upon him than the Pope of Rome;
that is to say, in Admitting of Excommunicated Persons to the Communion before
they are Absolved?

Sir, As we have done you no Wrong all this while, so we will now do you this
Right in the Story about the Election of Common Council Men, to Declare, That
we believe you were no ways concerned in it; but that the Greater part of it
belongs properly to Mr. S.

And now to Conclude, We cannot but Observe what an unlucky Hand you have had
at Vindications: You wrote one against Bunnion the Tinker; Another for Breaking
the Church-Windows at Gloucester, and making use of the Trinity in the Seal,
that was Idolatry in the Glass. This Preface of yours is the Third; and we do
not know, but that this Letter of Ours may Produce a Fourth.

If all this be for your Health, and by way of Prescription, as (a Wag said)
now and then to take a lusty Dose of Vindication Pills to Purge Choler, we wish
you good speed. We would do this in better Terms, but Letters and Vindications
are none of our Talent.

You were pleased to bestow a Couple of Latin Verses upon us at the end of your
Preface; it is possible they may be something against our Church, but we
understand them not.

We presume however, that they will do as well at the End of a Letter, as at
the End of a Preface; And therefore we shall conclude with them, Desiring, that
if your Book comes to a Second Edition you would bless the World with your
Crippling Verses in English.

Hoc mihi pro certo quod si cum Stercore certo,
Vinco, seu Vincor, certe Ego Maculor.
Sir, We ask your Pardon for the Freedom we have taken to Vindicate (according
to your Certificate,) Sir, Your Peaceable and Christian-like Tempered
Parishioners and Servants, WILLIAM NEWBERY, Deputy. WILLIAM EDMUNDS.



