THE NAKED TRUTH, IN AN Essay upon Trade: WITH SOME PROPOSALS FOR BRINGING The
Balance on our Side, Humbly Offered to the PARLIAMENT.

Praestat esse Prometheum quam Epimetheum. LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCVI.

The Naked Truth; in an ESSAY upon TRADE.
Humbly offered to the Parliament.
IT was said of Old, and grounded upon good Reason, That England was a mighty
Animal that would never die, unless it destroy it self; and nothing is
considered with greater regret and reluctance, than the fall of that Person who
was his own Executioner. How far too many of our own Subjects are at present
engaged against the true Interest of their Native Mother, carried on in a
necessitous pursuit of Preferment on the one Hand, and sinister and private
Gain on the other, is lamentable to consider, whilst both are but serving a
Foreign Interest, and nothing can attend the success of either Party but
falling into the Hands of the Common Enemy. Providence has been miraculously
prospicious unto us in our happy Revolution, thereby enabling us by a frequent
Meeting of our Great Council (which Blessing was denied us in our two last
Reigns) to establish the Interest of England once more upon its true Basis, by
discouraging that course of Trade which exhausted our Bullion to support our
Pride and Luxury, and by making up those Mounds which were carefully erected by
our Ancestors to secure the Merchandise of our Native Commodities, to our own
Subjects; which were suffered to be pulled down in our last Reigns only to
enslave us, Poverty being the proper Shoo-horn to Slavery; Pride and Luxury was
the only means, upon one Hand, to impoverish our Nobility and Gentry, and
thereby bring them into a dependence upon the Court for Preferment, which was
the best Inducement to make Laws to answer their own Necessities; and the more
our middle and lower sort of People are impoverished, the likelier they were to
submit to Wooden Shoos. Our East India and Turkey Trade has been the Darlings
of our late Reigns, which had their chiefest influence from our extravagant
Expense in a Foreign Consumption; and it is not the least of our Misfortunes in
the present juncture of our Affairs, that the private Interest of so many of
our most considerable Traders, does interfere with the present Necessities of
the public; this makes a Civil War in our own Bowels, most Advices tending to
the center of private Interest; and if any thing is touched upon that does
interfere, Great is Diana of the Ephesians! whilst our Golden Fleece, the only
spring of our Riches, has been laid open to all Nations, without so much as
the guard of Alien's Duties. It is now above forty Years since all Government
in Trade has been laid aside, and every private Man's Rule (both Foreigner and
English) freely become his own choice; and could the cunning of France (in
whose Favor these Alterations were chiefly made) but have found out a way to
reap these Benefits in Trade, secluding the Industry of Holland from getting a
like share, our Circumstances, I doubt, would have been worse than they are at
present.

This has carried the balance of Trade so much against us, that our
Necessities press us upon an Inquiry after the true Causes thereof: And I shall
make no Apology for this Essay being an Englishman, it being clear to my
Apprehension, that should we new model our Coin, and not our Trade, we shall
only make a bad Matter worse.

I will make it my Task to consider first the Strength of our Trade, in those
Advantages which Providence has afforded us.

In the next place, how it stands in the present management, in point of Profit
and Loss to the public.

And then cast in my Mite toward its amendment.

That our Golden Fleece is the spring of our Riches was never yet denied; and
England bore no small Figure in the World before the Days of Edward III. when
we parted with our Wool to other Nations, as Nature gave it us; and the
bringing of it to be a Manufacture in England, has as evidently been the
Increase of our Riches; in which particular I may truly say, that we are now
come to a very great Improvement, not only in respect of our Old Drapery, but
more particularly in our New Drapery and Art of Dying, which has been obtained
these late Years. And we are now able to gratify our Fancies, with our own
Growth, in a great variety of flowered and stripped Cloth, and the intermixture
of a Harmony of Colors in our Norwich Stuffs, as well as administer to the
Necessities of Nature.

This was accomplished with no small Difficulty, the Hanse-Towns of Germany and
Flanders being very loath to part with so great a Benefit as the Manufacture of
our Wool: And Edward III. obtained this Point upon them by main force, in a
total stop of the Exportation of our Wool for a short time, upon the strictest
Penalty; which was a very bold Attack when our Nation was wholly unskilful in
the Manufacture; but good success crowned his noble Attempt, and when he had
got a good Footing he gave a liberty to Export our Wool again, but took care
to collect a good Duty out of it. And one thing he did to favor his Design,
which I think deserves our notice at present, he put an effectual stop to the
wearing of Furrs Decimo quarto, E. 3. cap. 4.
, our Woollen Manufactures very much increased, and in the Reign of Henry IV.
we were able to furnish other Parts as well as our own Nation; and he
established the Company of Merchant-Adventurers to Trade to Zeland, Brabant and
Holland, who were so successful in those Parts, that the Duke of Burgoine, in
the Reign of Henry VI. makes a Law totally to Prohibit our Cloth in his
Dominions: Upon which Henry VI. makes a Law to Prohibit all Merchandise growing
or wrought in the said Duke's Dominions, Vicesimo octavo, Hen. 6. Cap 1.
from coming into England, upon Forfeiture, until he revoke the said Order: And
the Duke of Burgoine being stiff in this Matter, the Year following Henry VI.
confirms the said Act for seven Years, which soon obliged him to a compliance.
There was likewise some struggle of this nature between the Hanse-Towns and
Queen Elizabeth, which was accommodated very much to the English Interest, as
appears by the many and large Privileges granted to our English Merchants at
Hamborough, Rotterdam and Dort, from which I may draw this natural Deduction,
That we are able to give Rules in Trade to any part of the World, our Woollen
Manufactures being certainly the commanding Commodity in Trade, and our
Consumption of Foreign Commodities the most considerable of any one part of the
World. Our New Drapery has given us a very great advantage, being so agreeable
to Spain and the West Indies. And although our Nation is at present become the
Emblem of Poverty, yet the Handle of the Riches of all Europe is in our Hands;
and its lamentable to consider, that the blind Zeal of our Divisions should
hinder us from making a right use of it; the long Wool of England is the
Foundation of the Spanish Trade, which these late Years has Enriched both
France and Holland.

I am now to show how our Trade stands at present in point of Profit and Loss
to the Public: And I will herein confine my self to the four chief Branches
thereof, viz. Our East-India-Trade; our Straits Trade to Turkey and Leghorn;
our Trade to Holland, Flanders, Germany and Hamborough; and our Trade to Spain
and the West Indies; the two former of these are chiefly managed by our own
Subjects, and the two latter lie open to the wide World, and are chiefly in the
Hands of the Dutch.

Our East-India-Trade is chiefly carried on with Gold and Silver sent from
England, and taken in at Cadiz; when this Company lately enlarged themselves,
by throwing open their Books for a short time (which I suppose was no voluntary
Kindness to the public, but rather a touch of their Necessity) the Money then
brought in (I suppose the lightest of it) paid almost Two hundred thousand
Pounds in Bills, that were drawn upon them from Cadiz.

The Commodities that we chiefly receive from the East Indies, are Callicoes,
Muslins, Indian wrought Silks, Peper, Saltpeter, Indigo, etc. The advantage of
this Company is chiefly in their Muslins and Indian Silks (a great value in
these Commodities being comprehended in a small Bulk) in their being become the
general Wear in England; and this depends upon the cheap Workmanship of the
Indians, being instructed to humor our English Fancies, by Artificers of all
kinds sent from England; and this Trade being managed by a Joint Stock, that
can make what Presents they please (as appeared by a large Article in their
Accounts) these Commodities are always the high Mode of England; a Dress that
came under the Satyr of Juvenal when Rome was a parallel of our great City;
exactly described,

Tot premit ordinibus, tot adhuc compagibus altum,
AEdificat caput, Andromachen a front ridebis,
Post minor est --
And I think that once in fifteen hundred Years is enough for any such Mode to
appear in the World.

This East-India-Trade has been chiefly managed by a few Hands that have
reaped the Benefit thereof; and being a Joint Stock, managed with a great deal
of Secrecy, it gives no advantage to the younger Sons of our Nobility and
Gentry, and the hotness of the Climate has wasted a multitude of our English
Subjects. Papers are always stuck upon all Pillars of the Exchange, offering
great Rewards to Seamen that will come in to this Company's Service. This
Company laid the first Foundation to Stock-Jobbing, which of late Years has
received so many new Additions, that it is now become a voluminous Employment.

The extravagant Expense of our Nation in Apparel, has evidently been
encouraged by the East India Trade; and which adds to our loss, their
Commodities are fully Manufactured abroad: Many ancient Entails that were
carefully contrived by our Forefathers, for the advantage of their Posterity,
and to keep up the Monarchy of our English Nation, has been insensibly cut off
with Indian Silk: And it seems plain to me, that our Nation was plagued with
their Commodities in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when there
was this good Law made to secure our Gentlemen's Estates against the Syrenian
Charms of these bewitching Commodities, that might assault their tender part.
Whosoever shall Sell, Anno Quinto, Eliz. Cap. 6.
or Deliver to any Person (having not in Possession Lands or Fees, to the clear
yearly value of 3000 l.) any Foreign Wares, not first Grown, or first wrought
within the Queen's Dominions, appertaining to the Clothing or Adorning of the
Body; for which Wares, or the Workmanship thereof, the Seller shall not receive
the whole Money, or satisfaction in hand, or within Eight and twenty days after
the making or delivering thereof, the Seller, Maker, etc. shall be without all
remedy by order of any Law, Custom, or Decree, to recover any recompense for
such Wares, or the Workmanship, whatsoever assurance he shall have by Bond,
Surety, Promise, or Pawn of the Party, or any other; and all Assurances or
Bonds in that case shall be Void. Which was a temporary Act, and it Expired.

And I hope, I am now addressing my self to many Country Gentlemen, who can yet
remember how much better it was in the Country, when the Kitchen was kept hot
in a good hospitable Expense, and the Wool yielded a good Price, than it has
been since our Grandeur has only appeared in the curiosity of a Parlour dressed
up in Indian Silks and Muzlins, like Flower-pots, for a show.

Our Turkey, or Straits Trade, is carried on partly with our Woollen
Manufactures, and partly with Silver sent from England, and taken in at Cadiz;
and it gives us in return Raw Silks of diverse sorts, and a very good Staple,
Grogerom Yarn, Druggs in abundance; (the vent of which has a great dependence
upon our Taverns) Gauls, etc. which are Commodities that are not fully
Manufactured; and I think that this Trade deserves the favor of our Nation
when it is in a flourishing Condition: But at present our Coin being low, and
the balance of Trade so much against us, a Cloth Cloak seems as proper for our
Wear as one of Camlet, since we run so great a hazard to procure the Latter;
and our Turkey Merchants Estates being brought home at a great Expense to our
Nation, it appears to me to be of great moment, to consider whether this
Straits Trade does not yield too great an advantage to the Turks, in taking
from them their Silks, Grogerom Yarn, Druggs, etc. for our Money and Cloth (that
are both advantageous Commodities to encourage a War) when they are virtually
our Enemies, as they act against the Emperor, and are encouraged by the King of
France, whilst our Nation is only Impoverished with their Commodities, and we
have quick vent for our Cloth to Flanders and Germany, for the use of our own
Army; and to procure Linnens from those parts that our Nation is in need of at
home, to be at charge to impoverish our selves, is but Tapping our Vessel at
both ends; which may serve in an Election, but not in a War: Whilst it is
evident that the good success of the War that we are at present engaged in,
does very much depend upon the strength of that side that is like to support it
longest. Our Expenses in the way of living and carrying on our War, has
drained our Treasure (in ocular Demonstration) to a very low Ebb: And those
Streams that brought in our Treasure from Spain and the West Indies, are
evidently diverted into another Channel: So that without consideration, we must
inevitably fall. It is not an Indian Dress set forth with Scarlet Ribbons, kept
warm with a Sable-Tippet, or the easy Victories that we obtain over a Glass of
Red; nor indeed our Paper Credit, that will put the French King upon
advantageous Offers of Peace; but indeed the quite contrary. And this leads me
to the consideration of the profitable part of our Trade, which is in the hands
of other Nations.

Our Trade to Holland, Flanders, Germany, and Hamborough, is carried on with
the Native Commodities of our own Nation; and we are furnished from thence with
Linnens of all kinds, agreeable to all ranks of People, Whalebone, Wire,
Madders, Spicery, etc. And the balance of Trade in these parts in former days,
was always upon our side: They have taken from us Eighty Thousand Broad-Cloths
a Year; and the value of Fifty Thousand in Cottons and Kersies (as Sir Walter
Raleigh tells us:) But then our general Wear in England in fine Linnens, was
Hollands, Cambricks, Silesia Lawns, and other fine Flaxen Linnens from
Flanders; and I think we knew no Muslins until about Five and twenty years
since; ever since we got the Manufacture of our Wool from the Flemings, as often
as any good opportunity has been offered, it has always been improved to draw
it thither again; and no wonder, the benefit being so great. And since we have
obtained upon them beyond their power in that particular, a farther Contest
has often times arose about the Merchandise of our Woollen Manufacture; whether
they should fix a Factory in England, (or employ English Factors, which is the
same) to buy our Woollen Manufactures, and sell their Linnens at the utmost
advantage of our Markets? or, Whether we should have the Merchandise of our
Native Commodities fix a Factory in those parts, and buy their Commodities at
the best advantage of their Markets? That side which prevails in this matter,
does gain the Merchandise, the Freight, the management of the Exchange, and the
Government of Trade; a matter worth contending for. From Henry IV. to Edward
VI. the Merchandise of our Woollen Manufactures, was divided between our
Merchant Adventurers and the Foreign Merchants of the Still-yard, but for the
encouragement of our English Merchants, Aliens Duties were always paid by the
Still-yard Merchants, notwithstanding Naturalization, until the Twenty second
year of Henry VIII. at which time there was an Act made, that Denizens should
pay the same Duties that Aliens did. But the Merchants of the Stil-yard by
their Money, got themselves exempt, under the title of Merchants of the House of
Almain, or Tutonicorum: And I dread nothing more at this time than Foreign
Merchants under the title Tutonicorum: For these Merchants got their first
footing in England in the Reign of Henry VIII. by lending him Money to carry on
his Wars abroad. This was a great point gained up on the English Merchants. And
in the 32 Henry. VIII. cap. 16. it appears, that Aliens Duties in the general
was taken off by the King's Proclamation. This advantage prevailed so far upon
the Foreign Merchants side, that in the year 1552, the Fifth year of Edward VI.
they Shipped off Forty four thousand Cloths, and our English Merchants not Four
thousand; and all was Exported and Imported in Foreign Bottoms, as appears by
the Journals of Edward VI. The English Merchants being at this low Ebb, put in
their Complaint to the King and Council against these Merchants Tutonicorum;
and they gave in their Answer to the said Complaint, upon the Eighteenth day of
January; and upon the Twenty fifth their Answer was delivered to some Learned
Counsel, to peruse it, upon the Eighteenth day of February. The Merchant
Adventurers put in their Replication to the said Answer: And upon the Twenty
third a Decree was made by the Board, That upon knowledge and information of
their Charters, they had found First, That they were no sufficient Corporation.
Secondly, That their Names, Numbers and Nations were unknown. Thirdly, When
Edward IV. did restore them to their Privileges, it was upon the condition,
that they should cover no Foreigners Goods, which they had done. For these
Considerations, Sentence was given, That they had forfeited their Liberties,
and were to be no more than Strangers. Upon the 28 th. day came Ambassadors
from Hamborough, Lubeck, and the Regent of Flanders to speak upon the behalf of
these Merchants Tutonicorum. And upon the 2 d. of March, the Answer for the
Ambassadors was committed to the Lord Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Sir
Robert Bows, and Sir John Baker, Judge Mountague Griffith; Sollicitors
Gosnald, Goodrick and Brooks. It remained under consideration until the first
day of May, and then the Merchants Tutonicorum, received their full Answer,
confirming the former Judgment of the Counsel. This gave encouragement to a
great many English Merchants to come into this Company. And in October the
Third following, Three hundred Merchants of this Company of Merchant
Adventurers, met together, and lent Edward VI. Forty thousand Pounds to be paid
in Flanders: And they Shipped off Forty thousand Clothes. And the Merchandise to
these parts, remained in English hands from this time till the year 1663. And
now it is reduced to the same low ebb again, Aliens Duties having been taken
off ever since the 25th. of Charles II. and the same inconveniences attended
our Nation at that time as we labor under at present. In point of Gold, it is
thus expressed in a Statute made the same year, Diverse Covetous Persons of their
own Authority, Anno Quinto Edw. VI. Cap. 19.
have of late taken upon them to make Exchanges as well of Coined Gold as
Coined Silver; receiving and paying therefore more in value than has been
declared by the King's Proclamation to be current for, to the great hindrance
of the Commonwealth. Before I part with this considerable branch of our Trade,
I cannot but take notice of a very great hardship that was put upon Flanders in
the 12 th. of Car. II. in the settling of our Books of Rates; as if we had been
at that time in a Confederacy with the King of France, we were to put a stop to
their Trade, that he might buy the better Penniworths in their Towns; each Ell
of Flanders Linnens is charged at five Shillings to pay Custom; which was four
times the Custom of any Linnens from France at that time.

I come now to consider our new Drapery in our Trade to Spain and the
West Indies, which is the greatest improvement that England ever made: This
brings home our Silver, Spanish Wool, Cochineal, Iron, etc. And it was
Incorporated for some time, in the beginning of the Reign of James I. But we
knew no such thing as our new Drapery in those days.

Our Nation has lost Five hundred thousand Pounds per Annum, by not
Incorporating our Spanish Trade. This New Drapery of ours has set up France in
Merchandise, and enriched Holland. The French turned their Claret, Brandy,
Alamodes and Lutestrings, into Colchester Bays, Serges, and Perpetuana's, and
sent them to Spain and the West Indies; and had in return to France pieces of
Eight, Spanish Wool, Cochineal, Iron, etc. and by this means made themselves
Masters of a third part of the Spanish Trade. This Trade at present is almost
wholly centred in the hands of the Dutch, which makes them Masters of the
Silver, which is brought into Holland to serve our occasions as well as their
own; and by Bills sent into England, they have gained 25 l. per. Cent. to buy
our Bays and Serges for Spain, to fetch home more Silver; which must be a very
gainful Trade to them. And this open Trade to Holland in the Channel now it is
in, must unavoidably destroy our English Merchants in the general. The chief
Branch of this Spanish Trade that we are interessed in, is with the Portugues
for Wine, who have laid a very high Duty upon our Woollen Manufactures, almost
to a Prohibition. So this must be the purchase of our Money from Cadiz. So that
in the West as well as the East Indies, the impoverishing part of Trade falls
to our lot, and the profitable part of the Dutch. And the most encouraging
thought that offers to my apprehension in this whole matter, is, that what we
have lost since the Wars, has chiefly fallen into the hands of our Allies, who
are engaged with us in the War, and nearest the Danger, who in Gratitude will
bear a greater share if need require, being as well able to do that as lend us
Money. Charity seems now to begin at home, and should we Mortgage and Borrow
much longer, Vul^us fit immedicabile, and pars sincera trahitur. And it may be
best on both sides to ^ix the foot of our Accounts: When a Cure seems a little
desperate, we are very apt to cry out, Ense Recidendum. It is true, say some,
English Merchants ought to be Encouraged; but it is not a proper Season during
the Wars. A Man in a deep Consumption applies himself to his Physician in the
Autumn, and he told him he could do nothing for him until such Sp^ing-herbs did
appear: This was but a melancholy Answer; but it had been overwhelming, had
there been no certainty of the Spring. And we find a careful Shepherd upon the
first notice that a Sheep is seized with Worms, instantly bestirs himself to a
Cure, knowing that they will not only eat on, but engender; which is nearest my
Simile, being upon the Golden Fleece. I have now gone through the easy part of
my Task, and yet the nature of our Distemper bespeaks its own Cure. There
appears to me but one way to bring the Balance of Trade upon our side, which
if dexterously managed, would soon effect it. We have many considerable Traders
at present employed in bringing home superfluous Commodities, that are
purchased with our Bullion, to the hindrance of our own Native Commodities.
Another sort of People that are dronishly employed in Clubbing their Stocks to
ingross Commodities, under pretense of Banks for the good of the Public,
whereby our Nation is Excised at a very ill time. A third sort, of no
inconsiderable number, that like Mahomet's Fleas, shelter themselves in the
Fleece, and Charity must be very high, to judge some of them by their Actions,
to be in any other way for Heaven; and these like a dead weight hang upon the
Master-wheel of our Trade, which gives motion to all the rest; these live
splendidly in a needless Employment, between the Maker of our Woollen
Manufacture and the Buyer, when at the same we as much want Hands and Stock to
Export our Native Commodities to Spain, Flanders, Germany and Hamborough,
thereby to bring home a real profit to our Nation in a fair way of Trade; and
to disingage these Hands from the one, and engage upon the other, is what I
chiefly offer at, which I humbly conceive must be done by sharpness upon one
Hand, and encouragement upon the other. Corruption has so far prevailed among
us, that no Law can be effectual to prevent the Exportation of our Money when
there is a profit to be made thereby; and the higher Customs are set upon
Commodities that are any way handy, the less Money is brought in to the King.
The K of France made a Market of us by the prohibition of his Alamodes and
Lutestrings, they were always plenty and the Custom saved; and Fashion is truly
termed a Witch, the dearer and scacrer any Commodity, the more the Mode; 30 s.
a yard for Muslins, and only the shadow of a Commodity, when procured. This
must be effected, on this side, by Acts of Parliament, whose Penalties must
force their own Execution, strictly prohibiting the Consumption of these
superfluous Commodities that drain our Treasure. And I am confirmed in this
Opinion by the practice of former Days, when the same necessity required it. In
the 5th Year of Richard II. we have this account of the state of the Nation at
that time, and what was done. Anno quinto Rich. 2. cap. 2.
For the great mischief which the Realm suffers, and long has done, for that
Gold and Silver, as well in Money, Vessels, Plate and Jewels, as otherwise, by
Exchanges made in diverse manners, is carried out of the Realm, so that in
effect there is none thereof left; which thing, if it should longer be
suffered, would shortly be the destruction of the same Realm (which God
prohibit) it is asserted and recorded, and the King enjoineth all manner of
People, etc. The substance of this Act was to prohibit the Exportation of our
Money, particularly leveling at the Custom-house Officers in an extraordinary
Reward to be given by the King, if any of them was found tardy in this Affair:
And that which was the chiefest care at this time, was the setting the price of
Wine to be sold in Gross or Retail, and the forfeiture of them that sell them
dearer; and a Power given to the chief Officer of a City or Borough to sell
them at the same Prices if the Owner would not; and a Subsidy granted to the
King, so that the Money that comes thereby may be wholly employed upon the
keeping of the Sea. I cannot but here observe the good Genius of this time,
Anno sexto Rich. 2. c. 3.
in so ingenuous and frank a Confession of the Truth, whilst, like the
Laodiceans, we are Rich in Fancy or Design, In H -- d.
a multitude of weighty Money hoarded up -- which will be brought out --

The next parallel that I observe of this nature, If you will sell your
Liberties.
is anno quinto and sexto Edw. 6. cap. 19. where it is thus expressed, That
diverse covetous Persons of their own Authorities have of late taken upon them
to make Exchanges as well of coined Gold as coined Silver, receiving and paying
therefore more in value than has been declared by the Kings Proclamation to be
current for, within his Realm and other his Dominions, to the great hinderance
of the Commonwealth of this Realm, it was then Enacted, That no Person or
Persons should receive or pay away any Gold, etc. at any other price than the
same is or shall be declared by the Kings Proclamation to be current for: Which
seems to imply, that the advance price of Gold was then brought down, and
gradually settled by the King's Proclamation, which deserves our present
Consideration. But the next Year the price of Wine was likewise settled at two
Pence a Quart, and the number of Taverns reduced to forty in the City of
London. But that which is most considerable to my present purpose, is the
Statute made the first Year of Philip and Mary, cap 2. Whosoever shall wear
Silk in or upon his Hat, Bonet, Scabbord, Hose, Shoes or Spur-leather, shall
be three Months Imprisoned, and pay 10 l. except Mayors, Aldermen, etc. If any
Person knowing his Servant to offend, does not put him forth of his Service
within fourteen Days, or do retain him again, he shall forfeit 100 l. This
Statute was kept on foot the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Repealed in
express Words the first Year of King James I. I shall only add in this Matter,
that I think our Indian Silks and Muslins, which are fully Manufactured abroad,
do our Nation the greatest mischief at present, and a stop of the consumption
of these will ease us of our Scottish Fears. This I must confess was a sharp
Statute against our Straits Trade, but the more we consume of our own
Commodities, the better price we shall get for those we sell; and the more the
Linnens of Flanders and Germany are consumed in England, the better able will
they be to give us a good price; and in point of Policy, more to be encouraged
at this time than Turks and Indians. But a Silk-Weaver is not out of his way
when turned to Worsted, Druggets, Norwich-Stuffs, etc. What I further propose,
is an effectual stop to Engrossing of Commodities, and the preserving the Sale
of Goods in the public Market, which will bring in a good Stock into the
advantage of the public; and none so fit to make Merchants to Export our
Woollen Manufactures, as those Persons that understand them; hereby our
Cloth-factors may be capable to pay that Debt which they owe to the public.
Should we New-Coin our Money to its full Weight, and not remove this Temptation
of Exporting it, it will be but a Compliment to us, and soon make its Exit. A
multitude of Paper has been spent upon the subject of our Coin, most of which
I take to be no other than the Cry of a Lapwing, when his Nests is like to be
disturbed; and the great alteration of Exchanges, the same with the Scholar,
that endeavored, in his Declamation, to possess his Auditors with the Belief
of a dimness that had befallen the World, by the unhappy Accident of an Ass
that drank up the Moon. If we are honest and keep our Money at home, as Law
requires, it is the same thing whether an Ounce of Silver is ordered to go for
5 s. or 5 s. 6 d. if it answer the end that it was designed for in the
accommodation of Trade; that in one Commodity that I have an overplus, I shall
receive another that my need requires; and good care has been successively
taken that no Foreign Merchant should sell any Foreign Commodities, but he
should lay out his Money in England; for we are able to furnish Commodities for
any Commodity that our Occasions require, and let Foreign Bullion take its own
course, whilst the Government of the Mint is in the King's Hand.

And in this Counter-Scuffle about our Coin, to my Apprehension there appeared
a Jackdaw amongst the Rooks, in his artificial distinction of the Extrinsic,
Intrinsic and Real Value of our Coin, adherent to the Species, when a Dog will not
eat it; and I always thought that the real Value was in the Commodities
exchange, one for the other, and but virtually in the Money.

But I proceed to my Design in Hand, the Encouragement of our Trade, by such
good Laws that were recommended by His Majesty's most Gracious Speech, which
will give Encouragement to all our Subjects in general to fall in to the
Exportation of our Native Commodities, which can alone relieve us. And this can
be done but by these two ways: First, by Incorporating those Places that are
most proper for our Old and New Drapery, and then making those Companies so
Extensive (each Person Trading with his own Stock) that it may be secure from
Monopoly. In the next place, by Repealing the Statute of the 25 Car. II. that
destroyed Aliens Duties, which in the first Year of Queen Eliz. were called the
ancient Revenues of the Crown. And nothing has conduced so much to our present
Calamity, as the coloring Foreigners Goods; our Nation has hereby been
surprised, and our Interest supplanted, and Poverty is always the Daughter of
Perjury, and this has been the Ruin of our Seamen, which has been twice
recommended by His Majesty's Speech. By this Statute of Elizabeth, all English
Merchants were obliged to Ship their Goods upon English Ships, or pay Aliens
Duties; instead Primo Eliz. cap. 13.
of ten Groats for a Cloth to pay a Noble. And it is a vain thing to expect
that a German Merchant shall send for an English Ship to Bremen, to carry his
Linnens for England? Or, that he should order his Factor here to send his Cloth
in any other than upon his own bottom, when he is likely to be concerned in the
Shipping? The Merchandise and Freight will be one good step toward the
bringing the balance upon our side.

The loss of the Manufacture of so great a part of our Wool which is Exported,
and the Exportation of so great a quantity of our Woollen Manufacture, not
fully Manufactured, is at present a very impoverishing consequence to us; we
lose cent. per cent. in the first, and twenty per cent in the latter.

Application has been made by the Clothiers in the first of these, and by the
Diers in the latter: But it has not hitherto been worth our Notice; and the
present Bill to prevent the Exportation of Wool as it is Drawn, is certainly an
encouragement to Exportation: The turning of Felony into a Praemunire is in this
case the same thing, it being the same benefit to the Informer; and the keeping
of the Statute a foot of the first of King William and Queen Mary, is giving an
allowance to Export 3300 Todd of Wool to the Island of Jersie and Gernsie, more
than was allowed by the Statute of the 12 Car. II. and under the shelter of
6600 there may be 60000, and Southampton is the only place in England to wound
us in this Particular: It commands the best Wool in England in its kind, in a
place that is remote from our chiefest places of its Manufacture; and how easy
is it for French Lute-Strings, Alamodes, etc. to be Imported upon us in the
same Channel. In the 27 Year of the Reign of Edward III. it was made Felony to
English Men to Export Wool upon the pain of Life and Member, and of forfeiture
of the said Merchandise, V^^^simo Septimo Ed. 3. Cap. 3.
and of all their Goods and Chattels, and of forfeiture of all their Lands and
Tenements to the chief Lords, and the chief Lords shall have a writ of Escheat
in the case. They then found this Felony to be a snare in the matter, and in
the 38 of the same Reign they repealed the Felony, and continued the other
forfeiture; and why we may not at this time Colect a moderate Duty out of all
our Woollen Manufacture Exported, without being fully Manufactured, as well as
our Forefathers did so considerable a Duty out of our Wool that was Exported
when it is growing so fast upon us, is beyond my apprehension. The Duty arising
out of Wool from the Staple at Callis, was 38000 Pounds a year, which may be
computed at 100000 at this time; whilst these Commodities Died in Holland, are
Exported to Spain, Germany, and the East Indies; to which places we are able to
send. It was Enacted in the Reign of Henry VII. that no Cloth should be
Exported until it was Barbed, Rowed, Shorn; and the full art of Dying was not
obtained until of late years, but of very great concern to us to secure it as
far as we can: Dying Wares are very bulky, and affects our Shipping, brings a
Duty to the King. Many Commodities are of our own growth, as Allom, Coperas,
Wool, etc. and it imploys variety of Artificers in Dying, Pressing, Listing,
Tillet-Painting, etc.

The last thing that I humbly recommend for the advancement of our Trade in
Foreign parts, is the redressing the cheating abuses in Trade, by falsifying
and straining our Manufactures; and giving all encouragement to true making: A
piece of English Cloth brought to its Perfection, is a noble Commodity: And by
slight making and falsifying it, we give an advantage to Foreign Nations to
gain upon us, with Commodities of a worse quality, but better made; and thereby
give away those advantages which Providence has given us: And the Name of God
is hereby Blasphemed among the Turks, through us Christians, which is like the
Whoredoms of Jezabel.

Our Commonwealth is at this time very much oppressed by Engrossing. An Excise
for the Common good was not thought advisable, whilst in the mean while we are
brought into it by private hands. One hundred thousand Chaldron of Coals it is
believed has been bought up by Persons that designed to make a Market of them;
and the fit distance between a Lady Day and Michaelmas that the Act was to
commence with a considerable Duty, gave good encouragement: The mildness of the
Winter, through God's Providence, has hitherto prevented the sharpness of
their Designs; notwithstanding which, Coals are now worth Six and forty
Shillings a Chaldron. By a Statute now in force, which was made in the 7th year
of Edward VI. it was Enacted, That no Person, or Persons, shall buy any Wood,
Coals, or Fuel, but only such that will burn or consume the same, Homo Homini
Lupus.
or such Person that will sell the same by Retail to such as will burn and
consume the same by their own occupying, without fraud or covin, upon
forfeiture of treble the value of the Coals, one half to the King, and one half
to the Informer. If Fifty thousand Chaldron of these forfeited Coals were
applied to the King's use upon a treble forfeiture at forty Shillings a
Chaldron, it would advance Three hundred thousand Pounds; which would help well
at this time. Spanish and English Wool is Engrossed, Oil, Cochineal, all
Commodities where Engrossing is practicable; and a very great Complaint upon
our English Wool from all parts of the Kingdom.

In the 4th year of Edward IV. it was Enacted, That no Person for three years
should buy any Wool, unless he made it into Yarn, or some sort of Manufacture.
This Act was continued in the 4th Year of Henry VII. for 10 Years longer,
limited to 28 Counties. The same Act was continued for 10 Years more, in the
22d Year of Henry VIII. And in the 5th and 6th Years of Edward VI. it was made
general, but with that great caution, that the King by his Proclamation should
dissolve the said Act; notwithstanding which it remained in force 70 Years, and
was repealed the 21st Year of James Is It. and the reviving of this Act would be
a double advantage to Trade, in preventing the Exportation of Wool, and in
enhansing the Price of it. Presidents are safe Rules to walk by, the Interest
being still the same.

At a common heap of Losses in Juvenal's time, he tells us of one Codrus that
brought a good burden to the heap in a great zeal, Nihil habuit Codrus; quis
enim negat? Et tamen infelix perdidit totum nihil. Our Losses are not come upon
us upon a sudden; we have many Codrus's that have lost French Commissions,
which were carried on under English Colors for two or three per Cent. whilst
the French Merchant saved thereby five, or six per. Cent. in his Customs;
French Wines being charged 30 s. per Tun upon Aliens accounts, whilst these Men
would be thought to have lost their Estates too, tho they had none. And were
all the Commissions known that are at this time managed for Foreigners under
Engligh Colors, this short account would answer its Titles; and no wonder,
when our East India Company shall carry on a Trade for the Persians, and sell
their Goods for a Commission, or Permission, as they call it; which is plain
demonstration to me, That if Spain or Italy was a better Market for Indian
Commodities then England, that Calendar the Persian would find out a way to
carry them thither, and not pay 18 per cent. to the East India Company, to sell
them in England; and how great their share was in the East India Ships is not
mentioned; so that to pretend that our East India Trade do as well bring in
Money as send it out, is at this time but imposing upon the Public; and so
long as we have a Mint going in the Indies, as their Papers tell us, to Coin
Silver, I doubt we shall want it at home; but after all, nothing can keep us
poor but our own Divisions. And how little is that Merchant to be pitied, who,
when secured from the imminent danger of Caribdis, by the hazardous
interposition of a Friend, and advised to stear a middle course, should yet
contrary to such advice, and the ancient and practiced Rules of Navigation
split his Ship upon Scilla.

I have now gone through that Task to the best of my judgment, which my Native
Interest engaged me in, and submit the whole to the Consideration of this
August Assembly.

FINIS.

