THE CHARACTER OF A REBELLION, And what ENGLAND May expect from one.

OR, The Designs of Dissenters Examined by REASON, EXPERIENCE, And the LAWS and
STATUTES OF THE REALM.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, 1681.

The CHARACTER of a REBELLION, AND What England may expect from one, etc.
HE does not deserve the name of an Englishman, who in a time of Common and
Imminent Danger, dare not stand up for his King, his Religion, his Country,
Laws, Liberty, and the most Excellent Constitution of Government in the whole
World. And that all these are in the most apparent hazard even from those
People who pretend to be the great Opposers of Popery and Arbitrary Government,
I appeal not only to the Swarms of Insolent, Scandalous, Seditious and
Malicious Pamphlets which of late have made the Press and the whole Nation
groan, and are one of the greatest Grievances and Pests of the Commonwealth,
but to that general fear which the Insolence of Factious Dissenters has
raised, and thereby given too just ground for apprehensions of their breaking
out into Rebellion and Insurrections.

I am satisfied that they lay a great stress upon the Policy of this Invention,
to encourage their Party and frighten their Opposers, by the frequent boasts of
their Strength, Numbers, and what may follow if they be not gratified; how
dangerous it is to disoblige them; and I believe they had much rather compass
their Designs by these artifices, than run the Chance and Risque of a Decision
by the Sword; and I know also, that many of the principal Engineers have more
of the Fox than of the Lion, and are better at the Encounters of the Tongue and
Pen, than of the glittering Steel; but yet I think no Enemy ought to be
Esteemed contemptible, and the very first Essays toward Rebellion ought to be
encountered; it being not impossible but Law and Reason may baffle and subdue
them, before they take the Field; and it will be a very happy Combat where
nothing is spilt but Ink.

It cannot discourage me, that of late some Mercenary Pens and Designing
Persons have countenanced the notorious Enemies of the Established Government
with the Character of the only true Protestants, and that Libelling has been
esteemed a Virtue, if not a part of their Religion; Lying and Defamation the
scandals of good Moral Heathens, have been adopted into Christianity; while,
such as durst adventure to assert, or appear in defense of, the Government and
known Laws, were loaded with all the invidious Reproaches of Billingsgate
Invention; and most certainly with the name of Papist. I have a Veneration for
men of Sense, but cannot but despise those little writing Things who are but
one degree advanced above Apes and Monkeys that chatter and bite as they are
set on. And certainly a more contemptible piece of Senceless Detraction was
hardly ever invented on this side Bedlam, than to affirm that the Papists are
contriving to subvert the Government, and pretend to be Zealous against them,
as all honest men are against whoever shall attempt that, and at the same time,
to brand all such as vigorously appear for it against both Papists and
Phanatiques, with the title of Papists.

But Politicians move great Wheels by little ones, and the King and Government
must be disarmed, by this Popular Odium, of all their true Friends under the
Notion of Papists, that so they may come under the Guardianship and Protection
of these true Protestant Dissenters; and is it possible to Conjecture they
would not then be in good hands? I may be mistaken, but I believe I am not
single in my Opinion, that they would be in Salva Custodia, according to the
English of Jaylors.

And after all the repeated Affronts both to his Sacred Majesty and Persons of
the most Eminent Characters and Loyalty in the Nation, they must not be
reproved or censured for fear of dis-uniting Protestants, or forcing them to
Rebel. But truly if they proceed in these Methods, as they seem incorrigible,
they must excuse us if we cannot contribute our assistance to such an Union as
must terminate in our Ruin. The Laws have ever Esteemed them, as well as the
Papists, Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, and we know their Principles are
inconsistent with the Ancient Constitution of the Monarchy, and both their past
and late Actions have proved them true to their dangerous Principles, and the
Character which Learned Grotius gives of them, That they subvert St. Paul's
Rule of Subjection, and therefore that no Crowned head can be longer secure
from their practices than while they want Power; and if Sedition, Rebellion,
Murder, Rapine, Sacrilege, Usurpation, Injustice, Oppression, Tyranny,
Cruelty, Persecution exercised by Dissenters during their Empire, as is
attested and avowed by their own Records, and justified in Print, be
recommendatory Qualifications to trust them again with our Lives, Liberties,
Laws, Estates and Religion, judge all ye People!

Nay, had they no other Crime besides Ingratitude, I think that such a
Compendium of all that is ill, that they need not be painted more black than
that has made them; and for that, let his Majesty's Gracious and Generous Act
of Oblivion witness both their former Guilt, and present Ingratitude: If they
had not offended the Laws, and were not obnoxious to Justice, why did they
stand trembling after his Majesty's wondrous Restoration till they got the
Security of that Act? for which yet, the King out of the Abundant Excellency of
his Nature, and Unexampled Clemency, seemed no less solicitous than the
Criminals; and how they have requited his Royal Bounty, in all their late
Actions, is an Ingratitude that not only England, but all Europe is with
Astonishment a witness of.

The King like a Just and Excellent Prince, who like Heavens Monarch delights
in Mercy, suspends the Rigors and Severities of the Penal Laws against them;
this they construe to be Fear and not Favor, and improve it to a confidence to
demand their abolition, not without menacing insinuations upon refusal: he
assures them he will Govern according to Laws, to obviate a notorious Calumny
spread abroad by them among his People of a Design of introducing Arbitrary
Rule, and that he will neither act Arbitrarily, nor permit others to do is;
this is so far from giving satisfaction, that it is highly displeasing; the
Laws themselves are Uneasy, and to Govern by them burthensom and
unsupportable; and indeed it is impossible to please those with any thing, who
are resolute to receive no satisfaction unless they may have all.

Whither these Procedures must lead us, we need not to consult the Oracle. When
the Quicksilver rises so high in the Weather-glass of State, it is not
difficult to conjecture some blustering may follow. And indeed the methods which
these People have made use of, are too well known to leave us in suspense, if
Providence does not interpose, what will be the End: They have so far Exceeded
the Limits of their Duty, and have so accustomed themselves to affront the
Government by the repeated breach of Laws, that it can be no wonder if they
endeavor, even beyond what is consistent with Loyalty, to be secured from the
Penalties due to their disobedience: and if they are so violent and headstrong
when the Curb of the Law is so strict upon them, can we rationally suppose they
will be more tame and manageable, if they were secure of Impunity, or possessed
of Power?

The truth is, they are under the misfortune of all those who having affronted
Laws and Government, are perpetually haunted with their own Guilt, and the fear
of Punishment; they can never think themselves secure so long as there is a
Superior Power to call them to an account: nor is any thing capable of obliging
or giving them satisfaction, besides an absolute and unaccountable sovereignty.

But how can this be Effected? God and Nature have vested his Majesty, and the
Laws of the Land have declared the Sole Power of the Sword to be his inherent
Right, and it is both unnatural and irrational to suppose the Contrary; for
without this he can neither Protect Himself, nor Defend his Subjects: And
though an Essex Address was so confident to make a demand to have the Navy,
Forts and Garrisons put into confiding hands, that is, into the Power of
Dissenting Protestants or their professed Favorers; yet it is to be hoped that
his Majesty is too well acquainted, from the 12 Years Experience of his Exile
during their Usurpation, with their temper as to Loyalty, and too sensible who
are his Enemies, from the many Disturbances they have given him since his Happy
Return, to trust them with Power. A Scepter is a mere trifle without a Sword to
guard it, and therefore there is little hope for them from that Quarter; nor
can they have the least ground to think that the King will ungird himself of
his Royal Seignory, to oblige those who will make no other use of it but to his
disadvantage.

What? will they have a ruffle for it? truly, it has been confidently affirmed,
That some of the Party who have wanted the gift of Taciturnity have intimated
as much; and the insolence of their behavior, the boasts of their Numbers,
though it is well known they make very false Musters, and their Ten to One, is
not One in Ten; together with the late Cavalcades of so many hundred Armed Men
through the Streets of London, to attend some persons toward Oxon, so directly
contrary to the Statute of Northampton, 7 Edw. 1. and to the 2 Edw. 3. c. 3. 20
R. 2.1. absolutely prohibiting all Riding Armed to Parliaments, seemed to
discerning men little less than a sucking Rebellion, or at least a Design to
awe their Sovereign into Compliance; and such Extraordinary Attendance contrary
to Law, as it speaks a guilt in the Persons, so it betrays a fear on the one
hand, and a confidence on the other never practiced by any Subjects but such
who wanting the Guard of Loyalty and Innocence, fly to unlawful Arts and Arms
for Safety and Protection.

But Generous Countrymen, pray let us consider of the matter a little:
Precipitation is the Daughter of Folly or Madness, and the Mother of Ruin and
too late Repentance. I doubt not but all arts and insinuations are used that
may gain, encourage, animate or buoy up a Party, it is most evident every one
sees it, all persons know it. Discontents are raised, Fears and Jealousies
suggested and blown up to the height, the People are debauched with false
Representations, and Rebellious Principles, and now that they are under a
disappointment, they are taught a certain Wild Enthusiastic Faith, and by
their Zealous Rabbis made believe that God has a great Work to do, that is, to
destroy the Popish Church, of England, and work the thorough Reformation, and
he will bring it to pass though they cannot tell how; and thus their party are
kept up in Expectation of some Miracles of Rebellion. This certainly is done in
order to something. And therefore it imports all Englishmen to consider what
they do, who they are managed by, what they may get or lose; for certainly we
of this Nation have something to lose beyond what all our Neighbors can boast
of, but nothing to be got by altering our present Condition, and therefore by
the most Early precaution we ought to be aware of and endeavor to prevent any
tendencies to Rebellions or Insurrections. I think Consideration the Method of
Sober and Judicious Men, and am assured no person ever lost by those moments
spent in that Employ; but the want of it has ruined not only single persons and
private Families, but Mighty States and Empires. I will therefore offer to your
deliberating thought these following things.

1. Consider who they are that make all this noise, and give these disturbances
to the Nation? Upon Examination you will find they are those very restless,
murmuring Dissenters, who within less than Forty Years with the same Acts
turned the Kingdom upside-down, turned the Monarchy, the Ancient Hereditary
Imperial Monarchy of England into a Commonwealth or Republique, and who for
that Reason and the many Disturbances they gave Queen Elizabeth and King James,
are by many both New and Ancient Statutes of the Realm, deservedly Esteemed The
Dangerous Enemies of the Government. These are the Persons that fill both the
City and Country with Outcries of the Fears and Dangers of Popery and
Arbitrary Government; who yet when they were got into the Throne of Usurpation,
acted by Popish Principle, and Popish Counsels, and the very worst of the very
worst of Papists the Jesuits, and of Jesuits the most infamous, such as Mariana
and Scioppius, putting in Execution their Doctrines of Murdering and Deposing
lawful Princes: who governed with the most Arbitrary Injustice imaginable; and
notwithstanding their Repeated Oaths and Promises to observe the Fundamental
Laws, yet without Faith, Honor or Conscience they Taxed, Assessed, Decimated,
Fined, Imprisoned, Sequestered, Plundered, Banished, and by a pretended High
Court of Justice having thrown down the Supreme Court of Judicature the House
of Peers as Useless and Dangerous, at their uncontrolled will and pleasure,
which was then theirs and our only Law, they Murdered whom they pleased, as the
Reason of State to support their Usurpation made it appear Necessary or
Expedient. Who to their Eternal Infamy put it three several times to the Vote,
Whether they should not give One Blow for all, and massacre all those whose
unshaken Loyalty* Honor and Religion made them suspect as Enemies; who kept up
continual standing Armies at a vast Expense, to maintain their unlawful
authority, till at last the Servants turned out their Masters, and made us all
Slaves to the Law and Power of the Sword.

These are the Persons, or their Sons, for whom Dissenters join all their
Interests. For these Herod and Pilate must be made Friends: nay some who were
in the Black List of the late King's Judges, and strongly suspected to have
worn the Frocks and Vizzards, Excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, and the
late General Pardon; such who were in actual Arms against his present Majesty
or his Father, or the Sons of such who having got Estates by the Rapines of the
last Rebellion, and enjoy them by virtue of the Act of Oblivion; such as have
raised their inconsiderable Fortune, and Families, under the warm Sunshine of
Royal Bounty, and being waxen fat can kick against the Crown and spurn at the
Mitre, and having gotten Thousands by selling Places at Court, can call it the
House of Rimmon, and declaim against it, talk of Grievances, deny Money to
Support Tangier or the Foreign Alliances, smile upon Dissenters, and yet go to
Church and hear the Public Prayers, Receive the Sacrament, take any Oaths or
Tests to capacitate them for Places of Trust and Power; and when they are in
it, Exercise it to discourage and Oppress the Loyal, and animate the Factious;
These are the only persons that are cried up and cry up their own Abilities,
Loyalty and Integrity, and must be the only persons fit to represent the
Country and serve the King.

The Statute of 13 Car. 2.1. says Expressly, That whosoever shall advisedly
publish or affirm the King to be a Heretic or a Papist, or that he endeavors
to introduce Popery, or shall maliciously by Writing, Printing, Preaching or
other Speaking, Expressly declare, publish or utter any words, sentences or
other things, to incite or stir up the People to hatred or dislike of the
Person of his Majesty or the Established Government, every such person or
persons being thereof legally convicted, shall be disabled to have or enjoy,
and is thereby disabled and made incapable of having, holding or exercising any
Place, Office or Promotion Ecclesiastical Civil or Military, or any other
Employment in Church or State, other then that of his Peerage, and be liable to
such other punishments as are inflicted by the Common Law. That such as shall
affirm by Writing, Printing, Publishing, etc. That the Parliament of Nov. 3.
1640. is not dissolved, or that there lics any Obligation from the late Solemn
League and Covenant or Engagement, or that both or either House of Parliament
has a Legislative Power without the King, shall inour a Praemunire as the
Offenders against 16 R. 2. That a Peer or Commoner Convict of Offenses against
this Act, shall be disabled during bit life to sit in Parliament, unless his
Majesty be graciously pleased to pardon them. And though by a Proviso there
seems to be a reserve for freedom of debate in Parliament; yet what can be said
to those Speeches Printed and Published, which tell us that we want a King and
a Government whom we may trust; That the Money given for Tangier may be made
use of to raise an Army there. That discoursing of Tangier at this time, is
like Nero 's Fidling whilst Rome was consuming by Fire. A very pretty
comparison to answer the Kings Message; That a brand be set upon those that
advised the King not to pass the Bill; That instead of looking into the Tower,
they should have looked into Whitehall, there the Plot is hatched, cherished
and brought up; That the Court is a Nursery of Vice, and none but such Men are
employed; That some Lords have little Estates, some little Consciences, some
less Religion; And all this printed by an Anabaptist, a very fit tool for a
Reformation, if we would have one of the Munster cut. Out of the same Shop
comes the Vox Populi, and the Famous Addresses at Elections, which must be
recorded in perpetuam Rei memoriam with the Title of Vox Patriae. We have seen
Votes printed and published, and pleaded in Bar against the standing unrepealed
Laws in favor of Dissenters; and if repealing Laws without the Kings Consent,
be not assuming a Legislative Power, what is? We have seen the Non-conformists
under the notion of answering Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon of the Mischiefs of
Separation, openly in Print avow the Obligation of the Solemn League and
Covenant, page 13. There has passed, say they, a Solemn Oath over the Nation,
engaging the main Body of it to Endeavor a Reformation, and we dread to think
on it with what faces they shall be able to stand before God, who have lift up
their hands to him for things quite contrary in the late Revolutions. We have
seen but the other day a second Character-man assert the Superiority of
Parliaments to the Monarchy. Page 10. By which it is plain, says he, That the
Authority of the King being only Derivative, was inferior to the authority from
whence it was derived, which was the Parliament. Which is a step beyond the
affirming a Legislative Power in the Two Houses, which incurs a Praemunire, and
is a plain vesting them with the Original of Imperial Sovereignty; and all this
countenanced, promoted, and deliberately published to alienate the Affections
of the People from his Majesty, and presented to them to stir up in them a
dislike of His Majesty's Person and the Established Government. Notwithstanding
all which, these must be the Hopeful Patriots and Defenders of our Liberty and
Property; and we must not be Esteemed true Protestants, unless we follow them
in their Wild-goose Chase again, and with a pretended fear of Popery run into
Anarchy, Confusion, and every Evil work.

2. Consider, What must be the Way, and what the End, of these Violent Methods
if they proceed to Extremities. The Sword is a Dreadful Umpire of our
Differences; and yet this is the Arbitrator to which Rebels must fly, and with
which Dissenters seem to threaten us, if there be truth in their late
Addresses, when they do with such Ostentation talk of assisting those that
shall endeavor their satisfaction, with their Lives and Fortunes. And what
must be the End of this? Know ye not that the Sword devoureth one as well as
the other, and that it will be bitterness in the latter end? The Events of War
are uncertain, but the Mischiefs and the Miseries certain. Let us therefore
first sit down and state the account, compute our loss and gain, and see what
encouragement we have for the Undertaking.

And first for the Protestant Dissenters: Upon the first moment of an
Insurrection or Rebellion, the Gracious Act of Oblivion is gone; for though it
pardons old Scores, it is not like one of the Popes Indulgences, which
undertakes to pardon all the Crimes they shall do as long as they live; and if
that be once Forfeited, their Lives, Liberties and Estates must be at the
discretion of the Law, and the Mercy of the King, and he will have but little
encouragement to oblige those persons with a second Amnestie, who have so much
abused the First; and however the more inconsiderable offenders may fall under
the verge of Mercy as to their Lives, yet the principal Actors, Contrivers, and
Managers of Rebellion can expect no more favor than the Justice of the Law
will afford them, which is to be Drawn Hanged and Quartered, their Estates
Confiscate, their Families Ruined, their Honor lost, their Names and Memories
to be for ever Infamous, and their Posterity to curse them.

Secondly, All their Liberties Franchises, Charters, Immunities, Privileges,
and even that great One of Choosing and sending Representatives to Parliaments
will be forfeited and lost; for their Freedoms and Freeholds upon which that
Privilege depends, are by Rebellion ipso facto lost and gone.

Nay, Thirdly, Should they prevail against the Government, which morally
speaking is impossible, their Circumstances being so different from those of
the late Rebels, who had first disarmed the Government before they attempted to
overthrow it; Yet what could they rationally hope for even after a Conquest? Is
it possible for Men in their Senses to imagine, that an Usurping Power which is
advanced by all the steps of Wickedness and the Violation of the Laws of God
and Man, will value any Laws, Contracts, Oaths, Promises or Stipulations, or
that they will not maintain a Standing Force to protect their ill acquired
Sovereignty? And if a Military Government be so Formidable in a Lawful King
bounded by his own Laws, must it not be much more Dreadful in Lawless and
Usurping Tyrants? Was the Scepter of any Usurpers ever made of any other metal^
than of Iron, or in reality any thing besides a Sword? You know the Fable, The
Horse had a quarrel with the Stagg, and to satisfy his Ambition and Revenge,
he takes the man upon his Back; It Is true he won the Field, but for ever lost
his Liberty, being unable to dismount his Rider: Such Brutes are they, who
being weary of their present Condition, set up a Power which reduces them to a
worse.

Sovereignty and Supreme Power must be in some hand, there can be no Society,
no Commerce, no living without it; and certainly it is most advantageously
lodged there where God and Nature have placed it, and our Laws declared it to
be; and the Reason is plain, We have not power to choose for our selves, for
all Power is from God; and if we had, sure it is an Atheistical presumption to
think we are able to make a better choice than the only Wise God: And besides,
what security can we possibly have from Usurpers? Is it rational to think that
they who can upon any considerations be tempted to violate their Faith and
Allegiance to their Natural Liege Lord, shoul esteem it a Crime to break their
word with their Equals or Inferiors? it is just as likely as that he who thinks
it no sin to kill a man, should scruple to tread upon a Worm. Remember how you
were treated for Twelve Years after the Execrable Murder of the late King, and
you will find I tell you the Truth and what is to be expected from these
Protestant Dissenters, should they get into Power, and become a Government by
Rebellion.

And because there is a lamentable outcry against Jus Divinum, and affirming
Kings to Rule by Divine Right, and that therefore all Attempts or Rebellions
against them are unlawful under what pretense soever, give me leave with a
Digression not wholly impertinent, to stop the mouths of these Ignorant or
Designing Clamorers; They have often ridiculed Scripture Arguments upon that
subject, and therefore I will offer them some Parliament Authorities, which
seem to them far more convincing and Canonical. 1 Eliz. c. 3. It is declared,
That the Queen is, and ought to be by the Laws of God and by the Statutes of
the Realm, our most Rightful and Lawful Sovereign Liege Lady and Queen; So that
you see by Act of Parliament and a Protestant Parliament she held her Crown, by
this double Tenure Jure Divino and humano.

1 Jacob. 1. The King is Recognized to be Lawful Heir to the Imperial Crown of
these Realms both by the Laws of God and Man; and this Act is Ordained to be a
Memorial of Record by his Majesty's Assent to all Posterity among the Records
of the High Court of Parliament; without which Assent it could neither be
complete nor perfect, nor remain to all Posterity. These are the very words of
the Statute; so that you see after all the noise which has been made against
Jus Divinum, the Title of our Kings is declared to be so by Two Acts of
Parliament, unless those words [The Law of God] have some other meaning which
hitherto the great Masters of Revelation have not discovered to us.

But that I may come close up to the Point, There is not that person in
England, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions, of what Rank, Degree, Age,
Sex or Condition soever, who has not besides the General Concern a particular
Interest which does oblige him or them to endeavor to maintain, defend,
support, and preserve the present Establishment of the Government and Monarchy;
and by clear consequence, to detest, abhor, and by all Lawful ways and means
to labor to suppress, detect, oppose and prevent all such Designs, whether of
Papists or Commonwealth Protestants, who under Color of Religion, Reformation,
Liberty, Property, or any other of their specious pretenses shall go about to
alter or subvert the prosent most Exeellent Establishment. And to make this
good, I will give a true but short account of the Principal Advantages which we
do at present enjoy under his most Excellent Majesty and the Monarchy; all
which will be lost or forfeited, if the Old Foundation be destroyed by
Rebellion.

I will begin with that which is in every man's mouth, and is every man's
concern, the Magna Charea, or the Great Charter of England, the greatest and
most glorious Franchise and Immunity which is possessed by any Subjects on this
side Heaven; This Charter, since the first Grant, has been confirmed above 30
several Times with all the dreadful solemnities and imprecations upon whoever
should violate or infringe it; and if there were nothing in these formalities
of its Ratification, yet the consideration of such an irreparable loss, ought
to make us jealous and watchful against whatever may endanger it. Now though
this Charter may be forfeited by Rebellion, and yet the Monarchy survive, yet
can it not possibly survive the Monarchy, should that be subverted or changed
into a Commonwealth, as is evident both by the beginning and conclusion; for
we hold it of the Kings of England and their Heirs; for so it runs, Henricus
Dei gratia, etc. Know ye, That we have given and granted these Liberties
following to be held in Our Kingdom of England for ever. By which it appears
they are granted so long as it continues a Kingdom; and when ever it ceases to
be a Kingdom of England, or comes to be a Commonwealth of England, the Grant
and Charter becomes null and void. And suitable to the Beginning is the
Conclusion, which after the Enumeration of all the General and Particular
Liberties and Privileges, too long to be here inserted, and too great to be
lost for want of due caution or consideration, is in these words, Nos autem
Donationes and Concessiones praedictas ratas habentes, etc. Which Grants and
Concessions aforesaid We having ratified, and being willing to ratify for Us
and Our Heirs, do grant, confirm, and renew by the Tenor of these Presents,
willing and granting for Us and Our Heirs, that this Our foresaid Charter shall
for ever be firmly and inviolably observed in all and singular its Articles or
Branches. By which it is evident, that it is the Kings Charter, that it depends
upon the King and His Heirs; and being a Stipulation between the King and his
Heirs on the one part, and the Subjects on the other, if one of the Parties
shall cease to be, the Grant, Charter, Concession, and all its Dependencies
cease and fall of course, and are to all intents and purposes void and lost for
ever. And all the good Laws and Privileges of King Egbert and King Aelfred,
the great Monarchs of the Saxon Heptarchy, the Excellent Laws of Edward the
Confessor compiled out of the British, Saxon and Danish Laws, granted and
confirmed by William the Conqueror, which compose the Body of our Common and
Statute Law, together with the Charter of the Forests, and indeed all our Laws,
which are the Grants and Concessions of our Kings, and are therefore called the
Kings Laws, must run the same Fate: And to what a deplorable condition must
that Nation be reduced, where the very Foundation and Essence of Society, which
is Government and Laws, are torn up, lost, and ruined? Where the miserable
People must be left to the discretion and mercy of the Sword of Usurpers to be
governed arbitrarily, and be at their choice whether they shall enjoy any
benefit or advantage by their old Laws, and at the utmost uncertainty, whether
they shall obtain new ones that will compensate their loss. A Wood which has
been many hundred years growing, may be cut down and reduced to Ashes in a few
days; but it is the work of Ages to re-plant it and make it flourish: and we
have as little reason to believe, that what the Wisdom and Industry of our
Ancestors has been so many Ages oultivating, should it be destroyed, can in a
moment, or indeed for ever be repaired, as that Mushromes should advance to be
Cedars, or Brambles grow up to be stately Oaks: Liberty is such a Jewel, as
being once lost, rarely admits of the possibility of a Recovery, and therefore
should be kept with all the Caution imaginable. Our Laws are the true Argus,
whose hundred Eyes are the Guards and Sentinels which watch against this Dragon
of Rebellion which would devour it; and the Monarchy is the good Genius or
Guardian-Angel of Great Britains Liberty; and should we trust it to the Devil
of Rebellion, as once before, though clothed like an Angel of Light, we may
flatter our selves with the Imaginations of a happy Change; but we shall find
by woeful experience, that our golden Liberty will be turned into Iron Fetters:
and indeed when this great Bulwork of Liberty, our Magna Charta, and the
Foundations of our Laws, are either forfeited or usurped by Rebellion, we must
of necessity sink into the utmost misery and misfortune of servitude and
slavery.

I know this black and dismal Reverse of Englands Fate is industriously
concealed from the People by the Commonwealth Protestants; and it would be
unreasonable to expect they should show us any thing that must of necessity
pull off their Vizor, and by consequence ruin the very hopes of succeeding in
their Enterprise, which entirely depends upon their deceiving the People with
Hopes and Promises of Reformation of Religion, Redress of Grievances, etc. No,
they treat us with these as Men do crafty Horses, who being at ease and liberty
in a full Pasture, are shie of being taken up and ridden; they show us the
tempting Provender, but conceal the Bridle which they have ready in the other
Hand to slip over our Heads: They know when once they have put the Curb of
Power into our Mouths, then the Arbitrary Saddle is soon clapped on, then the
Riders may mount us at pleasure, and what Loads they please may be laid upon
our backs. We have seen and felt all this before, and therefore may with
confidence aver it to be true: our Backs were galled and almost broken with the
intolerable burdens they laid upon us; our Sides still remember the bleeding
Marks and Lashes of those Hot-spur-protestants of the late Commonwealth of
England, and the Keepers of our Liberties. We should be very weak to expect it;
but they must be worse than Idiots, should they tell us they design to Rebel or
over-turn the Government. Did ever a Highway-man tell a Traveller that he
intends to take his Purse? No; he entertains him with the danger of the Roads,
the great Robberies that are done, and talks tragically against the Trade,
pretends to be his Guard and his Conductor, tells him he will lead him such
byways, that he shall be sure to escape them; and when he has once got him out
of the Kings Highway, brought him into narrow Lanes among Woods, then he sets
upon him, robs, dismounts, and it may be binds him, wounds or kills him. This
is our Case, and when we see these Religious Padders, so busy tickling the
People in the Heads with dangers, fears and jealousies, and drawing them out of
the Kings Highway of Loyalty and Obedience into the Wood again, we must be
insensible if we do not see what will be the End on it; especially when we
confider that both the Prologue and the Actors are the very same Persons, or at
least of the same Principles, we must conclude they will act the very same
Tragedy if they be not prevented.

But Secondly, The King is the Fountain of Honor* Honor is both the Reward
and Encouragement of Virtue; if the Fountain be dried up, the Streams must
fail. The Duke, the Marquess, the Viscount, Earl, Baron, Baronet; all hold by
Patent, and flow from the source of Royal Bounty; and what becomes of all those
high Characters? If the Sun of Monarchy set, the Stats will fall and lose their
Luster, the Garter will be untied, and the Knights bright Spurs will rust; what
will the Privilege of Peerage, the Scandalum Magnatum fignifie, when Jack
Straw, and Wat Tyler, a Dray-man, a Cobbler, or a Carrier, shall be of more
Authority than a Lord, nay than the whole Honorable House, when it shall be
voted useless and dangerous? The Peers are Pares Regns, Peers of the Realm; and
if the Kingdom sink or degenerate into a Democracy, or Oligarchy, the Honor of
Peerage is gone, and the High and Mighty Princes may indeed have the empty
Titles and Ensigns of Honor; but for any Authority, they must be reduced to
the Common Level, and every little up-start Favorite of the Usurpers, shall
not only venture at a Competition, but carry any Place of Power before them.
This is no Fiction or Chymaera, but such a Truth as Experience has within our
Memory attested.

And here with all due respects and difference I must address my Discourse to
these Noble Persons of the Delicate Sex; it is an ungrateful Complement to
accost them with, to tell them their Honors will be lost; but credit me;
Illustrious Ladies, neither your Beauties, nor other most Attractive Charms,
will be able to secure you from the Insolence of Commonwealth Ravishers:
England can be no longer the Paradise of Women than it continues a Monarchy: My
Lord cannot suffer, but my Lady will have a share; the Widows of Barons, by the
Curiality or Courtesy of England, enjoy the Titles and Privileges of Peerage,
and the Daughters of Dukes, Earls, and Barons, do by the Favor of the same
Custom enjoy the Honor and Title of Ladies; these too must fall with the
Monarchy; and in a Commonwealth Joan is as good as my Lady even by daylight. I
remember Harry Martin, who was said not to be the greatest Enemy of the soft
Sex, yet in the late times stretched a Commission be had to seize Horses for
the Service of the Commonwealth, even to the taking the Coach-Horses of some
Noble Ladies sitting the Parliament, which was an Insolence and Breach of
Privilege; that, had Monarchy been in Power, he must have made a severe
account for, but all the redress they could obtain, was to sit down with the
affront; for the Commons House justified him in it; and he justified himself
for taking not only theirs but the Kings Horses from the Muse, by pleading
this; We have, said he, selzed the Kings Castles, Forts, Navy and Magazines;
for the good of the Commonwealth, and sure we may seize the Horses of any
Person for the same purpose: and the poor Ladies were obliged with patience to
pocket up the Injury, and either stay at home, or learn to walk in Pattins, to
make their Visits, or take the Air, notwithstanding their Quality, and the
Privileges of their Peerage.

Thirdly, The great Privilege, the very Being and Essenne of Parliaments falls
with the Monarchy; for it is by virtue of the Kings Writ that Parliaments are
called, chosen, mere, sir, debate, and do every thing that a Parliament can do;
without this there may be Assemblies or Conventions, but they are no more
Parliaments than the Consults of Jesuits at Wild-house, or the White Horse
Tavern were Parliaments, and are in reality no better than Riots and unlawful
Assemblies, who have no Right, no Power, no Authority; and whatever they act or
do, is a perfect Usurpation and Arbitrary Invasion of Sovereignty over their
fellow Subjects: And what Justice, Equity, Law or Right are the People to
expect from those who can have no Power, all the People being their Equals? And
when this shall once be understood, who will submit to them or obey them who
have no Authority to command, and then what Confusions, Distractions,
Insurrections, and Mutinies must follow, to the utter ruin and subversion of
Peace, Trade, Justice, and the Prosperity of the Nation, till we come either to
be a Prey to some Eorreign Invader, or ambitious Domestic Tyrant and Usurper.

Fourthly, the Charter of London, the Imperial City, and those large Liberties,
Franchises, Immunities, Lands and Revenues, Freedom from Tolls in all places of
England, nay their very Incorporation of Major, Aldermen, Common Counsel,
Sheriffs, Courts, Companies, etc. which are all the Favors of His Majesty, and
His Royal Progenitors, as at large appears by the Charter of London lately
printed in English, must all stand and fall with the Monarchy from which they
derive their Original, their Power, Authority and Jurisdiction, and without
which they cannot subsist; and if Gratitude were not able (as I hope it will)
to oblige this great Metropolis to a firm adherence to the Crown, yet their
Interest and Dependancy upon it does. For let us but consider what a wild
Desert of unmanageable Brutes must this City of necessity be without Laws and
Government, when even with the best and strongest, which it enjoys under the
Monarchy, together with the assistance of the Militia, all is little enough to
prevent disorders, and hinder the licentious from ruining the Honest and
Industrious: and should the Indigent Multitude, the Licentious Rabble, and the
Headstrong and unconsidering Youth, come to know there was no Law to punish
them, no Constables, Beedles, Justices, Compters or Officers, and Courts to
restrain them, the Freemen disfranchised, the Courts dissolved, the Indentures
of the Apprentices cancelled, what could be expected but Riots, Tumults,
Disorders, and that the Rich and Wealthy should become a Booty to the Poor,
lawless and unruly Multitude, and this now Well-governed, Rich, Populous, and
Flourishing City become a Ruinous Heap, and have stretched out upon it the Line
of Confusion, and the Stones of Emptiness, and this great Mart or Emporium,
famous throughout the Habitable World, lose all her Trade, Riches, and Glory,
and become the astonishment of the whole Earth.

Nor would the Lesser Cities, Corporations and Buroughs be in a better
Condition; all their Charters, Freedoms, Privileges, Fairs, Markets, Tolls,
etc. being derived from the same Fountain of Monarchy, must have the same Date
and Period with it, to their utter Undoing, Impoverishment and Ruin.

Fifthly, All Privileges granted to Merchants-Strangers, as the Hans Towns,
the Lombard, Eastland, Norway, Spain; Venite, Burgundy, the Dutch, etc. and all
our ancient and present Leagues of Peace, War, Offensive and Defensive,
Commerce and Traffic made with several Princes and States are built upon the
Foundation of the Monarchy, and expire with it; and what a Damp must such a
Blow give to the Trade of England, when all the Foreign Merchants shall
withdraw their Effects for want of the Security of these Alliances; and how
insecure must our Merchants be without them, I leave to the Thoughts and
Consideration of those Industrious and Worthy Merchants who frequent the
Change; which Place would have few Inhabitants besides the Statues of the
Kings, who have encouraged, promoted and advanced Commerce and Trade, if those
were permitted to stand, which I much question; being they must reproach
Usurpers with Ingratitude and Disloyalty. Foreign Trade is the great support
of England, and does so universally Influence all Men's Estates, that we see
they rise and fall in Proportion with the Actions of the Merchants; and what
will become of the East India, Guinea, African, Turkey, Hamburgh Companies, and
of all the Fraternities, Guilds and Companies of Trade in London, and all the
Cities and Buroughs of England and Wales, whose very Essence and Being depends
upon the Monarchy, and their Protection, Encouragement and Well being upon
those advantageous Privileges, Stipulations and Leagues of Commerce, which
have been and are made with Foreign Princes and States, it is easy to
determine: and should any of our Potent Neighbors, upon our unhappy
Circumstances, ingross the Trade, and turn the Current of it, let Antwerp teach
London, and Flanders England, that Staples and Factories, once removed, are
difficultly, if ever, regained.

Besides that, the setting up a Commonwealth, as it Cancels our Leagues and
Alliances, so it must put us into a state of War with all our Neighbors; for
all Crowned Heads must of necessity, in regard of the dangerous Precedent and
Example such a Revolution gives their Subjects, be declared Enemies; and for
Republics, the Emulation that is between them can never permit them to be
Friends.

Sixthly. Nor will the Dismal Effects of changing the present Established
Government only affect the Nobility and the Merchant, the Gentleman must have
his share too; for whereas there are about 10000 Manors in England and Wales,
whereof the Lords are as it were little Kings among their Tenants, and have the
Liberties of Sake, Soke, etc. and many Jurisdictions, as Court-Barons,
Court-Leets, to order and do Justice to their Tenants, from whence arise Fines,
Amerciaments, Estreats, Forfeitures, Deodands, Waifs, Strayes, Fines certain
and uncertain, Quit-rents, Heriots, Freewarren, Swanning, etc. all these being
Grants of several Kings, have their dependancy upon, and must run the same Fate
with Monarchy, if that stands, they stand, if that falls, they must fall also,
to the no small loss and detriment of all those Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Bodies-Corporate, and others, who are at the present possessed of them.

Seventhly, And lest there should be any Persons to whom the mischiefs of
Rebellion will not extend, its Consequences will affect the Body of the
Commons, the Freeholders, Copyholders, and Common People, there being none
who have any thing to lose, but must hazard and lose all, and many Thousands
their Lives in to the Bargain: it will strip the Copyholders, which are above
a fourth part of the Lands of England and Wales, of all their Ancient and
Beneficial Customs, the Common People of their Rights, Apportionments and
Admeasurement of Common of Pasture, Common of Estover, Agistments in Forests
and Purlieus, which in many Places of England are the greatest part of the
Livelihood of the Inhabitants, all which they possess by virtue of the Grants
and Charters of several Kings; and for the Freeholders, when their Interest in
Magna Charta, and Election of Representatives are gone, they will have little
left to boast of.

Eighthly, Nor will it only wrong the Living, but the Dead; for not to mention
the Impropriations and Advowsons to Rectories, which depend upon Grants from
the Crown, what will become of the Foundations of Colleges in the
Universities, Free-schools, Hospitals, Almshouses, all which possess their
Revenues by Charters and Grants from the Kings of England, and depend upon the
Monarchy; and should that fall (which God forbid) their Titles are gone, and
they must be at the Will of the New Lords, who according to the Proverb, will
be for new Laws. And how near the Brink of Ruin, and being swallowed by the
devouring Avarice of Pretended Religion, all these Foundations and Supports of
Learning were in the late Rebellion, need not be remembered, since it is
impossible it should be forgotten; and since among our Protestant Dissenters,
the Compter, the Cart and the Plough can afford such plenty of Learned
Apostles, Evangelists, Elders, and Teachers, there will not want a Judas to cry
out against Universities and Tithes, Quorsum perditis haec? Why all this loss?
let them be sold to maintain the Charges of the Commonwealth. Thus it was, and
thus it would be again, if they had Power, which I confess gives me some
admiration to see Persons who pretend to be learned and favorers of Learning
herd with such illiterate and ignorant Impostors. How were the poor People
cajoled with taking away the burden of Tithes, as they called them in the late
times; whereas had they been taken from the Clergy, whom they would render poor
and mercenary, that they may not have courage to oppose Rebellion; yet the poor
Laics would have had no more benefit than the Ass, whose wise Master, to ease
him, took off the Load which before he rid upon, and laid it upon his own
shoulders; which though it loaded him, did not at all lighten his Brother
Animal.

Ninthly, Neither will it stop here, but pass the Seas, and discharter all the
Foreign Plantations of Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, etc. which are holden by
the Proprietors by virtue of Royal Grants.

Tenthly, To conclude, it will render the whole Nation Slaves: for I pray once
divest us of the before recited Charters, Freedoms, Immunities and Liberties,
either by the prevailing of Usurping Rebels, or by the forfeiture of Rebellion;
and what are we but the most despicable and abject Slaves? and of all slavery
that is certainly the most insupportable, where we must submit to the Yoke of
our Equals and Inferiors.

Thus have I given you, Generous Countrymen, a short but true Character of that
Monster Rebellion; which though she puts on the Face and Voice of an Angel,
always has the Hands of a Devil. If you have any remainders of true English
Courage and Gallantry, for which your Ancestors have been so renowned; if you
think Liberty and Property worth the preserving, either to your selves, or to
be transmitted to your Posterity, it imports you to use your utmost endeavors
to crush the Cockatrice of a Commonwealth in the Egg, and by all lawful ways
and means to support, maintain, and defend the Monarchy with the last drop of
your Blood, and the last Penny of your Estate: It is your indispensable Duty,
the Laws of God, and the Statutes of the Realm require it, your own safety,
preservation, and indeed your whole Interest challenges it from you; it is a
Justice to your Posterity, to whom you were better leave no Name, than the
infamous Intail of slavery to their Fellow Subjects, Manacles and Chains
instead of Charters and Royal Franchises; which as they have descended to you,
you ought to take care to transmit them to Posterity whole and entire.

I know the greatest Criminals will make the first and loudest Protestations of
Innocence and Loyalty: Who so brisk as Hazael to repartee to the weeping
Prophet, who charged him with the Barbarous Mischiefs he would do when he
should get into Power; what am I a Dog that I should do this? Who so quick as
Judas to put the Question, Is it I? But we have learnt to read Men by their
Actions, not their Words; and that I may not criminate without Proof, which is
Calumny and Detraction, I refer you to the Testimony of two Evidences that will
not deceive, and can neither be accused of detracting Malice or biassed
Partiality; the one is Law, the other is Old Experience: By these you shall
know who are the Enemies of the Monarchy and established Government.

Now the Law expressly charges Papists and Sectaries, or Dissenting Protestants,
with the Accusation of being dangerous Enemies to the Government. That the
Papists are so is allowed of all hands; and that the other are no more innocent
in the Eye of the Law, is evident, in that there is not one Title of Law, the
least shreds of Records, which can give them a favorable word; but on the
contrary, 35 Eliz. c. 1. charges them with the danger of great inconveniences
and perils which may happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous Practices of
Seditious Sectaries; and the Reign of King Charles the first turned this into a
Prophecy, which they fulfilled; 13 Car. 2. c. 1. charges the Growth and
Increase of the late Troubles upon their score; and we know it was they that
preached us into Rebellion, and fought us into slavery; and the 13 Car. 2. c.
1. tells us, All His Majesty's Endeavors and unparalled Indulgence in
pardoning all that is past has not been able to oblige them, but that
nevertheless many evil Spirits are still working; and therefore for prevention
of mischief for the time to come, and for Preservation of the public Peace
both in Church and State, be it Enacted, etc. This we have found true ever
since. 16 Car. 2. c. 4. tells us of growing and dangerous Practices of
Seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal Persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late Experience
has showed. 17 Car. 2. c. 2. informs, that they distill the poisonous
Principles of Schism and Rebellion into the Hearts of His Majesty's Subjects,
to the great danger of the Church and Kingdom; so that the Testimony of the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm are clear against them, and declare them
dangerous Enemies: and if there were nothing else, their strict Confederacy in
the Common Cause, and the sudden Reconciliation that is among so many differing
Sects who are mortal Enemies in persuasion, and damn one another as deep as
Hell, only to get the Penal Laws against them repealed, is a sufficient
acknowledgement from themselves, both what our Laws esteem them, and what they
esteem our Government; and truly one of them speaks plain, Plotters Doom Page
10. where he tells you, That if Martin Luther were alive, he would call those,
who put the Penal Laws in Execution against Protestant Dissenters, the Devils
Magistrates, and the Devils Ministers, and not Gods, and a little after, Of
these therefore beware as of the Devil, whose first begotten Children they are.

And lest the single Testimony of the Laws should not be sufficient, Experience
makes good the Charge; have they not been infamous for Sedition, Conspiracies,
Rebellion? Have they not actually once before overthrown the Monarchy, set up
Arbitrary Power, trampled under foot our Magna Charta, Liberty, Property, Lives
and Religion, Murdered their Lawful Prince, Banished his Son? and had not
Providence miraculously interposed, nothing could have secured us from utter
Ruin and Destruction.

Nor will it at all avail them now to pretend that they abhor and detest all
such Designs or Intentions; the saving their Necks and Estates oblige them to
that Declaration, and the Design they have to impose upon the People, keeps
that concealed from them; but yet they are not so cautious at all times, nor so
full of abhorring, all the Art of Man cannot persuade them to abhor their Dagon
of the Solemn League and Covenant, or to abhor the Traitorous Position of
taking up Arms by His Majesty's Authority against His Person; which if they did
not think Rebellion Lawful, or did not intend to Rebel upon a fair occasion,
they would voluntarily and ex animo declare to be their Sense and Judgment.

But that you may see through these thin Pretenses to Loyalty, Duty, and
Affection to His Majesty, pray observe, first that the Late Rebels did the very
same; who so Dutiful and Loyal, such faithful Subjects as the Dissenting
Protestants, till they had grasped the Power, and when Victory, which they
argued was a Declaration of Gods Favor, had Elevated their Arms, then the Note
was changed, and he who before was treated with the Style of Sovereign and
Majesty, could get no better Language from them than plain Charles Stuart,
Tyrant and Usurper, and after the loss of His Crown and Life, to have His
Reputation murdered with an Epitaph in Capital Letters, written under the
Pedestal, from whence they had pulled His Statue in the Old Exchange, Exit
Tyrannus Regum Ultimus, that there might be as many Nations Witnesses of their
Infamous Villainy, as Curiosity or Commerce draws to that Public Place; which
for my Particular, I cannot but look upon as an infatuation in them, that
forced them to proclaim their own Infamy and Guilt to the whole World, and that
there should scarcely be a Nation under Heaven that is not able to produce a
Testimony against them.

Secondly, Observe, That the Survivors of that Black Tragedy have not given one
single Symptom of Repentance for their former Guilt* but as a most Infallible
Demonstration, that they are given up to the utmost Impenitence, and a seared
Conscience; notwithstanding all their Pretenses to Tenderness, they do not only
continue obstinately in their Errors, but compass Sea and Land to proselyte
others to their Opinions; and it is evident it is not Religion, but Design,
that is the chief Motive that gives fire to their Zeal, that they are for the
Drag-Net of a Toleration, and all are Fish that come to the Net, if they do but
center in the main Point which unites all these true Protestants, which is to
oppose the Government. How do they upon all occasions either extenuate or
endeavor to evade the Horrid Crimes of which they were the Actors; do they
not, as before was instanced, notwithstanding the Praemunire they incur, still
adhere to the Covenant? Are not all the Conventicles shut up on the 30th of
Jan. lest they should show any remorse for their having shed the Blood of the
Just, and call themselves Villains by deploring the Tragedy wherein they were
principal Actors, Abetters, and open Justifiers? Have they not constantly
opposed the Government both in Church and State, broken the Laws, disturbed the
Peace, and do they not avow and justify their doing it with pretense of
Conscience? and if they be the same Persons as they show plainly they are, if
ever they were dangerous, they are so still, and their pleading Not Guilty is
no more Justification against the Testimony of the Laws and Experience, than it
is in any other Criminals and Malefactors.

Thirdly, Observe, They do exactly trace the same Method and Footsteps of the
late Rebellion; they begin with Popery, but they presently change the Scent,
and fall upon Prelacy, the Church of England, and the Loyal Party. These must
be hunted down for Papists, Tories, Tantivies, Pensioners, Evil Counselors,
and Enemies to the King and Kingdom, and those must have the Title of the only
true Protestants, who are the most fierce and violent Schismatics, and such as
favor them, must be reputed the only fit Persons to represent the Nation;
whilst such Loyal Gentlemen or their Sons, who hazarded their Lives and
Fortunes in defense of the King and Government, are contemned, affronted,
punished, and treated with all the ignominious and reproachful Terms and Marks
of Infamy that spite and artful Malice can invent to render them odious or
suspicious to the People: They traduce the Government, and endeavor to make it
contemptible, revile the Bishops, malign the Loyal Peers, vilify the King, and
have much to do to keep from downright Treason; and if these be not sufficient
Arguments to prove that they are Enemies still, dangerous Enemies to the
Monarchy, our Ancient Laws, Government, Established Religion, and to the true
Interest and Happiness of England, I think if an Angel came from Heaven he
would not find credit; for sure I am he might manage it with greater skill, but
he could not produce more demonstrative Truth.

This, my Generous Countrymen, is the true state of your Interest, and our
present Affairs: This is what you must expect, should these Zealots come to
give you Laws: If therefore you have any value for your selves, your Posterity,
your Liberties, Property, Laws, the true Protestant Religion, the Trade, Peace,
or Honor of the English Nation, it is both your Interest, and your Duty, to
assert and stand up for the Monarchy, to support the Laws and Government to the
uttermost of your power, and by all Lawful Ways and Means to convince, persuade
and reclaim the Credulous and Mistaken, to suppress, oppose, and defeat the
Designs of these Factious dangerous Sectaries and Schismatics, for so our Laws
call them, who with fair Speeches, and flattering Pretenses, steal the Hearts
of the People like Absalom, only to exalt themselves into Sovereign Power, and
reduce you to the desperate Condition of slavery, which is always the Reward
and Issue of Rebellion.

FINIS.

