Captain Charles Newey's, Wonderful Discovery, of several Remarkable and
strange Things of great Consequence. To which is added his CASE and
VINDICATION, About his having 18 Wives, Subornation, and Hanging the Gallows in
Mourning, and other Remarkable Circumstances.
ARTICLE,
1. ABout the latter end of October 1699, the said Charles Newey, having
Occasion to go into the Country, desired Permission of his Brother, Mr. John
Newey, to leave some Trunks in his Custody, until his return, in which were
several valuable Wearing Clothes, Linen Papers, etc the said Trunks being
broke open, and diverse of the said Goods found wanting at his return, and
finding his said Brother, in stead of making him any Satisfaction, to Treat him
with very abusive and provoking Words, and having reported to Mr. Ferrour at
the Tobacco-Rowl in Newgate-market that the Captains Lady, who is of an
Unblemished Reputation, had Stole his Silver Tankard, and his having Swore the
Peace (before Sir Charles Leigh) against the said Charles Newey, and brought
Constables, and said all that Hell and Malice could Invent against the said
Charles, to Mr. Clavis the Dutch Shoo-maker (and his Neighbors) who Living
over against the Prince, and Princess in the Pell-Mell, where the World will
find it so: The said Charles made his Complaint thereof to the Justices then at
Hickes-Hall, who granting him a Search Warrant, by virtue of which some few of
the things missing were found in his said Brothers House, as can be Justified
by Mr. Phipps the Constable, who lives at the Kings-Head-Tavern near
Holborn-bars. as well as most of his Deceased Brothers Neighbors; the said
John was thereupon obliged to give Bail to appear at the next Sessions, but in
some time after the said John Newey. having been long Indisposed, fell Sick and
Dyed at his own House.

2. During the Sickness of the said John Newey, the said Charles went diverse
times to his House, with a design to be Reconciled to him, but found himself
still prevented by the Malice and Instigation of his said Brothers Wife, whose
design appears to have been to hinder her Husband, who having no Children, to
leave all his Goods, Money, and Estate to herself.

3. Imediatly after the Death of the said John Newey, the said Charles
Commenced a Suit in Law against his said Brothers Widow, in order to make void
his Will by reason of his Brothers defective Judgment, at the time of his
making the same, The said Widow finding herself in Danger to be cast in a
Suite of so great Consequence, made it her Chiefest Business to find out and
Solicit against the said Charles, all such Persons, with whom she understood
him to have had any former Difference, thereby to render him incapable of of
duly Prosecuting the aforesaid depending Suite in Law.

4. In a few Days after she caused the said Charles to be Apprehended, and
Charged with diverse Notorious Crimes, viz. that of Subornation, of having Two
Wives, for Assaulting one Turner; And the better to Facilitate her Sinister,
and Malicious Designs, by rendering the said Charles Obnoxous to the
Government, he was then also charged with having Hung Tyburn with Mourning, for
the Death of her late Majesty of ever blessed Memory.

5. On the 6th of December 1699, he was accordingly Indicted for Subborning as
was Pretended, one Jones, alias Ambril, alias Clement, to Swear some
particulars, relating to Coining against the said Widow Newey; having Married
one Mrs. Barbara Ferrour, Hanah Goodridge, his pretended former Wife being
Alive; for assaulting the said Turner.

6. To prove the first Charge of Subbornation, the Evidence produced against
him, was the aforemetion'd Jones, alias Ambrel, alias Clement the truth of
whose proceedings, with the said Charles Newey was thus; One Day whilst the
said Newey was at Docters-Commons, and being in Discourse with some Persons
there concerning his Affairs with the said Widow, in which he had occasion to
mention something of the said Hannah Goodridge, the said Jones being present,
and very attentive, (as was Sworn in Court) to the said Discourse, applied
thereupon to the said Charles, telling him he knew enough of the said Widow and
Hanah Goodridge, to free the said Newey from all the Trouble, which he then
seemed to Apprehend, declaring, that he thought himself obliged both in point
of Conscience, and Justice so to do.

7. Upon which the said Newey, with the said Jones, who at that time were
altogether Strangers to each other, went before Justice Ellis, where the said
Jones voluntarily made Oath, That in the Company of one Hanwel, who is since
Hanged for Coining, and did Lodge for a considerable time at the said Widows
House; he had seen the said Widow diverse times, Melting some quantities of
Mettle, to Coin, or to that Effect, with other particulars.

8 This Jones for want of sufficient Bail, was Committed to Newgate, and being
in miserable Circumstance, was so far prevailed upon by the Enemies of the said
Charles, that at the aforesaid Trial, the said Jones pretended, that whatsover
he had Sworn before Justice Ellis, relating to the said Widow, and Hannah
Goodridge, was false, and that he was persuaded to do it by the said Charles
Newey; upon the said Trial, there was also mention made of 105 Guineas which
the said Charles Newey truly lent his Brother, some time before his Death, and
received a Note from under his said Brothers Hand for the same before Witness.
He Arrested his said Brother for the said sum before his Death, who then did
not deny it, but said he would Paid it, and forgot to take up his Note, and at
other times, that he had paid more than that came to, for the said Charles in
his Minority: But his Wife Swore in Court that there never was such a Sum Lent,
though she had owned before, that there was to several of her Neighbors; The
said Jones also Swore that the said Note was forged by the said Charles, tho it
was Impossible for Jones to know any thing, relating to the 105 Guineas, unless
by hear say; upon which Evidence, the Jury (being Neighbors) or Friends to
the said Widow, and believing what she had so often related with Tears, found
the said Charles Guilty of the said Subbornation and Forgery, tho the known
Character of this Jones, alias Ambrel, alias Clement, is that of being a common
Evidence, of having been diverse times Perjured, as appears in Mr. Coopers
Trial, for the supposed Murder of Mrs. Stout, by the Name of Clement, Page the
31, and his Perjuries in Westminster Hall; of going by several Names; of
Marrying Women for Guineas a piece, and then going to Sea,

9. For having Two Wives, the Evidence against him was one Hollingworth, who
for his Crimes in France, was marked with the Flower-de-luce, and who here
Passes, sometimes for a Priest, sometimes for a Parson, and is of a poor, but
scandalous Life and Conversation, the matter which gave ground to this Trial,
was Hannah Goodridge, formerly endeavored to Father a Bastard on the said
Charles, but failing of her Intent, used all possible Endeavors with the said
Hollingworth to pretend that he knew her to be the Wife of the said Charles,
upon Notice thereof the said Charles, went to the said Hollingworth to inform
himself of her said endeavors, upon which the said Hollingworth told him, that
as he knew of no such thing, and to free the said Newey, from any further
Apprehensions, he the said Hollingworth, was both willing and desirous to
declare the whole Truth of the said Hannah Goodridges Proceedings, and
Endeavors with him, relating to the said pretended Marriage before some
Magistrate upon Oath.

10 So by Mutual consent, the said Newey and Hollingworth first went to Mr.
Hatchres Chambers, who is of a clear Character, where he Drew himself, what he
had a mind to Swear to, which Draught of his, was produced in Court, and Oath
made by the said Hatcher, that the said Hollingsworth had been several times by
himself, at the said Hatchres Chambers to persuade him to do it, and Convince
the said Charles, that he never said he Married him, etc. And then the said
Hollingsworth, and the said Hatcher, went before Roger Merideth Esquire a Master in
Chancry, where the said Hollingsworth, made this following Oath.

I, Phillip Hollingsworth, Aged 47 Years, makes Oath, that he this Deponant
never Married Capt. Charles Newey to Hannah Goodridge Spinster, or to any other
Woman whatsoever, according to the Church of England, Church of Rome, or of any
other Church whatsoever; But this Deponant Confesses it to be True, that he
this Deponant Complied with the Malice, and ill intentions of the said Hannah
Goodridge to Prosecute the said Charles Newey, in relation to the said
pretended Marriage, in order to obtain or Extort from the said Capt. Newey, a
Maintenance, or Provision, for the said Hannah Goodridge as his pretended Wife,
Signed

Phill. Hollingsworth.
Jurat 10 die Marij 1699. Coram me, Rog. Merideth.



11. This Affidavit was produced in Court, and the said Hollingsworth Confessed
he had Sworn the same, but pretended that he was forced thereto, by the said
Charles, and in the said Trial, Swore that he Married the said Hannah, to the
said Charles, but in a Tavern, without a License, or any Witnessess being by,
but themselves, and done in Latin. The Jury found the said Charles Guilty, tho
no Mortal could belive him Married to her and keep his reason; she was a
Servant where the said Charles Lodged, and was to help him to a Fortune, by the
Interest she pretended to have, with a Young Lady, where she formerly Lived, to
carry on which Intrigue, he was in the Country with her; but when Sworn to
Cohabit with her, he was in a Noble Peers Family, which can be easily proved;
When she was asked in Court, what Portion Mr. Newey had with her, she answred
some Dishes, Kettles and a Featherbed; An Inviting Bargain.

12. The 4th Crime he was Charged with, was Hanging Tyburn with Mourning. His
Enemies thought fit not to proceed therein, being Sensible, that he could not
only make his Innocence therein appear, but also prove that the said Report
Originally was both Groundless and False; tho the said Widow Swore, the said
Charles did it, as appears by his Commitment, and that he had often
acknowledged it to her. This is the height of Wickedness, and only what she
could be Guilty of. Can there be a greater Instance of the said Charles's being
Innocent of every thing he is Charged with, that the Gallows was never Hung with
Mourning? Does any thing so much Demonstrate the said Widdow's Perjury, and
Designs in accomplishing her Brothers Ruin, that she might be sure of what she
so basely got, to his Prejudice.

13. He humbly Entreats, that it may be Observed, that the only reason, or
Motive that moved the said Widow to Charge him with, and have him Prosecuted
for these Crimes, was only to Insure herself, and the said Suite in Law,
concerning his Brothers Will: The Witness against him owned themselves
Perjured, both having Sworn the Contrary before that time, the one before
Justice Ellis, and the other before a Master in Chancrey, one under pretense,
that he did not know what an Oath meant, tho he is a known Evidence in
Westminster Hall, a Perjured one in Mr. Cooper's Trial, and a Villain by
Profession; the other that he was forced to it; Was ever Man before him forced
to Forswear himself in Chancery? He might as well be forced to Committ Murder,
and then say he did not know what he did, or Robb and say, that it was
Necessity that forced him to it; the Law has no Regard to such Excuses; The
believing on Perjured wretenes is confounding or right and wrong Converting the
very order of all things. Can any one be so easily Imposed upon, as to Imagine,
that he who will Forswear himself at one time, will not be brought to do it at
another, or when ever he finds it his Interest so to do, and that if the said
Charles, had Suborned this Fellow as is pretended, it must have been to have
kept him Company in Swearing against his Sister, which never was: Is Perjury to
be Encouraged, or a thing to bless God for, or a Subject to beg a Petition
upon, of any real use to a Society of Men. If such Wretches Oaths as these are
taken, our Judges and Juries will pass by the Guilty, and Destroy the Innocent.
A known Highway-Man when taken, has no way to come off, but his turning
Evidence, by which he will save his Life and get Money to boot; what Innocent
Persons will he not Accuse to make up his Number: If these things be suffered,
what certainty has any Man, of his Life or his Estate. Truth sure, cannot
Arragn the Justice of our Nation whose Chiefest blessings is Liberty, it would
be hard to be Englishmen, and to have no other Benefit by our Births, then the
Fresh Air, or Sun Shine; 'Its Impossible to Insert one Quarter of the
Affidavits, Letters, Notes, and what would certainly Clear him, in his
Circumstances, which are worse than, he is willing to Express, or let the World
know: Every one's Bribed to use him Ill, and get him believed the worst of Men,
the said Widow to make sure of his Ruin, she that was but a Servant Maid, to
his said Brother, by procuring him a greater Number of Enemies, and Rendering
him Obnoxous to the Government, in Charging him with Hanging the Gallows in
Mourning; having gained her Ends, (as she Imagins) in his being Thrice
Pillory'd, once before her own Door; A pretty Credit or reward for her Husbands
Favors, Burnt in the Hand, and Secured in Prison, by a Fine of 320 l. she
Judged it not Convenient to make any further use of that Alligation, least her
Malice, and sinister Proceedings should thereby be made appear: By these
proceedings, he has lost all hopes of any Benefit by his Brothers Will, is
rendered uncaple of suing for several Debts of considerable Value: Deprived of
the Expectation of a Considerable Post, which he would reason to hope for, through
the Interest that was made for him by diverse Persons of Quallity and others;
he is Robbed of his Honor and Reputation, which with great Difficulty, Hardship
and Danger, he had Purchased, and is Abridg'd of his Liberty, by a Fine which
is not in his Power to Discharge.

14. And he solomnly Protests, that if he is not perfectly Innocent, of all and
every of the aforesaid Crimes, or if he knows any other Reason, or Motive that
could induce the said Widow Newey, or the Witnesess to Charge him therewith,
besides what is already related, it being what he Vowed when he thought himself
a Dying: He beggs the Almighty may never Prosper him in this World, nor his
Sins be forgiven him in the Next.

15. As for his Comportment in regard of the Govrnment, he rests assured that
there is not one person of either Honor or Credit to be found in the whole
Kingdom, that will Charge him with the least Disrespect thereunto.

16. And though he has through Indiscretion been an Enemy to himself, yet seeing
he has never been charged in all his whole Life before his present Misfortunes
with any thing unbecoming a Gentleman, he hopes the perusal of this Case will
prove acceptable to those who through no other cause, but the Malicious
Aspersions of his Enemies, had entertaind an Evil Impression of him; the only
thing he Wishes for, is that his Enemies may never Die until they acknowledge
his Innocence, and their own Malice: the World sees and knows, that there was
not a Creature that Swore against him, but what owned himself Perjured; so he
may be Innocent, and no Affront to those who believed him Guilty: He Is
Prosecuted by a Sister in Law, who does not think her self secure till she has
his Life. Those that Reproach us with any thing we are not Guilty of, tell us
we ought to Afflict our selves, no more than if they told us we were Sick, when
we were Well. And though the said Charles did appear before Justice Ellis with
this Jones, and was often with him for the Reasons aforesaid to his great
Misfortunes, yet in that it was not alleged by his very Enemies that he did
ever make use of him at Doctors-Commons, or where else he had occasion as he
must have done; had he Subornd one who owns himself Perjured, and of no Credit,
and not to be depended upon for any one thing, all which cannot but be admitted
as a great mark of his Innocence, and being Barbarously wronged as also that he
never in the least obsconded, notwithstanding his Knowledge of his Enemies
Malice which he must have been a Mad Man not to have done had he in the least
suspected himself Guilty, of so much as of a thought of what he is Charged with.

Now let the World believe if they can, that the said Charles Newey is Guilty
of any one thing that is laid to his Charge, I say now Mr. Allen the famous
Sub-Ordinary of Newgate and a promoter of his Misfortunes is Married to his
Sister, or raither Malicious Prosecuter, But I am Dumb and shall only assert
that no Creature has never been more wronged then.

Newey.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AT the farthest House on the Left Hand, in Blew-ball Court, in
Salisbury-Court, Fleet Street, ( being the first Court on the Left Hand over
against Salisbury-Square) Gentlemen, etc. may have an Interest made to Invest
them in Employments suitable to their several Qualities and Capacities. We have
now these Places to dispose of, viz. 4 in the Country, 2 upwards of 100 l. per
Ann. good Perquisites for Life, 1 of 70 l. and 1 of 50 l. per Ann. Sallaries,
the 2 first to be acted by Deputies, the others for Life, also in the City,
viz. 2 in the Law for Life, valued at upwards of 200 l. per Ann. each, 1 of
1200 l. a Year another of 700 l. per Ann. Sallary, good Perquisites, (in the
Law, and for Life also) 3 Places of upwards of 100 l. per Ann. 5 Places of
upwards of 60 l. per Ann. Sallaries, most for Life, and may be managed by
Deputies; at the other end of the Town, 1 Place of 200 l. per Ann. 3 of upwards
of 100 l. per Ann. with many other Places too long here to Insert, but we refer
to our Bills published in most Coffee-houses. We have now an opportunity of
serving several Persons, who Write a good Hand, and can give Security. We Buy
and Sell Estates, Houses, Ground Rents, etc. procure Money on good Security
etc. We speedily and faithfully Solicit all sorts of Causes depending in the
Courts of Law and Equity, Treasury, Navy-Office, etc. For the Satisfaction of
the Public, we think fit to add, that the Original Undertaker of this Business
in England was Mr. A. C. Deceased, by whom and us (some of us being near
Relations of the said Mr. C.) it has been successfully Managed upwards of 30
Years; all other Bills pretending to our Business not being of a Years
standing. Our chief Undertaker now is a Person of Quality; well known to many
of the principal Nobility and Gentry, of this Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by Jer. Wilkins, near Fleet Street, 1700.


