Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Lambethanis Martii 16. 1674. Tho. Tomkyns.

A COMMEMORATION SERMON, Preached at DARBY, Feb. 18. 1674.

For the Honorable Colonel Charles Cavendish, Slain in the Service of King
Charles the First, before Gainsborough in the Year 1643.

By WILLIAM NAILOUR.

(...).

blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark, for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1675.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, EARL of DEVONSHIRE.
My Lord,
THese Papers take shelter under Your great Name, to You they belong of Right
as the nearest Relation.

The Person here spoke of was Your Dear Brother; You suffered much in that
Cause for which He was Slain, He was a Martyr, You was a Confessor; He fought
upon Your Expense, Your Money raised his Regiment.

If I have fallen short (as needs I must) in the Description of so brave a Man,
impute that to the Excellency of the Subject, the best Faces of all others are
the hardest to hit, to draw unto the Life.

If any ask, why I would offer to undertake this business? To them I answer,
The last words of a Dying person (the Will is such) To me are Sacred, by no
means to be neglected. I have but done my Duty, and though I fail in all points
else, however I shall hope at least to gain this, Obsequii Gloriam, the praise
of a Ready Obedience.

Knowing Your Lordships Goodness so very well, I am inclined to thinks, You
will not refuse the First Fruits of his Pen, who subscribes himself in good
earnest,

Your Lordships Most devoted, as most obliged Servant W. Nailour.
Southampton House, March 29. 1675.
2 SAMUEL iii. 38. Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen
this day in Israel?


IT IS a Law of the twelve Tables, Honoratorum virorum lauds in concione
memorantur.
Let the Names of Honorable Persons be celebrated in public Assemblies, in
Funeral Orations; and it is most equal, meet, and right that they whose Works
praise them in the gates, should be commended there too, where there is the
greatest concourse of the People. The Roman Orator viewing the Troubles which
ensued the fall of L. Crassus takes his Death at the hands of the Gods as an
Act of Grace and Favor, Sed ii tamen Remp. casus secuti sunt, ut mihi non
crepta L. Crasso a Diis immortalibus vita, sed donata mors esse videatur. Cic.
not as an expression of their wrath and indignation. When I reflect upon the
distractions, and confusions which followed the Death of Colonel Cavendish,
methinks the Powers above did not snatch away his Life in anger, but rather
conferred Death upon him in pure kindness, that so his eyes might not behold
what his great Spirit could never brook; I mean the sight of Rebels triumphing,
Usurpers domineering. A dying Emperor in Ammianus Marcellinus tells us, Humile
est coelo sideribusque conciliatum lugeri Principem.
that it is low, mean, and effeminate to moan and bewail the Death and
departure of a Princely Person, who has exchanged a corruptible Crown for one
that fades not away. All this I grant, and yet with all it is manly enough to
rehearse the brave Actions of Heroic Persons after their Death, and offer them
to the present and future Ages for imitation. That Is my business at this time,
to represent the Glorious Exit, the Honorable Fall of the truly Noble and
Valiant Charles Cavendish, this day is designed for his Commemoration. Give me
leave then to arrest your thoughts, to rouse up your Memories with this
question; Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day
in Israel?

These words were uttered by David upon the death of Abner, one of great Name
among the Soldiers. I will look over the words as they lie in order with some
observation, and after that I shall apply them to my present purpose.

The first Observation I make is this, A Great man's Death passes not without a
signal remark, and public notice, the King talks of it, the Court does ring of
it; And the King said unto his Servants, Know ye not that there is a Prince
fallen, etc. Private men may steal into their graves without notice, and lie
there as obscurely as they lived here, but Great men cannot do so; thus the
light of a smaller Star may be intercepted and no body heed it, but if the Sun
is eclipsed all observe it: Great men are the main wheels in this Machine of
the World, and if they fall off they make a great alteration; whereas meaner
men are as the Dust upon these Wheels, and if that falls off who does mind it?
When the Grand Signior lay a Dying, and they asked him about his Successor, he
demanded thereupon; Will there be any World when I am dead? He thought his
Change would change the Universe. The Fall of a Great man does amuse the World,
alter its Figure, and put things into another posture: but when a Poor man
Falls we consider it no more then when one Atome in a Sunbeam strikes down
another. When a tall Ceder, or a stately Oak does fall, it is with a great
noise, but it is not so with the smaller wood, the lower shrubs. When tidings
came that the Great Pan was dead, that report was echoed with howlings and
ejulations; and the Death of a great Commander creates a Pannick fear, gives a
whole Army terror and amazement, whereas the death of a Common Soldier makes
no hubbub, is undiscerned, not lamented.

The Death of a great Person cannot go by us without notice; This then gives you
a just account of your present meeting. A great Man is fallen, I mean the
Honorable Charles Cavendish, second Son to the Right Honorable William Earl
of Devonshire deceased, and Christian his Wife my Noble Mistress. He was slain
in the Service of his Lord and Sovereign Charles the First of Blessed memory,
before Gainsborough in the Year 1643. His Body was carried to Newark, a
Garrison of the Kings, and there buried in the best manner, that is, according
to the Rites of the Church of England. The Corpse of this brave Person we have
brought to this Place to be laid in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors. Now it is
not fit such Dust as this should be hudled up in the dark, should be translated
in silence, which deserves the fairest Epitaph, the noblest Monument, the best
Encomiast. O that this Achilles had his Homer too! That the Name of Colonel
Cavendish might last with Ages, might vie with Eternity! What Seneca says of
the Stout Cannius let us engrave upon the Tomb of the undaunted Cavendish,
Dabimus te Aeternitati sacrum Caput. And that for the First Observe. The Second
follows,

Extraordinary Persons are not exempted from the Common Laws of Mortality, the
Prince and the Great man fall too, they must go the way of all Flesh, and Death
must feed upon them. Great men and Potentates of the earth are terrestrial
Deities, I have said, Ye are Gods; and all of you are Children of the most
High. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. Great men
have those that clear the passage, that prepare their way before them; but they
cannot say to Death, stand off, bear back, or if they do, that grim Sir minds
not these whifflers, but goes on his equal pace, and makes not distinction
betwixt the Poor man's Hut and the Prince's Palace. The mighty man must fall
just like the Mean, only his Death makes the greater noise, and Lucian fancied
in the shades below, his Ghost too roared the louder, otherwise he could
imagine no difference betwixt 'em. The Favorite of a King must die as sure as
he that is frowned upon at Court, Haman as well as Mordecai. Achitophel that
spoke Oracles must die as sure as Nabal that talked nonsense. The Rich man and
the Beggar must meet in the Grave ( Dives died as well as Lazarus;) the Coward
and the Courageous must mingle ashes.

Now if this be so, Then you that stand High, be not high-minded but fear. Give
me leave to say to you, what a Slave was commanded to a Roman Victor in the
hight of his Triumph, Respice futura, and hominem te esse cogita, Consider
what is to come, remember you are Mortal, It is appointed for you too once to
die, and after this the Judgment. Those who are the Keepers of our Liberties,
who shall set bounds to theirs? The thoughts of Death and Judgment will do it
most effectually, the Roman Tribunes were not so Sacred as these, the
Lacedaemonian Ephori were not so powerful. You that stand high, and live so
too, and over-drop the Shrubs about you, if you (like the Prodigal) spend your
Estate in Riot among Wanton Women, and mind not the Cries of the Poor, and that
you are their Steward; then I must advise you to read the Doom of Babylon with
trembling lest it should be yours, How much she has glorified her self, and
lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her, in the Cup which she
has filled, fill to her double. Great men must die as well as others, and they
have a greater account to give then Others have (for to whom God has committed
much, of him he will ask the more) therefore they must not be high-minded, but
fear. And, that for the second Observe. The Third ensues;

They that stand in high, stand in the most slippery places, and so are aptest
to catch a Fall; The Text tells us there is a Prince and a Great man fallen,
and it is no more then we might well look for. The Life of Man is short, of
Kings shorter, of Popes shortest. Kings have their Tasters, and it is fit they
should, auro bibitur Venenum, Poison is drunk out of the Golden Cup, whereas
none has a design upon the Poor man's Pitcher. Great men have great Estates,
and these are aptest to throw them down, like persons entangl'd in their looser
garments. Envy strikes at these men, and a rival Ambition undermines them;
some, like Pompey, can endure no Peers, and some, like Caesar, no Superiors. A
plenteous Fortune creates crudities, and makes a fat Churchyard, and constant
Felicity is a thing very hard of Digestion, if Want has killed its thousands,
this has killed its ten thousands. They that stand high are apt to be
giddy-headed, and they that are so are aptest to fall.

You then that stand upon the flat do not Envy, rather Pity those above you,
they are exposed to those winds and storms which fly over your heads; when
they are in turmoils you are at quiet. Hear one speak for all the rest and have
compassion. We Great men (says no mean Statesman) are like common Pools, to
which all the Beasts of the Forest resort, and they only exhaust and trouble
the Waters; you think we sleep upon a Pillow of Down, but there is a Stone
in it; our nights are broken, but you may rest whole ones; there is no end of
our Cares, as there is no end of our Possessions. The wearing a Crown gives the
headache, O Woman, you would not stoop to take up that rag out of the dirt, did
you but know how much trouble was wrapped up in it: these words were spoke by a
King, and were said of a Diadem. Great men (says the famous Verulam) are like
the Celestial Bodies, they have much Veneration but no Rest; but there is this
difference betwixt them, those Stars are always Fixed, these are still a
falling. It is a pitiful condition which Kings and Great men are commonly in,
so many Passions so many Masters, so many Servants so many Flatterers. Who may
say unto them, What do ye? Great men seldom hear the Truth; or if they do, He
that tells it becomes their Enemy, thus frantic people will fall foul upon
their best Physician. Offer to reprove Great men, and you offer them an
affront, they cannot bear it; tell them what will befall them if they go on in
their licentious courses and your mouth shall be stopped; Prophecy not again any
more at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court; and
Great men are Little Kings, and their Houses are Courts too in a smaller letter
and edition. You that stand upon the level, do not judge according to outward
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Consider well the case and condition
of them that stand highest and you will find cause to change your Envy into
Pity, your Admiration into Compassion. And that for the third Observation. Now
the fourth and last advances;

The holy Land is not a place privileged against the arrest of Death, it seems
they die too in the Land of Canaan, in the land of Israel, a Prince and a great
man did, and the smaller fry cannot hope to fare better. Christ died there, and
is the Disciple above his Master? it is well for him if he be as his Master.
When Man's Sin first made a breach into the World, at that breach Death
entered; and since that, Poor man can take sanctuary in no place but Death will
find and fetch him out; If you should take the wings of the morning (set out
never so early) and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Earth, yet Death would
overtake you, still you are in his Dominions. If any place would secure a man
against Death methinks it should be the Land of Canaan, which is a type of
Heaven, the Region of Immortality. But this will not do it; for I observe of
the Land of Canaan what the old Philosopher did of Rome, Here men die too. In
this the Type (the Holy Land) falls short of its Antitype (the Kingdom of
Heaven) in that Kingdom Moth and Rust do not corrupt, Death cannot break
through and steal away any, they that are there live and see God, but none here
can live and see him, we must die to do it.

Now since it is so that the best place is not privileged against the Arrest
of Death, where ever then you are look for Death, there expect it. This advice
the best of Stoics gives you, Incertum est quo te loco mors expectet; itaque
tu illam omni loco expecta. Death like Lightning enters every where, any Pore
in your whole Body is a passage big enough; and he that thinks in any place to
fence himself against Death is just as ridiculous as that Roman Emperor who
run under his Bed to shelter himself against Thunder. If you are at Sea, then
there are but three inches betwixt you and Death; if at Land, that ground you
tread on may be your Grave and long home, the place from whence you shall not
return. If you are in the City, the Bells ring out all day long; and if you
retire to your Country House, Death is never the farther off though less
thought on. If you are under the hardships of War, then Death stares you in the
face every moment; and if you wrap up your self in softness, you may remember
that the delicacies at Capua made greater havoc in an Army then the sore fight
of Cannae. When you are in Durance and laid in Chains the Iron enters into your
Soul, and a Prison is the perfect emblem of a Grave; and when you go abroad
your Keeper (I mean Death) goes along with you, is linkt unto you, Eadem catena
and custodiam and militem copulat. If you are exposed to Air and Wind the
Candle of your Life is apt to be puffed out suddenly, or at least to spend it
self so much sooner: and if you live in the Shade, under shelter, every minute
your Light grows still shorter, still nearer to the socket, quotidie morimur,
and tunc quoque cum crescimus, vita decrescit. No place, no Condition has a
privilege, has an exemption from Death and the Grave, in all places, in all
conditions wait and expect them.

And so much for the words of my Text by way of Observation; now I come to
apply them to the present occasion. And here I shall consider Abner 1. In his
Titles and Apellations [(...) a Prince, and a great one] 2. In the manner of
his Fall [and that was by a treacherous hand] 3. The place of it [and that was
in Israel] and in all these points the Noble Charles Cavendish is his Peer and
Parallel.

First, Abner was a great Prince in respect of his Command (thus he was Captain
of Readiness Host, and after that had the conduct of all Ishbosheths Forces) and
in regard of his Extraction (thus he was a near kinsman to the first King of
Israel;) for Abner was the Son of Ner, Readiness Uncle, 1 Samuel 14.50.

First, Abner was a great Prince in Respect of his Command, He is so, who has
the Legions under him, Phavorinus says with such an one there is no disputing.
They who have the Soldiery at their beck, may talk at a great rate (right or
wrong) and use the language of those younkers in Livy, that they do jus in
armis far, and omnia fortium virorum esse, that the Sword is the best divider
of Kingdoms, that they who have most Might have most Right; Our tongues are our
own we are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us? He is a great Prince
who offers to dispose of Crowns and Scepters, and does contest with and
contradict too the King of Kings in the doing of it; thus did Abner, God
Almighty by an express makes David King, but Abner for all that will set up
Ishbosheth. This Power it is Gigantick, for it gives battle to Heaven it self,
and my argument becomes unhappy by proving too much when thus I prove Abner a
great Prince, and therefore I will leave it, and proceed to another.

Secondly, Then consider Abner in point of Extraction, and so he is a great
Prince, Abner was the Son of Ner, Readiness Uncle, you may call him (if you
please) a Prince of the blood, only the Scepter departing from Readiness house he
must put Fuimus under his scutchin. Saul was an extraordinary man in Israel,
higher then the rest of the People in Place and Stature from the Shoulders
upwards, and He casts a great Luster on his near relations (such as Abner) and
they shine by his rays. When Readiness servants spoke to David about marrying
their Master's Daughter, He asked them this question, Seems it to you a light
thing to be a Kings Son in Law? And let me ask you this, Seems it to you a
light thing to be a Kings Cousin German? that was Abner, a great Prince by
virtue of his blood, nec dicendus sine cura, and not lightly to be spoke of.
Abner was a Prince and a great one, and so was Charles Cavendish, whether you
respect his Command, or his Extraction.

First, If you look upon him in his Command, So He was the Soldiers Mignion,
and his Masters Darling, designed by him for General of the Northern Horse (and
his Commission was given him) a great mark of Honor for one about five and
twenty, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights to Honor.
There was a time when he that did extraordinary things for his Lord and
Sovereign might hope to be rewarded by him in a manner extraordinary. Colonel
Cavendish was a Princely Person, and all his actions were agreeable to that
Character, he had in an eminent degree that which the Greeks call (...), the
semblance and appearance of a man made to govern. Methinks he gave this clear
indication of a great Commander, The Kings Cause lived with him, the Kings
Cause died with him; when Cromwell heard that he was Slain, he cried upon it,
We have done our Business. And yet two things (I must confess) this Commander
knew not, pardon his ignorance, He knew not how to Fly away, He knew not how
to Ask quarter. This Youthful Commander knew not how to Fly away, though an
Older did, I mean Henderson. For when this Bold Person entered Grantham on the
one side, that wary Gentleman, who should have attaqued it, fled away on the
other. He knew not how to Ask quarter, his Roman courage could not stoop to it.
If Cato thought it Usurpation in Caesar to give him his Life, Cavendish thought
it a greater for Traitors and Rebels of a common size to give him his. This
brave Hero might be oppressed (as he was at last by numbers,) but he could not be
Conquered, The dying words of the great Epaminondas will suite him, Satis vixi,
invictus enim morior. What wonders might have been expected from a Commander so
Vigilant, so Valiant, so Loyal, so Constant, had he not dropped down in his
blooming Age? But though he fell in his green years, he fell a Prince and a
great one too, in this respect Greater then Abner. For Abner that Son of Mars
deserved his Fathers epithet (...), one of both sides, first he sets up
Isbosheth, and then he deserts him. Whereas Cavendish merited such a Statue as
the Roman Senate decreed L. Vitellius, and the same Inscription, Pietatis
immobilis erga Principem, One whose Loyalty to his Great Master nothing could
shake.

Secondly, Consider the Noble Charles Cavendish in his Extraction, and so he is
a branch of that Family of which some descended that were Kings of Scotland,
this the word Fuimus joined to his maternal Coat does plainly point at. Not to
urge at this time his descent by the Fathers side from one of the Noblest
Families in England. An high Extraction to some persons is like the Dropsy,
the greatness of the man is his disease, and renders him unwieldy: but here is
a Person of great Extract free from the swelling of Greatness, as brisk and
active as the lightest Horseman that fought under him. In some parts of India
they tell us, That a Noble man accounts himself polluted if a Plebeian touch
him: but here is a person of that rank, who used the same familiarity and
frankness among the meanest of his Soldiers, the poorest miner, and among his
equals, and by stooping so low he rose the higher in the common account, and
was valued accordingly as a Prince and a Great one, thus Abner and Cavendish
run parallel in their Titles and Appellations.

Secondly, Let us consider Abner in the Manner of his Fall, that was by a
treacherous hand, and so fell Cavendish. Abner slew Asahel Joabs brother, but
it was in War, it was in his own Defense, Asahel, persued him, and could not be
diverted although Abner offered to put him by more then once: 2 Samuel 2.22.
For Abner said again to Asahel, turn thee aside from following me, wherefore
should I smite thee to the ground? But Asahel refused and fared accordingly,
for he fell by the Spear of Abner. This makes Joabs blood boil over. 2 Samuel
3.27.
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to
speak with him quietly; and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died,
for the blood of Asahel his brother. Thus fell Abner, and thus Cavendish; The
Colonels horse being mired in a bog at the Fight before Gainsborough 1643. the
Rebels surround him, and take him Prisoner, and after he was so, a base rascal
comes behind him and runs him through. Thus fell two great men by treacherous
hands, but with this difference, Abner fell upon a private Pique, Cavendish in
a National quarrel; Abner fell on the Wrong side, Cavendish on the Right, which
makes his Fall of the two the more illustrious, the more glorious. And that for
the Second particular, The manner of Abners Fall, that was by Treachery.

The Third and Last now follows, The Place of his Fall, that was in Israel.
Israel is the Place which God chose to set up his Name in, to establish his own
Worship, this Place is famous throughout the Scripture, it is the Glory of the
whole Earth, In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel. In Salem also
is his Tabernacle, and his dewlling place in Sion. Here fell Abner in his, and
Cavendish fell in our Israel, the Church of England, a Church not only
justified by her own Children, but highly applauded, wonderfully admired by
Forrainers and Strangers. Antonius de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato, (a man
rarely versed in Antiquity,) owned our Mother for a Church truly Apostolical,
and that too when he was leaving us and going to Rome. Fulgentio the Venetian
(the bosom-friend of the great Father Paul, and his successor in his
emploiment in that state) in his common discourse did often express the
superlative value, that vast esteem which he had in his breast for this Church.
And Hugo Grotius (that Prodigy of Learning) told our Ambassador in France,
That if he returned safe from Sweden (which Crown he served then under the
Character of Ambassador) he resolved to come and settle with his Wife and
Children in England, as preferring that Church very much before all other of
the Reformation. I will allege no more witnesses, the Judgment of this
Triumvirate may suffice for the Church of England. In this Church brave
Cavendish fell, and what is more then that, in this Churches quarrel. Abner
troubled Israel, though he fell in it; for he made an head, and drew his Sword
against a King of Gods choosing: but Cavendish sided with such a King, and
fought in defense of him and the Church against a generation of men, who cursed
all them bitterly that came not in to the help of the Lord against the Mighty,
this was the language of their Demagogues, thus it pleased them to Christian
Rebellion. O my Soul, enter not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly be
not thou united!

Thus I have compared Colonel Cavendish with Abner a fighting and famous man in
Israel, you see how he does equal, how he does exceed him. Peradventure what
has been said may have raised a generous Ambition. If so, you that emulate the
Name of Charles Cavendish, imitate his Virtues, then the Enemies of my Lord the
King, and those that rise up against him shall do him no harm, so long as there
is a succession of men of this Spirit and Principle to maintain and support
Kings and Crowns. That such a Race may never fail do thou grant, who art the
King of Kings, to whom we render from the bottom of our hearts in most humble
manner all Praise and Adoration both now, and ever. Amen, Amen.

THE END.

