THE Complete Mother. OR An Earnest Persuasive to all Mothers (especially those
of Rank and Quality) to Nurse their own Children.

A partu statim excipit lactandi cura. Atque hic quidem crat omni Machinarum
genere pugnadum adversus Pravam consuetudinem, sed mirum quam vulgo receptam,
qua Matres Infantulos suos conductitiis mulieribus tradunt nutriendos.

Erasm. de Matrimonio Christiano. p. 398. Nil tam praeter Naturam, quam ut
Mulier quod genuit, recuset alere.

Idem Eras. ibid. Sine eam totam, integram esse Matrem sui Filii. Permit her to
be the whole Complete Mother of her Son.

A. Gell. Noct. At. l. 12. c. 1. By HENRY NEWCOME, A. M. and Rector of
Tatten-hall in the County Palatine of Chester.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

Imprimatur,

Humf. Hody R. in Chapter P. ac D. D. Johanni Div. Provid. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Dom.

Aug. 18. 1694.

THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction. THE Author's Motives to this Undertaking, viz. Compassion
for Children injured by being Nursed by Strangers, Charity to such Mothers as
are reproached for doing their Duty, The Sense of his own Obligations to oppose
the Luxury of the Age: And hopes that such a plain Discourse may meet with some
Success. p. 1 Chap. I. The Case is briefly stated, and all those Texts of
Scripture are alleged, which relate to it: Together with the Arguments and
Inferences which result from them. p. 15 Chap. II. The great Mischiefs which
Mothers by transferring the Nursing of their Children to other Women, threaten
their Families with both in point of Succession, and that Mutual Affection
which ought to be among the several Branches of it. p 47 Chap. III. The
Inconveniences resulting to the Children themselves which are Nursed by
Strangers, in respect of their Bodies, either through the Nurses want of Care,
the Unsuitable Nourishment, or Contagious Diseases transmitted in her Milk. 62
Chap. IV. The Mischiefs which may be propagated from Mercenary Nurses to the
Minds of Children. p. 76 Chap. V. The Common Plea's for Nursing Children
abroad: Together with the Insufficiency of them, and the True Causes thereof.
p. 86 The Conclusion. A Pathetick Address to all, both Fathers and Mothers,
that they will admit the Preceding Particulars into their Serious and Impartial
Consideration. p. 98
THE INTRODUCTION.
1. CUstom like an impetuous Torrent makes its way through the firmest
Enclosures, and furiously throws down all the Bulworks of Laws, and the most
Sacred Obligations that obstruct its passage. Like a mighty Tyrant it usurps
upon Truth and Duty, and awes all into a Compliance with its violent
Government. Men live (as Seneca observes) not by Reason but by Imitation; De
beata vita. c. 1.
whence it comes to pass, that they fall upon one another by heaps, as so many
Blind-men into a Ditch. It were easy to instance in many things, strangely
unreasonable, which being recommended by Custom, have passed not only without
Control, but with Applause. I wish there were not too many popular Vices in
our own Nation, to prevent the labor of such an undertaking; Vices, which
though they have nothing to justify them besides their Commonness, have even
by that alone been able hitherto to baffle the most vigorous Attempts against
them. To mention no more, how many good Laws have been made, how many rational
and elaborate Discourses have been published both from the Pulpit and the Press
against Common Swearings, Intemperate Drinking, Black-mouthed Perjury and
Bloody Revenge? And yet with little other effect hitherto, than to give us so
many the more Instances of the Triumphs of Brutish Custom over Reason and
Religion: And to convince us that all such Attempts are as hopeless, as for one
with ten thousand, Luke 14.31.
to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand: Where the Assailant
is more likely to be condemned for his Rashness, than applauded for his Courage
and Resolution.

2. It may then be justly wondered at, how I come to be so daring, as to oppose
my weak Arms against such a mighty Current, or to undertake the controling of a
Custom, which hitherto has prevailed against all endeavors of Authority,
Reason and Eloquence far greater than I can pretend to: This I mean of Mothers
declining to Nurse their own Children, and putting them off to Strangers.
Annius Minutius the Roman Censor, is said to have took notice of it as a
strange Prodigy in his time, extremely ominous to Rome, that a Roman Lady
refusing to Nurse her own Child, gave Suck to a Puppy, that her Breasts might
with more safety be dried up by artificial Applications. But it is a thing too
common, to pass for a Prodigy among us (though I fear not less fatally ominous)
for Persons of the best Quality to run the greatest Hazards, and submit to the
most unhandsom Methods for drying up their Suck, rather than to become Nurses
to their own Children. And I find a most refined Pen (than whom none in this
Age could have been more likely to have succeeded, Ladies Calling, Part 2.
Sect. 2.. 28.
if either Reason, Eloquence, or a more charming strain of extraordinary Piety
be of any force) declining to attack this prevailing Custom, through mere
Despair of convincing by any thing that could be said.

3. But upon mature Consideration, I can find no reason why Impudence and
Obstinacy should protect any Sin from a just Reproof: Nor can I think it a
justifiable piece of Modesty to decline the defense of a good Cause, merely for
the Multitude and Confidence of its Opponents. It was brave in the Stripling
David to assault the monstrous Giant with his Sling and a few Stones; and the
Success was answerable to his Courage. And why may not I (relying on the same
God) hope for as good Success from these my slender Endeavors, since the Cause
I undertake, though it deserve the best, is sufficient to give Victory to the
meanest Advocate? Leaving therefore the Event to God's Providence, I am
encouraged to assault this stubborn and inveterate Custom.

1. By an hearty Compassion for the Infants which suffer by it.

2. For a necessary Vindication of those few honorable Ladies who have had the
Virtue and Courage by their Practice to confront it.

3. And by the Sense of my own Duty, as a Clergyman, to appear against the
Luxury of the Age.

4. For the first: I am not ashamed to own a peculiar Inclination in my self,
to love and delight in the Conversation of little Children, among whom I have
always found a most agreeable Diversion. Nor need I, since our Blessed Lord
himself gave encouragement to bring such little ones to him, was pleased to
take them in his Arms, and to propose their Innocence to our Imitation. And as
this has induced me to spend all my vacant Hours among Children for their
Improvement, as well as the gratifying of mine own Inclinations; so it makes me
the more Impatient at all those, who betray any Aversion, or are guilty of any
Unkindness toward them. And since the Children of our Nobility and Gentry are
justly reputed to be the Hopes of the next Generation, it is reasonable to be
most concerned for them; who in their Infancy generally are more Unhappy than
the Sons of Country Peasants. The Poor Tenants Child is for the most part
nursed in its own Mothers Bosom, and cherished by her Breasts, whilst the
Landlord's Heir is turned out, exiled from his Mothers embraces as soon as from
her Womb, and assigned to the Care of some Stranger, who has no other
Endearments toward it, than what are owing solely to her Interest. And such as
work for Wages, are usually not so careful how they do their Work, as to get
their Stipend; nor is a Mercinary Nurse much concerned how the Infant Improves,
provided she have a good place of it. Thus the Infants of the best Families are
most hardly used, and vast numbers of them undoubtedly destroyed. And sure I
need not despair of Pardon even from those Ladies who are most concerned in the
ensuing Reproof, since it is the result of my real and hearty Compassion for
their dear Children.

5. Besides Secondly, I have observed, that those Ladies, who contrary to this
prevailing Custom, have undertaken the Nursery of their own Babes, have often met
with unhandsom Reflections and bitter Taunts from others of the contrary
Practice, which makes the Vindication of them a necessary piece both of Justice
and Charity. A Lady that will condescend to be a Nurse, though to her own
Child, is become as Unfashionable and Ungenteel, as a Gentleman that will not
Drink, Swear and be profane; but dares be out of Fashion in leading an exactly
virtuous and sober Life. Apd if ever you saw the Modesty of such an one
assaulted by the Railery and Scorn of a Company of Debauchees, when he happens
to fall among them: You may imagine the need those few Ladies have of Courage
and Resolution, who by Nursing their own Children, expose themselves to the
Taunts and Derision of the many, who decline that Office, and look upon
themselves to be upbraided by their Examples.

6. And when I observe those few Ladies, who best discharge their Duties,
exposed to the Scoffs of such as neglect theirs; and on the other hand, reflect
on the Unhappiness of those poor Infants, whose Mothers make it a Punctilio of
State to cast them off to the Care of Strangers, I cannot but believe it a good
Office, and a few hours well bestowed, to attempt the Vindication of the best
Mothers, and to plead (with those that are otherwise) the cause of those
helpless Innocents, who are not able, unless in their inarticulate cries, to
speak for themselves. Especially

7. Since thirdly, the consideration of my own Obligations, as a Clergyman,
encourage me in this undertaking. For in the Book entitled, Cap. 13. De
Matrimonio.
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, which was composed by eight Bishops
(whereof Archbishop Cranmer and Bishop Ridley were two) eight Divines, and as
many Civil and Common Lawyers, in pursuance of an Act of Parliament, and
intended for the Government of the Reformed Church of England, and the Rules of
Ecclesiastical Courts, I find this passage. A Custom too soft and delicate has
prevailed among Wives, to discard their Offspring from their own Breasts, and
hire them out to be nursed by Strangers; which thing for the most part being
without any probable Causes, but only from an over-indulgent Fondness of their
own Bodies, it comes to pass, that to ease themselves, they shuffle off the
Honorable and Natural Pains of educating their own Children; and since this
inhumane and degenerate Sloathfulness of Mothers is the cause of many Evils, we
think it the Duty of Preachers to exhort Mothers not to desert their Offspring
which they have borne, nor to deny those the benefit of their Breasts, whom
they lately nourished in their Womb, and sustained with their own Bowels. Now
since our Reformation after it was brought to good Perfection in respect of
Worship and Doctrine, was hindered by the Death of King Edward from receiving
the Consummation which was intended in respect of Church Government and
Ecclesiastical Laws; this Book, which gives us the most authentic account what
was intended, cannot but be of great Authority with all that value the Judgment
of our first Reformers. So that I may from this conclude, not only that it is
every Preachers Duty to exhort Mothers to Nurse their own, but also that it is
the Duty of Mothers to comply with their Exhortations, and that if they do
otherwise, they betray an unjustifiable Contempt of these learned and pious
Reformers of and Martyrs for our Holy Religion.

8. To these Motives of my present undertaking I will add one more, viz. The
hopes of routing this unnatural Custom, and doing a deal of good thereby. I am
sure I have a very good Cause, and all the strength of Reason and Religion on
my side, and the Impulses of Nature to boot. I have also the more courteous and
tractable Sex to deal with, who I may promise my self, cannot all be obstinate
against the Evidences of their Duty, and the Inclinations of Natural Affection.
And why should I despair of rescuing so great a part of Mankind from the
Tyranny of an impudent Custom, who seem ready to accept of Liberty, and to wait
for some kind Deliverer to unloose their Fetters? Shall I doubt of a candid
Reception from that Sex, whom Nature has molded for Courtesy, and the
Impressions of Religion and Compassion? Especially since, as Themistocles is
said to have prevailed in his Addresses to Admelus King of the Molossi, by
bringing the King's Son in his Arms, I bring their own Children with me to
second my Persuasions by their prevailing Intercessions, or indeed not so much
to intercede for me, as to Petition for themselves.

9. But if any rebellious Lust, if Luxury, Pride or Avarice dare to appear
against me, I have the Ensigns of Divine Authority to awe them, Evidences I
mean from the Holy Scriptures and the Law of Nature to command their
Submission. And though those Books are said to be most fatally Destructive,
which convince of Duty and yet fail of persuading to it; yet what I have to
propose, seems to me so likely, not only to convince, but also to persuade,
that I hope it will do no harm but Service to the World. To conclude this
Introduction, though these Reasons prevailed to engage me to compose the
ensuing Discourse, yet for some Months I kept it by me, and could not persuade
my self to publish it, till I met with his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury's Sermons about the Education of Children lately published; wherein
he recommends this as the first and most natural Duty incumbent on Parents
toward their Children; and argues against the general neglect of it, as one of
the great and crying Sins of this Age and Nation. And when I found my self
backed by such Authority, I became incapable of fearing any Sensures, or
despairing of good Success.

CHAP. I. Wherein the Case is briefly stated, and all those Texts of Scripture
alleged which relate to it: Together with the Arguments and Inferences which
result from them.
1. IT will not be necessary to spend much time in any elaborate stating of the
Case, which I have undertaken. For it is agreed on all hands, that where there
is a natural Inability or any bodily Infirmities in the Mother ( real and not
merely pretended) that might have a pernicious Influence on her Nursery, God
who by his Providence has caused those Impediments, does in such cases
dispense with this Duty.

2. So that this is the Case, Whether all Mothers, be their Quality what it
will, who are neither disenabled by any natural Defect, nor contracted
Infirmity, are bound in Duty to give Suck themselves to their own Children.

This I affirm, and shall endeavor to evince both from the Holy Scriptures
recommending it as a Duty, the mischievous Consequences of neglecting it, and
the Insufficiency of all the usual Plea's, which are made for such neglect.
Which three general Heads shall limit my ensuing Discourse.

3. I begin with the Holy Scriptures. And because I intend all possible
plainness, without the Affectation of any artificial Method, I shall offer some
Passages to Consideration in the same order as they lie in our Bibles, and make
some obvious Remarks upon them, and such Inferences as they will fairly bear,
as I proceed.

4. And to begin with the Old Testament, the first passage we meet with to this
purpose is in Genesis 21.7. where Sarah says, Genesis 21.7.
Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given Children Suck?
For I have borne him a Son in his Old Age. We have Sarah a Nurse as well as a
Mother, though she were the Wise not of a mean Peasant, but of a mighty Prince;
a Prince so Potent, that the neighboring Kings courted his Alliance. A Prince
abounding in Wealth and Power, the Master of a numerous Family, out of which he
could number 318 Men fit to bear Arms, and all born in his House. Now the Wise
of such an one could not want Conveniences among so many Childbearing Women
that were in her Family, for the Nursing of her Son by another; she might have
pleaded either State or Business to have excused her self from the Employment;
especially being grown into years, which made her less able to undergo the
Fatigue of such an Office; and having Beauty beyond what was ordinary at her
Years, the decay of which, by the Toil and Watchings incident to a Nurse, she
might have fairly pleaded. But waving all these Plea's, she includes it her
Duty to Nurse the Fruit of her own Womb. For her words imply so much, Who would
have said to Abraham, that Sarah should have given Suck? For I have borne him a
Son, q. d. It is, I doubt nor, the Mothers Office, who bears the Child, to give
it Suck; since then I have borne Abraham a Son, I must give it Suck and Nurse
it for him. Had it been usual in those times for virtuous Mothers to decline
this Office, she would not have inferred her Nursing a Son for Abraham from her
bearing of one; whereas the one implying the other intimates a necessary
Consequence of the one from the other. And I do with the greater Confidence
urge this Argument, because it is St. Ambrose's Note on this Verse, De Abrah.
l. 1. c. 7.
The Moral use of this is, that Women are provoked to remember their Dignity,
and to give Suck to their Children. This is the proper Grace, the Honor of a
Mother, whereby she may recommend her self to her own Husband. However this is
certain, that this Pious Mother whom the Apostle proposes as a Pattern to her
Sex, and exhorts all Wives to imitate, that will do well, 1 Pet. 3.6.
and discharge Faithfully the Duties of their Relations, she not only Nurses
her Son her self, but plainly intimates, that she thought it her Duty to do so;
though she might have pleaded as many Excuses as most of them can who decline
this Office. They then that neglect the Duty, and have no better Pretenses for
such their neglect, than those which she waved as insufficient, are faulty at
least on this account, that they refuse to imitate Sarah, whom the Apostle
tells Wives they must follow, if they will do well.

5. The next Text is in Genesis Gen 49.25
49.25. where the Patriarch Jacob having foretold the numerous increase of the
Tribe of Joseph, that like a Fruitful Vine, Genesis 49.22
whose Branches spread over the wall, it should multiply into two Tribes; he
assures him that the God who had preserved and prospered him, notwithstanding
his many Afflictions from his Brethren at first, and the Egyptians afterward,
V. 25.
should Bless his Posterity with Blessings of Heaven above, Blessings of the
Deep, that lies beneath, Blessings of the Breast and of the Womb, i.e. He
would provide for him an Inheritance, fertile and well watered with Fountains
and Rivers, and a numerous Posterity to enjoy it. Where it is to be observed,
that the Blessings of the Breast and of the Womb are conjoined, and a Promise
made to this Tribe, that in order to its Increase, the Wives should be Fruitful
to bear, and Careful to Nurse their own; that God would bless it with such
Women, as both would bear a numerous Offspring and nourish their own Off-pring
with their own Breads. Whence the Inference is obvious, that as a Fruitful Wife
is a Blessing, so when she Nurses her Children she is a double Blessing to a
Family. And as it is the Duty of every one to be as great a Blessing as she can
be to her Family, so such Women must need be faulty, who after God has given
the Blessings of the Womb, refuse to complete the Felicity by the Blessings of
the Breast. The ten thousands of Ephraim, Deuteronomy. 33.17.
and the thousands of Manasseh, are the effects of these Blessings of the
Breast and of the Womb; and intimates to us, that it is a likely way to obtain
a numerous Posterity, such as Joseph's was, for Fruitful Mothers to become
themselves Careful Nurses.

6. In Exodus 2.7, 8. when Pharaoh's Daughter sends to seek out for a Nurse for
Moses, Exodus 2.7, 8.
whom she found exposed, her Maid called the Child's Mother, and to her she
committed the little Nursery. Now this may be considered, either as the Act of
the Royal Princess, the Contrivance of the Mother, or a Dispensation of Divine
Providence. If we suppose that Pharaoh's Daughter sent on purpose to enquire
out the Mother of the exposed Infant, we may conclude, she thought her the
fittest to Nurse it. If it be rather thought, that the Mother laid her Daughter
to watch and be ready if any such occasion should happen, to call her rather
than another, we have a commendable Instance of her Pious and Tender Concern
for her Son, and carnest desire to Nurse it her self, rather than any other
should ease her of that Burden, and do that work for her. But if besides either
the Princess or the Mothers Intention God by his wise Providence determined the
Messenger to apply her self to the Mother rather than any other Woman; we have
the plain Determination of God himself, that the Mother is fittest to Nurse her
own Child, and that it was best for this Infant, whom he intended for
extraordinary Service, to have the advantage of the most suitable Nurse. And it
is further observable, that tho God would have Moses trained up in Learning by
the Egyptian Doctors, that he might be better qualified for the great Charge he
was hereafter to undertake, yet he would not have him Suck Milk from an
Egyptian Nurse, which might have some bad Influence upon his Constitution and
his Manners.

7. Numb. 11.12. Moses thus expostulates with God, Have I conceived all this
People? Have I begot them? (...) is as properly spoken of the Mother as of the
Father. And Conception being peculiar to the Mother, it seems more reasonable
to render it in Analogy thereto. Have I brought them forth?
or brought them forth) That thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy
Bosom, as a Nursing Father (or There is no word in the Original for Father,
only the Participle (...) is Masculine; which yet the 72 render by (...) which
for most part is Feminine, and signifies a Nurse. And considering that
Frequently in Hebrew one Gender is put for another, It may well be rendered a
Nurse here, as more suitable to Conception and bring forth in the clause
foregoing.
as a Nurse) bears the Sucking Child to the Land, which thou swarest unto
their Fathers. Where Mosess Argument stands upon this Foundation that whosoever
has conceived and brought forth, ought to become Nurse to the Sucking Child,
and carry it in her Bosom. Unless this be granted; his Argument is invalid and
nothing to the purpose, the whole force of which seems to depend on that
Supposition. Judge then whether is more reasonable to charge Moses with an
Absurdity, or those Women with an Immorality who neglect the Duty, which he
takes for granted. He thought himself not obliged like a Nurse to bear that
froward People in his Bosom, because he had not conceived them nor brought them
forth. Thereby evidently implying, that the Mother who has conceived and
brought forth the Infant, ought (however froward it may be) to become its
Nurse, and Suckle it in her Bosom.

8. If we turn over to 1 Samuel 1.22, 23. we find, 1 Samuel 1.22, 23.
that after Hannah by her Prayers had obtained a Son, she resolves to lay aside
all other business, that she might attend this important one, the Nursing of
her Samuel. She was a Woman of great Piety, who constantly went with her
Hushand to the Sanctuary at the Feasts. Yet knowing how much God prefers Mercy
before Sacrifice, she resolves to do so too; staying at home to Nurse her Son,
as what she apprehended more acceptable to God, than to appear at his
Tabernacle with an Offering, and leave her Child at home to some Mercenary's
Care. Whence we may conclude, that even the Pretenses of Piety, which of all
others are the most plausible, are not sufficient to excuse Mothers from this
piece of Charity; and that if their Nursery should detain them for that time
from a constant Attendance on God's public Worship, he will in such a case
dispense with their absence, and accept their Charity toward their Infants
instead of Devotion to himself. Persons of Quality indeed may have such
assistance, that there can be no necessity of their confinement from Gods
House, especially since none of them but are much nearer to a Church than Ramah
was to Shiloh, Bunting's Travel of Patriarchs
which is computed to be twelve Miles, so that ordinarily they cannot have that
Plea to make. Yet if any be in such Circumstances, that either the public
Worship of God or the Nursing her Child must be neglected, she has here a
president to determine the case in favor of Charity against the specious
Objections of Devotion. And it is further observable, that Hannah's Nursing of
her first Son, was so far from hindering Fertility, that it rather procured a
Divine Benediction, which multiplied her Posterity to three Sons and two
Daughters, 1 Samuel 2.21
sufficient to rescue her from her Rivals Taunts, and rank her in the Catalogue
of fruitful Mothers. So vain is that popular Pretense, that Nursing is an
Impediment to Fruitfulness, and to be declined by great Persons for the better
securing of Succession by a numerous Posterity; for if those bear faster who
dry up their Breasts, they that Nurse their Children commonly bear longer, and
bring more up to an Healthful Maturity; which comes to pass, partly through
their greater Care, and partly through Gods Blessing on their exemplary Piety.

9. There is a Story in 1 Kings 3.21. of two Women of an infamous Character, 1.
Kings 3.21.
being styled Harlots; nor will I take the advantage some Interpreters give me,
to soften that Denomination into Victuallers; but will suppose them to have
been bad Women, yet observing something remarkably good in one of them, it is
the more to be took notice of. Now it is evident that the one of these Harlots
was a tender Mother, though she had been an unchaste Woman, and loved her Child
very well, however she came by it; and it is recorded of her, that she her self
gave it Suck. Which is an Argument, that though she had not Virtue sufficient
to secure her Chastity, yet she was not so overgrown with Vice, as to have
obliterated Natural Affection. The better of these two Harlots has the
Character of a Fond Mother, and her pleading before King Solomon, that she rose
to give her Child Suck, is an Intimation that this was a Duty of good Esteem in
those days, and that it would make something for her that she had done so. And
how can those Mothers pretend Affection to their Children, who attain not to
the Tenderness of this good-natured Harlot?

sect; 10. In the Book of Job, Job 39.16
c. 39.16. there is an elegant Description of the Ostriches stupid neglect of
her young ones, wherein this is especially took notice of, That she hardened
her self against her young ones, as though they were not hers. Whereby the
Spirit of God intimates it to be an Aggravation of Hard-heartedness to deal
hardly with those that are young, especially where natural Relation obliges to
a tender Regard: And that the nearer any come to resemble the Ostriches
Obduracy, in neglecting to take care of their Off spring, the more unnatural
and cruel they may be justly deemed. And if it be a piece of Hardship to turn
off a tender Infant to a Mercenary Nurse (as I doubt not but in the sequel of
this Discourse will be manifest) those Mothers must be accounted more Unnatural
than the Ostrich, because they have not so much Stupidity.

11. In Psalm. 29.9. the Psalmist says, Psalm. 22.9
Thou did make me hope, when I was upon my Mothers Breasts. Now hope is an
act of Reason, not to be exerted by an Infant not yet arrived to the Exercise
of Reason, yet here in a Poetical style attributed to such an one; to intimate,
that the Care God takes of Infants, and the early Provision he has made for
them, by filling their Mothers Breasts as soon as they have left her Womb, is
an Argument that Mankind is under the Care of God's Providence, and of
sufficient force to engage even Infants to hope in God, if they were capable.
And hence it is evident, that it is the Intention of the God of Nature, in
furnishing the Mother with full Breasts, to oblige her to minister thereby to
his Providence for the Preservation of her Child. Moreover the Psalmist's using
such a Phrase as this, does not only imply that he was nursed by his own
Mother, but also that it was usual in those days, for Mothers themselves to
perform that Office. The Practice of our Age would scarce allow us to express
the time of Infancy by hanging on the Mothers Breasts, wherein so few enjoy
that Privilege. And if we grant that such Idioms of Language are founded on
the prevailing Customs of Nations, we may conclude from this Phrase (and that
of Solomon's, who expresses a Brother Periphrastically, by one that sucked the
Breasts of his Mother) that it was in those days very common, Cant. 8.1.
and accounted most reasonable, that the Mother should Nurse at her Breasts all
the Children she had born in her Womb.

12. The Prophet Jeremiah exaggerates the Extremity of Famine in Jerusalem by
this Circumstance, that it had made Mothers Cruel to their Infants, and
incapable of giving them Suck, Lam. 4.23. Even the Sea Monsters draw out the
Breasts, Lam. 4.23.
they give Suck to their young ones; but the Daughters of my People is become
Cruel, like the Ostriches in the Wilderness. It Is true, it seems to be not so
much from the Hardness of their Hearts, as of the Times, that the Daughters of
Jerusalem do not that for their Offspring, which the very Seamonsters do for
theirs, and which no Creature on the Land is so much a Brute as to neglect,
except the Ostrich, whose stupidity is such, that she leaves her Eggs in the
Sand and takes no further care of them, no nor of her young ones neither, after
the heat of the Sun and of the Sand has hatched them. And nothing certainly,
but the Extremity of Famine, could make the Daughters of Jerusalem so Cruel,
that no Monster at Sea, no Brute on Land, can parallel them, except the
Ostrich. How then can they excuse themselves, who neglect their Children as
much out of Luxury, and in the midst of Plenty, as those Israelites did through
Famine? The Prophet thought this an Instance fit to exaggerate the great Misery
of a Famine, that it constrained Mothers to that which Nature most abhors. We
may then reasonably conclude, That he would have passed a very severe Censure
on those Mothers that become Cruel in the midst of Plenty; and for that very
reason too, because they abound with Plenty. They are more unnatural than
Sea Monsters, that draw out their Breasts to their young ones, whilst these
turn theirs off to some mean and Mercenary Neighbor.

13. I shall conclude my Observations out of the Old Testament, Hos. 9.14.
with that passage of the Prophet Hos. 9.14. Give them, O Lord, What will thou
give them? Give them a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts. For whether he pray
for this as a Blessing for Israel, that they may not be more miserable (in the
common Slaughter of their Country) for their Fertility, as our Lord Christ
pronounces such comparatively Happy in the Destruction of Jerusalem, that were
barren and had never born, Luke 23.29.
and whose Paps had never given, Suck. Or whether he denounce it as a Curse,
that their Women should be Barren and punished with a miscarrying Womb and dry
Breasts; which way soever we understand it, it affords us this Conclusion, that
the Spirit of God in the Scriptures makes dry Breasts as well as a miscarrying
Womb, the Periphrasis of Barrenness; thereby declaring it equally unnatural for
a Mother by artificial Applications to dry her Breasts, as to force Abortion;
and that where God gives a fruitful Womb, he expects ordinarily that the
Breasts should give Suck. God gives dry Breasts as a Curse to some, as an
Affliction to others; but they that invite that, whether Curse or Affliction,
to themselves by voluntary Applications, love not Blessing, therefore it shall
be far from them.

Thus have I lead you through the Old Testament, and showed you the laudable.
Examples it gives Mothers for Nursing their Children, and the plain Intimations
(at least) of the Divine Pleasure, that they should do likewise.

14. I proceed to set before you such passages of the New Testament as are of
the same Importance, and furnish us with some Proofs of the case proposed.

In the Gospel we read of a Woman, who in a Rapture of Admiration at Christ's
Discourses, cries out, Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps which thou have Sucked. Which
shows that she took it for granted, that the Mother of our Lord gave him Suck.
And upon this evidence, and because we find that Joseph in his Flight with his
Holy Infant into Egypt, took none other with him but the Blessed Virgin, it
has been unanimously agreed, that she was the Nurse as well as the Mother of
Christ. And since this Virgin, not only for the Nobility of her Extraction (tho
now sunk into a meaner Fortune) but especially for the Purity of her Manners,
has justly been reputed the Glory of her Sex, none can have an Example more
worthy of her Imitation. God chose not (says one of the Ancients) any ordinary
Woman to be the Mother of Christ, Apud Just. Mart quaest. and resp. ad Orthod.
q. 136. p. 375
but one that excelled all other Women in Virtue; whom he therefore pronounces
Blessed for her Virtues, for which he vouchsafed her to be his Mother. And such
eminent Virtues in this Royal Virgin recommend her as a fit Example for the
best and the greatest of her Sex to imitate.

15. In the next place it may be observed, That the Christian Religion has
adopted into Law and Duty, all those things which generally approve themselves
to the unprejudiced Reason of Mankind, Phil. 4.8.
to be things Honest, Lovely, and of good Report. Things honest ((...)) Grave,
1 Timothy 3.11.
or becoming Chaste and Virtuous Matrons. Things Lovely ((...)) which are
generally Grateful to all wise and virtuous Persons, and apt to procure Love.
Things of good Report, which are apt to procure to the Persons that do them,
and to the Religion which they profess, good Esteem and Commendation. Now I
dare appeal to all the World, whether those few Persons of Quality and Honor
are not generally looked upon with a Veneration and Esteem, who having broke
through an unreasonable Custom, and preferred the good of their Children before
a Fantastic Privilege of Greatness, become Nurses to their own Offspring. Who
does not approve of this as an Action becoming the Gravity of a Chaste Lady? In
whose Eyes is it not a Spectacle most Lovely? What virtuous and sober Persons
but think it very Praiseworthy? From this general Precept of Christianity
therefore we must conclude this generally to be the Duty of Christian Matrons.

16. That of the Apostles 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. is not here to be omitted. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children. (...).
Where two things are observable: First, That the Mother is here styled a
Nurse; for it is her own Children, not another, whom the Nurse is said to
Cherish. Whence it seems, that the Apostle taking it for granted, that the
Mother is her self the Nurse, implies it the Duty of all Mothers to undertake
that Office. Secondly, That St. Paul chooses to express his own mild and gentle
Behavior toward the Church, by a Mother Nursing her own. Which implies, that
the Mothers Care is the greatest, and her Carriage the most Tender toward her
Nursery, who is influenced by Natural Affection, and not merely by hopes of
Reward. It would have been a Disparagement to the Apostles mild and tender
Behavior toward them, to have compared him with a Mercenary Nurse, that looks
to another Child for hire, and is rarely so careful of it as its own Mother,
to whom Nature dictates the most compassionate Concern for its welfare.

17. Hitherto in the next place belongs the Character which the Apostle gives
of a Widow indeed, 1 Timothy 5.10.
who is to be maintained by the Churches Charity. He requires, among other
Virtues, that she be well reported for good Works, and that she have brought up
Children. (...).
The Greek word denotes Nursing Children. Our Lexicons cite Aristotle for the
use of it, and it is obserable, that he uses the Verb, from which this is
compounded to denote this peculiar Office of the Mother in his Oeconomicks,
which because it gives us the Judgment of that great Philosopher, Arist. Oeco.
l. 1. c. 3. (...). And (...), Acts 13.18. is in the Margent of our Bibles
rendered, Suffered them, as a Nurse bears the Child. And by Dr. Hammond,
Carried them as a Nurse; who concludes the right reading to be (...) from
(...), to do the Office of a Nurse; who not only bears the Child in her Arms,
but feeds and sustains it too, as God did the Israelites in the Wilderness.
(...) is also rendered a Nurse in the Text aforecited, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
I will here transcribe. As to their Children, says he, both Parents equally
contribute to their Generation; but their Offices are peculiar as to their
future Improvement. The Mothers Office is to Nurse, and the Fathers to Educate
or Correct. In the Judgment then of St. Paul, those Widows who had nursed their
own Children, were reputed to have done a good Work; and they that had not done
so, were judged for that very reason unworthy of the Churches Charity. And as
we may very well presume, the Apostle would not have exempted any indigent
Widow from that Privilege for no Fault; but that it was a thing Scandalous and
of very ill report, for any Christian Matron not to have nursed her own
Children.

18. I shall only add, That among the Duties of the younger Women, such as are
not yet past Child bearing, they are to be taught, That they love their
Children, Tit. 2.4. For if it be considered, that Nursing their own Children is
a very proper and natural Testimony to maternal Love, and the most likely means
not only to express but increase their natural Affection toward them; I see not
how they can evade the Obligation of this Precept. For the Law of Love obliges
a Mother to all proper Means and Ways of testifying and maintaining her Love,
and consequently to this. The greatest Ladies are bound to love their Children
as well as the meanest Beggar, and consequently to neglect no proper means of
showing and cherishing it: So that unless they deny Nursing of them to be such,
they must hence conclude it to be their Duty.

19. But before I put an end to this Chapter, it is requisite that I take
notice of some passages which seem to discountenance the Cause I have been
pleading for; least my pretermitting of them should make any to fancy it was
not for the Weakness but Cogency and Weight of the Objection that is raised
from them. I mean those Texts which mention some Nurses who were not the
Mothers of the Children whom they Nursed. Such was Deborah, Genesis 35.8. Ruth
4.10.
Rebecca's Nurse; Naomi, who became Nurse to her Grandson by Ruth;
Mephibosheth's Nurse, 2 Samuel 4.4. 2 Kings 11.2.
who let him fall as she sled; and Joash's Nurse that was hid with him.

20. Now in answer to these Instances, I shall only offer these things. 1. That
in some cases it is so far from being a necessary Duty, that it is not possible
for the Child to be nursed by its own Mother: As if she die in Childbed, or lie
under some natural Inability from the want of Nipples or Suck. And in such
cases recourse must be had to some other means for the Infants Preservation.
And for what appears to the contrary, this may be the occasion of the
Substitution of some of the Nurses abovenamed. Joash's Nurse it is probable
supplied the Office of his deceased Mother; for his Aunts Care about his
Preservation makes it likely, that his Mother was either dead before, or was
Murdered in the universal Butchery of the Royal Family by Athaliah. 2. Some of
those before named were dry Nurses, Assistants only not Substitutes to the
Mother: Such doubtless was Naomi, whose Age and long Widowhood makes it very
unlikely, that she should be able to give her Grandchild Suck. And Pareus from
Jacob's solemn Mourning at the Death of Deborah, concludes her to have been
called Rebecca's Nurse, because she had assisted her in the Nursing of her
Children, and not as if she had given her Suck; and that for this reason Jacob
after his Mothers Death, had taken her into his own Family. 3. If it be granted
most probable (as to me it seems to be) that Mephibosheth's Nurse gave him
Suck, and was substituted in the room of his Mother; this will be no
disadvantage to our Cause. For as it was his great Unhappiness to lose his
Mother betimes, so it was a greater, to be committed to such a Nurse, as by her
Carelessness (perhaps) made him a Cripple to his Death. Lastly, I cannot upon
the whole, remember one Instance out of the Holy Scriptures, of any either good
or bad Mother, who did her self deliver her Child to another to Nurse, nor is
it probable that any of the Nurses instanced above, were made such by the
Mothers of the Children themselves whilst they were living, and therefore they
reach not to Patronize their Case, who ordinarily do so.

21. Thus I have given a just and impartial account of the Testimonies of the
Holy Scripture both of the Old and New Testament, which respect our present
subject; and if they have been impartially considered, they must needs have
satisfied you, that those Mothers are most conformable to the Dictates of God's
Spirit in his Word, who themselves Nurse their own Children. And all the Favor
I desire of any Mother upon the Survey of the forementioned particulars, is to
allow her own Conscience to determine, whether God has not in his Word plainly
enough declared this to be her Duty. And then, I hope, none will be so Vain or
Impious, as to oppose Custom or the Privilege of her Rank, to such indisputable
Authority and plain Convictions of her Duty.

CHAP. II. Wherein are manifested the great Mischiefs which Mothers by
transferring the Nursing of their Children to other Women, threaten their
Families with; both in point of Succession, and that Mutual Affection which
ought to be among the several Branches of it.
1. MY proposed Method leads me how to the second part of my undertaking, viz.
To consider and represent the Mischievous Consequences which frequently result
from Mothers exposing their Children to be nursed by other Women, and cannot
otherwise be so surely prevented, as by discharging this Office themselves. And
they either respect the Family or the Child.

First, The whole Family may suffer great prejudice by this unreasonable
Custom: And that both in point of Succession, and that mutual Affection which
ought to be among the several Branches of it, and is necessary to its
flourishing Prosperity.

2. 1. The Families of the Great and the Rich especially are in danger to be
injured hereby in the Succession. None are so much concerned, as Persons of
Honor and Estates, to preserve the Succession of both to their own Offspring,
nor are any in so much danger as they to be injured that way. The poor Man
needs not fear a Supposititious Brood; for who will be desirous to obtrude a
Child on him to inherit Beggary? But if a poor Tenant have a fair Opportunity
to thrust her own or Friends Child into the room of her Landlords Heir, or can
contrive to make him pass for the Son of a Wealthy Tradesman, it requires a
deal of Honesty to withstand the Temptation. Now if it be considered how
mutable the Countenance of an Infant is; what Alterations a few days make in
the Lineaments of its Face, it may be judged no hard thing to deceive the most
Critical Mother after a Months absence. So that either if the Nurse have a mind
to make her own Child, or be hired to make some others a Fortune; or if she
have Overlaid her Nursery, and to conceal the Crime, cloth some other about
the same Age in its Spoils, perhaps the most curious Inspection may not be able
to discern the Cheat. I am sure the boorish and degenerate Rudeness of some,
who pass for the Children of very Polite, Ingenious and good humoured Parents,
give too much cause to suspect them Changlings. Nor is this a bare Supposition
without any Instances, for Valerius Maximus tells us, Val. Max. l. 9. c. 15.3.
That in the Reign of Augustus, one pretended to be the Son of his Sister
Octavia, affirming, That by reason of his great Weakness he had been changed
for the Nurses own Son. It Is true the Cheat succeeded not, yet Octavia's
putting of her Son off to be Nursed by a Stranger, gave an opportunity to
attempt it: And perhaps the reason that so few Nurses art detected in such like
Attempts, is because they frequently succeed better, being detected only where
they fail. Yet one remarkable Instance more there is, How Arthebar, or (as
others call him) Artabanus King of Epirus was more successfully imposed on,
having his Child changed at Nurse, and the Son of a mean Knight introduced into
his Family. Which Treason the Nurse at length, though too late discovering,
occasioned a Bloody War, wherein both Pretenders were slain, and the Kingdom it
self Usurped by Alexander the Brother of that Olympias, who was Alexander the
Great's Mother, And to prevent such Supposititious Bastardies, Lycurgus the
Famous Spartan Lawgiver enacted, That the noblest Spartan Women* even their
Kings Wives, should at the least Nurse their eldest Son. And Plutarch reports,
That the second Son of Themistes the seventh King of the Lacedaemonians,
succeeded his Father, only because he had been nursed by his own. Mother,
whereas the eldest had sucked the Breasts of a Stranger. Now as the Mothers
Nursing her self is a sure way to prevent any such Cheat of the Nurse; so it is
a Security to the Husband, that she has not her self, to escape the Infamy of
Barrenness., Consented to the introducing of another Child into his Family.
And it is the Note of St. Chrysostom upon Genesis 21.7. That therefore Sarah give
Suck, to make it more credible, that she was truly a Mother, least any by
reason of her Age should have suspected the Child to have been Supposititious.
For the Milk in her Breasts might satisfy the most Distrustful, that Isaac was
her genuine Offspring, and that beyond all Expectation she was become a Mother.
Hence I conclude, that the Quality of any Woman is so far from being a
reasonable Excuse from undertaking this part in the Education of her Child,
that it rather increases her Obligation. For the greatest Care ought to be
taken in preventing the Obtrusion of a Spurious Issue on the Families and
Successions, where there is the most Danger.

3. 2. I come to show Secondly, That as it is necessary to the Happiness of
every Family, that there be mutual Indearments between the several Branches of
it: So the putting of Children out to be nursed by others, is a very likely way
to hinder them, and the contrary to promote them; which I shall manifest in
these three Particulars, viz. In respect of the Mothers Affection toward the
Child, The Child's toward its Mother, and The Children of the same Parents
toward one another.

4. First, It is very unlikely that those Mothers, who transfer the Nursing of
their Children to others, should ordinarily love them as tenderly as those that
make them their own Care. A Gell. l. 12. c. 1. ad fin.
When the Infant is exiled from its Mothers sight, that warmth of Love, which
receives new Vigor from the frequent view of its Object, cools by degrees and
languishes; whilst the Interposition of other Objects soon weans her from that
poor Exile, who becomes abroad almost as much forgotten, as if it had been laid
in the Grave. It is not rare to observe, That Foster-Children are more dear to
their Nurses than their Mothers; and Mothers for the most part are fondest of
those whom they have nursed themselves. And it is too common an Observation,
That some Ladies show a greater Fondness toward their Dogs than their Children,
Ladies Calling, Part 2. Sect. 2. 26.
Showing those to all Comers, when in many days Converse one shall hear
nothing, whence it may be known that they have any Children. Concerning which
we have a remarkable Story in Plutarch, Plut. In Pencl*
How that Caesar once seeing some Strangers at Rome, who were People of Quality,
carrying up and down with them in their Arms and Bosoms young Puppy-dogs and
Munkies, and hugging and making much of them, took occasion to ask, Whether the
Women in their Country were not used to bear Children. By that Princely
Reprimand gravely reflecting upon such Persons as spend and lavish that
Affection and Kindness (which Nature has impleated in us) on Brute Creatures,
though it be due and owing only to humane Nature, those of our own Kind. Now
there can no account so likely be given of any Woman's greater Fondness, of
Brutes, than of their own Children, but that these being nursed abroad, their
Dogs are more conversant with them than they. I must confess (what a. Learned
Man objects) that many Ladies, Towerson on the Commandm. p. 237.
who place their Children abroad, are very tender of them, and sometimes more
Fond than Women of meaner Birth and Fortunes, who for the most part Nurse
themselves: Nor would I therefore be understood to intend the foregoing Censure
for all Mothers that decline this Office. In some, nay in many, I hope, Duty
and natural Affection triumph over this Temptation. However it is a Temptation
that prevails on too many, and they that are Wise, will for that reason
conclude it best and safest to avoid it. St. Ambrose made this Observation,
Amb. de Abr. l. 1. c. 7.
That Mothers generally love those best whom they have Suckled at their own
Breasts. Plut. (...), p. 3. Id. (...), p. 496.
And Plutarch concludes this the principal Intention of Nature, in giving the
Mother a Capacity of being a Nurse, and in placing her Breasts so conveniently
for the embracing of her little Nursery, that she may receive fresh Endearments
every Moment from those intimate Embraces. Nay, God himself supposes this apt
to create a great Tenderness in the Mother, when he says, Isa 49.15. Can a
Woman forget her Sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son
of her Womb? When the Woman makes the Son of her Womb her Sucking Child, or her
own Nursery, it is a thing next to impossible, that she should fail in the
Affection and Care of a Mother toward it.
And if this be granted as a most likely means to increase the Mothers Love to
her Child, she that exiles her little ones, takes the way hugely to cool, if
not quite extinguish it.

5. Secondly, This is the way to alienate the Child's Affections from its
Mother. Some Grammarians derive the Latin word Lac (Milk) from lacio (to
allure) as concluding no way so likely to allure the Child to love its Mother,
as Nursing it with her Milk. She performs indeed but half the Office, and
consequently earns but half of that Love which otherwise is due to a Mother who
only bears her Child and then turns it off. And I never yet met with any one
Instance to contradict the Observation of a Learned Prelate to this purpose,
viz. That many cruel Tyrants have killed their Mothers, Bishop Taylor's Grand
Example. p. 21. 10.
yet none ever offered Violence to his Nurse. And this shows that bearing in
the Womb is not so inviolable an Obligation to Love, as Nursing at the Breast.
We read of one of the Gracchi returning to Rome from his Victories in Asia,
that he presented his Mother with a Jewel of Silver, and his Nurse with a
Girdle of Gold; giving this reason for the preference of the latter, Roderic.
de Castro de Mulier. morbis.
That when his Mother, after his Birth, cast him off, his Nurse took him
forsaken as he was to her Breasts, and cherished him in her kind Embraces. This
is manifest, that Love desconds more strongly than it ascends, so that it is
not likely that the Child's Affections toward its Parents should exceed theirs
toward it. And therefore such a Mother has reason to expect the least Love
from her Children, who has showed the least toward them Perhaps whilst she is
in Prosperity, and stands in no need of their Love, Interest may oblige them to
carry civilly toward her: Yet it is to be suspected that they have no such
grounds in Nature, as will maintain a constant Fervor of Affection against the
Frowardness or Misfortunes of an Unnatural Mother. I do not affirm this to be a
constant Effect of that Cause, for sometimes perhaps the Mothers After-care may
make amends for the first Unkindness: Sometimes extraordinary good Nature in
the Child may conquer the Resentments of this early Neglect, or the Influences
of Divine Grace may triumph over this Temptation. It is enough for my purpose
that it is a Temptation, a Temptation which often prevails on a Graceless Child,
to requite hits Mothers Rejection of him with the like Unkindness: And this is
reason enough to oblige all Mothers to prevent it by their early Care and
Tenderness in Nursing.

6. Thirdly, As the Happiness of Families very much depends upon the mutual
Love of the several Branches of it among themselves; so the Mothers refusing
them that common Nourishment which were likely to promote it, is too justly
chargeable with the Mischiefs which result from their mutual Unkindnesses. We
read of Scipio Asiaticus, that though he rejected the Importunity of his
Brother Africanus, in behalf of ten Soldiers who were condemned for offering
Violence to the Vestals; yet he pardoned them at the request of his
Foster-Sister: And being asked the reason why he did more for his Nurses
Daughter than for his own Mothers Son, he returned this answer, I esteem her
rather to be my Mother who brought me up, than her that brought me forth and
then forsook me. Which shows both that his Nurse had more of his Love than his
Mother, and also her who sucked the same Milk, than he who had lain in the same
Womb. Plut. In Catone.
I remember Plutarch reports of Cato, that wise Roman, that as he obliged his
Wife to give her Children Suck with her own Breasts, so also to let the
Children of his Slaves Suck her too, that by partaking of the same Nourishment,
a Natural Affection might be instilled into them toward his Son. And the
frequent Instances of many great Persons Kindness and Liberality toward their
Foster-Brothers, is an Argument how prevalent this Method is, of propagating
the Streams of Love from the common Fountain of the Breast among all the
partakers of it. And the too common Observation of Fraternal Discords, as it is
matter of Melancholy Consideration, so it ought to oblige Mothers to neglect
no means any way likely to prevent them; especially to join them all at her
Breasts, that they may be more united in their Lives.

7. Thus have I demonstrated how much the good of Families obliges all Mothers,
especially Persons of Quality, to Nurse their own Children, that they may more
surely prevent all Opportunities of wronging their own Heir, of alienating
themselves from their Children, or their Children from them, or from one
another.

CHAP. III. In which is contained an account of the Inconveniences resulting
to the Children themselves that are Nursed by Strangers, in respect of their
Bodies, either through the Nurses want of Care, the unsuitable Nourishment, or
Contagious Diseases that may be transmitted in her Milk.
1. I Come now Secondly to represent the Mischiefs that threaten the Children
themelves, which are deserted by their own Mothers to be Nursed by Strangers.

It is a pretty Observation which St. Ambrose makes on Genesis 9.25. where Cham's
Curse is expressed in his Sons name, Cursed be Canaan, viz. That it is a
greater Punishment to wicked Cham to be Cursed in his Race, than in his own
Person. The Wounds which tender Parents receive in the Miseries of their
Children, are much more sensible than their own personal Calamities. This
Consideration then in all reason should touch all Mothers in the most sensible
part, and be of the greatest force with them, viz. That others Nursing of them
is likely to be extremely prejudicial to their Children, both in respett of
their Bodies and their Minds.

2. I shall in this Chapter show how the Health of the Child's Body is
endangered by putting it to a Stranger to be nursed, and that these several
ways, Either by her want of Care intending it, by yielding it unsuitable
Nourishment, or by transmitting Diseases to it.

3. A Mercenary Nurse is not likely to take so much Care of the Child as its
own Mother. In our Bibles we read of Mephiboshesth's Mishap received from his
Nurse, who letting him fall out of her Arms as she fled, made him ever after
unable to go. And who sees not how many carry about them to their death, the
Marks of their Nurses Carelessness? And no wonder, for Natural Affection will
make the Mother more watchful over and patient with the Frowardness of her own
Babe, than she can expect an Hireling to be. De Educ. lib. P. 3.
The Mother is fittest to Nurse, says Plutarch, because she will treat the
Child with more Compassion and Care, as being influenced by an inward
Tenderness, which bears date from its first being: Whereas the Love of a Nurse
is only Subdititious, the result not of Nature but of Wages. It is reasonable
to expect the Mistress of the Family more careful of her own Domestic Affairs,
than any of her Mercenary Servants, since the first is obliged by a greater
Interest than the latter; so that where the Mistress is Negligent, we do not
ordinarily expect the Maid should be more Industrious. And where the Mothers
Love can suffer a Child to be exposed, whom Nature has interested in its
Welfare, none can wonder if a Stranger neglect it. For indeed how can it be
expected, that an Hireling should endure all the Tediousnesses and
Inconveniences attending the Nursing of a little, helpless, perhaps Froward
Infant; when the Mother, to whom Natural Affection should have endeared the
Employment, out of Softness and Luxury declines it as a Burden? Or why has God
generally inspired the Mother with a greater Tenderness toward the Child, but
for this very end, That thereby she may be enabled to digest more easily the
little Vnhandsomnesses (as one phrases it) which others Will nauseate, Bishop
Taylour's Grand Example.
and submit to those Fatigues that none else will for its Preservation, whilst
her Care and Patience are doubled by her Affection? There are frequent Tragical
Instances of Infants Overlaid by Sleepy and Careless Nurses, which much more
rarely happen, where the Mother undertakes this Province her self. Methinks
then it is very reasonable thus to argue, She is fittest to Nurse the Child who
loves it best; and if the Mother is not ashamed to have it said, That any Woman
should love her Child better than her self, she must be concluded fittest to
Nurse it; and she ought to undertake that Office which requires so much
Vigilance and Patience, Care and Tenderness, as can be expected only from the
greatest Love. Nothing is more common, than for Mercenaries to let the poor
Babe Cry it self weary without regarding it, whilst the Mothers Ears would have
so affected her Heart, as to send her in all haste to quiet it. The Mother
ordinarily will spare no Pains to keep it Neat and Clean, whilst Nurses
generally are so Negligent, that Nastiness often breeds Diseases, and the keeping
of the Child Dirty, is a sure Preludium of its Funeral, When Dust is laid to
Dust, and Ashes to Ashes.

4. And here I cannot forbear to translate a passage out of a learned
Physician, Dr. Walter Harrys, in his Tract De acutis Morbis Infantum, viz. That
a worthy Divine, the Rector of Hayes, about twelve Miles from London, with
great Grief told him, that his Parish (being large and populous, and situate
in a very wholesome Air) at his first coming thither was replenished with
Infants sent abroad to be Nursed; yet in the compass of one Year he had buried
them all except two: And that the same number of Nurseries being again twice
supplied (through the Mercenary Diligence of those Women) out of London, he had
again this same Year laid them all in their Graves before their time. A. D.
1689.
So that by this account, the Citizens seem to put out their Children, not so
properly to be Nursed as to be Murdered. And I see not how they can be thought
to have a due regard of their Childrens Lives, who after such fair warning
given them by a Physician that Practices among them, and seems peculiarly
concerned for the good of Infants, resolve still to run this Hazard, and prefer
their own Ease before their Childrens Life.

5. But if the Child nursed by a Stranger be not killed by her neglect, yet
secondly it may be very much injured in its Health by the unsuitable
Nourishment which it derives from her Breasts. Galen. de sanit. tuend. l. 1. c.
7. Avicen l. 1. Fen. 3. Senner. de curat. inf. part 1. c. 1.
It is agreed upon by ancient and modern Physicians, that the Nourishment which
Infants receive in the Womb, is of the same Nature with the Milk, which, soon
after the Birth, Nature provides for it in the Breasts. And it is another
approved Rule among them, that a sudden Alteration of Diet is often Fatal, always
dangerous, especially to the Infirm and such as are unable to resist any
violent Impressions. If then we consider the waxen Tenderness of Infants (to
use Galens Expression on as well as Argument) and the Moisture of their
Constitution, Galen. de temper. l. 2. c. 1.
which makes them very susceptible of new Impressions, we must conclude that a
change of Diet immediately upon their Birth, is likely enough to have a
dangerous Influence upon them. Now there is as great Variety in Constitutions
as Faces, and consequently it will be as hard to find a Nurse of the same
Temperament with the Mother, as endued with the same Features. So that the
fatal Consequences of Strangers Nursing, may be imputed not always to their
Negligence, but sometimes to the great difference in the Constitution of the
Mother and the Nurse. For Galen peremptorily concludes, That the Child which
draws its own Mothers Breasts, uses not only the most accustomed, but also the
most proper aliment for it: Galen. de san. tuend. l. 1. c. 7. Avicen. l. 1.
Fen. 3. c. 2.
And Avicenna, That this it can best digest, and therefore it is most
convenient for it; so that if any Indisposition seize on it, the Mothers Breast
is most conducive to its Cure. And it is moreover to be observed, That for the
most part those Mothers who decline this Office, are of a delicate and finer
Mold, and Mercenary Nurses are generally robust and of a courser allay: And
though the latter may be the more Healthful, yet her Milk may for that reason
be the less suitable to the Constitution of an Infant conceived and nourished
hitherto in a Body more Fine and Tender. Brown Bread may be strong and wholesome
Food, yet not fit to be prescribed on a sudden to an infirm and delicate
Stomach, which has been long inured to Gruels and Pannado's. And if such
unsuitable Diet often prove Fatal to the Adult, there is more reason to fear,
lest it never prove otherwise to Tender Infants.

6. But the Danger is much greater, Lest Mercenary Nurses transmit some
desperate Contagion into their Nurseries. The Mothers Distemper is the most
plausible Pretense for her declining of this Office: And all conclude it very
reasonable, that in that case she forbear to Nurse, lest her Infant Suck Death
from her Breasts whose Womb gave it Life, and she propagate her Diseases to it,
together with her Milk, impregnated with the vicious Qualities of her Blood.
But then the Argument is as strong to oblige an Healthful Mother to Nurse,
least she should commit it to a Mercenary, infected with some latent Disease.
The Right Reverend Dr. Burnet Bishop of Salisbury in his Letters assures us,
Dr. Burnet's Let. 4 p. 248.
That one Mr. Gody Minister of St. Gervais in Geneva, had a Daughter then
sixteen Years old, who having a Nurse extraordinary thick of Hearing, spoke all
the little words that Children do at a Year old, but was Deaf at two years old.
Which he concludes was caused by some Vapor the Nurses Milk was charged with,
which was propagated to the Child, when she began to Suck more strongly, and to
take greater quantities of that corrupted Nourishment. But this (though a very
unhappy Infirmity) is very tolerable, in comparison of what other Infants have
by this means been infected with. For there is a Story in Dr. Ambr. Parey, Par.
de Lue Ven. c. 2.
a Famous French Chyrurgion, to this purpose, so remarkable, that I cannot but
judge it worthy to be transcribed.

7. A certain very good Citizen of this City of Paris, granted to his Wife,
being a very Chaste Woman, that conditionally she would Nurse her own Child (of
which she was lately delivered) she should have a Nurse in the House to ease
her of some part of the Labor. By ill-hap the Nurse they took was troubled
with the Venereal Disease, wherewith she Presently infected the Child, the
Child the Mother, the Mother her Husband, and he two of his Children, who
frequently accompanied him at Bed and Board, being ignorant of that Malignity
wherewith he was inwardly tainted. In the mean while the Mother, when she
observed that her Nurse-Child came not forward, but cried almost perpetually,
she asked my Counsel to tell her the cause of the Disease, which was not hard
to be done, for the whole Body thereof was replenished with Venereal Scabs and
Pustles, the hired Nurse and the Mothers Nipples were eaten in with virulent
Ulcers: Also the Fathers and the two other Childrens Bodies (whereof the one
was three and the other four Years old) were troubled with the like Pustles and
Scabs. I told them that they had all the Lues Venerea, which took its Original
and first Offspring by malign Contagion from the hired Nurse. I had them in
Cure, and by Gods help healed them all except the Sucking Child, which died in
the Cure. But the hired Nurse was soundly lashed in the Prison, and should have
been whipped through all the Streets of the City, but that the Magistrate had a
Care to preserve the Credit of the Unfortunate Family.

8. Now if it be considered how common this Disease is in our Debauched Age, we
may conclued it is only to be imputed to the Secrecy of Physicians and
Chyrurgions, that we have not fresher Instances of this Nature. And this will
be sufficient to caution all Mothers that are Healthful, rather than run the
hazard of such a Misfortune, to undergo the Fatigue of Nursing themselves. And
thus you see how many ways a Mercenary Nurse endangers the Life and Health of
your Children. And if it be an antedated Murder, by causing Abortion to hinder
the Propagation of a Man, it cannot be a less Crime, after he is born and
registered among Christians, to suffer him to die, and contribute any of these
ways to his Murder.

CHAP. IV. Wherein are showed the Mischiefs which may be propagated from
Mercenary Nurses to the Minds of Children.
1. HAving in the former Chapter showed what Harm a Child may receive in its
Body by an hired Nurse, I come in this to represent the Ill Influences such an
one may have on the Mind of her Nursery. And this (Ladies) will deserve your
more Serious Consideration, by how much the Soul of your Child is better than
its Body; especially since by the Improvements or Mis-improvements of the Mind,
Persons of Quality become extraordinary Useful or Pernicious. Remernber it is
not a Plowman, but a Nobleman or a Gentleman, that may be spoiled, and that
two ways, Either by the Diminution of the Child's Parts, or the Depravation of
his Disposition or his Manners.

2. First, The Nourishment received from the Breasts of a Mercenary Nurse, may
debase the Spirit, and diminish the Parts of a Child. The Faculties of the
Humane Soul in their Operations, depend very much upon the Disposition of the
Body in its united State. If then the Temper of the Body may be altered by
Diet, the Operations of the Mind may thereby be improved or impaired. Be the
Hand never so Skillful, the Music will not be equally Melodious, when it
strikes on a bad, as on a good Instrument. David himself, says one, could not
have charmed Readiness Melancholy Spirit with the Strings of his Bow, Bishop
Taylour's Grand Example. p. 22.
or the Wood of his Spear, as he did with his Harp. If the Soul of a Nightingal
were in the Body of an Owl, its Harmonious Warbling would be changed into
hideous Screaking; Or if the Humane Soul should, according to the Fancy of
Apuleius, be lodged in the Body of an Ass, it would not be able to speak or
argue rationally, as it does in the Body of a Philosopher, being condemned to
an Instrument not tuned for such noble Harmony. Now whatever Temperament of
Body a Child has received from the Mother, if it be depraved by the Nurse,
that Alteration may deprave its Parts, and hugely impair the Operations of its
Mind. And when a Sucking Child draws its Nourishment longer from the Body of a
stupid Nurse, than it did, whilst an Embrio, from the Substance of an ingenious
Mother, there is great reason to fear, least that have a greater Influence in
forming its Constitution than this; especially happening whilst it is Young and
Tender, and very susceptible of new Impressions.

3. Cause. Holy Court. l. 1. 8. p. 29.
Causin tells us, That in the History of Germany there is a Story of a Child
taken in a Forest, and presented to the Landtgrave of Hesse, which having been
bred among Wolves, learned to go on four feet, to Hunt, divide the Prey, and
sleep with them, and was in every thing, but his shape, become a perfect Wolf.
And may not Ferity and Stupidity be derived from the Breasts of Brutish Women,
as well as from Wolves, which if any look upon the preceding Relation as a
Fable rather than an History, may pass for the Moral of it.

4. I acknowledge the great Parts and brave Souls of many young Gentlemen, who
have run an Hazard in drawing their first Nourishment from strange Nurses. But
it may be these fell into the hands of some, whose Parts and Spirits were above
their Fortune: Or perhaps though their Parts be great, yet they might have been
more Considerable, had they enjoyed the same Advantages at the Breast as in the
Womb. And any Diminution of their Parts, as well as the total loss of them, is
to be deplored; and whatever has any probable Tendency thereto avoided.
Besides there are some Instances of Children in great Families falling
infinitely short of their Parents Ingenuity, and every Mother may reasonably
fear, least hers prove another of them, if she venture on this Method for their
Education, which in frequent Instances proves Pernicious. It is reported of
Alcibiades, Plut. in Alcib.
whose Parts were advanced so far above the ordinary pitch of his Countrymen,
that he drew his first Nourishment from the Breasts of a Spartan Woman. Id. in
Lycur.
And the brave Spirits of those Dames made other Grecians ambitious to purchase
Nurses from Sparta for the Improvement of their Childrens Spirit. I leave it
therefore, Ladies, to your Consideration, whether it be safe to suffer your
Children to Suck the Breasts of any Woman less Ingenious than your selves, much
less such stupid Women, as in respect of Parts and Spirits you would be very
loath to have them resemble, least your generous Plants set in a barren and
cankered Soil, degenerate and become Unfruitful.

5. But Secondly, It ought further to be considered, Whether the Suck of a
Mercenary Nurse may not corrupt the Disposition of the Infants Soul, and
deprave its Manners. For whosoever impartially considers it, will find great
reason to fear, least the Child imbibe the Nurses ill Conditions, together with
her Milk. Though Virtue is a Supernatural Perfection, added to our Nature in
this State of Depravation by the Influences of Divine Grace, yet some
Inclinations to it may be owing to the Temper of the Body, and propagated by a
Communication of Spirits in the Nourishment. Much more may Vicious
Dispositions, which are Natural, and depend more upon the Temper of the Blood
and Spirits. The Peevishness, the Lust, the Pride, the Stubbornness or Baseness
of a Nurse, receive great Encouragement from the Constitution of her Body,
which being in some measure propagated to her Nursery, gives it also a great
and Unhappy Propensity to the same Vices. This so far prevailed with the Mother
of St. Bernard, Guil. Abb. in vit. Bern. l. 1. c. 1.
that she would not let her Son draw any Breasts but her own, least he should
draw from them some Contagion of Vice. And the common Proverb, which expresses
an Inveterate Habit of Vice, By drinking it in with the Mothers Milk, being
grounded on universal Consent, gives great Authority to this Notion.

6. And Dion Cassius gives this account of the Prodigious Cruelty of Caligula,
who was the Son of the Famous Germanicus and Agrippina the Daughter of M.
Agrippa, two as Virtuous and Generous Persons as Heathen Rome could boast of.
That to the end he might be of a Martial Disposition, they committed him to a
Masculine Nurse, one that was Hairy on the Face like a Man, drew the long Bow,
run at the Ring, managed the great Horse, and was in all things most Cruelly
and Mischievously inclined. And from such a Nurse he became so in love with
Blood, that he not only delighted to be present at the Execution of Criminals,
but would lick the very Blood of the Weapons wherewith they were executed. And
Tiberius, who was such a Monster for Leachery, is said to have been Nursed by
one no less famous for Unchastity than the other for Cruelty. And I knew a
Gentleman, who had been very Sandalous in his Life for Whoredom, and confessed
in my presence, that his first Debauch was at Fourteen, with and through the
Enticements of his Lustful Nurse. Who would not think his Parents to blame, for
turning him off to such a Monster? Since from his Mother perhaps he might have
Sucked a more Happy Constitution, she being a very Chaste and Virtuous Woman.

7. Consider then, Ladies, what Assurance you have, that the Mercenary Nurse is
not of a Vicious Disposition, and conclude it your Duty, not to put off your
Child to any other, unless one from whom it may imbibe better Qualities than
from your selves. And since few of those Nicer Dames, who decline this Office,
think better of others than of themselves, I hope they will not be so unkind,
as to venture their Children abroad, where they may be likely to draw in a
Disposition to those Vices which they most abhor. I am much inclined to
subscribe to the Opinion of Wise Cato, Plut. in Catone.
That for the most part Noble Matrons are endued with more Virtuous
Inclinations than the meaner sort. And methinks for that reason they ought not
to place out their Children with any Women of baser Allay, and less Virtuous
Dispositions.

8. And thus I have given you an account of the probable Mischievous
Consequences of Nursing Children abroad, which are sufficient to persuade all
that truly love their Family, or their Children, to forego that unjustifiable
Custom. Unjustifiable I say, for I am sure none can justify themselves either
in point of Prudence or Duty, if they still adhere to it. And this leads me to
the last part of my undertaking, which shall be the subject of the next
Chapter, The Insufficiency of the common Excuses alleged by those that decline
the Nursing of their own Children.

CHAP. V. In which are mentioned the Common Plea's for Nursing Children abroad:
Together with the Insufficiency of them, and the true Causes thereof are
represented.
1. I Come now in the last place to remonstrare, that the Causes for which the
generality of those Mothers, that are capable and able, refuse to Nurse, are so
far from excusing, that they more evidently demonstrate and aggravate to their
Fault in so doing. For whatever Plea's are framed for them, they may be
resolved into some of these three Sins, Luxury, Covetousness or Pride.

2. First, Some of them proceed from and convince them of Luxury. For hitherto
it is reasonable to reduce the pretended Fears of diminishing their Beauty, and
prejudicing their Health by the disturbance of their Rest, and other Toils
incident to the Care of an helpless Infant. For I dare appeal to any one, who
impartially considers it, whether any thing but Luxury dictates this Pretense.
For first, There is neither Reason nor Experience on their side, who pretend
Nursing to be the Decay of a Woman's Health or Beauty. The contrary is generally
observed, That it helps the Appetite and Digestion, which is more likely to
preserve both, than destroy either. Morton Phthisiol. l. 1. c. 7.
I find it confirmed by the Experience of Learned Physicians, that often
Consumptive Persons have been cured by Nursing their Children; and such as at
other times have looked Meagre and Pale, whilst they have Nursed have been
Plump, Fleshy, and of a vivid Complexion. Whereas on the other hand, in drying
their Breasts, Women very commonly run apparent Hazards of destroying not their
Health only but their Lives. The unnatural stopping up of these Fountains,
occasions the corrupting of the Milk, and that corrupted Milk infecting the
Blood, often raises such a Ferment as produces a Fevor, or some other Fatal
Distemper. And none can think it Prudence to throw themselves into immature
Death to avoid Wrinkles.

3. Again Secondly, Granting that the Nursing of half a dozen Children should
decay the Glory of the Face a Year or two sooner, How could Beauty be better
bestowed, than in such a Work of Piety toward her own Family and Posterity? Nor
do I see how those Ladies can justify themselves against the Charge of Vanity
and Luxury, who prefer the color of their own Face before the advancing of
such important Interests. Did you ever see a vain Fop so enslaved to his neat
Clothes, that he declined Business most proper and necessary, for fear of some
little spot falling on them, or any rude Motion to disorder his Garniture?
There is as much Vanity in being a Slave to a fair Skin, as to a gaudy Suit.
The miraculous Beauty of Sarah in her old Age, and of the Blessed Virgin in
Youth, were neither so overvalued, as to deter them from being Nurses. So that
those may be concluded to value too highly the Smoothness and Superficial Glory
of their Skin, who prefer it before the greatest Good of their Posterity.

4. And Thirdly, For such as decline Nursing, For fear of having their Rest
disturbed, or being other ways overloaded, there needs no other Argument than
their own Apology, to convince them of Softness and Luxury. For what would any
one judge of a Mother, whom he should hear wishing that some one could undergo
the Sicknesses attending her Conception, the Toil of bearing her Child in the
Womb, and the Throes of Travel in her stead? Would he not conclude, That such
an one had deeply imbibed the Counsel, which Epicurus is said somewhere by
Arrian to have given his Scholars, to enjoy the Pleasures of Marriage, but by
all means avoid the trouble of Children. Now if such a Wish argue too much
Sensuality, How can they avoid that Imputation, who by throwing off as much of
the Pains of a Mother as they can, make it apparent, that it is only from the
Necessity of Nature that they decline no more? One that turns off her Child to
be Nursed by a Stranger, for fear of taking Pains with it by Day, or being
disturbed by it in the Night, evidences thereby, that she carried it in the
Womb Forty Weeks, and underwent the Pangs of Childbirth, only because Nature
in those cases could not admit of a Substitute. There is no Virtue in enduring
those Pains for your Child which you cannot avoid: And there are some Pains God
has so contrived, that they may be avoided (these I mean that attend the
Nursing of it) that by a voluntary undertaking of them, you may make it appear
how little you value your Ease, when it stands in Competition with your Duty.
For doubtless she loves her Ease too well, who will not undergo those Labors
for her own Child, which he expects another should take for Wages. Our Holy
Religion, as it requires the great est Charity in all its Professors, so it
prescribes Labors of Love; and consequently allows not of that overgreat
Tenderness to our selves, which is inconsistent with a Laborious Charity;
especially to the most natural and nearest Objects of a Mothers Charity, her
own Children.

5. Lastly, The Pretense of Inability to Nurse, is often reducible to this Head
of Luxury. It is the common Plea of those Mothers, who put their Children out
to Nurse, that either they want Nipples or Milk: And though this may be really
the case of some few, yet I am persuaded, not of all that pretend it. Such dry
Breasts, as one observes, are like the Gout, which is frequent among the Rich,
but a stranger among the Poor. Few of those Women who are too Poor to hire a
Nurse, but they are able to Nurse themselves; and I make no question but many
of our Rich and Honorable Dames, who pretend to want Suck or Nipples, would
have had both if their Fortunes had been less. Now in all such, Luxury is the
real Motive, though a Natural Inability be the Pretense. I might here add one
Particular more reducible to this Head, which though many are ashamed to plead,
has yet a great Influence on them in declining their Duty: I mean the
Restraints that the Discharge of it would bring on them. They cannot Dress
exactly according to the Mode, if to give Suck they must be called so often to
open their Breast: Nor will this be consistent with the Liberty they take to
Revel and Game often till after Midnight. But if the bare Proposal of this Plea
do not convince and shame them that use it, I must despair of prevailing with
them. But since I am sure there cannot be a better Argument to this Duty, than
that it may be a means to restrain them from those Faults, I will not Despair.


6. But that those Ladies, who have no better Plea's for the Neglect of this
Duty, than these which so evidently convict them of Luxury, and too great a
Fondness of their own Ease, will by a Serious Reflection upon this
Consideration, persuade themselves rather to discharge this Duty for the future
toward their Children, than to expose themselves to just Censure, by such
Apologies for their Neglect. For (to conclude this first Cause) what is the
true difference between a Modest Wife and an Adultress? But that the first
desires to bring forth a Child to the World, to be a Servant of God, a Citizen
to the Commonwealth, and an Object for her Charity and Diligence; whilst the
latter aims at no more than the gratifying of her lend Inclinations and base
Lusts. And I need not to say, how near those Mothers come to this latter
Character, who after the Consummation of Marriage, and the Birth of a Child (as
if Lust: were all they intended) decline the Labor and the Charity it gives
them an opportunity to exercise toward it, and transfer them all upon another.

7. Secondly, There is another Plea used for the declining of this Office which
is the result of Avarice, as the former is of Luxuryr, and made use of by the
Trading part of the Nation, as those by the Gentry. The Nursing of a Child is
looked on as too great a Confinement to the Wife, who by her Inspection over
the Household Affairs, or Attendance in the Shop, may save her Husband much more
than the Hire of a Nurse amounts to. But granting this, if (as has been
showed) Nursing be the Mothers Duty, no prospect of gaining by the neglect can
supersede her Obligation to it. And if I understand the Nature of Covetousness,
it is such a Love of Gain as this, that draws one to the neglect of any
Obligation, which is not consistent with his Profit. The Question is not,
Whether it may be as Conducive to your Temporal Interest, but whether it be as
Consistent with your Duty, to put out your Child to a Stranger, as to Nurse it
your self. And if Avarice be excluded from the Consult, you must conclude, that
other business ought to give place to this, which is so properly the Business
of a Mother. For unless you love your Child too little, and your Gain too nmch,
you will be sensible, that if your Infant be spoiled, or suffer any Prejudice
in Body or Mind, you can be no Gainers, though your Domestic Business, or your
Shop should be better attended.

8. Lastly, I humbly recommend it to the Consideration of all Mothers,
especially Persons of Quality, whether by adhering to this unnatural Custom,
they do not show themselves Guilty of a great deal of Pride. You think it below
you to stoop to the Office of a meaner Mother, and therefore, as a piece of
State, and Punctilio of Honor, turn off the Drudgery of Nursing to another.
For if this were not a very prevailing Motive, the Great and Honorable would
not be so universally conformable to this unreasonable Custom. But may they not
as reasonably conclude it too great a Condescension to become a Mother as a
Nurse? For there is the same equality between the most Honorable Lady and her
Child, as between the meanest Beggar and hers; and there is no more reason why
the best should think Scorn to Nurse her own at her Breast, than to bear it in
her Womb. Let then those whom God has advanced into a Superior Rank in the
World, learn to have Modest Thoughts of themselves, and they will be ashamed to
let such vain Punctilio's of Honor and Greatness influence them* Let such
remember that the Laws of God and Nature equally oblige the Lady as the Beggar,
the City as the Country Dame; and they will resolve not to plead the Fantastic
Privilege of their Quality, against the Good of their Children and their own
Duty. God expects that the greatest Lady, when she becomes a Mother, should do
the Duties of a Mother; and she certainly thinks of her self more highly than
she ought to think, whoever is so Vain, as to fancy it below her to do her
Duty. And if Luxury, Avarice and Pride, be the true Causes of this Customs
universal Prevailence, whatever are the Pretenses, it must needs be concluded
inexcusably Sinful: Which was the last thing I undertook to prove.

The Conclusion. Wherein a Pathetick Address is made to all, both Fathers and
Mothers, that they will admit the preceding Particulars into their Serious and
Impartial Consideration.
1. IT only remains, that I wind up this Discourse with a Serious Admonition to
all those whom God has honored with the Title of Parents, that they will
allow it an Impartial Consideration.

2. And first I shall speak to all Mothers, because they are Primarily and
Principally concerned. And methinks the very name might supercede the
Repetition of all other Arguments. For what is the Import of a Mother? Why is
the Earth styled the common Mother of all things, but that it Nourishes all
that it produces? And do not all other Beings the same, whether Animate or
Inanimate? Do not Grapes hang on the Vine, and Fruits on the Trees that
produced them, taking their Increase from the Sap of the Wood, to which they
owe their Original? And among Animals, Does not the Lamb know its own Dam, and
run to her Dug among a Thousand in the same Flock? Nay even Savage Lions and
Bears stand tamely to be Sucked by their young Cubs. The Philosopher Favorinus
was then in the right, A. Gell. l. 12. c. 1.
when he styled her but half a Mother, who Nourishes in her Womb what she knows
not, and consequently does not yet love, but casts it off as soon as she knows
it, and first begins to love it. Nay she is not to be reputed so much as half a
Mother, since the Nurse does longer communicate Constituent Nourishment to her
Child from her Body in Twelve Months, than the Mother in Nine. And how, Ladies,
would you resent it, if your Child should refuse to call you Mother, or own any
other Woman to be more its Mother than you? If this would grieve or vex you,
methinks you should be ashamed, that any other should have done more of the
Office of a Mother for it than your self.

3. Next to your relation to your Child, let me remind you of your Religion,
which recommends the greatest Charity to Strangers and Enemies. And how can it
be consistent with your Profession of Christianity, which obliges you to love
your Enemies, to be desective in your Love to) our nearest Relations? Look
then, unkind Mothers, look on your poor Infant newly thrust out of your Womb,
how Helpless and Forlorn it is. Hear the Lamentations wherewith it begins the
World. What are those cries, but the best ways it has to implore your Pity,
solicit your further Care, and to beg of you, now that it is excluded from the
Womb, to entertain it in your Bosom? Look on your own Breasts, which soon after
the. Birth spring full of Milk. Did Nature intend no more in this, but to put
you to the trouble of drying them? Or did it design you should supply your Babe
from that Store which she has provided? It had been much more wisely
contrived, for you to have been without Breasts and Receptacles for Milk, if
now you have them replenished, it will be the best to deprive your selves of
them. Is it not then a bold Reflection on the Divine Wisdom, to act as if you
could have contrived the parts of your Bodies better than he has done? If then
you cannot be so far. forsaken of Reason, as to imagine that the Author of your
Being intended your Breasts only for needless Excressences, much less Snares
and Temptations to your selves and others; as often as you look on them remember
their proper use; and resolve not to suffer your Child to want what Nature has
enabled you to supply it with. It is now removed out of your Womb into your
Arms, and the Meat which Nourished it there, follows it to your Breasts, that
it may be preserved by the Principles of its Constitution. Let not those parts
then serve only to minister to Pride and Wantonness, which are so apparently
intended by God for your Infants Sustentation.

4. I acknowledge there are but very few Persons of Quality that stoop to this
Employment; but this ought not to discourage you from it, but rather confirm
your Resolution to undertake it, as it gives you an opportunity to show your
selves Singularly good Mothers. Piety is then truly Heroic, when it dare own a
neglected Duty, and rather be laughed at, than deserve to be reproved. And if
Custom were a conclusive Argument in all cases, there are very few Vices but
might plead it as well as this. And your Husbands have as good a Plea for the
Vices you most dislike (such as Drunkenness, keeping Misses, etc.) as you have
for hiring other Women to Nurse your Children. Those Vices may plead Custom
among the Men, as this among the Women of Quality. Oppose then this evil Custom
among Women by your Example, and make the Experiment, whether you can hereby
teach the Men, as well as your own Sex, to be ashamed of wicked Fashions. For
who knows how much your Illustrious Example may contribute to the overthrowing
of Vile Customs, and the restoring of Credit to neglected Duties.

5. In a word, Let me beseech you to consider, how ye can answer to God, your
Families, or your Country, the Omission of this Duty: If your slighting of
Natures Dictates occasion any of the forementioned Mischiefs to the best
Families and greatest Hopes of the Nation, for such we may reckon the Children
of our Nobility and Gentry to be.

6. Especially, Let me entreat you once more to consider, how many Children
this Custom Murders every Year, and what an Hue and Cry of Innocents Blood
there is against it, which may well overtake the Abetters of it writh Divine
Vengeance. Murder is an Horrid Crime, but Parricide is worse. We detest the
Wickedness, and Cruelty of a poor Wretch, who to hide her Shame strangles her
Bastard. And how much better are those Mothers, who without so great a
Temptation (only to gratify their Luxury or Ease) resign up their Children,
the hopes of their Family and the Nation, to the Slaughter? If there were as
much Natural Affection among our Nicer Dames, as once there was in the Mothers
of Bethlehem, there would be as many Rachels among them Weeping for the
Slaughter of their Innocent Babes. Especially since not a Cruel Herod is the
Tyrant and Assassinate, but themselves. Nor is this any Vain, much less
Uncharitable Supposition, since it is obvious to common Observation, that
though those Mothers who do not Nurse, generally bring forth more Children yet;
fewer of them arrive to Maturity and survive them; which cannot be imputed so
much to the Frequency of Production since they are usually brought forth as
strong and lively as others) as to the ill Nursing of them by Strangers. And if
we justly detest their Inhumane Idolatry, who offered up their Children in the
Fiery Embraces of Moloch (since it is no more excusable to make such Sacrifices
to Luxury than to Superstition) methinks it should be a very Melancholy
Consideration to all Mothers, that the Lives of many Thousand poor Innocents,
even in this one Nation, are Sacrificed every Year for the Support of this
Luxurious and Unnatural Custom.

7. But I must confess there is one Case very necessary to be considered, which
has not yet been mentioned, viz. That very often the Father is unwilling that
his Wife should undertake this Office. And if he will not consent to her
Nursing, how can she do the Duty of a Wife, unless she wave this Office of a
Mother? In answer to this I have this only to return, That all I have hitherto
aimed at in this Discourse, is to persuade Mothers to be willing to Nurse their
Children: If this be effected, all I have to add is, That if any Husband be
Obstinate in refusing to permit it, the Wifes Duty is, to be obedient to him,
and leave him to answer for the Neglect which she cannot help. But that this
may not hereafter be any ones Case, I shall put an end to this Tract,

8. Secondly, By an earnest Address to all Fathers, that they do not put their
Wives upon such an Unhappy Strait by their Perverse Obstinacy, but rather (as
becomes their Duty) encourage them to undertake and assist them all they can in
performing this Office. You have, Sirs, an equal Concern with your Wives in all
the precedent Arguments. If the Word of God and the Law of Nature oblige them
to Nurse, it obliges you to teach them their Duty, or at least to encourage
them to practice it, and not hinder them from it. And whatever Mischiefs
redound to your Family, or your Child, by drawing the Breast of a Stranger,
they equally concern you as her, and (unless you have put off Reason, together
with Humanity and Natural Affection) must produce in you a very Sensible
Resentment. So that you are as much obliged to prevent them as she, and all the
Guilt is justly to be laid at your door, if it happen through your means that
she does not. Most of the Pains and Toil of Nursing is hers, and if your Rest
be sometimes broken, you are very Soft and Luxurious indeed, if you grudge to
endure much more than that for your Child's good. Nay you are very Churlish and
Unkind to her, if you contribute not all you can to make her Duty as easy as
may be to her. Abraham's Joy at the Weaning of his Son, Genesis 21.8.
is an Evidence he was well pleased that Sarah had Nursed him. And Elkanah, Who
before obliged his Wives constantly to accompany him to the Tabernacle, readily
consents to Hannahs stay at home for the Nursing of her Son. 1 Samuel 1.23.
No sooner does she move it, but he answers, Do as seems thee good. And if
all Husbands were in this like Abraham and Elkanah, the most Wives would be
like Sarah and Hannah, as ready, I mean, to Nurse as they. It is very rare that
any Wife refuses this Office, when her Husband is desirous she would undertake
it; much more when he persuades and encourages her, by the Provision of all
convenient Helps and Assistance for her.

9. In a word, A Custom so inveterate as this is, will not be so effectually
broke, as by a Mutual Concurrence of both the Father and the Mother. If the
Mother be desirous to Nurse, few Fathers will be so Morose and Unnatural as to
refuse their Consent: Or if the Father be Solicitous that the Mother her self
should do this Office for his Son, there are not many Women so in love with
their own Ease, or forgetful of their Childrens Advantage, as to decline it.
But where both desire it, they will be Meet-helps indeed, and afford such
mutual Encouragement, as Mill make all the Fatigues of it Easy and Delightful.
And Delightful, I dare undertake, it will be to both, if there be in them the
least Spark of Good Nature. There is such a Fascination in the Innocent
Postures, and Gradual Appearances of Reason, the pretty Smiles and confused
Jargon, the calm Endearments and unfeigned Love of these little Innocents, that
the Wisest Men have found a Satisfactory Diversion in their Company. And if any
one questions this, let him forbear to Censure, till he have made trial of this
Pleasure of a Father: As Agesilaus once answered one, Aelian. var. Hist. l. 12.
c. 15.
who laughed at him for condescending to Play with his Son. For I have known
some Fathers at first very Averse to their Wives Nursing, who after Experience
of those Pleasing Diversions, that are to be found in the constant Company of a
little Babe, would not on any Terms lose the Repetition of that Pleasure, by
turning the next abroad to a Strange Nurse.

10. Thus have I finished my Undertaking, and doubt not but I have said enough
to demonstrate my Sincere Compassion for the Exposed Infants of Great and
Honorable Parents; enough to vindicate those few Mothers, who by performing
this Office themselves, have provoked the Scoffs of the rest; and enough to
discharge mine own Duty in reminding them of theirs, according to my slender
Ability; which were all the ends I could propose to my self, with any Assurance
of Success. But if the Divine Blessing make these Papers more Successful, if it
so direct these few small Stones, taken out of a Shepherds Scrip, as to Foil a
Gigantick Inveterate Custom, and prevail on any, though never so few Ladies, to
become Nurses, I shall hope for a complete Victory from their Example, which I
cannot from my Discourse. Let but a few more truly Generous and Noble Matrons,
come in and join with those few that have already begun to set this Age a good
Example; and such a bright Constellation cannot but be took notice of, and have
a vigorous Influence to render it as Fashionable for the future, for Ladies to
Discharge this their Duty, as it is at present to Neglect it.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
FAmily Devotions for Sunday Evenings. In Two Volumes: Each containing Thirteen
Practical Discourses, with so many Prayers for two Quarters of the Year. By
Theophilus Dorrington. Printed for John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's
Churchyard.


