VOTES OF THE House of Representatives for His Majesty's Province of New York
in America.
Die Jovis Ant Merid. May 19. School.
SEveral of the Re^resentatives being returned by the Sheriffs of the Province,
pursuant to his Majesty's Writ, being met, to the Number of sixteen, viz. F^r
the City and County of New York Mr. Phillip French, Capt. Jacobus van
Cortlandt, Capt Thomas Wenham, and Capt. Johannes Kipp. For the City and County
of Albany, Mr. J^n Jansen, and Mr. Ryer Shermechorne. For the County of Vlster,
Mr. Abraham Haasbrocke. For the County of Richmond, Mr. John Teunison and Mr.
Thomas Morgan. For the County of Westchestre, Mr. John Drake and Mr. Joseph
Purdy. For the County of Suffolk, Lieut. Coll. Henry Pierson and Major Matthew
Howell. For Kings County, Mr. Myndert Courten. For Queens County, Major John
Jackson and Capt. Daniel Whitehead. They took the Oaths, and subscribed the
Test and Association before the Honorable Frederick P^illips, Coll. Stephanus
van Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, and Coll. Gabril Minveil, Esqrs. appointed
by his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, to administer the same. And also, Mr
Benjamin Jackson, appointed by his Excellency to be Clerk of the Assembly,
produced his Commission under the great Seal of the Province, and was sworn,
and signed as aforesaid.

A Message came from his Excellency by Mr. James Graham, his Majesty's Attorney
General, signifying that the House should choose a Speaker, and adjourn till
three of the Clock in the Afternoon, when his Excellency would be ready to
receive them. And accordingly, Mr. Phillp French. by the Majority of Votes, was
chosen Speaker and was conducted to the Chair. And the House adjourned till 3 a
Clock in the afternoon.

Die Jovis P. M. May 19. 1668.
The House met according to adjournment, and sent a Message by Mr. Benj.
Jackson, Clerk of the Assembly, to his Excellency to know whether he was ready
to receive them. Unto which he answered, he was ready. And accordingly the
House attended his Excellency at the Fort, where the Council being met, his
Excellency was pleased to make the following Speech, and deliver it to Mr.
Speaker in Writing, which the House ordered to be entered.

Gentlemen;
MY Voyage hither from England was very tedious, and attended with great
Hardships; but since my being among you I have endeavored to redeem that loss
of Time, by applying my self diligently to the Public business, in Duty to His
Majesty, and that I might be the better enabled to serve you.

I cannot but observe to you what a Legacy my Predecessor has left me, and what
Difficulties to strugle with, A Divided People, an Empty Treasury; a few
miserable, naked half-starv'd Soldiers, not half the Number the King allowed
pay for; the Fortifications, and even the Governors House very much out of
Repair; and in a word, Gentlemen, the whole Government out of Frame. To you
therefore I recommend the consideration of these Disorders, as best becoming
your Prudence to apply the proper Remedies, and you may be sure of my hearty
Concurrence in every thing that will conduce to the extinguishing those Heats
and Annimosities among you, which I fear have been of late years industriously
cherish't and fomented, and to the the curing all the other Disorders and
Mischiefs among you.

It has been represented to the Government in England. That this Province has
been a noted Receptacle of Pirates, and the Trade of it under no Restriction,
but the Acts of Trade violated, by the Neglect and Connivance of those whose
Duty it was to have prevented it. I hope Gentlemen, you will put all the
Discountenance imaginable on that flagacious Crime of Pyracy, which is not only
the worst fort of Robbery, but is, for the most part attended with the horrid
Sin of Murder, which is a great aggravation of that odious Practice, detested
by all the Civil Nations of the World. It Is not only injurious to the Honor of
his Majesty, and the English Nation, but also highly prejudicial to the Trade
of England, and particularly to the East India Company. And the Gentlemen of
the Council here present will bear me witness, that my Orders from his Majesty
are very strict for enquiring into, and effectually preventing for the future
that Lawless and Vile Trade of Pyracy within all my Covernment.

As I have declared my self against Pyracy, and all Unlawful Trade, so I must
assure you I will give you all the Encouragement I can possibly in carrying on
a lawful Trade, and every thing else that will make you Happy and Flourishing.

Mr. Speaker and you Gentlemen Representatives;

I have ordered all the Accounts to be laid before you, that you may see the
state of the Debts of the Government, and take such course for the Discharge of
them as you shall think fit. I wish too you would consider how to restore
Credit to the Government, which I understand is now very low, if not wholly
lost.

I have ordered the Engineer to go and visit the Fronteers, and to report to me
the State and Condition he finds the Fortifications in, which Report I intend
for you, as soon as it comes to my hands.

Gentlemen, I must remind you of the Necessity there is of finding out some
Expedient to reconcile the Parties among you. I must own to you, I set my heart
so much on it, that I shall think it the Glory of my Government to bring so
good a work to pass I desire therefore you will think of the proper Methods to
effect an entire Reconciliation among you. To be of one Faith and one Mind is
not only an excellent Scripture Rule, but also a good Maxim in Government.
Union amongst a People is the Bound of Peace, and of strength too.

You cannot but know what Abuses have been formerly in Elections of Members to
serve in the Assembly, which tends much to the Subversion of your Liberties. I
do therefore recommend to you the making a Law to provide against it, and that
you will think of such other Laws as you will stand in need of to secure to
this Province a lasting Happiness, to which I promise you my Concurrence.

I shall conclude Gentlemen, with recommending that which is chiefly incumbent
on us all, an inviolable Duty and Allegiance to his Majesty, who by his valor
has rescued us from the two greatest Plauges that ever infested the World,
Popery and Slavery, and by that, and his Wise and Temperate Government has
secu^'d us the free exercise of our holy Protestant Religion, the enjoyment of
our Liberties and Estates. And as a further Instance and Illustration of the
Glory of his Reign, His Majesty has with repeated hazards of his precious Life,
procured for Us and all Christendom, a Glorious Peace; for which, Gentlemen let
Us Address his Majesty. That he will be graciously pleased to accept of the
tender of our most humble Duty and Thanks.


And his Excellency in Council being pleased to approve of Mr Phillip French
for Speaker, the House returned, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and the
House Resolved, That his Excellency's Speech should be then Read, and it was
accordingly read to the House.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given to his Excellency for his
favorable Speech.

Major Gerhard Beekman, one of the Representatives for Kings County was sworn,
and signed the Test and Association before the Honorable Frederick Phillips,
Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, and Coll. Gabril Minveil,
Esqrs. appointed by his Excellency to administer the same.

A Petition of Dr. Samuel Staats, Capt. Johannes d' Peyster, Alderman Leonard
Lewis and Mr Ahraham Governeer, was presented to the House by Major Matthew
Howell, and read. And the House adjourned till to morrow Morning eight a Clock.

Die Veneris A. M. May 20. School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be returned to his Excellency for his
favorable Speech in the following Form, viz.

May it please your Excellency;
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Representatives of his
Majesty's Province, being very sensible of our great Obligation to your
Excellency for your most favorable Speech, think it our Duty to return our
most humble and hearty Thanks for the same, assuring you, That we shall have
all due regard to what your Excellency is pleased to recommend to us therein.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Phillip French, Speaker.

Ordered, That Mr. Gerrard Beekman, Mr. Johannes Bleker and Capt. Jacobus van
Cortland, Members of this House, do wait upon his Excellency with the Thanks of
this House. And the House adjourned till two a Clock afternoon, at the Ringing
of the bell.

Die Veneris P. M. May 20, School.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker, in behalf of this House, demand their Rights and
Privileges, viz. That none of the Members nor his Servants be Arrested nor
Molested during the Session. That they have freedom of access to your
Excellency's Person when occasion presents. That they have free liberty of
Speech, and a favorable Construction upon all Debates that arise among them.
And that this their Demand may be approved by his Excellency and Council, and
accordingly entered in the Council Books.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker give Direction that his Excellency's Speech and the
Votes of this House be printed.

Mr. Speaker and the House attended his Excellency in Council, and did demand
the Rights and Privileges of this House, which his Excellency was pleased to
accept and allow of.

Capt. Killian van Ranslaer having taken the Oaths appointed by Act of
Parliament, and subscribed the Test and Association, as appeared to the House
by Certificate from Frederick Phillips, Coll. Stephanus van Cortland, Coll.
Nicholas Bayard, and Coll. Gabriel Minveille, Esqrs. came to the House, and
took his place as Representative for the Baylwick of Ranslaers-wick. And the
House adjourned till to morrow morning eight a Clock.

Die Sabat. A. M. May 21. 16^8.
The House met according to adjournment, and Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and
the Roll being read, all the Members were present except Mr. Thomas Garton, one
of the Representatives for the County of Vlster.

The Motion being made, and the Question being put by Mr Speaker, Whether this
House shall draw up an Address to his Majesty, to Congratulate his Majesty's
safe arrival into England, and his obtaining an honorable Peace; and also
congratulating his Excellency's safe arrival into this Government, or consider
of the Petition concerning Elections and Grievances first. And it was carried
in the Affirmative, That his Majesty and his Excellency be first congratulated.
And the House adjourned till Monday two a clock in the afternoon.

Die Lunae P. M. May 23. School.
The House met according to adjournment, Mr Speaker assumed the Chair, and the
Roll being read, all the Members were present, except Mr. Thomas Garton, Mr.
John Drake and Mr. Joseph Purdy.

Ordered, That Major Gerrard Beekman, Mr. John Jansen Bleker and Mr. John
Teunison do wait upon his Excellency, and desire that a Commit of the Council
may be appointed to join with a Committee of this House to draw up an Address
to his Majesty.

James Graham, Esquire his Majesty's Attorney General, brought the following Order
of Council from his Excellency, which the House ordered to be entered, viz.

At a Council held at New York the 23d of May, School.
Present his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, etc.
UPon the Reading a Meslage of the Assembly this day, it is ordered, Coll.
Stephanus Cortland and Coll. Wilitam Smith be a Committee of the Council to
join with the Committee of the Assembly, in the forming and drawing up an
Address to his most Excellent Majesty; and that they take the Attorney General
to their Assistance.

Ordered, The Attorney General do deliver this Answer to the Assembly, and do
acquaint them that the Committee of the Council will be ready to meet their
Committee at Coll. Cortlands House at six a Clock this Evening.

By Order, David Jamison, Cl. Concilij.

Upon reading the aforesaid Order of Council, Ordered, That Major Matthew
Howell, Major John Jackson, Capt. Thomas VVenham and Capt. Daniel Whitehead be
a Committee to join with the Committee of Council at Coll. Stephen Cortlands
House at


