Philosophical Letters: OR, MODEST REFLECTIONS Upon some Opinions in NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY, MAINTAINED By several Famous and Learned Authors of this Age,
Expressed by way of LETTERS: By the Thrice Noble, Illustrious, and Excellent
Princess, The Lady MARCHIONESS of NEWCASTLE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1664.

TO HER EXCELLENCY The Lady MARCHIONESS OF NEW CASTLE, On her Book of
Philosophical Letters.
It Is Supernatural, nay it is Divine,
To write whole Volumes ere I can a line.
I'mplor'd the Lady Muses, those fine things,
But they have broken all their Fidle-strings
And cannot help me; Nay, then I did try
Their Helicon, but that is grown all dry:
Then on Parnassus I did make a sallie,
But that is laid level, like a Bowling-alley;
Invoked my Muse, found it a Pond, a Dream,
To your eternal Spring, and running Stream;
So clear and fresh, with Wit and Fancy store,
As then despair did bid me write no more.
W. Newcastle.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY The LORD MARQUIS of NEW CASTLE.
My Noble Lord,
ALthough you have always encouraged me in my harmless pastime of Writing, yet
was I afraid that your Lordship would be angry with me for Writing and
Publishing this Book, by reason it is a Book of Controversies, of which I have
heard your Lordship say, That Controversies and Disputations make Enemies of
Friends, and that such Disputations and Controversies as these, are a
pedantical kind of quarrelling, not becoming Noble Persons. But your Lordship
will be pleased to consider in my behalf, that it is impossible for one Person
to be of every one's Opinion, if their opinions be different, and that my
Opinions in Philosophy, being new, and never thought of, at least not divulged
by any, but my self, are quite different from others: For the Ground of my
Opinions is, that there is not only a Sensitive, but also a Rational Life and
Knowledge, and so a double Perception in all Creatures: And thus my opinions
being new, are not so easily understood as those, that take up several pieces
of old opinions, of which they patch up a new Philosophy, (if new may be made
of old things,) like a Suit made up of old Stuff bought at the Brokers:
Wherefore to find out a Truth, at least a Probability in Natural Philosophy by
a new and different way from other Writers, and to make this way more known,
easy and intelligible, I was in a manner forced to write this Book; for I have
not contradicted those Authors in any thing, but what concerns and is opposite
to my opinions; neither do I any thing, but what they have done themselves, as
being common amongst them to contradict each other: which may as well be
allowable, as for Lawyers to plead at the Bar in opposite Causes. For as
Lawyers are not Enemies to each other, but great Friends, all agreeing from the
Bar, although not at the Bar: so it is with Philosophers, who make their
Opinions as their Clients, not for Wealth, but for Fame, and therefore have no
reason to become Enemies to each other, by being Industrious in their
Profession. All which considered, was the cause of Publishing this Book;
wherein although I dissent from their opinions, yet does not this take off the
least of the respect and esteem I have of their Merits and Works. But if your
Lordship do but pardon me, I care not if I be condemned by others; for your
Favor is more then the World to me, for which all the actions of my Life shall
be devoted and ready to serve you, as becomes,

My LORD, Your Lordships honest Wife, and humble Servant, M. N.

TO THE MOST FAMOUS UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.
Most Noble, Ingenious, Learned, and Industrious Students.
BE not offended, that I dedicate to you this weak and infirm work of mine; for
though it be not an offering worthy your acceptance, yet it is as much as I can
present for this time; and I wish from my Soul, I might be so happy as to have
some means or ways to express my Gratitude for your Magnificent favors to me,
having done me more honor then ever I could expect, or give sufficient thanks
for: But your Generosity is above all Gratitude, and your Favors above all
Merit, like as your Learning is above Contradiction: And I pray God your
University may flourish to the end of the World, for the Service of the Church,
the Truth of Religion, the Salvation of Souls, the Instruction of Youth, the
preservation of Health, and prolonging of Life, and for the increase of
profitable Arts and Sciences: so as your several studies may be, like several
Magistrates, united for the good and benefit of the whole Commonwealth, nay,
the whole World. May Heaven prosper you, the World magnify you, and Eternity
record your fame; Which are the hearty wishes and prayers of,

Your most obliged Servant M. NEWCASTLE.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Worthy Readers,
I Did not write this Book out of delight, love or humor to contradiction; for
I would rather praise, then contradict any Person or Persons that are
ingenious; but by reason Opinion is free, and may pass without a passport, I
took the liberty to declare my own opinions as other Philosophers do, and to
that purpose I have here set down several famous and learned Authors opinions,
and my answers to them in the form of Letters, which was the easiest way for me
to write; and by so doing, I have done that, which I would have bone unto me;
for I am as willing to have my opinions contradicted, as I do contradict
others: for I love Reason so well, that whosoever can bring most rational and
probable arguments, shall have my vote, although against my own opinion. But
you may say, If contradictions were frequent, there would be no agreement
amongst Mankind. I answer; It is very true: Wherefore Contradictions are better
in general Books, then in particular Families, and in Schools better then in
Public States, and better in Philosophy then in Divinity. All which
considered, I shun, as much as I can, not to discourse or write of either
Church or State. But I desire so much favor, or rather Justice of you, Worthy
Readers, as not to interpret my objections or answers any other ways then
against several opinions in Philosophy; for I am confident there is not any
body, that does esteem, respect and honor learned and ingenious Persons more
then I do: Wherefore judge me neither to be of a contradicting humor, nor of a
vainglorious mind for dissenting from other men's opinions, but rather that it
is done out of love to Truth, and to make my own opinions the more
intelligible, which cannot better be done then by arguing and comparing other
men's opinions with them. The Authors whose opinions I mention, I have read, as
I found them printed, in my native Language, except Des Carts, who being in
Latin, I had some few places translated to me out of his works; and I must
confess, that since I have read the works of these learned men, I understand
the names and terms of Art a little better then I did before; but it is not so
much as to make me a Scholar, nor yet so little, but that, had I read more
before I did begin to write my other Book called Philosophical Opinions, they
would have been more intelligible; for my error was, I began to write so early,
that I had not lived so long as to be able to read many Authors; I cannot say,
I divulged my opinions as soon as I had conceived them, but yet I divulged them
too soon to have them artificial and methodical, But since what is past, cannot
be recalled, I must desire you to excuse those faults, which were committed for
want of experience and learning. As for School-learning, had I applied my self
to it, yet I am confident I should never have arrived to any; for I am so
incapable of Learning, that I could never attain to the knowledge of any other
Language but my native, especially by the Rules of Art: wherefore I do not
repent that I spent not my time in Learning, for I consider, it is better to
write wittily then learnedly; nevertheless, I love and esteem Learning,
although I am not capable of it. But you may say, I have expressed neither Wit
nor Learning in my Writings: Truly, if not, I am the more sorry for it; but
selfconceit, which is natural to mankind, especially to our Sex, did flatter
and secretly persuade me that my Writings had Sense and Reason, Wit and
Variety; but Judgment being not called to Counsel, I yielded to Selfconceits
flattery, and so put out my Writings to be Printed as fast as I could, without
being reviewed or corrected: Neither did I fear any censure, for Selfconceit
had persuaded me, I should be highly applauded; wherefore I made such haste,
that I had three or four Books printed presently after each other.

But to return to this present Work, I must desire you, worthy Readers, to read
first my Book called Philosophical and Physical Opinions, before you censure
this, for this Book is but an explanation of the former, wherein is contained
the Ground of my Opinions, and those that will judge well of a Building, must
first consider the Foundation; to which purpose I will repeat some few Heads
and Principles of my Opinions, which are these following: First, That Nature is
Infinite, and the Eternal Servant of God: Next, That she is Corporeal, and
partly self-moving, dividable and composable; that all and every particular
Creature, as also all perception and variety in Nature, is made by corporeal
self-motion, which I name sensitive and rational matter, which is life and
knowledge, sense and reason. Again, That these sensitive and rational parts of
matter are the purest and subtilest parts of Nature, as the active parts, the
knowing, understanding and prudent parts, the designing, architectonical and
working parts, nay, the Life and Soul of Nature, and that there is not any
Creature or part of nature without this Life and Soul; and that not only
Animals, but also Vegetables, Minerals and Elements, and what more is in
Nature, are endued with this Life and Soul, Sense and Reason: and because this
Life and Soul is a corporeal Substance, it is both dividable and composable;
for it divides and removes parts from parts, as also composes and joins parts
to parts, and works in a perpetual motion without rest; by which actions not
any Creature can challenge a particular Life and Soul to it self, but every
Creature may have by the dividing and composing nature of this self-moving
matter more or fewer natural souls and lives.

These and the like actions of corporeal Nature or natural Matter you may find
more at large described in my aforementioned Book of Philosophical Opinions,
and more clearly repeated and explained in this present. It Is true, the way of
arguing I use, is common, but the Principles, Heads and Grounds of my Opinions
are my own, not borrowed or stolen in the least from any; and the first time I
divulged them, was in the year 1653. since which time I have reviewed, reformed
and reprinted them twice; for at first, as my Conceptions were new and my own,
so my Judgment was young, and my Experience little, so that I had not so much
knowledge as to declare them artificially and methodically; for as I mentioned
before, I was always unapt to learn by the Rules of Art. But although they may
be defective for want of Terms of Art, and artificial expressions, yet I am
sure they are not defective for want of Sense and Reason: And if any one can
bring more Sense and Reason to disprove these my opinions, I shall not repine
or grieve, but either acknowledge my error, if I find my self in any, or
defend them as rationally as I can, if it be but done justly and honestly,
without deceit, spite, or malice; for I connot choose but acquaint you, Noble
Readers, I have been informed, that if I should be answered in my Writings, it
would be done rather under the name and cover of a Woman, then of a Man, the
reason is, because no man dare or will set his name to the contradiction of a
Lady; and to confirm you the better herein, there has one Chapter of my Book
called The Worlds Olio, treating of a Monastical Life, been answered already in
a little Pamphlet, under the name of a woman, although she did little toward
it; wherefore it being a Hermaphroditical Book, I judged it not worthy taking
notice of. The like shall I do to any other that will answer this present work
of mine, or contradict my opinions indirectly with fraud and deceit. But I
cannot conceive why it should be a disgrace to any man to maintain his own or
others opinions against a woman, so it be done with respect and civility; but
to become a cheat by dissembling, and quit the Breeches for a Petticoat, merely
out of spite and malice, is base, and not fit for the honor of a man, or the
masculine sex. Besides, it will easily be known; for a Philosopher or
Philosopheress is not produced on a sudden. Wherefore, although I do not care,
nor fear contradiction, yet I desire it may be done without fraud or deceit,
spite and malice; and then I shall be ready to defend my opinions the best I
can, whilst I live, and after I am dead, I hope those that are just and
honorable will also defend me from all sophistry, malice, spite and envy, for
which Heaven will bless them. In the mean time, Worthy Readers, I should
rejoice to see that my Works are acceptable to you, for if you be not partial,
you will easily pardon those faults you find, when you do consider both my sex
and breeding; for which favor and justice, I shall always remain,

Your most obliged Servant, M. N.

Philosophical Letters.
SECT. 1.
1.
MADAM,
YOu have been pleased to send me the Works of four Famous and Learned Authors,
to wit, of two most Famous Philosophers of our Age, Des Gartes, and Hobbs, and
of that Learned Philosopher and Divine Dr. More, as also of that Famous
Physician and Chemist Van Helmont. Which Works you have sent me not only to
peruse, but also to give my judgment of them, and to send you word by the usual
way of our Correspondence, which is by Letters, how far, and wherein I do
dissent from these Famous Authors, their Opinions in Natural Philosophy. To
tell you truly, Madam, your Commands did at first much affright me, for it did
appear, as if you had commanded me to get upon a high Rock, and fling my self
into the Sea, where neither a Ship, nor a Plank, nor any kind of help was near
to rescue me, and save my life; but that I was forced to sink, by reason I
cannot swim: So I having no Learning nor Art to assist me in this dangerous
undertaking, thought, I must of necessity perish under the rough censures of my
Readers, and be not only accounted a fool for my labor, but a vain and
presumptuous person, to undertake things surpassing the ability of my
performance; but on the other side I considered first, that those Worthy
Authors, were they my censurers, would not deny me the same liberty they take
themselves; which is, that I may dissent from their Opinions, as well as they
dissent from others, and from amongst themselves: And if I should express more
Vanity then Wit, more Ignorance then Knowledge, more Folly then Discretion, it
being according to the Nature of our Sex, I hoped that my Masculine Readers
would civilly excuse me, and my Female Readers could not justly condemn me.
Next I considered with my self, that it would be a great advantage for my Book
called Philosophical Opinions, as to make it more perspicuous and intelligible
by the opposition of other Opinions, since two opposite things placed near each
other, are the better discerned; for I must confess, that when I did put forth
my Philosophical Work at first, I was not so well skilled in the Terms or
Expressions usual in Natural Philosophy; and therefore for want of their
knowledge, I could not declare my meaning so plainly and clearly as I ought to
have done, which may be a sufficient argument to my Readers, that I have not
read heretofore any Natural Philosophers, and taken some Light from them; but
that my Opinions did merely issue from the Fountain of my own Brain, without
any other help or assistance. Wherefore since for want of proper Expressions,
my named Book of Philosophy was accused of obscurity and intricacy, I thought
your Commands would be a means to explain and clear it the better, although not
by an Artificial way, as by Logical Arguments or Mathematical Demonstrations,
yet by expressing my Sense and Meaning more properly and clearly then I have
done heretofore: But the chief reason of all was, the Authority of your
Command, which did work so powerfully with me, that I could not resist,
although it were to the disgrace of my own judgment and wit; and therefore I am
fully resoved now to go on as far, and as well as the Natural strength of my
Reason will reach: but since neither the strength of my Body, nor of my
understanding, or wit, is able to mark every line, or every word of their
works, and to argue upon them, I shall only pick out the ground Opinions of
the aforementioned Authors, and those which do directly dissent from mine, upon
which I intend to make some few Reflections, according to the ability of my
Reason; and I shall merely go upon the bare Ground of Natural Philosophy, and
not mix Divinity with it, as many Philosophers use to do, except it be in those
places, where I am forced by the Authors Arguments to reflect upon it, which
yet shall be rather with an expression of my ignorance, then a positive
declaration of my opinion or judgment thereof; for I think it not only an
absurdity, but an injury to the holy Profession of Divinity to draw her to the
Proofs in Natural Philosophy; wherefore I shall strictly follow the Guidance of
Natural Reason, and keep to my own ground and Principles as much as I can;
which that I may perform the better, I humbly desire the help and assistance of
your Favor, that according to that real and entire Affection you bear to me,
you would be pleased to tell me unfeignedly, if I should chance to err or
contradict but the least probability of truth in any thing; for I honor Truth
so much, as I bow down to its shadow with the greatest respect and reverence;
and I esteem those persons most, that love and honor Truth with the same zeal
and fervor, whether they be Ancient or Modern Writers.

Thus, Madam, although I am destitute of the help of Arts, yet being supported
by your Favor and wise Directions, I shall not fear any smiles of scorn, or
words of reproach; for I am confident you will defend me against all the
mischievous and poisonous Teeth of malicious detractors. I shall besides,
implore the assistance of the Sacred Church, and the Learned Schools, to take
me into their Protection, and shelter my weak endeavors: For though I am but
an ignorant and simple Woman, yet I am their devoted and honest Servant, who
shall never quit the respect and honor due to them, but live and die theirs, as
also,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and faithful Servant.

II.
MADAM,
BEfore I begin my Reflections upon the Opinions of those Authors you sent me,
I will answer first your Objection concerning the Ground of my Philosophy,
which is Infinite Matter: For you were pleased to mention, That you could not
well apprehend, how it was possible, that many Infinites could be contained in
one Infinite, since one Infinite takes up all Place Imaginary, leaving no room
for any other; Also, if one Infinite should be contained in an other Infinite,
that which contains, must of necessity be bigger then that which is contained,
whereby the Nater of Infinite would be lost; as having no bigger nor less, but
being of an Infinite quantity.

First of all, Madam, there is no such thing as All in Infinite, nor any such
thing as All the Place, for Infinite is not circumscribed nor limited: Next, as
for that one Infinite cannot be in an other Infinite, I answer, as well as one
Finite can be in another Finite; for one Creature is not only composed of
Parts, but one Part lies within another, and one Figure within another, and one
Motion within another. As for example, Animal Kind, have they not Internal and
External Parts, and so Internal and External Motions? And are not Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals enclosed in the Elements? But as for Infinites, you
must know, Madam, that there are several kinds of Infinites. For there is
first Infinite in quantity or bulk, that is such a big and great Corporeal
substance, which exceeds all bounds and limits of measure, and may be called
Infinite in Magnitude. Next there is Infinite in Number, which exceeds all
numeration and account, and may be termed Infinite in Multitude; Again there is
Infinite in Quality; as for example, Infinite degrees of softness, hardness,
thickness, thinness, heat and cold, etc. also Infinite degrees of Motion, and
so Infinite Creations, Infinite Compositions, Dissolutions, Contractions,
Dilations, Digestions, Expulsions; also Infinite degrees of Strength, Knowledge,
Power, etc. Besides there is Infinite in Time, which is properly named Eternal.
Now, when I say, that there is but one Infinite, and that Infinite is the Only
Matter, I mean infinite in bulk and quantity. And this Only matter, because it
is Infinite in bulk, must of necessity be divisible into infinite Parts, that
is, infinite in number, not in bulk or quantity; for though Infinite Parts in
number make up one infinite in quantity, yet they considered in themselves,
cannot be said Infinite, because every Part is of a certain limited and
circumscribed Figure, Quantity and Proportion, whereas Infinite has no limits
nor bounds: besides it is against the nature of a single Part to be Infinite,
or else there would be no difference between the Part and the whole, the nature
of a Part requiring that it must be less then its whole, but all what is less
has a determined quantity, and so becomes finite. Therefore it is no absurdity
to say, that an Infinite may have both Finite and Infinite Parts, Finite in
Quantity, Infinite in Number. But those that say, if there were an Infinite
Body, that each of its Parts must of necessity be Infinite too, are much
mistaken; for it is a contradiction in the same Terms to say One Infinite Part,
for the very Name of a Part includes a Finiteness, but take all parts of an
Infinite Body together, then you may rightly say they are infinite. Nay Reason
will inform you plainly, for example: Imagine an Infinite number of grains of
Corn in one heap, surely if the number of Grains be Infinite, you must grant of
necessity the bulk or body, which contains this infinite number of grains, to
be Infinite too; to wit, Infinite in quantity, and yet you will find each Grain
in it self to be Finite. But you will say, an Infinite Body cannot have parts,
for if it be Infinite, it must be Infinite in Quantity, and therefore of one
bulk, and one continued quantity, but Infinite parts in number make a discrete
quantity. I answer it is all one; for a Body of a continued quantity may be
divided and severed into fo many Parts either actually, or mentally in our
Conceptions or thoughts; besides nature is one continued Body, for there is no
such Vacuum in Nature, as if her Parts did hang together like a linked Chain;
nor can any of her Parts subsist single and by it self, but all the Parts of
Infinite Nature, although they are in one continued Piece, yet are they several
and discerned from each other by their several Figures. And by this, I hope,
you will understand my meaning, when I say, that several Infinites may be
included or comprehended in one Infinite; for by the one Infinite, I understand
Infinite in Quantity, which includes Infinite in Number, that is Infinite
Parts; then Infinite in Quality, as Infinite degrees of Rarity, Density,
Swiftness, Slowness, Hardness, Softness, etc. Infinite degrees of Motions,
Infinite Creations, Dissolutions, Contractions, Dilations, Alterations, etc.
Infinite degres of Wisdom, Strength, Power, etc. and lastly Infinite in Time or
Duration, which is Eternity, for Infinite and Eternal are inseparable; All
which Infinites are contained in the Only Matter as many Letters are contained
in one Word, many Words in one Line, many Lines in one Book. But you will say
perhaps, if I attribute an Infinite Wisdom, Strength, Power, Knowledge, etc. to
Nature; then Nature is in all coequal with God, for God has the same
Attributes: I answer, Not at all; for I desire you to understand me rightly,
when I speak of Infinite Nature, and when I speak of the Infinite Deity, sor
there is great difference between them, for it is one thing a Deitical or
Divine Infinite, and another a Natural Infinite; You know, that God is a
Spirit, and not a bodily substance, again that Nature is a Body, and not a
Spirit, and therefore none of these Infinites can obstruct or hinder each
other, as being different in their kinds, for a Spirit being no Body, requires
no place, Place being an attribute which only belongs to a Body, and therefore
when I call Nature Infinite, I mean an Infinite extension of Body, containing
an Infinite number of Parts; but what does an Infinite extension of Body hinder
the Infiniteness of God, as an Immaterial Spiritual being? Next, when I do
attribute an Infinite Power, Wisdom, Knowledge, etc. to Nature, I do not
understand a Divine, but a Natural Infinite Wisdom and Power, that is, such as
properly belongs to Nature, and not a supernatural, as is in god; For Nature
having Infinite parts of Infinite degrees, must also have an Infinite natural
wisdom to order her natural Infinite parts and actions, and consequently an
Infinite natural power to put her wisdom into act; and so of the rest of her
attributes, which are all natural: But Gods Attributes being supernatural,
transcend much these natural infinite attributes; for God, being the God of
Nature, has not only Natures Infinite Wisdom and Power, but besides, a
Supernatural and Incomprehensible Infinite Wisdom and Power; which in no ways
do hinder each other, but may very well subsist together. Neither does Gods
Infinite Justice and his Infinite Mercy hinder each other; for Gods Attributes,
though they be all several Infinites, yet they make but one Infinite.

But you will say, If Nature's Wisdom and Power extends no further then to
natural things, it is not Infinite, but limited and restrained. I answer, That
does not take away the Infiniteness of Nature; for there may be several kinds
of Infinites, as I related before, and one may be as perfect an Infinite as the
other in its kind. For example: Suppose a Line to be extended infinitely in
length, you will call this Line Infinite, although it have not an Infinite
breadth: Also, if an infinite length and breadth join together, you will call
it, an Infinite Superficies, although it wants an infinite depth; and yet every
Infinite, in its kind, is a Perfect Infinite, if I may call it so: Why then
shall not Nature also be said to have an Infinite Natural Wisdom and Power,
although she has not a Divine Wisdom and Power? Can we say, Man has not a free
Will, because he has not an absolute free Will, as God has? Wherefore, a
Natural Infinite, and the Infinite God, may well stand together, without any
opposition or hinderance, or without any detracting or derogating from the
Omnipotency and Glory of God; for God remains still the God of Nature, and is
an Infinite Immaterial Purity, when as Nature is an Infinite Corporeal
Substance; and Immaterial and Material cannot obstruct each other. And though
an Infinite Corporeal cannot make an Infinite Immaterial, yet an Infinite
Immaterial can make an Infinite Corporeal, by reason there is as much
difference in the Power as in the Purity: And the disparity between the Natural
and Divine Infinite is such, as they cannot join, mix, and work together,
unless you do believe that Divine Actions can have allay.

But you may say, Purity belongs only to natural things, and none but natural
bodies can be said purified, but God exceeds all Purity. It Is true: But if
there were infinite degrees of Purity in Matter, Matter might at last become
Immaterial, and so from an Infinite Material turn to an Infinite Immaterial,
and from Natrue to be God: A great, but an impossible Change. For I do verily
believe, that there can be but one Omnipotent God, and he cannot admit of
addition, or diminution; and that which is Material cannot be Immaterial, and
what is Immaterial cannot become Material, I mean, so, as to change their
natures; for Nature is what God was pleased she should be; and will be what she
was, until God be pleased to make her otherwise. Wherefore there can be no new
Creation of matter, motion, or figure; nor any annihilation of any matter,
motion, or figure in Nature, unless God do create a new Nature: For the
changing of Matter into several particular Figures, does not prove an
annihilation of particular Figures; nor the cessation of particular Motions an
annihilation of them: Neither does the variation of the Only Matter produce an
annihilation of any part of Matter, nor the variation of figures and motions of
Matter cause an alteration in the nature of Only Matter: Wherefore there
cannot be new Lives, Souls or Bodies in Nature; for, could there be any thing
new in Nature, or any thing annihilated, there would not be any stability in
Nature, as a continuance of every kind and sort of Creatures, but there would
be a confusion between the new and old matter, motions, and figures, as between
old and new Nature; In truth, it would be like new Wine in old Vessels, by
which all would break into disorder. Neither can supernatural and natural
effects be mixed together, no more then material and immaterial things or
beings: Therefore it is probable, God has ordained Nature to work in herself by
his Leave, Will, and Free Gift. But there have been, and are still strange and
erroneous Opinions, and great differences amongst Natural Philosophers,
concerning the Principles of Natural things; some will have them Atoms, others
will have the first Principles to be Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; some will have
them to be the four Elements, as Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; and others will
have but one of these Elements; also some will have Gas and Blas, Ferments,
Idea's, and the like; but what they believe to be Principles and Causes of
natural things, are only Effects; for in all Probability it appears to humane
sense and reason, that the cause of every particular material Creature is the
only and Infinite Matter, which has Motions and Figures inseparably united;
for Matter, Motion and Figure, are but one thing, individable in its Nature.
And as for Immaterial Spirits, there is surely no such thing in Infinite
Nature, to wit, so as to be Parts of Nature; for Nature is altogether Material,
but this opinion proceeds from the separation or abstraction of Motion form
Matter, viz. that man thinks matter and motion to be dividable from each other,
and believes motion to be a thing by its self, naming it an Imaterial thing,
which has a being, but not a bodily substance: But various and different
effects do not prove a different Matter or Cause, neither do they prove an
unsettled Cause, only the variety of Effects has obscured the Cause from the
several parts, which makes Particular Creatures partly Ignorant, and partly
knowing. But in my opinion, Nature is material, and not any thing in Nature,
what belongs to her, is immaterial; but whatsoever is Immaterial, is
Supernatural, Therefore Motions, Forms, Thoughts, Ideas, Conceptions,
Sympathies, Antipathies, Accidents, Qualities, as also Natural Life, and Soul,
are all Material: And as for Colors, Sents, Light, Sound, Heat, Cold, and the
like, those that believe them not to be substances or material things, surely
their brain or heart (take what place you will for the forming of Conceptions)
moves very Irregularly, and they might as well say, Our sensitive Organs are
not material; for what Objects soever, that are subject to our senses, cannot
in sense be denied to be Corporeal, when as those things that are not subject
to our senses, can be conceived in reason to be Immaterial? But some
Philosophers striving to express their wit, obstruct reason; and drawing
Divinity to prove Sense and Reason, weaken Faith so, as their mixed Divine
Philosophy becomes mere Poetical Fictions, and Romancical expressions, making
material Bodies immaterial Spirits, and immaterial Spirits material Bodies; and
some have conceived some things neither to be Material nor Immaterial, but
between both. Truly, Madam, I wish their Wits had been less, and their
Judgments more, as not to jumble Natural and Supernatural things together, but
to distinguish either clearly, for such Mixtures are neither Natural nor
Divine; But as I said, the Confufion comes from their too nice abstractions,
and from the separation of Figure and Motion from Matter, as not conceiving
them individable; but if God, and his servant Nature were as Intricate and
Confuse in their Works, as Men in their Understandings and Words, the Universe
and Production of all Creatures would soon be without Order and Government, so
as there would be a horrid and Eternal War both in Heaven, and in the World,
and so pitying their troubled Brains, and wishing them the Light of Reason,
that they may clearly perceive the Truth, I rest

MADAM, Your real Friend and faithful Servant.

III.
MADAM,
IT seems you are offended at my Opinion, that Nature is Eternal without
beginning, which, you say, is to make her God, or at least coeqnal with God;
But, if you apprehend my meaning rightly, you will say, I do not: For first,
God is an Immaterial and Spiritual Infinite Being, which Propriety God cannot
give away to any Creature, nor make another God in Essence like to him, for
Gods Attributes are not communicable to any Creature; Yet this does not hinder,
that God should not make Infinite and Eternal Matter, for that is as easy to
him, as to make a Finite Creature, Infinite Matter being quite of another
Nature then God is, to wit, Corporeal, when God is Incorporeal, the difference
whereof I have declared in my former Letter. But as for Nature, that it cannot
be Eternal without beginning, because God is the Creator and Cause of it, and
that the Creator must be before the Creature, as the Cause before the Effect,
so, that it is impossible for Nature to be without a beginning; if you will
speak naturally, as human reason guides you, and bring an Argument concluding
from the Priority of the Cause before the Effect, give me leave to tell you,
that God is not tied to Natural Rules, but that he can do beyond our
Understanding, and therefore he is neither bound up to time, as to be before,
for if we will do this, we must not allow, that the Eternal Son of God is
Coeternal with the Father, because nature requires a Father to exist before the
Son, but in God is no time, but all Eternity; and if you allow, that God has
made some Creatures, as Supernatural Spirits, to live Eternally, why should he
not as well have made a Creature from all Eternity? for Gods making is not our
making, he needs no Priority of Time. But you may say, the Comparison of the
Eternal Generation of the Son of God is Mystical and Divine, and not to be
applied to natural things: I answer, The action by which God created the World
or made Nature, was it natural of supernatural? surely you will say it was a
Supernatural and God-like action, why then will you apply Natural Rules to a
God-like and Supernatural Action? for what Man knows, how and when God created
Nature? You will say, the Scripture does teach us that, for it is not Six
thousand years, when God created this World. I answer, the holy Scripture
informs us only of the Creation of this Visible World, but not of Nature and
natural Matter; for I firmly believe according to the Word of God, that this
World has been Created, as is described by Moses, but what is that to natural
Matter? There may have been worlds before, as many are of the opinion that
there have been men before Adam, and many amongst Divines do believe, that
after the destruction of this World God will Create a new World again, as a new
Heaven, and a new Earth; and if this be probable, or at least may be believed
without any prejudice to the holy Scripture, why may it not be probably
believed that there have been other worlds before this visible World? for
nothing is impossible with God; and all this does derogate nothing from the
Honor and Glory of God, but rather increases his Divine Power. But as for the
Creation of this present World, it is related, that there was first a rude and
indigested Heap, or Chaos, without form, void and dark; and God said, Let it be
light; Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and let the Waters
under the Heaven be gathered together, and let the dry Land appear; Let the
Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding seed, and the Fruit-tree yielding
Fruit after its own kind; and let there be Lights in the Firmament, the one to
rule the Day, and the other the Night; and let the Waters bring forth
abundantly the moving Creature that has life; and let the Earth bring forth
living Creatures after its kind; and at last God said, Let us make Man, and
all what was made, God saw it was good. Thus all was made by Gods Command, and
who executed his Command but the Material servant of God, Nature? which ordered
her self-moving matter into such several Figures as God commanded, and God
approved of them. And thus, Madam, I verily believe the Creation of the World,
and that God is the Sole and omnipotent Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all
Creatures therein; nay, although I believe Nature to have been from Eternity,
yet I believe also that God is the God and Author of Nature, and has made
Nature and natural Matter in a way and manner proper to his Omnipotency and
Incomprehensible by us: I will pass by natural Arguments and Proofs, as not
belonging to such an Omnipotent Action; as for example, how the nature of
relative terms requires, that they must both exist at one point of Time, viz. a
Master and his Servant, and a King and his Subjects; for one bearing relation
to the other, can in no ways be considered as different from one another in
formiliness or laterness of Time; but as I said, these being merely natural
things, I will nor cannot apply them to Supernatural and Divine Actions; But if
you ask me, how it is possible that Nature, the Effect and Creature of God, can
be Eternal without beginning? I will desire you to answer me first, how a
Creature can be Eternal without end, as, for example, Supernatural Spirits are,
and then I will answer you, how a Creature can be Eternal without beginning;
For Eternity consists herein, that it has neither beginning nor end; and if it
be easy for God to make a Being without end, it is not difficult for Him to
make a Being without beginning. One thing more I will add, which is, That if
Nature has not been made by God from all Eternity, then the Title of God, as
being a Creator, which is a Title and action, upon which our Faith is grounded,
(for it is the first Article in our Creed) has been accessory to God, as I
said, not full Six thousand years ago; but there is not anything accessory to
God, he being the Perfection himself. But, Madam, all what I speak, is under
the liberty of Natural Philosophy, and by the Light of Reason only, not of
Revelation; and my Reason being not infallible, I will not declare my Opinions
for an infallible Truth: Neither do I think, that they are offensive either to
Church or State, for I submit to the Laws of One, and believe the Doctrine of
the Other, so much, that if it were for the advantage of either, I should be
willing to sacrifice my Life, especially for the Church; yea, had I millions of
Lives, and every Life was either to suffer torment or to live in ease, I would
prefer torment for the benefit of the Church; and therefore, if I knew that my
Opinions should give any offense to the Church, I should be ready every minute
to alter them: And as much as I am bound in all duty to the obedience of the
Church, as much am I particularly bound to your Ladyship, for your entire love
and sincere affection toward me, for which I shall live and die,

MADAM, Your most faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

IV.
MADAM,
I Have chosen, in the first place, the Work of that famous Philosopher Hobbs,
called Leviathan, wherein I find he says, Part. 1. chapter 1.
That the cause of sense or sensitive perception is the external body or
Object, which presses the Organ proper to each Sense. To which I answer,
according to the ground of my own Philosophical Opinions, That all things, and
therefore outward objects as well as sensitive organs, have both Sense and
Reason, yet neither the objects nor the organs are the cause of them; for
Perception is but the effect of the Sensitive and rational Motions, and not the
Motions of the Perception; neither does the pressure of parts upon parts make
Perception; for although Matter by the power of self-motion is as much
composeable as divideable, and parts do join to parts, yet that does not make
perception; nay, the several parts, betwixt which the Perception is made, may
be at such a distance, as not capable to press: As for example, Two men may see
or hear each other at a distance, and yet there may be other bodies between
them, that do not move to those perceptions, so that no pressure can be made,
for all pressures are by some constraint and force; wherefore, according to my
Opinion, the Sensitive and Rational free Motions, do pattern out each others
object, as Figure and Voice in each others Eye and Ear; for Life and Knowledge,
which I name Rational and Sensitive Matter, are in every Creature, and in all
parts of every Creature, and make all perceptions in Nature, because they are
the self-moving parts of Nature, and according as those Corporeal, Rational,
and Sensitive Motions move, such or such perceptions are made: But these
self-moving parts being of different degrees (for the Rational matter is purer
then the Sensitive) it causes a double perception in all Creatures, whereof one
is made by the Rational corporeal motions, and the other by the Sensitive; and
though both perceptions are in all the body, and in every part of the body of a
Creature, yet the sensitive corporeal motions having their proper organs, as
Workhouses, in which they work some sorts of perceptions, those perceptions
are most commonly made in those organs, and are double again; for the sensitive
motions work either on the inside or on the outside of those organs, on the
inside in Dreams, on the outside awake; and although both the Rational and the
Sensitive matter are inseparably joined and mixed together, yet do they not
always work together, for oftentimes the Rational works without any sensitive
paterns, and the sensitive again without any rational paterns. But mistake me
not, Madam, for I do not absolutely confine the sensitive perception to the
Organs, nor the rational to the Brain, but as they are both in the whole body,
so they may work in the whole body according to their own motions. Neither do I
say, that there is no other perception in the Eye but sight, in the Ear but
hearing, and so forth, but the sensitive organs have other perceptions besides
these; and if the sensitive and rational motions be irregular in those parts,
between which the perception is made, as for example, in the two forementioned
men, that see and hear each other, then they both neither see nor hear each
other perfectly; and if one's motions be perfect, but the other's irregular and
erroneous, then one sees and hears better then the other; or if the Sensitive
and Rational motions move more regularly and make perfecter paterns in the Eye
then in the Ear, then they see better then they hear; and if more regularly and
perfectly in the Ear then in the Eye, they hear better then they see: And so it
may be said of each man singly, for one man may see the other better and more
perfectly, then the other may see him; and this man may hear the other better
and more perfectly, then the other may hear him; whereas, if perception were
made by pressure, there would not be any such mistakes; besides the hard
pressure of objects, in my opinion, would rather annoy and obscure, then
inform. But as soon as the object is removed, the Perception of it, made by the
sensitive motions in the Organs, cease, by reason the sensitive Motions cease
from paterning, but yet the Rational Motions do not always cease so suddenly,
because the sensitive corporeal Motions work with the Inanimate Matter, and
therefore cannot retain particular figures long, whereas the Rational Matter
does only move in its own substance and parts of matter, and upon none other,
as my Book of Philosophical Opinions will inform you better. And thus
Perception, in my opinion, is not made by Pressure, nor by Species, nor by
matter going either from the Organ to the Object, or from the Object into the
Organ. By this it is also manifest, that Understanding comes not from Exterior
Objects, or from the Exterior sensitive Organs; for as Exterior Objects do not
make Perception, so they do neither make Understanding, but it is the rational
matter that does it, for Understanding may be without exterior objects and
sensitive organs; And this in short is the opinion of

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

V.
MADAM,
YOur Authors opinion is, Leviathan, Part. 1. c. 2.
that when a thing lies still, unless somewhat else stir it, it will lie still
for ever; but when a thing is in motion, it will eternally be in motion, unless
somewhat else stay it; the reason is, says he, because nothing can change it
self; To tell you truly, Madam, I am not of his opinion, for if Matter moves
it self, as certainly it does, then the least part of Matter, were it so small
as to seem Individable, will move it self; It Is true, it could not desist from
motion, as being its nature to move, and no thing can change its Nature; for
God himself, who has more power then self-moving Matter, cannot change himself
from being God; but that Motion should proceed from another exterior Body,
joining with, or touching that body which it moves, is in my opinion not
probable; for though Nature is all Corporeal, and her actions are Corporeal
Motions, yet that does not prove, that the Motion of particular Creatures or
Parts is caused by the joining, touching or pressing of parts upon parts; for
it is not the several parts that make motion, but motion makes them; and yet
Motion is not the cause of Matter, but Matter is the cause of Motion, for
Matter might subsist without Motion, but not Motion without Matter, only there
could be no perception without Motion, nor no Variety, if Matter were not
self-moving; but Matter, if it were all Inanimate and void of Motion, would lie
as a dull, dead and senseless heap; But that all Motion comes by joining or
pressing of other parts, I deny, for if sensitive and rational perceptions,
which are sensitive and rational motions, in the body, and in the mind, were
made by the pressure of outward objects, pressing the sensitive organs, and so
the brain or interior parts of the Body, they would cause such dents and holes
therein, as to make them sore and patched in a short time; Besides, what was
represented in this manner, would always remain, or at least not so soon be
dissolved, and then those pressures would make a strange and horrid confusion
of Figures, for not any figure would be distinct; Wherefore my opinion is, that
the sensitive and rational Matter does make or pattern out the figures of
several Objects, and does dissolve them in a moment of time; as for example,
when the eye sees the object first of a Man, then of a Horse, then of another
Creature, the sensitive motions in the eye move first into the figure of the
Man, then straight into the figure of the Horse, so that the Man's figure is
dissolved and altered into the figure of the Horse, and so forth; but if the
eye sees many figures at once, then so many several figures are made by the
sensitive Corporeal Motions, and as many by the Rational Motions, which are
Sight and Memory, at once: But in sleep both the sensitive and rational Motions
make the figures without patterns, that is, exterior objects, which is the
cause that they are often erroneous, whereas, if it were the former Impression
of the Objects, there could not possibly be imperfect Dreams or Remembrances,
for fading of Figures requires as much motion, as impression, and impression
and fading are very different and opposite motions; nay, if Perception was made
by Impression, there could not possibly be a fading or decay of the figures
printed either in the Mind or Body, whereas yet, as there is alteration of
Motions in self-moving Matter, so there is also an alteration of figures made
by these motions. But you will say, it does not follow, if Perception be made
by Impression, that it must needs continue and not decay; for if you touch and
move a string, the motion does not continue for ever, but cease by degrees; I
answer, There is great difference between Prime self-motion, and forced or
Artificial Motions; for Artificial Motions are only an Imitation of Natural
Motions, and not the same, but caused by Natural Motions; for although there is
no Art that is not made by Nature, yet Nature is not made by Art; Wherefore we
cannot rationally judge of Perception by comparing it to the motion of a string,
and its alteration to the ceasing of that motion, for Nature moves not by
force, but freely. It Is true, it is the freedom in Nature for one man to give
another a box on the Ear, or to trip up his heels, or for one or more men to
fight with each other; yet these actions are not like the actions of loving
Embraces and Kissing each other; neither are the actions one and the same, when
a man strikes himself, and when he strikes another; and so is likewise the
action of impression, and the action of self-figuring not one and the same, but
different; for the action of impression is forced, and the action of
self-figuring is free; Wherefore the comparison of the forced motions of a
string, rope, watch, or the like, can have no place here; for though the rope,
made of flax or hemp, may have the perception of a Vegetable, yet not of the
hand, or the like, that touched or struck it; and although the hand does
occasion the rope to move in such a manner, yet it is not the motion of the
hand, by which it moves, and when it ceases, its natural and inherent power to
move is not lessened; like as a man, that has left off carving or painting,
has no less skill then he had before, neither is that skill lost when he plays
upon the Lute or Virginals, or plows, plants, and the like, but he has only
altered his action, as from carving to painting, or from painting to playing,
and so to plowing and planting, which is not through disability but choice. But
you will say, it is nevertheless a cessation of such a motion. I grant it: but
the ceasing of such a motion is not the ceasing of self-moving matter from all
motions, neither is cessation as much as annihilation, for the motion lies in
the power of the matter to repeat it, as often it will, if it be not overpowred,
for more parts, or more strength, or more motions may overpower the less;
Wherefore forced, or artificial and free Natural motions are different in their
effects, although they have but one Cause, which is the self-moving matter, and
though Matter is but active and passive, yet there is great Variety, and so
great difference in force and liberty, objects and perceptions, sense and
reason, and the like. But to conclude, perception is not made by the pressure
of objects, no more then hemp is made by the Rope-maker, or metal by the
Bell-founder or Ringer, and yet neither the rope nor the metal is without sense
and reason, but the natural motions of the metal, and the artificial motions of
the Ringer are different; wherefore a natural effect in truth cannot be
produced from an artificial cause, neither can the ceasing of particular forced
or artificial motions be a proof for the ceasing of general, natural, free
motions, as that matter it self should cease to move; for there is no such
thing as rest in Nature, but there is an alteration of motions and figures in
self-moving matter, which alteration causes variety as well in opinions, as in
every thing else; Wherefore in my opinion, though sense alters, yet it does not
decay, for the rational and sensitive part of matter is as lasting as matter it
self, but that which is named decay of sense, is only the alteration of
motions, and not an obscurity of motions, like as the motions of memory and
forgetfulness, and the repetition of the same motions is called remembrance.
And thus much of this subject for the present, to which I add no more but rest

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

VI.
MADAM,
YOur Author discoursing of Imagination, says, Leviathan, part. 1. c. 2.
That as soon as any object is removed from our Eyes, though the Impression
that is made in us, remain, yet other objects more present succeeding and
working on us, the Imagination of the past is obscured and made weak. To which
I answer, first, that he conceives Sense and Imagination to be all one, for he
says, Imagination is nothing else, but a fading or decaying sense; whereas in
my opinion they are different, not only their matter, but their motions also
being distinct and different; for Imagination is a rational perception, and
sense a sensitive perception; wherefore as much as the rational matter differs
from the sensitive, as much does Imagination differ from Sense. Next I say,
that Impressions do not remain in the body of sensitive matter, but it is in
its power to make or repeat the like figures; Neither is Imagination less, when
the object is absent, then when present, but the figure patterned out in the
sensitive organs, being altered, and remaining only in the Rational part of
matter, is not so perspicuous and clear, as when it was both in the Sense and
in the Mind: And to prove that Imagination of things past does not grow weaker
by distance of time, as your Author says, many a man in his old age, will have
as perfect an Imagination of what is past in his younger years, as if he saw it
present. And as for your Authors opinion, that Imagination and Memory are one
and the same, I grant, that they are made of one kind of Matter; but although
the Matter is one and the same, yet several motions in the several parts make
Imagination and Memory several things: As for Example, a Man may Imagine that
which never came into his Senses, wherefore Imagination is not one and the same
thing with Memory. But your Author seems to make all Sense, as it were, one
Motion, but not all Motion Sense, whereas surely there is no Motion, but is
either Sensitive or Rational; for Reason is but a pure and refined Sense, and
Sense a grosser Reason. Yet all sensitive and rational Motions are not one and
the same; for forced or Artificial Motions, though they proceed from sensitive
matter, yet are they so different from the free and Prime Natural Motions, that
they seem, as it were, quite of another nature: And this distinction neglected
is the Cause, that many make Appetites and Passions, Perceptions and Objects,
and the like, as one, without any or but little difference. But having
discoursed of the difference of these Motions in my former Letter, I will not
be tedious to you, with repeating it again, but remain,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VII.
MADAM,
YOur Authors opinion, concerning Dreams Leviathan, Part. 1. c. 2.
, seems to me in some part very rational and probable, in some part not; For
when he says, that Dreams are only Imaginations of them that sleep, which
imaginations have been before either totally or by parcels in the Sense; and
that the organs of Sense, as the Brain and the Nerves, being benumbed in sleep,
as not easily to be moved by external objects, those Imaginations proceed only
from the agitation of the inward parts of man's body, which for the connection
they have with the Brain, and other organs, when they be distempered, do keep
the same in motion, whereby the Imaginations there formerly made, appear as if
a man were waking; This seems to my Reason not very probable: For, first,
Dreams are not absolutely Imaginations, except we do call all Motions and
Actions of the Sensitive and Rational Matter, Imaginations. Neither is it
necessary, that all Imaginations must have been before either totally or by
parcels in the Sense; neither is there any benumbing of the organs of Sense in
sleep. But Dreams, according to my opinion, are made by the Sensitive and
Rational Corporeal Motions, by figuring several objects, as awake; only the
difference is, that the Sensitive motions in Dreams work by rote and on the
inside of the Sensitive organs, when as awake they work according to the
patterns of outward objects, and exteriously or on the outside of the sensitive
Organs, so that sleep or dreams are nothing else but an alteration of motions,
from moving exteriously to move interiously, and from working after a Pattern
to work by rote: I do not say that the body is without all exterior motions,
when asleep, as breathing and beating of the Pulse (although these motions are
rather interior then exterior,) but that only the sensitive organs are
outwardly shut, so as not to receive the patterns of outward Objects,
nevertheless the sensitive Motions do not cease from moving inwardly, or on the
inside of the sensitive Organs; But the rational matter does often, as awake,
so asleep or in dreams, make such figures, as the sensitive did never make
either from outward objects, or of its own accord; for the sensitive has
sometimes liberty to work without Objects, but the Rational much more, which is
not bound either to the patterns of Exterior objects, or of the sensitive
voluntary Figures. Wherefore it is not diverse distempers, as your Author
says, that cause different Dreams, or Cold, or Heat; neither are Dreams the
reverse of our waking Imaginations, nor all the Figures in Dreams are not made
with their heels up, and their heads downwards, though some are; but this error
or irregularity proceeds from want of exterior Objects or Patterns, and by
reason the sensitive Motions work by rote; neither are the Motions reverse,
because they work inwardly asleep, and outwardly awake, for Madmen awake see
several Figures without Objects. In short, sleeping and waking is somewhat
after that manner, when men are called either out of their doors, or stay
within their houses; or like a Ship, where the Mariners work all under hatches,
whereof you will find more in my Philosophical Opinions; and so taking my
leave, I rest

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VIII.
MADAM,
YOur Author going on in his discourse of Imagination, says, Leviathan, part.
1. c. 3.
That, as we have no Imagination, whereof we have not formerly had sense, in
whole or in parts; so we have not Transition from one Imagination to another,
whereof we never had the like before in our senses. To which my answer is in
short, that the Rational part of Matter in one composed figure, as in Man, or
the like Creature, may make such figures, as the senses did never make in that
composed Figure or Creature; And though your Author reproves those that say,
part. 1. c. 2.
Imaginations rise of themselves; yet, if the self-moving part of Matter, which
I call Rational, makes Imaginations, they must needs rise of themselves; for
the Rational part of matter being free and self-moving, depends upon nothing,
neither Sense nor Object, I mean, so, as not to be able to work without them.
Next, when your Author, defining Understanding, says that it is nothing else,
but Ibid. c. 3.
an Imagination raised by words or other voluntary signs, My Answer is, that
Understanding, and so Words and Signs are made by self-moving Matter, that is,
Sense and Reason, and not Sense and Reason by Words and Signs; wherefore
Thoughts are not like ibid.
Water upon a plain Table, which is drawn and guided by the finger this or that
way, for every Part of self-moving matter is not always forced, persuaded or
directed, for if all the Parts of Sense and Reason were ruled by force or
persuasion, not any wounded Creature would fail to be healed, or any disease to
be cured by outward Applications, for outward Applications to Wounds and
Diseases might have more force, then any Object to the Eye: But though there is
great affinity and sympathy between parts, yet there is also great difference
and antipathy betwixt them, which is the cause that many objects cannot with
all their endeavors work such effects upon the Interior parts, although they
are closely pressed, for Impressions of objects do not always affect those
parts they press. Wherefore, I am not of your Author's opinion, that all Parts
of Matter press one another; It is true, Madam, there cannot be any part
single, but yet this does not prove, that parts must needs press each other:
And as for his Train of Thoughts, I must confess, that Thoughts for the most
part are made orderly, but yet they do not follow each other like Geese, for
surely, man has sometimes very different thoughts; as for Example, a man
sometime is very sad for the death of his Friend, and thinks of his own death,
and immediately thinks of a wanton Mistress, which later thought, surely, the
thought of Death did not draw in; wherefore, though some thought may be the
Ringleader of others, yet many are made without leaders. Again, your Author in
his description of the Mind says, that the discourse of the mind, when it it
is governed by design, is nothing but seeking, or the Faculty of Invention; a
hunting out of the Causes of some Effects, present or past; or of the Effects
of some present or past Cause. Sometimes a man seeks what he has lost, and from
that Place and Time wherein he misses it, his mind runs back from place to
place, and time to time, to find where and when he had it, that is to say, to
find some certain and limited Time and Place, in which to begin a method of
Seeking. And from thence his thoughts run over the same places and times to
find what action or other occasion might make him lose it. This we call
Remembrance or calling to mind. Sometimes a man knows a place determinate,
within the compass whereof he is to seek, and then his thoughts run over all
the Parts thereof in the same manner as one would sweep a room to find a Jewel,
or as a Spaniel ranges the field till he find a sent; or as a Man should run
over the Alphabet to start a Rhyme. Thus far your Author: In which discourse I
do not perceive that he defines what the Mind is, but I say, that if,
according to his opinion, nothing moves it self, but one thing moves another,
then the Mind must do nothing, but move backward and forward, nay, only
forward, and if all actions were thrusting or pressing of parts, it would be
like a crowd of People, and there would be but little or no motion, for the
crowd would make a stoppage, like water in a glass, the mouth of the Glass
being turned downwards, no water can pass out, by reason the numerous drops are
so closely pressed, as they cannot move exteriously. Next, I cannot conceive
how the Mind can run back either to Time or Place, for as for Place, the mind
is enclosed in the body, and the running about in the parts of the body or
brain will not inform it of an Exterior place or object; besides, objects being
the cause of the minds motion, it must return to its Cause, and so move until
it come to the object, that moved it first, so that the mind must run out of
the body to that object, which moved it to such a Thought, although that object
were removed out of the World (as the phrase is:) But for the mind to move
backward, to Time past, is more then it can do; Wherefore in my opinion,
Remembrance, or the like, is only a repetition of such Figures as were like to
the Objects; and for Thoughts in Particular, they are several figures, made by
the mind, which is the Rational Part of matter, in its own substance, either
voluntarily, or by imitation, whereof you may see more in my Book of
Philosophical Opinions. Hence I conclude, that Prudence is nothing else, but a
comparing of Figures to Figures, and of the several actions of those Figures,
as repeating former Figures, and comparing them to others of the like nature,
qualities, proprieties, as also chances, fortunes, etc. Which figuring and
repeating is done actually, in and by the Rational Matter, so that all the
observation of the mind on outward Objects is only an actual repetition of the
mind, as moving in such or such figures and actions; and when the mind makes
voluntary Figures with those repeated Figures, and compares them together, this
comparing is Examination; and when several Figures agree and join, it is
Conclusion or Judgment: likewise does Experience proceed from repeating and
comparing of several Figures in the Mind, and the more several Figures are
repeated and compared, the greater the experience is. One thing more there is
in the same Chapter, which I cannot let pass without examination; Your Author
says, That things Present only have a being in Nature, things Past only a
being in the Memory, but things to come have no being at all; Which how it
possibly can be, I am not able to conceive; for certainly, if nothing in nature
is lost or annihilated, what is past, and what is to come, has as well a
being, as what is present; and, if that which is now, had its being before, why
may it not also have its being hereafter? It might as well be said, that what
is once forgot, cannot be remembered; for whatsoever is in Nature, has as much a
being as the Mind, and there is not any action, or motion, or figure, in
Nature, but may be repeated, that is, may return to its former Figure, when it
is altered and dissolved; But by reason Nature delights in variety, repetitions
are not so frequently made, especially of those things or creatures, which are
composed by the sensitive corporeal motions in the inanimate part of Matter,
because they are not so easily wrought, as the Rational matter can work upon
its own parts, being more pliant in its self, then the Inanimate matter is; And
this is the reason, that there are so many repetitions of one and the same
Figure in the Rational matter, which is the Mind, but seldom any in the Gross
and inanimate part of Matter, for Nature loves ease and freedom: But to
conclude, Madam, I perceive your Author confines Sense only to Animal-kind,
and Reason only to Mankind: Truly, it is out of self-love, when one Creature
prefers his own Excellency before another, for nature being endued with
self-love, all Creatures have self-love too, because they are all Parts of
Nature; and when Parts agree or disagree, it is out of Interest and Self-love;
but Man herein exceeds all the rest, as having a supernatural Soul, whose
actions also are supernatural, To which I leave him, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

IX.
MADAM,
WHen your Author discourses of the use of Speech or Words and Names, he is
pleased to say, Leviathan, part. 1. c. 4.
That their use is to serve for marks and notes of Remembrance; Whereof to give
you my opinion, I say, That Speech is natural to the shape of Man; and though
sometimes it serves for marks or notes of remembrance, yet it does not always,
for all other Animals have Memory without the help of Speech, and so have deaf
and dumb men, nay more then those that hear and speak: Wherefore, though Words
are useful to the mind, and so to the memory, yet both can be without them,
whereas Words cannot be without Memory; for take a Bird and teach him to speak,
if he had not Memory, before he heard the words, he could never learn them. You
will ask me, Madam, What then, is Memory the Cause of Speech? I answer, Life
and Knowledge, which is Sense and Reason, as it creates and makes all sorts of
Creatures, so also amongst the rest it makes Words: And as I said before, that
Memory may be without the help of Speech or Words, so I say also, that there is
a possibility of reckoning of numbers, as also of magnitudes, of swiftness, of
force, and other things without words, although your Author denies it: But some
men are so much for Art, as they endeavor to make Art, which is only a
Drudgery-maid of Nature, the chief Mistress, and Nature her Servant, which is
as much as to prefer Effects before the Cause, Nature before God, Discord
before Unity and Concord.

Again, your Author, in his Chapter of Reason Chapter 5.
, defines Reason to be nothing else but Reckoning: I answer, That in my opinion
Reckoning is not Reason it self, but only an effect or action of Reason; for
Reason, as it is the chiefest and purest degree of animate matter, works
variously and in diverse motions, by which it produces various and diverse
effects, which are several Perceptions, as Conception, Imagination, Fancy,
Memory, Remembrance, Understanding, Judgment, Knowledge, and all the Passions,
with many more: Wherefore this Reason is not in one undivided part, nor bound
to one motion, for it is in every Creature more or less, and moves in its own
parts variously; and in some Creatures, as for example, in some men, it moves
more variously then in others, which is the cause that some men are more dull
and stupid, then others; neither does Reason always move in one Creature
regularly, which is the cause, that some men are mad or foolish: And though all
men are made by the direction of Reason, and endued with Reason, from the first
time of their birth, yet all have not the like Capacities, Understandings,
Imaginations, Wits, Fancies, Passions, etc. but some more, some less, and some
regular, some irregular, according to the motions of Reason or Rational part of
animate matter; and though some rational parts may make use of other rational
Parts, as one man of another man's Conceptions, yet all these parts cannot
associate together; as for example, all the Material parts of several objects,
no not their species, cannot enter or touch the eye without danger of hurting
or loosing it, nevertheless the eye makes use of the objects by patterning them
out, and so does the rational matter; by taking patterns from the sensitive;
And thus knowledge or perception of objects, both sensitive and rational, is
taken without the pressure of any other parts; for though parts join to parts,
(for no part can be single) yet this joining does not necessarily infer the
pressure of objects upon the sensitive organs; Whereof I have already
discoursed sufficiently heretofore, to which I refer you, and rest

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

X.
MADAM,
UNderstanding, says your Author, Leviathan, part. 1. c. 4.
is nothing else but Conception caused by speech, and therefore, if speech be
peculiar to man, (as, for ought I know, it is) then is understanding peculiar
to him also. Where he confineth Understanding only to speech and to Mankind;
But, by his leave, Madam, I surely believe, that there is more understanding in
Nature, then that, which is in speech, for if there were not, I cannot
conceive, how all the exact forms in Generations could be produced, or how
there could be such distinct degrees of several sorts and kinds of Creatures,
or distinctions of times and seasons, and so many exact motions and figures in
Nature: Considering all this, my reason persuades me, that all Understanding,
which is a part of Knowledge, is not caused by speech, for all the motions of
the Celestial Orbs are not made by speech, neither is the knowledge or
understanding which a man has, when sick, as to know or understand he is sick,
made by speech, nor by outward objects, especially in a disease he never heard,
nor saw, nor smelt, nor tasted, nor touched; Wherefore all Perception,
Sensation, Memory, Imagination, Appetite, Understanding, and the like, are not
made nor caused by outward objects, nor by speech. And as for names of things,
they are but different postures of the figures in our mind or thoughts, made by
the Rational matter; But Reasoning is a comparing of the several figures with
their several postures and actions in the Mind, which joined with the several
words, made by the sensitive motions, inform another distinct and separate
part, as an other man, of their minds conceptions, understanding, opinions, and
the like.

Concerning Addition and Substraction, wherein your Author says Reasoning
consists, I grant, that it is an act of Reasoning, yet it does not make Sense
or Reason, which is Life and Knowledge, but Sense and Reason which is
self-motion, makes addition and substraction of several Parts of matter; for
had matter not self-motion, it could not divide nor compose, nor make such
varieties, without great and lingering retardments, if not confusion. Wherefore
all, what is made in Nature, is made by self-moving matter, which self-moving
matter does not at all times move regularly, but often irregularly, which
causes false Logic, false Arithmetic, and the like; and if there be not a
certainty in these self-motions or actions of Nature, much less in Art, which
is but a secundary action; and therefore, neither speech, words, nor exterior
objects cause Understanding or Reason. And although many parts of the Rational
and Sensitive Matter joined into one, may be stronger by their association, and
overpower other parts that are not so well knit and united, yet these are not
the less pure; only these Parts and Motions being not equal in several
Creatures, make their Knowledge and Reason more or less: For, when a man has
more Rational Matter well regulated, and so more Wisdom then an other, that
same man may chance to overpower the other, whose Rational Matter is more
irreregular, but yet not so much by strength of the united Parts, as by their
subtilty; for the Rational Matter moving regularly, is more strong with
subtilty, then the sensitive with force; so that Wisdom is stronger then Life,
being more pure, and so more active; for in my opinion, there is a degree of
difference between Life and Knowledge, as my Book of Philosophical Opinions
will inform you.

Again, your Author says, That Man does excel all other Animals in this
faculty, that when he conceives any thing whatsoever, he is apt to enquire the
Consequences of it, and what effects he can do with it: Besides this (says he)
Man has an other degree of Excellence, that he can by Words reduce the
Consequences he finds to General Rules called Theoremes or Aphorisms, that is,
he can reason or reckon not only in Number, but in all other things, whereof
one may be added unto, or subtracted from an other. To which I answer, That
according to my Reason I cannot perceive, but that all Creatures may do as
much; but by reason they do it not after the same manner or way as Man, Man
denies, they can do it at all; which is very hard; for what man knows, whether
Fish do not Know more of the nature of Water, and ebbing and flowing, and the
saltness of the Sea? or whether Birds do not know more of the nature and
degrees of Air, or the cause of Tempests? or whether Worms do not know more of
the nature of Earth, and how Plants are produced? or Bees of the several sorts
of juices of Flowers, then Men? And whether they do not make there Aphorisms
and Theoremes by their manner of Intelligence? For, though they have not the
speech of Man, yet thence does not follow, that they have no Intelligence at
all. But the Ignorance of Men concerning other Creatures is the cause of
despising other Creatures, imagining themselves as petty Gods in Nature, when
as Nature is not capable to make one God, much less so many as Mankind; and
were it not for Man's supernatural Soul, Man would not be more Supreme, then
other Creatures in Nature, But (says your Author) this Privilege in Man is
allayed by another, which is, No living Creature is subject to absurdity, but
only Man. Certainly, Madam, I believe the contrary, to wit, that all other
Creatures do as often commit mistakes and absurdities as Man, and if it were
not to avoid tediousness, I could present sufficient proofs to you: Wherefore I
think, not only Man but also other Creatures may be Philosophers and subject
to absurdities as aptly as Men; for Man does, nor cannot truly know the
Faculties, and Abilities or Actions of all other Creatures, no not of his own
Kind as Mankind, for if he do measure all men by himself he will be very much
mistaken, for what he conceives to be true or wise, an other may conceive to be
false and foolish. But Man may have one way of Knowledge in Philosophy and
other Arts; and other Creatures another way, and yet other Creatures manner or
way may be as Intelligible and Instructive to each other as Man's, I mean, in
those things which are Natural. Wherefore I cannot consent to what your Author
says, That Children are not endued with Reason at all, till they have attained
to the use of Speech; for Reason is in those Creatures which have not Speech,
witness Horses, especially those which are taught in the manage, and many other
Animals. And as for the weak understanding in Children, I have discoursed
thereof in my Book of Philosophy; The rest of this discourse, lest I tire you
too much at once, I shall reserve for the next, resting in the mean time,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XI.
MADAM,
I sent you word in my last, that your Author's opinion is, That Children are
not endued with Reason at all, until they have attained to the use of Speech,
in the same Chapter Chapter 4.
he speaks to the same purpose thus: Reason is not as Sense and Memory born
with us, nor gotten by experience only, as Prudence is, but attained by
industry. To which I reply only this, That it might as well be said, a Child
when new born has not flesh and blood, because by taking in nourishment or
food, the Child grows to have more flesh and blood; or, that a Child is not
born with two legs, because he cannot go, or with two arms and hands, because
he cannot help himself; or that he is not born with a tongue, because he cannot
speak: For although Reason does not move in a Child as in a Man, in Infancy as
in Youth, in Youth as in Age, yet that does not prove that Children are without
Reason, because they cannot run and prate: I grant, some other Creatures appear
to have more Knowledge when new born then others; as for example, a young Foal
has more knowledge than a young Child, because a Child cannot run and play;
besides a Foal knows his own Dam, and can tell where to take his food, as to
run and suck his Dam, when as an Infant cannot do so, nor all beasts, though
most of them can, but yet this does not prove, that a Child has no reason at
all; Neither can I perceive that man is a Monopoler of all Reason, or Animals
of all Sense, but that Sense and Reason are in other Creatures as well as in
Man and Animals; for example, Drugs, as Vegetables and Minerals, although they
cannot slice, pound or infuse, as man can, yet they can work upon man more
subtly, wisely, and as sensibly either by purging, vomiting, spitting, or any
other way, as man by mincing, pounding and infusing them, and Vegetables will
as wisely nourish Men, as Men can nourish Vegetables; Also some Vegetables are
as malicious and mischievous to Man, as Man is to one another, witness Hemlock,
Nightshade, and many more; and a little Poppy will as soon, nay sooner cause a
Man to sleep, though silently, then a Nurse a Child with singing and rocking;
But because they do not act in such manner or way as Man, Man judges them to
be without sense and reason; and because they do not prate and talk as Man, Man
believes they have not so much wit as he has; and because they cannot run and
go, Man thinks they are not industrious; the like for Infants concerning
Reason. But certainly, it is not local motion or speech that makes sense and
reason, but sense and reason makes them; neither is sense and reason bound
only to the actions of Man, but it is free to the actions, forms, figures and
proprieties of all Creatures; for if none but Man had reason, and none but
Animals sense, the World could not be so exact, and so well in order as it is:
but Nature is wiser then Man with all his Arts, for these are only produced
through the variety of Natures actions, and disputes through the superfluous
varieties of Man's follies or ignorances, not knowing Natures powerful life and
knowledge: But I wonder, Madam, your Author says in this place, That Reason is
not born with Man, when as in another place, In his Elements of Philosophy,
part. 1. c. 1. art. 1.
he says, That every man brought Philosophy, that is Natural reason with him
into the World; Which how it agree, I will leave to others to judge, and to him
to reconcile it, remaining in the mean time,

MADAM, Your Constant Friend and Faithful Servant.

XII.
MADAM,
TWo sorts of motions, I find your Author Leviathan, part. 1. c. 6.
does attribute to Animals, viz. Vital and Animal, the Vital motions, says he,
are begun in Generation, and continued without Interruption through their whole
life, and those are the Course of the Blood, the Pulse, the Breathing,
Conviction, Nutrition, Excretion, etc. to which motions there needs no help of
Imaginations; But the animal Motions, otherwise called voluntary Motions, are
to go, to speak, to move any of our limbs, in such manner as is first fancied
in our minds: And because going, speaking, and the like voluntary motions,
depend always upon a precedent thought of whither, which way, and what, it is
evident, that the Imagination is the first Internal beginning of all voluntary
Motion. Thus far your Author. Whereof in short I give you my opinion, first
concerning Vital Motions, that it appears improbable if not impossible to me,
that Generation should be the cause and beginning of Life, because Life must of
necessity be the cause of Generation, life being the Generator of all things,
for without life motion could not be, and without motion not any thing could be
begun, increased, perfected, or dissolved. Next, that Imagination is not
necessary to Vital Motions, it is probable it may not, but yet there is
required Knowledge, which I name Reason; for if there were not Knowledge in all
Generations or Productions, there could not any distinct Creature be made or
produced, for then all Generations would be confusedly mixed, neither would
there be any distinct kinds or sorts of Creatures, nor no different Faculties,
Proprieties, and the like. Thirdly, concerning Animal Motions, which your
Author names Voluntary Motions, as to go, to speak, to move any of our limbs,
in such manner as is first fancied in our minds, and that they depend upon a
precedent thought of whither, which way, and what, and that Imagination is the
first Internal beginning of them; I think, by your Authors leave, it does imply
a contradiction, to call them Voluntary Motions, and yet to say they are caused
and depend upon our Imagination; for if the Imagination draws them this way, or
that way, how can they be voluntary motions, being in a manner forced and
necessitated to move according to Fancy or Imagination? But when he goes on in
the same place and treats of Endeavor, Appetite, Desire, Hunger, Thirst,
Aversion, Love, Hate, and the like, he derives one from the other, and treats
well as a Moral Philosopher; but whether it be according to the truth or
probability of Natural Philosophy, I will leave to others to judge, for in my
opinion Passions and Appetites are very different, Appetites being made by the
motions of the sensitive Life, and Passions, as also Imagination, Memory, etc.
by the motions of the rational Life, which is the cause that Appetites belong
more to the actions of the Body then the Mind: It Is true, the Sensitive and
Rational self-moving matter does so much resemble each other in their actions,
as it is difficult to distinguish them. But having treated hereof at large in
my other Philosophical Work, to cut off repetitions, I will refer you to that,
and desire you to compare our opinions together: But certainly there is so much
variety in one and the same sort of Passions, and so of Appetites, as it cannot
be easily expressed. To conclude, I do not perceive that your Author tells or
expresses what the cause is of such or such actions, only he mentions their
dependence, which is, as if a man should converse with a Nobleman's Friend or
Servant, and not know the Lord himself. But leaving him for this time, it is
sufficient to me, that I know your Ladyship, and your Ladyship knows me, that I
am,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

XIII.
MADAM,
HAving obeyed your Commands in giving you my opinion of the First Part of the
Book of that famous and learned Author you sent me, I would go on; but seeing
he treats in his following Parts of the Politics, I was forced to stay my Pen,
because of these following Reasons. First, That a Woman is not employed in
State Affairs, unless an absolute Queen. Next, That to study the Politics, is
but loss of Time, unless a man were sure to be a Favorite to an absolute
Prince. Thirdly, That it is but a deceiving Profession, and requires more Craft
then Wisdom. All which considered, I did not read that part of your Author: But
as for his Natural Philosophy, I will send you my opinion so far as I
understand it: For what belongs to Art, as to Geometry, being no Scholar, I
shall not trouble my self withal. And so I Will take my leave of you, when I have
in two or three words answered the Question you sent me last, which was,
Whether Nature be the Art of God, Man the Art of Nature, and a Politic
Government the Art of Man? To which I answer, It Is probable it may be so; only
I add this, That Nature does not rule God, nor Man Nature, nor Politic
Government Man; for the Effect cannot rule the Cause, but the Cause does rule
the Effect: Wherefore if men do not naturally agree, Art cannot make unity
amongst them, or associate them into one Politic Body and so rule them; But
man thinks he governs, when as it is Nature that does it, for as nature does
unite or divide parts regularly or irregularly, and moves the several minds of
men and the several parts of men's bodies, so war is made or peace kept: Thus it
is not the artificial form that governs men in a Politic Government, but a
natural power, for though natural motion can make artificial things, yet
artificial things cannot make natural power; and we might as well say, nature
is governed by the art of nature, as to say man is ruled by the art and
invention of men. The truth is, Man rules an artificial Government, and not the
Government Man, just like as a Watch-maker rules his Watch, and not the Watch
the Watch-maker. And thus I conclude and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XIV.
MADAM,
COncerning the other Book of that learned Author Hobbs you sent me, called
Elements of Philosophy, I shall likewise according to your desire, give you my
judgment and opinion of it as I have done of the former, not that I intend to
prejudice him any ways thereby, but only to mark those places wherein I seem
to dissent from his opinions, which liberty, I hope, he will not deny me; And
in order to this, I have read over the first Chapter of the mentioned Book,
treating of Philosophy in General, wherein amongst the rest, discoursing of the
Utility of Natural Philosophy, and relating the commodities and benefits which
proceed from so many arts and sciences, he is pleased to say, Art. 7.
that they are enjoyed almost by all people of Europe, Asia, and some of
Africa, only the Americans, and those that live near the Poles do want them:
But why, says he, have they sharper wits then these? Have not all men one kind
of soul, and the same faculties of mind? To which, give me leave, Madam, to
add, That my opinion is, that there is a difference between the Divine and the
Natural soul of man, and though the natural mind or soul is of one kind, yet
being made of rational matter, it is divideable and composeable, by which
division and composition, men may have more or less wit, or quicker and slower
wit; the like for Judgments, Imaginations, Fancies, Opinions, etc. For were the
natural rational mind individeable, all men would have the like degree of wit
or understanding, all men would be Philosophers or fools, which by reason they
are not, it proves the natural rational mind is divideable and composeable,
making variations of its own several parts by self-motion; for it is not the
several outward objects, or foreign instructions, that make the variety of the
mind; neither is wit or ingenuity alike in all men; for some are natural Poets,
Philosophers, and the like, without learning, and some are far more ingenious
then others, although their breeding is obscure and mean, Neither will learning
make all men Scholars, for some will continue Dunces all their life time;
Neither does much experience make all men wise, for some are not any ways
advanced in their wisdom by much and long experiences; And as for Poetry, it is
according to the common Proverb, a Poet is born, not made; Indeed learning does
rather hurt Fancy, for great Scholars are not always good Poets, nor all
Statesmen Natural Philosophers, nor all Experienced Men Wise Men, nor all
Judges Just, nor all Divines Pious, nor all Pleaders or Preachers Eloquent, nor
all Moral Philosophers Virtuous; But all this is occasioned by the various
Motions of the rational selfmoving matter, which is the Natural Mind. And thus
much for the present of the difference of wits and faculties of the mind; I add
no more, but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XV.
MADAM,
MY Discourse for the present shall be of Infinite, and the question shall be
first Whether several Finite parts, how many soever there be, can make an
Infinite. Your Author says, Elem. of Philos. c. 7. a. 12.
that several Finite parts when they are all put together make a whole Finite;
which, if his meaning be of a certain determinate number, how big soever, of
finite parts, I do willingly grant, for all what is determinate and limited, is
not Infinite but Finite; neither is there any such thing, as Whole or All in
Infinite; but if his meaning be, that no Infinite can be made of finite parts,
though infinite in number, I deny it; Next he says there can be no such thing
as One in Infinite, because No thing can be said One, except there be another
to compare it withal; which in my opinion does not follow, for there is but One
God, who is Infinite, and has none other to be compared withal, and so there
may be but one Only Infinite in Nature, which is Matter. But when he says,
there cannot be an Infinite and Eternal Division, is very true, viz, in this
sense, that one single part cannot be actually infinitely divided, for the
Compositions hinder the Divisions in Nature, and the Divisions the
Compositions, so that Nature, being Matter, cannot be composed so, as not to
have parts, nor divided so, as that her parts should not be composed, but there
are nevertheless infinite divided parts in Nature, and in this sense there may
also be infinite divisions, as I have declared in my Book of Philosophy. P. 1.
c. 8.
And thus there are Infinite divisions of Infinite parts in Nature, but not
Infinite actual divisions of one single part; But though Infinite is without
end, yet my discourse of it shall be but short and end here, though not my
affection, which shall last and continue with the life of

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Humble Servant.

XVI.
MADAM,
AN Accident, says your Author, Elem. of Philos c. 8. ^rt. 2.
is nothing else, but the manner of our Conception of body, or that Faculty of
any body, by which it works in us a Conception of it self; To which I willingly
consent; but yet I say, that these qualities cannot be separated from the body,
for as impossible it is that the essence of Nature should be separable from
Nature, as impossible is it that the various modes or alterations, either of
Figures or Motions, should be separable from matter or body; Wherefore when he
goes on, and says, An accident is not a body, but in a body, yet not so, as if
any thing were Art. 3.
contained therein, as it for example, redness were in blood in the same manner
as blood is in a bloody cloth; but as magnitude is in that which is great, rest
in that which rests, motion in that which is moved; I answer, that in my
opinion, not any thing in Nature can be without a body, and that redness is as
well in blood, as blood is in a bloody cloth, or any other color in any thing
else; for there is no color without a body, but every color has as well a
body as any thing else, and if Color be a separable accident, I would faih
know, how it can be separated from a subject, being bodiless, for that which is
no body is nothing, and nothing cannot be taken away from any thing; Wherefore
as for natural Color it cannot be taken away from any creature, without the
parts of its substance or body; and as for artificial Colors, when they are
taken away, it is a separation of two bodies, which joined together; and if
Color, or Hardness, or Softness do change, it is nothing else but an
alteration of motions and not an annihilation, for all changes and alterations
remain in the power of Corporeal motions, as I have said in other places; for
we might as well say, life does not remain in nature, when a body turns from an
animal to some other figure, as believe that those, they name accidents, do not
remain in Corporeal Motions; Wherefore I am not of your Authors mind, when he
says, Art. 20.
that when a White thing is made black, the whiteness perishes; for it cannot
perish, although it is altered from white to black, being in the power of the
same matter, to turn it again from black to white, so as it may make infinite
Repetitions of the same thing; but by reason nature takes delight in variety,
she seldom uses such repetitions; nevertheless that does not take away the
Power of self-moving matter, for it does not; and it cannot, are two several
things, and the latter does not necessarily follow upon the former; Wherefore
not any, the least thing, can perish in Nature, for if this were possible, the
whole body of nature might perish also, for if so many. Fugures and Creatures
should be annihilated and perish without any supply or new Creation, Nature
would grow less, and at last become nothing; besides it is as difficult for
Nature to turn something into nothing, as to Create something out of nothing;
Wherefore as there is no annihilation or perishing in Nature, so there is
neither any new Creation in Nature. But your Author makes a difference between
bodies and accidents, saying, that bodies are things and not Generated, but
accidents are Generated and not things, Truly, Madam, these accidents seem to
me to be like Van Helmont's Lights, Gases, Blazes and Ideas; and Dr More's
Immaterial Substances or Demons, only in this Dr More has the better, that
his Immaterial Substances, are beings, which subsist of themselves, whereas
accidents do not, but their existence is in other bodies; But what they call
Accidents, are in my opinion nothing else but Corporeal Motions, and if these
accidents be generated, they must needs be bodies, for how nothing can be
Generated in nature, is not conceivable, and yet your Author denies, Art. 2.
that Accidents are something, namely some part of a natural thing; But as for
Generations, they are only various actions of self-moving matter, or a variety
of Corporeal Motions, and so are all Accidents whatsoever, so that there is not
any thing in nature, that can be made new, or destroyed, for whatsoever was and
shall be, is in nature, though not always in act, yet in power, as in the
nature and power of Corporeal motions, which is selfmoving matter, And as there
is no new Generation of Accidents, so there is neither a new Generation of
Motions; wherefore when your Author says, Art. 21.
That, when the hand, being moved, moves the pen, the motion does not go out
of the hand into the pen, for so the writing might be continued, though the
hand stood still, but a new motion is generated in the pen, and is the pens
motion: I am of his opinion, that the motion does not go out of the hand into
the pen, and that the motion of the pen, is the pens own motion; but I deny,
that after holding the hand a little while still, and beginning to write again,
a new motion of the pen is generated; for it is only a repetition, and not a
new generation, for the Hand, Pen and Ink, repeat but the same motion or action
of writing: Besides, Generation is made by Connection or Conjunction of parts,
moving by consent to such or such Figures, but the motion of the Hand or the
Pen is always one and the same; wherefore it is but the variation and
repetition in and of the same motion of the Hand, or Pen, which may be
continued in that manner infinitely, just as the same Corporeal Motions can
make infinite variations and repetitions of one and the same Figure, repeating
it as often as they please, as also making Copy of Copy; And although I do not
deny, but there are Generations in Nature, yet not annihilations or perishings,
for if any one motion or figure should perish, the matter must perish also; and
if any one part of matter can perish, all the matter in nature may perish also;
and if there can any new thing be made or created in nature, which has not
been before, there may also be a new Nature, and so by perishings and new
Creations, this World would not have continued an age; But surely whatsoever is
in Nature, has been existent always. Wherefore to conclude, it is not the
generation and perishing of an Accident that makes its subject to be changed,
but the production and alteration of the Form, makes it said to be generated or
destroyed, for matter will change its motions and figures without perishing or
annihilating; and whether there were words or not, there would be such causes
and effects; But having not the art of Logic to dispute with artificial words,
nor the art of Geometry to demonstrate my opinions by Mathematical Figures, I
fear they will not be so well received by the Learned; However, I leave them to
any man's unprejudiced Reason and Judgment, and devote my self to your service,
as becomes,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and faithful Servant.

XVII.
MADAM,
YOur Author concerning Place and Magnitude says, that Place is nothing out of
the mind, nor Part. 2. c. 8. a. 5.
Magnitude any thing within it; for Place is a mere Phantasme of a body of such
quantity and figure, and Magnitude a peculiar accident of the body; But this
does not well agree with my reason, for I believe that Place, Magnitude and
Body are but one thing, and that Place is as true an extension as Magnitude,
and not a feigned one; Neither am I of his opinion, that Place is Immovable,
but that place moves, according as the body moves, for not any body wants
place, because place and body is but one thing, and wheresoever is body, there
is also place, and wheresoever is place, there is body, as being one and the
same; Wherefore Motion cannot be a relinquishing of one place and acquiring
another, Art. 10.
for there is no such thing as place different from body, but what is called
change of place, is nothing but change of corporeal motions; for, say an house
stands in such a place, if the house be gone, the place is gone also, as being
impossible that the place of the house should remain, when the house is taken
away; like as a man when he is gone out of his chamber, his place is gone too;
It Is true, if the ground or foundation do yet remain, one may say, there stood
such an house heretofore, but yet the place of the house is not there really at
that present, unless the same house be built up again as it was before, and
then it has its place as before; Nevertheless the house being not there, it
cannot be said that either place or house are annihilated, viz, when the
materials are dissolved, no not when transformed into millions of several other
figures, for the house remains still in the power of all those several parts of
matter; and as for space, it is only a distance betwixt some parts or bodies;
But an Empty place signifies to my opinion Nothing, for if place and body are
one and the same, and empty is as much as nothing, then certainly these two
words cannot consist together, but are destructive to one another. Concerning,
that your Author says; Two bodies cannot be together in the same place, nor
Art. 8.
one body in two places at the same time, is very true, for there are no more
places then bodies, nor more bodies then places, and this is to be understood
as well of the grosser, as the purest parts of nature, of the mind as well as
of the body, of the rational and sensitive animate matter as well as of the
inanimate, for there is no matter, how pure and subtle soever, but is imbodied,
and all that has body has place. Likewise I am of his opinion, That one body
has always one and the same Art. 5.
magnitude; for, in my opinion, magnitude, place and body do not differ, and as
place, so magnitude can never be separated from body. But when he speaks of
Rest, I cannot believe there is any such thing truly in Nature, for it is
impossible to prove, that any thing is without Motion, either consistent, or
composing, or dissolving, or transforming motions, or the like, although not
altogether perceptible by our senses, for all the Matter is either moving or
moved, and although the moved parts are not capable to receive the nature of
self-motion from the self-moving parts, yet these self-moving parts, being
joined and mixed with all other parts of the moved matter, do always move the
same; for the Moved or Inanimate part of Matter, although it is a Part of it
self, yet it is so intermixed with the self-moving Animate Matter, as they make
but one Body; and though some parts of the Inanimate may be as pure as the
Sensitive Animate Matter, yet they are never so subtle as to be self-moving;
Wherefore the Sensitive moves in the Inanimate, and the Rational in the
Sensitive, but often the Rational moves in it self. And, although there is no
rest in nature, nevertheless Matter could have been without Motion, when as it
is impossible that Matter could be without place or magnitude, no more then
Variety can be without motion; And thus much at this present: I conclude, and
rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XVIII.
MADAM,
PAssing by those Chapters of your Authors, that treat of Power and Act, Identy
and Difference, Analogisme, Angle and Figure, Figures deficient, dimension of
Circles, and several others, most of which belong to art, as to Geometry, and
the like; I am come to that wherein he discourses of Sense and Animal Motion,
saying, That some Natural bodies have in themselves the patterns almost of all
things, and others of none C. 25. a. 1.
at all; Whereof my opinion is, that the sensitive and rational parts of Matter
are the living and knowing parts of Nature, and no part of nature can challenge
them only to it self, nor no creature can be sure, that sense is only in
Animal-kind, and reason in Mankind; for can any one think or believe that
Nature is ignorant and dead in all her other parts besides Animals? Truly this
is a very unreasonable opinion; for no man, as wise as he thinks himself, nay
were all Mankind joined into one body, yet they are not able to know it,
unless there were no variety of parts in nature, but only one whole and
individeable body, for other Creatures may know and perceive as much as
Animals, although they have not the same Sensitive Organs, nor the same manmer
or way of Perception. Next your Author says, The cause of Sense or Perception
consists herein, that the first organ of sense is touched and pressed; For when
the Art. 2.
uttermost part of the organ is pressed, it no sooner yields, but the part next
within it is pressed also, and in this manner the pressure or motion is
propagated through all the parts of the organ to the innermost. And thus also
the pressure of the uttermost part proceeds from the pressure of some more
remote body, and so continually, till we come to that, from which, as from its
fountain, we derive the Phantasme or Idea, that is made in us by our sense: And
this, whatsoever it be, is that we commonly call the object; Sense therefore is
some Internal motion in the Sentient, Generated by some Internal motion of the
Parts of the object, and propagated through all the media to the innermost part
of the organ. Moreover there being a resistance or reaction in the organ, by
reason of its internal motion against the motion propagated from the object,
there is also an endeavor in the organ opposite to the endeavor proceeding
from the object, and when that endeavor inwards is the last action in the act
of sense, then from the reaction a Phantasme or Idea has its being. This is
your Authors opinion, which if it were so, perception could not be effected so
suddenly, nay I think the sentient by so many pressures in so many perceptions,
would at last be pressed to death, besides the organs would take a great deal
of hurt, nay totally be removed out of their places, so as the eye would in
time be pressed into the center of the brain; And if there were any Resistance,
Reaction or Endeavor in the organ, opposite to the Endeavor of the object,
there would, in my opinion, be always a war between the animal senses and the
objects, the endeavor of the objects pressing one way, and the senses pressing
the other way, and if equal in their strengths, they would make a stop, and the
sensitive organs would be very much pained; Truly, Madam, in my opinion, it
would be like that Custom which formerly has been used at Newcastle, when a
man was married, the guests divided themselves, behind and before the
Bridegroom; the one party driving him back, the other forwards, so that one
time a Bridegroom was killed in this fashion; But certainly Nature has a more
quick and easy way of giving intelligence and knowledge to her Creatures, and
does not use such constraint and force in her actions; Neither is sense or
sensitive perception a mere Phantasme or Idea, but a Corporeal action of the
sensitive and rational matter, and according to the variation of the objects or
patterns, and the sensitive and rational motions, the perception also is
various, produced not by external pressure, but by internal self-motion, as I
have declared heretofore; and to prove, that the sensitive and rational
corporeal motions are the only cause of perception; I say, if those motions in
an animal move in another way, and not to such perceptions, then that animal
can neither hear, see, taste, smell, nor touch, although all his sensitive
organs be perfect, as is evident in a man falling into a swoon, where all the
time he is in a swoon, the pressure of the objects is made without any effect;
Wherefore, as the sensitive and rational corporeal motions make all that is in
nature, so likewise they make perception, as being perception it self, for all
self-motion is perception, but all perception is not animal perception, or
after an animal way; and therefore sense cannot decay nor die; but what is
called a decay or death, is nothing else but a change or alteration of those
Motions: But you will say, Madam, it may be, that one body, as an object,
leaves the print of its figure, in the next adjoining body, until it comes to
the organ of sense, I answer that then sost bodies only must be pressed, and
the object must be so hard as to make a print, and as for rare parts of matter,
they are not able to retain a print without self-motion; Wherefore it is not
probable that the parts of air should receive a print, and print the same again
upon the adjoining part, until the last part of the air print it upon the eye;
and that the exterior parts of the organ should print upon the interior, till
it come to the center of the Brain, without self-motion. Wherefore in my
opinion, Perception is not caused either by the printing of objects, nor by
pressures, for pressures would make a general stop of all natural motions,
especially if there were any reaction or resistance of sense; but according to
my reason, the sensitive and rational corporeal motions in one body, pattern
out the Figure of another body, as of an exterior object, which may be done
easily without any pressure or reaction; I will not say, that there is no
pressure or reaction in Nature, but pressure and reaction does not make
perception, for the sensitive and rational parts of matter make all perception
and variety of motion, being the most subtle parts of Nature, as self-moving,
as also divideable, and composeable, and alterable in their figurative motions,
for this Perceptive matter can change its substance into any figure whatsoever
in nature, as being not bound to one constant figure. But having treated hereof
before, and being to say more of it hereaster, this shall suffice for the
present, remaining always,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XIX.
MADAM,
TO discourse of the World and Stars, is more then I am able to do, wanting the
art of Astronomy and Geometry; wherefore passing by that Chapter of your
Author, I am come to that Chapter 27.
wherein he treats of Light, Heat and Colors; and to give you my opinion of
Light, I say, it is not the light of the Sun, that makes an Animal see, for we
can see inwardly in Dreams without the Suns light, but it is the sensitive and
rational Motions in the Eye and Brain that make such a figure as Light; For if
Light did press upon the Eye, according to your Authors opinion, it might put
the Eye into as much pain as Fire does, when it sticks its points into our skin
or flesh. The same may be said of Colors, for the sensitive motions make such
a figure, which is such a Color, and such a Figure, which is such a Color;
Wherefore Light, Heat and Color, are not bare and bodiless qualities; but such
figures made by corporeal self-motions, and are as well real and corporeal
objects as other figures are; and when these figures change or alter, it is
only that their motions alter, which may alter and change heat into cold, and
light into darkness, and black color into white. But by reason the motions of
the Sun are so constant, as the motions of any other kind of Creatures, it is
no more subject to be altered then all the World, unless Nature did it by the
command of God; for though the Parts of self-moving Matter be alterable, yet
all are not altered; and this is the reason, that the figure of Light in our
eye and brain is altered, as well as it is alterable, but not the real figure
of the Sun, neither does the Sun enter our eyes; and as the Light of the Sun is
made or patterned in the eye, so is the light of Glow-worms-tails, and
Cats-eyes, that shine in the dark, made not by the Sun's, but their own motions
in their own parts; The like when we dream of Light, the sensitive corporeal
motions working inwardly, make the figure of light on the inside of the eye, as
they did pattern out the figure of light on the out side of the eye when awake,
and the objects before them; for the sensitive motions of the eye pattern out
the figure of the object in the eye, and the rational motions make the same
figure in their own substance. But there is some difference between those
figures that perceive light, and those that are light themselves; for when we
sleep, there is made the figure of light, but not from a copy; but when the eye
sees light, that figure is made from a copy of the real figure of the Sun; but
those lights which are inherent, as in Glow-worms-tails, are original lights,
in which is as much difference as between a Man and his Picture; and as for the
swiftness of the Motions of light, and the violence of the Motions of fire, it
is very probable they are so, but they are a certain particular kind or sort of
swift and violent motions; neither will all sorts of swift and violent motions
make fire or light, as for example the swift and violent Circular motion of a
Whirlewind neither makes light nor fire; Neither is all fire light, nor all
light fire, for there is a sort of dead fire, as in Spices, Spirits, Oils, and
the like; and several sorts of lights, which are not hot, as the light which is
made in Dreams, as also the inherent lights in Glowworms, Cats-eyes,
Fish-bones, and the like; all which several fires and lights are made by the
self-moving matter and motions distinguishable by their figures, for those
Motions make such a figure for the Suns light, such a figure for Glowworms
light, such a figure for Cats-eyes light, and so some alteration in every sort
of light; The same for Fire, only Fire-light is a mixed figure, as partly of
the figure of Fire, and partly of the figure of Light: Also Colors are made
after the like manner, viz. so many several Colors, so many several Figures;
and as these Figures are less or more different, so are the Colors.

Thus, Madam, whosoever will study Nature, must consider the Figures of every
Creature, as well as their Motions, and must not make abstractions of Motion
and Figure from Matter, nor of Matter from Motion and Figure, for they are
inseparable, as being but one thing, viz. Corporeal Figurative Motions; and
whosoever conceives any of them as abstract, will, in my opinion, very much
err; but men are apt to make more difficulties and enforcements in nature then
nature ever knew. But to return to Light: There is no better argument to prove
that all objects of sight are figured in the Eye, by the sensitive, voluntary
or self-motions, without the pressure of objects, but that not only the
pressure of light would hurt the tender Eye, but that the eye does not see all
objects according to their Magnitude, but sometimes bigger, sometimes less: as
for example, when the eye looks through a small passage, as a
Prospective-glass, by reason of the difficulty of seeing a body through a small
hole, and the double figure of the glass being unequal and concave, the
corporeal motions use more force, by which the object is enlarged, like as a
spark of fire by force is dilated into a great fire, and a drop of water by
blowing into a bubble; so the corporeal motions do double and treble their
strength, making the Image of the object exceeding large in the eye; for though
the eye be contracted, yet the Image in the eye is enlarged to a great
extension; for the sensitive and rational matter is extremely subtle, by reason
it is extremely pure, by which it has more means and ways of magnifying then
the Perspective-glass. But I intend to write more of this subject in my next,
and so I break off here, resting,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XX.
MADAM,
SOme perhaps will question the truth or probability of my saying, that Light
is a Body, objecting that if light were a body, when the Sun is absent or
retires under our Horizon, its light would leave an empty place, or if there
were no empty place but all full, the light of the Sun at its return would not
have room to display it self, especially in so great a compass as it does, for
two bodies cannot be in one place at one time. I answer, all bodies carry their
places along with them, for body and place go together and are inseparable, and
when the light of the Sun is gone, darkness succeeds, and when darkness is
gone, light succeeds, so that it is with light and darkness as with all
Creatures else; For you cannot believe, that if the whole World were removed,
there would be a place of the world left, for there cannot be an empty nothing,
no more then there can be an empty something; but if the world were
annihilated, the place would be annihilated too, place and body being one and
the same thing; and therefore in my opinion, there be no more places then there
are bodies, nor no more bodies then there are places.

Secondly, They will think it absurd that I say, the eye can see without light;
but in my opinion it seems not absurd, but very rational, for we may see in
dreams, and some do see in the dark, not in their fancy or imagination, but
really; and as for dreams, the sensitive corporeal motions make a light on the
inside of the organ of sight really, as I have declared in my former Letter.
But that we do not see ordinarily without exterior Light, the reason is, that
the sensitive Motions cannot find the outward objects to pattern out without
exterior light, but all perception does not proceed from light, for all other
perception besides animal sight requires not light. Neither in my opinion, does
the Perception of sight in all Creatures but Animals, but yet Animals do often
see in the dark, and in sleep: I will not say but that the animate matter which
by self-motion does make the Perception of light with other perceptive Figures,
and so animal perceptive light may be the presenter or ground perceptive figure
of sight; yet the sensitive corporeal motions can make other figures without
the help of light, and such as light did never present: But when the eye
patterns out an exterior object presented by light, it patterns also out the
object of light; for the sensitive motions can make many figures by one act,
not only in several organs, but in one organ; as for example, there is
presented to sight a piece of Imbroydery, wherein is silk, silver and gold upon
Satin in several forms or figures, as several flowers, the sensitive motions
straight by one and the same act, pattern out all those several figures of
flowers, as also the figures of Silk, Silver, Gold and Satin, without any
pressure of these objects, or motions in the medium, for if they all should
press, the eye would no more see the exterior objects, then the nose, being
stopped, could smell a presented perfume;

Thirdly, They may ask me, if sight be made in the eye, and proceeds not from
the outward object, what is the reason that we do not see inwardly, but
outwardly as from us? I answer, when we see objects outwardly, as from us, then
the sensitive motions work on the outside of the organ, which organ being
outwardly unequal, causes us to see outwardly, as from us, but in dreams we see
inwardly; also the sensitive motions do pattern out the distance together with
the object: But you will say, the body of the distance, as the air, cannot be
perceived, and yet we can perceive the distance; I answer, you could not
perceive the distance, but by such or such an object as is subject to your
sight; for you do not see the distance more then the air, or the like rare
body, that is between grosser objects; for if there were no stars, nor planets,
nor clouds, nor earth, nor water, but only air, you would not see any space or
distance; but light being a more visible body then air, you might figure the
body of air by light, but so, as in an extensive or dilating way; for when the
mind or the rational matter conceives any thing that has not such an exact
figure, or is not so perceptible by our senses; then the mind uses art, and
makes such figures, which stand like to that; as for example, to express
infinite to it self, it dilates it parts without alteration, and without
limitation or circumference; Likewise, when it will conceive a constant
succession of Time, it draws out its parts into the figure of a line; and if
eternity, it figures a line without beginning and end: But as for Immaterial,
no mind can conceive that, for it cannot put it self into nothing, although it
can dilate and rarifie it self to an higher degree, but must stay within the
circle of natural bodies, as I within the circle of your Commands, to express
my self,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and obedient Servant.

XXI.
MADAM,
HEat and Cold, according to your Authors opinion, are made by Dilation and
Contraction: for says he, When the Motion of the ambient ethereal C. 28. ^. 1.
substance makes the spirits and fluid parts of our bodies tend outward, we
acknowledge heat, but by the endeavor inwards of the same spirits and humors we
feel cold: so that to cool is to make the exterior parts of the body endeavor
inwards, by a motion contrary to that of calefaction, by which the internal
parts are called outward. He therefore that would know the cause of Cold, must
find by what motion the exterior parts of any body endeavor to retire inwards.
But I desire you to consider, Madam, that there be moist Colds, and dry Heats,
as well as dry Colds, and moist Heats; wherefore all sorts of Cold are not made
by the retyring of parts inwards, which is contraction or attraction; neither
are all sorts of Heat made by parts tending outward, which is dilation or
rarefaction; for a moist cold is made by dilation, and a dry heat by
contraction, as well as a moist heat is made by dilation, and a dry cold by
contraction: But your Author makes not this difference, but only a difference
between a dilated heat, and a contracted cold; but because a cold wind is made
by breath blown through pinched or contracted lips, and an hot wind by breath
through opened and extended lips, should we judge that all heat and cold must be
made after one manner or way? The contracted mouth makes Wind as well as the
dilated, but yet Wind is not made that way, as heat and cold; for it may be,
that only the air pressed together makes wind, or it may be that the corporeal
motions in the air may change air into wind, as they change water into vapor,
and vapor into air; or it may be something else that is invisible and rare, as
air; and there may be several sorts of wind, air, heat, cold, as of all other
Creatures, more then man is capable to know. As for your Authors opinion
concerning the congealing of Water, and how Ice is made, I will not contradict
it, only I think nature has an easier way to effect it, then he describes;
Wherefore my opinion is, that it is done by altering motions; as for example,
the corporeal motions making the figure of water by dilation in a Circle
figure, only alter from such a dilating circular figure into a contracted
square, which is Ice, or into such a contracted triangle, as is snow: And thus
water and vapor may be changed with ease, without any forcing, pressing,
raking, or the like. The same may be said of hard and bent bodies; and of
restitution, as also of air, thunder and lightning, which are all done by an
easy change of motion, and changing into such or such a figure is not the
motion of Generation, which is to build a new house with old materials, but
only a Transformation; I say a new house with old materials; not that I mean
there is any new Creation in nature, of any thing that was not before in
nature; for nature is not God, to make new beings out of nothing, but any thing
may be called new, when it is altered from one figure into another. I add no
more at this time, but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXII.
MADAM,
THe Generation of sound, according to your worthy Authors opinion, is as
follows: As Vision, Chapter 29. a. 1.
says he, so hearing is Generated by the medium, but but not in the same
manner; for sight is from pressure, that is, from an endeavor, in which there
is no perceptible progression of any of the parts of the medium, but one part
urging or thrusting on another, propagateth that action successively to any
distance whatsoever; where as the motion of the medium, by which sound is made,
is a stroke; for when we hear, the drum of the Ear, which is the first organ of
hearing, is stricken, and the drum being stricken, the Pia Matter is also
shaken, and with it the arteries inserted into it, by which the action
propagated to the heart it self, by the reaction of the heart a Phantasme is
made which we call Sound. Thus far your Author: To which give me leave to
reply, that I fear, if the Ear was bound to hear any loud Music, or another
sound a good while, it would soundly be beaten, and grow sore and bruised with
so many strokes; but since a pleasant sound would be rendered very unpleasant in
this manner, my opinion is, that like as in the Eye, so in the Ear the
corporeal sensitive motions do pattern out as many several figures, as sounds
are presented to them; but if these motions be irregular, then the figure of
the sound in the ear is not perfect according to the original; for if it be,
that the motions are tired with figuring, or the object of sound be too far
distant from the sensitive organ, then they move slowly and weakly, not that
they are tired or weak in strength, but with working and repeating one and the
same object, and so through love to variety, change from working regularly to
move irregularly, so as not to pattern outward objects as they ought, and then
there are no such patterns made at all, which we call to be deaf; and sometimes
the sensitive motions do not so readily perceive a soft sound near, as a
stronger farther off. But to prove it is not the outward object of sound with
its striking or pressing motion, nor the medium, that causes this perception of
sense, if there be a great solid body, as a wall, or any other partition
betwixt two rooms, parting the object and the sensitive organ, so, as the sound
is not able to press it, nevertheless the perception will be made; And as for
pipes to convey sounds, the perception is more fixed and perfecter in united
then in dilated or extended bodies, and then the sensitive motions can make
perfecter patterns; for the stronger the objects are, the more perfect are the
figures and patterns of the objects, and the more perfect is the perception.
But when the sound is quite out of the ear, then the sensitive motions have
altered the patterning of such figures to some other action; and when the sound
fades by degrees, then the figure or pattern alters by degrees; but for the
most part the sensitive corporeal motions alter according as the objects are
presented, or the perception patterns out. Neither do they usually make figures
of outward objects, if not perceived by the senses, unless through
Irregularities as in Mad men, which see such and such things, when as these
things are not near, and then the sensitive motions work by rote, or after
their own voluntary invention. As for Reflection, it is a double perception, and
so a double figure of one object; like as many pictures of one man, where some
are more perfect then others, for a copy of a copy is not so perfect as a copy
of an original. But the recoyling of sound is, that the sensitive motions in
the ear begin a new pattern, before they dissolved the former, so as there is
no perfect alteration or change, from making to dissolving, but pattern is made
upon pattern, which causes a confusion of figures, the one being neither
perfectly finished, nor the other perfectly made. But it is to be observed,
that not always the sensitive motions in the organs take their pattern from the
original, but from copies; as for example, the sensitive motions in the eye,
pattern out the figure of an eye in a glass, and so do not take a pattern from
the original it self, but by an other pattern, representing the figure of the
eye in a Looking-glass; The same does the Ear, by patterning out Echoes, which
is but a pattern of a pattern; But when as a man hears himself speak or make a
sound, then the corporeal sensitive motions in the Ear, pattern out the object
or figure made by the motions of the tongue and the throat, which is voice; By
which we may observe, that there may be many figures made by several motions
from one original; as for example, the figure of a word is made in a man's
mouth, then the copy of that figure is made in the ear, then in the brain, and
then in the memory, and all this in one Man: Also a word being made in a man's
mouth, the air takes a copy or many copies thereof; but the Ear patterns them
both out, first the original coming from the mouth, and then the copy made in
the air, which is called an Echo, and yet not any strikes or touches each
others parts, only perceives and patterns out each others figure. Neither are
their substances the same, although the figures be alike; for the figure of a
man may be carved in wood, then cut in brass, then in stone, and so forth,
where the figure may be always the same, although the substances which do
pattern out the figure are several, viz. Wood, Brass, Stone, etc. and so
likewise may the figure of a stone be figured in the fleshy substance of the
Eye, or the figure of light or color, and yet the substance of the Eye remains
still the same; neither does the substantial figure of a stone, or tree,
patterned out by the sensitive corporeal motions, in the flesh of an animal
eye, change from being a vegetable or mineral, to an animal, and if this cannot
be done by nature, much less by art; for if the figure of an animal be carved
in wood or stone, it does not give the wood or stone any animal knowledge, nor
an animal substance, as flesh, bones, blood, etc. no more does the patterning
or figuring of a Tree give a vegetable knowledge, or the substance of wood to
the eye, for the figure of an outward object does not alter the substance that
patterns it out or figures it, but the patterning substance does pattern out
the figure, in it self, or in its own substance, so as the figure which is
pattern'd, has the same life and knowledge with the substance by and in which
it is figured or pattern'd, and the inherent motions of the same substance; and
according as the sensitive and rational self-moving matter moves, so figures
are made; and thus we see, that lives, knowledges, motions and figures are all
material, and all Creatures are endued with life, knowledge, motion and figure,
but not all alike or after the same manner. But to conclude this discourse of
perception of Sound, the Ear may take the object of sound afar off, as well as
at a near distance; not only if many figures of the same sound be made from
that great distance, but if the interposing parts be not so thick, close, or
many as to hinder or obscure the object from the animal Perception in the
sensitive organ; for if a man lays his Ear near to the Ground, the Ear may hear
at a far distance, as well as the Eye can see, for it may hear the noise of a
troop afar off, perception being very subtle and active; Also there may several
Copies be made from the Original, and from the last Copy nearest to the Ear,
the Ear may take a pattern, and so pattern out the noise in the organ, without
any strokes to the Ear, for the subtle matter in all Creatures does inform and
perceive. But this is well to be observed, that the figures of objects are as
soon made, as perceived by the sensitive motions in their work of patterning.
And this is my Opinion concerning the Perception of Sound, which together with
the rest I leave to your Ladyships and others wiser Judgment, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIII.
MADAM,
I Perceive by your last, that you cannot well apprehend my meaning, when I say
that the print or figure of a Body Printed or Carved, is not made by the
motions of the body Printing or Carving it, but by the motions of the body or
substance Printed or Carved; for say you, Does a piece of Wood carve it self,
or a black Patch of a Lady cut its own figure by its own motions? Before I
answer you, Madam, give me leave to ask you this question, whether it be the
motion of the hand, or the Instrument, or both, that print or carve such or
such a body? Perchance you will say, that the motion of the hand moves the
Instrument, and the Instrument moves the Wood which is to be carved: Then I
ask, whether the motion that moves the Instrument, be the Instruments, or the
Hands? Perchance you will say the Hands; but I answer, how can it be the Hands
motion, if it be in the Instrument? You will say, perhaps, the motion of the
hand is tranferred out of the hand into the instrument, and so from the
instrument into the carved figure; but give me leave to ask you, was this
motion of the hand, that was transferred, Corporeal or Incorporeal? If you say,
Corporeal, then the hand must become less and weak, but if Incorporeal, I ask
you, how a bodiless motion can have force and strength to carve and cut? But
put an Impossible proposition, as that there is an Immaterial motion, and that
this Incorporeal motion could be transferred out of one body into another; then
I ask you, when the hand and instrument cease to move, what is become of the
motion? Perhaps you will say, the motion perishes or is annihilated, and when
the hand and the instrument do move again, to the carving or cutting of the
figure, then a new Incorporeal Motion is created; Truly then there will be a
perpetual creation and annihilation of Incorporeal motions, that is, of that
which naturally is nothing; for an Incorporeal being is as much as a natural
No-thing, for Natural reason cannot know nor have naturally any perception or
Idea of an Incorporeal being: besides, if the motion be Incorporeal, then it
must needs be a supernatural Spirit, for there is not any thing else Immaterial
but they, and then it will be either an Angel or a Devil, or the Immortal Soul
of man; but if you say it is the supernatural Soul, truly I cannot be persuaded
that the supernatural Soul should not have any other employment then to carve
or cut prints, or figures, or move in the hands, or heels, or legs, or arms of
a Man; for other animals have the same kind of Motions, and then they might
have a Supernatural Soul as well as Man, which moves in them. But if you say,
that these tranferrable motions are material, then every action whereby the
hand moves to the making or moving of some other body, would lessen the number
of the motions in the hand, and weaken it, so that in the writing of one
letter, the hand would not be able to write a second letter, at least not a
third. But I pray, Madam, consider rationally, that though the Artificer or
Workman be the occasion of the motions of the carved body, yet the motions of
the body that is carved, are they which put themselves into such or such a
figure, or give themselves such or such a print as the Artificer intended; for
a Watch, although the Artist or Watch-maker be the occasional cause that the
Watch moves in such or such an artificial figure, as the figure of a Watch, yet
it is the Watches own motion by which it moves; for when you carry the Watch
about you, certainly the Watch-makers hand is not then with it as to move it;
or if the motion of the Watch-makers hand be transferred into the Watch, then
certainly the Watch-maker cannot make another Watch, unless there be a new
creation of new motions made in his hands; so that God and Nature would be as
much troubled and concerned in the making of Watches, as in the making of a new
World; for God created this World in six days, and rested the seventh day, but
this would be a perpetual Creation; Wherefore I say that some things may be
Occasional causes of other things, but not the Prime or Principal causes; and
this distinction is very well to be considered, for there are no frequenter
mistakes then to confound these two different causes, which make so many
confusions in natural Philosophy; and this is the Opinion of,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIV.
MADAM,
IN answer to your question, What makes Echo, I say, it is that which makes
all the effects of Nature, viz. self-moving matter; I know, the common opinion
is, that Echo is made like as the figure of a Face, or the like, in a
Looking-glass, and that the Reverberation of sound is like the Reflection of
sight in a Looking-glass; But I am not of that opinion, for both Echo, and
that which is called the Reflection in a Looking-glass, are made by the
self-moving matter, by way of patterning and copying out. But then you will ask
me, whether the glass takes the copy of the face, or the face prints its copy
on the glass, or whether it be the medium of light and air that makes it? I
answer, although many Learned men say, that as all perception, so also the
seeing of ones face in a Looking-glass, and Echo, are made by impression and
reaction; yet I cannot in my simplicity conceive it, how bodies that come not
near, or touch each other, can make a figure by impression and reaction: They
say it proceeds from the motions of the Medium of light, or air, or both, viz.
that the Medium is like a long stick with two ends, whereof one touches the
object, the other the organ of sense, and that one end of it moving, the other
moves also at the same point of Time, by which motions it may make many several
figures; But I cannot conceive, how this motion of pressing forward and
backward should make so many figures, wherein there is so much variety and
curiosity. But, say light and air are as one figure, and like as a seal do
print another body; I answer, if any thing could print, yet it is not probable,
that so soft and rare bodies as light and air, could print such solid bodies as
glass, nor could air by reverberation make such a sound as Echo. But mistake
me not, for, I do not say, that the Corporeal motions of light or air, cannot,
or do not pencil, copy, or pattern out any figure, for both light and air are
very active in such sorts of Motions, but I say, they cannot do it on any other
bodies but their own. But to cut off tedious and unnecessary disputes, I return
to the expressing of my own opinion, and believe, that the glass in its own
substance does figure out the copy of the face, or the like, and from that copy
the sensitive motions in the eyes take another copy, and so the rational from
the sensitive; and in this manner is made both rational and sensitive
perception, sight and knowledge. The same with Echoes; for the air patterns out
the copy of the sound, and then the sensitive corporeal motions in the ear
pattern again this copy from the air, and so do make the perception and sense
of hearing. You may ask me, Madam, if it be so, that the glass and the air copy
out the figure of the face and of sound, whether the Glass may be said to see
and the Air to speak? I answer, I cannot tell that; for though I say, that the
air repeats the words, and the glass represents the face, yet I cannot guess
what their perceptions are, only this I may say, that the air has an
elemental, and the glass a mineral, but not an animal perception. But if these
figures were made by the pressures of several objects or parts, and by
reaction, there could not be such variety as there is, for they could but act
by one sort of motion: Likewise is it improbable, that sounds, words or voices,
should like a company of Wild-Geese fly in the air, and so enter into the ears
of the hearers, as they into their nests: Neither can I conceive, how in this
manner a word can enter so many ears, that is, be divided into every ear, and
yet strike every ear with an undivided vocal sound; You will say, as a small
fire does heat and warm all those that stand by; for the heat issues from the
fire, as the light from the Sun. I answer, all what issues and has motion,
has a Body, and yet most learned men deny that sound, light and heat have
bodies: But if they grand of light that it has a body, they say it moves and
presses the air, and the air the eye, and so of heat; which if so, then the air
must not move to any other motion but light, and only to one sort of light, as
the Suns light; for if it did move in any other motion, it would disturb the
light; for if a Bird did but fly in the air, it would give all the region of
air another motion, and so put out, or alter the light, or at least disturb it;
and wind would make a great disturbance in it. Besides, if one body did give
another body motion, it must needs give it also substance, for motion is either
something or nothing, body or no body, substance or no substance; if nothing,
it cannot enter into another body; if something, it must lessen the bulk of the
body it quits, and increase the bulk of the body it enters, and so the Sun and
Fire with giving light and heat, would become less, for they cannot both give
and keep at once, for this is as impossible, as for a man to give to another
creature his human Nature, and yet to keep it still. Wherefore my opinion is
for heat, that when many men stand round about a fire, and are heated and
warmed by it, the fire does not give them any thing, nor do they receive
something from the fire, but the sensitive motions in their bodies pattern out
the object of the fires heat, and so they become more or less hot according as
their patterns are numerous or perfect; And as for air, it patterns out the
light of the Sun, and the sensitive motions in the eyes of animals pattern out
the light in the air. The like for Echoes, or any other sound, and for the
figures which are presented in a Looking-glass. And thus millions of parts or
creatures may make patterns of one or more objects, and the objects neither
give nor loose any thing. And this I repeat here, that my meaning of Perception
may be the better understood, which is the desire of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXV.
MADAM,
I Perceive you are not fully satisfied with my former Letter concerning Echo,
and a figure presented in a Looking-glass; for you say, how is it possible, if
Echo consists in the ears patterning out of a voice or sound, but that it will
make a confusion in all the parts of the air? My answer is, that I do not say
that Echo is only made by the patterning out of the voice or sound, but by
repeating the same voice or sound, which repetition is named an Echo, for
millions of ears in animals may pattern out a voice or words, and yet never
repeat them, and so may millions of parts of the air; wherefore Echo does not
consist in the bare patterning out, but in the repetition of the same sound or
words, which are pattern'd out; and so some parts of the air may at one and the
same time pattern out a sound and not repeat it, and some may both pattern out,
and repeat it, but some may neither pattern out, nor repeat it, and therefore
the Repetition, not the bare Patterning out is called Echo: Just as when two
or more men do answer or mock each other, and repeat each others words, it is
not necessary, if there were a thousand standers by, that they should all do
the same. And as for the figure presented in a Looking-glass, I cannot conceive
it to be made by pressure and reaction; for although there is both pressure and
reaction in nature, and those very frequent amongst natures Parts, yet they do
neither make perception nor production. although both pressure and reaction are
made by corporeal self-motions; Wherefore the figure presented in a
Looking-glass, or any other smooth glassie body, is, in my opinion, only made
by the motions of the Looking-glass, which do both pattern out; and present the
figure of an external object in the Glass: But you will say, why do not the
motions of other bodies pattern out, and present the figures of external
objects, as well as smooth glassie bodies do? I answer, they may pattern out
external objects, for any thing I know; but the reason that their figures are
not presented to our eyes, lies partly in the presenting subject it self,
partly in our sight; for it is observed, that two things are chiefly required
in a subject that will present the figure of an external object; first it must
be smooth, even and glassie, next it must not be transparent: the first is
manifest by experience; for the subject being rough and uneven, will never be
able to present such a figure; as for example, A piece of steel rough and
unpolished, although it may perhaps pattern out the figure of an external
object, yet it will never present its figure, but as soon as it is polished,
and made smooth and glassie, the figure is presently perceived. But this is to
be observed, that smooth and glassie bodies do not always pattern out exterior
objects exactly, but some better, some worse; like as Painters have not all the
same ingenuity; neither do all eyes pattern out all objects exactly; which
proves that the perception of sight is not made by pressure and reaction, o:
herwise there would be no difference, but all eyes would see alike, Next I say,
it is observed, that the subject which will present the figure of an external
object, must not be transparent; the reason is, that the figure of Light being
a substance of a piercing and penetrating quality, has more force on
transparent, then on other solid dark bodies, and so disturbs the figure of an
external object pattern'd out in a transparent body, and quite over-masters it.
But you will say, you have found by experience, that if you hold a burning
Candle before a Transparentglass, although it be in an open Sun-light, yet the
figure of light and flame of the Candle will clearly be seen in the Glass. I
answer, that it is an other thing with the figure of Candlelight, then of a
duskish or dark body; for a Candlelight, though it is not of the same sort as
the Suns light, yet it is of the same nature and quality, and therefore the
Candlelight does resist and oppose the light of the Sun, so that it cannot
have so much power over it, as over the figures of other bodies patterned out
and presented in Transparent-glass. Lastly, I say, that the fault oftentimes
lies in the perceptive motions of our sight, which is evident by a plain and
Concave-glass; for in a plain Looking-glass, the further you go from it, the
more your figure presented in the glass seems to draw backward; and in a
Concave-glass, the nearer you go to it, the more seems your figure to come
forth: which effects are like as an house or tree appears to a Traveller; for,
as the man moves from the house or tree, so the house or tree seems to move
from the man; or like one that sails upon a Ship, who imagines that the Ship
stands still, and the Land moves; when as yet it is the Man and the Ship that
moves, and not the House, or Tree, or the Land: so when a Man turns round in a
quick motion, or when his head is dizzie, he imagines the room or place, where
he is, turns round. Wherefore it is the Inherent Perceptive motions in the Eye,
and not the motions in the Looking-glass, which cause these effects. And as for
several figures that are presented in one glass, it is absurd to imagine that
so many several figures made by so many several motions should touch the eye;
certainly this would make such a disturbance, if all figures were to enter or
but to touch the eye, as the eye would not perceive any of them, at least not
distinctly; Wherefore it is most probable that the glass patterns out those
figures, and the sensitive corporeal motions in the eye take again a pattern
from those figures patterned out by the glass, and so make copies of copies;
but the reason why several figures are presented in one glass in several
places, is, that two perfect figures cannot be in one point, nor made by one
motion, but by several corporeal motions. Concerning a Looking-glass, made in
the form or shape of a Cylinder, why it represents the figure of an external
object in an other shape and posture then the object is, the cause is the shape
and form of the Glass, and not the patterning motions in the Glass. But this
discourse belongs properly to the Optics, wherefore I will leave it to those
that are versed in that Art, to enquire and search more after the rational
truth thereof. In the mean time, my opinion is, that though the object is the
occasion of the figure presented in a Looking-glass, yet the figure is made by
the motions of the glass or body that presents it, and that the figure of the
glass perhaps may be patterned out as much by the motions of the object in its
own substance, as the figure of the object is patterned out and presented by
the motions of the glass in its own body or substance. And thus I conclude and
rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVI.
MADAM,
SInce I mentioned in my last that Light did disturb the figures of External
objects presented in Transparent bodies; you were pleased to ask, Whether light
does penetrate transparent bodies? I answer, for any thing I know, it may; for
when I consider the subtle, piercing and penetrating nature of light, I believe
it does; but again, when I consider that light is presented to our sight by
transparent bodies only, and not by duskish and dark bodies, and yet that
those duskish bodies are more porous then the transparent bodies, so that the
light has more passage to pass through them, then through transparent bodies;
but that on the contrary, those dark bodies, as Wood, and the like, do quite
obscure the light, when as transparent bodies, as Glass, etc. transmit it, I am
half persuaded that the transparent bodies, as Glass, rather present the Light
by patterning it out, then by giving it passage: Also I am of a mind, that the
air in a room may pattern out the Light from the Glass, for the Light in a room
does not appear so clear as in the Glass; also if the Glass be any way
defective, it does not present the Light so perfectly, whereas, if it were the
penetration of light through the glass, the light would pass through all sorts
of glass alike, which it does not, but is more clearly seen through some, and
more obscurely through others, according to the goodness or purity of the
glass. But you may say, that the light divulges the imperfection or goodness of
the glass; I answer, so it does of any other objects perceived by our sight;
for light is the presenter of objects to the sense and perception of sight, and
for any thing I know, the corporeal optic motions make the figure of light,
the ground figure of all other figures patterned out by the corporeal optic
motions, as in dreams, or when as some do see in the dark, that is, without the
help of exterior light. But you may say, That if the glass and the air in a
room did pattern out the figure of light, those patterns of light would remain
when light is absent: I answer, That is not usual in nature; for when the
object removes, the Pattern alters; I will not say but that the corporeal
optic motions may work by rote without objects, but that is irregular, as in
some distempers. And thus, Madam, I have given you my opinion also to this your
question; if you have any more scruples, I pray let me know of them, and assure
your self that I shall be ready upon all occasions to express my self,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XXVII.
MADAM,
YOur desire is to know, why sound is louder in a Vault, and in a large Room
then in a less? I answer, A Vault or arched Figure is the freest from
obstruction, as being without corners and points, so as the sensitive and
rational corporeal motions of the Ear can have a better perception; like as the
Eye can see farthest from a hill then being upon a level ground, because the
prospect is freer from the hill, as without obstruction, unless it be so cloudy
that the clouds do hinder the perception; And as the eye can have a better
prospect upon a hill, so the ear a stronger perception in a Vault; And as for
sound, that it is better perceived in a large, then in a little close room or
place, it is somewhat like the perception of sent, for the more the odorous
parts are bruised, the stronger is that perception of sent, as being repeated
double or treble, which makes the perception stronger, like as a thick body is
stronger then a thin one; So likewise the perception of sound in the air; for
though not all the parts of the air make repetitions, yet some or many make
patterns of the sound; the truth is, Air is as industrious to divulge or
present a found, by patterns to the Ear, as light does objects to the Eye. But
then you may ask me, Why a long hollow pipe does convey a voice to the ear more
readily, then any large and open place? My answer is, That the Parts of the air
in a long pipe are more Composed and not at liberty to wander, so that upon
necessity they must move only to the patterning out of the sound, having no
choice, which makes the sound much stronger, and the perception of the Ear
perfecter; But as for Pipes, Vaults, Prospects, as also figures presented in a
room through a little hole, inverted, and many the like, belongs more to
Artists then to my study, for though Natural Philosophy gives or points out the
Ground, and shows the reason, yet it is the Artist that Works; Besides it is
more proper for Mathematicians to discourse of, which study I am not versed in;
and so leaving it to them, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVIII.
MADAM,
FRom Sound I am come to Sent, in the discourse whereof, your Author Chapter 29.
art. 12.
is pleased to set down these following propositions: 1. That smelling is
hindered by cold and helped by heat: 2. That when the Wind blows from the
object, the smell is the stronger, and when it blows from the sentient toward
the object, the weaker, which by experience is found in dogs, that follow
thetrack of beasts by the Sent: 3. That such bodies as are last pervious to the
fluid medium, yield less smell then such as are more pervious: 4. That such
bodies as are of their own nature odorous, become yet more odorous, when they
are bruised: 5. That when the breath is stopped (at least in man) nothing can
be smelt: 6. That the Sense of smelling is also taken away by the stopping of
the Nostrils, though the mouth be left open. To begin from the last, I say,
that the nose is like the other sensitive organs, which if they be stopped, the
corporeal sensitive motions cannot take copies of the exterior objects, and
therefore must alter their action of patterning to some other, for when the eye
is shut and cannot perceive outward objects then it works to the Sense of
Touch, or on the inside of the organ to some phantasmes; and so do the rest of
the Senses. As for the stopping of breath, why it hinders the Sent, the cause
is, that the nostrils and the mouth are the chief organs, to receive air and to
let out breath: but though they be common passages for air and breath, yet
taste is only made in the mouth and tongue, and sent in the nose; not by the
pressure of meat, and the odoriferous object, but by patterning out the several
figures or objects of sent and taste, for the nose and the mouth will smell and
taste one, nay several things at the same time, like as the eye will see light,
color, and other objects at once, which I think can hardly be done by
pressures; and the reason is, that the sensitive motions in the sensitive
organs make patterns of several objects at one time, which is the cause, that
when flowers, and such like odoriferous bodies are bruised, there are as many
figures made as there are parts bruised or divided, and by reason of so many
figures the sensitive knowledge is stronger; but that stones, minerals, and the
like, seem not so strong to our smell, the reason is, that their parts being
close and united, the sensitive motions in the organ cannot so readily perceive
and pattern them out, as those bodies which are more porous and divided. But as
for the wind blowing the sent either to or from the sentient, it is like a
window or door that by the motion of opening and shutting, hinders or
disturbeth the sight; for bodies coming between the object and the organ, make
a stop of that perception. And as for the Dogs smelling out the track of
Beasts, the cause is, that the earth or ground has taken a copy of that sent,
which copy the sensitive motions in the nose of the Dog do pattern out, and so
long as that figure or copy lasts, the Dog perceives the sent, but if he does
not follow or hunt readily, then there is either no perfect copy made by the
ground, or otherwise he cannot find it, which causes him to seek and smell
about until he has it; and thus smell is not made by the motion of the air,
but by the figuring motions in the nose: Where it is also to be observed, that
not only the motions in one, but in millions of noses, may pattern out one
little object at one time, and therefore it is not, that the object of sent
fills a room by sending out the sent from its substance, but that so many
figures are made of that object of sent by so many several sensitive motions,
which pattern the same out; and so the air, or ground, or any other creature,
whose sensitive motions pattern out the object of sent, may perceive the same,
although their sensitive organs are not like to those of animal creatures; for
if there be but such sensitive motions and perceptions, it is no matter for
such organs. Lastly, it is to be observed, That all Creatures have not the same
strength of smelling, but some smell stronger, some weaker, according to the
disposition of their sensitive motions: Also there be other parts in the body,
which pattern out the object of sent, besides the nose, but those are interior
parts, and take their patterns from the nose as the organ properly designed for
it; neither is their resentment the same, because their motions are not alike,
for the stomach may perceive and pattern out a sent with aversion, when the
nose may pattern it out with pleasure. And thus much also of Sent; I conclude
and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXIX.
MADAM,
COncerning your Learned Authors discourse of Density and Rality, he defines C.
30. a. 1.
Thick to be that, which takes up more parts of a space given; and thin, which
contains fewer parts of the same magnitude: not that there is more matter in
one place then in an other equal place, but a greater quantity of some named
body; wherefore the multitude and paucity of the parts contained within the
same space do constitute density and rarity. Where of my opinion is, That there
is no more nor less space or place then body according to its' dilation or
contraction, and that space and place are dilated and contracted with the body,
according to the magnitude of the body, for body, place and magnitude are the
same thing, only place is in regard of the several parts of the body, and there
is as well space betwixt things distant a hairs breadth from one another, as
betwixt things distant a million of miles, but yet this space is nothing from
the body; but it makes, that that body has not the same place with this body,
that is, that this body is not that body, and that this bodies place is not
that bodies place. Next your Author says, Art. 2.
He has already clearly enough demonstrated, that there can be no beginning of
motion, but from an external and moved body, and that heavy bodies being once
cast upwards cannot be cast down again, but by external motion. Truly, Madam, I
will not speak of your Authors demonstrations, for it is done most by art,
which I have no knowledge in, but I think I have probably declared, that all the
actions of nature are not forced by one part, driving, pressing, or shoving
another, as a man does a wheel-barrow, or a whip a horse; nor by reactions, as
if men were at football or cuffs, or as men with carts meeting each other in a
narrow lane. But to prove there is no self-motion in nature, he goes on and
says; To attribute to created bodies the power to move themselves, what is it
else, then to say that there be creatures which have no dependence upon the
Creator? To which I answer, That if man. (who is but a single part of nature)
has given him by God the power and a free will of moving himself, why should
not God give it to Nature? Neither can I see, how it can take off the
dependence upon God, more then Eternity; for if there be an Eternal Creator,
there is also an Eternal Creature, and if an Eternal Master, an Eternal
Servant, which is Nature; and yet Nature is subject to Gods Command, and
depends upon him; and if all Gods Attributes be Infinite, then his Bounty is
Infinite also, which cannot be exercised but by an Infinite Gift, but a Gift
does not cause a less dependence. I do not say, That man has an absolute
Free Will, or power to move, according to his desire; for it is not conceived,
that a part can have an absolute power: nevertheless his motion both of body
and mind is a free and self-motion, and such a self-motion has every thing in
Nature according to its figure or shape; for motion and figure, being inherent
in matter, matter moves figuratively. Yet do I not say, That there is no
hindrance, obstruction and opposition in nature; but as there is no particular
Creature, that has an absolute power of self-moving; so that Creature which
has the advantage of strength, subtilty, or policy, shape, or figure, and the
like, may oppose and overpower another which is inferior to it, in all this;
yet this hinderance and opposition does not take away self-motion. But I
perceive your Author is much for necessitation, and against free will, which I
leave to Moral Philosophers and Divines. And as for the ascending of light, and
descending of heavy bodies, there may be many causes, but these four are
perceiveable by our senses, as bulk, or quantity of body, grossness of
substance, density, and shape or figure, which make heavy bodies descend: But
little quantity, purity of substance, rarity, and figure or shape make light
bodies ascend. Wherefore I cannot believe, that there are certain little bodies
as atoms, and by reason of their smallness, invisible, differing Art. 3.
from one another in consistence, figure, motion and magnitude, intermingled
with the air, which should be the cause of the descending of heavy bodies. And
concerning air, whether it be subject to our senses or not, I say, that if air
be neither hot, nor cold, it is not subject; but Art. 14.
if it be, the sensitive motions will soon pattern it out, and declare it. I Will
conclude with your Authors question, What Art. 6.
the cause is, that a man does not feel the weight of Water in Water? and
answer, it is the dilating nature of Water. But of this question and of Water I
shall treat more fully hereafter, and so I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXX.
MADAM,
I Am reading now the works of that Famous and most Renowned Author, Des
Carts, out of which I intend to pick out only those discourses which I like
best, and not to examine his opinions, as they go along from the beginning to
the end of his books; And in order to this, I have chosen in the first place,
his discourse of motion, and do not assent to his opinion, Philos. p. 2.
when he defines Motion to be only a Mode of a thing, and not the thing or
body it self; for, in my opinion, Art. 2^^
there can be no abstraction made of motion from body, neither really, nor in
the manner of our conception, for how can I conceive that which is not, nor
cannot be in nature, that is, to conceive motion without body? Wherefore Motion
is but one thing with body, without any separation or abstraction soever.
Neither does it agree with my reason, that one body can give or transferr Art.
40.
motion into another body; and as much motion it gives or transferrs into that
body, as much loses it: As for example, in two hard bodies thrown against one
another, where one, that is thrown with greater force, takes the other along
with it, and loses as much motion as it gives it. For how can motion, being no
substance, but only a mode, quit one body, and pass into another? One body may
either occasion, or imitate another motion, but it can neither give nor take
away what belongs to its own or another bodies substance, no more then matter
can quit its nature from being matter; and therefore my opinion is, that if
motion does go out of one body into another, then substance goes too; for
motion, and substance or body, as aforementioned, are all one thing, and then
all bodies that receive motion from other bodies, must needs increase in their
substance and quantity, and those bodies which impart or transferr motion, must
decrease as much as they increase: Truly, Madam, that neither Motion nor Figure
should subsist by themselves, and yet be transferrable into other bodies, is
very strange, and as much as to prove them to be nothing, and yet to say they
are something. The like may be said of all others, which they call accidents,
as skill, learning, knowledge, etc. saying, they are no bodies, because they
have no extension, but inherent in bodies or substances as in their subjects;
for although the body may subsist without them, yet they being always with the
body, body and they are all one thing: And so is power and body, for body
cannot quit power, nor power the body, being all one thing. But to return to
Motion, my opinion is, That all matter is partly animate, and partly inanimate,
and all matter is moving and moved, and that there is no part of Nature that
has not life and knowledge, for there is no Part that has not a comixture of
animate and inanimate matter; and though the inanimate matter has no motion,
nor life and knowledge of it self, as the animate has, nevertheless being both
so closely joined and commixed as in one body, the inanimate moves as well as
the animate, although not in the same manner; for the animate moves of it self,
and the inanimate moves by the help of the animate, and thus the animate is
moving and the inanimate moved; not that the animate matter transfers, infuses,
or communicates its own motion to the inanimate; for this is impossible, by
reason it cannot part with its own nature, nor alter the nature of inanimate
matter, but each retains its own nature; for the inanimate matter remains
inanimate, that is, without self-motion, and the animate loses nothing of its
self-motion, which otherwise it would, if it should impart or transferr its
motion into the inanimate matter; but only as I said heretofore, the inanimate
works or moves with the animate, because of their close union and commixture;
for the animate forces or causes the inanimate matter to work with her; and
thus one is moving, the other moved, and consequently there is life and
knowledge in all parts of nature, by reason in all parts of nature there is a
commixture of animate and inanimate matter: and this Life and Knowledge is sense
and reason, or sensitive and rational corporeal motions, which are all one
thing with animate matter without any distinction or abstraction, and can no
more quit matter, then matter can quit motion. Wherefore every creature being
composed of this commixture of animate and inanimate matter, has also
selfe-motion, that is life and knowledge, sense and reason, so that no part has
need to give or receive motion to or from another part; although it may be an
occasion of such a manner of motion to another part, and cause it to move thus
or thus: as for example, A Watch-maker does not give the watch its motion, but
he is only the occasion, that the watch moves after that manner, for the
motion of the watch is the watches own motion, inherent in those parts ever
since that matter was, and if the watch ceases to move after such a manner or
way, that manner or way of motion is never the less in those parts of matter,
the watch is made of, and if several other figures should be made of that
matter, the power of moving in the said manner or mode, would yet still remain
in all those parts of matter as long as they are body, and have motion in them.
Wherefore one body may occasion another body to move so or so, but not give it
any motion, but everybody (though occasioned by another, to move in such a way)
moves by its own natural motion; for self-motion is the very nature of animate
matter, and is as much in hard, as in fluid bodies, although your Author denies
it, saying, The nature of fluid bodies consists in the motion of those little
insensible parts into which Philos. part. 2. a. 54.
they are divided, and the nature of bard bodies, when those little particles
joined closely together, do rest; for there is no rest in nature; wherefore if
there were a World of Gold, and a World of Air, I do verily believe, that the
World of Gold would be as much interiously active, as the World of Air
exteriously; for Natures motions are not all external or perceptible by our
senses, neither are they all circular, or only of one sort, but there is an
infinite change and variety of motions; for though I say in my Philosophical
opinions, Part. 1. c. 5.
As there is but one only Matter, so there is but one only Motion; yet I do
not mean, there is but one particular sort of motions, as either circular, or
straight, or the like, but that the nature of motion is one and the same,
simple and entire in it self, that is, it is mere motion, or nothing else but
corporeal motion; and that as there are infinite divisions or parts of matter,
so there are infinite changes and varieties of motions, which is the reason
that I call motion as well infinite as matter; first that matter and motion are
but one thing, and if matter be infinite, motion must be so too; and secondly,
that motion is infinite in its changes and variations, as matter is in its
parts. And thus much of motion for this time; I add no more, but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXXI.
MADAM,
I Observe your Author in his discourse of Place makes a difference betwixt an
Interior and Exterior Philos. p. 2. a. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
place, and that according to this distinction, one body may be said to change,
and not to change its place at the same time, and that one body may succeed
into another place. But I am not of this opinion, for I believe not that there
is any more place then body; as for example, Water being mixed with Earth, the
water does not take the Earths place, but as their parts intermix, so do their
places, and as their parts change, so do their places, so that there is no more
place, then there is water and earth; the same may be said of Air and Water, or
Air and Earth, or did they all mix together; for as their bodies join, so do
their places, and as they are separated from each other, so are their places.
Say a man travels a hundred miles, and so a hundred thousand paces; but yet
this man has not been in a hundred thousand places, for he never had any other
place but his own, he has joined and separated himself from a hundred
thousand, nay millions of parts, but he has left no places behind him. You will
say, if he travel the same way back again, then he is said to travel through the
same places. I answer, It may be the vulgar way of expression, or the common
phrase; but to speak properly, after a Philosophical way, and according to the
truth in nature, he cannot be said to go back again through the same places he
went, because he left none behind him, or else all his way would be nothing but
place after place, all the hundred miles along; besides if place should be
taken so, as to express the joining to the nearest bodies which compass him
about, certainly he would never find his places again; for the air being fluid,
changes or moves continually, and perchance the same parts of the air, which
compassed him once, will never come near him again. But you may say, If a man
be hurt, or has some mischance in his body, so as to have a piece of flesh cut
out, and new flesh growing there; then we say, because the adjoining parts do
not change, that a new piece of flesh is grown in the same place where the
former flesh was, and that the place of the former flesh cut or fallen out, is
the same of this new grown flesh. I answer, In my opinion, it is not, for the
parts being not the same, the places are not, but every one has its own place.
But if the wound be not filled or closed up with other new flesh, you will say,
that according to my opinion there is no place then at all. I say, Yes, for the
air or any thing else may be there, as new parts joining to the other parts;
nevertheless, the air, or that same body which is there, has not taken the
fleshes place, which was there before, but has its own; but, by reason the
adjoining parts remain, man thinks the place remains there also which is no
consequence. It Is true, a man may return to the same adjoining bodies, where he
was before, but then he brings his place with him again, and as his body, so
his place returns also, and if a man's arm be cut off, you may say, there was
an arm heretofore, but you cannot say properly, this is the place where the arm
was. But to return to my first example of the mixture of Water, and Earth or
Air; Suppose water is not porous, but only dividable, and has no other place
but what is its own bodies', and that other parts of water intermix with it by
dividing and composing; I say, there is no more place required, then what
belongs to their own parts, for if some contract, others dilate, some divide,
others join, the places are the same according to the magnitude of each part or
body. The same may be said of all kinds or sorts of mixtures, for one body has
but one place; and so if many parts of the same nature join into one body and
increase the bulk of the body, the place of that same body is accordingly; and
if they be bodies of different natures which intermix and join, each several
keeps its place; And so each body and each particular part of a body has its
place, for you cannot name body or part of a body, but you must also understand
place to be with them, and if a point should dilate to a world, or a world
contract to a point, the place would always be the same with the body. And thus
I have declared my opinion of this subject, which I submit to the correction of
your better judgment, and rest,

MADAM, Your Ladyships faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXII.
MADAM,
IN my last, I hope, I have sufficiently declared my opinion, That to one body
belongs but one place, and that no body can leave a place behind it, but
wheresoever is body, there is place also. Now give me leave to examine this
question: when a bodies figure is printed on snow, or any other fluid or soft
matter, as air, water, and the like; whether it be the body, that prints its
own figure upon the snow, or whether it be the snow, that patterns the figure
of the body? My answer is, That it is not the body, which prints its figure
upon the snow, but the snow that patterns out the figure of the body; for if a
seal be printed upon wax, it is true, it is the figure of the seal, which is
printed on the wax, but yet the seal does not give the wax the print of its own
figure, but it is the wax that takes the print or pattern from the seal, and
patterns or copies it out in its own substance, just as the sensitive motions
in the eye do pattern out the figure of an object, as I have declared
heretofore. But you will say, perhaps, A body being printed upon snow, as it
leaves its print, so it leaves also its place with the print in the snow. I
answer, That does not follow; For the place remains still the bodies place, and
when the body removes out of the snow, it takes its place along with it: Just
like a man, whose picture is drawn by a Painter, when he goes away, he leaves
not his place with his picture, but his place goes with his body; and as the
place of the picture is the place of the color or paint, and the place of the
copy of an exterior object patterned out by the sensitive corporeal motions is
the place of the sensitive organ, so the place of the print in snow, is the
snows place; or else, if the print were the bodies place that is printed, and
not the snow's, it might as well be said, that the motion and shape of a watch
were not the motion and shape of the watch, but of the hand of him that made
it. And as it is with snow, so it is with air, for a man's figure is patterned
out by the parts and motions of the air, wheresoever he moves; the difference
is only, that air being a fluid body does not retain the print so long, as
snow or a harder body does, but when the body removes, the print is presently
dissolved. But I wonder much, your Author denies, that there can be two bodies
in one place, and yet makes two places for one body, when all is but the
motions of one body: Wherefore a man sailing in a Ship, cannot be said to keep
place, and to change his place; for it is not place he changes, but only the
adjoining parts, as leaving some, and joining to others; and it is very
improper, to attribute that to place which belongs to parts, and to make a
change of place out of change of parts. I conclude, repeating once again, that
figure and place are still remaining the same with body; For example; let a
stone be beat to dust, and this dust be severally dispersed, nay, changed into
numerous figures; I say, as long as the substance of the stone remains in the
power of those dispersed and changed parts, and their corporeal motions, the
place of it continues also; and as the corporeal motions change and vary, so
does place, magnitude and figure, together with their parts or bodies, for they
are but one thing. And so I conclude, and rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIII.
MADAM,
I Am absolutely of your Authors opinion, when he says, That all bodies of
this Universe are of one and Philos. part. 3. a. 46.
the same matter, really divided into many parts, and that these parts are
diversely moved: But that these motions should be circular more then of any
other sort, I cannot believe, although he thinks that this is the most probable
way, to find out the causes of natural effects: for nature is not bound to one
sort of motions more then to another, and it is but in vain to endeavor to
know how, and by what motions God did make the World, since Creation is an
action of God, and Gods actions are incomprehensible; Wherefore his ethereal
Whirlpooles, and little particles of matter, which he reduces to three sorts
and calls them the three elements of the Universe, their circular motions,
several figures, shavings, and many the like, which you may better read, then I
rehearse to you, are to my thinking, rather Fancies, then rational or probable
conceptions: for how can we imagine that the Universe was set a moving as a Top
by a Whip, or a Wheel by the hand of a Spinster, and that the vacuities were
filled up with shavings? for these violent motions would rather have disturbed
and disordered Nature; and though Nature uses variety in her motions or
actions, yet these are not extravagant, nor by force or violence, but orderly,
temperate, free, and easy, which causes me to believe, the Earth turns about
rather then the Sun; and though corporeal motions for variety make Whirl-winds,
yet Whirl-winds are not constant, Neither can I believe that the swiftness of
motion could make the matter more subtle and pure then it was by nature, for it
is the purity and subtilty of the matter, that causes motion, and makes it
swifter or slower, and not motion the subtilty and purity of matter; motion
being only the action of matter; and the self-moving part of matter is the
working part of nature, which is wise, and knows how to move and form every
creature without instruction; and this self-motion is as much her own as the
other parts of her body, matter and figure, and is one and the same with her
self, as a corporeal, living, knowing, and inseparable being, and a part of her
self. As for the several parts of matter, I do believe, that they are not all
of one and the same bigness, nor of one and the same figure, neither do I hold
their figures to be unalterable; for if all parts in nature be corporeal, they
are dividable, composable, and intermixable, and then they cannot be always of
one and the same sort of figure; besides nature would not have so much work if
there were no change of figures: and since her only action is change of
motion, change of motion must needs make change of figures: and thus natural
parts of matter may change from lines to points, and from points to lines, from
squares to circles, and so forth, infinite ways, according to the change of
motions; but though they change their figures, yet they cannot change their
matter; for matter as it has been, so it remains constantly in each degree, as
the Rational, Sensitive and Inanimate, none becomes purer, none grosser then
ever it was, notwithstanding the infinite changes of motions, which their
figures undergo; for Motion changes only the figure, not the matter it self,
which continues still the same in its nature, and cannot be altered without a
confusion or destruction of Nature. And this is the constant opinion of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXIV.
MADAM,
THat Rarefaction is only a change of figure, according to your Authors
opinion, is in my reason Philos. part. 2. a. 6, 7.
very probable; but when he says, that in rarefied bodies are little intervals
or pores filled up with some other subtle matter, if he means that all rarefied
bodies are porous, I dissent from him; for it is not necessary that all
rarefied bodies should be porous, and all hard bodies without pores: but if
there were a probability of pores, I am of opinion, it would be more in dense
and hard, than in rare and soft bodies; as for example, rarifying and dilating
motions are plaining, smoothing, spreading and making all parts even, which
could not well be, if there were holes or pores; Earth is dense and hard, and
yet is porous, and flame is rare and dilating, and yet is not porous; and
certainly Water is not so porous as Earth. Wherefore pores, in my opinion, are
according to the nature or form of the figure, and not according to the rarity
or thinness, and density or thickness of the substance. As for his thin and
subtle matter filling up the pores of porous bodies, I assent to your Author so
far, that I mean, thin and thick, or rare and dense substances are joined and
mixed together. As for plaining, smoothing and spreading, I do not mean so much
artificial plaining and spreading; as for example, when a piece of gold is
beaten into a thin plate, and a board is made plain and smooth by a Joyners
tool, or a napkin folded up is spread plain and even, although, when you
observe these arts, you may judge somewhat of the nature of natural dilations;
for a folded cloth is fuller of creases then when plain, and the beating of a
thin plate is like to the motion of dilation, which is to spread out, and the
form of rarifying is thinning and extending. I add only this, that I am not
of your Authors opinion, that Rest is the Cause or Glue which keeps the parts
of dense or hard bodies together, but it is retentive motions. And so I
conclude, resting,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXV.
MADAM,
THat the Mind, according to your Authors opinion, is a substance really
distinct from the body, and may be actually separated from it and subsist
without it: If he mean the natural mind and soul of Man, not the supernatural
or divine, I am far from his opinion; for though the mind moves only in its
own parts, and not upon, or with the parts of inanimate matter, yet it cannot
be separated from these parts of matter, and subsist by its self, as being a
part of one and the same matter the inanimate is of, (for there is but one
only matter, and one kind of matter, although of several degrees,) only it is
the self-moving part; but yet this cannot empower it, to quit the same natural
body, whose part it is. Neither can I apprehend, that the Mind's or Soul's seat
should be in the Glandula or kernel of the Brain, and there sit like a Spider
in a Cobweb, to whom the least motion of the Cobweb gives intelligence of a
Fly, which he is ready to assault, and that the Brain should get intelligence
by the animal spirits as his servants, which run to and fro like Ants to inform
it; or that the Mind should, according to others opinions, be a light, and
imbroidered all with Ideas, like a Heralds Coat; and that the sensitive organs
should have no knowledge in themselves, but serve only like peepingholes for
the mind, or barn-dores to receive bundles of pressures, like sheaves of Corn;
For there being a through mixture of animate, rational and sensitive, and
inanimate matter, we cannot assign a certain seat or place to the rational,
another to the sensitive, and another to the inanimate, but they are diffused
and intermixed throughout all the body; And this is the reason, that sense and
knowledge cannot be bound only to the head or brain: But although they are mixed
together, nevertheless they do not lose their interior natures by this mixture,
nor their purity and subtilty, nor their proper motions or actions, but each
moves according to its nature and substance, without confusion; The actions of
the rational part in Man, which is the Mind or Soul, are called Thoughts, or
thoughtful perceptions, which are numerous, and so are the sensitive
perceptions; for though Man, or any other animal has but five exterior
sensitive organs, yet there be numerous perceptions made in these sensitive
organs, and in all the body; nay, every several Pore of the flesh is a
sensitive organ, as well as the Eye, or the Ear. But both sorts, as well the
rational as the sensitive, are different from each other, although both do
resemble another, as being both parts of animate matter, as I have mentioned
before: Wherefore I Will add no more, only let you know, that I constantly
remain,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXXVI.
MADAM,
THat all other animals, besides man, want reason, your Author endeavors to
prove in his discourse of method, where his chief argument is, That other
animals cannot express their mind, thoughts or conceptions, either by speech or
any other signs, as man can do: For, says he, it is not for want of the organs
belonging to the framing of words, as we may observe in Parrats and Pies, which
are apt enough to express words they are taught, but understand nothing of
them. My answer is, That one man expressing his mind by speech or words to an
other, does not declare by it his excellency and supremacy above all other
Creatures, but for the most part more folly, for a talking man is not so wise
as a contemplating man. But by reason other Creatures cannot speak or discourse
with each other as men, or make certain signs, whereby to express themselves as
dumb and deaf men do, should we conclude, they have neither knowledge, sense,
reason, or intelligence? Certainly, this is a very weak argument; for one part
of a man's body, as one hand, is not less sensible then the other, nor the heel
less sensible then the heart, nor the leg less sensible then the head, but
each part has its sense and reason, and so consequently its sensitive and
rational knowledge; and although they cannot talk or give intelligence to each
other by speech, nevertheless each has its own peculiar and particular
knowledge, just as each particular man has his own particular knowledge, for
one man's knowledge is not another man's knowledge; and if there be such a
peculiar and particular knowledge in every several part of one animal creature,
as man, well may there be such in Creatures of different kinds and sorts: But
this particular knowledge belonging to each creature, does not prove that there
is no intelligence at all betwixt them, no more then the want of humane
Knowledge does prove the want of Reason; for reason is the rational part of
matter, and makes perception, observation, and intelligence different in every
creature, and every sort of creatures, according to their proper natures, but
perception, observation and intelligence do not make reason, Reason being the
cause, and they the effects. Wherefore though other Creatures have not the
speech, nor Mathematical rules and demonstrations, with other Arts and
Sciences, as Men; yet may their perceptions and observations be as wise as
Men's, and they may have as much intelligence and commerce betwixt each other,
after their own manner and way, as men have after theirs: To which I leave
them, and Man to his conceited prerogative and excellence, resting,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXXVII.
MADAM,
COncerning Sense and Perception, your Authors opinion is, That it is made by a
motion or impression from the object upon the sensitive organ, Philos. part. 4.
a. 189.
which impression, by means of the nerves, is brought to the brain, and so to
the mind or soul, which only perceives in the brain; Explaining it by the
example of a Man being blind, or walking in dark, who by the help Diopt. c. 1.
a. 2, 3. etc. 4. a. 1.
of his stick can perceive when he touches a Stone, a Tree, Water, Sand, and
the like; which example he brings to make a comparison with the perception of
Light; For, says he, Light in a shining body, is nothing else but a quick and
lively motion or action, which through the air and other transparent bodies
tends toward the eye, in the same manner as the motion or resistance of the
bodies, the blind man meets withal, tends through the stick toward the hand;
wherefore it is no wonder that the Sun can display its rays so far in an
instant, seeing that the same action, whereby one end of the stick is moved,
goes instantly also to the other end, and would do the same if the stick were
as long as Heaven is distant from Earth. To which I answer first, That it is
not only the Mind that perceives in the kernel of the Brain, but that there is
a double perception, rational and sensitive, and that the mind perceives by the
rational, but the body and the sensitive organs by the sensitive perception;
and as there is a double perception, so there is also a double knowledge,
rational tional and sensitive, one belonging to the mind, the other to the
body; for I believe that the Eye, Ear, Nose, Tongue, and all the Body, have
knowledge as well as the Mind, only the rational matter, being subtle and pure,
is not encumbered with the grosser part of matter, to work upon, or with it, but
leaves that to the sensitive, and works or moves only in its own substance,
which makes a difference between thoughts, and exterior senses. Next I say,
That it is not the Motion or Reaction of the bodies, the blind man meets
withal, which makes the sensitive perception of these objects, but the
sensitive corporeal motions in the hand do pattern out the figure of the Stick,
Stone, Tree, Sand, and the like. And as for comparing the perception of the
hand, when by the help of the stick it perceives the objects, with the
perception of light, I confess that the sensitive perceptions do all resemble
each other, because all sensitive parts of matter are of one degree, as being
sensible parts, only there is a difference according to the figures of the
objects presented to the senses; and there is no better proof for perception
being made by the sensitive motions in the body, or sensitive organs, but that
all these sensitive perceptions are alike; and resemble one another; for if
they were not made in the body of the sentient, but by the impression of
exterior objects, there would be so much difference betwixt them, by reason of
the diversity of objects, as they would have no resemblance at all. But for a
further proof of my own opinion, did the perception proceed merely from the
motion, impression and resistance of the objects, the hand could not perceive
those objects, unless they touched the hand it self, as the stick does; for it
is not probable, that the motions of the stone, water, sand; etc. should leave
their bodies and enter into the stick, and so into the hand; for motion must be
either something or nothing; if something, the stick and the hand would grow
bigger, and the objects touched less, or else the touching and the touched must
exchange their motions, which cannot be done so suddenly, especially between
solid bodies; But if motion has no body, it is nothing, and how nothing can
pass or enter or move some body, I cannot conceive. It Is true there is no part
that can subsist singly by it self, without dependence upon each other, and so
parts do always join and touch each other, which I am not against; but only I
say perception is not made by the exterior motions of exterior parts of
objects, but by the interior motions of the parts of the body sentient. But I
have discoursed hereof before, and so I take my leave, resting,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXVIII.
MADAM,
ICannot conceive why your Author is so much for little and insensible parts,
out of which the Elements and all other bodies are made; for though Nature is
divideable, yet she is also composeable; and I think there is no need to
dissect every creature into such little parts, to know their nature, but we can
do it by another way as well; for we may dissect or divide them into never so
little parts, and yet gain never the more knowledge by it. But according to
these principles he describing amongst the rest the nature of Water, says, That
those little Of Meteor. 1. a. 3.
parts, out of which Water consists, are in figure somewhat long, light and
slippery like little Eeles, which are never so closely joined and entangled,
but may easily be separated. To which I answer, That I observe the nature and
figure of water to be flowing, dilating, divideable and circular; for we may
see, in Tides, overflowings, and breaking into parts, as in rain, it will
always move in a round and circular figure; And I think, if its parts were long
and entangled like a knot of Eeles, it could never be so easily contracted and
denced into snow or ice. Neither do I think, That Salt Water has a mixture of
somewhat grosser parts, not so apt to bend; for to C. 3. a. 1.
my observation and reason, the nature of salt water consists herein, that its
circle-lines are pointed, which sharp and pointed figure makes it so
penetrating; yet may those points be separated from the circle lines of water,
as it is seen in the making of Salt. But I am not of your Authors opinion, That
those little points do stick so fast in flesh, as little nails, to keep it from
putrefaction; for points do not always fasten; or else fire, which certainly is
composed of sharp-pointed parts, would harden, and keep other bodies from
dissolving, whereas on the contrary, it separates and divides them, although
after several manners. But Putrefaction is only a dissolving and separating of
parts, after the manner of dilation; and the motion of salt is contracting as
well as penetrating, for we may observe, what flesh soever is dry-salted, does
shrink and contract close together; I will not say, but the pointed parts of
salt may fasten like nayls in some sorts of bodies, but not in all they work
on. And this is the reason also, that Seawater is of more weight then
fresh water, for being composed of points, those points stick within each
other, and so become more strong; But yet do they not hinder the circular
dilating motion of water, for the circle-lines are within, and the points
without, but only they make it more strong from being divided by other
exterior bodies that swim upon it. And this is the cause that Salt Water is not
so easily forced or turned to vapor, as Fresh, for the points piercing into
each other, hold it more strongly together; but this is to be considered, that
the points of salt are on the outside of the watery Circle, not on the inside,
which causes it to be divideable from the watery Circles. I will conclude, when
I have given the reason why water is so soon sucked up by sand, lime, and the
like bodies, and say that it is the nature of all spongy, dry and porous
bodies, meeting with liquid and pliable bodies as water, do draw and suck them
up, like as animal Creatures being thirsty, do drink: And so I take my leave,
and rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIX.
MADAM,
COncerning Vapor, Clouds, Wind and Rain, I am of your Authors opinion, That
Water is changed into Vapor, and Vapor into Air, and that dilated Vapors
make Wind, and condensed Vapors, Clouds Of Meteor. c. 2, 4, 5, 6.
and Mists; But I am not for his little particles, whereof, he says, Vapors
are made, by the motion of a rare and subtle matter in the pores of terrestrial
bodies; which certainly I should conceive to be loose atoms, did he not make
them of several figures and magnitude: for, in my opinion, there are no such
things in nature, which like little Flies or Bees do fly up into the air; and
although I grant, that in Nature are several parts, whereof some are more rare,
others more dense, according to the several degrees of matter, yet they are not
single, but all mixed together in one body, and the change of motions in those
joined parts, is the cause of all changes of figures whatever, without the
assistance of any foreign parts: And thus Water of it self is changed to Snow,
Ice, or Hail, by its inherent figurative Motions; that is, the circular
dilation of Water by contraction, changes into the figure of Snow, Ice, or
Hail; or by rarifying motions it turns into the figure of Vapor, and this
Vapor again by contracting motions into the figure of hoar-frost; and when all
these motions change again into the former, then the figure of Ice, Snow, Hail,
Vapor and Frost, turns again into the figure of Water: And this in all sense
and reason is the most facil and probable way of making Ice, Snow, Hail, etc.
As for rarefaction and condensation, I will not say that they may be forced by
foreign parts, but yet they are made by change and alteration of the inherent
motions of their own parts, for though the motions of foreign parts, may be
the occasion of them, yet they are not the immediate cause or actors thereof.
And as for Thunder, that clouds of Ice and Snow, the uppermost being condensed
by heat, and so made heavy, should fall upon another and produce the noise of
thunder, is very improbable; for the breaking of a little small string, will
make a greater noise then a huge shower of snow with falling, and as for Ice
being hard, it may make a great noise, one part falling upon another, but then
their weight would be as much as their noise, so that the clouds or roves of
Ice would be as soon upon our heads, if not sooner, as the noise in our Ears;
like as a bullet shot out of a Canon, we may feel the bullet as soon as we hear
the noise. But to conclude, all densations are not made by heat, nor all noises
by pressures, for sound is oftener made by division then pressure, and
densation by cold then by heat: And this is all for the present, from,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XL.
MADAM,
I Cannot perceive the Rational Truth of your Authors opinion, concerning
Colors, made by the agitation of little spherical bodies of an Ethereal
matter, transmitting the action of Light; for if colors were made after this
manner, there would, in my opinion, not be any fixed or lasting color, but one
color would be so various, and change faster then every minute; the truth is,
there would be no certain or perfect color at all: wherefore it seems
altogether improbable, that such liquid, rare and disunited bodies should
either keep or make inherent and fixed colors; for liquid and rare bodies,
whose several parts are united into one considerable bulk of body, their
colors are more apt to change then the colors of those bodies that are dry,
solid and dense; the reason is, that rare and liquid bodies are more loose,
slack, and agil, then solid and dry bodies, in so much, as in every alteration
of motion their colors are apt to change: And if united rare and liquid bodies
be so apt to alter and change, how is it probable, that those bodies, which are
small and not united, should either keep or make inherent fixed colors? I will
not say, but that such little bodies may range into such lines and figures, as
make colors, but then they cannot last, being not united into a lasting body,
that is, into a solid, substantial body, proper to make such figures as
colors. But I desire you not to mistake me, Madam, for I do not mean, that the
substance of colors is a gross thick substance, for the substance may be as
thin and rare as flame or light, or in the next degree to it; for certainly the
substance of light, and the substance of colors come in their degrees very
near each other; But according to the contraction of the figures, colors are
paler or deeper, or more or less lasting. And as for the reason, why colors
will change and rechange, it is according as the figures alter or recover their
forms; for colors will be as animal Creatures, which sometimes are faint,
pale, and sick, and yet recover; but when as a particular color is, as I may
say, quite dead, then there is no recovering of it. But colors may seem
altered sometimes in our eyes, and yet not be altered in themselves; for our
eyes, if perfect, see things as they are presented; and for proof, if any
animal should be presented in an unusual posture or shape, we could not judge of
it; also if a Picture, which must be viewed side-wards, should be looked upon
forwards, we could not know what to make of it; so the figures of colors, if
they be not placed rightly to the sight, but turned topsie-turvie as the Phrase
is, or upside-down, or be moved too quick, and this quick motion do make a
confusion with the lines of Light, we cannot possibly see the color perfectly.
Also several lights or shades may make colors appear otherwise then in
themselves they are, for some sorts of lights and shades may fall upon the
substantial figures of colors in solid bodies, in such lines and figures, as
they may overpower the natural or artificial inherent colors in solid bodies,
and for a time make other colors, and many times the lines of light or of
shadows will meet and sympathize so with inherent colors, and place their
lines so exactly, as they will make those inherent colors more splendorous
then in their own nature they are, so that light and shadows will add or
diminish or alter colors very much. Likewise some sorts of colors will be
altered to our sight, not by all, but only by some sorts of light, as for
example, blew will seem green, and green blew by candle light, when as other
colors will never appear changed, but show constantly as they are; the reason
is, because the lines of candle light fall in such figures upon the inherent
colors, and so make them appear according to their own figures; Wherefore it
is only the alteration of the exterior figures of light and shadows, that make
colors appear otherwise, and not a change of their own natures; And hence we
may rationally conclude, that several lights and shadows by their spreading and
dilating lines may alter the face or outside of colors, but not suddenly
change them, unless the power of heat, and continuance of time, or any other
cause, do help and assist them in that work of metamorphosing or transforming
of colors; but if the lines of light be only, as the phrase is, Skin-deep;
that is, but lightly spreading and not deeply penetrating, they may soon wear
out or be rubbed of; for though they hurt, yet they do not kill the natural
color, but the color may recover and reassume its former vigor and luster:
but time and other accidental causes will not only alter, but destroy
particular colors as well as other creatures, although not all after the same
manner, for some will last longer then others. And thus, Madam, there are three
sorts of Colors, Natural, Artificial, and Accidental; but I have discoursed of
this subject more at large in my Philosophical Opinions, to which I refer you,
and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLI.
MADAM,
MY answer to your Authors question, Why flame ascends in a pointed figure? is,
That the figure P. 4. art. 97.
of fire consists in points, and being dilated into a flame, it ascends in
lines of points slope-wayes from the fired fuel; like as if you should make two
or more sticks stand upright and put the upper ends close together, but let the
lower ends be asunder, in which posture they will support each other, which, if
both their ends were close together, they could not do. The second question is,
Why fire does not always flame? Art. 107.
I answer, Because all fuel is not flameable, some being so moist, as it does
oppose the fires dryness, and some so hard and retentive, as fire cannot so
soon dissolve it; and in this contest, where one dissipares, and the other
retains, a third figure is produced, viz. smoke, between the heat of one, and
the moisture of the other; and this smoke is forced by the fire out of the
fuel, and is nothing else but certain parts of fuel, raised to such a degree of
rarefaction; and if fire come near, it forces the smoke into flame, the smoke
changing it self by its figurative motions into flame; but when smoke is above
the flame, the flame cannot force the smoke to fire or enkindle it self, for
the flame cannot so well encounter it; which shows, as if smoke had a swifter
motion then flame, although flame is more rarefied then smoke; and if moisture
predominate, there is only smoke, if fire, then there is flame: But there are
many figures, that do not flame, until they are quite dissolved, as Leather,
and many other things. Neither can fire work upon all bodies alike, but
according to their several natures, like as men cannot encounter several sorts
of creatures after one and the same manner; for not any part in nature has an
absolute power, although it has self-motion; and this is the reason, that wax
by fire is melted, and clay hardened. The third question is, Why some few drops
of water sprinkled upon fire, do increase its flame? I answer, by reason of
their little quantity, which being over-powred by the greater quantity and
force of fire, is by its self-motions converted into fire; for water being of a
rare nature, and fire, for the most part, of a rarifying quality, it cannot
suddenly convert it self into a more solid body then its nature is, but
following its nature by force it turns into flame. The fourth question is, Why
the flame of spirit of Wine does consume the Wine, and yet cannot burn or hurt
a linen cloth? I answer, The Wine is the fuel that feeds the flame, and upon
what it feeds, it devoureth, and with the food, and feeder; but by reason Wine
is a rarer body then Oil, or Wood, or any other fuel, its flame is also
weaker. And thus much of these questions, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XLII.
MADAM,
TO conclude my discourse upon the Opinions of these two famous and learned
Authors, which I have hitherto sent you in several Letters, I could not choose
but repeat the ground of my own opinions in this present; which I desire you to
observe well, left you mistake any thing, whereof I have formerly discoursed.
First I am for self-moving matter, which I call the sensitive and rational
matter, and the perceptive and architectonical part of nature, which is the
life and knowledge of nature. Next I am of an opinion, That all Perception is
made by corporeal, figuring self-motions, and that the perception of foreign
objects is made by patterning them out: as for example, The sensitive
perception of foreign objects is by making or taking copies from these
objects, so as the sensitive corporeal motions in the eyes copy out the objects
of sight, and the sensitive corporeal motions in the ears copy out the objects
of sound; the sensitive corporeal motions in the nostrils; copy out the objects
of sent; the sensitive corporeal motions in the tongue and mouth, copy out the
objects of taste, and the sensitive corporeal motions in the flesh and skin of
the body copy out the foreign objects of touch; for when you stand by the
fire, it is not that the fire, or the heat of the fire enters your flesh, but
that the sensitive motions copy out the objects of fire and heat. As for my
Book of Philosophy, I must tell you, that it treats more of the production and
architecture of Creatures then of their perceptions, and more of the causes
then the effects, more in a general then peculiar way, which I thought
necessary to inform you of, and so I remain,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XLIII.
MADAM,
I Received your questions in your last: the first was, Whether there be more
body compact together in a heavy then in a light thing? I answer, That purity,
rarity, little quantity, exterior shape, as also motion cause lightness; and
grossness of bulk, density, much quantity, exterior figure and motion cause
heaviness, as it may be confirmed by many examples: but lightness and heaviness
are only conceptions of man, as also ascent and descent; and it may be
questioned, whether there be such things really in nature; for change of
motions of one and the same body will make lightness, and heaviness, as also
rarity and density: besides, the several figures and compositions of bodies
will cause them to ascend or descend, for Snow is a light body and yet descends
fron the clouds, and Water is a heavy body, and yet ascends in springs out of
the Earth; Dust is a dense body and yet is apt to ascend, Rain or Dew is a rare
body and yet is apt to descend; Also a Bird ascends by his shape, and a small
worm although of less body and lighter will fall down; and there can be no
other prof of light and heavy bodies but by their ascent and descent; But as
really there is no such thing as heavy or light in nature more then words, and
comparisons of different corporeal motions, so there is no such thing, as high
or low, place or time, but only words to make comparisons and to distinguish
different corporeal motions. The second question was, When a Basin with water
is wasted into smoke, which fills up a whole Room, Whether the air in the room
does, as the sensitive motions of the eye, pattern out the figure of the smoke;
or whether all the room is really filled with the vapor or smoke? I answer, If
it be only the pattern or figure of smoke or vapor, the extension and
dilation is not so much as man imagines; but why may not the air, which in my
opinion has self-motion, pattern out the figure of smoke as well as the eye?
for that the eye surely does it, may be proved; because smoke, if it enter the
eye, makes it not only smart and water much, but blinds it quite for the
present; wherefore smoke does not enter the eye, when the eye sees it, but the
eye patterns out the figure of smoke, and this is perception; In the same
manner may the air pattern out the figure of smoke. The third question was;
Whether all that they name qualities of bodies, as thickness, thinness,
hardness, softness, gravity, levity, transparentness and the like, be
substances? I answer, That all those, they call qualities, are nothing else but
change of motion and figure of the same body, and several changes of motions
are not several bodies, but several actions of one body; for change of motion
does not create new matter or multiply its quantity: for though corporeal
motions may divide and compose, contract and dilate, yet they cannot create new
matter, or make matter any otherwise then it is by nature, neither can they add
or substract any thing from its nature. And therefore my opinion is, not that
they are things subsisting by themselves without matter, but that there can no
abstraction be made of motion and figure from matter, and that matter and
motion being but one thing and inseparable, make but one substance. Wherefore
density and rarity, gravity and levity, etc. being nothing else but change of
motions, cannot be without matter, but a dense or rare, heavy or light matter
is but one substance or body; And thus having obeyed your commands, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XLIV.
MADAM,
IAm very ready to give you my opinion of those two questions you sent me,
whereof the first was, Whether that, which is rare and subtle, be not withal
pure? To which I answer, That all rare bodies are not subtle, nor pure, and
that all which is dense is not gross and dull: As for example, Puddle-water, or
also clear water, is rarer then Quicksilver, and yet not so subtle and pure as
Quicksilver; the like of Gold; for Quicksilver and Gold may be rarefied to a
transparentness, and yet be so dense, as not to be easily dissolved; and
Quicksilver is very subtle and searching, so as to be able to force other
bodies to divide as well as it can divide and compose its own parts. Wherefore
my opinion is, that the purest and subtilest degree of matter in nature, is
that degree of matter which can dilate and contract, compose and divide into
any figure by corporeal self-motion. Your second question was, Why a man's hand
cannot break a little hard body, as a little nail, whereas yet it is bigger
then the nail? I answer, It is not because the hand is softer then the nail,
for one hard body will not break suddenly another hard body, and a man may
easily break an iron nail with his hand, as I have bin informed; but it is some
kind of motion which can easier do it, then another: for I have seen a strong
cord wound about both a man's hands, who pulled his hands as hard and strongly
asunder as he could, and yet was not able to break it; when as a Youth taking
the same cord, and winding it about his hands as the former did, immediately
broke it; the cause was, that he did it with another kind of motion or pulling,
then the other did, which though he used as much force and strength, as he was
able, yet could not break it, when the boy did break it with the greatest ease,
and turning only his hands a little, which shows, that many things may be done
by a slight of motion, which otherwise a great strength and force cannot do.
This is my answer and opinion concerning your proposed questions; if you have
any more, I shall be ready to obey you, as,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XLV.
MADAM,
I understand by your last, that you are very desirous to know, Whether there
be not in nature such animal creatures both for purity and size, as we are not
capable to perceive by our sight. Truly, Madam, in my opinion it is very
probable there may be animal creatures of such rare bodies as are not subject
to our exterior senses, as well, as there are elements which are not subject to
all our exterior senses: as for example, fire is only subject to our sight and
feeling, and not to any other sense, water is subject to our sight, taste,
touch and hearing, but not to smelling; and earth is subject to our sight,
taste, touch and smelling, but not to our hearing; and vapor is only subject
to our sight, and wind only to our hearing; but pure air is not subject to any
of our senses, but only known by its effects: and so there may likewise be
animal creatures which are not subject to any of our senses both for their
purity and life; as for example, I have seen pumpt out of a water pump small
worms which could hardly be discerned but by a bright Sun-light, for they were
smaller then the smallest hair, some of a pure scarlet color and some white,
but though they were the smallest creatures that ever I did see, yet they were
more agil and fuller of life, then many a creature of a bigger size, and so
small they were, as I am confident, they were neither subject to taste, smell,
touch nor hearing, but only to sight, and that neither without dificulty,
requiring both a sharp sight and a clear light to perceive them; and I do
verily believe that these small animal creatures may be great in comparison to
others which may be in nature. But if it be probable that there may be such
small animal creatures in nature, as are not subject to our exterior senses, by
reason of their littleness; it is also probable, that there may be such great
and big animal creatures in nature as are beyond the reach and knowledge of our
exterior senses; for bigness and smallness are not to be judged by our exterior
senses, only; but as sense and reason inform us, that there are different
degrees in Purity and Rarity, so also in shapes, figures and sizes in all
natural creatures. Next you desired to know, Whether there can be an
artificial Life, or a Life made by Art? My answer is, Not; for although there
is Life in all natures parts, yet not all the parts are life, for there is one
part of natural matter which in its nature is inanimate or without life, and
though natural Life does produce Art, yet Art cannot produce natural Life, for
though Art is the action of Life, yet it is not Life it self: not but that
there is Life in Art, but not art in life, for Life is natural, and not
artificial; and thus the several parts of a watch may have sense and reason
according to the nature of their natural figure, which is steel, but not as
they have an artificial shape, for Art cannot put Life into the watch, Life
being only natural, not artificial. Lastly your desire was to know, Whether a
part of matter may be so small, as it cannot be made less? I answer, there is
no such thing in nature as biggest or least, nature being Infinite as well in
her actions as in her substance; and I have mentioned in my book of Philosophy,
and in a letter, I sent you heretofore concerning Infinite, that there are
several forts of Infinites, as Infinite in quantity or bulk, Infinite in
number, Infinite in quality, as Infinite degrees of hardness, softness,
thickness, thinness, swiftness, slowness, etc. as also Infinite compositions,
divisions, creations, dissolutions, etc. in nature; and my meaning is, that all
these Infinite actions do belong to the Infinite body of nature, which being
infinite in substance must also of necessity be infinite in its actions; but
although these Infinite actions are inherent in the power of the Infinite
substance of nature, yet they are never put in act in her parts, by reason
there being contraries in nature, and every one of the aforementioned actions
having its opposite, they do hinder and obstruct each other so, that none can
actually run into infinite; for the Infinite degrees of compositions hinder the
infinite degrees of divisions; and the infinite degrees of rarity, softness,
swiftness, etc. hinder the infinite degrees of density, hardness, slowness,
etc. all which nature has ordered with great wisdom and Prudence to make an
amiable combination between her parts; for if but one of these actions should
run into infinite, it would cause a horrid confusion between natures parts, nay
an utter destruction of the whole body of nature, if I may call it whole: as
for example, if one part should have infinite compositions, without the
hinderance or obstruction of division, it would at last mount and become equal
to the Infinite body of nature, and so from a part change to a whole, from
being finite to infinite, which is impossible; Wherefore, though nature has an
Infinite natural power, yet she does not put this power in act in her
particulars; and although she has an infinite force or strength, yet she does
not use this force or strength in her parts. Moreover when I speak of Infinite
divisions and compositions, creations and dissolutions, etc. in nature, I do
not mean so much the infinite degrees of compositions and divisions, as the
actions themselves to be infinite in number; for there being infinite parts in
nature, and every one having its compositions and divisions, creations and
dissolutions, these actions must of necessity be infinite too, to wit, in
number, according to the Infinite number of parts, for as there is an Infinite
number of parts in nature, so there is also an infinite number and variety of
motions which are natural actions. However let there be also infinite degrees
of these natural actions, in the body or substance of infinite nature; yet, as
I said, they are never put in act, by reason every action has its contrary or
opposite, which does hinder and obstruct it from running actually into
infinite. And thus I hope, you conceive clearly now, what my opinion is, and
that I do not contradict my self in my works, as some have falsely accused me,
for they by misapprehending my meaning, judge not according to the truth of my
sense, but according to their own false interpretation, which shows not only a
weakness in their understandings and passions, but a great injustice and injury
to me, which I desire you to vindicate when ever you chance to hear such
accusations and blemishes laid upon my works, by which you will Infinitely
oblige,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

SECT. II.
I.
MADAM,
BEing come now to the Perusal of the Works of that learned Author Dr. Moor, I
find that the only design of his Book called Antidote, is to prove the
Existence of a God, and to refute, or rather convert Atheists; which I wonder
very much at, considering, he says himself, Antidote, Book 1. c. 10. a. 5.
That there is no man under the cope of Heaven but believes a God; which if so,
what needs there to make so many arguments to no purpose? unless it be to show
Learning and wit; In my opinion, it were better to convert Pagans to be
Christians, or to reform irregular Christians to a more pious life, then to
prove that, which all men believe, which is the way to bring it into question.
For certainly, according to the natural Light of Reason, there is a God, and no
man, I believe, does doubt it; for though there may be many vain words, yet I
think there is no such atheistical belief amongst mankind, nay, not only
amongst men, but also, amongst all other creatures, for if nature believes a
God, all her parts, especially the sensitive and rational, which are the living
and knowing parts, and are in all natural creatures, do the like, and therefore
all parts and creatures in nature do adore and worship God, for any thing man
can know to the contrary; for no question, but natures soul adores and
worships God as well as man's soul; and why may not God be worshipped by all
sorts and kinds of creatures as well, as by one kind or sort? I will not say
the same way, but I believe there is a general worship and adoration of God;
for as God is an Infinite Deity, so certainly he has an Infinite Worship and
Adoration, and there is not any part of nature, but adores and worships the
only omnipotent God, to whom belongs Praise and Glory from and to all eternity:
For it is very improbable, that God should be worshipped only in part, and not
in whole, and that all creatures were made to obey man, and not to worship God,
only for man's sake, and not for God's worship, for man's use, and not God's
adoration, for man's spoil and not God's blessing. But this Presumption, Pride,
Vainglory and Ambition of man, proceeds from the irregularity of nature, who
being a servant, is apt to commit errors; and cannot be so absolute and exact
in her devotion, adoration and worship, as she ought, nor so well observant of
God as God is observing her: Nevertheless, there is not any of her parts or
creatures, that God is not acknowledged by, though not so perfectly as he
ought, which is caused by the irregularities of nature, as I said before. And
so God of his mercy have mercy upon all Creatures; To whose protection I
commend your Ladyship, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

II.
MADAM,
SInce I spoke in my last of the adoration and worship of God, you would feign
know, whether we can have an Idea of God? I answer, That naturally we may, and
really have a knowledge of the existence of God, as I proved in my former
letter, to wit, that there is a God, and that he is the Author of all things,
who rules and governs all things, and is also the God of Nature: but I dare not
think, that naturally we can have an Idea of the essence of God, so as to know
what God is in his very nature and essence; for how can there be a finite Idea
of an Infinite God? You may say, As well as of Infinite space. I answer, Space
is relative, or has respect to body, but there is not any thing that can be
compared to God; for the Idea of Infinite nature is material, as being a
material creature of Infinite material Nature. You will say, How can a finite
part have an Idea of infinite nature? I answer, Very well, by reason the Idea
is part of Infinite Nature, and so of the same kind, as material; but God being
an Eternal, Infinite, Immaterial, Individable Being, no natural creature can
have an Idea of him. You will say, That the Idea of God in the mind is
immaterial; I answer, I cannot conceive, that there can be any immaterial Idea
in nature; but be it granted, yet that Immaterial is not a part of God, for God
is individable, and has no parts; wherefore the Mind cannot have an Idea of
God, as it has of Infinite nature, being a part of nature; for the Idea of God
cannot be of the essence of God, as the Idea of nature is a corporeal part of
nature: and though nature may be known in some parts, yet God being
Incomprehensible, his Essence can by no ways or means be naturally known; and
this is constantly believed, by

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

III.
MADAM,
ALthough I mentioned in my last, that it is impossible to have an Idea of God,
yet your Author is pleased to say, That he will not stick to affirm, that the
Idea or notion of God is as easy, as any notion else Of the Immortality of the
Soul, l. 1. a. 4.
whatsoever, and that we may know as much of him as of any thing else in the
world. To which I answer, That in my opinion, God is not so easily to be known
by any creature, as man may know himself; nor his attributes so well, as man
can know his own natural proprieties: for Gods Infinite attributes are not
conceivable, and cannot be comprehended by a finite knowledge and understanding,
as a finite part of nature; for though nature's parts may be Infinite in
number, and as they have a relation to the Infinite whole, if I may call it so,
which is Infinite nature, yet no part is infinite in it self, and therefore it
cannot know so much as whole nature: and God being an Infinite Deity, there is
required an Infinite capacity to conceive him; nay, Nature her self although
Infinite, yet cannot posibly have an exact notion of God, by reason of the
disparity between God and her self; and therefore it is not probable, if the
Infinite servant of God is not able to conceive him, that a finite part or
creature of nature, of what kind or sort soever, whether Spiritual, as your
Author is pleased to name it, or Corporeal, should comprehend God. Concerning
my belief of God, I submit wholly to the Church, and believe as I have bin
informed out of the Athanasian Creed, that the Father is Incomprehensible, the
Son Incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost Incomprehensible; and that there are
not three, but one Incomprehensible God; Wherefore if any man can prove (as I
do verily believe he cannot) that God is not Incomprehensible, he must of
necessity be more knowing then the whole Church, however he must needs dissent
from the Church. But perchance your Author may say, I raise new and prejudicial
opinions, in saying that matter is eternal. I answer, The Holy Writ does not
mention Matter to be created, but only Particular Creatures, as this Visible
World, with all its Parts, as the history or description of the Creation of the
World in Genesis plainly shows; For God said, Let it it be Light, and there was
Light; Let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and let it divide
the Waters from the Waters; and Let the Waters under the Heaven be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry Land appear; and let the Earth bring
forth Grass, the Herb yielding Seed, and the Fruit-tree yielding Fruit after
his kind; and let there be Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven, to divide the
Day from the Night, etc. Which proves, that all creatures and figures were made
and produced out of that rude and desolate heap or chaos which the Scripture
mentions, which is nothing else but matter, by the powerful Word and Command of
God, executed by his Eternal Servant, Nature; as I have heretofore declared it
in a Letter I sent you in the beginning concerning Infinite Nature. But least I
seem to encroach too much upon Divinity, I submit this Interpretation to the
Church; However, I think it not against the ground of our Faith; for I am so
far from maintaining any thing either against Church or State, as I am
submitting to both in all duty, and shall do so as long as I live, and rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

IV.
MADAM,
SInce your Worthy and Learned Author is pleased to mention, That an ample
experience both of Men Antid. Book. 2. Chapter 2. a. 1.
and Things does enlarge our Understanding, I have taken occasion hence to
enquire, how a man's Understanding may be increased or enlarged. The
Understanding must either be in Parts, or it must be Individable as one; if in
Parts, then there must be so many Understandings as there are things
understood; but if Individable, and but one Understanding, then it must dilate
it self upon so many several objects. I for my part, assent to the first, That
Understanding increases by Parts, and not by Dilation, which Dilation must
needs follow, if the Mind or Understanding of man be Indivisible and without
parts; but if the Mind or Soul be Individable, then I would fain know, how
Understanding, Imagination, Conception, Memory, Remembrance, and the like, can
be in the mind? You will say, perhaps, they are so many faculties or properties
of the Incorporeal Mind, but, I hope, you do not intend to make the Mind or
Soul a Deity, with so many attributes, Wherefore, in my opinion, it is safer to
say, That the Mind is composed of several active Parts: but of these Parts I
have treated in my Philosophy, where you will find, that all the several Parts
of Nature are Living and Knowing, and that there is no part that has not Life
and Knowledge, being all composed of rational and sensitive matter, which is the
life and soul of Nature; and that Nature being Material, is composable and
dividable, which is the cause of so many several Creatures, where every
Creature is a part of Nature, and these Infinite parts or creatures are Nature
her self; for though Nature is a self-moving substance, and by self-motion
divides and composes her self several manners or ways into several forms and
figures, yet being a knowing, as well as a living substance, she knows how to
order her parts and actions wisely; for as she has an Infinite body or
substance, so she has an Infinite life and knowledge; and as she has an
Infinite life and knowledge, so she has an infinite wisdom: But mistake me not,
Madam; I do not mean an Infinite Divine Wisdom, but an Infinite Natural Wisdom,
given her by the Infinite bounty of the Omnipotent God; but yet this Infinite
Wisdom, Life and Knowledge in Nature make but one Infinite. And as Nature has
degrees of matter, so she has also degrees and variety of corporeal motions;
for some parts of matter are self-moving, and some are moved by these
self-moving parts of matter; and all these parts, both the moving and moved,
are so intermixed, that none is without the other, no not in any the least
Creature or part of Nature we can conceive; for there is no Creature or part of
Nature, but has a comixture of those mentioned parts of animate and inanimate
matter, and all the motions are so ordered by Natures wisdom, as not any thing
in Nature can be otherwise, unless by a Supernatural Command and Power of God;
for no part of corporeal matter and motion can either perish, or but rest; one
part may cause another part to alter its motions, but not to quit motion, no
more then one part of matter can annihilate or destroy another; and therefore
matter is not merely Passive, but always Active, by reason of the through
mixture of animate and inanimate matter; for although the animate matter is
only active in its nature, and the inanimate passive, yet because they are so
closely united and mixed together that they make but one body, the parts of the
animate or self-moving matter do bear up and cause the inanimate parts to move
and work with them; and thus there is an activity in all parts of matter moving
and working as one body, without any fixation or rest, for all is moveable,
moving and moved. All which, Madam, if it were well observed, there would not
be so many strange opinions concerning nature and her actions, making the
purest and subtillest part of matter immaterial or incorporeal, which is as
much, as to extend her beyond nature, and to rack her quite to nothing. But I
fear the opinion of Immaterial substances in Nature will at last bring in again
the Heathen Religion, and make us believe a god Pan, Bacchus, Ceres, Venus, and
the like, so as we may become worshippers of Groves and shadows, Beans and
Onions, as our Forefathers. I say not this, as if I would ascribe any worship
to Nature, or make her a Deity, for she is only a servant to God, and so are
all her parts or creatures, which parts or creatures, although they are
transformed, yet cannot be annihilated, except Nature her self be annihilated,
which may be, whenever the Great God pleases; for her existence and
resolution, or total destruction, depends upon Gods Will and Decree, whom she
fears, adores, admires, praises and prays unto, as being her God and Master;
and as she adores God, so do all her parts and creatures, and amongst the rest
Man, so that there is no Atheist in Infinite Nature, at least not in the
opinion of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

V.
MADAM,
I Cannot well conceive what your Author means by the Common Laws of Nature;
But if you desire Antid. Book. 2. c. 2.
my opinion how many Laws Nature has, and what they are; I say Nature has but
One Law, which is a wise Law, viz. to keep Infinite matter in order, and to
keep [so much Peace, as not to disturb the Foundation of her Government: for
though Natures actions are various, and so many times opposite, which would
seem to make wars between several Parts, yet those active Parts, being united
into one Infinite body, cannot break Natures general Peace; for that which Man
names War, Sickness, Sleep, Death, and the like, are but various particular
actions of the only matter; not, as your Author imagines, in a confusion, like
Bullets, or such like things juggled together in a man's Hat, but very orderly
and methodical: And the Playing motions of nature are the actions of Art, but
her serious actions are the actions of Production, Generation and
Transformation in several kinds, sorts and particulars of her Creatures, as
also the action of ruling and governing these her several active Parts.
Concerning the Preeminence and Prerogative of Man, whom your Author calls C. 3.
The flower and chief of all the products of nature upon this Globe of the
earth; I answer, That Man cannot well be judged of himself, because he is a
Party, and so may be Partial; But if we observe well, we shall find that the
Elemental Creatures are as excellent as Man, and as able to be a friend or foe
to Man, as Man to them, and so the rest of all Creatures; so that I cannot
perceive more abilities in Man then in the rest of natural Creatures; for
though he can build a stately House, yet he cannot make a Honeycomb; and
though he can plant a Slip, yet he cannot make a Tree; though he can make a
Sword, or Knife, yet he cannot make the Metal. And as Man makes use of other
Creatures, so other Creatures make use of Man, as far as he is good for any
thing: But Man is not so useful to his neighbor or fellow creatures, as his
neighbor or fellow creatures to him, being not so profitable for use, as apt
to make spoil. And so leaving him, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VI.
MADAM,
YOur Author demands, Whether there was ever any man, that was not mortal, and
whether there be any mortal that had not a beginning? Truly, if nature Antid.
1. 3. c. 15. a. 3.
be eternal, all the material figures which ever were, are, and can be, must be
also eternal in nature; for the figures cannot be annihilated, unless nature be
destroyed; and although a Creature is dissolved and transformed into numerous
different figures, yet all these several figures remain still in those parts of
matter, whereof that creature was made, for matter never changes, but is always
one and the same, and figure is nothing else but matter transposed or
transformed by motion several modes or ways. But if you conceive Matter to be
one thing, Figure another, and Motion a third, several, distinct and dividable
from each other, it will produce gross errors, for, matter, motion, and figure,
are but one thing. And as for that common question, whether the Egg was before
the Chick, or the Chick before the Egg, it is but a threadbare argument, which
proves nothing, for there is no such thing as First in Eternity, neither does
Time make productions or generations, but Matter; and whatsoever matter can
produce or generate, was in matter before it was produced; wherefore the
question is, whether Matter, which is Nature, had a beginning, or not? I say
not: for put the case, the figures of Earth, Air, Water, and Fire, Light and
Colors, Heat and Cold, Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, etc. were not
produced from all Eternity, yet those figures have nevertheless been in Matter,
which is Nature, from all eternity, for these mentioned Creatures are only
made by the corporeal motions of Matter, transforming Matter into such several
figures; Neither can there be any perishing or dying in Nature, for that which
Man calls so, is only an alteration of Figure. And as all other productions
are but a change of Matters sensitive motions, so all irregular and extravagant
opinions are nothing but a change of Matters rational motions; only
productions by rational motions are interior, and those by sensitive motions
exterior. For the Natural Mind is not less material then the body, only the
Matter of the Mind is much purer and subtiller then the Matter of the Body. And
thus there is nothing in Nature but what is material; but he that thinks it
absurd to say, the World is composed of mere self-moving Matter, may consider,
that it is more absurd to believe Immaterial substances or spirits in Nature,
as also a spirit of Nature, which is the Vicarious power of God upon Matter;
For why should it not be as probable, that God did give Matter a selfmoving
power to her self, as to have made another Creature to govern her? For Nature
is not a Babe, or Child, to need such a Spiritual Nurse, to teach her to go, or
to move; neither is she so young a Lady as to have need of a Governess, for
surely she can govern her self; she needs not a Guardian for fear she should
run away with a younger Brother, or one that cannot make her a Jointure. But
leaving those strange opinions to the fancies of their Authors, He add no more,
but that I am,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

VII.
MADAM,
YOur Author being very earnest in arguing against those that maintain the
opinion of Matter being self-moving, amongst the rest of his arguments brings
in this: Suppose, says he, Matter could Of the Immortality of the Soul, l. 1.
c. 12.
move it self, would mere Matter with self-motion amount to that admirable wise
contrivance of things which we see in the World? -- All the evasion I can
imagine, our adversaries may use here, will be this: That Matter is capable of
sense, and the finest and most subtle of the most refined sense; and
consequently of Imagination too, yea happily of Reason and Understanding. I
answer, it is very probable, that not only all the Matter in the World or
Universe has Sense, but also Reason; and that the sensitive part of matter is
the builder, and the rational the designer; whereof I have spoken of before,
and you may find more of it in my Book of Philosophy. But, says your Author,
Let us see, if all their heads laid together can contrive the anatomical
Fabric of any Creature that lives? I answer, all parts of Nature are not
bound to have heads or tayls; but if they have, surely they are wiser then many
a man's. I demand, says he, Has every one of these Particles, that must have a
hand in the framing of the body of an animal, the whole design of the work by
the Impress of some Phantasme upon it? or as they have several offices, so have
they several parts of the design? I answer, All the actions of self-moving
Matter are not Impresses, nor is every part a handlabourer, but every part
unites by degrees into such or such a Figure. Again, says he, How is it
conceiveable that any one Particle of Matter, or many together, (there not
existing, yet in Nature an animal) can have the Idea Impressed of that Creature
they are to frame? I answer, all figures whatsoever have been, are, or can be
in Nature, are existent in nature. How, says he, can they in framing several
parts confer notes? by what language or speech can they communicate their
Counsels one to another? I answer, Knowledge does not always require speech, for
speech is an effect and not a cause, but knowledge is a cause and not an effect;
and nature has infinite more ways to express knowledge then man can imagine,
Wherefore, he concludes, that they should mutually serve one another in such a
design, is more impossible; then that so many men, blind and dumb from their
nativity, should join their forces and wits together to build a Castle, or
carve a statue of such a Creature, as none of them knew any more in several,
then some one of the smallest parts thereof, but not the relation it bore to
the whole. I answer, Nature is neither blind nor dumb, nor any ways defective,
but infinitely wife and knowing; for blindness and dumbness are but effects of
some of her particular actions, but there is no defect in self-moving matter,
nor in her actions in general; and it is absurd to conceive the Generality of
wisdom according to an Irregular effect or defect of a particular Creature; for
the General actions of Nature are both life and knowledge, which are the
architects of all Creatures, and know better how to frame all kinds and sorts
of Creatures then man can conceive; and the several parts of Matter have a more
easy way of communication, then Man's head has with his hand, or his hand with
pen, ink, and paper, when he is going to write; which later example will make
you understand my opinion the better, if you do but compare the rational part
of Matter to the head, the sensitive to the hand, the inanimate to pen, ink and
paper, their action to writing, and their framed figures to those figures or
letters which are written; in all which is a mutual agreement without noise or
trouble. But give me leave, Madam, to tell you, That self-moving Matter may
sometimes err and move irregularly, and in some parts not move so strong,
curious, or subtle at sometimes, as in other parts, for Nature delights in
variety; Nevertheless she is more wise then any Particular Creature or part can
conceive, which is the cause that Man thinks Nature's wise, subtle and lively
actions, are as his own gross actions, conceiving them to be constrained and
turbulent, not free and easy, as well as wise and knowing; Whereas Nature's
Creating, Generating and Producing actions are by an easy connection of parts
to parts, without Counterbuffs, Joggs and Jolts, producing a particular figure
by degrees, and in order and method, as humane sense and reason may well
perceive: And why may not the sensitive and rational part of Matter know better
how to make a Be, then a Be does how to make Honey and Wax? or have a better
communication betwixt them, then Bees that fly several ways, meeting and
joining to make their Combs in their Hives? But pardon, Madam, for I think it
a Crime to compare the Creating, Generating and producing Coporeal Life and
Wisdom of Nature unto any particular Creature, although every particular
Creature has their share, being a part of Nature. Wherefore those, in my
opinion, do grossly err, that bind up the sensitive matter only to taste,
touch, hearing, seeing, and smelling; as if the sensitive parts of Nature had
not more variety of actions, then to make five senses; for we may well observe,
in every Creature there is difference of sense and reason according to the
several modes of self-motion; For the Sun, Stars, Earth, Air, Fire, Water,
Plants, Animals, Minerals; although they have all sense and knowledge, yet they
have not all sense and knowledge alike, because sense and knowledge moves not
alike in every kind or sort of Creatures, nay many times very different in one
and the same Creature; but yet this does not cause a general Ignorance, as to
be altogether Insensible or Irrational, neither do the erroneous and irregular
actions of sense and reason prove an annihilation of sense and reason; as for
example, a man may become Mad or a Fool through the irregular motions of sense
and reason, and yet have still the Perception of sense and reason, only the
alteration is caused through the alteration of the sensitive and rational
corporeal motions or actions, from regular to irregular; nevertheless he has
Perceptions, Thoughts, Ideas, Passions, and whatsoever is made by sensitive and
rational Matter, neither can Perception be divided from Motion, nor Motion from
Matter; for all sensation is Corporeal, and so is Perception. I can add no
more, but take my leave, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VIII.
MADAM,
YOur Author is pleased to say, that Matter is a Principle purely passive, and
no otherwise moved or modified, Of the Immortality of the Soul, l. 2. c. 1. a.
3.
then as some other thing moves and modifies it, but cannot move it self at
all; which is most demonstrable to them that contend for sense and perception
in it: For if it had any such perception, it would, by virtue of its
self-motion withdraw its self from under the knocks of hammers, or fury of the
fire; or of its own accord approach to such things as are most agreeable to it,
and pleasing, and that without the help of muscles, it being thus immediately
endowed with a self-moving power. By his leave, Madam, I must tell you, that I
see no consequence in this argument; Because some parts of matter cannot
withdraw themselves from the force and power of other parts, therefore they
have neither sense, reason, nor perception: For put the case, a man should be
overpowr'd by some other men, truly he would be forced to suffer, and no
Immaterial Spirits, I think, would assist him. The very same may be said of
other Creatures or parts of Nature; for some may overpower others, as the
fire, hammer and hand does overpower a Horse-shooe, which cannot prevail over
so much odds of power and strength; And so likewise it is with sickness and
health, life and death; for example, some corporeal motions in the body turning
Rebels, by moving contrary to the health of an animal Creature, it must become
sick; for not every particular creature has an absolute power, the power being
in the Infinite whole, and not in single divided parts: Indeed, to speak
properly, there is no such thing as an absolute power in Nature; for though
Nature has power to move it self, yet not beyond it self. But mistake me not,
for I mean by an absolute Power; not a circumscribed and limited, but an
unlimited power, no ways bound or confined, but absolutely or every way
Infinite, and there is not any thing that has such an absolute power but God
alone: neither can Nature be undividable, being Corporeal or Material; nor rest
from motion being naturally self-moving, and in a perpetual motion. Wherefore
though Matter is self-moving, and very wise, (although your Author denies it,
calling those Fools that maintain this In the Append. to the Antid. c. 3. a. 10.
opinion) yet it cannot go beyond the rules of its Nature, no more then any Art
can go beyond its Rules and Principles: And as for what your Author says, That
every thing would approach to that, which is agreeable and pleasant; I think I
need no demonstration to prove it; sor we may plainly see it in all effects of
Nature, that there is Sympathy and Antipathy, and what is this else, but
approaching to things agreeable and pleasant, and withdrawing it self from
things disagreeable, and hurtful or offensive? But of this subject I shall
discourse more hereafter, wherefore I finish here, and rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

IX.
MADAM,
YOur Authors opinion is, That Matter being once actually divided as far as
possibly it can, it is a perfect In the Preface before the Imm. of the Soul.
contradiction it should be divided any further. I answer, Though Nature is
Infinite, yet her actions are not all dilative nor separative, but some divide
and some compose, some dilate and some contract, which causes a mean betwixt
Natures actions or motions. Next your Author says, That as Infinite Greatness
has no Figure, so Infinite Littleness has none also. I answer, Whatsoever has
a body, has a figure; for it is impossible that substance, or body, and figure,
should be separated from each other, but wheresoever is body or substance,
there is also figure, and if there be an infinite substance, there must also be
an infinite figure, although not a certain determined or circumscribed figure,
for such a figure belongs only to finite particulars; and therefore I am of
your Authors mind, That it is a contradiction to say an Infinite Cube or
Triangle, for a Cube and a Triangle is a perfect circumscribed figure, having
its certain compass and circumference, be it never so great or little;
wherefore to say an Infinite Cube, would be as much as to say a Finite
Infinite. But as for your Authors example of Infinite matter, space or
duration, divided into three equal parts, all which he says must needs be
Infinite, or else the whole will not be so, and then the middle part of them
will seem both Finite and Infinite. I answer, That Matter is not dividable into
three equal parts, for three is a finite number and so are three equal parts;
but I say that Matter being an Infinite body, is dividable into Infinite parts,
and it does not follow, as your Author says, That one of those infinite parts
must be infinite also, for else there would be no difference betwixt the whole
and its parts; I say whole for distinctions and better expressions sake, and do
not mean such a whole which has a certain number of parts, and is of a certain
and limited figure, although never so great; but an Infinite whole, which
expression I must needs use, by reason I speak of Infinite parts; and that each
one of these Infinite parts in number may be finite in substance or figure, is
no contradiction, but very probable and rational; nay, I think it rather absurd
to say that each part is infinite; for then there would be no difference
betwixt parts and whole, as I said before. Only this is to be observed, that
the Infinite whole is Infinite in substance or bulk, but the parts are Infinite
in number, and not in bulk, for each part is circumscribed, and finite in its
exterior figure and substance. But mistake me not, when I speak of
circumscribed and finite single parts; for I do not mean, that each part does
subsist single and by it self, there being no such thing as an absolute single
part in Nature, but Infinite Matter being by self-motion divided into an
infinite number of parts, all these parts have so near a relation to each
other, and to the infinite whole, that one cannot subsist without the other;
for the Infinite parts in number do make the Infinite whole, and the Infinite
whole consists in the Infinite number of parts; wherefore it is only their
figures which make a difference betwixt them; for each part having its proper
figure different from the other, which is circumscribed and limited, it is
called a finite single part; and such a part cannot be said Infinitely
dividable, for infinite composition and division belong only to the Infinite
body of Nature, which being infinite in substance may also be infinitely
divided, but not a finite and single part: Besides, Infinite composition does
hinder the Infinite division, and Infinite division hinders the Infinite
composition; so that one part cannot be either infinitely composed, or
infinitely divided; and it is one thing to be dividable, and another to be
divided. And thus, when your Author Antid. Book. 2. c. 4.
mentions in another place, That if a body be divisible into Infinite Parts, it
has an Infinite number of extended parts: If by extension he mean corporeal
dimension, I am of his opinion; for there is no part, be it never so little in
Nature, but is material; and if material, it has a body; and if a body, it must
needs have a bodily dimension; and so every part will be an extended part: but
since there is no part but is finite in its self, it cannot be divisible into
infinite parts; neither can any part be infinitely dilated or contracted; for
as composition and division do hinder and obstruct each other from running into
Infinite, so does dilation hinder the Infinite contraction, and contraction the
Infinite dilation, which, as I said before, causes a mean betwixt Nature's
actions; nevertheless, there are Infinite dilations and contractions in Nature,
because there are Infinite contracted and dilated parts, and so are infinite
divisions because there are infinite divided parts; but contraction, dilation,
extension, composition, division, and the like, are only Nature's several
actions; and as there can be no single part in Nature that is Infinite, so
there can neither be any single Infinite action. But as for Matter, Motion and
Figure, those are Individable and Inseparable, and make but one body or
substance; for it is as impossible to divide them, as impossible it is to your
Author to separate the essential proprieties, which he gives, from an Immortal
Spirit; And as Matter, Motion and Figure are inseparable; so is likewise
Matter, Space, Place and Duration; For Parts, Motion, Figure, Place and
Duration, are but one Infinite body; only the Infinite parts are the Infinite
divisions of the Infinite body, and the Infinite body is a composition of the
Infinite parts; but figure, place and body are all one, and so is time, and
duration, except you will call time the division of duration, and duration the
composition of time; but infinite time, and infinite duration is all one in
Nature: and thus Nature's Principal motions and actions are dividing,
composing, and disposing or ordering, according to her Natural wisdom, by the
Omnipotent God's leave and permission. Concerning the Sun, which your Author
speaks of in the same place, and denies him to be a Spectator of our Particular
affairs upon Earth; saying, there is no such divine Principle in him, whereby
he can do it. I will speak nothing against, nor for it; but I may say, that the
Sun has such a Principle as other Creatures have, which is, that he has
sensitive and rational corporeal motions, as well as animals or other
Creatures, although not in the same manner, nor the same organs; and if he have
sensitive and rational motions, he may also have sensitive and rational
knowledge or perception, as well as man, or other animals and parts of Nature
have, for ought any body knows; for it is plain to humane sense and reason,
that all Creatures must needs have rational and sensitive knowledge, because
they have all sensitive and rational matter and motions. But leaving the Sun
for Astronomers to contemplate upon, I take my leave, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

X.
MADAM,
YOur Author in his arguments against Motion, being a Principle of Nature,
endeavors to prove, Append. to the Antid. c. 11.
that Beauty, Color, Symmetry, and the like, in Plants, as well as in other
Creatures, are no result from the mere motion of the matter; and forming this
objection, It may be said, says he, That the regular motion of the matter made
the first plant of every kind; but we demand, What regulated the motion of it,
so as to guide it, to form it self into such a state? I answer, The Wisdom of
Nature or infinite Matter did order its own actions so, as to form those her
Parts into such an exact and beautiful figure, as such a Tree, or such a
Flower, or such a Fruit, and the like; and some of her Parts are pleased and
delighted with other parts, but some of her parts are afraid or have an
aversion to other parts; and hence is like and dislike, or sympathy and
antipathy, hate and love, according as nature, which is infinite self-moving
matter, pleases to move; for though Natural Wisdom is dividable into parts, yet
these parts are united in one infinite Body, and make but one Being in it self,
like as the several parts of a man make up but one perfect man; for though a
man may be wise in several causes or actions, yet it is but one wisdom; and
though a Judge may show Justice in several causes, yet it is but one Justice;
for Wisdom and Justice, though they be practiced in several causes, yet it is
but one Wisdom, and one Justice; and so, all the parts of a man's body, although
they move differently, yet are they but one man's bodily actions; Just as a
man, if he carve or cut out by art several statues, or draw several Pictures,
those statues or pictures are but that one man's work. The like may be said of
Natures Motions and Figures; all which are but one self-active or self-moving
Material Nature. But Wise Nature's Ground or Fundamental actions are very
Regular, as you may observe in the several and distinct kinds, sorts and
particulars of her Creatures, and in their distinct Proprieties, Qualities, and
Faculties, belonging not only to each kind and sort, but to each particular
Creature; and since man is not able to know perfectly all those proprieties
which belong to animals, much less will he be able to know and judge of those
that are in Vegetables, Minerals and Elements; and yet these Creatures, for any
thing Man knows, may be as knowing, understanding, and wise as he; and each as
knowing of its kind or sort, as man is of his; But the mixture of ignorance and
knowledge in all Creatures proceeds from thence, that they are but Parts; and
there is no better proof, that the mind of man is dividable, then that it is
not perfectly knowing; nor no better proof that it is composeable, then that it
knows so much: but all minds are not alike, but some are more composed then
others, which is the cause, some know more then others; for if the mind in all
men were alike, all men would have the same Imaginations, Fancies, Conceptions,
Memories, Remembrances, Passions, Affections, Understanding, and so forth: The
same may be said of their bodies; for if all men's sensitive parts were as one,
and not dividable and composeable, all their Faculties, Properties,
Constitutions, Complexions, Appetites, would be the same in every man without
any difference; but humane sense and reason does well perceive, that neither
the mind, life nor body are as one piece, without division and composition.
Concerning the divine Soul, I do not treat of it; only this I may say, That
all are not devout alike, nor those which are, are not at all times alike
devout. But to conclude: some of our modern Philosophers think they do God good
service, when they endeavor to prove Nature, as Gods good Servant, to be
stupid, ignorant, foolish and mad, or any thing rather then wise, and yet they
believe themselves wise, as if they were no part of Nature; but I cannot
imagine any reason why they should rail on her, except Nature had not given
them as great a share or portion, as she has given to others; for children in
this case do often rail at their Parents, for leaving their Brothers and
Sisters more then themselves. However, Nature can do more then any of her
Creatures: and if Man can Paint, Imbroider, Carve, Ingrave curiously; why may
not Nature have more Ingenuity, Wit and Wisdom then any of her particular
Creatures? The same may be said of her Government. And so leaving Wise Nature,
I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XI.
MADAM,
TO your Authors argument, That if Motion belong naturally to Matter, Matter
being Uniform, Antid. l. 2. c. 1.
it must be alike moved in every part of particle imaginable of it, by reason
this Motion being natural and essential to Matter, is alike every way. I
answer, That this is no more necessary, then that the several actions of one
body, or of one part of a body should be alike; for though Matter is one and
the same in its Nature, and never changes, yet the motions are various, which
motions are the several actions of one and the same Natural Matter; and this is
the cause of so many several Creatures; for self-moving matter by its
self-moving power can act several ways, modes or manners; and had not natural
matter a self-acting power, there could not be any variety in Nature; for
Nature knows of no rest, there being no such thing as rest in Nature; but she
is in a perpetual motion, I mean self-motion, given her from God: Neither do I
think it Atheistical (as your Author deems) to maintain this opinion of
selfmotion, as long as I do not deny the Omnipotency of God; but I should
rather think it Irreligious to make so many several Creatures as Immaterial
Spirits, like so many several Deities, to rule and govern Nature and all
material substances in Nature; for what Atheism does there lie in saying, that
natural matter is naturally moving, and wise in her self? Does this oppose the
omnipotency and Infinite wisdom of God? It rather proves and confirms it; for
all Natures free power of moving and wisdom is a gift of God, and proceeds from
him; but I must confess, it destroys the power of Immaterial substances, for
Nature will not be ruled nor governed by them, and to be against Natural
Immaterial substances, I think, is no Atheism, except we make them Deities;
neither is it Atheism to contradict the opinion of those, that believe such
natural incorporeal Spirits, unless man make himself a God. But although Nature
is wise, as I said before, and acts methodically, yet the variety of motions is
the cause of so many Irregularities in Nature, as also the cause of Irregular
opinions; for all opinions are made by self-moving matters motions, or (which
is all one) by corporeal self-motion, and some in their opinions do conceive
Nature according to the measure of themselves, as that Nature can, nor could
not do more, then they think, nay, some believe they can do as much as Nature
does; which opinions, whether they be probable or regular, I Will let any man
judge; adding only this, that to humane sense and reason it appears plainly,
that as God has given Nature a power to act freely, so he does approve of her
actions, being wise and methodical in all her several Productions, Generations,
Transformations and Designs: And so I conclude for the present, only subscribe
my self, as really I am,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XII.
MADAM,
I Am of your Authors opinion, concerning self-activity or self-motion, That
what is Active of it self, can Of the Immortality of the Soul, l. 1. c. 7.
no more cease to be active then to be: And I have been always of this opinion,
even from the first beginning of my conceptions in natural Philosophy, as you
may see in my first Treatise of Natural Philosophy, which I put forth eleven
years since; where I say, That self-moving Matter is in a Perpetual motion; But
your Author endeavors srom thence to conclude, That Matter is not self-active,
because it is reducible to rest. To which I answer, That there is no such thing
as Rest in Nature: Not do I say, that all sorts of motions are subject to our
senses, for those that are subject to our sensitive Perceptions, are but gross
Motions, in comparison to those that are not subject to our exterior senses: as
for example; We see some bodies dilate, others consume, others corrupt; yet we
do not see how they dilate, nor how they consume, nor how they corrupt: Also we
see some bodies contract, some attract, some condense, some consist, etc. yet
we do not see their contracting, attracting, condensing, consisting or
retenting motions; and yet we cannot say, they are not corporeal motions,
because not subject to our exterior senses; for if there were not contracting,
attracting, retenting or consistent corporeal self-motions, it had been
impossible that any creature could have been composed into one united figure,
much less stayed and continued in the same figure without a general alteration.
But your Author says, If Matter, as Matter, had Motion, nothing would hold
together, but Flints, Adamants, Brass, Iron, yea, this whole Earth, would
suddenly melt into a thinner substance then the subtle Air, or rather it never
had been condensated together to this consistency we find it. But I would ask
him, what reason he can give, that corporeal self-motion should make all matter
rare and fluid, unless he believe there is but one kind of motion in Nature,
but this, human sense and reason will contradict; for we may observe there are
Infinite changes of Motion, and there is more variety and curiosity in
corporeal motions, then any one single Creature can imagine, much less know;
but I suppose he conceives all corporeal matter to be gross, and that not any
corporeal motion can be subtle, penetrating, contracting and dilating; and that
whatsoever is penetrating, contracting and dilating, is Individable: But by his
leave, Madam, this does not follow; for though there be gross degrees of
Matter, and strong degrees of Corporeal Motions, yet there are also pure and
subtle degrees of Matter and Motions; to wit, that degree of Matter, which I
name sensitive and rational Matter, which is natural Life and Knowledge, as
sensitive Life and rational Knowledge. Again, your Author asks, What glue or
cement holds the parts of hard matter in Stones and Metals together? I answer,
Consistent or retentive corporeal motions, by an agreeable union and
conjunction in the several parts of Metal or Stone; and these retentive or
consistent motions, are as strong and active, if not more, then some dilative
or contractive motions; for I have mentioned heretofore, that, as sensitive and
rational corporeal motions are in all Creatures, so also in Stone, Metal, and
any other dense body whatsoever; so that not any one Creature or part of Matter
is without Motion, and therefore not any thing is at rest. But, Madam, I dare
say, I could bring more reason and sense to prove, that sensitive and rational
Matter is fuller of activity, and has more variety of motion, and can change
its own parts of self-moving Matter more suddenly, and into more exterior
figures, then Immaterial Spirits can do upon natural Matter. But your Author
says, That Immaterial Spirits are endued with Sense and Reason; I say, My
sensitive and rational corporeal Matter is Sense and Reason it self, and is the
Architect or Creator of all figures of Natural matter; for though all the parts
of Matter are not self-moving, yet there is not any part that is not moving or
moved, by and with the mover, which is animate matter. And thus I conclude, and
rest constantly,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XIII.
MADAM,
THat Matter is incapable of Sense, your Author proves by the example of dead
Carcasses; For, says he, Motion and Sense being really one and the Of the
Imwortality of the Soul. l. 2. c. 2.
same thing, it must needs follow, that where there is motion, there is also
sense and perception; but on the contrary, there is Reaction in dead Carcasses,
and yet no Sense. I answer shortly, That it is no consequence, because there is
no animal sense nor exterior perceptible local motion in a dead Carcass,
therefore there is no sense at all in it; for though it has not animal sense,
yet it may nevertheless have sense according to the nature of that figure, into
which it did change from being an animal. Also he says, If any Matter have
sense, it will follow, that upon reaction all shall have the like; and that a
Bell while it is ringing, and a Bow while it is bent, and every fack-in-a-box,
that Schoolboys play with, shall be living animals. I answer, It is true, if
reaction made sense; but reaction does not make sense, but sense makes
reaction; and though the Bell has not an animal knowledge, yet it may have a
mineral life and knowledge, and the Bow, and the Jack-in-a-box a vegetable
knowledge; for the shape and form of the Bell, Bow, and Jack-in-a-box, is
artificial; nevertheless each in its own kind may have as much knowledge as an
animal in his kind; only they are different according to the different
proprieties of their Figures: And who can prove the contrary that they have
not? For certainly Man cannot prove what he cannot know; but Man's nature is so,
that knowing but little of other Creatures, he presently judges there is no
more knowledge in Nature, then what Man, at least Animals, have; and confines
all sense only to Animal sense, and all knowledge to Animal knowledge. Again
says your Author, That Matter is utterly incapable of such operations as we
find in our selves, and that therefore there is something in us Immaterial or
Incorporeal; for we find in our selves that one and the same thing, both hears,
and sees, and tastes, and perceives all the variety of objects that Nature
manifests unto us. I answer, That is the reason there is but one matter, and
that all natural perception is made by the animate part of matter; but although
there is but one matter in Nature, yet there are several parts or degrees, and
consequently several actions of that only matter, which causes such a variety
of perceptions, both sensitive and rational: the sensitive perception is made
by the sensitive corporeal motions, copying out the figures of foreign objects
in the sensitive organs of the sentient; and if those sensitive motions do
pattern out foreign objects in each sensitive organ alike at one and the same
time, then we hear, see, taste, touch and smell, at one and the same time: But
Thoughts and Passions, as Imagination, Conception, Fancy, Memory, Love, Hate,
Fear, Joy, and the like, are made by the rational corporeal motions in their
own degree of matter, to wit, the rational. And thus all perception is made by
one and the same matter, through the variety of its actions or motions, making
various and several figures, both sensitive and rational. But all this variety
in sense and reason, or of sensitive and rational perceptions, is not made by
parts pressing upon parts, but by changing their own parts of matter into
several figures by the power of self-motion: For example, I see a Man or Beast;
that Man or Beast does not touch my eye in the least, neither in it self, nor
by pressing the adjoining parts: but the sensitive corporeal motions straight
upon the sight of the Man or Beast make the like figure in the sensitive organ,
the Eye, and in the eyes own substance or matter, as being in the eye as well
as the other degrees of matter, to wit, the rational and inanimate, for they
are all mixed together. But this is to be observed, That the rational matter can
and does move in its own substance, as being the purest and subtillest degree
of matter; but the sensitive being not so pure and subtle, moves always with
the inanimate Matter, and so the perceptive figures which the rational Matter,
or rational corporeal Motions make, are made in their own degree of Matter; but
those figures which the sensitive patterns out, are made in the organs or parts
of the sentient body proper to such or such a sense or perception: as in an
animal Creature, the perception of sight is made by the sensitive corporeal
motions in the Eye; the perception of hearing, in the Ear,. and so forth. As
for what your Author says, That we cannot conceive any portion of Matter, but
is either hard or soft; I answer, That these are but effects of Matters
actions, and so is rare, and dense, and the like; but there are some Creatures
which seem neither perfectly rare, nor dense, nor hard, nor soft, but of mixed
qualities; as for example, Quicksilver seems rare, and yet is dense; soft, and
yet is hard; for though liquid Quicksilver is soft to our touch, and rare to
our sight, yet it is so dense and hard, as not to be readily dissolved from its
nature; and if there be such contraries and mixtures in one particular creature
made of self-moving Matter, what will there not be in Matter it self, according
to the old saying: If the Man such praise shall have; What the Master that
keeps the knave? So if a particular Creature has such opposite qualities and
mixtures of corporeal motions, what will the Creator have which is self-moving
Matter? Wherefore it is impossible to affirm, that self-moving Matter is either
all rare, or all dense, or all hard, or all soft; because by its self-moving
power it can be either, or both, and so by the change and variety of motion,
there may be soft and rare Points, and hard and sharp Points, hard and
contracted Globes, and soft and rare Globes; also there may be pressures of
Parts without printing, and printing without pressures. Concerning that part of
Matter which is the Common Sensorium, your Author demands, Whether some point
of it receive the whole Image of the object, or whether it be wholly received
into every point of it? I answer, first, That all sensitive Matter is not in
Points: Next, That not any single part can subsist of it self; and then that
one Part does not receive all parts or any part into it self; but that Parts by
the power of self-motion can and do make several figures of all sizes and
sorts, and can Epitomize a great object into a very little figure; for outward
objects do not move the body, but the sensitive and rational matter moves
according to the figures of outward objects: I do not say always, but most
commonly; But, says your Author; How can so small a Point receive the Images of
so vast or so various objects at once, without obliteration or confusion.
First, I answer, That, as I said before, sensitive Matter is not bound up to a
Point, nor to be a single selfsubsisting Part. Next, as for confusion, I say,
that the sensitive matter makes no more confusion, then an Engraver, when he
engraves several figures in a small stone, and a Painter draws several figures
in a small compass; for a Carver will cut out several figures in a
Cherry-stone, and a Lady in a little black Patch; and if gross and rude Art is
able to do this, why may not Ingenious and Wise Nature do? And as Nature is
ingenious and knowing in her self, so in her Parts, and her Parts in her; for
neither whole nor Parts are ignorant, but have a knowledge, each according to
the motion of its own Parts; for knowledge is in Motion, and Motion in Matter;
and the diversity and variety of motion is the diversity and variety of
knowledge, so that every particular figure and motion has its particular
knowledge, as well as its proper and peculiar parts; and as the parts join or
divide, so does knowledge, which many times causes Arts to be lost and found,
and memory and remembrance in Particular Creatures: I do not say, they are
utterly lost in nature, but only in respect to particular Creatures, by the
dissolving and dividing of their particular figures. For the rational matter,
by reason it moves only in its own parts, it can change and rechange into
several figures without division of parts, which makes memory and remembrance:
But men not considering or believing there might be such a degree of only
matter, namely rational, it has made them err in their judgments. Nevertheless
there is a difference between sensitive and rational parts and motions, and yet
they are agreeable most commonly in their actions, though not always. Also the
rational can make such figures as the sensitive cannot, by reason the rational
has a greater power and subtiler faculty in making variety, then the sensitive;
for the sensitive is bound to move with the inanimate, but the rational moves
only in its own parts; for though the sensitive and rational oftentimes cause
each other to move, yet they are not of one and the same degree of matter, nor
have they the same motions. And this rational Matter is the cause of all
Notions, Conceptions, Imaginations, Deliberation, Determination, Memory, and
any thing else that belongs to the Mind; for this matter is the mind of Nature,
and so being dividable, the mind of all Creatures, as the sensitive is the
life; and it can move, as I said, more subtly, and more variously then the
sensitive, and make such figures as the sensitive cannot, without outward
examples and objects. But all diversity comes by change of motion, and motions
are as sympathetical and agreeing, as antipathetical and disagreeing; And
though Nature's artificial motions, which are her Playing motions, are
sometimes extravagant, yet in her fundamental actions there is no extravagancy,
as we may observe by her exact rules in the various generations, the distinct
kinds and sorts, the several exact measures, times, proportions and motions of
all her Creatures, in all which her wisdom is well expressed, and in the variety
her wise pleasure: To which I leave her, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XIV.
MADAM,
IF there be any sense and perception in Matter, says Of the Immortality of the
Soul. l. 2. c. 1. a. 1, 6, 7.
your Author, it must needs be Motion or Reaction of one part of matter against
another; and that all diversity of sense and perception does necessarily arise
from the diversity of the Magnitude, Figure, Posture, Vigor and Direction of
Motion in Parts of the Matter; In which variety of perceptions, Matter has
none, but such, as are impressed by corporeal motions, that is to say, that are
perceptions of some actions, or modificated Impressions of parts of matter
bearing one against another. I have declared, Madam, my opinion concerning
Perception in my former Letters, that all Perception is not Impression and
Reaction, like as a Seal is printed on Was: For example, the corporeal rational
motions in the mind do not print, but move figuratively; but the sensitive
motions do carve, print, engrave, and, as it were, pencil out, as also move
figuratively in productions, and do often take patterns from the rational
figures, as the rational motions make figures according to the sensitive
patterns; But the rational can move without patterns, and so the sensitive: For
surely, were a man born blind, deaf, dumb, and had a numb palsy in his
exterior parts, the sensitive and rational motions would nevertheless move both
in body and mind according to the nature of his figure; for though no copies
were taken from outward objects, yet he would have thoughts, passions,
appetites, and the like; and though he could not see exterior objects, nor hear
exterior sounds, yet no question but he would see and hear interiously after
the manner of dreams, only they might not be any thing like to what is
perceiveable by man in the World; but if he sees not the Sun-light, yet he
would see something equivalent to it; and if he hears not such a thing as
Words, yet he would hear something equivalent to words; for it is impossible,
that his sensitive and rational faculties should be lost for want of an Ear, or
an Eye; so that Perception may be without exterior object, or marks, or
patterns: for although the sensitive Motions do usually pattern out the figures
of exterior objects, yet that does not prove, but they can make interior
figures without such objects. Wherefore Perception is not always Reaction,
neither is Perception and Reaction really one thing; for though Perception and
Action is one and the same, yet not always Reaction; but did Perception proceed
from the reaction of outward objects, a blind and deaf man would not so much as
dream; for he would have no interior motion in the head, having no other
exterior sense but touch, which, if the body was troubled with a painful
disease, he would neither be sensible of, but to feel pain, and interiously
feel nothing but hunger and fullness; and his Mind would be as Irrational as
some imagine Vegetables and Minerals are. To which opinion I leave them, and
rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XV.
MADAM,
YOur Author is pleased, in Mirth, and to disgrace the opinion of those which
hold, that Perception is made by figuring, to bring in this following example:
Suppose, says he, one Particle should shape it self into a George on Horseback
with a Lance in his hand, In the second Book of the Immortality of the Soul,
chapter 6.
and another into an Enchanted Castle; this George on Horseback must run
against the Castle, to make the Castle receive his impress and similitude: But
what then? Truly the Encounter will be very Unfortunate, for S. George indeed
may easily break his Lance, but it is impossible that he should by justling
against the Particle in the form of a Castle, conveigh the entire shape of
himself and his Horse thereby, such as we find our selves able to imagine of a
man on Horseback; which is a Truth as demonstrable as any Theorem in
Mathematics. I answer, first, That there is no Particle single and alone by it
self; Next, I say, It is more easy for the rational matter to put it self into
such figures, and to make such encounters, then for an Immaterial mind or
sustance to imagine it; for no imagination can be without figure, and how
should an Immaterial created substance present such Figures, but by making them
either in it self or upon matter? For S. George and the Castle are figures, and
their encounters are real fighting actions, and how such figures and actions
can be in the mind or memory, and yet not be, is impossible to conceive; for,
as I said, those figures and actions must be either in the incorporeal mind, or
in the corporeal parts of matter; and if the figures and motions may be in an
incorporeal substance, much more is it probable for them to be in a corporeal;
nay if the figures and their actions can be in gross corporeal matter, why
should they not be in the purest part of matter, which is the rational matter?
And as for being made known to the whole body, and every part thereof, it is
not necessary, no more then it is necessary, that the private actions of every
Man or Family should be made known to the whole Kingdom, or Town, or Parish:
But my opinion of self-corporeal motion and perception, may be as demonstrable
as that of Immaterial Natural Spirits, which, in my mind, is not demonstrable
at all, by reason it is not corporeal or material; For how can that be
naturally demonstrable, which naturally is nothing? But your Author believes
the Mind or rational Soul to be individable, and therefore concludes, that the
Parts of the same Matter, although at great distance, must of necessity know
each Particular act of each several Part; but that is not necessary; for if
there were not ignorance through the division of Parts, every man and other
creatures would know alike; and there is no better proof, that matter, or any
particular creature in nature is not governed by a created Immaterial Spirit,
then that knowledge is in parts; for the hand does not know what pain the head
feels, which certainly it would do, if the mind were not dividable into parts,
but an individable substance. But this is well to be observed, that some parts
in some actions agree generally in one body, and some not; as for example,
temperance and appetite do not agree; for the corporeal actions of appetite
desire to join with the corporeal actions of such or such other parts, but the
corporeal actions of temperance do hinder and forbid it; whereupon there is a
faction amongst the several parts: for example, a Man desires to be drunk with
Wine; this desire is made by such corporeal actions as make appetite; the
rational corporeal motions or actions which make temperance, oppose those that
make appetite, and that sort of actions which has the better, carries it, the
hand and other parts of the body obeying the strongest side; and if there be no
wine to satisfy the appetite, yet many times the appetite continues; that is,
the parts continue in the same motions that make such an appetite; but if the
appetite does not continue, then those parts have changed their motions; or
when by drinking, the appetite is satisfied, and ceases, then those parts that
made the appetite, have altered their former motions. But oftentimes the
rational corporeal motions may so agree with the sensitive, as there may be no
opposition or crossing at all, but a sympathetical mutual agreement betwixt
them, at least an approvement; so that the rational may approve what the
sensitive covet or desire: Also some motions of the rational, as also of the
sensitive matter, may disagree amongst themselves, as we see, that a man will
often have a divided mind; for he will love and hate the same thing, desire and
not desire one and the same thing, as to be in Heaven, and yet to be in the
World: Moreover, this is to be observed, That all rational perceptions or
cogitations, are not so perspicuous and clear as if they were Mathematical
Demonstrations, but there is some obscurity, more or less in them, at least
they are not so well perceivable without comparing several figures together,
which proves, they are not made by an individable, immaterial Spirit, but by
dividable corporeal parts: As for example, Man writes oftentimes false, and
seldom so exact, but he is forced to mend his hand, and correct his opinions,
and sometimes quite to alter them, according as the figures continue or are
dissolved and altered by change of motion, and according as the actions are
quick or slow in these alterations, the humane mind is settled or wavering; and
as figures are made, or dissolved and transformed, Opinions, Conceptions,
Imaginations, Understanding, and the like, are more or less; And according as
these figures last, so is constancy or inconstancy, memory or forgetfulness,
and as those figures are repeated, so is remembrance; but sometimes they are so
constant and permanent, as they last as long as the figure of the body, and
sometimes it happens not once in an age, that the like figures are repeated,
and sometimes they are repeated every moment: As for example; a man remembers
or calls to mind the figure of another man, his friend, with all his qualities,
dispositions, actions, proprieties, and the like, several times in an hour, and
sometimes not once in a year, and so as often as he remembers him, as often is
the figure of that man repeated; and as often as he forgets him, so often is his
figure dissolved. But some imagine the rational motions to be so gross as the
Trotting of a Horse, and that all the motions of Animate matter are as rude and
course as renting or tearing asunder, or that all impressions must needs make
dents or creases. But as Nature has degrees of corporeal matter, so she has
also degrees of corporeal motions, Matter and Motion being but one substance;
and it is absurd to judge of the interior motions of self-moving matter, by
artificial or exterior gross motions, as that all motions must be like the
tearing of a sheet of Paper, or that the printing and patterning of several
figures of rational and sensitive matter must be like the printing of Books;
nay, all artificial Printings are not so hard, as to make dents and impresses;
witness Writing, Painting, and the like; for they do not disturb the ground
whereon the letters are written, or the picture drawn, and so the curious
actions of the purest rational matter are neither rude nor rough; but although
this matter is so subtle and pure, as not subject to exterior human senses and
organs, yet certainly it is dividable, not only in several Creatures, but in
the several parts of one and the same Creature, as well as the sensitive, which
is the Life of Nature, as the other is the Soul; not the Divine, but natural
Soul; neither is this Soul Immaterial, bnt Corporeal; not composed of rags and
shreds, but it is the purest, simplest and subtillest matter in Nature. But to
conclude, I desire you to remember, Madam, that this rational and sensitive
Matter in one united and finite Figure or particular Creature, has both common
and particular actions; for as there are several kinds and sorts of Creatures,
and particulars in every kind and sort: so the like for the actions of the
rational and sensitive matter in one particular Creature. Also it is to be
noted, That the Parts of rational matter, can more suddenly give and take
Intelligence to and from each other, then the sensitive; nevertheless, all
Parts in Nature, at least adjoining parts, have Intelligence between each
other, more or less, because all parts make but one body; for it is not with
the parts of Matter, as with several Constables in several Hundreds, or several
Parishes, which are a great way distant from each other, but they may be as
close as the combs of Bees, and yet as partable and as active as Bees. But
concerning the Intelligence of Natures Parts, I have sufficiently spoken in
other places; and so I Will add no more, but that I unfeignedly remain,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XVI.
MADAM,
SEnsation in corporeal motion is first, and Perception In the Pref. of the
Imm. of the Soul.
follows, says your Author: to which opinion I give no assent, but do believe
that Perception and Sensation are done both at one and the same time, as being
one and the same thing without division, either in reason or sense, and are
performed without any knocks, or jolts, or hitting against. But let me tell
you, Madam, there arises a great mistake by many, from not distinguishing well,
sensitive Motion, and rational Motion; for though all motions are in one only
matter, yet that matter does not move always in the same manner, for then there
could be no variety in Nature; and truly, if man, who is but a part of Nature,
may move diversely, and put himself into numerous postures; Why may not Nature?
But concerning Motions, and their variety, to avoid tedious repetitions, I must
still referr you to my Book of Philosophical Opinions; I Will add only this,
that it is well to be observed, That all Motions are not Impressions, neither
do all Impressions make such dents, as to disturb the adjoining Parts:
Wherefore those, in my opinion, understand Nature best, which say, that
Sensation and Perception are really one and the same; but they are out, that
say, there can be no communication at a distance, unless by pressing and
crowding; for the patterning of an outward object, may be done without any
inforcement or disturbance, jogging or crowding, as I have declared heretofore;
for the sensitive and rational motions in the sensitive and rational parts of
matter in one creature, observing the exterior motions in outward objects, move
accordingly, either regularly or irregularly in patterns; and if they have no
exterior objects, as in dreams, they work by rote. And so to conclude, I am
absolutely of their opinion, who believe, that there is nothing existent in
Nature, but what is purely Corporeal, for this seems most probable in sense and
reason to me,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XVII.
MADAM,
OUtward Objects, as I have told you before, do not make Sense and Reason, but
Sense and Reason do perceive and judge of outward objects; For the Sun does not
make sight, nor does sight make light; but sense and reason in a Man, or any
other creature, do perceive and know there are such objects as Sun, and Light,
or whatsoever objects are presented to them. Neither does Dumbness, Deafness,
Blindness, etc. cause an Insensibility, but Sense through irregular actions
causes them; I say, through Irregular actions, because those effects do not
properly belong to the nature of that kind of Creatures; for every Creature, if
regularly made, has particular motions proper to its figure; for natural
Matters wisdom makes distinctions by her distinct corporeal motions, giving
every particular Creature their due Portion and Proportion according to the
nature of their figures, and to the rules of her actions, but not to the rules
of Arts, Mathematical Compasses, Lines, Figures, and the like. And thus the
Sun, Stars, Meteors, Air, Fire, Water, Earth, Minerals, Vegetables and Animals,
may all have Sense and Reason, although it does not move in one kind or sort of
Creatures, or in one particular, as in another: For the corporeal motions
differ not only in kinds and sorts, but also in Particulars, as is perceivable
by human sense and reason; Which is the cause, that Elements have elemental
sense and knowledge, and Animals animal sense and knowledge, and so of
Vegetables, Minerals, and the like. Wherefore the Sun and Stars may have as
much sensitive and rational life and knowledge as other Creatures, but such as
is according to the nature of their figures, and not animal, or vegetable, or
mineral sense and knowledge. And so leaving them, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XVIII.
MADAM,
YOur Author denying that Fancy, Reason and Animadversion are seated in the
Brain, and that the Brain is figured into this or that Conception: Antid. lib.
1. c. 11.
I demand, says he, in what knot, loop or interval thereof does this faculty of
free Fancy and active Reason reside? My answer is, that in my opinion, Fancy
and Reason are not made in the Brain, as there is a Brain, but as there is
sensitive and rational matter, which makes not only the Brain, but all
Thoughts, Conceptions, Imaginations, Fancy, Understanding, Memory, Remembrance,
and whatsoever motions are in the Head, or Brain: neither does this sensitive
and rational mattet remain or act in one place of the Brain, but in every part
thereof; and not only in every part of the Brain, but in every part of the
Body; nay, not only in every part of a Man's Body, but in every part of Nature.
But, Madam, I would ask those, that say the Brain has neither sense, reason,
nor self-motion, and therefore no Perception; but that all proceeds from an
Immaterial Principle, as an Incorporeal Spirit, distinct from the body, which
moves and actuates corporeal matter; I would fain ask them, I say, where their
Immaterial Ideas reside, in what part or place of the Body? and whether they be
little or great? Also I would ask them, whether there can be many, or but one
Idea of God? If they say many, then there must be several, distinct Deitical
Ideas; if but one, Where does this Idea reside? If they say in the head, then
the heart is ignorant of God; if in the heart, then the head is ignorant
thereof, and so for all parts of the body; but if they say, in every part, then
that Idea may be disfigured by a lost member; if they say, it may dilate and
contract, then I say it is not the Idea of God, for God can neither contract
nor extend; nor can the Idea it self dilate and contract, being immaterial; for
contraction and dilation belong only to bodies, or material beings: Wherefore
the comparisons betwixt Nature and a particular Creature, and between God and
Nature, are improper; much more betwixt God and Natures particular motions and
figures, which are various and changeable, although methodical. The same I may
ask of the Mind of Man, as I do of the Idea in the Mind. Also I might ask them,
what they conceive the natural mind of man to be; whether material or
immaterial? If material, their opinion is rational, and so the mind is
dividable and composable; if immaterial, then it is a Spirit; and if a Spirit,
it cannot possibly dilate nor contract, having no dimension nor divisibility of
parts, (although your Author proves it by the example of Light; but I have
expressed my meaning heretofore, that light is divisible) and if it have no
dimension, how can it be confined in a material body? Wherefore when your
Author says, the mind is a substance, it is to my reason very probable; but not
when he says, it is an immaterial substance, which will never agree with my
sense and reason; for it must be either something, or nothing, there being no
medium between, in Nature. But pray mistake me not, Madam, when I say
Immaterial is nothing; for I mean nothing Natural, or so as to be a part of
Nature; for God forbid, I should deny, that God is a Spiritual Immaterial
substance, or Being; neither do I deny that we can have an Idea, notion,
conception, or thought of the Existence of God; for I am of your Authors
opinion, That there is no Man under the cope of Heaven, that does not by the
light of Nature, know, and believe there is a God; but that we should have such
a perfect Idea of God, as of any thing else in the World, or as of our selves,
as your Author says, I cannot in sense and reason conceive to be true or
possible. Neither am I against those Spirits, which the holy Scripture
mentions, as Angels and Devils, and the divine Soul of Man; but I say only,
that no Immaterial Spirit belongs to Nature, so as to be a part thereof; for
Nature is Material, or Corporeal; and whatsoever is not composed of matter or
body, belongs not to Nature; nevertheless, Immaterial Spirits may be in Nature,
although not parts of Nature. But there can neither be an Immaterial Nature,
nor a Natural Immaterial; Nay, our very thoughts and conceptions of Immaterial
are Material, as made of self-moving Matter. Wherefore to conclude, these
opinions in Men proceed from a Vainglory, as to have found out something that
is not in Nature; to which I leave them, and their natural Immaterial
Substances, like so many Hobgoblins to fright Children withal, resting in the
mean time,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XIX.
MADAM,
THere are various opinions concerning the seat of Common Sense, as your Author
rehearses them in his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul; Lib. 2. c. 4.
But my opinion is, That common sense has also a common place; for as there is
not any part of the body that has not sense and reason, so sense and reason is
in all parts of the body, as it is observable by this, that every part is
subject to pain and pleasure, and all parts are moveable, moving and moved;
also appetites are in every part of the body: As for example, if any part
itches, it has an appetite to be scratched, and every part can pattern out
several objects, and so several touches; and though the rational part of matter
is mixed in all parts of the body, yet it has more liberty to make variety of
Motions in the head, heart, liver, spleen, stomach, bowels, and the like, then
in the other parts of the body; nevertheless, it is in every part, together
with the sensitive: but they do not move in every part alike, but differ in
each part more or less, as it may be observed; and although every part has
some difference of knowledge, yet all have life and knowledge, sense and reason,
some more, some less, and the whole body moves according to each part, and so
do all the bodily Faculties and Proprieties, and not according to one single
part; the rational Soul being in all parts of the body: for if one part of the
body should have a dead Palsy, it is not, that the Soul is gone from that
part, but that the sensitive and rational matter has altered its motion and
figure from animal to some other kind; for certainly, the rational Soul, and so
life, is in every part, as well in the Pores of the skin, as in the ventricles
of the brain, and as well in the heel as in the head; and every part of the
body knows its own office, what it ought to do, from whence follows an
agreement of all the parts: And since there is difference of knowledge in every
part of one body, well may there be difference between several kinds and sorts,
and yet there is knowledge in all; for difference of knowledge is no argument to
prove they have no knowledge at all. Wherefore I am not of the opinion, that
that which moves the whole body, is as a Point, or some such thing in a little
kernel or Glandula of the Brain, as an Ostrich-egge is hung up to the roof of a
Chamber; or that it is in the stomach like a single penny in a great Purse;
neither is it in the midst of the heart, like a Lady in a Lobster; nor in the
blood, like as a Menow, or Sprat in the Sea; nor in the fourth Ventricle of the
Brain, as a lousie Soldier in a Watchtower. But you may say, it is like a
farthing Candle in a great Church: I answer, That Light will not enlighten the
by Chapels of the Church, nor the Quest-house, nor the Belfrey; neither does
the Light move the Church, though it enlightens it: Wherefore the Soul after
this manner does not move the corporeal body, no more then the Candle moves the
Church, or the Lady moves the Lobster, or the Sprat the Sea as to make it ebb
and flow. But this I desire you to observe, Madam, that though all the body of
man or any other Creature, has sense and reason, which is life and knowledge,
in all parts, yet these parts being all corporeal, and having their certain
proportions, can have no more then what is belonging or proportionable to each
figure: As for example; if a Man should feed, and not evacuate some ways or
other, he could not live; and if he should evacuate and not feed, he could not
subsist: wherefore in all Natures parts there is ingress and egress, although
not always perceived by one creature, as Man; but all exterior objects do not
enter into Man, or any other Creature, but are figured by the rational, and
some by the sensitive parts or motions in the body; wherefore it is not
rational to believe, that exterior objects take up any more room, then if there
were none presented to the sensitive organs: Nor is there any thing which can
better prove the mind to be corporeal, then that there may be several Figures
in several parts of the body made at one time, as Sight, Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling, and Touching, and all these in each several organ, as well at one, as
at several times, either by patterns, or not; which figuring without Pattern,
may be done as well by the sensitive motions in the organs, as by the rational
in the mind, and is called remembrance. As for example: a Man may hear or see
without an object; which is, that the sensitive and rational matter repeat such
figurative actions, or make others in the sensitive organs, or in the mind: and
Thoughts, Memory, Imagination, as also Passion, are no less corporeal actions
then the motion of the hand or heel; neither has the rational matter, being
naturally wise, occasion to jumble and knock her parts together, by reason
every part knows naturally their office what they ought to do, or what they may
do. But I conclude, repeating only what I have said often before, that all
Perceptions, Thoughts, and the like, are the Effects, and Life and Knowledge,
the Nature and Essence of self-moving Matter. And so I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XX.
MADAM,
IAm not able to conceive how the Mind of Man can be compared to a Table Book,
in which nothing Antid. Book. 1. c. 5.
is writ; nor how to a Musician, who being asleep, does not so much as dream of
any Music, but being jogged and awakend by another, who tells him two or three
words of a Song, and desires him to sing it, presently recovers himself, and
sings upon so slight an Intimation: For such intimations are nothing else but
outward objects, which the interior sense consents to, and obeys; for interior
sense and reason does often obey outward objects: and in my opinion there is no
rest in Nature, and so neither in the Mind or natural Soul of Man, which is in
a perpetual motion, and needs therefore no jogging to put it into any actual
motion; for it has actual motion and knowledge in it self, because it is a
selfmoving substance, actually knowing, and Material or Corporeal, not
Immaterial, as your Author thinks: and this material or corporeal Mind is
nothing else but what I call the rational matter, and the corporeal life is the
sensitive matter. But this is to be observed, that the motions of the corporeal
Mind do often imitate the motions of the sensitive Life, and these again the
motions of the mind: I say oftentimes; for they do it not always, but each one
can move without taking any pattern from the other. And all this I understand
of the Natural Soul of Man; not of the Divine Soul, and her powers and
faculties, for I leave that to Divines to inform us of; only this I say, that
men not conceiving the distinction between this natural and divine Soul, make
such a confusion betwixt those two Souls and their actions, which causes so
many disputes and opinions. But if Nature has power from God to produce all
kinds of Vegetables, Minerals, Elements, Animals, and other sorts of Creatures,
Why not also Man? Truly if all Creatures are natural Creatures, Man must be so
too; and if Man is a natural Creature, he must needs have natural sense and
reason, as well as other Creatures, being composed of the same matter they are
of. Neither is it requisite, that all Creatures, being of the same matter, must
have the same manner of sensitive and rational knowledge; which if so, it is not
necessary for Corn to have Ears to hear the whistling or chirping of Birds, nor
for Stones to have such a touch of feeling as animals have, and to suffer pain,
as they do, when Carts go over them; as your Author is pleased to argue out of
AEsopes Tales; or for the Heliotrope to have eyes to see the Sun: for what
necessity Chapter 3.
is there that they should have humane sense and reason? which is, that the
rational and sensitive matter should act and move in them as she does in man or
animals: Certainly if there must be any variety in nature, it is requisite she
should not; wherefore all Vegetables, Minerals, Elements, and Animals, have
their proper motions different from each others, not only in their kinds and
sorts, but also in their particulars. And though Stones have no progressive
motion to withdraw themselves from the Carts going over them, which your Author
thinks they would do, if they had sense, to avoid pain: nevertheless they have
motion, and consequently sense and reason, according to the nature and
propriety of their figure, as well as man has according to his. But this is
also to be observed, that not any humane Creature, which is accounted to have
the perfectest sense and reason, is able always to avoid what is hurtful or
painful, for it is subject to it by Nature: Nay, the Immaterial Soul it self,
according to your Author, Append. to the Antid. chapter 3.
cannot by her self-contracting faculty withdraw her self from pain. Wherefore
there is no manner of consequence to conclude from the sense of Animals to the
sense of Minerals, they being as much different as their Figures are; And
saying this, I have said enough to express the opinion and mind of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXI.
MADAM,
YOur Author endeavors very much to prove the Existency of a Natural
Immaterial Spirit, whom he defines to be an Incorporeal substance, Indivisible,
that can move it self, can penetrate, contract and dilate it self, and can also
move and alter the matter. Whereof, if you will have my opinion, I confess
freely to you, that in my sense and reason I cannot conceive it to be possible,
that there is any such thing in Nature; for all that is a substance in Nature,
is a body, and what has a body, is corporeal; for though there be several
degrees of matter, as in purity, rarity, subtilty, activity; yet there is no
degree so pure, rare and subtle, that can go beyond its nature, and change from
corporeal to incorporeal, except it could change from being something to
nothing, which is impossible in Nature. Next, there is no substance in Nature
that is not divisible; for all that is a body, or a bodily substance, has
extension, and all extension has parts, and what has parts, is divisible. As
for self-motion, contraction and dilation, these are actions only of Natural
Matter; for Matter by the Power of God is self-moving, and all sorts of
motions, as contraction, dilation, alteration, penetration, etc. do properly
belong to Matter; so that natural Matter stands in no need to have some
Immaterial or Incorporeal substance to move, rule, guide and govern her, but
she is able enough to do it all her self, by the free Gift of the Omnipotent
God; for why should we trouble our selves to invent or frame other
unconceivable substances, when there is no need for it, but Matter can act, and
move as well without them and of it self? Is not God able to give such power to
Matter, as to an other Incorporeal substance? But I suppose this opinion of
natural Immaterial Spirits does proceed from Chemistry, where the extracts are
vulgarly called Spirits; and from that degree of Matter, which by reason of its
purity, subtilty and activity, is not subject to our grosser senses; However,
these are not Incorporeal, be they never so pure and subtle. And I wonder much
that men endeavor to prove Immaterial Spirits by corporeal Arts, when as Art
is not able to demonstrate Nature and her actions; for Art is but the effect of
Nature, and expresses rather the variety, then the truth of natural motions;
and if Art cannot do this, much less will it be able to express what is not in
Nature, or what is beyond Nature; as to trace the Visible (or rather Invisible)
footsteps of the divine Council and Providence, or Antid. lib. 2. chapter 2.
to demonstrate things supernatural, and which go beyond man's reach and
capacity. But to return to Immaterial Spirits, that they should rule and govern
infinite corporeal matter, like so many demy-Gods, by a dilating nod, and a
contracting frown, and cause so many kinds and sorts of Corporeal Figures to
arise, being Incorporeal themselves, is Impossible for me to conceive; for how
can an Immaterial substance cause a Material corporeal substance, which has no
motion in it self, to form so many several and various figures and creatures,
and make so many alterations, and continue their kinds and sorts by perpetual
successions of Particulars? But perchance the Immaterial substance gives
corporeal matter motion. I answer, My sense and reason cannot understand, how
it can give motion, unless motion be different, distinct and separable from it;
nay, if it were, yet being no substance or body it self, according to your
Authors and others opinion, the question is, how it can be transmitted or given
away to corporeal matter? Your Author may say, That his Immaterial and
Incorporeal spirit of Nature, having self-motion, does form Matter into several
Figures: I answer, Then that Immaterial substance must be transformed and
metamorphosed into as many several figures as there are figures in Matter; or
there must be as many spirits, as there are figures; but when the figures
change, what does become of the spirits? Neither can I imagine, that an
Immaterial substance, being without body, can have such a great strength; as to
grapple with gross, heavy, dull, and dead Matter; Certainly, in my opinion, no
Angel, nor Devil, except God Empower him, would be able to move corporeal
Matter, were it not selfmoving, much less any Natural Spirit. But God is a
Spirit, and Immovable; and if created natural Immaterials participate of that
Nature, as they do of the Name, then they must be Immovable also. Your Author,
Madam, may make many several degrees of Spirits; but certainly not I, nor I
think any natural Creature else, will be able naturally to conceive them. He
may say, perchance, There is such a close conjunction betwixt Body and Spirit,
as I make betwixt rational, sensitive, and inanimate Matter. I answer, That
these degrees are all but one Matter, and of one and the same Nature as mere
Matter, different only in degrees of purity, subtilty, and activity, whereas
Spirit and Body are things of contrary Natures. In fine, I cannot conceive, how
a Spirit should fill up a place or space, having no body, nor how it can have
the effects of a body, being none it self; for the effects flow from the cause;
and as the cause is, so are its effects: And so confessing my ignorance, I can
say no more, but rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXII.
MADAM,
YOur Author having assigned Indivisibility to the Soul or Spirit that moves
and actuates matter, I desire to know, how one Indivisible Spirit can be in so
many dividable parts? For there being Infinite parts in Nature, they must
either have one Infinite Spirit to move them, which must be dilated infinitely,
or this Spirit must move severally in every part of Nature: If the first, then
I cannot conceive, but all motion must be uniform, or after one and the same
manner; nay, I cannot understand, how there can be any dilation and
contraction, or rather any motion of the same spirit, by reason if it dilate,
then, (being equally spread out in all the parts of Matter,) it must dilate
beyond Matter; and if it contract, it must leave some parts of matter void, and
without motion. But if the Spirit moves every part severally, then he is
divisible; neither can I think, that there are so many Spirits as there are
Parts in Nature; for your Author says, there is but one Spirit of Nature; I
will give an easy and plain example: When a Worm is cut into two or three
parts, we see there is sensitive life and motion in every part, for every part
will strive and endeavor to meet and join again to make up the whole body; now
if there were but one indivisible Life, Spirit, and Motion, I would fain know,
how these severed parts could move all by one Spirit. Wherefore, Matter, in my
opinion, has self-motion in it self, which is the only soul and life of
Nature, and is dividable as well as composable, and full of variety of action;
for it is as easy for several parts to act in separation, as in composition,
and as easy in composition as in separation; Neither is every part bound to
one kind or sort of Motions; for we see in exterior local motions, that one man
can put his body into several shapes and postures, much more can Nature. But is
it not strange, Madam, that a man accounts it absurd, ridiculous, and a
prejudice to Gods Omnipotency, to attribute selfmotion to Matter, or a material
Creature, when it is not absurd, ridiculous, or any prejudice to God, to
attribute it to an Immaterial Creature? What reason of absurdity lies herein?
Surely I can conceive none, except it be absurd and ridiculous to make that,
which no man can know or conceive what it is, viz. an immaterial natural
Spirit, (which is as much as to say, a natural No-thing) to have motion, and
not only motion, but self-motion; nay, not only self-motion, but to move,
actuate, rule, govern, and guide Matter, or corporeal Nature, and to be the
cause of all the most curious varieties and effects in nature: Was not God able
to give self-motion as well to a Material, as to an Immaterial Creature, and
endow Matter with a self-moving power? I do not say, Madam, that Matter has
motion of it self, so, that it is the prime cause and principle of its own
self-motion; for that were to make Matter a God, which I am far from believing;
but my opinion is, That the self-motion of Matter proceeds from God, as well as
the self-motion of an Immaterial Spirit; and that I am of this opinion, the
last Chapter of my Book of Philosophy will enform you, where I treat of the
Deitical Center, as the Fountain from whence all things do flow, and which is
the supreme Cause, Author, Ruler and Governor of all. Perhaps you will say, it
is, because I make Matter Eternal. It Is true, Madam, I do so: but I think
Eternity does not take off the dependence upon God, for God may nevertheless be
above Matter, as I have told you before. You may ask me how that can be? I say,
As well as any thing else that God can do beyond our understanding: For I do
but tell you my opinion, that I think it most probable to be so, but I can give
you no Mathematical Demonstrations for it: Only this I am sure of, That it is
not impossible for the Omnipotent God; and he that questions the truth of it,
may question Gods Omnipotency. Truly, Madam, I wonder how man can say, God is
Omnipotent, and can do beyond our Understanding, and yet deny all that he is
not able to comprehend with his reason. However, as I said, it is my opinion,
That Matter is self-moving by the power of God; Neither can Animadversion, and
Perception, as also the variety of Figures, prove, that there must be another
external Agent or Power to work all this in Matter; but it proves rather the
contrary; for were there no selfmotion in Matter, there would be no Perception,
nor no variety of Creatures in their Figures, Shapes, Natures, Qualities,
Faculties, Proprieties, as also in their Productions, Creations or Generations,
Transformations, Compositions, Dissolutions, and the like, as Growth, Maturity,
Decay, etc. and for Animals, were not Corporeal Matter self-moving, dividable
and composable, there could not be such variety of Passions, Complexions,
Humors, Features, Statures, Appetites, Diseases, Infirmities, Youth, Age, etc.
Neither would they have any nourishing Food, healing Salves, sovereign
Medicines, reviving Cordials, or deadly Poisons. In short, there is so much
variety in Nature, proceeding from the self-motion of Matter, as not possible
to be numbered, nor thoroughly known by any Creature: Wherefore I should labor in
vain, if I endeavored to express any more thereof; and this is the cause that
I break off here, and only subscribe my self,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIII.
MADAM,
COncerning the comparison, your Author makes In the Append. to the Antid. c.
3. and Of the Immortality of the Soul, l. 1. c. 5.
between an Immaterial Spirit, and Light, That, as Light is contractive and
dilative, and yet not divisible, so is also an Immaterial substance. Give me
leave to tell you, that in my opinion, all that is contractive and dilative, is
also dividable, and so is light: As for example; when a Candle is snuff'd, the
Snuffers do not only clip the wick, but also the light: The like when a dark
body is interposed, or crosses the rays of the Sun; it cuts those rays asunder,
which by reason they cannot join together again, because of the interposed
body, the light cut off, suddenly goes out; that is, the matter of light is
altered from the figure of light, to some other thing, but not annihilated: And
since no more light can flow into the room from the Fountain or Spring of
Light, the Sun, because the passage is stopped close, the room remains dark:
For Light is somewhat of the nature of Water; so long as the Spring is open,
the Water flows, and whatsoever is taken away, the Spring supplies; and if
another body only presses through it, it immediately joins and closes its
severed parts again, without any difficulty or loss; The same does Light; only
the difference is, that the substance of Light is extraordinary rare, and pure;
for as Air is so much rarer then Water, so Light is so much rarer and purer
then Air, and its matter may be of so dilating a nature, as to dilate from a
point into numerous rays. As for ordinary Fire-light, it does not last longer,
then it has fuel to feed it, and so likewise it is with the light of the Sun;
for Light is according to the substance that feeds it; and though it is a
substance it self, yet it increases and decreases, according as it has
something that succors or nourishes it. But some may object, that if Light
were a body, and did contract and dilate, as I say, it is impossible that it
could display it self in so great and vast a compass, and remove so suddenly
and instantly as it does. To which objection, I answer, first, That although I
say, Light is a real corporeal substance, and does contract and dilate it self
from a point into numerous rays, as also in another Letter I sent you before
Sect. 1. Let. 20.
, That Light and Darkness do succeed each other; nevertheless, as for the
perception of Light, I am not so eager in maintaining this opinion, as if it
was an Infallible Truth, and impossible to be otherwise; but I say only, That,
to my sense and reason, it seems very probable, that it may be so, that the
light of the Sun does really dilate it self into so vast a compass as we see;
and that light and darkness do really succeed each other, as all other
Creatures do: But yet it seems also probable to me, that the parts of the Air
may only pattern out the figure of light, and that the light we see in the Air
may be only patterns taken from the real figure of the light of the Sun: And
therefore, if it be according to the former opinion, to wit, That the light of
the Sun does really dilate it self into so vast a compass, My answer is, That
contraction and dilation are natural corporeal actions or motions, and that
there is no alteration of motion in Nature, but is done in Time, that is,
successively, not instantly; for Time is nothing else but the alteration of
motion: Besides, I do not perceive any so sudden and swift alteration and
succession of light, but that it is done by degrees: As for example; in the
morning, when it begins to dawn and grow light, it appears clearly to our sight
how light does come forth, and darkness remove by degrees; and so at night,
when it grows dark, how light removes, and darkness succeeds; nay, if there be
any such sudden change of the motions of Light, I desire you to consider,
Madam, that light is a very subtle, rare, piercing and active body, and
therefore its motions are much quicker then those of grosser bodies, and cannot
so well be perceived by our gross exterior senses. But if it be, that the Air
does pattern out the light of the Sun, then the framed objection can prove
nothing, because there is not then such a real dilation or succession of light,
but the corporeal figurative motions of the Air do make patterns of the light
of the Sun, and dissolve those patterns or figures again, more suddenly and
quickly then man can shut and open his eyes, as being more subtle then his
gross exterior senses. But it may be said, that if Air did pattern out the
light of the Sun, the light would increase by these numerous patterns. I
answer, that cannot appear to our Eyes; for we see only the pattern'd figure
of light, and that a great compass is enlightened; also that the further the air
is from the Sun, the darker it is; nevertheless, I do verily believe, that the
body of the Sun is far brighter then the light we see, and that the substance
of light, and the patterns taken from light, are not one and the same, but very
different. And thus much of light. As for Penetration, I conceive it to be
nothing else but division; as when some parts pierce and enter through other
parts, as Duellers run each other through, or as water runs through a sieve. And
this is the opinion of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXIV.
MADAM,
HAving given you my opinion, both of the substance and perception of Light, in
my last Letter, I perceive your desire is to know how Shadows are made. Truly,
Madam, to my sense and reason, it appears most probable, that shadows are made
by the way of patterning: As for example; when a Man's, or Trees, or any other
the like Creature's shadow is made upon the Ground, or Wall, or the like; those
bodies, as the Ground, or Wall, do, in my opinion, pattern out the interposing
body that is between the light and them: And the reason that the shadow is
longer or shorter, or bigger or less, is according as the light is nearer or
further off; for when the light is perpendicular, the interposing body cannot
obscure the light, because the light surrounding the interposing body by its
brightness, rather obscures the body, then the body the light; for the numerous
and splendorous patterns of light taken from the body of the Sun, do quite
involve the interposing body. Next, you desire to know, Whether the light we
see in the Moon, be the Moons own natural light, or a borrowed light from the
Sun: I answer, that in my opinion, it is a borrowed light; to wit, that the
Moon does pattern out the light of the Sun: and the proof of it is, that when
the Sun is in an Eclipse, we do plainly perceive that so much of the Sun is
darkened as the Moon covers; for though those parts of the Moon, that are next
the Sun, may, for any thing we know, pattern out the light of the Sun, yet the
Moon is dark on that side which is from the Sun. I will not say, but that part
of the Moon which is toward the Earth, may pattern out the Earth, or the
shadow of the Earth, which may make the Moon appear more dark and sullen; But
when the Moon is in an Eclipse, then it is plainly perceived that the Moon
patterns out the Earth, or the shadow of the Earth. Besides, those parts of the
Moon that are farthest from the Sun, are dark, as we may observe when as the
Moon is in the Wane, and enlightened when the Sun is nearer. But I will leave
this argument to observing Astrologers, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXV.
MADAM,
IF acording to your Authors opinion, In every particular world, such as Man is
especially, his own Soul (which is a Spirit) be the peculiar and most
perfective architect of the Fabric of his Body, as the Soul of the Of the
Immortality of the Soul. l. 2. c. 10.
world is of it: Then I cannot conceive in my reason, how the separation is
made in death; for I see, that all animals, and so mankind, have a natural
desire to live, and that life and soul are unwilling to part; And if the power
lies in the Soul, why does she not continue with the Body, and animate, move
and actuate it, as she did before, or order the matter so, as not to dissolve?
But if the dissolution lies in the body, then the body has self-motion: Yet it
is most probable, if the soul be the architect of the body, it must also be the
dissolver of it; and if there come not another soul into the parts of matter,
the body must either be annihilated, or lie immoved as long as the world lasts,
which is improbable; for surely all the bodies of men, or other animals, are
employed by Nature to some use or other: However, it is requisite, that the
soul must stay so long in the body, until it be turned into dust and ashes;
otherwise, the body having no self-motion, would remain as it was when the soul
left it, that is, entire and undissolved: As for example; when a man dies, if
there be no motion in his body, and the soul, which was the mover, be gone, it
cannot possibly corrupt; for certainly, that we call corruptton, is made by
motion, and the body requires as much motion to be dissolved or divided, as it
does to be framed or composed; Wherefore a dead body would remain in the same
state continually, if it had no self-motion in it: And if another soul should
enter into the body, and work it to another figure, then certainly there must
be much more souls then bodies, because bodies are subject to change into
several forms; but if the animal spirits, which are left in the body after the
soul is gone, are able to dissolve it without the help of the soul, then it is
probable they could have framed it without the help of the soul; and so they
being material, it must be granted, that matter is self-moving: But if
corporeal matter have corporeal self-motion, a selfmoving Immaterial Spirit, by
reason of their different natures, would make great obstruction, and so a
general confusion; for the corporeal and incorporeal motions would hinder and
oppose each other, their natures being quite different; and though they might
subsist together without disturbance of each other, yet it is not probable they
should act together, and that in such a conjunction, as if they were one united
body; for it is, in my opinion, more probable, that one material should act
upon another material, or one immaterial upon another immaterial, then that an
immaterial should act upon a material or corporeal. Thus the consideration or
contemplation of immaterial natural Spirits puts me always into doubts, and
raises so many contradictions in my sense and reason, as I know not, nor am not
able to reconcile them: However, though I am doubtful of them, yet I can assure
your self that I continue,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVI.
MADAM,
BY reason the Soul is a Spirit, and therefore Contractible and Dilatable, your
Authors opinion is, Of the Immortality of the Soul, l. 2. c. 10.
That it begins within less compass at first in organizing the fitly prepared
matter, and so bears it self on in the same tenor of work, till the body has
attained its full growth; and that the Soul dilates it self in the dilating of
the Body, and so possesses it through all the members thereof. Truly, Madam, as
for the contraction and dilation of an immaterial Spirit, if I heard never so
many arguments, I should hardly be able to conceive the possibility of it; For
in my opinion, dilating and contracting are motions and actions of Nature,
which belong to natural material Creatures, and to none else; for dilation and
contraction cannot be without extension, but extension belongs to parts which
an immaterial Spirit has not: But suppose it be so, then the Soul must
contract and dilate, extend and shrink together, and so grow less and bigger,
according to the extension of the body; and when the body dies, the soul, in my
opinion, must contract to a very point; and if one part of the body die before
the other, the soul must by degrees withdraw out of those parts: also when a
part of the body is cut off, the soul must needs contract, and grow less; the
like when a man is let blood. Which contracting of the soul, by your Authors
leave, does seem, to my imagination, just like the contracting of Hodmandod
into her shell. Besides, if the soul be individable, and equally spread all
over the body, then, to my opinion, she must necessarily be of a human shape;
and if the body be deformed, the soul must be deformed also; and if the body be
casually extended, as by taking Poison into the body, the soul must be so too,
as being individable and filling every part; and if a man be born with six
fingers or toes, the soul must be so too; or if a dwarf, the soul must be a
dwarf also; and if he be born deaf and dumb, the soul must be so too. But if
two Twins, as it may fall out, should be born united in one body, I would fain
know then, whether they would have two souls, or but one? As for example, if
they should have but one body, and one stomach, liver, heart, spleen, lungs,
bowels, and yet have four legs, four hands, and two heads: It seems, to my
opinion, that then two Immaterial Souls must be joined as into one; neither do
I know yet how this could well be, the monster having but one body, nor how
that Immaterial Soul can be divided, being inseparably double, when the body
dies. But, Madam, all this I speak of the Natural Soul of Man, not of the
Divine Soul, which is not subject to natural imperfections, and corporeal
errors, being not made by Nature, but a supernatural and divine gift of the
Omnipotent God, who surely will not give any thing that is not perfect.
Wherefore it is not probable, this Divine Soul, being not subject to Nature,
should be an architect of the body, as having an higher and more divine
employment, viz. to fix her self on her Creator, and being endued with
supernatural faculties, and residing in the body in a supernatural manner; all
which I leave to the Church: for I should be loath to affirm any thing contrary
to their Doctrine, or the Information of the holy Scripture, as grounding my
belief only upon the sacred Word of God, and its true Interpretation made by
the Orthodox Church; but not upon the opinions of particular persons: for
particular men's opinions are not authentical, being so different and various,
as a man would be puzzled which to adhere to. Thus, Madam, I avoid, as much as
ever I can, not to mix Divinity with Natural Philosophy; for I consider, that
such a mixture would breed more confusion in the Church, then do any good to
either; witness the doctrine of the Soul of Man, whereof are so many different
opinions: The only cause, in my opinion, is, that men do not conceive the
difference between the Divine, and Natural material Soul of Man, making them
both as one, and mixing or confounding their faculties and proprieties, which
yet are quite different; thus they make a Hodg-podg, Bisk or Olio of both;
proving Divinity by Nature, and Faith by Reason; and bringing Arguments for
Articles of Faith, and sacred Mysteries out of Natural Arts and Sciences;
whereas yet Faith and Reason are two contrary things, and cannot consist
together; according to the Proverb, Where Reason ends, Faith begins. Neither is
it possible that Divinity can be proved by Mathematical Demonstrations; for if
Nature be not able to do it, much less is Art: Wherefore it is inconvenient to
mix supernatural Spirits with Air, Fire, Light, Heat, Cold, etc. and to apply
corporeal actions and qualities to them; and the Divine Soul, with the Brain,
Blood, Flesh, Animal Spirits, Muscles, Nerves, Bones, etc. of Man; all which
makes a confusion betwixt the Mind or Natural Soul of Man, and the Supernatural
and Divine Soul inspired into him by God; for both their faculties and
proprieties are different, and so are their effects, as proceeding from so
different causes. And therefore, Madam, as for Divinity, I pray devoutly, and
believe without disputing; but as for Natural Philosophy, I reason freely, and
argue without believing, or adhering to any ones particular opinion, which I
think is the best and safest way to choose for,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend, and Servant.

XXVII.
MADAM,
YOur Author in the continuation of his discourse concerning the Immaterial
Soul of Man, demonstrating, that her seat is not bound up in a certain place of
the body, but that she pervades all the body and every part thereof, takes,
amongst the rest, an argument from Passions and Sympathies: Moreover, says he,
Passions and Sympathies, in my judgment, are more easily to be resolved into
this hypothesis of the Soul's pervading Immort. of the Soul. Book 2. c. 10.
the whole Body, then in restraining its essential presence to one part
thereof. -- But it is evident that they arise in us against both our will and
appetite; For who would bear the tortures of fears and jelousies, if he could
avoid it? Concerning Passions, Madam, I have given my opinion at large in my
Book of Philosophy, and am of your Authors mind, that Passions are made in the
Heart, but not by an Immaterial spirit, but by the Rational soul which is
material; and there is no doubt, but that many Passions, as Fear, Jealousy,
etc. arise against our will and appetite; for so may foreign Nations invade
any Kingdom without the will or desire of the Inhabitants, and yet they are
corporeal men: The same may be said of Passions; and several parts of matter
may invade each other, whereof one may be afraid of the other, yet all this is
but according as corporeal matter moves, either Generally, or Particularly:
Generally, that is, when many parts of Matter unite or join together, having
the like appetites, wills, designs; as we may observe, that there are general
agreements amongst several parts, in Plagues, as well as Wars, which Plagues
are not only amongst Men, but amongst Beasts; and sometimes but in one sort of
animals, as a general Rot amongst Sheep, a general Mange amongst Dogs, a
general Farcy amongst Horses, a general Plague amongst Men; all which could not
be without a general Infection, one part infecting another, or rather one part
imitating the motions of the other, that is next adjoining to it; for such
infections come by the near adhesion of parts, as is observable, which
immaterial and individable natural Spirits could not effect; that is, to make
such a general infection in so many several parts of so many several Creatures,
to the Creatures dissolution: Also there will be several Invasions at one time,
as Plague, and War, amongst neighboring and adjoining Creatures or Parts. But
this is to be observed, That the sensitive corporeal motions make all diseases,
and not the Rational, although the Rational are many times the occasion, that
the sensitive do move into such or such a disease; for all those that are sick
by conceit, their sicknesses are caused by the rational corporeal motions. But
being loath to make tedious repetitions hereof, having discoursed of diseases
and passions in my mentioned Book of Philosophy, I will refer you thither, and
rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVIII.
MADAM,
COncerning Dimness of Sight, which your Author will have to proceed from the
deficiency of the Animal Immort. of the Soul. Book 2. 6b. 8.
Spirits, My meaning in short is, That when sight is dim, though the sensitive
organs are perfect, this dimness is caused by the alteration only of the
sensitive motions in the organs, not moving to the nature of sight. And so is
made Deafness, Dumbness, Lameness, and the like, as also Weariness; for the
Relaxation of strength in several parts, is only an alteration of such sorts
of motions which make the nerves strong; and if a man be more dull at one time,
then at another, it is that there are not so many changes of motions, nor so
quick motions at that time, as at another; for Nature may use more or less
force as she pleases: Also she can and does often use opposite actions, and
often sympathetical and agreeable actions, as she pleases; for Nature having a
free power to move, may move as she will; but being wise, she moves as she
thinks best, either in her separating or uniting motions, for continuance, as
well as for variety. But if, according to your Author, the Immaterial Soul
should determinate matter in motion, it would, in my opinion, make a confusion;
for the motions of the Matter would often oppose and cross the motions of the
Immaterial Soul, and so they would disagree, as a King and his Subjects,
(except God had given the Soul an absolute power of command, and restrained
matter to an irrisistible and necessitated obedience; which, in my opinion, is
not probable:) By which disagreement, Nature, and all that is in Nature, would
have been quite ruined at this time; for no kinds, sorts, or particulars, would
keep any distinction, if Matter did not govern it self, and if all the parts
did not know their own affairs, abilities, offices, and functions: Besides, it
would, to my thinking, take up a great deal of time, to receive commands in
every several action, at least so much, that for example, a man could not have
so many several thoughts in so short a time, as he has. But concerning the
Animal Spirits, which your Author calls the Instruments, Organs and Engines of
the Incorporeal Soul; I would fain know, whether they have no motion but what
comes from the Soul, or whether they have their own motion of themselves? If
the first, then the Soul must, in my opinion, be like a Deity, and have a
divine Power, to give and impart Motion; if the second, then the spirits being
material, it follows that Matter has motion of it self, or is self-moving; But
if the Immaterial natural Soul can transfer her gifts upon corporeal matter,
then it must give numerous sorts of motions, with all their degrees; as also
the faculty of figuring, or moving figuratively in all corporeal Matter: Which
power, in my judgment, is too much for a Creature to give. If you say, the
Immaterial Soul has this power from God; I answer, Matter may have the same;
and I cannot imagine why God should make an Immaterial Spirit to be the Proxy
or Vicegerent of his Power, or the Quartermaster General of his Divine
Providence, as your Author is pleased to style it, when Immort. of the Soul.
Book 3. c. 13.
he is able to effect it without any Underofficers, and in a more easy and
compendious way, as to impart immediately such self-moving power to Natural
Matter, which man attributes to an Incorporeal Spirit. But to conclude, if the
Animal Spirits be the Instruments of the Incorporeal Soul, then the Spirits of
Wine are more powerful then the Animal Spirits, nay, then the Immaterial Soul
her self; for they can put them and all their actions quite out of order: the
same may be done by other material things, Vegetables, Minerals, and the like.
And so leaving this discourse to your better consideration, I take my leave for
this time, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful and affectionate Friend, and Servant.

XXIX.
MADAM,
TOuching the State or Condition of the Supernatural and Divine Soul, both in,
and after this life, I must crave your excuse that I can give no account of it;
for I dare affirm nothing; not only that I am no professed Divine, and think
it unfit to take any thing upon me that belongs not to me, but also that I am
unwilling to mingle Divinity and Natural Philosophy together, to the great
disadvantage and prejudice of either; for if each one did contain himself
within the circle of his own Profession, and no body did pretend to be a Divine
Philosopher, many absurdities, confusions, contentions, and the like, would be
avoided, which now disturb both Church and Schools, and will in time cause
their utter ruin and destruction; For what is Supernatural, cannot naturally
be known by any natural Creature; neither can any supernatural Creature, but
the Infinite and Eternal God, know thoroughly everything that is in Nature, she
being the Infinite servant of the Infinite God, whom no finite Creature, of
what degree soever, whether natural or supernatural, can conceive; for if no
Angel nor Devil can know our thoughts, much less will they know Infinite
Nature; nay, one finite supernatural Creature cannot, in my opinion, know
perfectly another supernatural Creature, but God alone, who is all-knowing: And
therefore all what is said of supernatural Spirits, I believe, so far as the
Scripture makes mention of them; further I dare not presume to go; the like of
the supernatural or divine Soul: for all that I have writ hitherto to you of
the Soul, concerns the natural Soul of Man, which is material, and not the
supernatural or divine Soul; neither do I contradict any thing concerning this
divine soul, but I am only against those opinions, which make the natural soul
of man an immaterial natural spirit, and confound supernatural Creatures with
natural, believing those spirits to be as well natural Creatures and parts of
Nature, as material and corporeal beings are; when as there is great difference
betwixt them, and nothing in Nature to be found, but what is corporeal. Upon
this account I take all their relations of Demons, of the Genii, and of the
Souls after the departure from humane Bodies, their Vehicles, Shapes,
Habitations, Converses, Conferences, Entertainments, Exercises, Pleasures,
Pastimes, Governments, Orders, Laws, Magistrates, Officers, Executioners,
Punishments, and the like, rather for Poetical Fictions, then Rational
Probabilities; containing more Fancy, then Truth and Reason, whether they
concern the divine or natural Soul: for as for the divine Soul, the Scripture
makes no other mention of it, but that immediately after her departure out of
this natural life, she goes either to Heaven or Hell, either to enjoy Reward,
or to suffer Punishment, according to man's actions in this life. But as for
the Natural Soul, she being material, has no need of any Vehicles, neither is
natural death any thing else but an alteration of the rational and sensitive
motions, which from the dissolution of one figure go to the formation or
production of another. Thus the natural soul is not like a Traveller, going out
of one body into another, neither is air her lodging; for certainly, if the
natural humane soul should travel through the airy regions, she would at last
grow weary, it being so great a journey, except she did meet with the soul of a
Horse, and so ease her self with riding on Horseback. Neither can I believe
Souls or Demons in the Air have any Commonwealth, Magistrates, Officers and
Executioners in their airy Kingdom; for wheresoever are Governments,
Magistrates and Executioners, there are also Offenses, and where there is power
to offend, as well as to obey, there may and will be sometimes Rebellions and
Civil Wars; for there being different forts of Spirits, it is impossible they
should all fo well agree, especially the good and evil Genii, which certainly
will fight more valiantly then Hector and Achilles, nay, the Spirits of one
sort would have more Civil Wars then ever the Romans had; and if the Soul of
Caesar and Pompey should meet, there would be a cruel fight between those two
Heroical souls; the like between Augustus's and Antonius's Soul. But, Madam,
all these, as I said, I take for fancies proceeding from the Religion of the
Gentiles, not fit for Christians to embrace for any truth; for if we should, we
might at last, by avoiding to be Atheists, become Pagans, and so leap out of
the Drying Pan into the Fire, as turning from Divine Faith to Poetical Fancy;
and if Ovid should revive again, he would, perhaps, be the chief head or pillar
of the Church. By this you may plainly see, Madam, that I am no Platonic; for
this opinion is dangerous, especially for married Women, by reason the
conversation of the Souls may be a great temptation, and a means to bring
Platonic Lovers to a nearer acquaintance, not allowable by the Laws of
Marriage, although by the sympathy of the Souls. But I conclude, and desire
you, not to interpret amiss this my discourse, as if I had been too invective
against Poetical Fancies; for that I am a great lover of them, my Poetical
Works will witness; only I think it not fit to bring Fancies into Religion:
Wherefore what I have writ now to you, is rather to express my zeal for God and
his true Worship, then to prejudice any body; and if you be of that same
Opinion, as above mentioned, I wish my Letter may convert you, and so I should
not account my labor lost, but judge my self happy, that any good could proceed
to the advancement of your Soul, from,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXX.
MADAM,
I Sent you word in my last, I would not meddle with writing any thing of the
Divine Soul of Man, by reason it belongs to Faith and Religion, and not to
Natural Philosophy; but since you desire my opinion concerning the Immortality
of the Divine Soul, I cannot but answer you plainly, that first I did wonder
much you made question of that, whose truth, in my opinion, is so clear, as
hardly any rational man will make a doubt of it; for I think there is almost no
Christian in the world, but believes the Immortality of the Soul, no not
Christians only, but Mahometans and Jews: But I left to wonder at you, when I
saw Wise and Learned Men, and great Divines, take so much pains as to write
whole Volumes, and bring so many arguments to prove the Immortality of the
Soul; for this was a greater Miracle to me, then if Nature had showed me some
of her secret and hidden effects, or if I had seen an Immaterial Spirit.
Certainly, Madam, it seems as strange to me to prove the Immortality of the
Soul, as to convert Atheists; for it impossible, almost, that any Atheist
should be found in the World: For what Man would be so senceless as to deny a
God? Wherefore to prove either a God, or the Immortality of the Soul, is to
make a man doubt of either: for as Physicians and Surgeons apply strengthening
Medicines only to those parts of the body which they suppose the weakest, so
it is with proofs and arguments, those being for the most part used in such
subjects, the truth of which is most questionable. But in things Divine,
Disputes do rather weaken Faith, then prove Truth, and breed several strange
opinions; for Man being naturally ambitious, and endeavoring to excel each
other, will not content himself with what God has been pleased to reveal in his
holy Word; but invents and adds something of his own; and hence arise so many
monstrous expressions and opinions, that a simple man is puzzled, not knowing
which to adhere to; which is the cause of so many schisms, sects, and
divisions in Religion: Hence it comes also, that some pretend to know the very
nature and essence of God, his divine Counsels, all his Actions, Designs,
Rules, Decrees, Power, Attributes, nay, his Motions, Affections, and Passions,
as if the Omnipotent Infinite God were of a humane shape; so that there are
already more divisions then Religions, which disturb the peace and quiet both
of mind and body; when as the ground of our belief consists but in some few and
short Articles, which clearly explained, and the moral part of Divinity well
pressed upon the People, would do more good, then unnecessary and tedious
disputes, which rather confound Religion, then advance it: but if man had a
mind to show Learning, and exercise his Wit, certainly there are other
subjects, wherein he can do it with more profit, and less danger, then by
proving Christian Religion by Natural Philosophy, which is the way to destroy
them both. I could wish, Madam, that every one would but observe the Command of
Christ, and give to God what is Gods, and to Caesar what is Caesar's, and so
distinguish what belongs to the actions of Nature, and what to the actions of
Religion; for it appears to my Reason, that God has given Nature, his eternal
Servant, a peculiar freedom of working and acting, as a self-moving Power from
Eternity; but when the Omnipotent God acts, he acts supernaturally, as beyong
Nature; of which devine actions none but the holy Church, as one united body,
mind and soul, should discourse, and declare the truth of them, according to
the Revelation made by God in his holy Word, to her Flock the Laity, not
suffering any one single person, of what profession or degree soever,
indifferently to comment, interpret, explain, and declare the meaning or sense
of the Scripture after his own fancy. And as for Nature's actions, let those
whom Nature has endued with such a proportion of Reason, as is able to search
into the hidden causes of natural effects, contemplate freely, without any
restraint or consinement; for Nature acts freely, and so may natural Creatures,
and amongst the rest Man, in things which are purely natural; but as for things
supernatural, man cannot act freely, by reason they are beyond his sphere of
conception and understanding, so as he is forced to set aside Reason, and only
to work by Faith. And thus, Madam, you see the cause why I cannot give you a
full description of the Divine Soul of Man, as I mentioned already in my last,
but that I do only send you my opinion of the natural soul, which I call the
rational soul; not that I dare say, the supernatural soul is without natural
reason, but natural reason is not the divine soul; neither can natural reason,
without Faith, advance the divine soul to Heaven, or beget a pious zeal,
without divine and supernatural Grace: Wherefore Reason, or the rational Soul
is only the Soul of Nature, which being material, is dividable, and so becomes
numerous in particular natural Creatures; like as the sensitive life being also
material and dividable, becomes numerous, as being in every Creature, and in
every part of every Creature; for as there is life in every Creature, so there
is also a soul in every Creature; nay, not only in every Creature, but in
every particle of every Creature, by reason every Creature is made of rational
and sensitive Matter; and as all Creatures or parts of Nature are but one
infinite body of Nature, so all their particular souls and lives make but one
infinite soul and life of Nature; and this natural soul has only natural
actions, not supernatural; nor has the supernatural soul natural actions; for
although they subsist both together in one body, yet each works without
disturbance to the other; and both are Immortal; for of the supernatural soul
there is no question, and of the natural soul, I have said before, that nothing
is perishable or subject to annihilation in nature, and so no death, but what
is called by the name of death, is only an alteration of the corporeal natural
motions of such a figure to another figure; and therefore as it is impossible,
that one part of Matter should perish in Nature, so is it impossible, that the
natural or rational soul can perish, being material: The natural humane soul
may alter, so as not to move in an animal way, or not to have animal motions,
but this does not prove her destruction or annihilation, but only a change of
the animal figure and its motions, all remaining still in Nature. Thus my Faith
of the Divine, and my opinion of the Natural Soul, is, that they are both
Immortal; as for the immediate actions of the Divine Soul, I leave you to the
Church, which are the Ministers of God, and the faithful dispensers of the
sacred mysteries of the Gospel, the true Expounders of the Word of God,
Reformers of men's lives, and Tutors of the Ignorant, to whom I submit my self
in all that belongs to the salvation of my Soul, and the regulating of the
actions of my life, to the honor and glory of God. And I hope they will not
take any offense at the maintaining and publishing my opinions concerning
Nature and Natural effects, for they are as harmless, and as little prejudicial
to them, as my designs; for my only and chief design is, and ever has been to
understand. Nature rightly, obey the Church exactly, Believe undoubtedly, Pray
zealously, Live virtuously, and Wish earnestly, that both Church and Schools
may increase and flourish in the sacred knowledge of the true Word of God, and
that each one may live peaceable and happily in this world, die quietly, and
rise blessedly and gloriously to everlasting Life and happiness: Which
happiness I pray God also to confer upon your Ladyship; Till then, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful and constant Friend, to serve you.

XXXI.
MADAM,
I Will leave the Controversy of Free Will and Necessity, Of the Immortality
of the Soul. l. 1. c. 3.
which your Author is discoursing of, to Divines to decide it, only I say
this, that Nature has a natural Free Will and power of self-moving, and is not
necessitated; but yet that this Free Will proceeds from God, who has given her
both will and power to act freely. But as for the question, whether there be
nothing Lib. 2. c. 2.
in the Universe, but mere body? I answer, My opinion is not, that there is
nothing in the world but mere Body; but that Nature is purely material or
corporeal, and that there is no part of Nature, or natural Creature, which is
not Matter, or Body, or made of Matter; also, that there is not any thing else
mixed with body, as a copartner in natural actions, which is distinct from Body
or Matter; nevertheless, there may be supernatural spiritual beings or
substances in Nature, without any hinderance to Matter or corporeal Nature. The
same I may say of the natural material, and the divine and supernatural Soul;
for though the divine Soul is in a natural body, and both their powers and
actions be different, yet they cause no ruin or disturbance to each other, but
do in many cases agree with each other, without incroachment upon each others
powers or actions; for God, as he is the God of all things, so the God of
Order. Wherefore it is not probable, that created Immaterial or Incorporeal
beings should order Corporeal Nature, no more then Corporeal Nature orders
Immaterial or Incorporeal Creatures. Neither can, in my opinion, Incorporeal
Creatures be clearly conceived by Corporeals, although they may really exist
and subsist in Nature; only, as I said before, it is well to be considered,
that there is difference betwixt being in Nature, and being a part of Nature;
for bodiless things, and so spiritual substances, although they may exist in
Nature, yet they are not natural, nor parts of Nature, but supernatural, Nature
being merely corporeal, and Matter the ground of Nature; and all that is not
built upon this material ground, is nothing in Nature. But you will say, The
divine Soul is a part of Man, and Man a part of Nature, wherefore the divine
Soul must needs be a part of Nature. I answer, Not: For the divine Soul is not
a part of Nature, but supernatural, as a supernatural Gift from God only to
Man, and to no other Creature: and although in this respect it may be called a
part of Man, yet it is no natural or material part of Man; neither does this
supernatural Gift disturb Nature or natural Matter, or natural Matter this
supernatural Gist. And so leaving them both, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXII.
MADAM,
IF you desire my opinion concerning Witches, whereof your Learned Author has
many Discourses and Stories: I will tell you really, that in my sense Antid.
lib. 3.
and reason, I do not believe any, except it be the witch of Endor, which the
Scripture makes mention of; for though I believe that there is a Devil, as the
Word of God and the Church inform me, yet I am not of the opinion, that God
should suffer him to have such a familiar conjunction, and make such contracts
with Man, as to empower him to do mischief and hurt to others, or to foretell
things to come, and the like; for I believe that all things Immaterial, as
Spirits, Angels, Devils, and the divine Soul of Man, are no parts of Nature,
but Supernatural, Nature knowing of no Creature that belongs to her, but what
is material; and since incorporeal Creatures are no parts of Nature, they
neither have natural actions, nor are they concerned as copartners or co-agents
in the actions of Nature and natural Creatures; but as their substances, so
their actions are supernatural, and beyond our conceivement. As for Faires, I
will not say, but there may be such Creatures in Nature, and have airy bodies,
and be of a humane shape, and have humane actions, as I have described in my
Book of Poems; for there are many things in Nature, whereof Man has no
knowledge at all, and it would be a great folly for any one to deny what he does
not see, or to ascribe all the unusual effects in Nature to Immaterial Spirits;
for Nature is so full of variety, that she can and does present sometimes such
figures to our exterior senses, as are not familiar to us, so as we need not to
take our refuge to Immaterial Spirits: nay, even those that are so much for
Incorporeal Spirits, must confess, that they cannot be seen in their own
natures, as being Invisible, and therefore have need to take vehicles of some
grosser bodies to manifeft themselves to men: and if Spirits cannot appear
without bodies, the nearest way is to ascribe such unusual effects or
apparitions, as happen sometimes, rather to matter that is already corporeal,
and not to go so far as to draw Immaterial Spirits to Natural actions, and to
make those Spirits take vehicles fit for their purposes: for Nature takes
sometimes delight in unusual Varieties. Concerning those stories which your
Author relates In his discourse of Euthusiasm. esct.
of the strange effects of Food received into a man's body, how they did work
upon the Imagination, and change and transform the humors of those that did
feed upon them, those, I say, seem very probable to me. As for example; of a
Wench who being struck into an Epilepsy, upon the seeing of a Malefactors Head
cut off, was advised to drink Cats-blood; which being done, she not long after
degenerated into the nature and property of that Animal, cried and jumped like
a Cat, and hunted Mice with the same silence and watchfulness as they do. Then
of a Man, being long fed with Swines-blood, which took a special pleasure in
wallowing and tumbling himself in the mire. Also of a Girl, which being
nourished up with Goats-milk, would skip like a Goat, and brouze on Trees as
Goats use to do. And of a Man, who by eating the brains of a Bear, became of a
Bear-like disposition. All these stories I believe to be true; for naturally
the motions of a Man may sometimes sympathize so much with the received food,
as to make an alteration in his humor or disposition. But although it be
natural, yet it is not regular, at least not usual, but proceeds from an
irregular and unusual change of motions, like as the conception and generation
of a Monster; For if it were ordinary, then those which drink much of the blood
of beasts, would also degenerate into a beastly nature, the contrary whereof is
sufficiently known: Likewise those that drink much of Cows-milk, would change
into their humors and natures. But certainly, some kinds of meats do not only
cause sickness, but madness, and strange Imaginations; all which unnatural or
unusual accidents are caused by Matter's irregular motions; Whereof I have
declared my opinion in other places; and so I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful and constant Friend, to serve you.

XXXIII.
MADAM,
YOu will have my opinion of the Book that treats of the Pre-existence of
Souls, and the Key that unlocks the Divine Providence; but I have told you
heretofore, that there are so many different opinions concerning the Soul, as I
do not know which to embrace, for the multiplicity confounds my choice: and the
cause of these various opinions, in my simple judgment, is, that most men make
no difference between the Divine, and Natural Soul. As for the Natural Soul,
humane sense and reason may perceive, that it consists of Matter, as being
Material; but as for the Divine Soul, being not material, no humane sense and
reason is able naturally to conceive it; for there cannot possibly be so much
as an Idea of a natural nothing, or an immaterial being, neither can sense and
reason naturally conceive the Creation of an Immaterial substance; for as the
Creation of material Creatures, as of this World, belongs to Faith, and not to
Reason, so does also the Creation of Immaterial substances, as Spirits; nay, it
is more difficult to understand a Natural Nothing to be made out of nothing,
then a Natural Something out of nothing. And as for the Progress of Immaterial
Souls, which the same Author mentions, I cannot conceive how No-thing can make
a Progress, and therefore I suppose, it is an Improper, or Metaphorical
expression. The truth is, what is Immaterial, belongs not to a Natural knowledge
or understanding, but is Supernatural, and goes beyond a natural reach or
capacity. Concerning the Key of Divine Providence, I believe God did never give
or lend it to any man; for surely, God, who is infinitely Wise, would never
entrust so frail and foolish a Creature as Man, with it, as to let him know his
secret Counsels, Acts, and Decrees. But setting aside Pride and Presumption,
Sense and Reason may easily perceive, that Man, though counted the best of
Creatures, is not made with such infinite Excellence, as to pierce into the
least secrets of God; Wherefore I am in a maze when I hear of such men, which
pretend to know so much, as if they had plundered the Celestial Cabinet of the
Omnipotent God; for certainly, had they done it, they could not pretend to more
knowledge then they do. But I, Madam, confess my Ignorance, as having neither
divine Inspirations, nor extraordinary Visions, nor any divine or humane
learning, but what Nature has been pleased to bestow upon me: Yet in all this
Ignorance, I know that I am, and ought to be,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XXXIV.
MADAM,
SInce in my former Letters I have discoursed of Immaterial Spirits, and
declared my meaning, that I do not believe them to be natural Creatures, or
parts of Nature; you are of opinion, as if I did contradict my self, by reason
that in the first Edition of my Book called Philosophical Opinions, I name the
rational and sensitive Matter, rational and sensitive Spirits. To which I
answer, first, That when I did write my first Conceptions in Natural
Philosophy, I was not so experienced, nor had I those observations which I have
had since; Neither did I give those first Conceptions time to digest, and come
to a maturity or perfect growth, but forced them forth as soon as conceived,
and this made the first publishing of them so full of Imperfections, which I am
much sorry for; But since that time, I have not only reviewed, but corrected
and altered them in several places, so that the last Impression of my
Philosophical Opinions, you will find more perfect and exact then the former.
Next, I pray you to take notice, Madam, that in the mentioned first Edition, by
the word Spirits, I meant Material, not Immaterial Spirits; for observing, that
Learned Men do discourse much of Animal Spirits, which are Material, and that
also high extracts in Chemistry are called Spirits; I used that word purposely,
thinking it most proper and convenient to express my sense and meaning of that
degree of matter which I call rational and sensitive. But considering again,
that my opinions, being new, would be subject to misapprehensions and
mis-interpretations; to prevent those, I thought it fitter to leave out the
word Spirits in the second, as also in the last Edition of my named Book of
Philosophy, lest my Readers should think I meant Immaterial Spirits; for I
confess really, that I never understood, nor cannot as yet apprehend Immaterial
Spirits; for though I believe the Scripture, and the Church, that there are
Spirits, and do not doubt the existency of them, yet I cannot conceive the
nature of Immaterial Spirits, and what they are; Wherefore I do only treat of
natural material substances, and not of incorporeal; also my discourse is of
the Infinite servant of the Infinite God, which servant is corporeal or
material Nature: God is only to be admired, adored, and worshipped; but not
ungloriously to be discoursed of; Which Omnipotent God, I pray of his Infinite
Mercy to give me Faith to believe in him, and not to let presumption prevail
with me so, as to liken vain and idle conceptions to that Incomprehensible
Deity. These, Madam, are my humble Prayers to God; and my request to you is,
that I may continue the same in your love and affection, which I have been
hitherto; so shall I live content, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

SECT. III.
I.
MADAM,
I Have discharged my duty thus far, that in obedience to your commands, I have
given you my answers to the opinions of three of those famous and learned
Authors you sent me, viz. Hobbes, Des Carts, and More, and explained my own
opinions by examining theirs; My only task shall be now to proceed in the same
manner with that famous Philosopher and Chemist, Van Helmont; But him I find
more difficult to be understood then any of the forementioned, not only by
reason of the Art of Chemistry, which I confess my self not versed in, but
especially, that he has such strange terms and unusual expressions as may puzle
any body to apprehend the sense and meaning of them: Wherefore, if you receive
not that full satisfaction you expect from me, in examining his opinions and
arguments, I beg your pardon before hand, and desire you to remember, that I
sent you word in the beginning, I did undertake this work more out of desire to
clear my own opinions, then a quarrelsome humor to contradict others; which if
I do but obtain, I have my aim. And so to the business: When as your Author
discourses of the causes and beginnings of Natural things, he is pleased to
say, That Souls and Lives, as they know no Degrees, so they know no Parts;
which Van Helm. in his Book entitled, Physic Refined, chapter 4. of the Causes
and beginning of natural things.
opinion is very different from mine: For although I confess, that there is but
one kind of Life, and one kind of Soul in Nature, which is the sensitive Life,
and the rational Soul, both consisting not only of Matter, but of one kind of
Matter, to wit, Animate; nevertheless they are of different degrees, the matter
of the rational Soul being more agil, subtle and active, then the matter of the
sensitive Life; which is the reason that the rational can act in its own
substance or degree of matter, and make figures in it self, and its own parts;
when as the sensitive, being of somewhat a grosser degree then the rational,
and not so subtle and active, is confined to work with and upon the Inanimate
matter. But mistake me not, Madam, for I make only a difference of the degrees
of Subtilty, Activity, Agility, Purity, betwixt rational and sensitive Matter;
but as for the rational Matter it self, it has no degrees of Purity, Subtilty
and Activity in its own Nature or Parts, but is always one and the same in its
substance in all Creatures, and so is the sensitive. You will ask me, How comes
then the difference of so many Parts and Creatures in Nature, if there be no
degrees of Purity, Activity, and Subtilty in the substance of the rational, and
in the substance of the sensitive Matter? As for example: if there were no such
degrees of the Parts of rational Matter amongst themselves, as also of the
Parts of the sensitive, there would be no difference betwixt Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals, and Elements, but all Creatures would be alike without
distinction, and have the same manner of sense and reason, life and knowledge. I
answer, That although each sort or degree of animate Matter, rational as well
as sensitive, has in it self or its own substance no degrees of purity, rarity,
and subtilty, but is one and the same in its nature or essence; nevertheless,
each has degrees of quantity, or parts, which degrees of quantity do make the
only difference betwixt the several creatures or parts of Nature, as well in
their general, as particular kinds; for both the rational and sensitive matter
being corporeal, and so dividable into parts, some creatures do partake more,
some less of them, which makes them to have more or less, and so different
sense and reason, each according to the nature of its kind: Nay this difference
of the degrees of quantity or parts in the substance of the rational and
sensitive Matter, makes also the difference betwixt particulars in every sort
of Creatures, as for example, between several particular Men: But as I said,
the nature or essence of the sensitive and rational Matter is the same in all;
for the difference consists not in the Nature of Matter, but only in the
degrees of quantity, and parts of Matter, and in the various and different
actions or motions of this same Matter. And thus Matter being dividable, there
are numerous lives and souls in Nature, according to the variousness of her
several Parts and Creatures. Next your Author, mentioning the Causes and
Principles of natural Bodies, assigns two first or chief beginnings and
corporeal causes of every Creature, to wit, the Element of Water, and the
Ferment or Leaven; which Ferment he calls a formal created being; neither a
substance, nor an accident, but a neutral thing. Truly, Madam, my reason is not
able to conceive this neutral Being; for it must either be something or nothing
in Nature: and if he makes it any thing betwixt both, it is a strange Monster,
and will produce monstrous effects: and as for Water, if he does make it a
Principle of Natural things, I see no reason why he excludes the rest of the
Elements: But, in my opinion, Water, and the rest of the Elements, are but
effects of Nature, as other Creatures are, and so cannot be prime causes. The
like the Ferment, which, to my sense and reason, is nothing else, but a natural
effect of natural matter. Concerning his opinion, That Causes and Beginnings
are all one, or that there is but little difference betwixt them, I do readily
subscribe unto it; but when he speaks of those things, which are produced
without life, my reason cannot find out, what, or where they should be; for
certainly, in Nature they are not, Nature being Life and Soul her self, and all
her parts being enlivened and soulified, so that there can be no generation or
natural production without Life. Neither is my sense and reason capable to
understand his meaning, when he says, That the Seeds of things, and the
Spirits, as the Dispensers thereof, are divided from the Material Cause: For I
do see no difference betwixt the Seed, and the material Cause, but they are all
one thing, it being undeniable, that the seed is the matter of that which is
produced. But your Author was pleased to say heretofore, that there are but two
beginnings or causes of natural things, and now he makes so many more; for,
says he, Of Efficient and Seminal Causes, some are efficiently effecting, and
others effectively effecting: which nice distinctions, in my opinion, do but
make a confusion in natural knowledge, setting a man's brain on the rack; for who
is able to conceive all those Chymaeras and Fancies of the Archeus, Ferment,
various Ideas, Blas, Gas, and many more, which are neither something nor
no-thing in Nature, but betwixt both, except a man have the same Fancies,
Visions and Dreams, your Author had? Nature is easy to be understood, and
without any difficulty, so as we stand in no need to frame so many strange
names, able to fright any body. Neither do natural bodies know many prime
causes and beginnings, but there is but one only chief and prime cause from
which all effects and varieties proceed, which cause is corporeal Nature, or
natural self-moving Matter, which forms and produces all natural things; and
all the variety and difference of natural Creatures arises from her various
actions, which are the various motions in Nature; some whereof are Regular,
some Irregular: I mean Irregular, as to particular Creatures, not as to Nature
her self, for Nature cannot be disturbed or discomposed, or else all would run
into confusion; Wherefore Irregularities do only concern particular Creatures,
not Infinite Nature; and the Irregularities of some parts may cause the
Irregularities of other Parts, as the Regularities of some parts do cause the
Regularities of others: And thus according as Regularities and Irregularities
have power, they cause either Peace or War, Sickness or Health, Delight and
Pleasure, or Grief and Pain, Life or Death, to particular Creatures or parts of
Nature; but all these various actions are but various Effects, and not prime
Causes; which is well to be observed, lest we confound Causes with Effects. And
so leaving this discourse for the present, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

II.
MADAM,
IT is no wonder, your Author has so many odd and strange opinions in
Philosophy, since they do not only proceed from strange Visions, Apparitions,
and Dreams, but are built upon so strange grounds and principles as Ideas,
Archeus, Gas, Blas, Ferment, and the like, the names of which sound so harsh
and terrifying, as they might put any body easily into a fright, like so many
Hobgoblins or Immaterial spirits; but the best is, they can do no great harm,
except it be to trouble the brains of them, that love to maintain those
opinions; for though they are thought to be powerful beings, yet being not
corporeal substances, I cannot imagine wherein their power should consist; for
Nothing In his chapter called The Fiction of Elementary Complexions and Mixtures.
can do nothing. But to mention each apart; first his Archeus he calls the
Spirit of Life; a vital Gas or Light; the Balsam preserving from Corruption;
the Vulcan or In the chapter Of the Birth and Original of Forms.
Smith of Generation; the stirrer up, and inward director of Generation; an
Air; a skiey or airy Spirit; clothing himself presently with a bodily
clothing, in things In the chapter Of the Ideas of Diseases. See his chapter called
The Seat of Diseases in the Soul is confirmed.
soulified, walking through all the dens and retiring places of the seed, and
transforming the matter according to the perfect act of its own Image,
remaining the president and overseer or inward ruler of his bounds even till
death; the Principle of Life: the Inn of Life, the only immediate Chapter Of
Archeal Diseases.
Witness, Executor, and Instrument of Life; the Prince Chapter called The Subject
of inhering of Diseases is in the point of life, etc.
and Center of Life; the Ruler of the Stern; the Keeper of Life, and promoter
of Transmutations; the Porter of the Soul; a Fountainous being; a Flint. These,
and many more names your Author attributes to his Archeus, but what properly it
is, and what its Nature and its peculiar office, I am not able to conceive. In
the next place, Gas and Blas are to your Author also true Principles of Natural
things; for Gas In the chapter Of the Gas of the Water.
is the Vapor into which Water is dissolved by Cold, but yet it is a far more
fine and subtle thing then Vapor; which he demonstrates by the Art of
Chemistry. This Gas in another place he calls In the chapter Of the Fiction of
Elementary Complexions and Mixtures.
a Wild Spirit, or Breath, unknown hitherto, which can neither be constrained
by Vessels, nor reduced into a visible body; in some things it is nothing but
Water; as for example in Salt, in Fruits, and the like. But Blas In the chapter Of
the Blas of Meteors.
proceeds from the local and alterative motion of the Stars, and is the general
beginning of motion, producing heat and cold, and that especially with the
changing of the Winds. There is also Blas In the chapter Of the unknown action of
Government.
in all sublunary things; witness Amulets or preserving Pomanders, whereby they
do constrain objects to obey them; Which Incorporeal Blas of Government acts
without a Corporeal Efflux, even as the Moon makes the Sea to swell; but the
fleshly generation In the chapter Of the Blas of Man.
has a Blas of its own, and it is twofold, one which existeth by a natural
Motion, the other voluntary, which existeth as a mover to it self by an
Internal Willing. There is also a Blas of the Heart, which is the fuel of the
Vital Spirit, and consequently of its heat. The Ferment Of the Causes and
beginnings of Natural things.
he describes to be A true Principle or Original beginning of things, to wit, a
Formal Created being, which is neither a substance, nor an accident, but a
Neutral being, framed from the beginning of the World in the places of its own
Monarchy, in the manner of Light, Fire, the magnal or sheath of the Air, Forms,
etc. that it may prepare, stir up, and go before the Seeds. Lastly, his Ideas
are Certain formal seminal Lights, Of the Ideas of Diseases.
mutually piercing each other without the adultery of Union; For, says he,
although at first, that, which is imagined, is nothing, but a mere being of
reason, yet it does not remain such; for truly the Fancy is a sealifying
virtue, and in this respect is called Imaginative, because it forms the Images
of Likenesses, or Ideas of things conceived, and does characterize them in its
own Vital Spirit, and therefore that Idea is made a spiritual or seminal
powerful being, to perform things of great moment. And those Ideas he makes
various and numerous; as Archeal Ideas, Ideas of Diseases, Sealifyiug Ideas,
Piercing Ideas, Foreign and strange Ideas, Mad Ideas, Irrational and
Incorrigible Ideas, Staggering Ideas, and a hundred others: the like of Gas,
Blas, and the rest. Thus, Madam, I have made a rehearsal of your Authors
strange, and hitherto unknown, Principles (as his Confession is) of Natural
things, which, to my sense and reason, are so obscure, intricate and perplex,
as is almost impossible exactly to conceive them; when as Principles ought to
be easy, plain, and without any difficulty to be understood; Wherefore what
with his Spirits, meer-beings, non-beings, and neutralbeings, he troubles
Nature, and puzles the brains of his Readers so, that, I think, if all men were
of his opinion, or did follow the way of his Philosophy, Nature would desire
God she might be annihilated: Only, of all other, she does not fear his
Non-beings, for they are the weakest of all, and can do her the least hurt, as
not being able to obstruct real and corporeal actions of Nature; for Nature is
a corporeal substance, and without a substance Motion cannot be, and without
Motion opposition cannot be made, nor any action in Nature, whether Prints,
Seals, Stamps, Productions, Generations, Thoughts, Conceptions, Imaginations,
Passions, Appetites, or the like: and if motions cannot be without substance;
then all Creatures, their properties, faculties, natures; etc, being made by
corporeal motions, cannot be Non-beings, no nor anything else that is in
Nature; for non-beings are not in the number of Natural things, Nature
containing nothing within her, but what is substantially, really, and
corporeally existent. But your Authors Of the Magnetic cure of wounds.
Ideal Entity, (whereof he is speaking in another place of his Works,) which
performs all the Works of Nature, seems to me, as if it were the Jack of all
Offices, or like the Jack in a Clock, that makes every Wheel move; for it has
an admirable power to put off and on Corporeality and Incorporeality, and to
make it self Something and Nothing as often as it has occasion; but if this
Proteus have such power, it may well be named the Magic of Nature. Your Author
says, it is not the Devil, nor any effect thereof: but certainly, in my
opinion, according to its description, and the effects laid to its performance,
it must be more then the Devil; wherefore, in my Reason, I cannot conceive it,
neither am I able to understand his Fantastic Activity, Fancy of Forms, the
Souls acting by an insensible way, and many more such like expressions. But I
conceive that all these can be nothing else but the several motions of the
sensitive and rational matter, which is the Active, Ingenious, Distinguishing,
Knowing, Wise and Understanding part of Infinite corporeal Nature; and though
Infinite Matter has Infinite parts in general, yet there is a finiteness in
every part considered by it self: not that I think a Part can really subsist
single and by it self, but it is only considered so in the manner of our
Conception, by reason of the difference and variousness of natural Creatures:
for these being different from each other in their figures, and not all alike,
so that we can make a distinction betwixt them; this difference and distinction
causes us to conceive every part of a different figure by it self: but properly
and according to the Truth of Nature, there is no part by it self subsisting;
for all parts are to be considered, not only as parts of the whole, but as
parts of other parts, all parts being joined in Infinite Nature, and tied by an
inseparable tie one way or other, although we do not altogether perceive it.
But to return to Ideas: I had almost forgot to tell you, Madam, of another kind
of Ideas, by your Author named, Bewitching or Enchanting Ideas, Of things
Conceived, or Conceptions.
which are for the most part found in Women, against which I cannot but take
exception in the behalf of our Sex: For, says he, Women stamp Ideas on
themselves, whereby they, no otherwise then Witches driven about with a
malignant spirit of despair, are oftentimes governed or snatched away unto
those things, which otherwise they would not, and do bewail unto us their own
and unvoluntary Madness: These Ideas are hurtful to themselves, and do, as it
were, Inchant, Infatuate, and weaken themselves; for so (as Plutarch witnesses)
a desire of death by hanging took hold of all the young Maids in the Island
Chios. By this it appears, that your Author has never been in Love, or else he
would have found, that Men have as well bewitching Ideas as Women, and that
they are as hurtful to Men, as to Women. Neither can I be persuaded to believe,
that men should not have as well Mad Ideas as Women; for to mention no other
example, some, (I will not speak of your Author) their Writings and strange
Opinions in Philosophy do sufficiently witness it; but whence those Ideas do
proceed, whether from the Bride-bed of the Soul, or the Spleen, your Author
does not declare. As for the young Maids in Chios, I must confess, it is a very
strange example; but I think there have been as many Men that have killed
themselves, as Women, if not more: However, I hope, by the Grace of God, the
young Maids in this Kingdom are better advised; for if they should do the like,
it would be a sad fate for all young Men. To conclude, Madam, all these
rehearsed opinions of your Author, concerning the Grounds or Principles of
Natural Philosophy, if you desire my Unfeigned Judgment, I can say no more, but
that they show more Fancy, then Reason and Truth, and so do many others; and,
perhaps, my opinions may be as far from Truth as his, although their Ground is
Sense and Reason; for there is no single Creature in Nature, that is able to
know the perfectest Truth: but some opinions, to humane sense and reason, may
have more probability then others, and every one thinks his to be most
probable, according to his own fancy and imagination, and so I think of mine;
nevertheless, I leave them to the censure of those, that are endued with solid
judgment and reason, and know how to discern betwixt things of fancy and
reason, and amongst the rest, I submit them to the censure of your Ladyship,
whose solid and wise Judgment is the rule of all the actions of,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

III.
MADAM,
YOur Author relating how he dissents from the False Doctrine, as he terms it,
of the Schools, concerning the Elements, and their Mixtures, Qualities,
Temperaments, Discords, etc. in order to Diseases, In his Treatise called. A
passive deceiving of the Schools of the Humourists.
is pleased to say as follows: I have sufficiently demonstrated, that there are
not four Elements in Nature, and by consequence, if there are only three, that
four cannot go together, or encounter; and that the fruits which Antiquity has
believed to be mixed bodies, and those composed from a concurrence of four
Elements, are materially of one only Element; also that those three Elements
are naturally cold; nor that native heat is any where in things, except from
Light, Life, Motion, and an altering Blas: In like manner, that all actual
moisture is of Water, but all virtual moisture from the property of the seeds:
Likewise, that dryness is by it self in the Air and Earth, but in Fruits by
reason of the Seeds and Coagulations; and that there are not Contraries in
Nature. To give you my opinion hereof, first I think it too great a presumption
in any man, to feign himself so much above the rest, as to accuse all others of
ignorance, and that none but he alone has the true knowledge of all things as
infallible and undeniable, and that so many Learned, Wise and Ingenious Men in
so many ages have been blinded with errors; for certainly, no particular
Creature in Nature can have any exact or perfect knowledge of Natural things,
and therefore opinions cannot be infallible truths, although they may seem
probable; for how is it possible that a single finite Creature should know the
numberless varieties and hidden actions of Nature? Wherefore your Author cannot
say, that he has demonstrated any thing, which could not be as much
contradicted, and perhaps with more reason, then he has brought proofs and
demonstrations: And thus when he speaks of Elements, that there are not four in
Nature, and that they cannot go together, or encounter, it may be his opinion;
but others have brought as many reasons to the contrary, and I think with more
probability; so as it is unnecessary to make a tedious discourse thereof, and
therefore I Will refer you to those that have treated of it more learnedly and
solidly then I can do. But I perceive your Author is much for Art, and since he
can make solid bodies liquid, and liquid bodies solid, he believes that all
bodies are composed out of the Element of Water, and that Water therefore is
the first Principle of all things; when as Water, in my opinion, is but an
Effect, as all other natural Creatures, and therefore cannot be a cause or
principle of them. Concerning the Natural coldness of Water, Air, and Earth, it
may be, or not be so, for any thing your Author can truly know; but to my sense
and reason, it seems probable that there are things naturally hot and moist,
and hot and dry, as well as cold and moist, and cold and dry: But all these are
but several effects produced by the several actions of Natural Matter, which
Natural Matter is the only Principle of all Natural Effects and Creatures
whatever; and this Principle, I am confident your Author can no more prove to
be Water, then he can prove that Heat, Light, Life, Motion, and Blas, are not
material. Concerning what he says, That Native Heat is no where in things,
except from Light, Life, Motion, and an altering Blas: I believe that motion of
life makes not only heat, but all effects whatsoever; but this native heat is
not produced only from the motions of Particular lives in particular
Creatures, but it is made by the motions of Natures life; which life, in all
probability, is the selfmoving Matter, which no doubt, can and does make Light
and Blas without Heat, and Heat without Light or Blas; Wherefore Light and Blas
are not principles of native Heat, no more then native Heat is the principle of
Light and Blas. Neither is Water the Principle of Actual moisture, nor the
propriety of seeds the Principle of all Virtual moisture; but self-moving
Matter is the Principle of all, and makes both actual and virtual moisture, and
there is no question but there are many sorts of moistures. As for Dryness,
which he says, is by it self in the Air and Earth, and in Fruits by reason of
the Seeds and Coagulations: I cannot conceive how any thing can be by it self
in Nature, by reason there is nothing alone and single in Nature, but all are
inseparable parts of one body: perchance, he means, it is naturally and
essentially inherent in Air and Earth; but neither can that be in my reason,
because all Creatures and Effects of Nature are Intermixed, and there is as much
dryness in other Creatures, as in Air and Earth. Lastly, as for his opinion,
That there are no Contraries in Nature; I believe not in the essence or nature
of Matter; but sense and reason inform us, that there are Contraries in Natures
actions, which are Corporeal motions, which cause mixtures, qualities, degrees,
discords, as also harmonious conjunctions and concords, compositions,
divisions, and the like effects whatsoever. But though your Author seems to be
an enemy to the mixtures of Elements, yet he makes such a mixture of Divinity,
and natural Philosophy, that all his Philosophy is nothing but a mere
Hotch-potch, spoiling one with the other. And so I will leave it to those that
delight in it, resting,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

IV.
MADAM,
WAter, according to your Authors opinion, is frozen into Snow, Ice, or Hail,
not by Cold, Chapter Of the Gas of Water.
but by its own Gas. But since I am not able to conceive what his Gas is, being
a term invented by himself, I will briefly declare my own opinion, which is,
That Snow, Ice, and Hail, in my judgment, are made in the like manner, as
Passions or Colors are made and raised in Man; for a sad discourse, or a cruel
object will make a Man pale and cold, and a fearful object, will make him
tremble; whereas a wanton and obscene discourse will make some red and hot. But
yet these discourses and objects are only external, occasional, and not
immediate efficient causes of such alterations. Also when a Man eats or drinks
any thing that is actually hot or cold, or enters into a cold or hot room,
bath, or air, he becomes hot or cold by the actions of those external agents
that work upon him, or rather whose motions the sensitive motions of his body
do pattern out. The like for diseases; for they may be caused either by hearing
ill reports, or by taking either hurtful or superfluous food into the Body, or
by Infections inwardly or outwardly, and many other ways. Likewise may Colors
be made different ways; And so may Snow, Ice, and Hail; for all loose, rare,
and porous Bodies are more apt to alter and change then close, solid, and dense
bodies; and not only to change from what they are, but to rechange to what
they were. But, Madam, many studious persons study Nature more in her own
substance, then in her various actions, which is the cause they arrive to no
knowledge of Natures Works; for the same parts of Matter may act or work several
ways: Like as a Man, or other animal creature, may put one part of his body
into various and several postures, and move it many different ways. Your Author
may say, that although several Creatures may be changed to our sight or
perception, yet they are not really changed in Nature. I answer, Their
Principle, which is a natural matter, of which all Creatures are made, cannot
be changed, because it is one, simple, and unalterable in its Nature; but the
figures of several Creatures are changed continually by the various motions of
this matter; not from being matter, but only from such or such a figure into
another; and those figures which do change, in their room are others produced
to keep up the certain kinds of Creatures by a continual successive alteration.
And as there are changes of parts, so there are also mixtures of several parts,
figures and motions in one and the same Matter; for there are not different
kinds in the nature of Matter: But, although Matter is of several degrees, as
partly animate and partly inanimate, and the animate Matter is partly rational,
and partly sensitive; Nevertheless, in all those degrees it remains the same
only or mere Matter; that is, it is nothing else but Matter, and the only
ground in which all changes are made. And therefore I cannot perceive it to be
impossible in Nature, as to your Author it seems, That Water should not be
transchangeable into Air; for, that he says, The Air would have increased into
a huge bulk, and all Water would have long since failed: It is no consequence,
because there is a Mutual transmutation of all figures and parts of Nature, as
I declared above; and when one part is transchanged into another, that part is
supplied again by the change of another; so that there can be no total mutation
of kinds or sorts of figures, but only a mutual change of the particulars.
Neither is it of any consequence, when your Author says, That if Water should
once beturned into Air, it would always remain Air, because a returning agent
is wanting, which may turn Air again into Water. For he might as well say, a
Man cannot go or turn backward, being once gone forward. And although he brings
a General Rule, That every thing, as much as in it lies, does desire to remain
in it self; Yet it is impossible to be done, by reason there is no rest in
Nature, she being in a perpetual motion, either working to the consistance of a
figure, or to the uniting of several parts, or to the dissolving or dividing of
several parts, or any other ways. By dissolving, I do not mean annihilating,
but such a dissolving of parts as is proper for the altering of such a figure
into one or many other figures. But rather then your Author will consent to the
transchanging of Water into Air, he will feign several grounds, soils or
pavements in the Air, which he calls Peroledes, and so many Floodgates and
Folding-dores, and make the Planets their Key-keepers; which are pretty
Fancies, but not able to prove any thing in Natural Philosophy. And so leaving
them to their Author, I rest,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

V.
MADAM,
I Cannot in reason give my consent to your Authors opinion, That Fishes do by
the force or virtue of an Chapter The Fiction of Elementary Complexions and
Mixtures.
inbred Seed transchange simple water into fat, bones, and their own flesh, and
that materially they are nothing but water transchanged, and that they return
into water by art. For though my opinion is, that bodies change and alter from
one figure into another, yet they do not all change into water, neither is
water changed into all other figures; and certainly Fishes do not live nor
subsist merely by Water, but by several other meats, as other animals do;
either by feeding upon other Fishes, the stronger devouring the weaker, or upon
Mud, and Grass, and Weeds, in the bottom of Seas, Rivers and Ponds, and the
like: As for example, put Fish into a Pool or Sluice, wherein there is not any
thing but clear, pure water, and in a short time they will be starved to death
for want of Food; and as they cannot live only by water, so neither can they
breed by the power of water, but by the power of their food, as a more solid
substance: And if all Creatures be nourished by those things whereof they
consist, then Fishes do not consist of water, being not nourished by water; for
it is not the transchanging of water, by which Fishes live, and by which they
produce; but it is the transchange of food, proceeding from other Creatures, as
I mentioned above? It Is true, Water is a proper element for them to live in, but
not to live on; and though I have neither learning, nor experience in
Chemistry, yet I believe, that your Author, with all the subtilest Art he had,
could not turn or convert all Creatures into pure and simple water, but there
would have been dregs and several mixtures left: I will not say, that the
Furnace may not rarifie bodies extremely, but not convert them into such a
substance or form as Nature can. And although he thinks Gold is made of Water,
yet I do not believe he could convert it into Water by the help of Fire; he
might make it soluble, fluid and rare, but all things that are supple, soluble,
flowing and liquid, are not Water; I am confident no Gas or Blas will, or can
transform it, nor no Art whatsoever; what Nature may do, I know not. But since
your Authors opinion is, that Air is also a Primigenial Element, and in its
nature a substance, Why does he not make it a Principle of natural bodies, as
well as Water? I think it had not been so improper to liken Juices to Water;
but to make the only Principle of the composition and dissolution of all
Creatures to be Water, seems to me very improbable. Neither can I admit in
reason that the Elements should be called, first, pure, and simple beings; we
might as well call all other creatures, first, pure, and simple beings: for
although the word Element sounds as much as Principle, yet they are in my
reason no more Principles of Nature, then other Creatures are, there being but
one Principle in Nature, out of which all things are composed, viz. the only
matter, which is a pure and simple corporeal substance; and what Man names
impure dregs and filths, these are only irregular and cross motions of that
matter, in respect to the nature of such or such a figure; or such motions as
are not agreeable and sympathetical to our Passions, Humors, Appetites, and the
like. Concerning the Contrarieties, Differences and Wars in Nature, which your
Author denies, I have spoken thereof already, and though he endeavors in a
long discourse to prove, that there is no War in nature; yet, in my opinion, it
is to little purpose, and it makes but a war in the thoughts of the Reader; I
know not what it did in his own. But I observe he appeals often to Divinity to
bear him up in Natural Philosophy; but how the Church does approve his
Interpretations of the Scripture, I know not: Wherefore I will not meddle with
them, lest I offend the Truth of the Divine Scripture, wherein I desire to
submit to the Judgment of the Church, which is much wiser then I, or any single
Person can be. However, for all what your Author says, I do nevertheless verily
believe, there is a war between Natural motions: For example; between the
Regular motions of Health, and the Irregular motions of Sickness; and that
things applied do oftentimes give assistance to one side or other, but many
times in the conflict, the applied remedies are destroyed, and sometimes they
are forced to be Neutrals: Wherefore though the nature of Infinite Matter is
simple, and knows of no discord, yet her actions may be cross and opposite: the
truth is, Nature could never make such variety, did her actions never oppose
each other, but live in a constant Peace and Unity. And thus leaving them to
agree, I am confident your Ladyship and I shall never disagree; for as long as
my life does last, I shall always prove,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

VI.
MADAM,
YOur Author condemns the Schools for saying, That Air is moist, or that it may
be converted into Water In the chapter of Air.
by pressing it together; bringing an example of an Iron Pipe, wherein Air has
been pressed together, which afterward in its driving out has, like a Hand-gun
discharged with Gunpowder, sent a bullet through a board or plank. Truly,
Madam, concerning the moisture of Air, I am against it, but the transchanging
of Air into Water I do verily believe, viz. that some sorts of Air may be
contracted or condensed into Water, and that Water again may be dilated into
Air, but not readily, commonly and easily by Art, but only by Nature.
Wherefore your Authors Experiment can serve for no proof; for an artificial
trial cannot be an infallible natural demonstration, the actions of Art, and
the actions of Nature being for the most part very different, especially in
productions and transmutations of natural things: Neither can an alteration of
parts, cause an utter destruction of the whole, because when some parts change
from their figures, other parts of matter change again into the like figures,
by which successive change the continuation of the whole is kept up. Next your
Author reproves the Schools for maintaining the opinion, that Air is hot; for
says he, Water, Air, and Earth, are cold by Creation, because without Light,
Heat, and the partaking of Life. He might, in my opinion, conclude, as well,
that Man is cold by Creation, because a Chameleon, or a Fish is cold, being all
of animal kind: But why may not some sorts of Air, Water and Earth be hot, and
some be cold, as well as some sorts of Light are hot, and some cold; and so
several other Creatures? His Reasons prove nothing: for Light does not make
Heat, nor is it the principle of Heat; and it is no consequence to say, all
that is without Light is without Heat, there being many things without Light,
which nevertheless are Hot; But to say, Water, Air, and Earth are cold, because
they are without heat, is no proof, but a mere begging of the principle; for it
is but the same thing, as if I should say, this is no Stone, because it is no
Glass. And that Water, Air and Earth, do not partake of Life, must be proved
first, for that is not granted as yet, there being, according to my opinion,
not one Creature that wants Life in all Nature. Again: your Author is of
opinion, That Water is the first and chief Principle of all Natural things. But
this I can no more believe, then that Water should never change or degenerate
from its essence: nay, if your Author means, there shall always be Water in
Nature, it is another thing; but if he thinks that not any part of water does
or can change or degenerate in its nature, and is the principle and chief
producer of all other Creatures; then he makes Water rather a Creator then a
Creature; and it seems, that those Gentiles which did worship Water, were of
the same opinion, whereas yet he condemns all Pagan opinions, and all those
that follow them. Moreover, I cannot subscribe to his opinion, That Gas and
Blas from the Stars do make heat: For heat is made several ways, according to
its several sorts; sor there is a dry heat, and a moist heat, a burning,
melting, and evaporating heat, and many more. But as for Meteors, that they are
made by Gas and Blas, I can say nothing, by reason I am not skilled in
Astrology, and the science of the Heavens, Stars, and Planets; wherefore if I
did offer to meddle with them, I should rather express my Ignorance, then give
your Ladyship any solid reasons; and so I am willing to leave this speculation
to others, resting content with that knowledge Nature has given me without the
help of Learning: Which I wholly dedicate and offer to your Ladyship, as
becomes,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VII.
MADAM,
HAving made mention in my last of your Authors opinion, That Air is in its
nature Cold, I thought it fit to take a stricter view of the temper of Air, and
to send you withal my own opinion thereof. First of all, I would fain know,
what sort of Air your Author means; for if he thinks there is but one sort of
Air, he might as well say, that there is but one sort of Animals, or
Vegetables; whereas yet there are not only different sorts of animal and
vegetable kind, but also different particulars in one and the same sort: As for
example; what difference is not amongst Horses, as between a Barb, a Turk, a
Ginnet, a Courser of Naples, a Flanders-horse, a Galloway, an English-horse,
and so forth? not only in their shapes, but also in their natures, tempers and
dispositions? The like for Cows, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Dogs, as also for Fowl and
Fish, nay, for Men. And as for Vegetables, What difference is there not between
Barley and Wheat, and between French-barly, Pine-barly, and ordinary Barley; as
also our English-wheat, Spanish-wheat, Turkish-wheat, Indian-wheat, and the
like? What difference is there not amongst Grapes, as the Malago, Muscadel, and
other Grapes, and so of all the rest of Vegetables? The same may be said of the
Elements; for there is as much difference amongst the Elements as amongst other
Creatures. And so of Air: for Air in some places, as in the Indies, especially
about Brasilia, is very much different from our air, or from the air that is in
other places: Indeed, in every different Climate, you shall find a difference
of air, wherefore it is impossible to assign a certain temper of heat or cold to
air in general. But although my sense and reason inform me, that air in its own
nature or essence is neither hot nor cold, yet it may become hot or cold, by
hot or cold motions; for the sensitive perceptive motions of Air may pattern
out heat or cold; and hence it is, that in Summer, when as heat predominates,
the air is hot; and in Winter, when as cold predominates, the air is cold. But,
perhaps, you will say, air may be cooled by moving it with a Fan, or such like
thing which can make wind; wherefore it follows, that air must needs be
naturally cold. I answer, That does not prove Air to be in its nature cold: for
this moving or making of wind may contract or condense the air into cold
motions, which may cause a cold wind, like as Ventiducts, where the air running
through narrow Pipes makes a cold wind. The same may be done with a man's breath;
for if he contract his lips close, his breath will be cold, but if he opens his
mouth wide, his breath will be warm. Again: you may say, that rain is congealed
by the coldness of the air into Snow, Hail and Ice. I answer; Frost, Ice, Snow
and Hail, do not proceed from the coldness of the air, but rather the coldness
of the air proceeds from them; for Ice, Snow, and Hail, proceed from cold
contraction and condensation of a vaporous or watery substance; and as Frost
and Snow cause air to be cold, so Thunder and Lightning cause it to be hot, so
long as they last. Thus, Madam, though Air may be altered either to heat or
cold, yet it is neither hot nor cold in it self. And this is all for the
present that I can say concerning the Temper of Air; I conclude, and rest,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

VIII.
MADAM,
HAving hitherto considered your Authors Elements or Principles of Natural
things, you will give me leave to present you now with a short view of his
Opinions concerning Wind, Vacuum, Rainbows, Thunder, Lightning, Earthquakes,
and the like; which I will do as briefly as I can, lest I betray my Ignorance;
for I confess my self not to be well versed in the knowledge of Meteors, nor in
those things which properly belong to the Mathematics, as in Astrology,
Geography, Optics, and the like. But your Author says, in the first place,
That Natural Wind Chapter Of the Blas of Meteors.
is nothing but a flowing Air, moved by the Blas of the Stars. Certainly,
Madam, if this were so, then, in my judgment, when the Stars blaze, we should
have constant Winds, and the more they blaze, the more violent winds there
would be: But I have rather observed the contrary, that when the Stars blaze
most apparently, we have the calmest weather either in Summer or Winter.
Perchance your Author will say, he does not mean this apparent and visible
Blas, but another invisible Blas. I answer; I know not, nor cannot conceive any
other Blas in the Stars, except I had seen it in a Vision; neither do I think
that Nature her self knows of any other, But your Author does refer himself
upon the Authority of Hypocrates, who says, That not only the Wind is a blast,
but that all Diseases are from blasts; and that there is in us a Spirit
stirring up all things by its Blas; which Spirit, by a Microcosmical Analogy,
or the proportion of a little World, he compares to the blasts of the world. As
for my particular, Madam, I dare say, I could never perceive, by my sense and
reason, any such blazing Spirit in me; but I have found by experience, that
when my mind and thoughts have been benighted with Melancholy, my Imagination
has been more active and subtle, then when my mind has been clear from dark
Melancholy: Also I find that my thoughts and conceptions are as active, if not
more, in the night then in the day; and though we may sometimes dream of
several Lights, yet I cannot perceive a constant light in us; however Light,
Blazes, and all those effects are no more then other effects of Nature are; nor
can they have more power on other Creatures, then other Creatures have on them:
Neither are they made otherwise then by the corporeal motions of Natural
Matter, and are dissolved and transchanged as other Creatures, out of one form
or figure into another. Next your Author discoursing Chapter Of Vacuum.
whether there be any Vacuum in Nature, does incline to the affirming party,
that there is a Vacuum in the Air; to wit, There is in the air something, that
is less then a body, which fills up the emptinesses or little holes and pores
in the air, and which is wholly annihilated by fire; It is actually void of all
matter, and is a middle thing between a body and an Incorporeal Spirit, and
almost nothing in respect of bodies; for it came from Nothing, and so may
easily be reduced to nothing. All this, Madam, surpasses my capacity; for I can
in no ways conceive any thing between something and nothing, as to be less then
something, and more then nothing; for all that is corporeal in Nature, is to my
reason something; that is, some really existent thing; but what is incorporeal
in Nature, is nothing; and if there be any absolute vacuum in Nature, as your
Author endeavors to prove, then certainly this Vacuum cannot be any thing
whatsoever; for a Vacuum is a pure Nothing. But many ingenious and learned men
have brought as many arguments and reasons against Vacuum, as others bring for
it, and so it is a thing which I leave to them to exercise their brains withal.
The like is the opinion which many maintain concerning Place, viz. that there
is a constant succession of Place and Parts, so that when one part removes,
another does succeed in its place; the truth and manner whereof I was never
able to comprehend: for, in my opinion, there can be no place without body, nor
no body without place, body and place being all but one thing. But as for the
perpetual Creation and annihilation of your Authors Vacuities, give me leave to
tell you, Madam, that it would be a more laborious work, then to make a new
World, or then it was to make this present World; for God made this World in
six days, and rested the seventh day; but this is a perpetual making of
something out of nothing. Again: concerning Rainbows, your Author says, Chapter Of
an Irregular Meteor.
That a Rainbow is not a natural effect of a natural Cause, but a divine
Mystery in its original; and that it has no matter, but yet is in a place, and
has its colors immediately in a place, but in the air mediately, and that it
is of the nature of Light. This is indeed a great mystery to my reason; for I
cannot conceive, as I said before, a place without a body, nor how Light and
Colors can be bodiless: But as for Rainbows, I have observed, when as water
has been blown up into the air into bubles, that by the reflection of light on
the watery bubles, they have had the like colors of the Rainbow; and I have
heard, that there has been often seen at the rising and setting of the Sun,
Clouds of diverse colors; Wherefore I cannot be persuaded to believe that a
Rainbow should not have a natural cause, and consequently be a natural effect;
For that God has made it a sign of the Covenant between him and mortal men, is
no proof, that it is not a natural effect; Neither can I believe that it has
not been before the Flood, and before it was made a sign by God, as your Author
imagines; for though it was no sign before the Flood, yet it may nevertheless
have had its being and existence before the Flood. Moreover, as for Thunder and
Lightning, your Authors opinion is; That although they may have concurring
natural Causes, yet the mover of them is an Incorporeal Spirit, which is the
Devil; who having obtained the Principality of this world, that he may be a
certain executer of the Judgments of the chief Monarch, and so the Umpire and
Commissioner of Lightning and Thunder, stirs up a monstrous and sudden Blas in
the Air, yet under Covenanted Conditions; for unless his power were bridled by
divine Goodness, he would shake the Earth with one stroke so, as to destroy all
mortal men: and thus the cracking noise or voice of Thunder is nothing but a
spiritual Blas of the Evil Spirit. I will not deny, Madam, that Thunder and
Lightning do argue the Power of the most Glorious God, for so do all the rest
of the Creatures; but that this is the only and immediate cause, which your
Author assigns of Thunder and Lightning, I cannot believe; for surely, in my
opinion, Thunder and Lightning are as much natural effects as other Creatures
in Nature; and are not the Devils Blas, for I think they may be made without
the help of the Devil; nay, I believe, he may be as much afraid of Thunder, as
those Creatures that live on Earth. But what the causes are, and how Thunder
and Lightning are made, I have elsewhere declared more at large, especially in
my Philosophical Opinions. Again your Author speaking Chapter Of the Earthquake.
of the Trembling of the Earth, thinks it is nothing else but the Judgment of
God for the sins of Impenitent men. For my part, Madam, I can say little to it,
either concerning the divine, or the natural cause of Earthquakes: As for the
divine and supernatural Cause, which your Author gives, if it was so, then I
wonder much, why God should command Earthquakes in some parts of the World
more frequent then in others. As for example; we here in these parts have very
seldom Earthquakes, and those we have, which is hardly one in many ages, are
not so furious, as to do much harm; and so in many other places of the World,
are as few and as gentle Earthquakes as here; when as in others, Earthquakes
are very frequent and dreadful: From whence it must needs follow, if
Earthquakes be only a Judgment from God for the sins of Impenitent Men, and
not a natural effect, that then those places, where the Earth is not so apt to
tremble, are the habitations of the blessed, and that they, which inhabit those
parts that are apt to tremble, are the accursed; when as yet, in those places
where Earthquakes are not usual and frequent, or none at all, People are as
wicked and impious, if not more, then in those where Earthquakes are common.
But the questions is, Whether those parts which suffer frequent and terrible
Earthquakes, would not be so shaken or have such trembling fits, were they
uninhabited by Man, or any other animal Creature? Certainly, in my opinion,
they would. But as for the Natural Cause of Earthquakes, you must pardon me,
Madam, that I cannot knowingly discourse thereof, by reason I am not so well
skilled in Geography, as to know the several Soils, Climats, Parts, Regions, or
Countries, nor what disposed matter may be within those parts that are subject
to frequent Earthquakes: Only this I may say, that I have observed, that the
light of a small Fire or Candle, will dilate it self round about; or rather
that the air round about the Fire or Candle, will pattern out both its light
and its heat. Also I have observed, That a Man in a raging fit of Madness will
have such an unsual strength, as ten strong men shall hardly be able to
encounter or bind him, when as, this violent fit being past, a single man, nay
a youth, may over-master him: Whence I conclude, that the actions, as the
motions of Nature, are very powerful when they use their force, and that the
ordinary actions of Nature are not so forcible as necessary; but the
extraordinary are more forcible then necessary. Lastly, your Author Chapter Of the
Birth or Original of Forms.
takes great pains to prove, That the Sun with his light rules the Day, and the
Moon with hers the Night; and that the Moon has her own Native light; and that
Bats, Mice, Dormice, Owls, and many others, as also Men, which rise at night,
and walk in their sleep, see by the light and power of the Moon; also that
Plants are more plentifully nourished by the night. But lest it might be
concluded, that all this is said without any probability of Truth, by reason
the Moon does not every night shine upon the Earth, he makes a difference
between the Manner of the Sun's and Moon's enlightening the Earth; to wit, that
the Sun strikes his beams in a right line toward the Earth, but the Moon does
not respect the Center of the World, which is the Earth, in a right line; but
her Center is always excentrical, and she respects the Earth only by accident,
when she is concentrical with the World; And therefore he thinks there is
another light under the Earth even at Midnight, whereby many Eyes do see, which
owes also its rise to the Moon. This opinion of your Author I leave to be
examined by those that have skill in Astronomy, and know both the Light and the
Course of the Moon: I will only say thus much, that when the Moon is
concentrical, as he calls it, with the World, as when it is Full and New Moon,
she does not shine only at night, but also in the day, and therefore she may
rule the day as well as the night, and then there will be two lights for the
ruling of the day, or at least there will be a strife betwixt the Sun and the
Moon, which shall rule. But as for Men walking asleep by the light of the Moon,
my opinion is, That blind men may walk as well by the light of the Sun, as
sleeping men by the light of the Moon. Neither is it probable, that the Moon or
her Blas does nourish Plants; for in a cold Moon-shiny night they will often
die; but it is rather the Regular motions in well tempered matter that cause
fruitful productions and maturity. And so I repose my Pen, lest it trespass too
much upon your Patience, resting,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

IX.
MADAM,
IN my former, when I related your Authors opinion, concerning Earthquakes, I
forgot to tell you, that he counts the the Doctrine of the Schools absurd, when
they say that Air, or any Exhalation, is the cause of them: For, says he, There
is no place in the Pavements or soils of the Earth, wherein any airy body may
be entertained, whether that body be a wind, or an airy exhalation. But since I
promised I would not offer to appoint or assign any natural causes of
Earthquakes, I have only taken occasion hence to enquire, whether it may not be
probably affirmed, that there is air in the bowels of the Earth: And to my
reason it seems very probable; I mean not this Exterior air, flowing about the
circumference of the Earth we inhabit; but such an airy matter as is pure,
refined, and subtle, there being great difference in the Elements, as well as
in all other sorts of Creatures; for what difference is there not between the
natural heat of an animal, and the natural heat of the Sun? and what difference
is there not between the natural moisture of an Animal, and the natural
moisture of Water? And so for the Purity of Air, Dryness of Earth, and the
like: Nay, there is great difference also in the production of those Effects:
As for example; the heat of the Earth is not produced from the Sun, nor the
natural heat in Animals, nor the natural heat in Vegetables; for if it were so,
then all Creatures in one Region or place of the Earth would be of one temper.
As for example: Poppy, Nightshade, Lettuce, Thyme, Sage, Parsley, etc. would be
all of one temper and degree, growing all in one Garden, and upon one patch of
Ground, whereon the Sun equally casts his beams, when as yet they are all
different in their natural tempers and degrees. And so certainly there is Air,
Fire, and Water, in the bowels of the Earth, which were never made by the Sun,
the Sea, and this Exterior elemental Air. Wherefore those, in my opinion, are
in gross Errors, who imagine that these Interior Effects in the Earth are
produced from the mentioned Exterior Elements, or from some other foreign and
external Causes; for an external cause can only produce an external effect, or
be an occasion to the production of such or such an effect, but not be the
immediate efficient or essential cause of an interior natural effect in another
Creature, unless the Interior natures of different Creatures have such an
active power and influence upon each other, as to work interiously at a
distance, such effects as are proper and essential to their Natures, which is
improbable; for though their natures and dispositions may mutually agree and
sympathize, yet their powers cannot work upon their Interior Natures so, as to
produce internal natural effects and proprieties in them. The truth is, it
cannot be; for as the Cause is, so is the Effect; and if the Cause be an
exterior Cause, the Effect must prove so too: As for example; the heat of the
Sun, and the heat of the Earth, although they may both agree, yet one is not
the cause of the other; for the Suns heat cannot pierce into the bowels of the
Earth, neither can the heat of the Earth ascend so far as to the Center of the
Sun: As for the heat of the Earth, it is certain enough, and needs no proof;
but as for the heat of the Sun, our senses will sufficiently inform us, that
although his beams are shot forth in direct lines upon the face of the Earth,
yet they have not so much force, as to pierce into a low Celler or Vault;
Wherefore it is not probable, that the Earth has its natural heat from the
Sun, and so neither its dryness from the Air, nor its moisture from the Sea,
but these interior effects in the Earth proceed from some other interior
causes. And thus there may be great difference between the heat, cold,
moisture, and drought which is in the Elements, and between those which are in
Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, not only in their General kinds, but also
in their Particulars: And not only a difference in the aforesaid qualities of
heat, cold, moisture, and drought, but also in all other motions, as Dilations,
Contractions, Rarefactions, Densations, etc. nay, in their Mixtures and
Temperaments: As for example; the temper of a Mineral is not the temper of an
Animal, or of a Vegetable, neither is the temper of these the temper of the
exterior Elements, no more then the temper of the Elements is the temper of
them; for every Creature has a temper natural and peculiar to it self, nay,
every particular Creature, has not only different tempers, compositions, or
mixtures, but also different productions; or else, if there were no difference
in their productions; every Creature would be alike, when as yet there are
seldom two that do exactly resemble each other. But I desire you to understand
me well, Madam, when I speak of Particular heats, colds, droughts, and
moistures; for I do not believe that all Creatures are made out of the four
Elements, no more, then that the Elements are produced from other Creatures,
for the Matter of all Creatures is but one and the same; but although the
Matter is the same, nevertheless, the Tempers, Compositions, Productions,
Motions, etc. of particular Creatures, may be different, which is the cause of
their different exterior figures, or shapes, as also of their different
Interior Natures, Qualities, Properties, and the like. And so, to conclude,
there is no impossibility or absurdity in affirming, that there may be Air,
Fire, and Water, in the bowels of the Earth proper for those Creatures, which
are in her, although not such an Elemental Air, Fire and Water, as is subject
here to our senses; but another kind of Air, Fire and Water, different from
those. But this being a subject for Learned and Ingenious men to work and
contemplate upon, better, perhaps, then I can do, I will leave it to them, and
so remain,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

X.
MADAM,
YOur Author mentioning in his Works, several Seeds of several Creatures, makes
me express my opinion thus in short concerning this Subject: Several Seeds seem
to me no otherwise then several Humors, or several Elements, or several other
Creatures made of one and the same Matter, that produce one thing out of
another, and the barrenness of seeds proceeds either from the irregularity of
their natural motions, or from their unaptness or unactivity of producing. But
it is to be observed, Madam, that not every thing does produce always its like,
but one and the same thing, or one and the same Creature, has many various and
different productions; for sometimes Vegetables do produce Animals, Animals
produce Minerals, Minerals produce Elements, and Elements again Minerals, and
so forth: for proof I will bring but a mean and common example. Do not Animals
produce Stones, some in one, and some in another part of their bodies, as some
in the Heart, some in the Stomach, some in the Head, some in the Gall, some in
the Kidneys, and some in the Bladder? I do not say, that this Generation of
Stone is made the same way as the natural generation of Animals, as, for
example, Man is born of his Parents; but I speak of the generation or
production of Creatures in general, for otherwise all Creatures would be alike,
if all generations were after one and the same manner and way. Likewise do not
Fruits, Roots, Flowers and Herbs, produce Worms? And do not Stones produce
Fire? witness the Flint. And does not Earth produce Metal? It Is true, some talk
of the seed of Metals, but who with all his diligent observations could find it
out as yet? Wherefore it is, in my opinion, not probable, that Minerals are
produced by way of seeds. Neither can I perceive that any of the Elements is
produced by seed, unless Fire, which seems, to my sense and reason, to increase
numerously by its seed, but not any other of the Elements. And thus productions
are almost as various as Creatures, or rather parts of Creatures, are; for we
see how many productions there are in one animal body, as the production of
flesh, bones, marrow, brains, gristles, veins, sinews, blood, and the like,
and all this comes from Food, and Food from some other Creatures, but all have
their original from the only matter, and the various motions of Nature. And
thus, in my opinion, all things are made easily, and not by such constrained
ways as your Author describes, by Gas, Blas, Ideas, and the like; for I am
confident, Nature has more various ways of producing natural things then any
Creature is able to conceive. I Will give another example of Vegetables, I pray
you but to consider, Madam, how many several ways Vegetables are produced, as
some by seeds, some by slips, some by grafts, etc. The graft infuses and
commixes with the whole stock and the branches, and these do the like with the
graft: As for example; an Apple grafted in Colewort produces Apples; but those
Apples will have a taste and sent of the Colewort, which shows that several
parts of several Creatures mix, join, and act together; and as for seeds, they
are transchanged wholly, and every part thereof into the produced fruit, and
every part of the seed makes a several production by the help of the co-working
parts of the Earth, which is the reason that so many seeds are produced from
one single seed; But Producers, that waste not themselves in productions, do
not produce so numerously as those that do dissolve; yet all Creatures increase
more or less, according to their supplies or assistances; for seeds will
increase and multiply more in manured and sertile then in barren grounds; nay,
if the ground be very barren, no production at all will be; which shows, that
productions come not barely from the seed, but require of necessity some
assistance, and therefore neither Archeus, nor seminal Ideas, nor Gas, nor
Blas, would do any good in Vegetables, if the ground did not assist them in
their generations or productions, no more then a house would be built without
the assistance of laborers or workmen; for let the materials lie never so
long, surely they will never join together of themselves to the artificial
structure of an house. Wherefore since there is so much variety in the
production of one kind of Creatures, nay of every particular in every kind,
what needs Man to trouble his brain for the manner and way to describe
circumstantially every particular production of every Creature by seminal or
printing Ideas, or any other far-fetched terms, since it is impossible to be
done? And as for those Creatures whose producers are of two different sorts, as
a Mule bred of an Ass and a Horse, and another Creature bred of a Cony and a
Dormouse; all which your Author thinks In the Chapter the Position is demonstrated:
and in the chapter called the Authority of the Duumvirate.
do take more after their mother then their father, more after the breeder then
the begetter; I will not eagerly affirm the contrary, although it seems to me
more probable: But this I can say, that I have observed by experience, that
Faunes and Foales have taken more after the Male then after the Female; for
amongst many several colored Deer, I have seen but one milk white Do; and she
never brought forth a white Faun, when as I have seen a white Buck beget white
and speckled Faunes of black and several colored Does. Also in Foals I have
observed, that they have taken more after the Male then after the Female, both
in shape and color. And thus I express no more, but what I have observed my
self; others may find out more examples; these are sufficient for me; so I
leave them, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XI.
MADAM,
YOu will cease to wonder, that I am not altogether capable to understand your
Authors opinions in Natural Philosophy, when you do but consider, that his
expressions are for the most part so obscure, mystical and intricate, as may
puzzle any brain that has not the like Genius, or the same Conceptions with
your Author; wherefore I am forced oftentimes to express my ignorance rather,
then to declare to you the true sense of his opinions. In the number of these
is his discourse of a Middle Life Chapter called Magnum oportet.
, viz. That the qualities of a middle life do remain in things that are
transchanged: For I cannot understand what he means by a middle life; whether
it be a life that is between the strongest and weakest, or whether he means a
life between the time of production and dissolution, or between the time of
conception and production; or whether he means a life that is between two sorts
of substances, as more then an Animal, and not so high and excellent as an
Angel; or whether he means a middle life for places, as neither in Heaven nor
in Hell, but in Purgatory, or neither in, nor out of the world, or any other
kind of life: Wherefore I Will leave this Hermaphroditical or neutral life to
better understandings then mine. Likewise I must confess my disability of
conceiving the overshadowing of his Archeus, and how it brings this middle life
into its first life. For concerning Generation, I know of none that is
performed by overshadowing, except it be the miraculous conception of the
blessed Virgin, as Holy Writ informs us; and I hope your Author will not
compare his Archeus to the Holy Spirit; But how a middle life may be brought
again into the first life, is altogether unconceivable to me: And so is that,
when he says, that the first life of the Fruit is the last of the seed; for I
cannot imagine, that the seed dies in the fruit; but, in my opinion, it lives
rather in the fruit, and is numerously increased, as appears by the production
of seed from the fruit. But the most difficult of all to be understood, are his
Ideas, which he makes certain seminal Images, Formal Lights, and operative
means, whereby Of the Ideas of Diseases.
the soul moves and governs the body; whose number and variety is so great, as
it transcends my capacity, there being Ideas of Inclination, of Affection, of
Consideration or Judgment, of Passion, and these either mild, or violent,
besides a great number of Archeal and foreign Ideas. Truly, Madam, I cannot
admire enough the powerful effects of these Ideas, they themselves being no
substances or material Creatures; For how that can pierce, seal, and print a
figure, which has neither substance nor matter, my reason is not able to
comprehend, since there can be no figure without matter or substance, they
being inseparably united together, so, that where figure is, there is also
substance, and where substance is, there is also figure; neither can any figure
be made without a substance. You may say, Ideas, though they are not material
or corporeal beings themselves, yet they may put on figures, and take bodies
when they please: I answer, That then they can do more then Immaterial Spirits;
for the Learned say, That Immaterial Spirits are Immaterial substances; but
your Author says, that Ideas are no substances; and I think it would be easier
for a substance to take a body, then for that which is no substance: But your
Author might have placed his Ideas as well amongst the number of Immaterial
Spirits, to wit, amongst Angels and Devils, and then we should not have need to
seek far for the causes of the different natures and dispositions of Mankind,
but we might say, that Ill-natured men proceeded from Evil, and Good-natured
men from Good Spirits or Ideas. However, Madam, I do not deny Ideas, Images, or
Conceptions of things, but I deny them only to be such powerful beings and
Principal efficient Causes of Natural effects; especially they being to your
Author neither bodies nor substances themselves. And as for the Figure of a
Cherry, which your Author makes so frequent a repetition of, made by a longing
Woman on her Child; I dare say that there have been millions of Women, which
have longed for some or other thing, and have not been satisfied with their
desires, and yet their Children have never had on their bodies the prints or
marks of those things they longed for: but because some such figures are
sometimes made by the irregular motions of animate Matter, would this be a
sufficient proof, that all Conceptions, Ideas and Images have the like effects,
after the same manner, by piercing or penetrating each other, and sealing or
printing such or such a figure upon the body of the Child? Lastly, I cannot but
smile when I read that your Author makes a Disease proceed from a non-being to
a substantial being: Which if so, then a disease, according to his opinion, is
made as the World was, that is, out of Nothing; but surely luxurious persons
find it otherwise, who eat and drink more then their natural digestive motions
can dispose; for those that have infirm bodies, caused by the irregular motions
of animate matter, find that a disease proceeds from more then a non-being.
But, Madam, I have neither such an Archeus, which can produce, in my mind, an
Idea of Consent or approbation of these your Authors opinions, nor such a light
that is able to produce a beam of Patience to tarry any longer upon the
examination of them; Wherefore I beg your leave to cut off my discourse here,
and only to subscriibe my self, as really I am,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XII.
MADAM,
I Cannot well apprehend your Authors meaning, when he says, Chapter Narure is
ignorant of Contraries
That Nature does rise from its fall; for if he understands Nature in general,
I cannot imagine how she should fall and rise; for though Man did fall, yet
Nature never did, nor cannot fall, being Infinite: And therefore in another
place, In the Hist. of Tartar.
when he says, that Nature first being a beautiful Virgin, was defiled by sin;
not by her own, but by Man's sin, for whose use she was created; I think it too
great a presumption and arrogance to say that Infinite Nature was not only
defiled by the sin of Man, but also to make Man the chief over all Nature, and
to believe Nature was only made for his sake; when as he is but a small finite
part of Infinite Nature, and almost Nothing in comparison to it. But I suppose
your Author does not understand Nature in general, but only the nature of some
Particulars, when he speaks of the fall and rise of Nature; however, this fall
and rise of the nature of Particulars, is nothing but a change of their natural
motions. And so likewise, I suppose, he understands the nature of Particulars,
when he says in another place, Chapter Disease is an unknown guest.
That Nature in diseases is standing, sitting, and lying; for surely Nature in
general has more several postures then sitting, standing, or lying: As also
when he speaks Nature is ignorant of Contraries.
of the Virtues and Properties that stick fast in the bosom of Nature, which I
conceive to be a Metaphorical expression; although I think it best to avoid
Metaphorical, similizing, and improper expressions in Natural Philosophy, as
much as one can; for they do rather obscure then explain the truth of Nature;
nay, your Author himself is of this opinion Chapter The Image of the Ferment begets
the Mass with Child.
, and yet he does nothing more frequent then bring in Metaphors and
similitudes. But to speak properly, there is not any thing that sticks fast in
the bosom of Nature, for Nature is in a perpetual motion: Neither can she be
heightened or diminished by Art; for Nature will be Nature in despite of her
Handmaid. And as for your Authors opinion, That there are no Contraries in
Nature, I am quite of a contrary mind, viz. that there is a Perpetual war and
discord amongst the parts of Nature, although not in the nature and substance
of Infinite Matter, which is of a simple kind, and knows no contraries in it
self, but lives in Peace, when as the several actions are opposing and crossing
each other; and truly, I do not believe, that there is any part or Creature
ofNature, that has not met with opposers, let it be never so small or great.
But as War is made by the division of Natures parts, and variety of natural
actions, so Peace is caused by the unity and simplicity of the nature and
essence of only Matter, which Nature is peaceable, being always one and the
same, and having nothing in it self to be crossed or opposed by; when as the
actions of Nature, or natural Matter, are continually striving against each
other, as being various and different. Again your Author says, That a
Specifical being cannot be altered but by Fire, and that Fire is the Death of
other Creatures: also that Alchymy, as it brings many things to a degree of
greater efficacy, and stirs up a new being, so on the other hand again, it by a
privy filching does enfeeble many things. I, for my part, wonder, that Fire,
being as your Author says, no substantial body, but substanceless in its
nature, should work such effects; but however, I believe there are many
alterations without Fire, and many things which cannot be altered by Fire. What
your Authors meaning is of a new being, I know not; for, to my reason, there
neither is, nor can be made any new being in Nature, except we do call the
change of motions and figures a new Creation; but then an old suit turned or
dressed up may be called new too. Neither can I conceive his Filching or
Stealing: For Nature has or keeps nothing within her self, but what is her own;
and surely she cannot steal from her self; nor can Art steal from Nature; she
may trouble Nature, or rather make variety in Nature, but not take any thing
from her, for Art is the insnarled motions of Nature: But your Author, being a
Chemist, is much for the Art of Fire, although it is impossible for Art to work
as Nature does; for Art makes of natural Creatures artificial Monsters, and
does oftener obscure and disturb Natures ordinary actions, then prove any Truth
in Nature. But Nature loving variety, does rather smile at Arts follies, then
that she should be angry with her curiosity: like as for example, a Poet will
smile in expressing the part or action of a Fool. Wherefore Pure natural
Philosophers, shall by natural sense and reason, trace Natures ways, and
observe her actions, more readily then Chemists can do by Fire and Furnaces;
for Fire and Furnaces do often delude the Reason, blind the Understanding, and
make the Judgment stagger. Nevertheless, your Author is so taken with Fire,
that from thence he imagines a Formal Light, which he believes to be the
Tip-top of Life; but certainly, he had, in my opinion, not so much light as to
observe, that all sorts of light are but Creatures, and not Creators; for he
judges of several Parts of Matter, as if they were several kinds of Matter,
which causes him often to err, although he conceits himself without any Error.
In which conceit I leave him, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XIII.
MADAM,
THe Art of Fire, as I perceive, is in greater esteem and respect with your
Author, then Nature her self: For he says, Chapter Called, The Essay of a Meteor.
That some things can be done by Art, which Nature cannot do; nay he calls Chapter
Heat does not digest efficiently, but excitingly.
Art The Mistress of Nature, and subjects whole Nature unto Chemical
speculation; For, nothing, says he, Chapter The ignorant natural Philosophy of
Aristotle and Galen.
does more fully bring a Man, that is greedy of knowing, to the knowledge of all
things knowable, then the Fire; for the root or radical knowledge of natural
things consists in the Fire: Chapter A modern Pharmacapoly and dispensatory.
It pierces the secrets of Nature, and causes a further searching out in
Nature, then all other Sciences, being put together; and pierces even into the
utmost depths of real truth: Chapter Of the Power of Medicines.
It creates things which never were before. These, and many more the like
expressions, he has in the praise of Chemistry. And truly, Madam, I cannot
blame your Author, for commending this Art, because it was his own profession,
and no man will be so unwise as to dispraise his own Art which he professes;
but whether those praises and commendations do not exceed truth, and express
more then the Art of Fire can perform, I will let those judge, that have more
knowledge therein then I: But this I may say, That what Art or Science soever is
in Nature, let it be the chief of all, yet it can never be called the Mistress
of Nature, nor be said to perform more then Nature does, except it be by a
divine and supernatural Power; much less to create things which never were
before, for this is an action which only belongs to God: The truth is, Art is
but a Particular effect of Nature, and as it were, Nature's Mimick or Fool, in
whose playing actions she sometimes takes delight; nay, your Author confesses
it himself, when he calls Chapter Heat does not digest efficiently, bnt excitingly.
the Art of Chemistry, Nature's emulating Ape, and her Chambermaid, and yet he
says, she is now and then the Mistress of Nature; which in my opinion does not
agree: for I cannot conceive how it is possible to be a Chambermaid, and yet to
be the Mistress too; I suppose your Author believes, they justle sometimes each
other out, or take by turns one another place. But whatever his opinion be, I
am sure, that the Art of Fire cannot create and produce so, as Nature does, nor
dissolve substances so as she does, nor transform and transchange, as she does,
nor do any effect like Nature: And therefore I cannot so much admire this Art
as others do, for it appears to me, rather to be a troubler, then an assistant
to Nature, producing more Monsters then perfect Creatures; nay, it rather does
shut the Gates of Truth, then unlock the Gates of Nature: For how can Art
inform us of Nature, when as it is but an effect of Nature? You may say, The
cause cannot be better known then by its effect; for the knowledge of the
effect, leads us to the knowledge of the cause. I answer, It Is true: but you will
consider, that Nature is an Infinite cause, and has Infinite effects; and if
you knew all the Infinite effects in nature, then perhaps you might come to
some knowledge of the cause; but to know nature by one single effect, as art is,
is impossible; nay, no man knows this particular effect as yet perfectly; For
who is he, that has studied the art of fire so, as to produce all that this art
may be able to afford? witness the Philosophers-stone. Besides, how is it
possible to find out the only cause by so numerous variations of the effects?
Wherefore it is more easy, in my opinion, to know the various effects in
Nature by studying the Prime cause, then by the uncertain study of the
inconstant effects to arrive to the true knowledge of the prime cause; truly it
is much easier to walk in a Labyrinth without a Guide, then to gain a certain
knowledge in any one art or natural effect, without Nature her self be the
guide, for Nature is the only Mistress and cause of all, which, as she has
made all other effects, so she has also made arts for varieties sake; but most
men study Chemistry more for employment, then for profit; not but that I
believe, there may be some excellent Medicines found out and made by that art,
but the expense and labor is more then the benefit; neither are all those
Medicines sure and certain, nor in all diseases safe; neither can this art
produce so many medicines as there are several diseases in Nature, and for the
Universal Medicine, and the Philosophers-stone or Elixir, which Chemists brag
of so much; it consists rather in hope and expectation, then in assurance; for
could Chemists find it out, they would not be so poor, as most commonly they
are, but richer then Solomon was, or any Prince in the World, and might have
done many famous acts with the supply of their vast Golden Treasures, to the
eternal and immortal fame of their Art; nay, Gold being the Idol of this world,
they would be worshipped as well for the sake of Gold, as for their splendorous
Art; but how many have endeavored and labored in vain and without any effect?
Gold is easier to be made, then to be destroyed, says your Author Chapter The first
Principles of the Chemists, nor the Essences of the same are of the Army of
Diseases.
, but I believe one is as difficult or impossible, nay more, then the other;
for there is more probability of dissolving or destroying a natural effect by
Art, then of generating or producing one; for Art cannot go beyond her sphere
of activity, she can but produce an artificial effect, and Gold is a natural
Creature; neither were it Justice, that a particular creature of Nature should
have as much power to act or work as Nature her self; but because neither
Reason, nor Art has found out as yet such a powerful opposite to Gold, as can
alter its nature; men therefore conclude that it cannot be done. Your Author
relates In the Chapter Of Life Eternal, and in the Chapter Of the Tree of Life.
to have seen the Gold-making stone, which he says, was of color such, as
Saffron is in its powder, but weighty and shining like unto powdered Glass; one
fourth part of one grain thereof, (a grain he reckons the six hundredth part of
one ounce) being projected upon eight ounces of Quicksilver made hot in a
Crucible, and straight way there were found eight ounces, and a little less
then eleven grains of the purest Gold; therefore one only grain of that powder
had transchanged 19186 parts of Quicksilver, equal to it self, into the best
Gold. Truly, Madam, I wish with all my heart, the poor Royalists had had some
quantity of that powder; and I assure you, that if it were so, I my self would
turn a Chemist to gain so much as to repair my Noble Husbands losses, that his
noble family might flourish the better. But leaving Gold, since it is but a
vain wish, I do verily believe, that some of the Chemical medicines do, in some
desperate cases, many times produce more powerful and sudden effects then the
medicines of Galenistsi, and therefore I do not absolutely condemn the art of
Fire, as if I were an enemy to it; but I am of an opinion, that my Opinions in
Philosophy, if well understood, will rather give a light to that art, then
obscure its worth; for if Chemists did but study well the corporeal motions or
actions of Natures substantial body; they would, by their observations,
understand Nature better, then they do by the observation of the actions of
their Art; and out of this consideration and respect, I should almost have an
ambition, to become an Artist in Chemistry, were I not too lazy and tender for
that employment; but should I quit the one, and venture the other, I am so vain
as to persuade my self, I might perform things worthy my labor upon the ground
of my own Philosophy, which is substantial Life, Sense, and Reason; for I would
not study Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, but the Natural motions of every
Creature, and observe the variety of Natures actions. But, perchance, you will
smile at my vain conceit, and, it may be, I my self, should repent of my pains
unsuccessfully bestowed, my time vainly spent, my health rashly endangered, and
my Noble Lords Estate unprofitably wasted, in fruitless trials and experiments;
Wherefore you may be sure, that I will consider well before I act; for I would
not lose Health, Wealth, and Fame, and do no more then others have done, which
truly is not much, their effects being of less weight then their words. But in
the mean time, my study shall be bent to your service, and how to express my
self worthily,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and faithful Servant.

XIV.
MADAM,
I Have read your Authors discourse concerning Sensation Of the Disease of the
Stone. Chapter 9.
, but it was as difficult to me to understand it, as it was tedious to read it;
Truly, all the business might have have been easily declared in a short
Chapter, and with more clearness and perspicuity: For Sensation, is nothing
else but the action of sense proceeding from the corporeal sensitive motions,
which are in all Creatures or parts of Nature, and so all have sense and
sensation, although not alike after one and the same manner, but some more,
some less, each according to the nature and propriety of its figure. But your
Author speaks of Motion without Sense, and Sense without Motion, which is a
mere impossibility; for there is not, nor cannot be any Motion in Nature
without Sense, nor any Sense without Motion; there being no Creature without
self-motion, although not always perceptible by us, or our external senses; for
all motion is not exteriously local, and visible. Wherefore, not any part of
Nature, according to my opinion, wants Sense and Reason, Life and Knowledge; but
not such a substanceless Life as your Author describes, but a substantial, that
is; a corporeal Life. Neither is Light the principle of Motion, but Motion is
the principle of Light: Neither is Heat the principle of Motion, but its effect
as well as Cold is; for I cannot perceive that Heat should be more active then
Cold. Neither is there any such thing as Unsensibleness in Nature, except it be
in respect of some particular Sensation in some particular Figure: As for
example, when an Animal dies, or its Figure is dissolved from the Figure of an
Animal; we may say it has not animal sense or motion, but we cannot say, it
has no sense or motion at all; for as long as Matter is in Nature, Sense and
Motion will be; so that it is absurd and impossible to believe, or at least to
think, that Matter, as a body, can be totally deprived of Life, Sense, and
Motion, or that Life can perish and be corrupted, be it the smallest part of
Matter conceivable, and the same turned or changed into millions of Figures;
for the Life and Soul of Nature is self-moving Matter, which by Gods Power, and
leave, is the only Framer and Maker, as also the Dissolver and Transformer of
all Creatures in Nature, making as well Light, Heat, and Cold, Gas, Blas, and
Ferments, as all other natural Creatures beside, as also Passions, Appetites,
Digestions, Nourishments, Inclination, Aversion, Sickness and Health; nay, all
Particular Ideas, Thoughts, Fancies, Conceptions, Arts, Sciences, etc. In
brief, it makes all that is to be made in Nature. But many great Philosophers
conceive Nature to be fuller of Intricacy, Difficulty, and Obscurity, then she
is, puzling themselves about her ordinary actions, which yet are easy and
free, and making their arguments hard, constrained, and mystical, many of them
containing neither sense nor reason; when as, in my opinion, there is nothing
else to be studied in Nature, but her substance and her actions. But I will
leave them to their own Fancies and Humors, and say no more, but rest,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XV.
MADAM,
COncerning Sympathy and Antipathy, and attractive or magnetic Inclinations,
which some do ascribe to the influence of the Stars, others to an unknown
Spirit as the Mover, others to the Instinct of Nature, hidden Proprieties, and
certain formal Virtues; but your Author Chapter Of Sympathetical Mediums.
does attribute to directing Ideas, begotten by their Mother Charity, or a
desire of Good Will, and calls it In the Plague-Grave.
a Gift naturally inherent in the Archeusses of either part: If you please to
have my opinion thereof, I think they are nothing else but plain ordinary
Passions and Appetites. As for example: I take Sympathy, as also Magnetisme or
attractive Power, to be such agreeable Motions in one part or Creature, as do
cause a Fancy, love and desire to some other part or Creature; and Antipathy,
when these Motions are disagreeable, and produce contrary effects, as dislike,
hate and aversion to some part or Creature. And as there are many sorts of such
motions, so there are many sorts of Sympathyes and Antipathyes, or Attractions
and Aversions, made several manners or ways; For in some subjects, Sympathy
requires a certain distance; as for example, in Iron and the Loadstone; for if
the Iron be too far off, the Loadstone cannot exercise its power, when as in
other subjects, there is no need of any such certain distance, as betwixt the
Needle and the North Pole, as also the Weapon-salve; for the Needle will turn
it self toward the North, whether it be near or far off from the North Pole;
and so, be the Weapon which inflicted the wound, never so far from the wounded
Person, as they say, yet it will nevertheless do its effect: But yet there must
withal be some conjunction with the blood; for as your Author mentions In the
Magnetic cnre of Wounds.
, the Weapon shall be in vain anointed with the Unguent, unless it be made
bloody, and the same blood be first dried on the same Weapon. Likewise the
sounding of two eights when one is touched, must be done within a certain
distance: the same may be said of all Infectious and catching Diseases amongst
Animals, where the Infection, be it the Infected Air, or a Poisonous Vapor, or
any thing else, must needs touch the body, and enter either through the Mouth,
or Nostrils, or Ears, or Pores of the body; for though the like Antipathies of
Infectious Diseases, as of the Plague, may be in several places far distant and
remote from each other at one and the same time, yet they cannot infect
particular Creatures, or Animals, without coming near, or without the sense of
Touch: For example; the Plague may be in the East Indies, and in this Kingdom,
at one and the same time, and yet be strangers to each other; for although all
Men are of Mankind, yet all have not Sympathy or Antipathy to each other; the
like of several Plagues, although they be of the same kind of disease, yet,
being in several places at one time, they may not be a kin to each other, nor
one be produced by the other, except the Plague be brought over out of an
infected Country, into a sound Country, by some means or other. And thus some
Sympathy and Antipathy is made by a close conjunction, or corporeal uniting of
parts, but not all; neither is it required, that all Sympathy and Antipathy
must be mutual, or equally in both Parties, so that that part or party, which
has a Sympathetical affection or inclination to the other, must needs receive
the like sympathetical affection from that part again; for one man may have a
sympathetical affection to another man, when as this man has an antipathetical
aversion to him; and the same may be, for ought we know, betwixt Iron and the
Loadstone, as also betwixt the Needle and the North; for the Needle may have a
sympathy toward the North, but not again the North toward the Needle; and so
may the Iron have toward the Loadstone, but not again the Loadstone toward
the Iron: Neither is Sympathy or Antipathy made by the issuing out of any
invisible rays, for then the rays betwixt the North and the Needle would have
a great way to reach: But a sympathetical inclination in a Man toward another,
is made either by sight, or hearing; either present, or absent: the like of
infectious Diseases. I grant, that if both Parties do mutually affect each
other, and their motions be equally agreeable; then the sympathy is the
stronger, and will last the longer, and then there is a Union, Likeness, or
Conformableness, of their Actions, Appetites, and Passions; For this kind of
Sympathy works no other effects, but a conforming of the actions of one party,
to the actions of the other, as by way of Imitation, proceeding from an
internal sympathetical love and desire to please; for Sympathy does not produce
an effect really different from it self, or else the sympathy betwixt Iron and
the Loadstone would produce a third Creature different from themselves, and so
it would do in all other Creatures. But as I mentioned above, there are many
sorts of attractions in Nature, and many several and various attractions only
in one sort of Creatures, nay, so many in one particular as not to be numbered;
for there are many Desires, Passions, and Appetites, which draw or entice a man
to something or other, as for example, to Beauty, Novelty, Luxury,
Covetousness, and all kinds of Virtues and Vices; and there are many particular
objects not in every one of these, as for example, in Novelty? For there are so
many several desires to Novelty, as there are Senses, and so many Novelties
that satisfy those desires, as a Novelty to the Ear, a Novelty to the Sight,
to Touch, Taste, and Smell; besides in every one of these, there are many
several objects; To mention only one example, for the novelty of Sight; I have
seen an Ape, dressed like a Cavalier, and riding on Horseback with his sword by
his side, draw a far greater multitude of People after him, then a Loadstone of
the same bigness of the Ape would have drawn Iron; and as the Ape turned, so
did the People, just like as the Needle turns to the North; and this is but one
object in one kind of attraction, viz. Novelty: but there be Millions of
objects besides. In like manner good Cheer draws abundance of People, as is
evident, and needs no Demonstration. Wherefore, as I said in the beginning,
Sympathy is nothing else but natural Passions and Appetites, as Love, Desire,
Fancy, Hunger, Thirst, etc. and its effects are Concord, Unity, Nourishment,
and the like: But Antipathy is Dislike, Hate, Fear, Anger, Revenge, Aversion,
Jealousy, etc. and its effects are Discord, Division, and the like. And such
an Antipathy is between a Wolf and a Sheep, a Hound and a Hare, a Hawk and a
Partridg, etc. For this Antipathy is nothing else but fear in the Sheep to run
away from the Wolf, in the Hare to run from the Hound, and in the Partridg to
fly from the Hawk; for Life has an Antipathy to that which is named Death; and
the Wolf's stomach has a sympathy to food, which causes him to draw near, or
run after those Creatures he has a mind to feed on. But you will say, some
Creatures will fight, and kill each other, not for Food, but only out of an
Antipathetical nature. I answer: When as Creatures fight, and endeavor to
destroy each other, if it be not out of necessity, as to preserve and defend
themselves from hurt or danger, then it is out of revenge, or anger, or
ambition, or jealousy, or custom of quarrelling, or breeding. As for example:
Cocks of the Game, that are bred to fight with each other, and many other
Creatures, as Bucks, Staggs, and the like, as also Birds, will fight as well as
Men, and seek to destroy each other through jealousy; when as, had they no
Females amongst them, they would perhaps live quiet enough, rather as
sympathetical Friends, then antipathetical Foes; and all such Quarrels proceed
from a sympathy to their own interest. But you may ask me, what the reason is,
that some Creatures, as for example, Mankind, some of them, will not only like
one sort of meat better then another of equal goodness and nourishment, but
will like and prefer sometimes a worse sort of meat before the best, to wit,
such as has neither a good taste nor nourishment? I answer: This is nothing
else, but a particular, and most commonly an inconstant Appetite; for after
much eating of that they like best, especially if they get a surfeit, their
appetite is changd to aversion; for then all their feeding motions and parts
have as much, if not more antipathy to those meats, as before they had a
sympathy to them. Again, you may ask me the reason, why a Man seeing two
persons together, which are strangers to him, does affect one better then the
other; nay, if one of these Persons be deformed or ill-favored, and the other
well-shaped and handsome; yet it may chance, that the deformed Person shall be
more acceptable in the affections and eyes of the beholder, then he that is
handsome? I answer: There is no Creature so deformed, but has some agreeable
and attractive parts, unless it be a Monster, which is never loved, but for its
rarity and novelty, and Nature is many times pleased with changes, taking
delight in variety: and the proof that such a sympathetical affection proceeds
from some agreeableness of Parts, is, that if those persons were veiled, there
would not proceed such a partial choice or judgment from any to them. You may
ask me further, whether Passion and Appetite are also the cause of the sympathy
which is in the Loadstone toward Iron, and in the Needle toward the North? I
answer, Yes: for it is either for nourishment, or refreshment, or love and
desire of association, or the like, that the Loadstone draws Iron, and the
Needle turns toward the North. The difference only betwixt the sympathy in
the Needle toward the North, and betwixt the sympathy in the Loadstone toward
the Iron is, that the Needle does always turn toward the North, but the
Loadstone does not always draw Iron: The reason is, because the sympathy of the
Needle toward the North requires no certain distance, as I said in the
beginning; and the North Pole continuing constantly in the same place, the
Needle knows whither to turn; when as the sympathy between the Loadstone and
Iron requires a certain distance, and when the Loadstone is not within this
compass or distance, it cannot perform its effect, to wit, to draw the Iron,
but the effect ceases, although the cause remains in vigor. The same may be
said of the Flower that turns toward the Sun; for though the Sun be out of
sight, yet the Flower watches for the return of the Sun, from which it receives
benefit: Like as faithful Servants watch and wait for their Master, or hungry
Beggars at a Rich man's door for relief; and so does the aforesaid Flower; nay,
not the Flower only, but any thing that has freedom and liberty of motion,
will turn toward those Places or Creatures whence it expects relief.
Concerning ravenous Beasts that feed on dead Carcasfes, they, having more eager
appetites then food, make long flights into far distant Countries to seek food
to live on, but surely, I think, if they had food enough at home, although not
dead Carcasses, they would not make such great Journies; or if a battle were
fought, and many slain, and they upon their journey should meet with sufficient
food, they would hardly travel further before they had devoured that food
first: But many Birds travel for the temper of the Air, as well as for food,
witness Woodcocks, Cranes, Swallows, Fieldfares, and the like; some for cold,
some for hot, and some for temperate Air. And as for such Diseases as are
produced by conceit and at distance, the cause is, the fearfulness of the
Patient, which produces Irregularities in the Mind, and these occasion
Irregularities in the Body, which produce such a disease, as the Mind did
fearfully apprehend; when as without that Passion and Irregularity, the Patient
would, perhaps, not fall sick of that disease, But to draw toward an end, I Will
answer briefly to your Authors alleged example Chapter Of the Magnetic Power.
which he gives of Wine, that it is troubled while the Vine flowreth: The
reason, in my opinion, may perhaps be, that the Wine being the effect of the
Vine, and proceeding from its stock as the producer, has not so quite altered
Nature, as not to be sensible at all of the alteration of the Vine; For many
effects do retain the proprieties of their causes; for example, many Children
are generated, which have the same proprieties of their Parents, who do often
propagate some or other virtuous or vicious qualities with their offspring;
And this is rather a proof that there are sensitive and rational motions, and
sensitive and rational knowledge in all Creatures, and so in Wine, according to
the nature or propriety of its Figure; for without motion, sense and reason, no
effect could be; nor no sympathy or antipathy. But it is to be observed, that
many do mistake the true Causes, and ascribe an effect to some cause, which is
no more the cause of that same effect, then a particular Creature is the cause
of Nature; and so they are apt to take the Fiddle for the hot Bricks, as if the
Fiddle did make the Ass dance, when as it was the hot Bricks that did it; for
several effects may proceed from one cause, and one effect from several causes;
and so in the aforesaid example, the Wine may perhaps be disturbed by the
alteration of the weather at the same time of the flowring of the Vines; and so
may Animals, as well as Vegetables, and other Creatures, alter alike at one and
the same point of time, and yet none be the cause of each others alteration.
And thus, to shut up my discourse, I repeat again, that sympathy and antipathy
are nothing else but ordinary Passions and Appetites amongst several Creatures,
which Passions are made by the rational animate Matter, and the Appetites by
the sensitive, both giving such or such motions, to such or such Creatures; for
cross motions in Appetites and Passions make Antipathy, and agreeable motions
in Appetites and Passions make Sympathy, although the Creatures be different,
wherein these motions, Passions and Appetites are made; and as without an
object a Pattern cannot be, so without inherent or natural Passions and
Appetites there can be no Sympathy or Antipathy: And there being also such
Sympathy betwixt your Ladyship and me, I think my self the happiest Creature
for it, and shall make it my whole study to imitate your Ladyship, and conform
all my actions to the rule and pattern of yours, as becomes,

MADAM, Your Ladyships faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

XVI.
MADAM,
MY opinion of Witches and Witchcraft, (of whose Power and strange effects your
Author is pleased to relate many stories) in brief, is this; My Sense and
Reason does inform me, that there is Natural Witchcraft, as I may call it,
which is Sympathy, Antipathy, Magnetisme, and the like, which are made by the
sensitive and rational motions between several Creatures, as by Imagination,
Fancy, Love, Aversion, and many the like; but these Motions, being sometimes
unusual and strange to us, we not knowing their causes, (For what Creature
knows all motions in Nature, and their ways.) do stand amazed at their working
power; and by reason we cannot assign any Natural cause for them, are apt to
ascribe their effects to the Devil; but that there should be any such devilish
Witchcraft, which is made by a Covenant and Agreement with the Devil, by whose
power Men do enchaunt or bewitch other Creatures, I cannot readily believe.
Certainly, I dare say, that many a good, old honest woman has been condemned
innocently, and suffered death wrongfully, by the sentence of some foolish and
cruel Judges, merely upon this suspicion of Witchcraft, when as really there
has been no such thing; for many things are done by slights or juggling Arts,
wherein neither the Devil nor Witches are Actors. And thus an Englishman whose
name was Banks, was like to be burnt beyond the Seas for a Witch, as I have
been informed, only for making a Horse show tricks by Art; There have been
also several others; as one that could vomit up several kinds of Liquors and
other things: and another who did make a Drum beat of it self. But all these
were nothing but slights and juggling tricks; as also the talking and walking
Bell; and the Brazen-Head which spoke these words, Time was, Time is, and Time
is past, and so fell down; Which may easily have been performed by speaking
through a Pipe conveyed into the said head: But such and the like trifles
will amaze many grave and wise men, when they do not know the manner or way how
they are done, so as they are apt to judge them to be effected by Witchcraft or
Combination with the Devil. But, as I said before, I believe there is Natural
Magic; which is, that the sensitive and rational Matter often moves such a way,
as is unknown to us; and in the number of these is also the bleeding of a
murdered body at the presence of the Murderer, which your Author Chapter Of the
Magnetic cure of wounds.
mentions; for the corporeal motions in the murdered body may move so, as to
work such effects, which are more then ordinary; for the animal Figure, being
not so quickly dissolved, the animal motions are not so soon altered, (for the
dissolving of the Figure is nothing else but an alteration of its Motions;) and
this dissolution is not done in an instant of time, but by degrees: But yet I
must confess, it is not a common action in Nature, for Nature has both common,
and singular or particular actions: As for example, Madness, natural Folly, and
many the like, are but in some particular persons; for if those actions were
general, and common, then all, or most men would be either mad, or fools, but,
though there are too many already, yet all men are not so; and so some
murdered bodies may bleed or express some alterations at the presence of the
Murderer, but I do not believe, that all do so; for surely in many, not any
alteration will be perceived, and others will have the same alterations without
the presence of the Murderer. And thus you see, Madam, that this is done
naturally, without the help of the Devil; nay, your Author does himself confess
it to be so; for, says he, The act of the Witch is plainly Natural; only the
stirring up of the virtue or power in the Witch comes from Satan. But I cannot
understand what your Author means, by the departing of spiritual rays from the
Witch into Man, or any other animal, which she intends to kill or hurt; nor how
Spirits wander about in the Air, and have their mansions there; for men may
talk as well of impossibilities, as of such things which are not composed of
Natural Matter: If man were an Incorporeal Spirit himself, he might, perhaps,
sooner conceive the essence of a Spirit, as being of the same Nature; but as
long as he is material, and composed of Natural Matter, he might as well
pretend to know the Essence of God, as of an Incorporeal Spirit. Truly, I must
confess, I have had some fancies oftentimes of such pure and subtle substances,
purer and subtiler then the Sky or Ethereal substance is, whereof I have
spoken in my Poetical Works; but these substances, which I conceived within my
fancy, were material, and had bodies, though never so small and subtle; for I
was never able to conceive a substance abstracted from all Matter, for even
Fancy it self is material, and all Thoughts and Conceptions are made by the
rational Matter, and so are those which Philosophers call Animal Spirits, but a
material Fancy cannot produce immaterial effects, that is, Ideas of Incorporeal
Spirits: And this was the cause that in the first impression of my
Philosophical Opinions, I named the sensitive and rational Matter, sensitive
and rational Spirits, because of its subtilty, activity and agility; not that I
thought them to be immaterial, but material Spirits: but since Spirits are
commonly taken to be immaterial, and Spirit and Body are counted opposite to
one another, to prevent a misapprehension in the thoughts of my Readers, as if
I meant Incorporeal Spirits, I altered this expression in the last Edition, and
called it only sensitive and rational Matter, or, which is all one, sensitive
and rational corporeal motions. You will say, perhaps, That the divine Soul in
Man is a Spirit: but I desire you to call to mind what I oftentimes have told
you, to wit, that when I speak of the Soul of Man, I mean only the Natural,
not the Divine Soul; which as she is supernatural, so she acts also
supernaturally; but all the effects of the natural Soul, of which I discourse,
are natural, and not divine or supernatural. But to return to Magnetisme; I am
absolutely of opinion, that it is naturally effected by natural means, without
the concurrence of Immaterial Spirits either good or bad, merely by natural
corporeal sensitive and rational motions; and, for the most part, there must be
a due approach between the Agent and the Patient, or otherwise the effect will
hardly follow, as you may see by the Loadstone and Iron; Neither is the
influence of the Stars performed beyond a certain distance, that is, such a
distance as is beyond sight or their natural power to work; for if their light
comes to our Eyes, I know no reason against it, but their effects may come to
our bodies. And as for infectious Diseases, they come by a corporeal imitation,
as by touch, either of the infected air, drawn in by breath, or entering through
the Pores of the Body, or of some things brought from infected places, or else
by hearing; but diseases, caused by Conceit, have their beginning, as all
alterations have, from the sensitive and rational Motions, which do not only
make the fear and conceit, but also the disease; for as a fright will sometimes
cure diseases, so it will sometimes cause diseases; but as I said, both fright,
cure, and the disease, are made by the rational and sensitive corporeal motions
within the body, and not by Supernatural Magic, as Satanical Witchcraft,
entering from without into the body by spiritual rays. But having discoursed
hereof in my former Letter, I will not trouble you with an unnecessary
repetition thereof; I conclude therefore with what I begun, viz. that I believe
natural Magic to be natural corporeal motions in natural bodies: Not that I
say, Nature in her self is a Magicianess, but it may be called natural Magic
or Witchcraft, merely in respect to our Ignorance; for though Nature is old,
yet she is not a Witch, but a grave, wise, methodical Matron, ordering her
Infinite family, which are her several parts, with ease and facility, without
needless troubles and difficulties; for these are only made through the
ignorance of her several parts or particular Creatures, not understanding their
Mistress, Nature, and her actions and government, for which they cannot be
blamed; for how should a part understand the Infinite body, when it does not
understand it self; but Nature understands her parts better, then they do her.
And so leaving Wise Nature, and the Ignorance of her Particulars, I understand
my self so far, that I am,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XVII.
MADAM,
I Am not of your Authors In his Treatise of Time.
opinion, That Time has no relation to Motion, but that Time and Motion are as
unlike and different from each other as Finite from Infinite, and that it has
its own essence or being Immovable, Unchangeable, Individable, and unmixed
with things, nay, that Time is plainly the same with Eternity. For, in my
opinion, there can be no such thing as Time in Nature, but what Man calls Time,
is only the variation of natural motions; wherefore Time, and the alteration
of motion, is one and the same thing under two different names; and as Matter,
Figure, and Motion, are inseparable, so is Time inseparably united, or rather
the same thing with them, and not a thing subsisting by it self; and as long as
Matter, Motion and Figure have been existent, so long has Time; and as long as
they last, so long does Time. But when I say, Time is the variation of motion,
I do not mean the motion of the Sun or Moon, which makes Days, Months, Years,
but the general motions or actions of Nature, which are the ground of Time; for
were there no Motion, there would be no Time; and since Matter is dividable,
and in parts, Time is so too; neither has Time any other Relation to Duration,
then what Nature her self has. Wherefore your Author is mistaken, when he
says, Motion is made in Time, for Motion makes Time, or rather is one and the
same with Time; and Succession is no more a stranger to Motion, then Motion is
to Nature, as being the action of Nature, which is the Eternal servant of God.
But, says he, Certain Fluxes of Formerlinesses and Laternesses, have respect
unto frail moveable things in their motions, wherewith they hasten unto the
appointed ends of their period, and so unto their own death or destruction; but
what relation has all that to Time: for therefore also ought Time to run with
all and every motion? Verily so there should be as many times and durations as
there are motions. I answer: To my Reason, there are as many times and
durations as there are motions; for neither time nor duration can be separated
from motion, no more then motion can be separated from them, being all one. But
Time is not Eternity, for Eternity has no change, although your Author makes
Time and Eternity all one, and a being or substance by it self: Yet I will
rather believe Solomon', then him, who says, that there is a time to be merry,
and a time to be sad; a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice, and so forth:
making so many divisions of Time as there are natural actions; whenas your
Author makes natural actions strangers to Nature, dividing them from their
substances: Which seems very improbable in the opinion of,

MADAM, Your Ladyships faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

XVIII.
MADAM,
YOur Authors Of the disease of the Stone, Chapter 9.
opinion is, That a bright burning Iron does not burn a dead Carcass after an
equal manner as it does a live one; For in live bodies, says he, it primarily
burts the sensitive Soul, the which therefore being impatient, rages after a
wonderful manner, does by degrees resolve and exasperate its own and vital
liquors into a sharp poison, and then contracts the fibers of the flesh, and
turns them into an escharre, yea, into the way of a coal; but a dead Carcass is
burnt by bright burning Iron, no otherwise, then if Wood, or if any other
unsensitive thing should be; that is, it burns by a proper action of the fire,
but not of the life. To which opinion, I answer: That my Reason cannot conceive
any thing to be without life, and so neither without sense; for whatsoever has
self-motion, has sense and life; and that self-motion is in every Creature, is
sufficiently discoursed of in my former Letters, and in my Philosophical
Opinions; sor self-motion, sense, life, and reason, are the grounds and
principles of Nature, without which no Creature could subsist. I do not say,
That there is no difference between the life of a dead Carcass, and a live one,
for there is a difference between the lives of every Creature; but to differ in
the manner of life, and to have neither life nor sense at all, are quite
different things: But your Author affirms himself, that all things have a
certain sense of feeling, when he speaks of Sympathy and Magnetisme, and yet he
denies that they have life: And others again, do grant life to some Creatures,
as to Vegetables, and not sense. Thus they vary in their Opinions, and divide
sense, life, and motion, when all is but one and the same thing; for no life is
without sense and motion, nor no motion without sense and life; nay, not
without Reason; for the chief Architect of all Creatures, is sensitive and
rational Matter. But the mistake is, that-most men, do not, or will not
conceive, that there is a difference and variety of the corporeal sensitive and
rational motions in every Creature; but they imagine, that if all Creatures
should have life, sense, and reason, they must of necessity have all alike the
same motions, without any difference; and because they do not perceive the
animal motions in a Stone or Tree, they are apt to deny to them all life,
sense, and motion. Truly, Madam, I think no man will be so mad, or irrational,
as to say a Stone is an Animal, or an Animal is a Tree, because a Stone and
Tree have sense, life, and motion; for every body knows, that their Natural
figures are different, and if their Natures be different, then they cannot have
the same Motions, for the corporeal motions do make the nature of every
particular Creature, and their differences; and as the corporeal motions act,
work, or move, so is the nature of every figure, Wherefore, no body, I hope,
will count me so senseless, that I believe sense and life to be after the like
manner in every particular Creature or part of Nature; as for example, that a
Stone or Tree has animal motions, and does see, touch, taste, smell and hear by
such sensitive organs as an Animal does; but, my opinion is, that all Sense is
not bound up to the sensitive organs of an Animal, nor Reason to the kernel of
a man's brain, or the orifice of the stomach, or the fourth ventricle of the
brain, or only to a man's body; for though we do not see all Creatures move in
that manner as Man or Animals do, as to walk, run, leap, ride, etc. and perform
exterior acts by various local motions; nevertheless, we cannot in reason say,
they are void and destitute of all motion; For what man knows the variety of
motions in Nature: Do not we see, that Nature is active in every thing, yea,
the least of her Creatures. For example; how some things do unanimously
conspire and agree, others antipathetically flee from each other; and how some
do increase, others decrease; some dissolve, some consist, and how all things
are subject to perpetual changes and alterations; and do you think all this is
done without motion, life, sense, and reason? I pray you consider, Madam, that
there are internal motions as well as external, alterative as well as
constitutive; and several other sorts of motions not perceptible by our senses,
and therefore it is impossible that all Creatures should move after one sort of
motions. But you will say, Motion may be granted, but not Life, Sense, and
Reason. I answer, I would fain know the reason why not; for I am confident that
no man can in truth affirm the contrary: What is Life, but sensitive Motion?
what is Reason, but rational motion? and do you think, Madam, that any thing
can move it self without life, sense and reason? I, for my part, cannot imagine
it should; for it would neither know why, whither, nor what way, or how to
move. But you may reply, Motion may be granted, but not self-motion; and life,
sense, and reason, do consist in self-motion. I answer: this is imposible; for
not any thing in Nature can move naturally without natural motion, and all
natural motion is self-motion. If you say it may be moved by another; My answer
is, first, that if a thing has no motion in it self, but is moved by another
which has self-motion, then it must give that immovable body motion of its own,
or else it could not move, having no motion at all; for it must move by the
power of motion, which is certain; and then it must move either by its own
motion, or by a communicated or imparted motion; if by a communicated motion,
then the self-moveable thing or body must transfer its own motion into the
immovable, and lose so much of its own motion as it gives away, which is
impossible, as I have declared heretofore at large, unless it do also transfer
its moving parts together with it, for motion cannot be transfered without
substance. But experience and observation witnesses the contrary. Next, I say,
if it were possible that one body did move another, then most part of natural
Creatures, which are counted immovable of themselves, or inanimate, and
destitute of self-motion, must be moved by a forced or violent, and not by a
natural motion; for all motion that proceeds from an external agent or moving
power, is not natural, but forced, only self-motion is natural; and then one
thing moving another in this manner, we must at last proceed to such a thing
whch is not moved by another, but has motion in it self, and moves all others;
and, perhaps, since man, and the rest of animals have self-motion, it might be
said, that the motions of all other inanimate Creatures, as they call them,
does proceed from them; but man being so proud, ambitious, and self-conceited,
would soon exclude all other animals, and adscribe this power only to himself,
especially since he thinks himself only endued with Reason, and to have this
prerogative above all the rest, as to be the sole rational Creature in the
World. Thus you see, Madam, what confusion, absurdity, and constrained work
will follow from the opinion of denying self-motion, and so consequently, life
and sense to natural Creatures. But I, having made too long a digresion, will
return to your Authors discourse: And as for that he says, A dead Carcass burns
by the proper action of the fire, I answer, That if the dissolving motions of
the fire be too strong for the consistent motions of that body which fire works
upon, then fire is the cause of its alteration; but if the consistent motions
of the body be too strong for the dissolving motions of the fire, then the fire
can make no alteration in it. Again: he says, Calx vive, as long as it remains
dry, it gnaws not a dead Carcass; but it presently gnaws live flesh, and makes
an escharre; and a dead carcass is by lime wholly resolved into a liquor, and
is combibed, except the bone and gristle thereof; but it does not consume live
flesh into a liquor, but translates it into an escharre. I will say no more to
this, but that I have fully enough declared my opinion before, that the actions
or motions of life alter in that which is named a dead Carcass, from what they
were in that which is called a Living body; but although the actions of Life
alter, yet life is not gone or annihilated; for life is life, and remains still
the same, but the actions or motions of life change and differ in every figure;
and this is the cause that the actions of Fire, Time, and Calx-vive, have not
the same effects in a dead Carcass, as in a living Body; for the difference of
their figures, and their different motions, produce different effects in them;
and this is the cause, that one and the same fire does not burn or act upon all
bodies alike: for some it dissolves, and some not; and some it hardens, and
some it consumes; and some later, some sooner: For put things of several
natures into the same Fire, and you will see how they will burn, or how fire
will act upon them after several manners; so that fire cannot alter the actions
of several bodies to its own blas; and therefore, since a living and a dead
Body (as they call them) are not the same, (for the actions or motions of life,
by their change or alteration, have altered the nature or figure of the body)
the effects cannot be the same; for a Carcass has neither the interior nor
exterior motions of that figure which it was before it was a Carcass, and so
the figure is quite altered from what it was, by the change and alteration of
the motions. But to conclude, the motions of the exterior Agent, and the
motions of the Patient, do sometimes join and unite, as in one action, or to
one effect, and sometimes the motions of the Agent are only an occasion, but
not a co-workman in the production of such or such an effect, as the motions of
the Patient do work; neither can the motions of the Agent work totally and
merely of themselves, such or such effects, without the assistance or
concurrence of the motions of the Patient, but the motions of the Patient can:
and there is nothing that can prove more evidently that Matter moves it self,
and that exterior agents or bodies are only an occasion to such or such a
motion in another body, then to see how several things put into one and the
same fire, do alter after several modes; which shows, it is not the only
action of fire, but the interior motions of the body thrown into the fire,
which do alter its exterior form or figure. And thus, I think I have said
enough to make my opinions clear, that they may be the better understood: which
is the only aim and desire of,

MADAM, Your humble and faithful Servant.

XIX.
MADAM,
YOur Author is not a Natural, but a Divine Philosopher, for in many places he
undertakes to interpret the Scripture; wherein, to my judgment, he expresses
very strange opinions; you will give me leave at this present to note some few.
First, in one place, Chapter The Position is demonstrated.
interpreting that passage of Scripture, Genesis 6. 2.
where it is said, That the sons of God took to wives the daughters of men: He
understands by the Sons of God, those which came from the Posterity of Adam,
begotten of a Man and a Woman, having the true Image of God: But by the
Daughters of Men, he understands Monsters; that is, those which through the
Devils mediation, were conceived in the womb of a Junior Witch or Sorceress:
For when Satan could find no other ways to deprive all the race of Men of the
Image of God, and extinguish the Immortal mind out of the stock of Adams
Posterity, he stirred up detestable copulations, from whence proceeded savage
Monsters, as Faunes, Satyrs, Sylphs, Gnomes, Nymphs, Driades, Najades,
Nereides, etc. which generated their offsprings amongst themselves, and their
posterities again contracted their copulations amongst themselves, and at
length began Wedlocks with Men; and from this copulation of Monsters and
Nymphs, they generated strong Giants. Which Interpretation, how it agrees with
the Truth of Scripture, I will leave to Divines to judge: But, for my part, I
cannot conceive, how, or by what means or ways, those Monsters and Nymphs were
produced or generated. Next, his opinion is, That Adam did ravish Eve, and
defloured her by force, calling him the first infringer of modesty, and
deflourer of a Virgin; and that therefore God let hair grow upon his chin,
cheeks, and lips, that he might be a Compere, Companion, and like unto many
four-footed Beasts, and might bear before him the signature of the same; and
that, as he was lecherous after their manner, he might also show a rough
countenance by his hairs: which whether it be so, or not, I cannot tell,
neither do I think your Author can certainly know it himself; for the Scripture
makes no mention of it: But this I dare say, that Eves Daughters prove rather
the contrary, viz. that their Grandmother did freely consent to their
Grandfather. Also he says, That God had purposed to generate Man by the
overshadowing of the Holy Spirit, but Man perverted the Intent of God; for had
Adam not sinned, there had been no generation by the copulation of a Man and
Woman, but all the offsprings had appeared out of Eve, a Virgin, from the Holy
Spirit, as conceived from God, and born of a woman, a virgin, To which, I
answer, first, That it is impossible to know the Designs and secret Purposes of
God: Next, to make the Holy Spirit the common Generator of all Mankind, is
more then the Scripture expresses, and any man ought to say: Lastly, it is
absurd, in my opinion, to say, that frail and mortal Men, can pervert the
intent and designs of the Great God; or that the Devil is able to prevent God's
Intent, (as his expression is in the same place.) But your Author shows a great
affectioin to the Female Sex, when he says, that God does love Women before
Men, and that he has given them a free gift of devotion before men; when as
others do lay all the fault upon the Woman, that she did seduce the Man;
however in expressing his affection for Women, your Author expresses a
partiality in God. And, as for his opinion, that God creates more Daughters
then Males, and that more Males are extinguished by Diseases, Travels, Wars,
Duels, Shipwracks, and the like: Truly, I am of the same mind, that more Men
are killed by Travels, Wars, Duels, Shipwracks, etc. then Women; for Women
never undergo these dangers, neither do so many kill themselves with
intemperate Drinking, as Men do; but yet I believe, that Death is as general,
and not more favorable to Women, then he is to Men; for though Women be not
slain in Wars like Men, (although many are, by the cruelty of Men, who not
regarding the weakness of their sex, do inhumanely kill them,) yet many do die
in Childbed, which is a Punishment only concerning the Female sex. But to go
on in your Authors Interpretations: His knowledge of the Conception of the
Blessed Virgin, reaches so far, as he does not stick to describe exactly, not
only how the blessed Virgin conceived in the womb, but first in the heart, or
the sheath of the heart; and then how the conception removed from the heart,
into the womb, and in what manner it was performed. Certainly, Madam, I am
amazed, when I see men so conceited with their own perfections and abilities,
(I may rather say, with their imperfections and weaknesses) as to make
themselves God's privy Counselors, and his Companions, and partakers of all
the sacred Mysteries, Designs, and hidden secrets of the Incomprehensible and
Infinite God. O the vain Presumption, Pride, and Ambition of wretched Men!
There are many more such expressions in your Authors works, which, in my
opinion, do rather detract from the Greatness of the Omnipotent God, then
manifest his Glory: As for example; That Man is the clothing of the Deity, and
the sheath of the Kingdom of God, and many the like: which do not belong to
God; for God is beyond all expression, because he is Infinite; and when we name
God, we name an Unexpressible, and Incomprehensible Being; and yet we think we
honor God, when we express him after the manner of corporeal Creatures.
Surely, the noblest Creature that ever is in the World, is not able to be
compared to the most Glorious God, but whatsoever comparison is made, detracts
from his Glory: And this, in my opinion, is the reason, that God forbad any
likeness to be made of him, either in Heaven, or upon Earth, because he exceeds
all that we might compare or liken to him. And as men ought to have a care of
such similizing expressions, so they ought to be careful in making
Interpretations of the Scripture, and expressing more then the Scripture
informs; for what is beyond the Scripture, is Man's own fancy; and to regulate
the Word of God after Man's fancy, at least to make his fancy equal with the
Word of God, is Irreligious. Wherefore, men ought to submit, and not to pretend
to the knowledge of God's Counsels and Designs, above what he himself has been
pleased to reveal: as for example, to describe of what Figure God is, and to
comment and descant upon the Articles of Faith; as how Man was Created; and
what he did in the state of Innocence; how he did fall; and what he did after
his fall: and so upon the rest of the Articles of our Creed, more then the
Scripture expresses, or is conformable to it. For if we do this, we shall make
a Romance of the holy Scripture, with our Paraphrastical Descriptions: which
alas! is too common already. The truth is, Natural Philosophers, should only
contain themselves within the sphere of Nature, and not trespass upon the
Revelation of the Scripture, but leave this Profession to those to whom it
properly belongs. I am confident, a Physician, or any other man of a certain
Profesion, would not take it well, if others, who are not professed in that
Art, should take upon them to practice the same: And I do wonder, why every
body is so forward to encroach upon the holy Profession of Divines, which yet
is a greater presumption, then if they did it upon any other; for it contains
not only a most hidden and mystical knowledge, as treating of the Highest
Subject, which is the most Glorious, and Incomprehensible God, and the
salvation of our Souls; but it is also most dangerous, if not interpreted
according to the Holy Spirit, but to the bias of man's fancy. Wherefore,
Madam, I am afraid to meddle with Divinity in the least thing, lest I incur the
hazard of offending the divine Truth, and spoil the excellent Art of
Philosophying; for a Philosophical Liberty, and a Supernatural Faith, are two
different things, and suffer no co-mixture; as I have declared sufficiently
heretofore. And this you will find as much truth, as that I am,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XX.
MADAM,
ALthough your Author Chapter Of the Image of the Mind.
is of the opinion of Plato, in making Three sorts of Atheists: One that
believes no Gods; Another, which indeed admits of Gods, yet such as are
uncarefull of us, and despisers of small matters, and therefore also ignorant
of us: And lastly, a third sort, which although they believe the Gods to be
expert in the least matters, yet do suppose that they are flexible and
indulgent toward the smallest cold Prayers or Petitions: Yet I cannot approve
of this distinction, for I do understand but one sort of Atheists; that is,
those which believe no God at all; but those which believe that there is a God,
although they do not worship him truly, nor live piously and religiously as
they ought, cannot, in truth, be called Atheists, or else there would be
innumerous sorts of Atheists; to wit, all those, that are either no Christians,
or not of this or that opinion in Christian Religion, besides all them that
live wickedly, impiously and irreligiously; for to know, and be convinced in
his reason, that there is a God, and to worship him truly, according to his
holy Precepts and Commands; are two several things: And as for the first, that
is, for the Rational knowledge of the Existence of God, I cannot be persuaded
to believe, there is any man which has sense and reason, that does not
acknowledge a God; nay, I am sure, there is no part of Nature which is void and
destitute of this knowledge of the Existence of an Infinite, Eternal, Immortal,
and Incomprehensible Deity; for every Creature, being endued with sense and
reason, and with sensitive and rational knowledge, there can no knowledge be more
Universal then the knowledge of a God, as being the root of all knowledge: And as
all Creatures have a natural knowledge of the Infinite God, so, it is probable,
they Worship, Adore, and Praise his Infinite Power and Bounty, each after its
own manner, and according to its nature; for I cannot believe, God should make
so many kinds of Creatures, and not be worshipped and adored but only by Man:
Nature is God's Servant, and she knows God better then any Particular Creature;
but Nature is an Infinite Body, consisting of Infinite Parts, and if she adores
and worships God, her Infinite Parts, which are Natural Creatures, must of
necessity do the like, each according to the knowledge it has: but Man in this
particular goes beyond others, as having not only a natural, but also a
revealed knowledge of the most Holy God; for he knows Gods Will, not only by
the light of Nature, but also by revelation, and so more then other Creatures
do, whose knowledge of God is merely Natural. But this Revealed Knowledge makes
most men so presumptuous, that they will not be content with it, but search
more and more into the hidden mysteries of the Incomprehensible Deity, and
pretend to know God as perfectly, almost, as themselves; describing his Nature
and Essence, his Attributes, his Counsels, his Actions, according to the
revelation of God, (as they pretend) when as it is according to their own
Fancies. So proud and presumptuous are many: But they show thereby rather their
weaknesses and follies, then any truth; and all their strict and narrow pryings
into the secrets of God, are rather unprofitable, vain and impious, then that
they should benefit either themselves, or their neighbor; for do all we can,
God will not be perfectly known by any Creature: The truth is, it is a mere
impossibility for a finite Creature, to have a perfect Idea of an Infinite
Being, as God is; be his Reason never so acute or sharp, yet he cannot
penetrate what is Impenetrable, nor comprehend what is Incomprehensible:
Wherefore, in my opinion, the best way is humbly to adore what we cannot
conceive, and believe as much as God has been pleased to reveal, without any
further search; lest we diving too deep, be swallowed up in the bottomless
depth of his Infiniteness: Which I wish every one may observe, for the benefit
of his own self, and of others, to spend his time in more profitable Studies,
then vainly to seek for what cannot be found. And with this hearty wish I
conclude, resting,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXI.
MADAM,
YOur Author is so much for Spirits, that he does not stick to affirm, Chapter Of
the Magnetic cure of wounds.
That Bodies scarce make up a moity or half part of the world; but Spirits,
even by themselves, have or possess their moity, and indeed the whole world. If
he mean bodiless and incorporeal Spirits, I cannot conceive how Spirits can
take up any place, for place belongs only to body, or a corporeal substance,
and millions of immaterial Spirits, nay, were their number infinite, cannot
possess so much place as a small Pinspoint, for Incorporeal Spirits possess no
place at all: which is the reason, that an Immaterial and a Material Infinite
cannot hinder, oppose, or obstruct each other; and such an Infinite, Immaterial
Spirit is God alone. But as for Created Immaterial Spirits, as they call them,
it may be questioned whether they be Immaterial, or not; for there may be
material Spirits as well as immaterial, that is, such pure, subtle and agil
substances as cannot be subject to any humane sense, which may be purer and
subtiller then the most refined air, or purest light; I call them material
spirits, only for distinctions sake, although it is more proper, to call them
material substances: But be it, that there are Immaterial Spirits, yet they are
not natural, but supernatural; that is, not substantial parts of Nature; for
Nature is material, or corporeal, and so are all her Creatures, and whatsoever
is not material is no part of Nature, neither does it belong any ways to
Nature: Wherefore, all that is called Immaterial, is a Natural Nothing, and an
Immaterial Natural substance, in my opinion, is nonsense: And if you contend
with me, that Created Spirits, as good and bad Angels, as also the Immortal
Mind of Man, are Immaterial, then I say they are Supernatural; but if you say,
they are Natural, then I answer they are Material: and thus I do not deny the
existence of Immaterial Spirits, but only that they are not parts of Nature,
but supernatural; for there may be many things above Nature, and so above a
natural Understanding, and Knowledge, which may nevertheless have their being
and existence, although they be not Natural, that is, parts of Nature: Neither
do I deny that those supernatural Creatures may be amongst natural Creatures,
that is, have their subsistence amongst them, and in Nature; but they are not
so commixed with them, as the several parts of Matter are, that is, they do not
join to the constitution of a material Creature; for no Immaterial can make a
Material, or contribute any thing to the making or production of it; but such a
co-mixture would breed a mere confusion in Nature: wherefore, it is quite
another thing, to be in Nature, or to have its subsistence amongst natural
Creatures in a supernatural manner or way, and to be a part of Nature. I allow
the first to Immaterial Spirits, but not the second, viz. to be parts of
Nature. But what Immaterial Spirits are, both in their Essence or Nature, and
their Essential Properties, it being supernatural, and above natural Reason, I
cannot determine any thing thereof. Neither dare I say, they are Spirits like
as God is, that is, of the same Essence or Nature, no more then I dare say or
think that God is of a humane shape or figure, or that the Nature of God is as
easy to be known as any notion else whatsoever, and that we may know as much
of him as of any thing else in the world. For if this were so, man would know
God as well as he knows himself; but God and his Attributes are not so easily
known as man may know himself and his own natural Proprieties; for God and his
Attributes are not conceiveable or comprehensible by any humane understanding,
which is not only material, but also finite; for though the parts of Nature be
infinite in number, yet each is finite in it self, that is, in its figure, and
therefore no natural Creature is capable to conceive what God is; for he being
infinite, there is also required an infinite capacity to conceive him; Nay,
Nature her self, although she is Infinite, yet cannot possibly have an exact
notion of God, by reason she is Material, and God is Immaterial; and if the
Infinite servant of God is not able to conceive God, much less will a finite
part of Nature do it. Besides, the holy Church does openly confess and declare
the Incomprehensibility of God, when in the Athanasian Creed, she expresses,
that the Father is Incomprehensible, the Son Incomprehensible, and the Holy
Ghost Incomprehensible, and that there are not three, but one Incomprehensible
God: Therefore, if any one will prove the contrary, to wit, that God is
Comprehensible, or (which is all one) that God is as easy to be known as any
Creature whatsoever, he surely is more then the Church: But I shall never say
or believe so, but rather confess my ignorance, then betray my folly; and leave
things Divine to the Church; to which I submit, as I ought, in all Duty: and as
I do not meddle with any Divine Mysteries, but subject my self, concerning my
Faith or Belief, and the regulating of my actions for the obtaining of Eternal
Life, wholly under the government and doctrine of the Church, so, I hope, they
will also grant me leave to have my liberty concerning the contemplation of
Nature and natural things, that I may discourse of them, with such freedom, as
mere natural Philosophers use, or at least ought, to do; and thus I shall be
both a good Chistian, and a good Natural Philosopher: Unto which, to make the
number perfect, I will add a third, which is, I shall be,

MADAM, Your real and faithful Friend and Servant.

XXII.
MADAM,
THough I am loath (as I have often told you) to imbarque my self in the
discourse of such a subject, as no body is able naturally to know, which is the
supernatural and divine Soul in Man; yet your Author having, in my judgment,
strange opinions, both of the Essence, Figure, Seat and Production of the Soul,
and discoursing thereof, with such liberty and freedom, as of any other natural
Creature, I cannot choose but take some notice of his discourse, and make some
reflections upon it; which yet, shall rather express my ignorance of the same
subject, then in a positive answer, declare my opinion thereof; for, in things
divine, I refer my self wholly to the Church, and submit only to their
instructions, without any further search of natural reason; and if I should
chance to express more then I ought to do, and commit some errror, it being out
of ignorance rather then set purpose, I shall be ready upon better information,
to mend it, and willingly subject my self under the censure and correction of
the holy Church, as counting it no disgrace to be ignorant in the mysteries of
Faith, since Faith is of things unknown, but rather a duty required from every
Layman to believe simply the Word of God, as it is explained and declared by
the Orthodox Church, without making Interpretations out of his own brain, and
according to his own fancy, which breeds but Schisms, Heresies, Sects, and
Confusions. But concerning your Author, I perceive by him, first, that he makes
no distinction between the Natural or Rational Soul or Mind of Man, and between
the Divine or Supernatural Soul, but takes them both as one, and distinguishes
only the Immortal Soul from the sensitive Life of Man, which he calls the
Frail, Mortal, Sensitive Soul. Next, all his knowledge of this Immortal Soul is
grounded upon Dreams and Visions, and therefore it is no wonder, if his
opinions be somewhat strange and irregular. I saw, in a Vision, says he, Chapter Of
the Image of the Mind.
my Mind in a humane shape; but there was a light, whose whole homogeneal body
was actively seeing, a spiritual substance, Chrystalline, shining with a proper
splendour, or a splendour of its own, but in another cloudy part it was rouled up
as it were in the husk of it self; which whether it had any splendour of it
self, I could not discern, by reason of the superlative brightness of the
Crystal Spirit contained within. Whereupon he defines the Soul to be a Spirit,
beloved of God, homogeneal, simple, immortal, created into the Image of God,
one only Being, whereto death adds nothing, or takes nothing from it, which
may be natural or proper to it in the Essence of its simplicity. As for this
definition of the Soul, it may be true, for any thing I know: but when your
Author makes the divine Soul to be a Light, I cannot conceive how that can
agree; for Light is a Natural and Visible Creature, and, in my opinion, a
corporeal substance; whereas the Soul is immaterial and incorporeal: But be it,
that Light is not a substance, but a neutral Creature, according to your
Author; then, nevertheless the Immortal Soul cannot be said to be a light,
because she is a substance. He may say, Of the Spirit of life.
The Soul is an Incomprehensible Light. But if the Soul be Incomprehensible,
how then does he know that she is a light, and not only a light, but a
glorious and splendorous light? You will say, By a Dream, or Vision. Truly,
Madam, to judge any thing by a Dream, is a sign of a weak judgment. Nay, since
your Author calls the soul constantly a light; if it were so, and that it were
such a splendorous, bright and shining light, as he says; then when the body
dies, and the soul leaves its Mansion, it would certainly be seen, when it
issues out of the body. But your Author calls the Soul a Spiritual Substance,
and yet he says, she has an homogeneal body, actively seeing and shining with a
proper splendour of her own; which how it can agree, I leave to you to judge; for
I thought, an Immaterial spirit and a body were too opposite things, and now I
see, your Author makes Material and Immaterial, Spiritual and Corporeal, all
one. But this is not enough, but he allows it a Figure too, and that of a human
shape; for says he, I could never consider the Thingliness of the Immortal Mind
with an Individual existence, deprived of all figure, neither but that it at
least would answer to a human shape; but the Scripture, as much as is known to
me, never does express any such thing of the Immortal Soul, and I should be
loath to believe any more thereof then it declares. The Apostles, although they
were conversant with Christ, and might have known it better, yet were never so
inquisitive into the nature of the Soul, as our Modern divine Philosophers are;
for our Savior, and they, regarded more the salvation of Man's Soul, and gave
holy and wise Instructions rather, how to live piously and conformably to God's
Will, to gain eternal Life, then that they should discourse either of the
Essence or Figure, or Proprieties of the Soul, and whether it was a light, or
any thing else, and such like needless questions, raised in aftertimes only by
the curiosity of divine Philosophers, or Philosophying Divines; For though
Light is a glorious Creature, yet Darkness is as well a Creature as Light, and
ought not therefore to be despised; for if it be not so bright, and shining as
Light, yet it is a grave Matron-like Creature, and very useful: Neither is the
Earth, which is inwardly dark, to be despised, because the Sun is bright. The
like may be said of the soul, and of the body; for the body is very useful to
the soul, how dark soever your Author believes it to be; and if he had not seen
light with his bodily eyes, he could never have conceived the Soul to be a
Light: Wherefore your Author can have no more knowledge of the divine soul then
other men have, although he has had more Dreams and Visions; nay, he himself
confesses, that the Soul is an Incomprehensible Light; which if so, she cannot
be perfectly known, nor confined to any certain figure; for a figure or shape
belongs only to a corporeal substance, and not to an incorporeal: and so, God
being an Incomprehensible Being, is excluded from all figure, when as yet your
Author does not stick to affirm, that God is of a humane figure too, as well as
the humane Soul is; For, says he, Since God has been pleased to adopt the Mind
alone into his own Image, it also seems to follow, that the vast and unutter
able God is of a humane Figure, and that from an argument from the effect, if
there be any force of arguments in this subject. Oh! the audacious curiosity of
Man! Is it not blasphemy to make the Infinite God of a frail and humane shape,
and to compare the most Holy to a sinful Creature? Nay, is it not an absurdity,
to confine and enclose that Incomprehensible Being in a finite figure? I dare
not insist longer upon this discourse, lest I defile my thoughts with the
entertaining of such a subject that derogates from the glory of the Omnipotent
Creator; Wherefore, I will hasten, as much as I can, to the seat of the Soul,
which, after relating several opinions, your Author concludes to be the orifice
of the stomach, where the Immortal Soul is involved and entertained in the
radical Inn or Bride-bed of the sensitive Soul or vital Light; which part of
the body is surely more honored then all the rest: But I, for my part, cannot
conceive why the Soul should not dwell in the parts of conception, as well, as
in the parts of digestion, except it be to prove her a good Huswife; however,
your Author allows her to slide down sometimes: For, The action of the Mind,
says he, being imprisoned in the Body, does always tend downwards; but whether
the Soul tend more downwards then upwards, Contemplative Persons, especially
Scholars, and grave Statesmen, do know best; certainly, I believe, they find
the soul more in their heads then in their heels, at least her operations. But,
to conclude, if the Soul be pure and single of her self, she cannot mix with
the Body, because she needs no assistance; nor join with the Body, though she
lives in the Body, for she needs no support; and if she be individable, she
cannot divide her self into several Parts of the Body; but if the Soul spread
over all the Body, then she is bigger, or less, according as the Body is; and
if she be only placed in some particular part, then only that one part is
endued with a Soul, and the rest is Soul-less; and if she move from place to
place, then some parts of the Body will be sometimes endued with a Soul,
sometimes not; and if any one part requires not the subsistence of the Soul
within it, then perhaps all the Body might have been able to spare her; neither
might the Soul, being able to subsist without the body, have had need of it.
Thus useless questions will trouble men's brains, if they give their fancies
leave to work. I should add something of the Production of the Soul; but being
tired with so tedious a discouse of your Author, I am not able to write any
more, but repose my Pen, and in the mean while rest affectionately,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIII.
MADAM,
YOur Authors comparison Of the seat of the Soul. It. Of the Image of the Mind.
of the Sun, with the immaterial or divine Soul in Man, makes me almost of
opinion, that the Sun is the Soul of this World we inhabit, and that the fixed
Stars, which are counted Suns by some, may be souls to some other worlds; for
every one man has but one immaterial or divine soul, which is said to be
individable and simple in its essence, and therefore unchangeable; and if the
Sun be like this immaterial soul, then the Moon may be like the material soul.
But as for the Production of this immaterial and divine Soul in Man, whether it
come by an immediate Creation from God, or be derived by a successive
propagation from Parents upon their Children, I cannot determine any thing,
being supernatural, and not belonging to my study; nevertheless, the
Propagation from Parents seems improbable to my reason; for I am not capable to
imagine, how an immaterial soul, being individable, should beget another. Some
may say, by imprinting or sealing, viz. that the soul does print the Image of
its own figure upon the spirit of the seed; which if so, then first there will
only be a production of the figure of the soul, but not of the substance, and
so the Child will have but the Image of the soul, and not a real and
substantial soul. Secondly, Every Child of the same Parents would be just
alike, without any distinguishment; if not in body, yet in the Faculties and
Proprieties of their Minds or Souls. Thirdly, There must be two prints of the
two souls of both Parents upon one Creature, to wit, the Child; for both
Parents do contribute alike to the Production of the Child, and then the Child
would either have two souls, or both must be joined as into one; which how it
can be, I am not able to conceive. Fourthly, If the Parents print the Image of
their souls upon the Child, then the Child's soul bears not the Image of God,
but the Image of Man, to wit, his Parents. Lastly, I cannot understand, how an
immaterial substance should make a print upon a corporeal substance, for
Printing is a corporeal action, and belongs only to bodies. Others may say,
that the soul is from the Parents transmitted into the Child, like as a beam of
Light; but then the souls of the Parents must part with some of their own
substance; for light is a substance dividable, in my opinion; and if it were
not, yet the soul is a substance, and cannot be communicated without losing
some of his own substance, but that is impossible; for the immaterial soul
being individable, cannot be diminished nor increased in its substance or
Nature. Others again, will have the soul produced by certain Ideas; but Ideas
being corporeal, cannot produce a substance Incorporeal or Spiritual. Wherefore
I cannot conceive how the souls of the Parents, being individable in
themselves, and not removeable out of their bodies until the time of death,
should commix so, as to produce a third immaterial soul, like to their own. You
will say, As the Sun, which is the fountain of heat and light, heats and
enlightens, and produces other Creatures. But I answer, The Sun does not
produce other Suns, at least not to our knowledge. It Is true, there are various
and several manners and ways of Productions, but they are all natural, that is,
material, or corporeal; to wit, Productions of some material beings, or
corporeal substances; but the immaterial soul not being in the number of these,
it is not probable, that she is produced by the way of corporeal productions,
but created and infused from God, according to her nature, which is
supernatural and divine: But being the Image of God, how she can be defiled
with the impurity of sin, and suffer eternal damnation for her wickedness,
without any prejudice to her Creator, I leave to the Church to inform us
thereof. Only one Question I will add, Whether the Soul be subject to Sickness
and Pain? To which I answer: As for the supernatural and divine Soul, although
she be a substance, yet being not corporeal, but spiritual, she can never
suffer pain, sickness, nor death; but as for the natural soul, to speak
properly, there is no such thing in Nature as pain, sickness, or death; unless
in respect to some Particular Creatures composed of natural Matter; for what
Man calls Sickness, Pain, and Death, are nothing else but the Motions of
Nature; for though there is but one only Matter, that is, nothing but mere
Matter in Nature, without any co-mixture of either a spiritual substance, or
any thing else that is not Matter; yet this mere Matter is of several degrees
and parts, and is the body of Nature; Besides, as there is but one only
Matter, so there is also but one only Motion in Nature, as I may call it, that
is, mere corporeal Motion, without any rest or cessation, which is the soul of
that Natural body, both being infinite; but yet this only corporeal Motion is
infinitely various in its degrees or manners, and ways of moving; for it is
nothing else but the action of natural Matter, which action must needs be
infinite, being the action of an infinite body, making infinite figures and
parts. These motions and actions of Nature, since they are so infinitely
various, when men chance to observe some of their variety, they call them by
some proper name, to make a distinguishment, especially those motions which
belong to the figure of their own kind; and therefore when they will express
the motions of dissolution of their own figure, they call them Death; when they
will express the motions of Production of their figure, they call them
Conception and Generation; when they will express the motions proper for the
Consistence, Continuance and Perfection of their Figure, they call them Health;
but when they will express the motions contrary to these, they call them
Sickness, Pain, Death, and the like: and hence comes also the difference
between regular and irregular motions; for all those Motions that belong to the
particular nature and consistence of any figure, they call regular, and those
which are contrary to them, they call irregular. And thus you see, Madam, that
there is no such thing in Nature, as Death, Sickness, Pain, Health, etc. but
only a variety and change of the corporeal motions, and that those words
express nothing else but the variety of motions in Nature; for men are apt to
make more distinctions then Nature does: Nature knows of nothing else but of
corporeal figurative Motions, when as men make a thousand distinctions of one
thing, and confound and entangle themselves so, with Beings, Non-beings, and
Neutral-beings, Corporeals and Incorporeals, Substances and Accidents, or
manners and modes of Substances, new Creations, and Annihilations, and the
like, as neither they themselves, nor any body else, is able to make any sense
thereof; for they are like the tricks and slights of Juglers, it is here, it is
gone; and amongst those Authors which I have read as yet, the most difficult to
be understood is this Author which I am now perusing, who runs such divisions,
and cuts Nature into so small Parts, as the sight of my Reason is not sharp
enough to discern them. Wherefore I will leave them to those that are more
quick-sighted then I, and rest,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XXIV.
MADAM,
YOur Author relates, how by some the Immortal Soul Chapter Of the Image of the
Soul.
is divided into two distinct parts; the Inferior or more outward, which by a
peculiar name is called the Soul, and the other the Superior, the more inward,
the which is called the bottom of the Soul or Spirit, in which Part the Image
of God is specially contained; unto which is no access for the Devil, because
there is the Kingdom of God: and each part has distinct Acts, Proprieties, and
Faculties. Truly, Madam, I wonder, how some men dare discourse so boldly of the
Soul, without any ground either of Scripture or Reason, nay, with such
contradiction to themselves, or their own opinions; For how can that be severed
into parts, which in its nature is Individable? and how can the Image of God
concern but one Part of the Soul, and not the other? Certainly, if the Soul is
the Image of God, it is his Image wholly, and not partially, or in parts. But
your Author has other as strange and odd opinions as these, some whereof I have
mentioned in my former Letters, viz. the Souls being a Light, her Figure, her
Residence, and many the like: Amongst the rest, there is one thing which your
Author frequently makes mention Chapter Of the Magnetic cure of wounds.
of; I know not what to call it, whether a thing, or a being, or no-thing; for
it is neither of them; not a substance, nor an accident; neither a body, nor a
spirit; and this Monster (sor I think this is its proper name, since none other
will fit it) is the Lacquey of the Soul, to run upon all errands; for the Soul
sitting in her Princely Throne or Residence, which is the orifice of the
stomach, cannot be every where her self; neither is it fit she should, as being
a disgrace to her, to perform all offices her self for want of servants,
therefore she sends out this most faithful and trusty officer, (your Author
calls him Ideal Entity) who being prepared for his journey, readily performs
all her commands, as being not tied up to no commands of places, times or
dimensions, especially in Women with Child he operates most powerfully; for
sometime he printed a Cherry on a Child, by a strong Idea of the Mother; but
this Ideal Entity or servant of the Soul, has troubled my brain more, then his
Mistress the Soul her self; for I could not, nor cannot as yet conceive, how he
might be able to be the Jack of all offices, and do Journies and travel from
one part of the body to another, being no body nor substance himself, nor tied
to any place, time, and dimension, and therefore I will leave him. Your Author
also speaks much of the Inward and Outward Man; but since that belongs to
Divinity, I will declare nothing of it; only this I say, that, in my opinion,
the Inward and Outward man do not make a double. Creature, neither properly,
nor improperly; properly, as to make two different men; improperly, as we use
to call that man double, whose heart does not agree with his words. But by the
Outward man I understand the sinful actions of flesh and blood, and by the
Inward man the reformed actions of the Spirit, according to the Word of God;
and therefore the Outward and Inward man make but one Man. Concerning the
Natural Soul, your Author Of the seat of the Soul.
speaks of her more to her disgrace then to her honor; for he scorns to call
her a substance, neither does he call her the Rational Soul, but he calls her
the Sensitive Soul, and makes the Divine Soul to be the Rational Natural Soul,
and the cause of all natural actions; for he being a Divine Philosopher, mixes
Divine and Natural things together: But of the Frail, Mortal, Sensitive Soul,
as he names her, which is only the sensitive Life, his opinions are, that she
is neither a substance, nor an accident, but a Neutral Creature, and a Vital
Light, which has not its like in the whole World, but the light of a Candle;
for it is extinguished, and goes out like the flame of a Candle; it is locally
present, and entertained in a place, and yet not comprehended in a place.
Nevertheless, although this sensitive soul is no substance, yet it has the
honor to be the Inn or Lodging-place of the Immortal Soul or Mind; and these
two souls being both lights, do pierce each other; but the Mortal soul blunts
the Immortal soul with its cogitation of the corruption of Adam. These
opinions, Madam, I confess really, I do not know what to make of them; for I
cannot imagine, how this Mortal soul, being no substance, can contain the
Immortal soul, which is a substance; nor how they can pierce each other, and
the Mortal soul being substanceless, get the better over an Immortal substance,
and vitiate, corrupt, and infect it; neither can I conceive, how that, which in
a manner is nothing already, can be made less and annihilated. Wherefore, my
opinion is, that the Natural Soul, Life, and Body, are all substantial parts of
Infinite Nature, not subsisting by themselves each apart, but inseparably
united and co-mixed both in their actions and substances; for not any thing can
and does subsist of it self in Nature, but God alone; and things supernatural
may, for ought I know: It Is true, there are several Degrees, several particular
Natures, several Actions or Motions, and several Parts in Nature, but none
subsists single, and by it self, without reference to the whole, and to one
another. Your Author says, the Vital Spirit sits in the Throne of the Outward
man as Vice Roy of the Soul, and acts by Commission of the Soul; but it is
impossible, that one single part should be King of the whole Creature, since
Rational and Sensitive Matter is divided into so many parts, which have equal
power and force of action in their turns and several employments; for though
Nature is a Monarchess over all her Creatures, yet in every particular Creature
is a Republic, and not a Monarchy; for no part of any Creature has a sole
supreme Power over the rest. Moreover, your Author Chapter Of the Image of the Mind.
says, That an Angel is not a Light himself, nor has an Internal Light, natural
and proper to himself, but is the Glass of an Uncreated Light: Which, to my
apprehension, seems to affirm, That Angels are the Looking-glasses of God; a
pretty Poetical Fancy, but not grounded on the Scripture: for the Scripture
does not express any such thing of them, but only that they are Ministering
Spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation: Heb.
11. 14.
Which, I think, is enough for us to know here, and leave the rest until we
come to enjoy their company in Heaven. But it is not to be admired, that those,
which pretend to know the Nature and Secrets of God, should not have likewise
knowledge of Supernatural Creatures; In which conceit I leave them, and rest,

MADAM, Your real and faithful Friend and Servant.

XXV.
MADAM,
REason and Intellect are two different things to your Author Chapter The hunting
or searching out of Sciences. It. Of the Image of the Mind.
; for Intellect, says he, does properly belong to the Immortal Soul, as being a
Formal Light, and the very substance of the Soul it self, wherein the Image of
God only consists; But Reason is an uncertain, frail faculty of the Mortal
Soul, and does in no ways belong, nor has any communion with the Intellect of
the Mind. Which seems to me, as if your Author did make some difference between
the Divine, and the Natural Soul in Man, although he does not plainly declare
it in the same Terms; for that which I name the Divine Soul, is to him the
Immortal Mind, Intellect, or Understanding, and the Seat of the Image of God;
but the Natural Soul he calls the Frail, Mortal, and Rational Soul; and as
Understanding is the Essence of the Immortal, so Reason is to him the Essence
of the Mortal Soul; which Reason he attributes not only to Man, but also to
Brutes: For Reason and Discourse, says he, do not obscurely flourish and grow
in brute Beasts, for an aged Fox is more crafty then a younger one by rational
discourse; and again, That the Rational Part of the Soul does belong to brutes,
is without doubt: Wherein he rightly dissents from those, which only do
attribute a sensitive Soul to brutes; and Reason to none but Man, whom
therefore they call a Rational Creature, and by this Rational Faculty do
distinguish him from the rest of Animals. And thus I perceive the difference
betwixt your Authors opinion, and theirs, is, That other Philosophers commonly
do make the Rational soul, to be partly that which I call the supernatural and
divine Soul, as only belonging to man, and bearing the Image of God, not
acknowledging any other Natural, but a Sensitive soul in the rest of Animals,
and a Vegetative soul in Vegetables; and these three souls, or faculties,
operations, or degrees, (call them what you will, for we shall not fall out
about names,) concur and join together in Man; but the rest of all Creatures,
are void and destitute ofLife, as well as of Soul, and therefore called
Unanimate; and thus they make the natural rational soul, and the divine soul in
man to be all one thing, without any distinguishment; but your Author makes a
difference between the Mortal and Immortal soul in Man; the Immortal he calls
the Intellect or Understanding, and the Mortal soul he calls Reason: but to my
judgment he also attributes to the immortal soul, actions which are both
natural, and supernatural, adscribing that to the divine soul, which only
belongs to the natural, and taking that from the natural, which properly
belongs to her. Besides, he slights and despises the Rational soul so, as if
she were almost of no value with Man, making her no substance, but a mental
intricate and obscure Being, and so far from Truth, as if there were no
affinity betwixt Truth and Reason, but that they disagree in their very roots,
and that the most refined Reason may be deceitful. But your Author, by his
leave, confounds Reason, and Reasoning, which are two several and distinct
things; for reasoning and arguing differs as much from Reason, as doubtfulness
from certainty of knowledge, or a wavering mind from a constant mind; for
Reasoning is the discoursive, and Reason the understanding part in Man, and
therefore I can find no great difference between Understanding and Reason:
Neither can I be persuaded, that Reason should not remain with Man after this
life, and enter with him into Heaven, although your Author speaks much against
it; for if Man shall be the same then, which he is now, in body, why not in
soul also? It Is true, the Scripture says, he shall have a more glorious body,
but it does not say, that some parts of the body shall be cast away, or remain
behind; and if not of the body, why of the soul? Why shall Reason, which is the
chief part of the natural Soul, be wanting? Your Author is much for Intellect
or Understanding; but I cannot imagine how Understanding can be without Reason.
Certainly, when he saw the Immortal Soul in a Vision, to be a formal Light, how
could he discern what he saw, without Reason? How could he distinguish between
Light and Darkness, without Reason? How could he know the Image of the Mind to
be the Image of God, without the distinguishment of Reason? You will say, Truth
informed him, and not Reason. I answer, Reason shows the Truth. You may reply,
Truth requires no distinguishment or judgment. I grant, that perfect Truth
requires not reasoning or arguing, as whether it be so, or not; but yet it
requires reason, as to confirm it to be so, or not so: for Reason is the
confirmation of Truth, and Reasoning is but the Inquisition into Truth:
Wherefore, when our Souls shall be in the fullness of blessedness, certainly,
they shall not be so dull and stupid, but observe distinctions between God,
Angels, and sanctified Souls; as also, that our glory is above our merit, and
that there is great difference between the Damned, and the Blessed, and that
God is an Eternal and Infinite Being, and only to be adored, admired, and
loved, and that we enjoy as much as can be enjoyed: All which the Soul cannot
know without the distinguishment of Reason; otherwise we might say, the Souls
in Heaven, love, joy, admire and adore, but know not what, why, or wherefore;
For, shall the blessed Souls present continual Praises without reason? Have
they not reason to praise God for their happiness, and shall they not remember
the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son? For without remembrance of them,
they cannot give a true acknowledgment, although your Author says there is no
use of Memory or remembrance in Heaven: but surely, I believe there is; for if
there were not memory in Heaven, the Penitent Thief upon the Cross his Prayers
had been in vain; for he desired our Savior to remember him when he did come
into his Kingdom: Wherefore if there be Understanding in Heaven, there is also
Reason; and if there be Reason, there is Memory also: for all Souls in Heaven,
as well as on Earth, have reason to adore, love, and praise God. But, Madam, my
study is in natural Philosophy, not in Theology; and therefore I Will refer you
to Divines, and leave your Author to his own fancy, who by his singular Visions
tells us more news of our Souls, then our Savior did after his Death and
Resurrection: Resting in the mean time,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVI.
MADAM,
COncerning those parts and chapters of your Authors Works, which treat of
Physic; before I begin to examine them, I beg leave of you in this present, to
make some reflections first upon his Opinions concerning the Nature of Health
and Diseases: As for Health, he is pleased to say, Chapter Called the Authors
answers.
That it consists not in a just Temperature of the body, but in a sound and
entire Life; for otherwise, a Temperature of body is as yet in a dead Carcass
newly killed, where notwithstanding there is now death, but not life, not
health: Also he says, Chapter Of the subject of inhering of diseases.
That no disease is in a dead Carcass. To which I answer, That, in my opinion,
Life is in a dead Carcass, as well as in a living Animal, although not such a
Life as that Creature had before it became a Carcass, and the Temperature of
that Creature is altered with the alteration of its particular life; for the
temperature of that particular life, which was before in the Animal, does not
remain in the Carcass, in such a manner as it was when it had the life of such
or such an Animal; nevertheless, a dead Carcass has life, and such a
temperature of life, as is proper, and belonging to its own figure: for there
are as many different lives, as there be different creatures, and each creature
has its particular life and soul, as partaking of sensitive and rational
Matter. And if a dead Carcass has life, and such a temperature of motions as
belong to its own life, then there is no question, but these motions may move
sometimes irregularly in a dead Carcass as well, as in any other Creature; and
since health and diseases are nothing else but the regularity or irregularity
of sensitive corporeal Motions, a dead Carcass having Irregular motions, may be
said as well to have diseases, as a living body, as they name it, although it
is no proper or usual term for other Creatures, but only for Animals. However,
if there were no such thing as a disease (or term it what you will, I will call
it Irregularity of sensitive motions) in a dead Carcass, How comes it that the
infection of a disease proceeds often from dead Carcasses into living Animals?
For, certainly, it is not merely the odor or stink of a dead body, for then
all stinking Carcasses would produce an Infection; wherefore this Infection
must necessarily be inherent in the Carcass, and proceed from the Irregularity
of its motions. Next I Will ask you, Whether a Consumption be a disease, or not?
If it be, then a dead Carcass might be said to have a disease, as well as a
living body; and the Egyptians knew a sovereign remedy against this disease,
which would keep a dead Carcass entire and undissolved many ages; but as I said
above, a dead Carcass is not that which it was being a living Animal, wherefore
their effects cannot be the same, having not the same causes. Next, your Author
is pleased to call, with Hippocrates, Nature the only Physicianess of
Diseases. I affirm it; and say moreover, that as she is the only Physicianess,
so she is also the only Destroyeress and Murtheress of all particular
Creatures, and their particular lives; for she dissolves and transforms as well
as she frames and creates; and acts according to her pleasure, either for the
increase or decrease, augmentation or destruction, sickness or health, life or
death of Particular Creatures. But concerning Diseases, your Authors opinion
is, That a Disease is as Natural as Health. I answer; it is true, Diseases are
natural; but if we could find out the art of healing, as well as the art of
killing and destroying; and the art of uniting and composing, as well as the
art of separating and dividing, it would be very beneficial to man; but this
may easier be wished for, then obtained; for Nature being a corporeal
substance, has infinite parts, as well as an infinite body; and Art, which is
only the playing action of Nature, and a particular Creature, can easier
divide and separate parts, then unite and make parts; for Art cannot match,
unite, and join parts so as Nature does; for Nature is not only dividable and
composeable, being a corporeal substance, but she is also full of curiosity and
variety, being partly self-moving: and there is great difference between forced
actions, and natural actions; for the one sort is regular, the other irregular.
But you may say, Irregularities are as natural as Regularities. I grant it; but
Nature leaves the irregular part most commonly to her daughter or creature Art,
that is, she makes irregularities for varieties sake, but she her self orders
the regular part, that is, she is more careful of her regular actions; and thus
Nature taking delight in variety suffers irregularities; for otherwise, if
there were only regularities, there could not be so much variety. Again your
Author says, That a disease does not consist but Chapter The subject of inhering of
diseases is in the point of life.
in living bodies. I answer, there is not any body that has not life; for if
life is general, then all figures or parts have life; but though all bodies
have life, yet all bodies have not diseases; for diseases are but accidental to
It. Chapter Of the knowledge of diseases.
bodies, and are nothing else but irregular motions in particular Creatures,
which may be not only in Animals, but generally in all Creatures; for there
may be Irregularities in all sorts of Creatures, which may cause untimely
dissolutions; but yet all dissolutions are not made by irregular motions, for
many creatures dissolve regularly, but only those which are untimely. In the
same place your Author mentions, That a Disease consists immediately in Life it
self, but not in the dregs and filthinesses, which are erroneous foreigners
and strangers to the life. I grant, that a Disease is made by the motions of
Life, but not such a life as your Author describes, which does go out like the
snuff of a Candle, or as one of Lucian's Poetical Lights; but by the life of
Nature, which cannot go out without the destruction of Infinite Nature: and as
the Motions of Nature's life make diseases or irregularities, so they make that
which man names dregs and filths; which dregs, filths, sickness, and death, are
nothing but changes of corporeal motions, different from those motions or
actions that are proper to the health, perfection and consistence of such or
such a figure or creature. But, to conclude, there is no such thing as
corruption, sickness, or death, properly in Nature, for they are made by
natural actions, and are only varieties in Nature, but not obstructions or
destructions of Nature, or annihilations of particular Creatures; and so is
that we name Superfluities, which bear only a relation to a particular
Creature, which has more Motion and Matter then is proper for the nature of
its figure. And thus much of this subject for the present, from,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXVII.
MADAM,
In my last, I remember, I told you of your Authors opinion concerning the seat
of Diseases, viz. that Diseases are properly in living bodies, and consist in
the life it self; but when I consider his definition of Life, and of a Disease,
I cannot conceive how they should consist together; for he describes Chapter Of the
knowledge of diseases.
a Disease to be a real, material and substantial being, truly subsisting in a
body; but life to be a mere nothing, and yet the immediate mansion of a
disease, the inward subject, yea, and workman of the same; and that with the
life all diseases depart into nothing. Surely, Madam, it exceeds my
understanding; for, first, I cannot conceive how life, which is a mere Nothing,
can be a lodging to something? Next, how Nothing can depart and die? and
thirdly how Something can become Nothing? I think your Author might call a dead
Carcass as well No-thing, as Life; and since he names Diseases the Thieves of
Life, they must needs be but poor Thieves, because they steal No-thing. But
your Author compares Life to Light, and calls it an Extinguishable Light, like
the light of a Candle; which if so, then the old saying is verified, That life
goes out like the snuff of a Candle. But I wonder, Madam, that grave and wise
men will seriously make use of a fimilifing old Proverb, or of a Poetical
Fancy, in matter of natural Philosophy; for I have observed, that Homer,
Lucian, Ovid, Virgil, Horace, etc. have been very ferviceable to great
Philosophers, who have taken the ground of their Fictions, and transferred them
into Natural Philosophy, as Immaterial substances, Non-beings, and many the
like; but they can neither do any good nor hurt to Nature, but only spoil
Philosophical Knowledge; and as Nature is ignorant of Immaterials and
Non-beings, so Art is ignorant of Nature; for Mathematical Rules, Measures, and
Demonstrations, cannot rule, measure nor demonstrate Nature, no more, then
Chemical Divisions, Dissolutions and Extractions (or rather distractions, nay,
I may say destructions) can divide, dissolve, extract, compose, and unite, as
Nature does; Wherefore their Instruments, Figures, Furnaces, Limbecks, and
Engines, cannot instruct them of the truth of Natures Principles; but the best
and readiest way to find out Nature, or rather some truth of Nature, is sense
and reason, which are Parts of Natures active substance, and therefore the
truest informers of Nature; but the Ignorance of Nature has caused Ignorance
amongst Philosophers, and the Ignorance of Philosophers has caused numerous
Opinions, and numerous Opinions have caused various Discourses and Disputes;
which Discourses and Disputes, are not Sense and Reason, but proceed from
Irregular Motions; and Truth is not found in Irregularities. But to return to
Life: it seems your Author has taken his opinion from Lucian's Kingdom of
Lights, the Lights being the Inhabitants thereof; and when any was adjudged to
die, his Light was put out, which was his punishment: And thus this Heathenish
Fiction is become a Christian Verity; when as yet your Author rayls much at
those, that insist upon the Opinions and Doctrine of Pagan Philosophers.
Wherefore I will leave this Poetical Fancy of Life, and turn to Death, and see
what opinion your Author has of that. First, concerning the cause or original
of Death; Neither God, says he Chapter Called the Position.
, nor the Evil Spirit, is the Creator of Death, but Man only, who made death
for himself; Neither did Nature make death, but Man made death natural. Which
if it be so, then Death being, to my opinion, a natural Creature, as well as
Life, Sickness, and Health; Man, certainly, had great Power, as to be the
Creator of a natural Creature. But, I would fain know the reason, why your
Author is so unwilling to make God the Author of Death, and Sickness, as well
as of Damnation? Does it imply any Impiety or Irreligiousness? Does not God
punish, as well as reward? and is not death a punishment for our sin? You may
say, Death came from sin, but sin did not come from God. Then some might ask
from whence came sin? You will say, From the Transgression of the Command of
God, as the eating of the Forbidden Fruit. But from whence came this
Transgression? It might be answered, From the Persuasion of the Serpent. From
whence came this Persuasion? From his ill and malicious nature to oppose God,
and ruin the race of Mankind. From whence came this ill Nature? From his Fall.
Whence came his Fall? From his Pride and Ambition to be equal with God. From
whence came this Pride? From his Free Will. From whence came his Free Will?
From God. Thus, Madam, if we should be too inquisitive into the actions of God,
we should commit Blasphemy, and make God Cruel, as to be the Cause of Sin, and
consequently of Damnation. But although God is not the Author of Sin, yet we
may not stick to say, that he is the Author of the Punishment of Sin, as an Act
of his Divine Justice; which Punishment, is Sickness, and Death; nay, I see no
reason, why not of Damnation too, as it is a due punishment for the sins of the
wicked; for though Man effectively works his own punishment, yet Gods Justice
inflicts it: Like as a just Judge may be called the cause of a Thief being
hanged. But these questions are too curious; and some men will be as
presumptuous as the Devil, to enquire into Gods secret actions, although they
be sure that they cannot be known by any Creature. Wherefore let us banish such
vain thoughts, and only admire, adore, love, and praise God, and implore his
Mercy, to give us grace to shun the punishments for our sins by the
righteousness of our actions, and not endeavor to know his secret designs.
Next, I dissent from your Author Chapter Of the knowledge of diseases.
, That Death and all dead things do want roots whereby they may produce: For
death, and dead things, in my opinion, are the most active producers, at least
they produce more numerously and variously then those we name living things;
for example, a dead Horse will produce more several Animals, besides other
Creatures, then a living Horse can do; but what Archeus and Ideas a dead
Carcass has, I can tell no more, then what Blas or Gas it has; only this I
say, that it has animate Matter, which is the only Archeus or Master-workman,
that produces all things, creates all things, dissolves all things, and
transforms all things in Nature; but not out of Nothing, or into Nothing, as to
create new Creatures which were not before in Nature, or to annihilate
Creatures, and to reduce them to nothing; but it creates and transforms out of,
and in the same Matter which has been from all Eternity. Lastly, your Author is
pleased to say, That he does not behold a disease as an abstracted Quality; and
that Apoplexy, Leprosy, Dropsy, and Madness, as they are Qualities in the
abstract, are not diseases. I am of his mind, that a disease is a real and
corporeal being, and do not understand what he and others mean by abstraoted
qualities; for Nature knows of no abstraction of qualities from substances, and
I doubt Man can do no more then Nature does: Besides, those abstractions are
needless, and to no purpose; for no Immaterial quality will do any hurt, if it
be no substance; wherefore Apoplexy, Leprosy, Dropsy, and Madness, are
Corporeal beings, as well as the rest of Diseases, and not abstracted
Qualities; and I am sure, Persons that are affected with those diseases will
tell the same. Wherefore leaving needless abstractions to fancies abstracted
from right sense and reason, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVIII.
MADAM,
I Am very much troubled to see your Authors Works filled with so many spiteful
reproaches and bitter taunts against the Schools of Physicians, condemning both
their Theory and Practice; nay, that not only the Modern Schools of
Physicians, but also the two ancient and famous Physicians, Galen, and
Paracelsus, must sufficiently suffer by him; especially Galen; for there is
hardly a Chapter in all his Works, which has not some accusations of blind
errors, sloth, and sluggishness, Ignorance, Covetousness, Cruelty, and the
like: Which I am very sorry for; not only for the sake of your Author himself,
who herein does betray both his rashness, and weakness, in not bridling his
passions, and his too great presumption, reliance and confidence in his own
abilities, and extraordinary Gifts; but also for the sake of the Fame and
Repute of our Modren Physicians; for without making now any difference betwixt
the Galenists and Paracelsians, and examining which are the best, (for I think
them both excellent in their kinds, especially when joined together) I will
only say this in general; that the Art of Physic has never flourished better
then now, neither has any age had more skilful, learned, and experienced
Physicians, then this present; because they have not only the knowledge and
practice of those in ages Past, but also their own experience joined with it,
which cannot but add perfection to their Art; and I, for my part, am so much
for the old way of Practice, that ifI should be sick, I would desire rather
such Physicians which follow the same way, then those, that by their new
Inventions, perchance, cure one, and kill a hundred. But your Author In his
Promises, Column. 3.
will have a Physician to be like a Handycrafts man, who being called to a
work, promises that work, and stands to his promise; and therefore, It is a
shame, says he, in a Physician, being called to a sick-man in the beginning of
the disease, and when his strength is yet remaining, to suffer the same man to
die. This, in my opinion, is a very unreasonable comparison, to liken a
Handicrafts man to a Physician, and the art of Curing to the art of Building,
or any the like, without regard of so many great differences that are between
them, which I am loath to rehearse, for brevities sake, and are apparent enough
to every one that will consider them: but this I may say, that it is not always
for want of skill and industry in a Physician, that the cure is not effected,
but it lies either in the Incureableness of the disease, or any other external
accidents that do hinder the success: Not but that the best Physicians may err
in a disease, or mistake the Patients inward distemper by his outward temper,
or the interior temper by his outward distemper, or any other ways; for they
may easily err through the variaction of the disease, which may vary so
suddenly and often, as it is impossible to apply so fast, and so many Medicines,
as the alteration requires, without certain death; for the body is not'able,
oftentimes, to dispose and digest several Medicines so fast, as the disease may
vary, and therefore what was good in this temper, may, perhaps, be bad in the
variation; insomuch, that one medicine may in a minute prove a Cordial, and
Poison. Nay, it may be that some Physicians do err through their own ignorance
and mistake, must we therefore condemn all the skill, and accuse all the
Schools of Negligence, Cruelty, and Ignorance? God forbid: for it would be a
great Injustice. Let us rather praise them for the good they do, and nor rashly
condemn them for the evil they could not help: For we may as well condemn those
holy and industrious Divines, that cannot reform wicked and perverse Sinners,
as Physicians, because they cannot restore every Patient to his former health,
the Profession of a Physician being very difficult; for they can have but
outward signs of inward distempers. Besides, all men are not diffected after
they are dead, to inform Physicians of the true cause of their death; nay, if
they were, perchance they would not give always a true information to the
Physician, as is evident by many examples; but oftentimes the blame is laid
upon the Physician, when as the fault is either in Nature, or any other cause,
which Art could not mend. And if your Author had had such an extraordinary Gift
from God as to know more then all the rest of Physicians, why did he not
accordingly, and as the Scripture speaks of Faith, show his skill by his Works
and Cures? certainly, could he have restored those that were born blind, lame,
deaf and dumb, or cured the spotted Plague, or Apoplexy after the third fit, or
the Consumption of Vital parts, or a Fever in the Arteries, or dissolved a
Stone too big to go through the passage, and many the like; he would not only
have been cried up for a rare Physician, but for a miracle of the World, and
worshipped as a Saint: But if he could not effect more then the Schools can do,
why does he inveigh so bitterly against them? Wherefore I cannot commend him in
so doing; but as I respect the Art of Physic, as a singular Gift from God to
Mankind, so I respect and esteem also learned and skilful Physicians, for their
various Knowledge, industrious Studies, careful Practice, and great Experiences,
and think every one is bound to do the like, they being the only supporters
and restorers of humane life and health: For though I must confess, with your
Author, that God is the only giver of Good, yet God is not pleased to work
Miracles ordinarily, but has ordained means for the restoring of health, which
the Art of Physic does apply; and therefore those Persons that are sick, do
wisely to send for a Physician; for Art, although it is but a particular
Creature, and the handmaid of Nature, yet she does Nature oftentimes very good
service; and so do Physicians often prolong their Patients lives. The like do
Surgeons; for if those Persons that have been wounded, had been left to be
cured only by the Magnetic Medicine, I believe, numbers that are alive would
have been dead, and numbers would die that are alive; insomuch, as none would
escape, but by miracle, epecially if dangerously hurt. Concerning the
Coveteousness of Physicians, although sickness is chargeable, yet I think it is
not Charitable to say or to think, that Physicians regard more their Profit,
then their Patients health; for we might as well condemn Divines for taking
their Tithes and Stipends, as Physicians for taking their Fees: but the holy
Writ tells us, that a Labourer is Worthy of his hire or reward; and, for my
part, I think those commit a great sin, which repine at giving Rowards in any
kind; for those that deserve well by their endeavors, ought to have their
rewards; and such Meritorious Persons, I wish with all my Soul, may prosper and
thrive. Nevertheless, as for those persons, which for want of means are not
able to reward their Physicians, I think Physicians will not deal so
unconscionably, as to neglect their health and lives for want of their Fees,
but expect the reward from God, and be recompensed the better by those that
have Wealth enough to spare. And this good opinion I have of them. So leaving
them, I rest,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XXIX.
MADAM,
I Am of your Authors mind, That heat is not the cause of digestion; but I
dissent from him, when he says, That it is the Ferment of the stomach that does
cause it: For, in my opinion, Digestion is only made by regular digestive
motions, and ill digestion is caused by irregular motions, and when those
motions are weak, then there is no digestion at all, but what was received,
remains unaltered; but when they are strong and quick, then they make a speedy
digestion. You may ask me, what are digestive motions? I answer, They are
transchanging, or transforming motions: but since there be many sorts of
transchanging motions, digestive motions are those, which transchange food into
the nourishment of the body, and dispose properly, fitly and usefully of all
the Parts of the food, as well of those which are converted into nourishment,
as of those which are cast forth. For give me leave to tell you, Madam, that
some parts of natural Matter, do force or cause other parts of Matter to move
and work according to their will, without any change or alteration of their
parts; as for example, Fire and Metal; for Fire will cause Metal to flow, but
it does not readily alter it from its nature of being Metal; neither does Fire
alter its nature from being Fire. And again, some parts of Matter will cause
other parts to work and act to their own will, by forcing these over-powred
parts to alter their own natural motions into the motions of the victorious
Party, and so transforming them wholly into their own Figure; as for example,
Fire will cause Wood to move so as to take its figure, to wit, the figure of
Fire, that is, to change its own figurative motions into the motions of Fire:
and this latter kind of moving or working is found in digestion; for the
regular digestive motions do turn all food received from its own nature or
figure, into the nourishment, figure, or nature of the body, as into flesh,
blood, bones, and the like. But when several parts of Matter meet or join with
equal force and power, then their several natural motions are either quite
altered, or partly mixed: As for example; some received things not agreeing with
the natural constitution of the body, the corporeal motions of the received,
and those of the receiver, do dispute or oppose each other: for the motions of
the received, not willing to change their nature conformable to the desire of
the digestive motions, do resist, and then a War begins, whereby the body
suffers most; for it causes either a sickness in the stomach, or a pain in the
head, or in the heart, or in the bowels, or the like: Nay, if the received food
gets an absolute victory, it dissolves and alters oftentimes the whole body, it
self remaining entire and unaltered, as is evident in those that die of
surfeits. But most commonly these strifes and quarrels, if violent, do alter
and dissolve each others forms or natures. And many times it is not the fault
of the Received, but of the Receiver; as for example, when the digestive and
transforming motions are either irregular, or weak; for they being too weak, or
too few, the meat or food received is digested only by halves; and being
irregular, it causes that which we call corruption. But it may be observed,
that the Received food is either agreeable, or disagreeable, to the Receiver;
if agreeable, then there is a united consent of Parts, to act regularly and
perfectly in digestion; if disagreeable, then the Received acts to the Ruin,
that is, to the alteration or dissolution of the Nature of the Receiver; but if
it be neutral, that is, neither perfectly agreeable, nor perfectly
disagreeable, but between both, then the receiver, or rather the digestive
Motions of the receiver, use a double strength to alter and transform the
received. But you may ask me, Madam, what the reason is, that many things
received, after they are dissolved into small parts, those parts will keep
their former color and savor? I answer; The cause is, that either the
retentive Motions in the Parts of the received, are too strong for the
digestive and alterative Motions of the receiver, or perchance, this color and
savor is so proper to them, as not to be transchanged: but you must observe,
that those digestive, alterative and transchanging motions, do not act or move
all after one and the same manner; for some do dissolve the natural figure of
the received, some disperse its dissolved parts into the parts of the body,
some place the dispersed parts fitly and properly for the use, benefit, and
consistence of the body; for there is so much variety in this one act of
digestion, as no man is able to conceive; and if there be such variety in one
Particular natural action, what variety will there not be in all Nature?
Wherefore, it is not, as I mentioned in the beginning, either Ferment, or Heat,
or any other thing, that causes digestion; for if all the constitution and
nature of our body was grounded or did depend upon Ferment, then Brewers and
Bakers, and those that deal with Ferments, would be the best Physicians. But I
would fain know the cause which makes Ferment? You may say, saltness, and
sowreness. But then I ask, From whence comes saltness and sowreness? You may
say, From the Ferment. But then I shall be as wise as before. The best way,
perhaps, may be to say, with your Author, that Ferment is a Primitive Cause,
and a beginning or Principle of other things, and it self proceeds from
nothing. But then it is beyond my imagination, how that can be a Principle of
material things, which it self is nothing; that is, neither a substance, nor an
accident. Good Lord! what a stir do men make about nothing! I am amazed to see
their strange Fancies and Conceptions vented for the Truest Reasons: Wherefore
I will return to my simple opinion; and as I cannot conceive any thing that is
beyond Matter, or a Body; so I believe, according to my reason, that there is
not any part in Nature, be it never so subtle or small, but is a self-moving
substance, or endued with selfmotion; and according to the regularity and
irregularity of these motions, all natural effects are produced, either
perfect, or imperfect; timely births, or untimely and monstrous births; death,
health, and diseases, good and ill dispositions, natural and extravagant
Appetites and Passions, (I say natural, that is, according to the nature of
their figures;) Sympathy and Antipathy, Peace and War, Rational and
Fantastical opinions. Nevertheless, all these motions, whether regular or
irregular, are natural; for regularity and irregularity has but a respect to
particulars, and to our conceptions, because those motions which move not after
the ordinary, common or usual way or manner, we call Irregular. But the
curiosity and variety in Nature is unconceiveable by any particular Creature;
and so leaving it, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXX
MADAM,
YOur Author says Chapter Of a Six-fold digestion.
, it is an ancient Truth, That whatsoever things, meats being digested and cast
out by vomit, are of a sour taste and smell, yea, although they were seasoned
with much sugar. But I do not assent to this opinion; for I think that some
Vomits have no more taste then pure Water has. Neither am I of his mind, That
Digestion is hastened by sharpness or tartness: For do but try it by one simple
experiment; take any kind of flesh-meat, boil or stew it with Vinegar, or sour
wine, or with much salt; and you will find, that it does require a longer time,
or rather more motions to dissolve, then if you boil it in fair water, without
such ingredients as are sour, sharp, or salt; also if you do but observe, you
will find the dregs more sandy, stony and hard, being dressed with much salt, and
sharp wine, or vinegar, then when they are not mixed with such contracting and
fixing Ingredients? Wherefore, if the Ferment of the stomach has such a
restringent and contracting quality, certainly digestions will be but slow and
unprofitable; but Nature requires expulsion as much as attraction, and dilation
as much as contraction, and digestion is a kind of dilation. Wherefore, in my
judgment, contracting tartness and sharpness does rather hinder digestion then
further it. Next I perceive, your Author inclines to the opinion, That Choler
is not made by meat See The passive deceiving of the Schools, the humorists, C.
I.
: But I would ask him, whether any humor be made ofmeat, or whether blood;
flesh, etc. are made and nourished by meat? If they be not, then my answer is,
That we eat to no purpose; but if they be, then Choler is made so too. But if
he says, That sorne are made, and some not; then I would ask, what that humor
is made of, that is not made by meat or food received into the body? But we
find that humors, blood, flesh, etc. will be sometimes more, sometimes less,
according either to feeding, or to digestion, which digestion is a contribution
of food to every several part of the body for its nourishment; and when there
is a decay ofthose parts, then it is caused either by fasting, or by irregular
digestion, or by extraordinary evacuation, or by distempered matter, etc. all
which, causes sickness, paleness, leanness; weakness, and the like. Again: your
Author is against the opinion of the Schools, That the Gall is a receptacle of
superfluous humors and dregs: for he says, it has rather the constitution of a
necessary and vital bowel, and is the balsom of the liver and blood. Truly, it
may be so, for any thing I know, or it may be not; for your Author could but
guess, not assuredly know, unless he had been in a man as big as the Whale in
whose belly Jonas was three days, and had observed the interior parts and
motions of every part for three years time, and yet he might perchance have
been as ignorant at the coming forth, as if he never had been there; for
Natures actions are not only curious, but very various; and not only various,
but very obscure; in so much, as the most ingenious Artists cannot trace her
ways, or imitate her actions; for Art being but a Creature, can do or know no
more then a Creature; and although she is an ingenious Creature, which can and
has found out some things profitable and useful for the life of others, yet
she is but a handmaid to Nature, and not her Mistress; which your Author, in my
opinion, too rashly affirms, when he says, That the Art of Chemistry is not
only the Chambermaid and emulating Ape, but now and Chapter Heat does not digest
efficiently.
then the Mistress of Nature: For Art is an effect of Nature, and to prefer the
effect before the cause, is absurd. But concerning Chemistry, I have spoken in
another place; I Will return to my former Discourse: and I wonder much why your
Author is so opposite to the Schools, concerning the doctrine of the Gall's
being a receptacle for superfluities and dregs; for I think there is not any
Creature that has not places or receptacles for superfluous matter, such as we
call dregs; for even the purest and hardest Mineral, as Gold, has its dross,
although in a less proportion then some other Creatures; nay, I am persuaded,
that even Light, which your Author does so much worship, may have some
superfluous matter, which may be named dregs; and since Nature has made parts
in all Creatures to receive and discharge superfluous matter, (which receiving
and discharging is nothing else but a joining and dividing of parts to and from
parts,) why may not the Gall be as well for that use as any other part? But I
pray mistake me not, when I say superfluous matter or dregs; for I understand
by it, that which is not useful to the nourishment or confistence of such or
such a Creature; but to speak properly, there is neither superfluity of matter
nor dregs in Nature. Moreover, your Author mentions a six-fold digestion, and
makes every digestion to be performed by inbreathing or inspiration; For in the
first digestion, he says, The spleen does inspire a sour Ferment into the
Meat: In the second, The Gall does inspire a ferment, or fermental blas into
the slender entrails: In the third, The Liver does inspire a bloody ferment
into the veins of the Mensentery, etc. I answer, first, I am confident Nature
has more ways then to work only by Inspirations, not only in General, but in
every Particular. Next, I believe there are not only six, but many more
digestions in an animal Creature; for not only every sort of food, but every
bit that is eaten, may require a several digestion, and every several part of
the body works either to expel, or preserve, or for both; so that there are
numerous several Motions in every Creature, and many changes of motions in each
particular part; but Nature is in them all. And so leaving her, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXI.
MADAM,
YOur Author, in opposition to the Schools, endeavoring to prove that there
are no humors in an animal body, except blood, proves many humors in himself.
But I can see no reason, why Nature should not make several humors, as well as
several Elements, Vegetables, Minerals, Animals, and other Creatures; and that
in several parts of the body, and many several ways; for to mention but one
sort of other Creatures, viz. Vegetables, they are, as we see, not only
produced many several ways, but in many several grounds; either by sowing,
setting, or grafting, either in clayie, limy, sandy, chalky, dry, or wet
grounds: And why may not several humors be produced as well of other Creatures
and parts, as others are produced of them? for all parts of Nature are produced
one from another, as being all of one and the same Matter, only the variation
of corporeal motions makes all the difference and variety between them, which
variety of motions is impossible to be known by any particular Creature; for
Nature can do more then any Creature can conceive. Truly, Madam, I should not
be of such a mind, as to oppose the Schools herein so eargerly as your Author
does; but artificial actions make men to have erroneous opinions of the actions
of Nature, judging them all according to the rule and measure of Art, when as
Art often deludes men under the cover of truth, and makes them many times believe
falsehood for truth; for Nature is pleased with variety, and so does make
numerous absurdities, doubts, opinions, disputations, objections, and the like.
Moreover, your Author is as much against the radical moisture, as he is against
the four humors; saying, that according to this opinion of the Schools, a fat
belly, through much grease affording more fuel to the radical moisture, must of
necessity live longer. But this, in my opinion, is only a wilful mistake; for
I am confident, that the Schools do not understand radical moisture to be
gross, fat radical oil, but a thin oily substance. Neither do they believe
radical heat to be a burning, fiery and consuming heat, but such a degree of
natural heat, as is comfortable, nourishing, refreshing, and proper for the
life of the animal Creature: Wherefore radical heat and moisture does not only
consist in the Grease of the body; for a lean body may have as much, and some
of them more Radical moisture, then fat bodies. But your Author instead of this
radical moisture, makes a nourishable moisture, only, as I suppose, out of a
mind to contradict the Schools; when as I do not perceive, that the Schools
mean by Radical moisture, any other then a nourishable moisture, and therefore
this distinction is needless. Lastly, he condemns the Schools, for making an
affinity betwixt the bowels and the brain. But he might as will condemn
Politicians, for saying there is an affinity betwixt Governors and Subjects, or
betwixt command and obedience; but as the actions of Particulars, even from the
meanest in a Commonwealth, may chance to make a Public disturbance, so
likewise in the Commonwealth of the body, one single action in a particular
part may cause a disturbance of the whole Body, nay, a total ruin and
dissolution of the composed; which dissolution is called Death; and yet these
causes are neither Light, nor Blas, nor Gas, no more then men are shining Suns,
or flaming Torches, or blazing Meteors, or azure Skies. Wherefore leaving your
Author to his contradicting humor, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXII.
MADAM,
I Do verily believe, with the Schools, the Purging of the Brain, against your
Author; Chapter Called The Erring Watchman, or Wandering Keeper.
For I know no reason, why all the parts of a man's body should not stand in
need of evacuation and purging, as well as some. It Is true, if the substance or
nourishment received were all useful, and only enough for the maintenance,
subsistence and continuance of the Creature, and no more, then there would be
no need of such sort of evacuation; but I believe the corporeal self-motions in
a body, discharge the superfluous matter out of every part of the body, if the
motions of the superfluous matter be not too strong, and overpower the motions
in the parts of the body; but some parts do produce more superfluities then
others, by reason their property is more to dilate, then to contract, and more
to attract, then to retain or fix; which parts are the brain, stomach, bowels,
bladder, gall, and the like: wherefore, as there is nourishment in all parts of
the body, so there are also excrements in all parts, for there is no
nourishment without excrement. Next your Author says, That the nourishment of
the solid parts is made with the transmutation of the whole venal blood into
nourishment, without a separation of the pure from the impure. But I pray give
me leave to ask, Madam, whether the solid Parts are not Instruments for the
nourishment of the Venal blood? Truly, I cannot conceive, how blood should be
nourished, wanting those solid parts, and their particular motions and
employments. Again: his opinion is, That the brain is nourished by a few and
slender veins; neither does a passage or channel appear whereby a moist
excrement may derive, or a vapor enter. And by reason of the want of such a
passage, in another place Chapter called The Spirit of Life.
he is pleased to affirm, That nothing can fume up from the stomach into the
brain, and therefore Wine does not make drunk with fuming from the stomach into
the head, but the Winie spirit is immediately snatched into the arteries out of
the stomach without digestion, and so into the head, and there breeds a
confusion. First, I am not of the opinion, that all nourishment comes from the
veins, or from one particular part of the body, no more do Excrements; neither
do I believe that every passage in the body is visible to Anatomists, for
Natures works are too curious and intricate for any particular Creature to find
them out, which is the cause that Anatomists and Chemists are so often mistaken
in natural causes and effects; for certainly, they sometimes believe great
Errors for great Truths. Next, as for Drunkenness, I believe that many, who
drink much Wine, are drunk before such time as the Wine spirit can get into the
Arteries; but if there be Pores to the Brain, as it is most probable, the
spirit of Wine may more easily ascend and enter those Pores, then the Pores of
the Arteries, or the Mouth-veins, and so make a circular journey to the Head.
But as for Excrements, whereof I spoke in the beginning, as they are made
several manners or ways, and in several parts of the body, so they are also
discharged several ways from several parts, and several ways from each
particular part, indeed so many several ways and manners, as would puzzle the
wisest man in the world, nay your Authors Interior keeper of the Brain, to find
them out. Wherefore, to conclude, he is the best Physician, that can tell how
to discharge superfluity, and to retain useful nourishments; or to restore by
the application of proper Medicines, decaying parts, or to put in order
Irregular motions; and not those that have Irregular opinions of Immaterial
causes: To which, I leave them, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXIII.
MADAM,
I Do not approve of your Authors Doctrine, forbidding Phlebotomy or
blood-letting in Fevers, opposite to the received Practice of the Schools; his
reason is, that he believes there can be no corruption in the blood. Corrupted
blood, says he, cannot be in the veins, neither does a state of ill juice
consist in the veins; for In his Treatise of Fevers, c. 4.
Gangrenes do teach, that nothing of Putrified matter can long persist without
a further contagion of it self. Also he says, That the blood of the veins is no
otherwise distinguished by its several colors and signs, then as wine is
troubled when the vine flourishes. To which I answer, first, That I can see no
reason why there should not be as well corrupt blood, or an ill state of juice
in the veins, as ill humors in the body. Perchance he will say, There is no
corruption in the body. But Ulcers do teach the contrary. He may reply, Ulcers
are not parts of the body. I answer, T is true; but yet they are evil
Inhabitants in the body, and the like may be in the Veins. But surely some men
may have corrupted parts of their bodies, and yet live a great while; witness
Ulcers in the Lungs, and other parts. But your Author may say, When a part of
the body is corrupted, it is no longer an animal Part. I grant it: but yet, as
I said, that transformed part may remain in the body some time without
destruction of the whole body; and so likewise, when some of the blood, is
transchanged from being blood, so as not to be capable to be reduced again, it
may nevertheless remain in the veins without destruction of the veins, or of
the whole body: Neither do I conceive any reason, why corrupt blood should
Gangrene in the veins, and infect the adjoining parts more then corrupted lungs
do. Next, as for the comparison of the various colors and signs of the blood,
with Wine being troubled when the Vine is flourishing; I answer, That it does
not prove any thing; for we speak of such colors, as are signs of corrupted,
and not such as are signs of troubled blood: Besides, it is an unlike
comparison; for though Wine may become thick by much fermentation, yet it does
not turn into water, as blood in some sick and diseased persons will do. But
corrupted blood may be, not only in the veins of sick, but also of healthy
persons; and the story says, that Seneca, when his veins were cut, they would
not bleed, although in a hot Bath, by reason that which was in the veins, was
rather like a white jelly, then blood, and yet he was healthy, though old;
which proves, that it is not necessary for the blood to be so pure and fluid as
your Author will have it. The truth is, the more fluid the blood is, the weaker
it is; like balsam, the more gummy it is, the stronger it is: but veins, which
are the mouth, to receive or suck in juices, as also the stomach which digests
the meat that after is turned into blood, may be defective either through
weakness, superfluity, obstruction, corruption, or evil and hurtful diet, or
through the disorders of other particular parts, which may disturb all the
parts in general, as skilful Physicians have observed, and therefore apply
remedies accordingly; for if the defect proceeds from weakness, they give
strengthening remedies; if from superfluities, they give evacuating remedies;
if from evil diets, they prescribe such a course of diet as shall be
beneficial, and conducing for the restoring of health to the whole body. But
your Author, as I perceive, believes the blood to be the chief vital part of
the body; which surely it is not: for if it were, the least disturbance of the
blood would endanger the life of the whole body, and the least diminution would
cause a total dissolution of that animal Creature which has blood: Not but that
blood is as necessary as breath for respiration, and food for nourishment of
the body; but too much blood is as dangerous to the life of the animal body, as
too great a piece of food, which cannot be swallowed down, bu^ does stick in
the throat, and stop the breath, or so much quantity as cannot be digested; for
too great a fullness or abounding makes a stoppage of the blood, or which is
worse, causes the veins to break, and an evil digestion, makes a corruption, or
at least such disorder as to endanger the whole animal Figure. But some veins
breed more blood, and some less, and some better, and some worse blood, some
hotter, and some colder, some grosser, and some purer, some thicker, and some
thinner; and some veins breed rather an evil juice or corrupt matter then pure
blood; the truth is, blood is bred somewhat after the manner of Excrements, for
the veins are somewhat like the guts, wherein the excrements are digested. But
you will say, A man may live without excrements, but not without blood. I
answer: a man can live no more without excrements and excremental humors, then
he can without blood: but yet I am not of your Authors mind, that bleeding and
purging are destructive; for superfluities are as dangerous as scarcities, nay
more; like as an house filled with rubbish is in more danger to sink or fall,
then that which is empty; and when a house is on fire, it is wisdom to take out
the Movables, but a folly to let them increase the flame. But your Author
says, Blood-letting takes not only away the bad, but also the good blood, by
which it diminishes and impairs much the strength of the body. I will answer by
way of question, Whether in War men would not venture the loss of some few
friends, to gain the victory, or save the whole body of the Army? or whether
the destroying of the enemies Army be not more advantageous, then the loss of
some few friends? For although some good blood may issue out with the bad, yet
the veins have more time, room, and some more power to get friendly juices from
the several parts of the body, which will be more obedient, trusty, and true to
the life and service of the whole body. But neither Fevers, nor any other
distempers, will be more afraid of your Authors words, Stones, Spirits, as also
Rings, Beads, Bracelets, and the like toys, fitter for Children to play withal,
then for Physicians to use; then an Army of men will be of their enemies
Colors, Ensigns, Feathers, Scarfs, and the like; knowing it must be Swords,
Pistols, Guns, Powder and Bullets, that must do the business to destroy the
enemy, and to gain the victory: Wherefore in Diseases it must be Bleeding,
Purging, Vomiting, using of Clysters, and the like, if any good shall be done.
It Is true, they must well be ordered, otherwise they will do more hurt then
good; for Diseases are like Enemies, which sometimes take away our Arms for
their own uses. But your Author says again, That the Matter of a Fever floats
not in the veins, nor sits nigh the heart. I answer: There are several sorts of
Fevers; for all Fevers are not produced after one and the same manner, or from
one and the same cause, as is very well known to wise and experienced
Physicians; but although some Fevers are not in the blood, yet that does not
prove, that the blood is never in a Fever; for sometimes the blood is in a
Fever, and not the solid parts; and sometimes the fluid and moveable humors,
and not the blood, or solid parts; and sometimes the solid parts, and not the
blood, nor the liquid and moveable humors; and sometimes they are all in a
Fever; and sometimes only the radical parts, and neither the blood, humors,
nor solid parts: and this last kind of Fever, which is a hectic Fever, in my
opinion, is incureable; but the others may be cureable, if there be not too
many varieties of distempers, or irregular motions. And as for a Fever in the
solid parts, Letting of blood, and taking away the humor, may cure it; for the
veins being empty, suck the heat out of the solid parts, which solid parts
cannot draw out a distempered heat in the veins, and the opening of the veins
gives vent to some of the interior heat to issue forth: Wherefore it is very
requisite, that in all sorts of Fevers, except Hectick-Fevers, blood-letting
should be used, not only once, but often; for it is better to live with a
little blood, and a little strength, which will soon be recovered, then to die
with too much, or too hot and distempered blood. Also Purging, but especially
Vomiting is very good; for if the humors be in a Fever, they may infect the
vital parts, as also the blood; but if they be not in a Fever, yet the solid
parts or blood may do the same, and so make the contagion greater; for the
humors are as the movables in a house, which ought to be cast out if either
they or the house should be on fire; and if a disorder proceeds from the error
of a particular part, then care must be taken to rectify that part for the
health of the whole: Wherefore Physicians use in some cases Blood-letting, in
some Purging, in some Vomiting, in some Bathing, in some Sweating, in some
Cordials, especially after much evacuation, in some they prescribe a good diet,
and in some they mix and prescribe partly one and partly the other, and in some
cases they are forced to use all these remedies; for though great evacuations
may cause weakness, yet they often save the life; and there is no Patient, but
had rather lose some strength, then life; for life can gather strength again;
but all strong men are not always long lived, nor all long-lived men very
strong; for many that are but weak, will live to a very old age. Lastly,
concerning what your Author says, that there is but one Choler and Phlegm in
Nature; I answer, That is more then he knows: for all that is in Nature, is not
nor cannot be known by any Particular Creature; and he might say, as well, the
same of particular Metals, as that there is but one sort of Gold or Silver,
when as there is great difference in the weight, purity, color, and gloss, of
several parts of Gold and Silver: Neither is all Gold found in one place; but
some is found in Rocks, some in Sand, some in Mines, some in Stones; and so
Silver, some is found in the bowels of the Earth, some in the veins of Stones,
and some in other Metals, as Lead, and Iron, and some in Coals. And the like
may be said of Choler and Phlegm; for they may be several in several places or
parts of the body, and be of different colors, tastes, odours, and degrees of
heat or cold, thinness or thickness, or the like; for though there is but one
Matter in Nature, yet this only Matter by its several actions or motions
changes into several figures, and so makes several sorts of Creatures, and
different particulars in every sort. And thus, Madam, I have delivered unto you
my opinion concerning the cure of Fevers by Blood-letting: Which I submit to
the correction of your better judgment, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIV.
MADAM,
YOur Author is not only against Phlebotomy or Blood-letting, but against all
Purging Medicines, which he condemns to carry a hidden poison in them, and to
be a cruel and stupid invention. But certainly he shall not have my assent; for
if they be Poison, they are a very beneficial Poison; and Physical Purgations,
in my opinion, are very necessary and profitable for the prolonging of life,
and taking away of diseases, provided they be proper for those diseases in
which they are used; and so is Phlebotomy, Vomits, and the like: but Medicines
are often wrong applied, and many times the disease is so various, that it is
as hard for a Physician to hit right with several Medicines, as for a Gunner or
Shooter to kill with Powder and small Shot a Bird flying in the Air; not that
it is not possible to be done, but it is not ordinary, or frequent: neither
does the fault only lie in the Gun, Powder, or Shot, but in the swiftness of
the flight of the Bird, or in the various motion of the air, or in a sudden
wind, or mist, or the like; for the same Gunner may perhaps easily kill a Bird
sitting in a bush, or hopping upon the ground. The like may be said of
Diseases, Physicians, and Medicines; for some diseases have such sudden
alterations, by the sudden changes of motions, that a wise Physician will not,
nor cannot venture to apply so many several medicines so suddenly as the
alteration requires; and shall therefore Physicians be condemned? and not only
condemned for what cannot be helped by reason of the variety of irregular
motions, but what cannot be helped in Nature? For some diseases are so deadly,
as no art can cure them, when as otherwise Physicians with good and proper
medicines, have, and do as yet rescue more people from death, then the Laws do
from ruin. Nay, I have known many that have been great enemies to Physic, die
in the flower of their age, when as others which used themselves to Physic,
have lived a very long time. But you may say, Country People and Laborers,
take little or no Physic, and yet grow most commonly old, whereas on the
contrary, Great and rich Persons take much Physic, and do not live so long as
the common sort of men does. I answer: It is to be observed, first, that there
are more Commons, then Nobles, or Great and rich persons; and there is not so
much notice taken of the death of a mean, as of a noble, great, or rich person;
so that for want of information or knowledge, one may easily be deceived in the
number of each sort of persons. Next, the Vulgar sort use laborious exercises,
and spare diet; when as noble and rich persons are most commonly lazy and
luxurious, which breeds superfluities of humors, and these again breed many
distempers: For example, you shall find few poor men troubled with the Gout,
Stone, Pox, and the like diseases, nor their Children with Rickets; for all
this comes by luxury, and no doubt but all other diseases are sooner bred with
luxury, then temperance; but whatsoever is superfluous, may, if not be taken
away, yet mediated with lenitive and laxative medicines. But as for Physicians,
surely never age knew any better, in my opinion, then this present, and yet
most of them follow the rules of the Schools, which are such as have been
grounded upon Reason, Practice, and Experience, for many ages: Wherefore those
that will wander from the Schools, and follow new and unknown ways, are, in my
opinion, not Orthodoxes, but Heretics in the Art of Physic. But to return to
your Author, give me leave, Madam, to consider what his opinions are concerning
the Purging of Choler; Come on, says he to the Schools In his Treatise of
Fevers, c. 5.
, Why does that, your Choler following with so swift an efflux, stink so
horribly, which but for one quarter of an hour before did not stink? To which
it may be answered, That though humors may not stink in themselves, yet the
excrements mixed with the humors may stink; also the very passing through the
excrements will cause a strong savor. But your Author thinks, That by passing
through so suddenly, the humors cannot borrow such a smell of stinking dung
from the Intestines. Truly, it is easily said, but hardly proved, and the
contrary is manifest by putting clear, pure water into a stinking vessel, which
straightway is corrupted with an ill smell. He talks also of Vitriol dissolved
in Wine, which if it be taken, presently provokes vomit; but if after drinking
it, any one shall drink thereupon a draught of Ale or Beer, or Water, etc. he
indeed shall suffer many stools, yet wholly without stink. I answer: This
expresses Vitriol to be more poisonous, by taking away the natural savor of
the bowels, then Scammony, Coloquintida, Manna, Cassia, Sena, Rhubarb, etc. to
all which your Author is a great enemy; and it is well known to experienced
Physicians, that Medicines prepared by the art of fire are more poisonous and
dangerous then natural drugs; nay, I dare say, that many Chemical Medicines,
which are thought to be Cordials, and have been given to Patients for that
purpose, have proved more poisonous then any Purging Physic. Again your Author
says, It is worthy of Lamentation, that Physicians would have loosening things
draw out one humor, and not another, by selection or choice. My answer is, That
natural drugs and simples are as wise in their several operations, as Chemists
in their artificial distillations, extractions, sublimations, and the like; but
it has long been observed by Physicians, that one simple will work more upon
one part of the body, then upon another; the like may be said of humors. But
give me leave to tell you, Madam, that if your Author believes magnetic or
attractive cures (as he does, and in whose behalf he makes very long
discourses) he does in this opinion contradict himself. He may say, perhaps,
There is no such thing as what Physicians name humors. But grant there be none,
yet he cannot deny that there are offensive juices, or moveable substances made
by evil, as irregular digestions, which may be troublesome and hurtful to the
nature of the body. Or perchance he will say, There are such humors, but they
are beneficial and not offensive to the nature of the body. I answer: Then he
must make an agreement with every part of the body, not to make more of these
humors then is useful for the body. Also he mentions some few that took Purging
Physic, and died. Truly so they might have done without taking it: but he does
not tell, how many have died for want of proper and timely Purges. In truth,
Madam, it is an easy thing to find fault, but not so easy to mend it. And as
for what he speaks of the weighing of those humors and excrements, which by
purging were brought out of some Princes body, and how much by the Schools
rules remained, and of the place which should maintain the remainder; I only
say this, that all the several sorts of juices, humors, or moveable substances
in a body, do not lie in one place, but are dispersed, and spread all about and
in several parts and places in the body; so that the several Laxative medicines
do but draw them together, or open several parts, that they may have freedom to
travel with their chief Commanders, which are the Purging medicines. But your
Author says, the Loadstone does not draw rust. And I say, no more do Purging
drugs draw out pure Matter: for it may be as natural for such medicines to draw
or work only upon superfluities, that is, corrupted, or evil-affected humors,
juices or moveable substances, as for the Loadstone to draw Iron; and so it may
be the property of Purges to draw only the rust of the body, and not the pure
metal, which are good humors. But few do consider or observe sufficiently the
variety of Natures actions, and the motions of particular natural Creatures,
which is the cause they have no better success in their cures. And so leaving
them to a more diligent inquisition and search into Nature, and her actions, I
rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXV.
MADAM,
I Find your Author to be as great an enemy to Issues, Cauteries, Clysters, and
the like, as he is to Bloodletting and Purging; especially to Issues, which he
counts to be blasphemous against the Creator, and blames much the Schools for
prescribing them. But concerning Blood-letting and Purging, I have declared my
opinion in my former Letters; and if you desire my judgment of Clysters and
Issues, I must needs tell you, that it is well known these many ages, that in
such diseases which lie in the guts, and cause pain in the head, and stop the
ureteres, Clysters have been very beneficial, but wise Physicians do not
prescribe them, unless upon necessity: As for example; if the disease in the
Guts proceed from cold or wind, they prescribe a Sack-Clyster, with oil of
Walnuts; and if the disease in the guts proceed from a sharp or bitter humor,
then they prescribe Milk, or Posset, sweetened with Sugar: the same if the guts
be too full of excrements or slime. But in case of diseases in the head or
stomach, they prescribe attractive Clysters, to wit, such as draw down from the
upper into the lower parts, wherein the Physical drugs are; and if the guts be
too dry, or dryer then their nature requires, they prescribe moistening
Clysters, such as have not only wetting, but slimy qualities. And surely
Clysters properly and timely applied, are a safe, speedy, easy and profitable
medicine, and far more safe then Chemical Salts, Tartars, Spirits, or the like.
Next concerning Issues and Cauteries, your Author, I say, is so much against
them, as he counts them a blasphemy; for says he Of Cauteries.
, I have beheld always an implicit blasphemy in a Cautery, whereby they openly
accuse the Creator of insufficiency in framing the emunctories; for I have
bidden above a thousand Issues to be filled up with flesh. Also, That which God
has made whole and entire, that it might be very good, seems to the Schools,
that it should be better if it be kept wounded. Truly, Madam, in my opinion, it
is no blasphemy at all, neither directly nor indirectly, to make Issues, but a
mere superstition to believe the contrary, viz. that they are blasphemy, and a
great folly not to make them when need requires it to the preservation of ones
health. God has made our body whole and entire, says your Author: by which he
will prove that no holes must be made in the body to let out excrementious
matter, and therefore he thinks that body to be whole and entire which is
without an Issue, when as yet our bodies have numerousissues, which are the
pores of the skin, to let out sweat; and therefore if he counts that body not
to be whole and entire that has issues, then no humane body is entire.
Certainly, no Artificial Issue will make the body maimed, but it will
nevertheless continue whole and entire although it has Issues. He says it is
Blasphemy; But how will he prove it? Surely not by the Scripture; and if not by
the Scripture, then it is a blasphemy according to his own brain and fancy.
It Is true, God gave no express Command to make Issues; but according to your
Author, God did never create Diseases, and so there was no need either to make
such Issues in bodies as to let out distempered Matter, or to give any command
for them; but we might as well say, we must not use any Physic, because it is
not so natural to man as food, and serves not for the nourishment of the body,
but only to keep off, or drive out diseases: Also no stone must be cut, but
man must rather endure torment and death. But setting aside this superstitious
doctrine of your Author, it is evident enough, and needs no proof, that
Cancers, Fistula's, Wenns, Eating-evils, Madness, Fevers, Consumptions,
Rheumes, Pleurisies, and numerous other diseases, are not better cured then by
Issues, or making of wounds, either by Lancets, Pen-knifes, Scissers, Rasors,
Corrosives, Causticks, Leeches, or the like. And although your Author says,
That that Matter which proceeds from, or out of an Issue, is made in the lips
of the wound, and not in the body; for it cannot possibly drain or draw out any
moisture, either from within or between the skin and the flesh, having no
passages: Yet if this were so, how come Fistula's, Cancers, and the like
diseases, to have passages from within the body to the exterior parts, so, as
to make a wound, out of which much sharp and salt humor issues? which humor
certainly is not made in the lips of the wound, but in the body: Also whence
comes the humor that makes the Gout? For though the swelling and inflammation
will sometimes appear exteriously, yet after some time those tumors and humors
retire back into the body from whence they did flow; but he might as well say
that Pit-falls or Sluices do not drain Land from a superfluity of Water, as that
Issues do not drain the body of superfluous humors. Wherefore I am absolutely
of opinion, that the Practice of the Schools is the best and wifest Practice,
as well in making Issues, letting blood, Purging by Siege or Vomits, as any
other means used by them; for by Issues I have seen many cured, when no other
medicines would do any good with them; and letting blood, I am confident, has
rescued more lives, then the Universal Medicine, could Chemists find it out,
perchance would do. So also Clysters and Vomits, skilfully applied, have done
great benefits to the life of men; for every part and member has its peculiar
way to be purged and cleansed; for example, Clysters principally cleanse the
Guts, Purges the Stomach, Vomits the Chest, Sneezing the Head, Bleeding the
Veins, and Issues drain the whole body of naughty humors: All which remedies,
properly and timely used, keep the body from being choked with superfluities.
'There are several other ways of cures besides for several diseases, but I
leave those to learned and skilful Physicians, who know best how and when to
use them to the benefit and health of their Patients, although your Author
finds much fault with them, and blames them for suffering men to die miserably;
but God has given power to Nature to make certain dissolutions, although
uncertain diseases, and uncertain remedies. Neither has she in her power to
give Immortal Life to particular Creatures, for this belongs to God alone, and
therefore no Universal Medicine will keep out death, or prolong life further
then its thread is spun, which I doubt is but a Chymaera, and an impossible
thing, by reason there are not only so many different varieties in several
diseases, but in one and the same disease, as no Universal remedy would do any
good. But your Author is much pleased with Paradoxes, and Paradoxes are not
certain Truths: Wherefore it is better, in my judgment, to follow the old
approved and practiced way of the Schools, grounded upon Experience and Reason,
then his Paradoxical Opinions. To which Schools, as your Author is a great
Enemy, so I am a great Friend, as well as,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble Servant.

XXXVI.
MADAM,
I Approve well of your Authors opinion Of Fevers, Chapter 12.
, That Drink ought not to be forbidden in Fevers; but yet I would not allow so
much as to drown and oppress the Patients life, but only so much as to refresh
and moisten him; and therefore the best way is to drink little and often. But
as for Wine, which your Author commends in Fevers, I am utterly against it,
unless the Fever proceed from a cold or crude cause, otherwise cooling Ptisans
are most beneficial to those that are sick of a continual Fever, which for the
most part is a general Fever throughout the whole body, one part infecting the
other, until they be all infected, like as in the Plague. And to let you know
the proof of it; when I was once sick beyond the Seas, I sent for a Doctor of
Physic who was an Irishman: and hearing of some that knew him, and his
practice, that he was not successful in his Cures, but that his Patients most
commonly died, I asked him what he used to prescribe in such or such diseases?
where amongst the rest, as I remember, he told me, That he allowed his Patients
to drink Wine in a Fever. I thought he was in a great error, and told him my
opinion, that though Wine might be profitable, perhaps, to some few, yet for
the most part it was very hurtful and destructive, alleging another famous
Physician in France, Dr. Davison, who used in continual Fevers, to prescribe
only cooling Ptisan, made of a little Barley, and a great quantity of Water,
so thin as the Barley was hardly perceived, and a spoonful of syrup of Limmon
put into a quart of the said Ptisan; but in case of a Flux, he ordered some few
seeds of Pomegranats to be put into it, and this cold Ptisan was to be the
Patients only drink: Besides, once in Twenty four hours he prescribed a couple
of potched Eggs, with a little Verjuice, and to let the Patient blood, if he
was dry and hot; I mean dry exteriously, as from sweat; and that either often
or seldom, according as occasion was found: Also he prescribed two grains of
Laudanum every night, but neither to give the Patient meat nor drink two hours
before and after: Which advice and Practice of the mentioned Physician
concerning Fevers, with several others, I declared to this Irish Doctor, and he
observing this rule, cured many, and so recovered his lost esteem and repute.
But your Author being all for Wine, and against cooling drinks, or Julips, in
hot Fevers, says, That cooling means are more like to death, to cessation from
motion, and to defect; but heat from moderate Wine is a mean like unto life. To
which I answer, first, That cold, or cooling things, are as active as hot or
heating things; neither is death more cold then hot, nor life more hot then
cold; for we see that Frost is as active and strong as burning heat; and Water,
Air, and Earth, are as full of life, as Fire; and Vegetables, Minerals, and
Elements, have life as well as Animals: But we, feeling a Man's flesh cold when
he is dissolving from an Animal, think death is cold; and seeing he was hot
before the same alteration, say, Life is hot: Also finding an animal, when it
is dissolving, to be without external local Motion, we say it is dead; and when
it has as yet this local motion before its alteration, we call it alive; which
certainly is not proper. Next I say, that a wise Man when his house is fired,
will fling or squirt water upon it, to quench it, and take out all movables
lest they should increase the flame; likewise he will make vent for the flame
to issue forth. But perchance your Author may say, that Fevers are not hot.
Truly, in my opinion, he might say as well that Fire is cold. Again: he may
say, That although the effect be hot, yet the cause is cold. I answer: That in
some diseases, the effects become so firmly rooted, and so powerful, that they
must be more looked upon then the cause: for such variety there is in Nature,
that oftentimes, that which was now an effect, turns to be a cause, and again a
cause an effect: For example; A cold cause often produces a hot effect, and
this hot effect becomes again a cause of a cold effect: Which variation is not
only a trouble, but a great obstruction to wise Physicians; for Nature has
more varieties in diseases, then Physicians have remedies, And as for drink, if
Fevers be neither hot, nor dry, nor require drink for want of moisture; then I
see no reason why drink should be urged, and those Physicians blamed that
forbid it; for if thirst proceed from an evil digestion, drink will rather
weaken the stomach; for heat and dryness draw soon away the drink in the
stomach, and putting much into a weak stomach does rather hurt then good. But
if necessity require it, then I approve rather of raw and crude Water, then of
hot inflaming Wiue. And so taking my leave, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXVII.
MADAM,
IN your Authors Treatise of Fevers, I find one Chapter Chapter 14.
whose Inscription is, A Perfect Curing of all Fevers, wherein he declares the
secrets of the Cures of Fevers, consisting all in Chemical Medicines. But
considering, that if all Fevers could be cured by such Medicines, then all
Physicians would strive to obtain them; I can hardly believe (by your Authors
favor) that any such perfect curing of all Fevers can be effected, but that
your Authors prescriptions, if they should come to the trial, might fail as
well as any other. Likewise he mentions a Medicine of Paracelsus, named
Diaceltesson, or the Coraline Secret; which, he says, cures radically the Gout
no less then Fevers: Which if so, I wonder why so many Great, Noble and Rich
Persons, groan so much under the pains of the Gout; certainly it is not for
want of cost to have them prepared, nor for want of an ingenious and
experienced Chemist; for this age does not want skilful workmen in that Art,
nor worthy and wise Physicians; which if they knew such sovereign medicines,
would soon apply them to their Patients; but I suppose that they finding their
effects to be less then the cost and labor bestowed upon them, forbear to use
them. Moreover, he mentions In the Chapter named Butler.
another remedy for most diseases, by him called Driff, prepared also by the
Art of Chemistry; but I believe all those remedies will not so often cure, as
fail of cure, like as the Sympathetical Powder; for if there were such
sovereign medicines that did never fail of a successful effect, certainly men
being curious, inquisitive, and searching, would never leave till they had
found them out. Also amongst Vegetables, the herb Chameleon and Arsmart are in
great request with your Author; For, says he, they by their touching alone, do
presently take away cruel diseases, or at leastwise ease them. Which if so, I
wonder that there is not more use made of them, and they held in greater esteem
then they are; Also that your Author does not declare the virtue of them, and
the manner and way how, and in what diseases to use them, for the benefit of
his neighbor, to which end, he says, all his labors and actions are directed?
But again, your Author confirms, as an Eyewitness, That the bone of the arm of
a Toad presently has taken away the Toothache at the first co-touching. Which
remedy, if it was constant, few, in my opinion, would suffer such cruel pains,
and cause their teeth to be drawn out, especially if sound. Likewise of the
mineral Electrum or Amber of Paracelsus, he affirms Chapter Of the manner of
entrance of things darted into the body.
to have seen, that hung about the neck, it has freed those that were
persecuted by unclean spirits, and that many simples have done the like
effects; but surely, Madam, I cannot be persuaded that the Devil should be put
away so easily; for he being a Spirit, will not be chased by corporeal means,
but by spiritual, which is Faith, and Prayer; and the cure of dispossessing the
Devil belongs to Divines, and not to Natural Philosopers or Physicians. But
though exterior remedies, as Amulets, Pomanders, and the like, may perform
sometimes such effects as to cure or preserve from some diseases, yet they are
not ordinary and constant, but merely by chance. But there are more false
remedies then true ones, and if one remedy chance to work successfully with one
distempered person, it may fail of its success applied to others in the same
kind of distemper; nay, it may cure perhaps one and the same person of a
distemper once, and in the return of the same disease effect little or nothing;
witness those remedies that are applied in Agues, Toothaches, and the like,
especially Amulets; for one and the same disease in several persons, or in one
and the same person at several times, may vary and change so often, and proceed
from so different causes, and be of so different tempers, and have such
different motions, as one and the same medicine can do no good: And what would
the skill of Physicians be, if one remedy should cure all diseases? Why should
they take so much pains in studying the various causes, motions, and tempers of
diseases, if one medicine had a general power over all? Nay, for what use
should God have created such a number of different simples, Vegetables, and
Minerals, if one could do all the business? Lastly, your Author rehearses Chapter
Of things injected into the body.
some strange examples of Childbearing Women, who having seen terrible and
cruel sights, as Executions of Malefactors, and dismembring of their bodies,
have brought forth monstrous births, without heads, hands, arms, legs, etc.
according to the objects they had seen. I must confess, Madam, that all
Creatures are not always formed perfect; for Nature works irregularly
sometimes, wherefore a Child may be born defective in some member or other, or
have double members instead of one, and so may other animal Creatures; but this
is nevertheless natural, although irregular to us: but to have a Child born
perfect in the womb, and the lost member to be taken off there, and so brought
forth defective, as your Author mentions, cannot enter my belief; neither can
your Author himself give any reason, but he makes only a bare relation of it;
for certainly, if it was true, that the member was chopped, rent or plucked off
from the whole body of the Child, it could not have been done without a violent
shock or motion of the Mother, which I am confident would never have been able
to endure it; for such a great alteration in her body would of necessity,
besides the death of the Child, have caused a total dissolution of her own
animal parts, by altering the natural animal motions: But, as I said above,
those births are caused by irregular motions, and are not frequent and
ordinary; for if upon every strange sight, or cruel object, a
Childbearing-woman should produce such effects, Monsters would be more frequent
then they are. In short, Nature loves variety, and this is the cause of all
strange and unusual natural effects; and so leaving Nature to her will and
pleasure, my only delight and pleasure is to be,

MADAM, faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

XXXVIII.
MADAM,
YOur Author reproving the Schools, that they forbid Salt to some diseased
persons, as pernicious to their health: Good God, says he Of the disease of the
Stone, c. 3.
, how unsavory are the Schools, and how unsavory do they bid us to be! But I
suppose the Schools do not absolutely forbid all diseased persons to abstein
from salt, but only not to use it excessively, or too frequently; for
experience proves, that salt meats have not only increased, but caused
diseases, as the Stone, the Gout, Sciatica, Fistula's, Cancers, sore Eyes, sore
Throats, and the like: I do not say, that those diseases are always bred with
the excess of salt diets; for diseases of one and the same kind, may be bred
variously; but this has been observed, that whosoever is affected with such
diseases, shall after a salt meal find himself in more pain then before;
wherefore a constant or common salt diet cannot but be hurtful. Neither are
those persons that feed much on salt meats, or use strong drinks, take number
for number, so healthful or longlived, as those that are temperate and
abstaining. Next, your Author Chapter Of the reason or consideration of diet.
bewails The shameful simplicity of those, that give their Patients Leaf-Gold,
Pearls, and bruised or powderd precious Stones, as Cordials, in fainting fits,
and other distempers: For, says he, they may be dissolved, but not altered;
wherefore they cannot produce any powerful effect to the health of the Patient.
Truly, Madam, I am not of his mind; for were it that those remedies or cordials
could not be transchanged, yet their virtues may nevertheless be very
beneficial to the fick: For example; a man that is assaulted by enemies, or by
chance is fallen into a deep Pit, or is ready to be strangled, and in all not
able to help himself, yet by the help of another man, may be rescued and freed
from his danger, and from death, using such means as are able to release him,
which either by drawing his Sword against his ememies, or by throwing a rope
down into the Pit, and haling him out, or by cutting the rope by which he hung,
may save him, and yet neither the man, nor any of his Instruments, as Sword,
Rope, Knife, and the like, need to be transchanged. The like may be said of the
aforementioned medicines or remedies; which if they be not transchangeable, yet
they may nevertheless do such operations, as by their natural active qualities
and proprieties to overpower the irregular motions in the natural parts of the
body of the Patient; for many diseases proceed more from irregular motions then
irregular parts: and although there is no motion without matter, yet one and
the same matter may have diverse and various changes of motions, and moving
parts will either oppose or assist each other without transchanging. And truly,
Madam, I wonder that your Author does condemn such Cordials made of Leaf-gold,
Pearls, powdered precious Stones, or the like, and yet verily believe, that
Amber, Saphires, Emeraulds, Beads, Bracelets, etc. outwardly applied or worn,
can cure more then when inwardly taken; surely, if this be so, they cure more
by Faith, then by Reason. But it seems your Author regulates the actions of
Nature to the artificial actions of his Furnace, which although sometimes they
produce wonderful effects, yet not such as Nature does; for if they cure one,
they commonly kill ten; nay, the best of their Medicine is so dangerous, as it
ought not to be applied but in desperate cases: Wherefore Wise Physicians must
needs be Provident and Cautious when they use them. And so leaving them, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXXIX.
MADAM,
I Will not dispute your Authors opinion concerning the Plague of Men, which he
says, does not infect In the Plaguegrave, chapter 17.
Beasts, neither does the plague of Beasts infect Men; but rather believe it to
be so: for I have observed, that Beasts infect only each other, to wit, those
of their own kind, as Men do infect other Men. For example: the Plague amongst
Horses continues in their own kind, and so does the Plague amongst Sheep; and
for any thing we know, there may be a plague amongst Vegetables, as well as
amongst Animals, and they may not only infect each other, but also those
Animals that do feed on those infectious Vegetables: so that Infections may be
caused several ways; either by inbreathing and attracting or sucking in the
Poison of the Plague, or by eating and converting it into the substance of the
body; for some kinds of poison are so powerful, as to work only by way of
inbreathing. Also some sorts of Air may be full of infection, and infect many
Men, Beasts, Birds, Vegetables, and the like; for Infections are variously
produced, Internally as well as Externally, amongst several particular
Creatures; for as the Plague may be made internally, or within the body of a
particular Creature, without any exterior infection entering from without into
the body, so an external Infection again may enter many several ways into the
body. And thus there be many contagious diseases caused merely by the internal
motions of the body, as by fright, terror, conceit, fancy, imagination, and the
like, and many by the taking of poisonous matter from without into the body;
but all are made by the natural motions or actions of animate matter, by which
all is made that is in Nature, and nothing is new, as Solomon says; but what is
thought or seems to be new, is only the variation of the Motions of this old
Matter, which is Nature. And this is the reason that not every Age, Nation, or
Creature, has always the like diseases; for as all the actions of Nature vary,
so also do diseases. But to speak of the Plague, although I am of opinion, that
the Plague of Beasts does not infect Men, unless they be eaten; nor the plague
of Men, Beasts; yet Magistrates do wisely in some places, that in the beginning
of the plague of Men, they command Dogs and Cats to be killed, by reason, as
your Author says, The skins and flesh of Brutes may be defiled with our
Plague, and they may be pestiferous contagions unto us. I will add one thing
more, which does concern the Poison of Measels, whereof your Author is saying
Chapter Called, The Lunar Tribute.
, That it is only proper to humane kind. What kind of Measles he means, I know
not; but certainly Hogs are often affected with that disease, as is vulgarly
known; but whether they be different diseases in their kinds, and proceed from
different motions, I will let others inquire. And so I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XL.
MADAM,
COncerning the disease of the Stone, your Author seems to be of an opinion,
That the stone in the Bladder, and the stone in the Kidneys, are not made after
one and the same manne: For, says he Of the Stone, ch 6. See the chapter called, A
Numero-Critical Paradox of supplies.
, The Bladder and the same Urine in number procreates a duelech of another
condition, then that which is made in the Kidney. And truly, Madam, it may be
so; for there are several ways or modes in irregularities, as well as
regularities, and not every kind is alike, no not every Particular, but there
is some difference between them: Wherefore, it may very well be, that the
corporeal motions that make the stone in the Kidneys, are not just alike to
those that make the stone in the Bladder; and as each sort of stone is
different, so their particular causes ought to be different; but this is to be
observed, that generally all diseases which produce hardness, are made by
contracting, condensing and retenting motions, and therefore the remedies of
them must be dilating, rarifying and dissolving. Next your Author says, The
Stone is not bred by heat, but heat is rather an effect of the stone; neither
is a certain muscilage, or a slimy, snivelly Phlegm the cause or matter of the
stone, but the stone is the cause of the phlegm. But, in my judgment, it seems
more probable, that a slimy matter is more proper for a stone to be made of,
then that a stone should make slime, except it be in its dissolution; that is,
when the stone, as in its generation or production it did change from a slimy
or liquid substance to a stone by condensing and contracting motions, does, by
dilating and rarifying motions, dissolve again into such a liquid and slimy
body. I will not say always, to wit, that the stone must needs be resolved into
a slimy matter, but oftentimes it may be so. Neither can I absolutely affirm
that either heat or cold only is the cause of a stone; for some may be
produced by hot, and some by cold contractions and densations, there being as
many several sorts of stones as there are of other Creatures: But this is to be
well noted, that as some sorts of hot contractions do make stones, so some
sorts of hot dilations do dissolve them: The like of cold contractions and
dilations. Again: your Author speaking of the womb wherein the stone is made;
Every generated thing or being, says he, must of necessity have a certain place
or womb where it is produced; for there must needs be places wherein things may
be made before they are bred. I answer: As there is not any body without place,
nor any place without body, so the womb is not the place of the body generated,
neither before nor after its generation, no more then a man can be said to be
in a room when he is not there, but every body carries its place along with it.
Moreover, concerning the voiding of bloody Urine, which happens sometimes in
the disease of the Stone, my opinion is, That it does not always proceed from
the Stone, but many times from the breaking or voluntary opening of some Veins.
But as for the cure of the disease of the Stone your Author Chapter 7.
is pleased to affirm, That no disease is incurable, and so neither the disease
o^ the Stone; For he himself has cured many of the Stone to which they had been
obedient for some years. Indeed, Madam, I fear his words are more cheerful then
effectual; however it may be possible, if the Kidneys be no ways impaired, or
the Bladder hurt; but if there be some such imperfection in either or both,
then it is as much, in my opinion, as to say, Man can do more then Nature does:
Neither can I believe, that then any of your Authors Chemical preparations, as
Aroph, Ludus, Alkahest, and the like, if they were to be had, would do any
good, no nor Daucus, or wild Carrot-seed, if the disease be as yet curable,
will prove an effectual remedy for it, although your Author is pleased to
relate an example of a man, to whom it did much good; for I can affirm the
contrary by other the like Examples, that it never did any good to those that
used it; nor the liquor of the Birch-tree, whose virtue and efficacy I do not
believe to be so great as your Author describes Chapter 8.
: But for the stoppage of Urine, Marsh-mallow and oil of Almonds, which he
despises, I approve to be good, and better then any of his Unknown, Chemical
Secrets; for those Chemical Medicines, as he himself confesses, are hard to be
had, especially Alkahest, which is only to be obtained by a Particular favor
from Heaven, and is rather a supernatural Gift, then a natural remedy. But your
Author does wisely, to commend such remedies as can never, or with great
difficulty be obtained, and then to say that no disease is incurable. And so
leaving him to his unknown secrets, and those to them that will use them, I am
resolved to adhere to the Practice of the Schools, which I am confident will be
more beneficial to the health of,

MADAM, Your real and faithful Friend and Servant.

XLI.
MADAM,
YOur Author speaking of the Gout, and of that kind of Gout which is called
Hereditary, says, It consists immediately in the Spirit of Life. First, as for
that which is called an Hereditary Disease, propagated from Parents upon their
Children; my opinion is, That it is nothing else but the same actions of the
animate matter, producing the same effect in the Child as they did in the
Parent: For example; the same motions which made the Gout in the Parent, may
make the same disease in the Child; but every Child has not his Parents
diseases, and many Children have such diseases as their Parents never had;
neither is any disease tied to a particular Family by Generation, but they
proceed from irregular motions, and are generally in all Mankind; and therefore
properly there is no such thing as an hereditary propagation of diseases; for
one and the same kind of disease may be made in different persons, never a kin
to one another, by the like motions; but because Children have such a near
relation to their Parents by Generation, if they chance to have the same
diseases with their Parents, men are apt to conclude it comes by inheritance;
but we may as well say, that all diseases are hereditary; for there is not any
disease in Nature but is produced by the actions of Nature's substance; and if
we receive life and all our bodily substance by Generation from our Parents, we
may be said to receive diseases too; for diseases are inherent in the matter or
substance of Nature, which every Creature is a part of, and are real beings
made by the corporeal motions of the animate matter, although irregular to us;
for as this matter moves, so is Life or Death, Sickness or Health, and all
natural effects; and we consisting of the same natural matter, are naturally
subject as well to diseases as to health, according as the Matter moves. Thus
all diseases are hereditary in Nature; nay, the Scripture it self confirms it,
informing us, that diseases, as well as death, are by an hereditary propagation
derived from Adam upon all Posterity. But as for the Gout, your Authors
doctrine is Of the disease of the Stone. c. 9.
, That Life is not a body, nor proper to a body, nor of the offspring of
corporeal Proprieties Of the subject of inhering of diseases in the point of
life.
, but a mere No-thing; and that the Spirit of Life Of the Spirit of Life.
is a real being, to wit, the arterial blood resolved by the Ferment of the
heart into salt air, and enlightened by life, and that the Gout does immediately
consist in this spirit of life. All which how it does agree, I cannot conceive;
for that a real being should be enlightened by Nothing, and be a spirit of
Nothing, is not imaginable, nor how the Gout should inhabit in the spirit of
life; for then it would follow, that a Child, as soon as it is brought forth
into the world, would be troubled with the Gout, if it be as natural to him as
life, or have its habitation in the Spirit of Life. Also your Author is
speaking of an Appoplexy in the head, which takes away all sense and motion.
But surely, in my opinion, it is impossible that all sense and motion should be
out of the head; only that sense and motion, which is proper to the head, and
to the nature of that Creature, is altered to some other sensitive and rational
motions, which are proper to some other figure; for there is no part or
particle of matter that has not motion and sense. I pray consider, Madam, is
there any thing in Nature that is without motion? Perchance you will say,
Minerals; but that is proved otherwise; as for example, by the sympathetical
motion between the Loadstone and Iron, and between the Needle and the North, as
also by the operation of Mercury, and several others: Wherefore there is no
doubt, but all kinds, sorts and particulars of Creatures have their natural
motions, although they are not all visible to us, but not such motions as are
made by Gas, or Blas, or Ideas, etc. but corporeal sensitive and rational
motions, which are the actions of Natural Matter. You may say, Some are of
opinion, that Sympathy and Antipathy are not Corporeal motions. Truly,
whosoever says so, speaks no reason; for Sympathy and Antipathy are nothing
else but the actions of bodies, and are made in bodies; the Sympathy betwixt
Iron and the Loadstone is in bodies; the Sympathy between the Needle and the
North is in bodies; the Sympathy of the Magnetic powder is in bodies. The
truth is, there is no motion without a body, nor no body without motion.
Neither does Sympathy and Antipathy work at distance by the power of Immaterial
Spirits, or rays, issuing out of their bodies, but by agreeable or disagreeable
corporeal motions; for if the motions be agreeable, there is Sympathy; if
disagreeable, there is Antipathy; and if they be equally found in two bodies,
then there is a mutual Sympathy or Antipathy; but if in one body only, and not
in the other, there is but Sympathy or Antipathy on one side, or in one
Creature. Lastly, concerning swoonings or fainting fits, your Authors opinion
is, that they proceed from the stomach: Which I can hardly believe; for many
will swoon upon the sight of some object, others at a sound, or report, others
at the smell of some disagreeable odor, others at the taste of some or other
thing that is not agreeable to their nature, and so forth: also some will swoon
at the apprehension or conceit of something, and some by a disorder or
irregularity of motions in exterior parts. Wherefore, my opinion is, that
swoonings may proceed from any part of the body, and not only from the
stomach. But, Madam, I being no Physicianess may perhaps be in an error, and
therefore I will leave this discourse to those that are thoroughly learned and
practiced in this Art, and rest satisfied that I am,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble Servant.

XLII.
MADAM,
YOur Author In the chapter called Butler.
is inquiring whether some cures of diseases may be effected by bare
co-touchings; and I am of his opinion, they may; for co-touchings of some
exterior objects may cause alterations of some particular motions in some
particular parts of matter, without either transferring their own motions into
those parts, (for that this is impossible, I have heretofore declared) or
without any corporeal departing from their own parts of matter into them, and
alterations may be produced both in the motions and figures of the affected
parts: but these cures are not so frequent as those that are made by the
entering of medicines into the diseased parts, and either expel the malignant
matter, or rectify the irregular and disordered motions, or strengthen the
weak, or reduce the straying, or work any other ways according to the nature
and propriety of their own substance, and the disposition of the distempered
parts: Nevertheless, those cures which are performed exteriously, as to heal
inward affects by an outwad bare co-touching, are all made by natural motions
in natural substances, and not by Non-being, substanceless Ideas, or spiritual
Rays; for those that will cure diseases by Non-beings, will effect little or
nothing; for a disease is corporeal or material, and so must the remedies be,
there being no cure made but by a conflict of the remedy with the disease; and
certainly, if a non-being fight against a being, or a corporeal disease, I
doubt it will do no great effect; for the being will be too strong for the
non-being: Wherefore my constant opinion is, that all cures whatsover, are
perfected by the power of corporeal motions, working upon the affected parts
either interiously or exteriously, either by applying external remedies to
external wounds, or by curing internal distempers, either by medicines taken
internally, or by bare external co-touchings. And such a remedy, I suppose, has
been that which your Author speaks of, viz. a stone of a certain Irishman,
which by a mere external contact has cured all kinds of diseases, either by
touching outwardly the affected parts, or by licking it but with the tip of the
Tongue, if the disease was Internal: But if the virtue of the Stone was such,
as your Author describes, certainly, what man soever he was that possessed such
a jewel, I say, he was rather of the nature of the Devil, then of man, that
would not divulge it to the general benefit of all mankind; and I wonder much,
that your Author, who otherwise pretends such extraordinary Devotion, Piety,
and Religiousness, as also Charity, viz. that all his works he has written, are
for the benefit of his neighbor, and to detect the errors of the Schools
merely for the good of man, does yet plead his cause, saying, That secrets, as
they are most difficultly prepared, so they ought to remain in secret forever
in the possession of the Privy Council, what Privy Counsels he means, I know
not; but certainly some are more difficult to be spoken to, or any thing to be
obtained from, then the preparation of a Physical Arcanum. However, a general
good or benefit ought not to be concealed or kept in privy Councels, but to be
divulged and publicly made known, that all sorts of People, of what condition,
degree, or Nation soever, might partake of the general blessing and bounty of
God. But, Madam, you may be sure, that many, who pretend to know Physical
secrets, most commonly know the least, as being for the most part of the rank
of them that deceive the simple with strange tales which exceed truth; and to
make themselves more authentical, they use to rail at others, and to condemn
their skill, only to magnify their own: I say, many, Madam, as I have
observed, are of that nature, especially those, that have but a superficial
knowledge in the Art of Physic; for those that are thoroughly learned, and
sufficiently practiced in it, scorn to do the like; which I wish may prosper
and thrive by their skill. And so I rest,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble Servant.

XLIII.
MADAM,
YOur Author is pleased to relate a story of one that died suddenly, and being
disfected, there was not the least sign of decay or disorder found in his body.
Chapter 61. called, The Preface.
But I cannot add to those that wonder, when no sign of distemper is found in a
man's body after he is dead; because I do not believe, that the subtillest,
learned, and most practiced Anatomist, can exactly tell all the Interior
Government or motions, or can find out all obscure and invisible passages in a
man's body; for concerning the motions, they are all altered in death, or
rather in the dissolution of the animal figure; and although the exterior
animal figure or shape does not alter so soon, yet the animal motions may alter
in a moment of time; which sudden alteration may cause a sudden death, and so
the motions being invisible, the cause of death cannot be perceived; for no
body can find that which is not to be found, to wit, animal motions in a dead
man; for Nature has altered these motions from being animal motions to some
other kind of motions, she being as various in dissolutions, as in productions,
indeed so various, that her ways cannot be traced or known thoroughly and
perfecty, but only by piecemeals, as the saying is, that is, but partly:
Wherefore man can only know that which is visible, or subject to his senses;
and yet our senses do not always inform us truly, but the alterations of
grosser parts are more easily known, then the alterations of subtle corporeal
motions, either in general, or in particular; neither are the invisible
passages to be known in a dead Carcass, much less in a living body. But, I
pray, mistake me not, when I say, that the animal motions are not subject to
our exterior senses; for I do not mean all exterior animal motions, nor all
interior animal motions; for though you do see no interior motion in an animal
body, yet you may feel some, as the motion of the Heart, the motion of the
Pulse, the motion of the Lungs, and the like; but the most part of the interior
animal motions are not subject to our exterior senses; nay, no man, he may be
as observing as he will, can possibly know by his exterior senses all the
several and various interior motions in his own body, nor all the exterior
motions of his exterior parts: and thus it remains still, that neither the
subtillest motions and parts of matter, nor the obscure passages in several
Creatures, can be known but by several parts; for what one part is ignorant of,
another part is knowing, and what one part is knowing, another part is ignorant
thereof; so that unless all the Parts of Infinite Matter were joined into one
Creature, there can never be in one particular Creature a perfect knowledge of
all things in Nature. Wherefore I shall never aspire to any such knowledge, but
be content with that little particular knowledge, Nature has been pleased to
give me, the chief of which is, that I know my self, and especially that I am,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XLIV.
MADAM,
I Perceive you are desirous to know the cause, Why a man is more weak at the
latter end of a disease then at the beginning, and is a longer time recovering
health, then loosing health; as also the reason of relapses and intermissions?
First, as for weakness and strength, my opinion is, they are caused by the
regular and irregular motions in several parts, each striving to overpower the
other in their conflict; and when a man recovers from a disease, although the
regular motions have conquered the irregular, and subdued them to their
obedience, yet they are not so quite obedient as they ought, which causes
weakness: Neither do the regular motions use so much force in Peace, as in War;
for though animate matter cannot lose force, yet it does not always use force;
neither can the parts of Nature act beyond their natural power, but they do act
within their natural power; neither do they commonly act to the utmost of their
power. And as for Health, why it is sooner lost then recovered; I answer, That
it is easier to make disorders then to rectify them: as for example, in a
Commonwealth, the ruins of War are not so suddenly repaired, as made. But
concerning Relapses and Intermissions of diseases, Intermissions are like
truces or cessations from War for a time; and Relapses are like new stirs or
tumults of Rebellion; for Rebels are not so apt to settle in peace as to renew
the war upon slight occasions; and if the regular motions of the body be
stronger, they reduce them again unto obedience. But diseases are occasioned
many several ways; for some are made by a home Rebellion, and others by
foreign enemies, and some by natural and regular dissolutions, and their cures
are as different; but the chief Magistrates or Governors of the animal body,
which are the regular motions of the parts of the body, want most commonly the
assistance of foreign Parts, which are Medicines, Diets, and the like; and if
there be factions amongst these chief Magistrates, or motions of the parts of
the body, then the whole body suffers a ruin. But since there would be no
variety in Nature, nor no difference between Natures several parts or
Creatures, if her actions were never different, but always agreeing and
constant, a war or rebellion in Nature cannot be avoided: But, mistake me not,
for I do not mean a war or rebellion in the nature of substance of Matter, but
between the several parts of Matter, which are the several Creatures, and their
several Motions; for Matter being always one and the same in its nature, has
nothing to war withal; and surely it will not quarrel with its own Nature. Next
you desire to know, that if Nature be in a Perpetual motion, Whence comes a
duration of some things, and a Tiredness, Weariness, Sluggishness, or
Faintness? I answer, first, That in some bodies, the Retentive motions are
stronger then the dissolving motions; as for example, Gold, and Quicksilver or
Mercury; the separating and dissolving motions of Fire have only power to melt
and rarifie them for a time, but cannot alter their nature: so a Hammer, or
such like instrument, when used, may beat Gold, and make it thin as a Cobweb,
or as dust, but cannot alter its interior nature: But yet this does not prove
it to be either without motion, or to be altogether unalterable, and not
subject to any dissolution; but only that its retentive motions are too strong
for the dissolving motions of the Fire, which by force work upon the Gold; and
we might as well say, that Sand, or an Earthen Vessel, or Glass, or Stone, or
any thing else, is unalterable, and will last eternally, if not disturbed. But
some of Natures actions are as industrious to keep their figures, as others are
to dissolve, or alter them; and therefore Retentive motions are more strong and
active in some figures, then dissolving motions are in others, or producing
motions in other Figures. Next, as for Tiredness, or Faintness of motions,
there is no such thing as tiredness or faintness in Nature, for Nature cannot
be tired, nor grow faint, or sick, nor be pained, nor die, nor be any ways
defective; for all this is only caused through the change and variety of the
corporeal motions of Nature, and her several parts; neither do irregular
motions prove any defect in Nature, but a prudence in Natures actions, in
making varieties and alterations of Figures; for without such motions or
actions, there could not be such varieties and alterations in Nature as there
are: neither is slackness of some motions a defect, for Nature is too wise to
use her utmost force in her ordinary works; and though Nature is infinite, yet
it is not necessary she should use an infinite force and power in any
particular act. Lastly, you desire my opinion, Whether there be motion in a
dead animal Creature. To which, I answer: I have declared heretofore, that
there is no such thing as death in Nature, but what is commonly named death, is
but an alteration or change of corporeal motions, and the death of an animal is
nothing else but the dissolving motions of its figure; for when a man is dying,
the motions which did formerly work to the consistence of his figure do now
work to the dissolution of his figure, and to the production of some other
figures, changing and transforming every part thereof; but though the figure of
that dead animal is dissolved, yet the parts of that dissolved figure remain
still in Nature although they be infinitely changed, and will do so eternally,
as long as Nature lasts by the Will of God; for nothing can be lost or
annihilated in Nature. And this is all, Madam, that I can answer to your
questions, wherein, I hope, I have obeyed your commands, according to the duty
of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XLV.
MADAM,
I Have thus far discharged my duty, that according to your commands, I have
given you my judgment of the works of those four famous Philosophers of our
age, which you did send me to peruse, and have withal made reflections upon some
of their opinions in Natural Philosophy, especially those, wherein I did find
them dissent from the Ground and Principles of my own Philosophy. And since by
your leave I am now publishing all those Letters which I have hitherto written
to your concerning those aforesaid Authors, and their Works, I am confident I
shall not escape the censures of their followers; But, I shall desire them,
that they will be pleased to do me this Justice, and to examine first my
opinions well, without any partiality or wilful misinterpretation of my sense,
before they pass their censure: Next, I desire them to consider, That I have no
skill in School-learning, and therefere for want of terms of Art may easily
chance to slip, or at least, not express my opinions so clearly as my readers
expected; However, I have done my endeavor, and to my sense and reason they
seem clear and plain enough, especially as I have expressed them in those
Letters I have sent you; for concerning my other Work, called Philosophical
Opinions, I must confess, that it might have been done more exactly and
perspicuously, had I been better skilled in such words and expressions as are
usual in the Schools of Philosophers; and therefore, if I be but capable to
learn names and terms of Art, (although I find my self very untoward to learn,
and do despair of proving a Scholar) I will yet endeavor to rectify that
work, and make it more intelligible; for my greatest ambition is to express my
conceptions so, that my Readers may understand them: For which I would not
spare any labor or pains, but be as industrious as those that gain their
living by their work; and I pray to God, that Nature may give me a capacity to
do it. But as for those that will censure my works out of spite and malice,
rather then according to justice, let them do their worst; for if God do but
bless them, I need not to fear the power of Nature, much less of a part of
Nature, as Man. Nay, if I have but your Ladyships approbation, it will satisfy
me; for I know you are so wife and just in your judgment, that I may safely
rely upon it: For which I shall constantly and unfeignedly remain as long as I
live,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most faithful Friend and humble Servant.

SECT. IV.
I.
MADAM,
I Perceive, you take great delight in the study of Natural Philosophy, since
you have not only sent me some Authors to peruse, and give my judgment of
their opinions, but are very studious your self in the reading of Philosophical
Works: and truly, I think you cannot spend your time more honorably,
profitably, and delightfully, then in the study of Nature, as to consider how
Variously, Curiously, and Wisely, she acts in her Creatures; for if the
particular knowledge of a man's self be commendable, much more is the knowledge
of the general actions of Nature, which does lead us to the knowledge of our
selves. The truth is, by the help of Philosophy our Minds are raised above our
selves, into the knowledge of the Causes of all natural effects. But leaving the
commending of this noble study, you are pleased to desire my opinion of a very
difficult and intricate argument in Natural Philosophy, to wit, of Generation,
or Natural Production. I must beg leave to tell you, first, that some (though
foolishly) believe, it is not fit for Women to argue upon so subtle a Mystery:
Next, there have been so many learned and experienced Philosophers, Physicians,
and Anatomists, which have treated of this subject, that it might be thought a
great presumption for me, to argue with them, having neither the learning nor
experience by practice which they had: Lastly, There are so many several ways
and manners of Productions in Nature, as it is impossible for a single Creature
to know them all: For there are Infinite variations made by self-motion in
Infinite Matter, producing several Figures, which are several Creatures in that
same Matter. But you would fain know, how Nature, which is Infinite Matter,
acts by self-motion? Truly, Madam, you may as well ask any one part of your
body, how every other part of your body acts, as to ask me, who am but a small
part of Infinite Matter, how Nature works. But yet, I cannot say, that Nature
is so obscure, as her Creatures are utterly ignorant; for as there are two of
the outward sensitive organs in animal bodies, which are more intelligible then
the rest, to wit, the Ear, and the Eye; so in Infinite Matter, which is the
body of Nature, there are two parts, which are more understanding or knowing
then the rest, to wit, the Rational and Sensitive part of Infinite Matter; for
though it be true, That Nature, by self-division, made by self-motion into
self-figures, which are self-parts, causes a self-obscurity to each part,
motion, and figure; nevertheless, Nature being infinitely wise and knowing, its
infinite natural wisdom and knowledge is divided amongst those infinite parts of
the infinite body: and the two most intelligible parts, as I said, are the
sensitive and rational parts in Nature, which are divided, being infinite, into
every Figure or Creature; I cannot say equally divided, no more, then I can
say, all creatures are of equal shapes, sizes, properties, strengths,
quantities, qualities, constitutions, semblances, appetites, passions,
capacities, forms, natures, and the like; for Nature delights in variety, as
humane sense and reason may well perceive: for seldom any two creatures are
just alike, although of one kind or sort, but every creature does vary more or
less. Wherefore it is not probable, that the production or generation of all or
most Creatures, should be after one and the same manner or way, for else all
Creatures would be just alike without any difference. But this is to be
observed, that though Nature delights in variety, yet she does not delight in
confusion, but, as it is the propriety of Nature to work variously, so she
works also wisely; which is the reason, that the rational and sensitive parts
of Nature, which are the designing and architectonical parts, keep the species
of every kind of Creatures by the way of Translation in Generation, or natural
Production; for whatsoever is transferred, works according to the nature of
that figure or figures from whence it was transferred, But mistake me not; for
I do not mean always according to their exterior Figure, but according to their
interior Nature; for different motions in one and the same parts of matter,
make different figures, wherefore much more in several parts of matter and
changes of motion; But, as I said, Translation is the chief means to keep or
maintain the species of every kind of Creatures, which Translation in natural
production or generation, is of the purest and subtilest substances, to wit,
the sensitive and rational, which are the designing and architectonical parts
of Nature. You may ask me, Madam, what this wise and ingenious Matter is. I
answer: It is so pure, subtle, and self-active, as our humane shares of sense
and reason cannot readily or perfectly perceive it; for by that little part of
knowledge that a humane creature has, it may more readily perceive the strong
action then the purer substance; for the strongest action of the purest
substance is more perceivable then the matter or substance it self; which is
the cause, that most men are apt to believe the motion, and to deny the matter,
by reason of its subtilty; for surely the sensitive and rational matter is so
pure and subtle, as not to be expressed by humane sense and reason. As for the
rational-matter, it is so pure, fine, and subtle, that it may be as far beyond
lucent matter, as lucent matter is beyond gross vapors, or thick clouds; and
the sensitive matter seems not much less pure: also there is very pure
inanimate matter, but not subtle and active of it self; for as there are
degrees in the animate, so there are also degrees in the inanimate matter; so
that the purest degree of inanimate matter comes next to the animate, not in
motion, but in the purity of its own degree; for it cannot change its nature
so, as to become animate, yet it may be so pure in its own nature, as not to be
perceptible by our grosser senses. But concerning the two degrees of animate
Matter, to wit, the sensitive and rational, I say that the sensitive is much
more acute then Vitriol, Aquafortis, Fire, or the like; and the rational much
more subtle and active then Quicksilver, or Light, so as I cannot find a
comparison fit to express them, only that this sensitive and rational
self-moving Matter is the life and soul of Nature; But by reason this Matter is
not subject to our gross senses, although our senses are subject to it, as
being made, subsisting and acting through the power of its actions, we are not
apt to believe it, no more then a simple Country-wench will believe, that Air
is a substance, if she neither hear, see, smell, taste, or touch it, although
Air touches and surrounds her: But yet the effects of this animate matter prove
that there is such a matter; only, as I said before, this self-moving matter
causing a self-division as well as a general action, is the cause of a
self-obscurity, which obscurity causes doubts, disputes, and inconstancies in
humane opinions, although not so much obscurity, as to make all Creatures
blindfold, for surely there is no Creature but perceives more or less. But to
conclude, The Rational degree of Matter is the most intelligible, and the
wisest part of Nature, and the Sensitive is the most laborious and provident
part in Nature, both which are the Creators of all Creatures in Infinite
Matter; and if you intend to know more of this Rational and Sensitive Matter,
you may consult my Book of Philosophy, to which I refer you. And so taking my
leave for the present, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

II.
MADAM,
I Understand by your last, that you have read the Book of that most learned
and famous Physician and Anatomist, Dr. Harvey, which treats of Generation; and
in the reading of it, you have marked several scruples, which you have framed
into several questions concerning that subject, to which you desire my answer.
Truly, Madam, I am loath to imbarque my self in this difficult argument, not
only for the reasons I have given you heretofore, but also that I do not find
my self able enough to give you such a satisfactory answer as perhaps you do
expect. But since your Commands are so powerful with me, that I can hardly
resist them, and your Nature so good that you easily pardon any thing that is
amiss, I will venture upon it according to the strength of my Natural Reason,
and endeavor to give you my opinion as well and as clearly as I can. Your
first question is; Whether the action of one or more producers be the only
cause of Natural Production or Generation, without imparting or transferring
any of their own substance or Matter. I answer: The sole co-action of the
Producers may make a change of exterior forms or figures, but not produce
another Creature; for if there were not substance or matter, as well as action,
both transferred together, there would not be new Creatures made out of old
Matter, but every production would require new Matter, which is impossible, if
there be but one Matter, and that infinite; and certainly, humane sense and
reason may well perceive, that there can be but one Matter, for several kinds
of Matter would make a confusion; and thus if new Creatures were made only by
substanceless motion, it would not only be an infinite trouble to Nature, to
create something out of nothing perpetually, but, as I said, it would make "a
confusion amongst all Nature's works, which are her several Parts or Creatures.
But by reason there is but one Matter, which is Infinite and Eternel, and this
Matter has self-motion in it, both Matter, and Motion must of necessity
transmigrate, or be transferred together without any separation, as being but
one thing, to wit, Corporeal Motion. It Is true, one part of animate or
self-moving Matter, may without Translation move, or rather occasion other
parts to move; but one Creature cannot naturally produce another without the
transferring of its corporeal motions. But it is well to be observed, that
there is great difference between the actions of Nature; for all actions are
not generating, but some are patterning, and some transforming, and the like;
and as for the transforming action, that may be without translation, as being
nothing else but a change of motions in one and the same part or parts of
Matter, to wit, when the same parts of Matter do change into several figures,
and return into the same figures again. Also the action of Patterning is
without Translation; for to pattern out, is nothing else but to imitate, and to
make a figure in its own substance or parts of Matter like another figure. But
in generation every producer does transfer both Matter and Motion, that is,
Corporeal Motion into the produced; and if there be more producers then one,
they all do contribute to the produced; and if one Creature produces many
Creatures, those many Creatures do partake more or less of their producer. But
you may say, If the producer transfers its own Matter, or rather its own
corporeal motions into the produced, many productions will soon dissolve the
producer, and he will become a sacrifice to his offspring. I answer; That does
not follow: for as one or more Creatures contribute to one or more other
Creatures; so other Creatures do contribute to them, although not after one and
the same manner or way, but after diverse manners or ways; but all manners and
ways must be by translation to repair and assist; for no Creature can subsist
alone and of it self, but all Creatures traffic and commerce from and to each
other, and must of necessity do so, since they are all parts of the same
Matter: Neither can Motion subsist without Matter, nor quit Matter, nor act
without Matter, no more, then an Artificer can work without materials, and
without selfmotion Matter would be dead and useless; Wherefore Matter and
Motion must upon necessity not only be inseparable, but be one body, to wit,
corporeal motion; which motion by dividing and composing its several parts, and
acting variously, is the cause of all Production, Generation, Metamorphosing,
or any other thing that is done in Nature. But if, according to your Author,
the sole action be the cause of Generation without transferring of substance,
then Matter is useless, and of none or little effect; which, in my opinion, is
not probable.

Your second question is, Whether the Production or Generation of animals is as
the Conceptions of the Brain, which the Learned say are Immaterial? I answer:
The Conceptions of the Brain, in my opinion, are not Immaterial, but Corporeal;
for though the corporeal motions of the brain, or the matter of its
conceptions, is invisible to humane Creatures, and that when the brain is
dissected, there is no such matter found, yet that does not prove, that there
is no Matter, because it is not so gross a substance as to be perceptible by
our exterior senses: Neither will your Authors example hold, that as a builder
erects a house according to his conception in the brain, the same happens in
all other natural productions or generations; for, in my opinion, the house is
materially made in the brain, which is the conception of the builder, although
not of such gross materials, as Stone, Brick, Wood, and the like, yet of such
matter as is the Rational Matter, that is, the house when it is conceived in
the brain, is made by the rational corporeal figurative motions of their own
substance or degree of Matter; But if all Animals should be produced by mere
fancies, and a Man and a Woman should beget by fancying themselves together in
copulation, then the produced would be a true Platonic Child; But if a Woman
being from her Husband should be so got with Child, the question is, whether
the Husband would own the Child; and if amorous Lovers (which are more
contagious for appetite and fancy then Married persons) should produce Children
by Immaterial contagions, there would be more Children then Parents to own them.

Your third question is, Whether Animals may not be produced, as many Diseases
are, by contagion? I answer: Although contagions may be made at a distance, by
perception; yet those diseases are not begotten by immaterial motions, but by
the rational and sensitive corporeal motions, which work such diseases in the
body of a Creature, by the association of parts, like as the same disease is
made in another body: Neither are diseases always produced after one and the
same manner, but after diverse manners; whereas animals are produced as animals,
that is, after one natural and proper way; for although all the effects in
particular be not alike, yet the general way or manner to produce those effects
is the same: As for example; there is no other way to produce a fruitful Egg,
but by a Cock and a Hen; But a Contagious disease, as the Smallpox, or the
like, may be produced by the way of Surfeits or by Conceit, which may cause the
sensitive corporeal parts, through the irregular motions of the rational
corporeal parts, to work and produce such a disease, or any other ways. But
neither a disease, nor no creature else can be produced without matter, by
substanceless motion; for wheresoever is motion, there is also matter, matter
and motion being but one thing.

Your fourth question is, Whether an Animal Creature is perfectly shaped or
formed at the first Conception? I answer: If the Creature be composed of many
and different parts, my opinions is, it cannot be. You may say, That if it has
not all his parts produced at once, there will be required many acts of
generation to beget or produce every part, otherwise the producers would not be
the Parents of the produced in whole, but in part. I answer: The Producer is
the designer, architect, and founder of the whole Creature produced; for the
sensitive and rational corporeal motions, which are transferred from the
producer or producers, join to build the produced like to the producer in
specie, but the transferred parts may be invisible and insensible to humane
Creatures, both through their purity and little quantity, until the produced is
framed to some visible degree; for a stately building may proceed from a small
beginning, neither can humane sense tell what manner of building is designed at
the first foundation. But you may say, That many Eggs may be made by one act of
the producers, to wit, the Cock and the Hen, and those many Eggs may be laid at
several times, as also hatched at several times, and become Chickens at several
times. I answer; It may well and easily be so: for the rational and sensitive
parts or corporeal motions which were transferred in one act, designed many
produced through that one act; for those transferred corporeal motions,
although they have not a sufficient quantity of themselves to make all the
produced in their perfect shapes at once, yet they are the chief designer,
architect and founder of all that are to be produced; for the corporeal motions
which are transferred, join with those they are transferred to, and being
associates, work to one design, the sensitive being the architect, the rational
the designer, which together with the inanimate parts of matter, can never want
materials, neither can the materials want laborers; for the degrees of matter
are inseparable, and do make but one body or substance. Again you may say, That
some parts of Matter may produce another Creature not like to the producer in
its species, as for example, Monsters. I answer, That is possible to be done,
but yet it is not usual; for Monsters are not commonly born, but those
corporeal motions which dwell in one species, work according to the nature of
the same species; and when the parts of Matter are transferred from Creature to
Creature, that is, are separated from some parts, and joined to other pars of
the same species, and the same nature; those transferred parts of matter,
although invisible in quantity, by reason of their purity and subtilty, begin
the work of the produced according to its natural species, and the laborers in
other parts of matter work to the same end; just as it is in the artificial
building of a house, where the house is first designed by the Architect, or
Master, and then the laborers work not after their own fancy, (else it would
not be the same house that was designed, nor any uniformity in it) but
according to the architects or surveyors design; so those parts of matter or
corporeal motions that are transferred from the producer, are like the
architect, but the laborers or workmen are the assisting and adjoining parts
of matter. But you will say, How comes it, that many creatures may be made by
one or two? I answer: As one owner or two partners may be the cause of many
buildings, so few or more transferred rational and sensitive corporeal motions
may make and produce as many creatures as they can get materials and laborers;
for if they get one, they get the other, by reason the degrees of matter, viz.
animate and inanimate, are inseparably mixed, and make but one body or
substance; and the proof of it is, that all animals are not constant in the
number of their offspring, but sometimes produce more, and sometimes fewer,
and sometimes their offspring is less, and sometimes larger, according to the
quantity of matter. Again you may say, That in some Creatures there is no
passage to receive the transferred matter into the place of the architecture. I
answer: That all passages are not visible to humane sense; and some humane
Creatures have not a sufficient humane reason to conceive, that most of Natures
works are not so gross as to be subject to their exterior senses; but as for
such parts and passages, whether exterior or interior, visible or invisible, as
also for copulation, conception, formation, nourishment, and the like in
Generation, I leave you to Physicians and Anatomists. And to conclude this
question, we may observe, that not any animal Creatures shape dissolveth in one
instant of time, but by degrees; why should we believe then, that Animals are
generated or produced in their perfect shape in one instant of time, and by one
act of Nature? But sense and reason knows by observation, that an animal
Creature requires more time to be generated, then to be dissolved, like as an
house is sooner and with less pains pulled down, then built up. Your Fifth
question is, Whether Animals are not generated by the way of Metamorphosing? To
which I answer, That it is not possible that a third Creature can be made
without translation of corporeal motions; and since Metamorphosing is only a
change of motions in the same parts of Matter, without any translation of
corporeal motions, no animal Creature can be produced or generated by the way
of Metamorphosing. Your Sixth question is, Whether a whole may be made out of a
part? I answer: There is no whole in Nature, except you will call Nature her
self a whole; for all Creatures are but parts of Infinite Matter. Your Seventh
question is, Whether all Animals, as also Vegetables, are made or generated by
the way of Eggs? I have said heretofore, That it is not probable, that
different sorts, nay, different kinds of Creatures, should all have but one
manner or way of production; for why should not Nature make different ways of
productions, as well as different Creatures? And as for Vegetables, if all
their Seeds be likened unto Eggs, then Eggs may very well be likened to Seeds;
which if so, then a Peas-cod is the Hen, and the Peace in the Cod is the cluster
of Eggs: the like of ears of Corn. And those animals that produce but one
creature or seed at a time, may be like the kernel of a Nut, when the shell is
broke, the creature comes forth. But how this will agree with your Author, who
says, that the creature in the shell must make its own passage, I cannot tell;
for if the Nut be not broken by some external means or occasion, the kernel is
not like to get forth. And as for humane Eggs, I know not what to answer; for
it is said, that the first Woman was made of a man's ribb; but whether that ribb
was an egg, I cannot tell. And why may not Minerals and Elements be produced by
the way of Eggs as well as Vegetables and Animals? Nay, why may not the whole
World be likened unto an Egg? Which if so, the two Poles are the two ends of
the Egg; and for the Elements, the Yolk is the Fire, the White, the Water; the
Film, the Air; and the Shell it self will very well serve for the Earth: But
then it must first be broken, and pounded into one lump or solid mass, and so
swim or sink into the midst of the liquid parts, as to the Center; and as for
the several faetuses in this great Egg, they are the several Creatures in it.
Or it might be said, that the Chaos was an Egg, and the Universe, the Chicken.
But leaving this fimilizing, it is like, that some studious Men may by long
study upon one part of the body, conceive and believe that all other parts are
like that one part; like as those that have gazed long upon the Sun, all they
see for a time, are Suns to them; or like as those which having heard much of
Hobgoblins, all they see are Hobgoblins, their fancies making such things. But,
Madam, to make a conclusion also of this question, I repeat what I said before,
viz. that all Creatures have not one way of production; and as they have not
all one way of production, so they have neither one instant of time either for
perfection or dissolution, but their perfection and dissolution is made by
degrees. Your Eighth question is, Whether it may not be, that the sensitive and
rational corporeal motions in an Egg do pattern out the figure of the Hen and
Cock, whilst the Hen sits upon the Egg, and so bring forth Chickens by the way
of patterning? I answer: The action of patterning, is not the action of
Generation; for as I said heretofore, the actions of Nature are different, and
Generation must needs be performed by the way of translation, which translation
is not required in the action of Patterning; but according as the Producers
are, which transfer their own matter into the produced, so is the produced
concerning its species; which is plainly proved by common examples; for if
Pheasants, or Turkey, or Goose-eggs, be laid under an ordinary Hen, or an
ordinary Hens-egg be laid under a Pheasant, Turkey, or Goose, the Chickens of
those Eggs will never be of any other species then of those that produced the
Egg; for an ordinary Hen, if she sit upon Pheasants, Turkey, or Goose-eggs, does
not hatch Chickens of her own species, but the Chickens will be of the species
either of the Pheasant, or Turkey, or Goose, which did at first produce the Egg;
which proves, that in Generation, or Natural production, there is not only
required the action of the Producers, but also a Transferring of some of their
own parts to form the produced. But you may say, What does the sitting Hen
contribute then to the production of the Chicken? I answer: The sitting Hen
does only assist the Egg in the production of the Chicken, as the Ground does
the Seed. Your Ninth question is, Concerning the Soul of a particular Animal
Creature, as whether it be wholly of it self, and subsists wholly in and by it
self? But you must give me leave first to ask you what Soul you mean, whether
the Divine, or the Natural Soul, for there is great difference betwixt them,
although not the least that ever I heard, rightly examined and distinguished;
and if you mean the Divine Soul, I shall desire you to excuse me, for that
belongs to Divines, and not to Natural Philosophers; neither am I so
presumptuous as to entrench upon their sacred order. But as for the Natural
Soul, the Learned have divided it into three parts, to wit, the Vegetative,
Sensitive, and Rational Soul; and according to these three Souls, made three
kinds of lives, as the Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational Life. But they might
as well say, there are infinite bodies, lives, and souls, as three; for in
Nature there is but one life, soul, and body, consisting all of one Matter,
which is corporeal Nature. But yet by reason this life and soul is material, it
is divided into numerous parts, which make numerous lives and souls in every
particular Creature; for each particular part of the rational self-moving
Matter, is each particular soul in each particular Creature, but all those
parts considered in general, make but one soul of Nature; and as this
selfmoving Rational Matter has power to unite its parts, so it has ability or
power to divide its united parts. And thus the rational soul of every
particular Creature is composed of parts, (I mean parts of a material
substance; for whatsoever is substanceless and incorporeal, belongs not to
Nature, but is Supernatural;) for by reason the Infinite and Only matter is by
self-motion divided into self-parts, not any Creature can have a soul without
parts; neither can the souls of Creatures subsist without commerce of other
rational parts, no more then one body can subsist without the assistance of
other bodies; for all parts belong to one body, which is Nature: nay, if any
thing could subsist of it self, it were a God, and not a Creature: Wherefore
not any Creature can challenge a soul absolutely to himself, unless Man, who
has a divine soul, which no other Creature has. But that which makes so many
confusions and disputes amongst learned men is, that they conceive, first,
there is no rational soul but only in man; next, that this rational soul in
every man is individable. But if the rational soul is material, as certainly to
all sense and reason it is, then it must not only be in all material
Creatures, but be dividable too; for all that is material or corporeal has
parts, and is dividable, and therefore there is no such thing in any one
Creature as one entire soul; nay, we might as well say, there is but one
Creature in Nature, as say, there is but one individable natural soul in one
Creature. Your Tenth question is, Whether Souls are producible, or can be
produced? I answer: in my opinion, they are producible, by reason all parts in
Nature are so. But mistake me not; for I do not mean that any one part is
produced out of Nothing, or out of new matter; but one Creature is produced by
another, by the dividing and uniting, joining and disjoyning of the several
parts of Matter, and not by substanceless Motion out of new Matter. And because
there is not any thing in Nature, that has an absolute subsistence of it self,
each Creature is a producer, as well as a produced, in some kind or other; for
no part of Nature can subsist single, and without reference and assistance of
each other, or else every single part would not only be a whole of it self,
but be as a God without control; and though one part is not another part, yet
one part belongs to another part, and all parts to one whole, and that whole to
all the parts, which whole is one corporeal Nature. And thus, as I said before,
productions of one or more creatures, by one or more producers, without matter,
merely by immaterial motions, are impossible, to wit, that something should be
made or produced out of nothing; for if this were so, there would consequently
be an annihilation or turning into nothing, and those Creatures, which produce
others by the way of immaterial motions, would rather be as a God, then a part
of Nature, or Natural Matter. Besides, it would be an endless labor, and more
trouble to create particular Creatures out of nothing, then a World at once;
whereas now it is easy for Nature to create by production and transmigration;
and therefore it is not probable, that any one Creature has a particular life,
soul, or body to it self, as subsisting by it self, and as it were precised
from the rest, having its own subsistence without the assistance of any other;
nor is it probable, that any one Creature is new, for all that is, was, and
shall be, till the Omnipotent God disposes Nature otherwise.

As for the rest of your questions, as whether the Sun be the cause of all
motions, and of all natural productions; and whether the life of a Creature be
only in the blood, or whether it have its beginning from the blood, or whether
the blood be the chief architect of an animal, or be the seat of the soul;
sense and reason, in my opinion, does plainly contradict them; for concerning
the blood, if it were the seat of the Soul, then in the circulation of the
blood, if the Soul has a brain, it would become very dizzie by its turning
round; but perchance some may think the Soul to be a Sun, and the Blood the
Zodiac, and the body the Globe of the Earth, which the Soul surrounds in such
time as the Blood is flowing about. And so leaving those similizing Fancies,
I Will add no more, but repeat what I said in the beginning, viz. that I rely
upon the goodness of your Nature, from which I hope for pardon, if I have not
so exactly and solidly answered your desire; for the argument of this discourse
being so difficult, may easily lead me into an error, which your better
judgment will soon correct; and in so doing you will add to those favors for
which I am already,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most obliged Friend and humble Servant.

III.
MADAM,
You thought verily, I had mistaken my self in my last, concerning the Rational
Souls of every particular Creature, because I said, all Creatures had numerous
Souls; and not only so, but every particular Creature had numerous Souls.
Truly, Madam, I did not mistake my self, for I am of the same opinion still;
for though there is but one Soul in infinite Nature, yet that soul being
dividable into parts, every part is a soul in every single creature, were the
parts no bigger in quantity then an atome. But you ask whether Nature has
Infinite souls? I answer: That Infinite Nature is but one Infinite body,
divided into Infinite parts, which we call Creatures; and therefore it may as
well be said, That Nature is composed of Infinite Creatures or Parts, as she is
divided into Infinite Creatures or Parts; for Nature being Material, is
dividable, and composable. The same may be said of Nature's Soul, which is the
Rational part of the only infinite Matter, as also of Nature's Life, which is
the sensitive part of the only Infinite self-moving Matter; and of the
Inanimate part of the only. Infinite Matter, which I call the body for
distinction sake, as having no self-motion in its own nature, for Infinite
Material Nature has an Infinite Material Soul, Life, and Body. But, Madam, I
desire you to observe what I said already, viz. that the parts of Nature are as
apt to divide, as to unite; for the chief actions of Nature are to divide, and
to unite; which division is the cause, that it may well be said, every
particular Creature has numerous souls; for every part of rational Matter is a
particular Soul, and every part of the sensitive Matter is a particular Life;
all which, mixed with the Inanimate Matter, though they be Infinite in parts,
yet they make but one Infinite whole, which is Infinite Nature; and thus the
Infinite division into Infinite parts is the cause, that every particular
Creature has numerous Souls, and the transmigration of parts from, and to
parts, is the reason, that not any Creature can challenge a single soul, or
souls to it self; the same for life. But most men are unwilling to believe,
that Rational Souls are material, and that this rational Matter is dividable in
Nature; when as humane sense and reason may well perceive, that Nature is
active, and full of variety; and action, and variety cannot be without motion,
division, and composition: but the reason that variety, division, and
composition, runs not into confusion, is, that first there is but one kind of
Matter; next, that the division and composition of parts does balance each
other into a union in the whole. But, to conclude, those Creatures which have
their rational parts most united, are the wisest; and those that have their
rational parts most divided, are the wittiest; and those that have much of this
rational matter, are much knowing; and those which have less of this rational
matter, are less knowing; and there is no Creature that has not some; for like
as all the parts of a humane body are endued with life, and soul; so are all
the parts of Infinite Nature; and though some parts of Matter are not animate
in themselves, yet there is no part that is not mixed with the animate matter;
so that all parts of Nature are moving, and moved. And thus, hoping I have
cleared my self in this point, to your better understanding, I take my leave,
and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

IV.
MADAM,
IN the Works of that most famous Philosopher and Mathematician of our age Gal.
which you thought worth my reading, I find, he discourses much of upwards and
downwards, backwards and forwards; but to tell you really, I do not understand
what he means by those words, for, in my opinion, there is properly no such
thing as upwards, downwards, backwards, or forwards in Nature, for all this is
nothing else but natural corporeal motions, to which in respect of some
particulars we do attribute such or such names; for if we conceive a Circle, I
pray where is upwards and downwards, backwards and forwards? Certainly, it is,
in my opinion, just like that, they name Rest, Place, Space, Time, etc. when as
Nature her self knows of no such things, but all these are only the several
and various motions of the only Matter. You will say, How can Rest be a
motion? I answer: Rest is a word which expresses rather man's ignorance then his
knowledge; for when he sees, that a particular Creature has not any external
local motion perceptible by his sight, he says it rests, and this rest he
calls a cessation from motion, when as yet there is no such thing as cessation
from motion in Nature; for motion is the action of natural Matter, and its
Nature is to move perpetually; so that it is more probable for motion to be
annihilated, then to cease. But you may say, It is a cessation from some
particular motion. I answer: You may rather call it an alteration of a
particular motion, then a cessation; for though a particular motion does not
move in that same manner as it did before, nevertheless it is still there, and
not only there, but still moving; only it is not moving after the same manner
as it did move heretofore, but has changed from such a kind of motion to
another kind of motion, and being still moving it cannot be said to cease:
Wherefore what is commonly called cessation from motion, is only a change of
some particular motion, and is a mistake of change for rest. Next, I find in
the same Author a long discourse of circular and strait motions; to wit, That
they are simple motions, and that all others are composed out of them, and are
mixed motions; Also, That the Circular Motion is perfect, and the Right
imperfect; and that all the parts of the world, if moveable of their own
nature, it is impossible, that their motions should be Right, or any other then
Circular: That a Circular motion is never to be gotten naturally, without a
preceding right motion: That a Right motion cannot naturally be perpetual: That
a Right motion is impossible in the World well ordered: and the like. First, I
cannot conceive why natural Matter should use the Circle-figure more then any
other in the motions of her Creatures; for Nature, which is Infinite Matter, is
not bound to one particular motion, or to move in a Circle more then any other
figure, but she moves more variously then any one part of hers can conceive;
Wherefore it is not requisite that the natural motions of natural bodies should
be only Circular. Next, I do not understand, why a Circular Motion cannot be
gotten naturally without a precedent right motion; for, in my opinion,
corporeal motions may be round or circular, without being or moving straight
before; and if a straight line does make a circle, then an imperfect figure
makes a perfect; but, in my opinion, a circle may as well make a straight line,
as a strait line a circle; except it be like a Gordian knot, that it cannot be
dissolved, or that Nature may make some corporeal motions as constant as she
makes others inconstant, for her motions are not alike in continuance and
alteration. And as for right motion, that naturally it cannot be perpetual; my
opinion is, that it cannot be, if Nature be finite; but if Nature be infinite,
it may be: But the circular motion is more proper for a finite, then an
infinite, because a circle-figure is perfect and circumscribed, and a straight
line is infinite, or at least producible in infinite; and there may be other
worlds in infinite Nature, besides these round Globes perceptible by our sight,
which may have other figures; for though it be proper for Globes or Spherical
bodies to move round, yet that does not prove, that Infinite Matter moves
round, or that all worlds must be of a Globous figure; for there may be as
different Worlds, as other Creatures. He says, That a Right motion is
impossible in the World well ordered; But I cannot conceive a Right motion to
be less orderly then a Circular in Nature, except it be in some Particulars;
but oftentimes that, which is well ordered in some cases, seems to some men's
understandings and perceptions ill ordered in other cases; for man, as a part,
most commonly considers but the Particulars, not the Generals, like as every
one in a Commonwealth considers more himself and his Family, then the Public.
Lastly, Concerning the simplicity of Motions, as that only circular and
straight motions are simple motions, because they are made by simple Lines; I
know not what they mean by simple Lines; for the same Lines which make straight
and circular figures, may make as well other figures as those; but, in my
opinion, all motions may be called simple, in regard of their own nature; for
they are nothing else but the sensitive and rational part of Matter, which in
its own nature is pure, and simple, and moves according to the Nature of each
Figure, either swiftly or slowly, or in this or that sort of motion; but the
most simple, purest and subtillest part is the rational part of matter, which
though it be mixed with the sensitive and inanimate in one body, yet it can and
does move figuratively in its own matter, without the help or assistance of any
other. But I desire you to remember, Madam, that in the compositions and
divisions of the parts of Nature, there is as much unity and agreement as there
is discord and disagreement; for in Infinite, there is no such thing, as most,
and least; neither is there any such thing as more perfect, or less perfect in
Matter. And as for Irregularities, properly there is none in Nature, for Nature
is Regular; but that, which Man (who is but a small part of Nature, and
therefore but partly knowing) names Irregularities, or Imperfections, is only
a change and alteration of motions; for a part can know the variety of motions
in Nature no more, then Finite can know Infinite, or the bare exterior shape
and figure of a man's body can know the whole body, or the head can know the
mind; for Infinite natural knowledge is corporeal; and being corporeal, it is
dividable; and being dividable, it cannot be confined to one part only; for
there is no such thing as an absolute determination or subsistence in parts
without relation or dependence upon one another. And since Matter is Infinite,
and acts wisely, and all for the best, it may be as well for the best of
Nature, when parts are divided antipathetically, as when they they are united
sympathetically: Also Matter being Infinite, it cannot be perfect, neither can
a part be called perfect, as being a part. But mistake me not, Madam; for when
I say, there is no perfection in Nature, as I do in my Philosophical Opinions
Part. 1. e. 14.
, I mean by Perfection, a finiteness, absoluteness, or compleatness of figure;
and in this sense I say Nature has no perfection by reason it is Infinite; but
yet I do not deny, but that there is a perfection in the nature or essence of
Infinite Matter; for Matter is perfect Matter; that is, pure and simple in its
own substance or nature, as mere Matter, without any mixture or addition of
some thing that is not Matter, or that is between Matter and no Matter; and
material motions are perfect motions although Infinite: just as a line may be
called a perfect line, although it be endless, and Gold, or other Metal, may
be called perfect Gold, or perfect Metal, although it be but a part. And thus
it may be said of Infinite Nature, or Infinite Matter, without any
contradiction, that it is both perfect, and not perfect; perfect in its nature
or substance, not perfect in its exterior figure. But you may say, If Infinite
Matter be not perfect, it is imperfect, and what is imperfect, wants something.
I answer, That does not follow: for we cannot say, that what is not perfect,
must of necessity be imperfect, because there is something else, which it may
be, to wit, Infinite; for as imperfection is beneath perfection, so perfection
is beneath Infinite; and though Infinite Matter be not perfect in its figure,
yet it is not imperfect, but Infinite; for Perfection and Imperfection belongs
only to Particulars, and not to Infinite. And thus much for the present. I
conclude, and rest,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most obliged Friend and humble servant.

V.
MADAM,
The Author, mentioned in my former Letter,. says, That Quietness is the degree
of Infinite slowness, and that a moveable body passing from quietness, passes
through all the degrees of slowness without staying in any. But I cannot
conceive that all the Parts of Matter should be necessitated to move by
degrees; for though there be degrees in Nature, yet Nature does not in all her
Actions move by degrees. You may say, for example, from one to twenty, there
are eighteen degrees between One, and Twenty; and all these degrees are
included in the last degree, which is twenty. I answer; That may be: but yet
there is no progress made through all those degrees; for when a body does move
strong at one time, and the next time after moves weak; I cannot conceive how
any degrees should really be made between. You may say, By Imagination. But
this Imagination of degrees, is like the conception of Space and Place, when as
yet there is no such thing as Place or Space by it self; for all is but one
body, and Motion is the action of this same body, which is corporeal Nature;
and because a particular body can and does move after various manners,
according to the change of its corporeal motions, this variety of motions man
call's Place, Space; Time, Degrees, etc. confidering them by themselves, and
giving them peculiar names, as if they could be parted from body, or at least
be conceived without body; for the Conception or Imagination it self is
corporeal, and so are they nothing else but corporeal motions. But it seems as
if this same Author conceived also motion to be a thing by it self, and that
motion begets motion, when he says, That a body by moving grows stronger in
motion by degrees, when as yet the strength was in the matter of the body
eternally; for Nature was always a grave Matron, never a sucking Infant: and
though parts by dissolving and composing may lose and get acquaintance of each
other, yet no part can be otherwise in its nature, then ever it was; Wherefore
change of corporeal motions is not losing nor getting strength or swiftness;
for Nature does not lose force, although she does not use force in all her
various actions; neither can any natural body get more strength then by nature
it has, although it may get the assistance of other bodies joined to it. But
swiftness and slowness are according to the several figurative actions of
self-moving matter; which several actions or motions of Nature, and their
alterations, cannot be found out by any particular Creature: As for example,
the motions of Lead, and the motions of Wood, unless Man knew their several
causes; for Wood, in some cases, may move slower then Lead; and Lead, in other
cases, slower then Wood. Again: the same Author says, That an heavy moveable
body descending, gets force enough to bring it back again to as much height.
But I think, it might as well be said, That a Man walking a mile, gets as much
strength as to walk back that mile; when it is likely, that having walked ten
miles, he may not have so much strength as to walk back again one mile; neither
is he necessitated to walk back, except some other more powerful body do force
him back: for though Nature is self-moving, yet every part has not an absolute
power, for many parts may overpower fewer; also several corporeal motions may
cross and oppose as well as assist each other; for if there were not
opposition, as well as agreement and assistance amongst Nature's parts, there
would not be such variety in Nature as there is. Moreover, he makes mention of
a Line, with a weight hung to its end, which being removed from the
perpendicular, presently falls to the same again. To which, I answer: That it
is the appetite and desire of the Line, not to move by constraint, or any
forced exterior motion; but that which forces the Line to move from the
Perpendicular, does not give it motion, but is only an occasion that it moves
in such a way; neither does the line get that motion from any other exterior
body, but it is the lines own motion; for if the motion of the hand, or any
other exterior body, should give the line that motion, I pray, from which does
it receive the motion to tend to its former state? Wherefore, when the Line
moves backwards or forwards, it is not, that the Line gets what it had not
before, that is, a new corporeal motion, but it uses its own motion; only, as
I said, that exterior body is the occasion that it moves after such a manner or
way, and therefore this motion of the line, although it is the lines own
motion, yet in respect of the exterior body that causes it to move that way, it
may be called a forced, or rather an occasioned motion. And thus no body can
get motion from another body, except it get matter too; for all that motion
that a body has, proceeds from the self-moving part of matter, and motion and
matter are but one thing; neither is there any inanimate part of matter in
Nature, which is not comixed with the animate, and consequently, there is no
part which is not moving, or moved; the Animate part of matter is the only
self-moving part, and the Inanimate the moved: not that the animate matter does
give away its own motion to the inanimate, and that the inanimate becomes
self-moving; but the animate, by reason of the close conjunction and
commixture, works together with the inanimate, or causes the inanimate to work
with it; and thus the inanimate remains as simple in its own nature, as the
animate does in its nature, although they are mixed; for those mixtures do not
alter the simplicity of each others Nature. But having discoursed of this
subject in my former Letters, I take my leave, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VI.
MADAM,
IT seems, my former Letter concerning Motion, has given you occasion to
propound this following question to me, to wit, When I throw a bowl, or strike
a ball with my hand; whether the motion, by which the bowl or ball is moved, be
the hands, or the balls own motion? or whether it be transferred out of my hand
into the ball? To which, I return this short answer: That the motion by which
(for example) the bowl is moved, is the bowls own motion, and not the hands
that threw it; for the hand cannot transfer its own motion, which has a
material being, out of it self into the bowl, or any other thing it handles,
touches, or moves; or else if it did, the hand would in a short time become
weak and useless, by losing so much substance, unless new motions were as fast
created, as expended. You Will say, perhaps, that the hand and the bowl may
exchange motions, as that the bowls own motion does enter into the hand, and
supply that motion which went out of the hand into the bowl, by a close joining
or touch, for in all things moving and moved, must be a joining of the mover to
the moved, either immediate, or by the means of another body. I answer: That
this is more probable, then that the hand should give out, or impart motion to
the bowl, and receive none from the bowl; but by reason motion cannot be
transferred without matter, as being both inseparably united, and but one
thing; I cannot think it probable, that any of the animate or self-moving
matter in the hand, quits the hand, and enters into the bowl; nor that the
animate matter, which is in the bowl, leaves the bowl, and enters into the
hand, because that self-moving substance is not readily prepared for so sudden
a Translation or Transmigration. You may say, It may as easily be done as food
is received into an animal body and excrement discharged, or as air is taken
in, and breath sent out, by the way of respiration; and that all Creatures are
not only produced from each other, but do subsist by each other, and act by
each others assistance. I answer: It is very true, that all Creatures have more
power and strength by a joined assistance, then if every part were single, and
subsisted of it self. But as some parts do assist each other, so on the other
side, some parts do resist each other; for though there be a unity in the
nature of Infinite Matter, yet there are divisions also in the Infinite parts
of Infinite Matter, which causes Antipathy as much as Sympathy; but they being
equal in assistance as well as in resistance, it causes a conformity in the
whole nature of Infinite Matter; for if there were not contrary, or rather, I
may say, different effects proceeding from the only cause, which is the only
matter, there could not possibly be any, or at least, so much variety in
Nature, as humane sense and reason perceives there is. But to return to our
first argument: You may say, that motion may be transferred out of one body
into another, without transferring any of the Matter. I answer: That is
impossible, unless motion were that which some call No-thing, but how No-thing
can be transferred, I cannot imagine: Indeed no sense and reason in Nature can
conceive that which is No-thing; for how should it conceive that which is not
in Nature to be found. You Will say, perhaps, It is a substanceless thing, or an
incorporeal, immaterial being or form. I answer: In my opinion, it is a mere
contradiction, to say, a substanceless thing, form, or being, for surely in
Nature it cannot be. But if it be not possible that motion can be divided from
matter, you may say, that body from whence the motion is transferred, would
become less in bulk and weight, and weaker with every act of motion; and those
bodies into which corporeal motion or selfmoving matter was received, would
grow bigger, heavier, and stronger. To which, I answer: That this is the
reason, which denies that there can be a translation of motion out of the
moving body into the moved; for questionless, the one would grow less, and the
other bigger, that by loosing so much substance, this by receiving. Nay if it
were possible, as it is not, that motion could be transferred without matter,
the body out of which it goes, would nevertheless grow weaker; for the strength
lies in the motion, unless you believe, this motion which is transferred to
have been useless in the mover, and only useful to the moved; or else it would
be superfluous in the moved, except you say, it became to be annihilated after
it was transferred and had done its effect; but if so, then there would be a
perpetual and infinite creation and annihilation of substanceless motion, and
how there could be a creation and annihilation of nothing, my reason cannot
conceive, neither is it possible, unless Nature had more power then God, to
create Nothing, and to annihilate Nothing. The truth is, it is more probable
for sense and reason to believe a Creation of Something out of Nothing, then a
Creation of Nothing out of Nothing. Wherefore it cannot in sense and reason be,
that the motion of the hand is transferred into the bowl. But yet I do not say,
that the motion of the hand does not contribute to the motion of the bowl; for
though the bowl has its own natural motion in it self, (for Nature and her
creatures know of no rest, but are in a perpetual motion, though not always
exterior and local, yet they have their proper and certain motions, which are
not so easily perceived by our grosser senses.) nevertheless the motion of the
bowl would not move by such an exterior local motion, did not the motion of the
hand, or any other exterior moving body give it occasion to move that way;
Wherefore the motion of the hand may very well be said to be the cause of that
exterior local motion of the bowl, but not to be the same motion by which the
bowl moves. Neither is it requisite, that the hand should quit its own motion,
because it uses it in stirring up, or putting on the motion of the bowl; for it
is one thing to use, and another to quit; as for example, it is one thing to
offer his life for his friends service, another to employ it, and another to
quit or lose it. But, Madam, there may be infinite questions or exceptions, and
infinite answers made upon one truth; but the wisest and most probable way is,
to rely upon sense and reason, and not to trouble the mind, thoughts, and
actions of life, with improbabilities, or rather impossibilities, which sense
and reason knows not of, nor cannot conceive. You may say, A Man has sometimes
improbable, or impossible Fancies, Imaginations, or Chymaera's, in his mind,
which are No-things. I answer, That those Fancies and Imaginations are not
No-things, but as perfectly imbodied as any other Creatures; but by reason,
they are not so grossly imbodied, as those creatures that are composed of more
sensitive and inanimate matter, man thinks or believes them to be no bodies;
but were they substanceless figures, he could not have them in his mind or
thoughts: The truth is, the purity of reason is not so perspicuous and plain to
sense, as sense is to reason, the sensitive matter being a grosser substance
then the rational. And thus, Madam, I have answered your proposed question,
according to the ability of my Reason, which I leave to your better
examination, and rest in the mean while,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

VII.
MADAM,
HAving made some mention in my former Letter of the Receiving of Food, and
discharging of Excrements, as also of Respiration, which consists in the
sucking in of air, and sending out of breath in an animal body; you desire to
know, Whether Respiration be common to all animal Creatures? Truly, I have not
the experience, as to tell you really, whether all animals respire, or not; for
my life being, for the most part, solitary and contemplative, but not active, I
please my self more with the motions of my thoughts, then of my senses; and
therefore I shall give you an answer according to the conceivement of my reason
only, which is, That I believe, all animals require Respiration; not only
those, which live in the air, but those also, which live in waters, and within
the earth; but they do not respire all after one and the same manner; for the
matter which they imbreath, is not every where the same, nor have they all the
same organs, or parts, nor the same motions. As for example: Some Creatures
require a more thin and rarer substance for their imbreathing or inspiring,
then others, and some a more thick and grosser substance then others, according
to their several Natures; for as there are several kinds of Creatures,
according to their several habitations or places they live in, so they have
each a distinct and several sort of matter or substance for their
inspiraration. As for example: Some live in the Air, some upon the face of the
Earth, some in the bowels of the Earth, and some in Waters. There is some
report of a Salamander, who lives in the Fire; but it being not certainly
known, deserves not our speculation. And, as in my opinion, all animal
Creatures require Respiration, so I do verily believe, that also all other
kinds of Creatures, besides animals, have some certain manmer of imbreathing
and transpiring, viz. Vegetables, Minerals, and Elements, although not after
the same way as Animals, yet in a way peculiar and proper to the nature of
their own kind. For example: Take away the earth from Vegetables, and they will
die, as being, in my opinion, stifled or smothered, in the same manner, as when
the Air is taken away from some Animals. Also, take Minerals out of the bowels
of the Earth, and though we cannot say, they die, or are dead, because we have
not as yet found out the alterative motions of Minerals, as well as of
Vegetables, or Animals, yet we know that they are dead from production and
increase, for not any Metal increases being out of the Earth. And as for
Elements, it is manifest that Fire will die for want of vent; but the rest of
the Elements, if we could come to know the matter; manner, and ways of their
Vital Breathing, we might kill or revive them as we do Fire. And therefore all
Creatures, to my Reason, require a certain matter and manner of inspiration and
expiration, which is nothing else but an adjoining and disjoyning of parts to
and from parts; for not any natural part or creature can subsist single, and by
it self, but requires assistance from others, as this, and the rest of my
opinions in Natural Philosophy, desire the assistance of your favor, or else
they will die, to the grief of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

VIII.
MADAM,
TH other day I met with the Work of that Learned Author Dr. Chapter which treats
of Natural Philosophy; and amongst the rest, in the Chapter of Place, I found
that he blames Aristotle for saying, there are none but corporeal dimensions,
Length, Breadth, and Depth in Nature, making besides these corporeal, other
incorporeal dimensions which he attributes to Vacuum. Truly, Madam, an
incorporeal dimension or extension, seems, in my opinion, a mere contradiction;
for I cannot conceive how nothing can have a dimension or extension, having
nothing to be extended or measured. His words are these: Imagine we therefore,
that God should please to annihilate the whole stock or mass of Elements, and
all concretions resulting therefrom, that is, all corporeal substances now
contained within the ambit or concave of the lowest Heaven, or Lunar sphere;
and having thus imagined, can we conceive that all the vast space or region
circumscribed by the concave superfice of the Lunar sphere, would not remain
the same in all its dimensions, after as before the reduction of all bodies
included therein to nothing? To which, I answer: That, in my opinion, he makes
Nature Supernatural; for although God's Power may make Vacuum, yet Nature
cannot; for God's and Nature's Power are not to be compared, neither is God's
invisible Power perceptible by Natures parts; but according to Natural
Perception, it is impossible to conceive a Vacuum, for we cannot immagine a
Vacuum, but we must think of a body, as your Author of the Circle of the Moon;
neither could he think of space but from one side of the Circle to the other,
so that in his mind he brings two sides together, and yet will have them
distant; but the motions of his thoughts being subtiler and swifter then his
senses, skip from side to side without touching the middle parts, like as a
Squirrel from bough to bough, or an Ape from one table to another, without
touching the ground, only cutting the air. Next, he says, That an absolute
Vacuum, is neither an Accident, nor a Body, nor yet Nothing, but Something,
because it has a being; which opinion seems to me like that of the divine Soul;
but I suppose Vacuum is not the divine Soul, nor the divine Soul, Vacuum; or
else it could not be sensible of the blessed happiness in Heaven, or the
Torments in Hell. Again he says, Let us screw our supposition one pin higher,
and farther imagine, that God, after the annihilation of this vast machine, the
Universe, should create another in all respects equal to this, and in the same
part of space wherein this now consists: First, we must conceive, that as the
spaces were immense before God created the world, so also must they eternally
persist of infinite extent, if he shall please at any time to destroy it; Next,
that these immense spaces are absolutely immovable. By this opinion, it seems,
that Gods Power cannot so easily make or annihilate Vacuum, as a substance;
because he believes it to be before all Matter, and to remain after all Matter,
which is to be eternal; but I cannot conceive, why Matter, or fullness of body,
should not as well be Infinite and Eternal, as his conceived Vacuum; for if
Vacuum can have an eternal and infinite being, why may not fullness of body, or
Matter? But he calls Vacuum Immovable, which in my opinion is to make it a God;
for God is only Immovable and Unalterable, and this is more Glorious then to
be dependant upon God; wherefore to believe Matter to be Eternal, but yet
dependent upon God, is a more humble opinion, then his opinion of Vacuum; for
if Vacuum be not created, and shall not be annihilated, but is Uncreated,
Immaterial, Immovable, Infinite, and Eternal, it is a God; but if it be
created, God being not a Creator of Nothing, nor an annihilator of Nothing, but
of Something, he cannot be a Creator of Vacuum; for Vacuum is a pure Nothing.
But leaving Nothing to those that can make something of it, I will add no more,
but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

IX.
MADAM,
THat Learned Author, of whom I made mention in my last, is pleased to say in
his Chapter of Time, that Time is the Twin-brother to Space; but if Space be as
much as Vacuum, then I say, they are Twin-nothings; for there can be no such
thing as an empty or immaterial space, but that which man calls space, is only
a distance betwixt several corporeal parts, and time is only the variation of
corporeal motions; for were there no body, there could not be any space, and
were there no corporeal motion, there could not be any time. As for Time,
considered in General, it is nothing else but the corporeal motions in Nature,
and Particular times are the Particular corporeal motions; but Duration is
only a continuance, or continued subsistence of the same parts, caused by the
consistent motions of those parts; Neither are Time, Duration, Place, Space,
Magnitude, etc. dependents upon corporeal motions, but they are all one and the
same thing; Neither was Time before, nor can be after corporeal motion, for
none can be without the other, being all one: And as for Eternity, it is one
fixed instant, without a flux, or motion. Concerning his argument of
Divisibility of Parts, my opinion is, That there is no Part in Nature
Individable, no not that so small a part, which the Epicureans name an Atome;
neither is Matter separable from Matter, nor Parts from Parts in General, but
only in Particulars; for though parts can be separated from parts, by
selfmotion, yet upon necessity they must join to parts, so as there can never
be a single part by it self. But hereof, as also of Place, Space, Time, Motion,
Figure, Magnitude, etc. I have sufficiently discoursed in my former Letters, as
also in my Book of Philosophy; and as for my opinion of Atoms, their figures
and motions, (if any such things there be) I will refer you to my Book of
Poems, out of which give me leave to repeat these following lines, containing
the ground of my opinion of Atoms:

All Creatures, howsoever they may be named, Page 7. in the second Impression.

Are of long, square, flat, or sharp Atoms framed.
Thus several figures several tempers make, Page 9.

But what is mixed, does of the four partake.
The only cause, why things do live and die, Page 22.

'S according as the mixed Atoms lie.
Thus life, and death, and young, and old, Page 24.

Are as the several Atoms hold:
Wit, understanding in the brain
Are as the several atoms reign:
And dispositions, good, or ill,
Are as the several atoms still;
And every Passion, which does rise,
Is as each several atome lies.
Thus sickness, health, and peace, and war,
Are as the several atoms are.
If you desire to know more, you may read my mentioned Book of Poems whose
first Edition was printed in the year, 1653. And so taking my leave of you, I
rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

X.
MADAM,
I Received the Book of your new Author that treats of Natural Philosophy,
which I perceive is but lately come forth; but although it be new, yet there
are no new opinions in it; for the Author does follow the opinions of some old
Philosophers, and argues after the accustomed Scholastical way, with hard,
intricate, and nonsensical words: Wherefore I shall not take so much pains as
to read it quite over, but only pick out here and there some few discourses,
which I shall think most convenient for the clearing of my own opinion; in the
number of which, is, first, that of Matter, whereof the Author is pleased to
proclaim the opinion that holds Matter to be Infinite, not only absurd, but
also impious. Truly, Madam, it is easily said, but hardly proved; and not to
trouble you with unnecessary repetitions, I hope you do remember as yet what I
have written to you in the beginning concerning the infiniteness of Nature, or
natural Matter, where I have proved that it implies no impiety, absurdity, or
contradiction at all, to believe that Matter is Infinite; for your Authors
argument, concluding from the finiteness of particular Creatures to Nature her
self, is of no force; for though no part of Nature is Infinite in bulk, figure,
or quantity, nevertheless, all the parts of Infinite Nature are Infinite in
number, which infinite number of parts must needs make up one Infinite body in
bulk, or quantity; for as a finite body or substance is dividable into finite
parts, so an Infinite body, as Nature, or natural Matter, must of necessity be
dividable into infinite parts in number, and yet each part must also be finite
in its exterior figure, as I have proved in the beginning by the example of a
heap of grains of corn. Certainly, Madam, I see no reason, but since, according
to your Author, God, as the prime Cause, Agent, and Producer of all things, and
the action by which he produced all things, is Infinite; the Matter out of
which he produced all particular Creatures may be Infinite also. Neither does
it, to my sense and reason, imply any contradiction or impiety; for it
derogates nothing from the Glory and Omnipotency of God, but God is still the
God of Nature, and Nature is his Servant, although Infinite, depending wholly
upon the will and pleasure of the All-powerful God: Neither do these two
Infinites obstruct each other; for Nature is corporeal, and God is a
supernatural and spiritual Infinite Being, and although Nature has an Infinite
power, yet she has but an Infinite Natural power, whereas Gods Omnipotency is
infinitely extended beyond Nature. But your Author is pleased to refute that
argument, which concludes from the effect to the cause, and proves Matter to be
infinite, because God as the Cause is Infinite, saying, that this Rule does
only hold in Univocal things, (by which, I suppose, he understands things of
the same kind and nature) and not in opposites. Truly, Madam, by this he limits
Gods power, as if God were not able to work beyond Nature, and Natural Reason
or Understanding; and measures Gods actions according to the rules of Logic;
which whether it be not more impious, you may judge your self. And as for
opposites, God and Nature are not opposites, except you will call opposites
those which bear a certain relation to one another, as a Cause, and its Effect;
a Parent, and a Child; a Master, and a Servant; and the like. Nay, I wonder how
your Author can limit Gods action, when as he confesses himself, that the
Creation of the World is an Infinite action. God acted finitely, says he, by an
Infinite action; which, in my opinion, is mere nonsense, and as much as to
say, a man can act weakly by a strong action, basely by an honest action,
cowardly by a stout action. The truth is, God being Infinite, cannot work
finitely; for, as his Essence, so his Actions cannot have any limitation, and
therefore it is most probable, that God made Nature Infinite; for though each
part of Nature is finite in its own figure, yet considered in general, they are
Infinite, as well in number, as duration, except God be pleased to destroy
them; nay, every particular may in a certain sense be said Infinite, to wit,
Infinite in time or duration; for if Nature be Infinite and Eternal, and there
be no annihilation or perishing in Nature, but a perpetual successive change
and alteration of natural figures, then no part of Nature can perish or be
annihilated; and if no part of Nature perishes, then it lasts infinitely in
Nature, that is, in the substance of natural Matter; for though the corporeal
motions, which make the figures, do change, yet the ground of the figure, which
is natural matter, never changes. The same may be said of corporeal motions:
for though motions change and vary infinite ways, yet none is lost in Nature,
but some motions are repeated again: As for example; the natural motions in an
Animal Creature, although they are altered in the dissolution of the animal
figure, yet they may be repeated again by piecemeals in other Creatures; like
as a Commonwealth, or united body in society, if it should be dissolved and
dispersed, the particulars which did constitute this Commonwealth or society,
may join to the making of another society; and thus the natural motions of a
body do not perish when the figure of the body dissolves, but join with other
motions to the forming and producing of some other figures. But to return to
your Author. I perceive his discourse is grounded upon a false supposition,
which appears by his way of arguing from the course of the Stars and Planets,
to prove the finiteness of Nature; for by reason the Stars and Planets roll
about, and turn to the same point again, each within a certain compass of time,
he concludes Nature or Natural Matter to be finite too. And so he takes a part
for the whole, to wit, this visible World for all Nature, when as this World is
only a part of Nature, or Natural Matter, and there may be more and Infinite
worlds besides; Wherefore his conclusion must needs be false, since it is built
upon a false ground. Moreover, he is as much against the Eternity of Matter, as
he is against Infiniteness; concluding likewise from the parts to the whole:
For, says he, since the parts of Nature are subject to a beginning and ending,
the whole must be so too. But he is much mistaken, when he attributes a
beginning and ending to parts, for there is no such thing as a beginning and
ending in Nature, neither in the whole, nor in the parts, by reason there is no
new creation or production of Creatures out of new Matter, nor any total
destruction or annihilation of any part in Nature, but only a change,
alteration and transmigration of one figure into another; which change and
alteration proves rather the contrary, to wit, that Matter is Eternal and
Incorruptible; for if particular figures change, they must of necessity change
in the Infinite Matter, which it self, and in its nature, is not subject to any
change or alteration: besides, though particulars have a finite and limited
figure, and do change, yet their species do not; for Mankind never changes, nor
ceases to be, though Peter and Paul die, or rather their figures dissolve and
divide; for to die is nothing else, but that the parts of that figure divide
and unite into some other figures by the change of motion in those parts.
Concerning the Inanimate Matter, which of it self is a dead, dull, and idle
matter, your Author denies it to be a co-agent or assistant to the animate
matter: For, says he, how can dead and idle things act? To which, I answer:
That your Author being, or pretending to be a Philosopher, should consider that
there is difference betwixt a Principal and Instrumental cause or agent; and
although this inanimate, or dull matter, does not act of it self as a principal
agent, yet it can and does act as an Instrument, according as it is employed by
the animate matter: for by reason there is so close a conjunction and
commixture of animate and inanimate Matter in Nature, as they do make but one
body, it is impossible that the animate part of matter should move without the
inanimate; not that the inanimate has motion in her self, but the animate
bears up the inanimate in the action of her own substance, and makes the
inanimate work, act, and move with her, by reason of the aforesaid union and
commixture. Lastly, your Author speaks much of Minima's, viz. That all things
may be resolved into their minima's, and what is beyond them, is nothing, and
that there is one maximum, or biggest, which is the world, and what is beyond
that, is Infinite. Truly, Madam, I must ingeniously confess, I am not so high
learned, as to penetrate into the true sense of these words; for he says, they
are both divisible, and indivisible, and yet no atoms, which surpasses my
Understanding; for there is no such thing, as biggest and smallest in Nature,
or in the Infinite matter; for who can know how far this World goes, or what is
beyond it? There may be Infinite Worlds, as I said before, for ought we know;
for God and Nature cannot be comprehended, 'nor their works measured, if we
cannot find out the nature of particular things, which are subject to our
exterior senses, how shall we be able to judge of things not subject to our
senses. But your Author does speak so presumptuously of Gods Actions, Designs,
Decrees, Laws, Attributes, Power, and secret Counsels, and describes the
manner, how God created all things, and the mixture of the Elements to an hair,
as if he had been Gods Counselor and Assistant in the work of Creation; which
whether it be not more impiety, then to say, Matter is Infinite, I Will let
others judge. Neither do I think this expression to be against the holy
Scripture; for though I speak as a natural Philosopher, and am unwilling to
cite the Scripture, which only treats of things belonging to Faith and, and
not to Reason; yet I think there is not any passage which plainly denies Matter
to be Infinite, and Eternal, unless it be drawn by force to that sense: Solomon
says, That there is not any thing new: and in another place it is said, That
God is all fulfilling; that is, The Will of God is the fulfilling of the
actions of Nature: also the Scripture says, That Gods ways are unsearchable,
and past finding out. Wherefore, it is easier to treat of Nature, then the God
of Nature; neither should God be treated of by vain Philosophers, but by holy
Divines, which are to deliver and interpret the Word of God without sophistry,
and to inform us as much of Gods Works, as he has been pleased to declare and
make known. And this is the safest way, in the opinion of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XI.
MADAM,
YOur new Author endeavors to prove, that Water in its own proper nature is
thicker then Earth; which, to my sense and reason, seems not probable; for
although water is less porous then earth in its exterior figure, yet it is not
so thick as earth in its interior nature: Neither can I conceive it to be true,
that water in its own nature, and as long as it remains water, should be as
hard as Crystal, or stone, as his opinion is; for though Elements are so pliant
(being not composed of many different parts and figures) as they can change and
rechange their exterior figures, yet they do not alter their interior nature
without a total dissolution; but your Author may as well say, that the interior
nature of man is dust and ashes, as that water in its interior nature is as
thick as earth, and as hard as Crystal, or stone; whereas yet a man, when he
becomes dust and ashes, is not a man; and therefore, when water is become so
thick as earth, or so hard as stone, it is not water; I mean when it is so in
its interior nature, not in its exterior figure; for the exterior figure may be
contracted, when yet the interior nature is dilative; and so the exterior may
be thick or hard, when the interior is soft and rare. But you may say, that
water is a close, and heavy, as also a smooth and glossy body. I answer: That
does not prove its interior nature to be hard, dense, thick, or contracted; for
the interior nature and parts of a body may be different from the exterior
figure or parts; neither does the close joining of parts hinder dilatation; for
if so, a line or circle could not dilate or extend: But this close uniting of
the parts of water is caused through its wet and glutinous quality, which wet
and sticking quality is caused by a watery dilatation; for though water has
not interiously so rare a dilatation as Air, Fire, and Light, yet it has not
so close a contraction as Earth, Stone, or Metal; neither are all bodies that
are smooth and shining, more solid and dense, then those that are rough and
dark; for light is more smooth, glossy, and shining, then Water, Metal, Earth,
or Transparent-stones, and yet is of a dilative nature. But because some bodies
and figures which are transparent and smooth, are dense, hard, and thick, we
cannot in reason, or sense, say, that all bodies and figures are so. As for
Transparency, it is caused through a purity of substance, and an evenness of
parts: the like is glossiness, only glossiness requires not so much
regularity, as transparency. But to return to Water; its exterior Circle-figure
may easily dilate beyond the degree of the propriety or nature of water, or
contract beneath the propriety or nature of water. Your Author may say, Water
is a globous body, and all globous bodies tend to a Center. I answer: That my
sense and reason cannot perceive, but that Circles and Globes do as easily
dilate, as contract: for if all Globes and Circles should endeavor to draw or
fall from the circumference to the Center, the Center of the whole World, or at
least of some parts of the World, would be as a Chaos: besides, it is against
sense and reason, that all Matter should strive to a Center; for humane sense
and reason may observe, that all Creatures, and so Matter, desire liberty, and
a Center is but a Prison in comparison to the Circumference; wherefore if
Matter crowds, it is rather by force, then a voluntary action. You will say,
All Creatures desire rest, and in a Center there is rest. I answer; Humane sense
and reason cannot perccive any rest in Nature: for all things, as I have proved
heretofore, are in a perpetual motion. But concerning Water, you may ask me,
Madam, Whether congealed Water, as Ice, if it never thaw, remains Water? To
which, I answer: That the interior nature of Water remains as long as the Ice
remains, although the outward form is changed; but if Ice be contracted into
the firmness and density of Crystal, or Diamond, or the like, so as to be
beyond the nature of Water, and not capable to be that Water again, then it is
transformed into another Creature, or thing, which is neither Water, nor Ice,
but a Stone; for the Icy contraction does no more alter the interior nature of
Water, which is dilating, then the binding of a man with Chains alters his
nature from being a man; and it might be said as well, that the nature of Air
is not dilating, when enclosed in a bladder, as that Water does not remain
Water in its interior nature, when it is contracted into Ice. But you may ask,
Whether one extreme can change into another? I answer: To my sense and reason
it were possible, if extremes were in Nature; but I do not perceive that in
Nature there be any, although my sense and reason does perceive alterations in
the effects of Nature; for though one and the same part may alter from
contraction to dilation, and from dilation to contraction; yet this contraction
and dilation are not extremes, neither are they performed at one and the same
time, but at different times. But having sufficiently declared my opinion
hereof in my former Letters, I Will add no more, but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XII.
MADAM,
MY discourse of Water in my last Letter has given you occasion to enquire
after the reason, Why the weight of a great body of water does not press so
hard and heavily as to bruise or crush a body, when it is sunk down to the
bottom? As for example: If a man should be drowned, and afterward cast out
from the bottom of a great Sea, or River, upon the shore; he would only be
found smothered or choked to death, and not pressed, crushed, or bruised, by
the weight of water. I answer; The reasons are plain: for, first, the nature of
a man's respiration requires such a temperature of breath to suck in, as is
neither too thick, nor too thin for his lungs, and the rest of his interior
parts, as also for the organs and passages of his exterior senses, but fit,
proper, and proportionable to those mentioned parts of his body: As for
example; in a too thin and rarefied air, man will be as apt to die for want of
breath, as in a too gross and thick air he is apt to die with a superfluity of
the substance he imbreaths; for thick smoke, or thick vapor, as also too gross
air, will soon smother a man to death; and as for choking, if a man takes more
into his throat then he can swallow, he will die; and if his stomach be filled
with more food then it is able to digest, if it cannot discharge it self, he
will die with the excess of food; and if there be no food, or too little put
into it, he will also die for want of food. So the eye, if it receives too
many, or too gross, or too bright objects, it will be dazzled or blinded, and
some objects through their purity are not to be seen at all: The same for
Hearing, and the rest of the exterior senses. And this is the reason, why man,
or some animal Creatures are smothered and choked with water; because water is
thicker then the grossest air or vapor; for if smoke, which is rarer then
water, will smother and choke a man, well may water, being so much thicker. But
yet this smothering or choking does not prove, that water has an interior or
innate density (as your Authors opinion is) no more then smoke, or thick and
gross air has; but the density of water is caused more through the wet and
moist exterior parts, joining and uniting closely together; and the interior
nature of smoke being more moist or glutinous then thin air, and so more apt to
unite its exterior parts, it makes it to come in effect nearer to water; for
though water and smoke are both of rare natures, yet not so rare as clear and
pure air; neither is water or smoke so porous as pure air, by reason the
exterior parts of water and smoke are more moist or glutinous then pure air.
But the thickness of water and smoke is the only cause of the smothering of
men, or some animals, as by stopping their breath; for a man can no more live
without air, then he can without food; and a well tempered or middle degree of
air is the most proper for animal Respiration; for if the air be too thick, it
may soon smother or choke him; and if too thin, it is not sufficient to give
him breath: And this is the reason that a man being drowned, is not only
smothered, but choked by water; because there enters more through the exterior
passages into his body then can be digested; for water is apt to flow more
forcibly and with greater strength then air; not that it is more dilating then
air, but by reason it is thicker, and so stronger, or of more force; for the
denser a body is, the stronger it is; and a heavy body, when moved, is more
forcible then a light body. But I pray by this expression mistake not the
nature of water; for the interior nature of water has not that gravity, which
heavy or dense bodies have, its nature being rare and light, as air, or fire;
but the weight of water, as I said before, proceeds only from the closeness
and compactness of its exterior parts, not through a contraction in its
interior nature; and there is no argument, which proves better, that water in
its interior nature is dilating, then that its weight is not apt to press to a
point; for though water is apt to descend, through the union of its parts, yet
it cannot press hard, by reason of its dilating nature, which hinders that
heavy pressing quality; for a dilating body cannot have a contracted weight, I
mean, so as to press to a Center, which is to a point; and this is the reason,
that when a grave or heavy body sinks down to the bottom of water, it is not
oppressed, hurt, crushed, or bruised by the weight of water; for, as I said, the
nature of water being dilating, it can no more press hard to a center, then
vapor, air, or fire: The truth is, water would be as apt to ascend as descend,
if it were not for the wet, glutinous and sticking, cleaving quality of its
exterior parts; but as the quantity and quality of the exterior parts makes
water apt to sink, or descend, so the dilating nature makes it apt to flow, if
no hinderance stop its course; also the quantity and quality of its exterior
parts is the cause, that some heavy bodies do swim without sinking: as for
example; a great heavy Ship will not readily sink, unless its weight be so
contracted as to break asunder the united parts of water; for the wet quality
of water causing its exterior parts to join close, gives it such an united
strength, as to be able to bear a heavy burden, if the weight be dilated, or
level, and not piercing or penetrating; for those bodies that are most compact,
will sink sooner, although of less weight then those that are more dilated
although of greater weight: Also the exterior and outward shape or form makes
some bodies more apt to sink then others; Indeed, the outward form and shape of
Creatures is one of the chief causes of either sinking or swimming. But to
conclude, water in its interior nature is of a mean or middle degree, as
neither too rare, nor too grave a body; and for its exterior quality, it is in
as high a degree for wetness, as fire is for heat; and being apt both to
divide, and to unite, it can bear a burden, and devour a burden, so that some
bodies may swim, and others sink; and the cause, that a sunk body is not
oppressed, crushed, or squeesed, is the dilating nature and quality of water,
which hinders its parts from pressing or crowding toward a point or center;
for although water is heavy, and apt to descend, yet its weight is not caused
by a contraction of its substance, but by a union of its parts. Thus, Madam, I
have obeyed your commands, in giving you my reasons to your propounded
question; which if you approve, I have my aim; if not, I submit to your better
judgment: for you know I am in all respects,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend to serve you.

XIII.
MADAM,
I Am glad, you are pleased with my reasons I gave to your propounded question
concerning the weight of Water; and since you have been pleased to send me some
more of that subject, I shall be ready also to give my answer to them,
according to the capacity of my judgment. First, you desire to know, How it
comes, that Water will by degrees ascend through a narrow pipe, when the pipe
is placed straight upright, or perpendicular? The reason, in my opinion is,
that Water, having a dilative nature, when it finds an obstruction to descend
or flow even, will dilate it self ascendingly, according as it has liberty, or
freedom, and strength, or quantity; the truth is, water would be more apt to
ascend then to descend, were it not for the close uniting of its liquid Parts,
which causes its exterior density, and this density makes it of more weight
then its nature is; and the proof that water is apt in its nature to ascend,
is, that some sorts of vapors are made only by the dilation and rarefaction
of ascending Water. Your second question is, Why the surface of water seems to
be concave in its middle, and higher on every side? I answer, The interior
figure of water is a circular figure, which being a round figure, is both
concave, and unequal; for where one is, the other must be; and the motions of
ebbing and flowing, and ascending or descending, are partly of that figure; and
so according to the exterior dilating strength or weakness, the exterior parts
of water become either concave or unequal; for in a full strength, as a full
stream, the exterior parts of water flow in a unequal figure, but when they want
strength, they ebb in a concave figure. Your third question is, What makes
frozen water apt to break those Vessels wherein it is contained, in the act of
freezing or congealing? I answer: The same cause that makes water clear, as
also more swelled then usually it is: which cause is the inherent dilative
nature of water; for water being naturally dilative, when as cold attractions
do assault it, the moist dilations of water in the conflict use more then their
ordinary strength to resist those cold contracting motions, by which the body
of water dilates it self into a larger compass, according as it has liberty or
freedom, or quantity of parts; and the cold parts not being able to drive the
water back to its natural compass, bind it as it is extended, like as if a
beast should be bound when his legs and neck are thrust out at the largest
extent, in striving to kick or thrust away his enemies and imprisoners: And so
the reason why water breaks those vessels wherein it is enclosed, in the act of
its freezing or congealing is, that when the cold contractions are so strong as
they endeavor to extinguish the dilating nature of water, the water resisting,
forces its parts so, as they break the vessel which incloses them: The same
reason makes Ice clear and transparent; for it is not the rarefaction of water
that does it, but the dilation, which causes the parts of water to be not only
more loose and porous, but also more smooth and even, by resisting the clold
contractions; for every part endeavors to defend their borders with a well
ordered and regular flowing or streaming, and not only to defend, but to
enlarge their compass against their enemies. Your fourth question is, How it
comes that Snow and Salt mixed together does make Ice? The reason, in my
judgment, is, that Salt being very active, and partly of the nature of fire,
does sometimes preserve, and sometimes destroy other bodies, according to its
power, or rather according to the nature of those bodies it works on; and salt
being mixed with snow, endeavors to destroy it; but having not so much force,
melts it only by its heat, and reduces it into its first principle, which is
water, altering the figure of snow; but the cold contractions remaining in the
water, and endeavoring to maintain and keep their power, straight draw the
water or melted snow into the figure of ice, so as neither the salts heat, nor
the waters dilative nature, are able to resist or destroy those cold
contractions; for although they destroyed the first figure, which is snow, yet
they cannot hinder the second, which is Ice, Your last question is, How the
Clouds can hang so long in the Sky without falling down? Truly, Madam, I do
not perceive that Clouds, being come to their full weight and gravity, do keep
up in the air, but some of them fall down in showers of rain, others in great
and numerous flakes of snow; some are turned into wind, and some fall down in
thick mists, so that they only keep up so long, until they are of a full
weight for descent, or till their figure is altered into some other body, as
into air, wind, rain, lightning, thunder, snow, hail, mist, and the like. But
many times their dilating motions keep or hinder them from descending, to which
contracting motions are required. In my opinion, it is more to be admired, that
the Sea does not rise, then that Clouds do not fall; for, as we see, Clouds
fall very often, as also change from being Clouds, to some other figure:
Wherefore it is neither the Sun, nor Stars, nor the Vapors, which arise from
the Earth, and cause the Clouds, nor the porositity of their bodies, nor the
Air, that can keep or hinder them from falling or changing to some other body;
but they being come to their full weight, fall or change according as is
fittest for them. And these are all the reasons I can give you for the present;
if they do not satisfy you, I will study for others, and in all occasions
endeavor to express my self,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XIV.
MADAM,
SInce in my last, I made mention of the Congealing of Water into Ice and Snow,
I cannot choose, but by the way tell you, that I did lately meet with an
Author, who is of opinion, That Snow is nothing else but Ice broken or ground
into small pieces. To which, I answer: That this opinion may serve very well
for a Fancy, but not for a Rational Truth, or at least for a Probable Reason;
For why may not the cold motions make snow without beating or grinding, as well
as they make Ice? Surely Nature is wiser then to trouble her self with
unnecessary labor, and to make an easy work difficult, as Art her Creature
does, or as some dull humane capacities conceive; for it is more easy for
Nature to make Snow by some sorts of cold contractions, as she makes Ice by
other sorts of cold contractions, then to force Air and Wind to beat, grind,
or pound Ice into Snow, which would cause a confusion and disturbance through
the Irregularity of several parts, being jumbled in a confused manner together.
The truth is, it would rather cause a War in Nature, then a natural production,
alteration, or transformation: Neither can I conceive, in what region this
turbulent and laborious work should be acted; certainly not in the caverns of
the Earth, for snow descends from the upper Region. But, perchance, this Author
believes, that Nature imploys Wind as a Hand, and the Cold air as a Spoon, to
beat Ice like the white of an Egg into a froth of Snow. But the great quantity
of Snow, in many places, does prove, that Snow is not made of the fragments of
Ice, but that some sorts of cold contractions on a watery body, make the figure
of snow in the substance of water, as other sorts of cold contractions make the
figure of ice; which motions and figures I have treated of in my Book of
Philosophy, according to that Judgment and Reason which Nature has bestowed
upon me. The Author of this Fancy, gives the same reason for Snow being white:
For Ice, says he, is a transparent body, and all transparent bodies, when
beaten into powder, appear white; and since Snow is nothing else but Ice powder
d small, it must of necessity show white. Truly, Madam, I am not so
experienced, as to know that all transparent bodies, being beaten small, show
white; but grant it be so, yet that does not prove, that the whiteness of snow
proceeds from the broken parts of Ice, unless it be proved that the whiteness
of all bodies proceeds from the powdering of transparent bodies, which I am
sure he cannot do; for Silver, and millions of other things are white, which
were never produced from the powder of transparent bodies: Neither do I know
any reason against it, but that which makes a Lilly white, may also be the
cause of the whiteness of Snow, that is, such a figure as makes a white color;
for different figures, in my opinion, are the cause of different colors, as
you will find in my Book of Philosophy, where I say, that Nature by contraction
of lines draws such or such a Figure, which is such or such a Color; as such a
Fgure is red, and such a Figure is green, and so of all the rest: But the
Palest colors, and so white, are the loosest and slackest figures; Indeed,
white, which is the nearest color to light, is the smoothest, evenest and
straightest figure, and composed of the smallest lines: As for example; suppose
the figure of 8. were the color of Red, and the figure of 1. the color of
White; or suppose the figure of Red to be a z. and the figure of an r. to be
the figure of Green, and a straight l. the figure of White; And mixed figures
make mixed colors: The like examples may be brought of other Figures, as of a
Harpsichord and its strings, a Lute and its strings, a Harp and its strings,
etc. By which your Reason shall judge, whether it be not easier for Nature, to
make Snow and its whiteness by the way of contraction, then by the way of
dissolution: As for example; Nature in making Snow, contracts or congeals the
exterior figure of Water into the figure of a Harp, which is a Triangular
figure with the figure of straight strings within it; for the exterior figure
of the Harp represents the exterior figure of Snow, and the figure of the
strings extended in straight lines represent the figure of its whiteness. And
thus it is easier to make Snow and its whiteness at one act, then first to
contract or congeal water into Ice, and then to cause wind and cold air to beat
and break that Ice into powder, and lastly to contract or congeal that powder
into flakes of Snow? Which would be a very troublesome work for Nature, viz. to
produce one effect by so many violent actions and several labors, when the
making of two figures by one action will serve the turn. But Nature is wiser
then any of her Creatures can conceive; for she knows how to make, and how to
dissolve, form, and transform, with facility and ease, without any difficulty;
for her actions are all easy and free, yet so subtle, curious and various, as
not any part or creature of Nature can exactly or thoroughly trace her ways, or
know her wisdom. And thus leaving her, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XV.
MADAM,
I Have taken several questions out of your new Author, which I intend to
answer in this present Letter according to the conceptions of my own sense and
reason, and to submit them to your censure; which if you vouchsafe to grant me
without partiality, I shall acknowledge my self much obliged to you for this
favor. The first question is, Why wet Linen is dried in the Air? I answer;
That, according to my sense and reason, the water which is spread upon the
linen, being not united in a full and close body, dilates beyond the
Circle-degree of water and wetness, and so does easily change from water to
vapor, and from vapor to air, whereby the linen becomes as dry, as it was
before it became wet. The second question is, Why Water and Wine intermix so
easily and suddenly together? I answer: All wet liquors, although their
exterior figures do differ, yet their interior natures, figures and forms are
much alike, and those things that are of the same interior nature, do easily
and suddenly join as into one: Wherefore Wine and Water having both wet
natures, do soon incorporate together, whereas, were they of different natures,
they would not so peaceably join together, but by their contrary natures become
enemies, and strive to destroy each other; but this is to be observed, that the
sharp points of the Circle-lines of Wine, by passing through the smooth
Circle-lines of Water, help to make a more hasty and sudden conjunction. The
third question, is, Why Light, which in its nature is white, shining through a
colored Glass, does appear of the same color which the Glass is of, either
Blew, Green, Red, or the like? I answer: The reason is, that though Light in
its nature be white, and the Glass clear and transparent, yet when as the Glass
is stained or painted with colors, both the clearness of the glass, and the
whiteness of the light, is obstructed by the figure of that color the glass is
stained or painted withal, and the light spreading upon or through the glass,
represents it self in the figure of that same color; indeed, in all
probability to sense and reason, it appears, that the lines or beams of light,
which are straight, small, even, and parallel, do contract in their entrance
through the glass into the figure of the color the glass is stained or painted
with, so that the light passes through the glass figuratively, in so much, as
it seems to be of the same color the glass is of, although in it self it is
white, lucent, and clear; and as the light appears, so the eye receives it, if
the sight be not destructive. The fourth question, is, Whether (as your Authors
opinion is) kisses feel pleasing and delightful by the thinness of the parts,
and a gentle stirring and quavering of the tangent spirits, that give a
pleasing tact? I answer: If this were so, then all kisses would be pleasing,
which surely are not; for some are thought very displeasing, especially from
thin lips; wherefore, in my opinion, it is neither the thinness of the parts of
the lips, nor the quavering of the tangent spirits, but the appetites and
passions of life, reason, and soul, that cause the pleasure: Nevertheless, I
grant, the stirring up of the spirits may contribute to the increasing,
heightning, or strengthening of that tact, but it is not the prime cause of it.
The fifth question, is, Whether the greatest man have always the greatest
strength? I answer, Not: for strength and greatness of bulk does not always
consist together, witness experience: for a little man may be, and is
oftentimes stronger then a tall man. The like of other animal Creatures: As for
example, some Horses of a little or middle size, have a great deal more
strength then others which are high and big; for it is the quantity of
sensitive matter that gives strength, and not the bigness or bulk of the body.
The sixth question, is, Whether this World or Universe be the biggest Creature?
I answer: It is not possible to be known, unless Man could perfectly know its
dimension or extension, or whether there be more Worlds then one: But, to speak
properly, there is no such thing as biggest or least in Nature. The seventh
question, is, Whether the Earth be the Center of Matter, or of the World? As
for Matter, it being Infinite, has no Center, by reason it has no
Circumference; and, as for this World, its Center cannot be known, unless man
knew the utmost parts of its circumference, for no Center can be known without
its circumference; and although some do imagine this world so little, that in
comparison to Infinite Matter, it would not be so big as the least Pins head,
yet their knowledge cannot extend so far as to know the circumference of this
little World; by which you may perceive the Truth of the old saying, Man talks
much, but knows little. The eighth question is, Whether all Centers must needs
be full, and close, as a stufft Cushion; and whether the matter in the Center
of the Universe or World be dense, compact, and heavy? I answer: This can no
more be known, then the circumference of the World; for what man is able to
know, whether the Center of the world be rare, or dense, since he does not know
where its Center is; and as for other particular Centers, some Centers may be
rare, some dense, and some may have less matter then their circumferences. The
ninth question is, Whether Finite Creatures can be produced out of an Infinite
material cause? I answer: That, to my sense and reason, an Infinite cause must
needs produce Infinite effects, though not in each Particular, yet in General;
that is, Matter being Infinite in substance, must needs be dividable into
Infinite parts in number, and thus Infinite Creatures must needs be produced
out of Infinite Matter; but Man being but a finite part, thinks all must be
finite too, not only each particular Creature, but also the Matter out of
which all Creatures are produced, which is corporeal Nature. Nevertheless,
those Infinite effects in Nature are equalized by her different motions which
are her different actions; for it is not nonsense, but most demonstrable to
sense and reason that there are equalities or a union in Infinite. The tenth
question is, Whether the Elements be the only matter out of which all other
Creatures are produced? I answer: The Elements, as well as all other Creatures,
as it appears to humane sense and reason, are all of one and the same Matter,
which is the only Infinite Matter; and therefore the Elements cannot be the
Matter of all other Creatures, for several sorts of Creatures have several ways
of productions, and I know no reason to the contrary, but that Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, may as well derive their essence from each other, as
from the Elements, or the Elements from them; for as all Creatures do live by
each other, so they are produced from each other, according to the several ways
or manners of productions. But mistake me not, Madam, for I speak of production
in General, and not of such natural production whereby the several species of
Creatures are maintained: As for example, Generation in Animals; for an Element
cannot generate an Animal in that manner as an Animal can generate or produce
its like; for as Nature is wise, so her actions are all wise and orderly, or
else it would make a horrid confusion amongst the Infinite parts of Nature. The
eleventh question is, What is meant by Natural Theology? I answer: Natural
Theology, in my opinion, is nothing else but Moral Philosophy; for as for our
belief, it is grounded upon the Scripture, and not upon Reason.

These, Madam, are the Questions which I have picked out of your new Author,
together with my answers, of which I desire your impartial Judgment: But I must
add onething more before I conclude; which is, I am much pleased with your
Authors opinion, That Sound may be perceived by the Eye, Color by the Ear, and
that Sound and Color may be smelled and tasted; and I have been of this
opinion eleven years since, as you will find in my Book of Poems, whose first
Edition was printed in the Year, 1653. And thus I take my leave of you, and
remain constantly,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend to serve you.

XVI.
MADAM,
COncerning your question of the ascending nature of fire, I am absolutely of
Aristotle's Opinion, that it is as natural for Fire to ascend, as it is for
Earth to descend; And why should we believe the nature of one, and doubt the
nature of the other? For if it be granted, that there are as well ascending, as
descending bodies in Nature, as also low and high places, (according to the
situation of Particulars) and Circumferences, as well as Centers, (considering
the shape of bodies) I cannot perceive by humane reason, but that the Nature of
fire is ascending, and that it is very improbable, it should have a descending
or contracting nature, as to tend or endeavor to a Center. But, Madam, give me
leave to ask what sort of Fire you mean, whether a Celestial, or a Terrestrial
Fire, viz. that which is named an Elemental fire, or any other sort of fire?
for there may be as many several sorts of fire, as of other Creatures; or
whether you mean only that sort of fire that belongs to this terrestrial
Globe, or all the fire in general that is in Infinite Nature? and if you mean
only that sort of fire which belongs to this Terrestrial World we live upon; I
answer, There are many several sorts of that fire too; for all the fire
belonging to this Earthly Globe, does not lie in one place, body, or part, no
more then all metal, or but one sort of metal, as Gold, lies in one mine, or
all Mankind in one womb. Neither can I believe, that the Sun is the only
Celestial Fire in Nature, but that there may be as numerous Suns, as there are
other sorts of Creatures in Nature. But as for the ascending propriety of this
terrestrial Fire, you may say, That the Elements do commix and unite in this
worldly Globe, and if Fire should have an ascending motion, it would pierce
into other Globes, or Worlds, and never leave ascending. I answer: That, first
of all, the strength of fire is to be considered, consisting not only in its
quantity, but also in its quality; as whether it can ascend to those bodies and
places which are far above it: For example; A Man, or any other Creature, has
never so much strength, or ability, or length of life, as to travel to the
utmost parts of the Universe, were the way never so plain and free, and the
number of men never so great: the like for Elementary fire, which has life and
death, that is, generation and dissolution, and successive motion, as well as
other Creatures. But you would fain know, whether fire, if it were left at
liberty, would not turn to a Globous figure? I answer; That, to my sense and
reason, it would not: but some men, seeing the flame of fire in an arched Oven,
descend round the sides of the Oven in a Globous figure, do perhaps imagine the
nature of fire to be descending, and its natural figure round as a Globe, which
is ridiculous; for the fire in the Oven, although every where encompassed and
bound, yet, according to its nature, ascends to the top of the Oven; and
finding a stoppage and suppression, offers to descend perpendicularly; but by
reason of a continual ascending of the following flame, the first, and so all
the following parts of flame are forced to spread about, and descend round the
sides of the Oven, so that the descension of the flame is forced, and not
natural, and its Globous figure is caused, as it were, by a mould, which is the
Oven. But some are of opinion, that all bodies have descending motions toward
the Center of this worldly Globe, and therefore they do not believe, that any
bodies do ascend naturally: But what reason have they to believe one, and not
the other? Besides, how do they know that all bodies would rest in the Center
of this terrestriaal Globe, if they came thither? For if it was possible, that
a hole could be dug from the superficies of this Earthly Globe through the
middle or Center of it unto the opposite superficies, and a stone be sent
through; the question is, whether the stone would rest in the Center, and not go
quite through? Wherefore this is but an idle Fancy; and the proof that Fire
tends not to a Center, is, because it cannot be poised or weighed, not only by
reason of its rarity, but of its dilative and aspiring Nature; and as fire is
ascending, or aspiring, so likewise do I, Madam, aspire to the top of your
favor, and shall never descend from the ambition to serve you, but by the
suppression of death. Till then, I remain,

MADAM, Your constant Friend, and faithful Servant.

XVII.
MADAM,
IN your last, you were pleased to desire my answer to these following
Questions: First, What the reason is, that a Vessel, although it be of a solid
and compact substance, yet will retain the smell or odor of a foreign
substance poured into it, for a long time? I answer: The Vessel, or rather the
perceptive corporeal motions of the Vessel, having patterned out the figure of
the sent of the odorous substance, retain that same figure of sent, although
the odorous substance is gone; and as long as that patterned figure is perfect,
the sent will remain in the Vessel, either more or less, according as the
figure does last or alter. But you must consider, Madam, that although it be
the natural motions that make those patterns of odours, yet those patterned
figures are but as it were artificial, like as a man who draws a Copy from an
Original; for Nature has diverse and several ways of such motions as we call
Art, for whatsoever is an imitation, is that which man calls Art. Your second
question was, How it came, that the mind and understanding in many did die or
dissolve before the body? I answer: The reason is, because the rational
corporeal motions alter before the sensitive; for as in some, as for example,
in Natural fools, the rational motions never move to a regular humane
understanding, so in some dying Persons they do make a general alteration
before the sensitive. Your third question was, Why a man, being bitten by a mad
Dog, is only distempered in his mind, and not in his body? The reason,
according to my judgment, is, that the rational part of Matter is only
disturbed, and not the sensitive. The fourth question was, Why a Basilisk will
kill with his eyes? I answer: It is the sensitive corporeal motions in the
organ of fight in the man, which upon the printing of the figure of the eyes of
the Basilisk, make a sudden alteration. Your fifth question was, Why an Asp
will kill insensibly by biting? The reason, in my opinion, is, That the biting
of the Asp has the same efficacy as deadly Opium has, yea, and much stronger.
Your sixth question was, Why a Dog that rejoices, swings his tail, and a Lion
when angry, or a Cat when in a fear, do lift up their tails? I answer: The
several motions of the mind may produce either but one, or several sorts of
motions in some part or parts of the body; and as the sensitive motions of
anger will produce tears, so will the motions of joy; but grief made by the
rational motions of the mind, may by excess disturb and make a general
alteration of the sensitive motions in an animal: the same may excessive joy.
But, Madam, you may perhaps find out better reasons for your own questions then
these are; for my endeavor was only to frame my answer to the ground of my
own opinions, and so to satisfy your desire, which was, and is still the
ambition of,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XVIII.
MADAM,
IN your last, you were pleased to desire an account, how far, or how much I
did understand the ancient and modern Philosophers in their Philosophical
Writings. Truly, Madam, I can more readily tell you what I do not understand,
then what I do understand: for, first, I do not understand their sophistical
Logic, as to persuade with arguments that black is white, and white is black;
and that fire is not hot, nor water wet, and other such things; for the glory
in Logic is rather to make doubts, then to find truth; indeed, that Art now is
like thick, dark clouds, which darken the light of truth. Next: I do not
understand in particular, what they mean by second matter; for if they name
figures and forms second matter, they may as well say, all several motions,
which are the several actions of Nature, are several matters, and so there
would be infinite several matters, which would produce a mere confusion in
Nature. Neither do I understand, when they say, a body dissolves into the first
matter; for I am not able to conceive their first matter, nor what they mean by
magna and major materia; for I believe there is but one matter, and the motion
of that matter is its action by which it produces several figures and effects;
so that the nature of the matter is one and the same, although its motions,
that is, its actions, be various, for the various effects alter not the nature
or unity of the only matter. Neither do I understand what they mean by
corruption, for surely Nature is not corruptible. Nor do I understand their
individables in Nature, nor a bodiless form, nor a privation, nor a being
without a body; nor any such thing as they call rest, for there is not any thing
without motion in Nature: Some do talk of moving minima's, but they do not tell
what those minima's or their motions are, or how they were produced, or how
they came to move. Neither do I understand when they say there is but one
World, and that finite; for if there be no more Matter then that which they
call the whole World, and may be measured by a Jacob's staff, then certainly
there is but little matter, and that no bigger then an atome in comparison to
Infinite. Neither can my reason comprehend, when they say, that not any thing
has power from its interior nature to move exteriously and locally; for common
sense and reason, that is sight and observation, does prove the contrary.
Neither do I know what they mean by making a difference between matter and
form, power and act; for there can be no form without matter, nor no matter
without form; and as act includes power, so power is nothing without act:
Neither can I conceive Reason to be separable from matter; nor what is meant
when they say, that, only that is real, which moves the understanding without.
Nor do I understand what they mean by intentionals, accidentals, incorporeal
beings, formal ratio, formal unity, and hundreds the like; enough to puzle
truth, when all is but the several actions of one cause, to wit, the only
matter. But most men make such cross, narrow, and intricate ways in Nature,
with their over-nice distinctions, that Nature appears like a Labyrinth, whenas
really she is as plain as an un-plowed, ditched, or hedged champion: Nay, some
make Nature so full, that she can neither move nor stir; and others again will
have her so empty, as they leave not anything within her; and some with their
penetrations, pressings, squeezings, and the like, make such holes in her, as
they do almost wound, press and squeeze her to death: And some are so learned,
witty, and ingenious, as they understand and know to discourse of the true
compass, just weight, exact rules, measures and proportions of the Universe, as
also of the exact division of the Chaos, and the architecture of the world, to
an atome. Thus, Madam, I have made my confession to you of what I understand
not, and have endeavored to make my ignorance as brief as I could; but the
great God knows, that my ignorance is longer then that which is named life and
death; and as for my understanding, I can only say, that I understand nothing
better, but my self to be,

MADAM, Your most faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XIX.
MADAM,
SInce I have given you, in my last, an account how much I did understand the
Philosophical works of both the ancient and modern Philosophers, or rather what
I did not understand of them, you would fain have my op^^^on now of the persons
themselves. Truly, Madam, as for those that are dead, or those that are living,
I cannot say any thing, but that I believe they all were or are worthy persons,
men of vast understandings, subtle conceptions, ingenious wits, painful
students, and learned writers. But as for their works, as I told you
heretofore, I confess ingeniously, I understand them not, by reason I am
ignorant in their Scholastical Arts, as Logic, Metaphysick, Mathematics, and
the like: For to my simple apprehension, when as Logicians argue of natural
causes and effects, they make natural causes to produce natural effects with
more difficulty and enforcement then Nature knows of; and as for
Mathematicians, they endeavor to inchant Nature with Circles, and bind her
with lines so hard, as if she were so mad, that she would do some mischief,
when left at liberty. Geometricians weigh Nature to an Atome, and measure her
so exactly, as less then a hairs breadth; besides, they do press and squeeze
her so hard and close, as they almost stifle her. And Natural Philosophers do
so stuff her with dull, dead, senceless minima's, like as a sack with meal, or
sand, by which they raise such a dust as quite blinds Nature and natural
reason. But Chemists torture Nature worst of all; for they extract and distill
her beyond substance, nay, into no substance, if they could. As for natural
Theologers, I understand them least of any; for they make such a gallamalfry of
Philosophy and Divinity, as neither can be distinguished from the other. In
short, Madam, They all with their intricate definitions and distinctions set my
brain on the rack: but some Philosophers are like some Poets, for they
endeavor to write strong lines. You may ask me, what is meant by strong lines?
I answer: Weak sense. To which leaving them, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XX.
MADAM,
I Am not of your opinion, That nice distinctions and Logistical arguments
discover truth, dissolve doubts, and clear the understanding; but I say, they
rather make doubts of truth, and blindfold the understanding; Indeed, nice
distinctions and sophistical arguments, are very pernicious both in Schools,
Church, and State: As for the Church, although in Divinity there is but one
Truth, yet nice distinctions, and Logistical sophistry, have made such
confufion in it, as has caused almost as many several opinions as there are
words in the Scripture; and as for natural Theology, which is moral Philosophy,
they have divided virtues and vices into so many parts, and minced them so
small, that neither can be clearly distinguished. The same in Government; they
endeavor to cut between command and obedience to a hairs breadth. Concerning
causes of Law, they have abolished the intended benefit, and banished equity;
and instead of keeping Peace, they make War, causing enmity betwixt men: As for
Natural Philosophy, they will not suffer sense and reason to appear in that
study: And as for Physic, they have killed more men then Wars, Plagues, or
Famine. Wherefore from nice distinctions and Logistical sophistry, Good God
deliver us, especially, from those that concern Divinity; for they weaken
Faith, trouble Conscience, and bring in Atheism: In short, they make
controversies, and endless disputes. But least the opening of my meaning in
such plain terms should raise a controversy also between you and me, I Will cut
off here, and rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXI.
MADAM,
YEsterday I received a visit from the Lady N. M. who you know has a quick
wit, rational opinions, and subtle conceptions; all which she is ready and free
to divulge in her discourse. But when she came to my Chamber, I was casting up
some small accounts; which when she did see, What, said she, are you at
Numeration? Yes, said I: but I cannot number well, nor much, for I do not
understand Arithrnetick. Said she, You can number to three. Yes, said I, I can
number to four: Nay, faith, said she, the number of three is enough, if you
could but understand that number well, for it is a mystical number. Said I,
There is no great mystery to count that number; for one, and two, makes three.
Said she, That is not the mystery; for the mystery is, That three makes one:
and without this mystery no man can understand Dlvinity, Nature, nor himself.
Then I desired her to make me understand that mystery. She said, It required
more time to inform me, then a short visit, for this mystery was such, as did
puzle all wise men in the world; and the not understanding of this mystery
perfectly, had caused endless divisions and disputes. I desired, if she could
not make me understand the mystery, she would but inform me, how three made one
in Divinity, Nature, and Man. She said, That was easy to do; for in Divinity
there are three Persons in one Essence, as God the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, whose Essence being individable, they make but one God; And as for
Philosophy, there is but Matter, Motion, and Figure, which being individable,
make but one Nature; And as for Man, there is Soul, Life, and Body, all three
joined in one Man. But I replied, Man's Life, Soul and Body, is dividable. That
is true, said she, but then he is no more a Man; for these three are his
essential parts, which make him to be a man; and when these parts are
dissolved, then his interior nature is changed, so that he can no longer be
called a man: As for example; Water being turned into Air, and having lost its
interior nature, can no more be called Water, but it is perfect Air; the same
is with Man: But as long as he is a Man, then these three forementioned parts
which make him to be of that figure are individably united as long as man
lasts. Besides, said she, this is but in the particular, considering man
single, and by himself; but in general, these three, as life, soul, and body,
are individably united, so that they remain as long as manking lasts. Nay,
although they do dissolve in the particulars, yet it is but for a time; for
they shall be united again at the last day, which is the time of their
resurrection; so that also in this respect we may justly call them individable,
for man shall remain with an united soul, life, and body, eternally. And as she
was thus discoursing, in came a Sophisterian, whom when she spied, away she
went as fast as she could; but I followed her close, and got hold of her, then
asked her, why she ran away? She answered, if she stayed, the Logician would
dissolve her into nothing, for the profession of Logicians is to make something
nothing, and nothing something. I prayed her to stay and discourse with the
Logician: Not for a world, said she, for his discourse will make my brain like
a confused Chaos, full of senseless minima's; and after that, he will so knock,
jolt, and jog it, and make such whirls and pits, as will so torture my brain,
that I shall wish I had not any: Wherefore, said she, I will not stay now, but
visit you again to morrow. And I wish with all my heart, Madam, you were so
near as to be here at the same time, that we three might make a Triumvirate in
discourse, as well as we do in friendship. But since that cannot be, I must
rest satisfied that I am,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXII.
MADAM,
YOu were pleased to desire my opinion of the works of that Learned and
Ingenious Writer B. Truly, Madam, I have read but some part of his works; but
as much as I have read, I have observed, he is a very civil, eloquent, and
rational Writer; the truth is, his style is a Gentleman's style. And in
particular, concerning his experiments, I must needs say this, that, in my
judgment, he has expressed himself to be a very industrious and ingenious
person; for he does neither puzle Nature, nor darken truth with hard words and
compounded languages, or nice distinctions; besides, his experiments are proved
by his own action. But give me leave to tell you, that I observe, he studies
the different parts and alterations, more then the motions, which cause the
alterations in those parts; whereas, did he study and observe the several and
different motions in those parts, how they change in one and the same part, and
how the different alterations in bodies are caused by the different motions of
their parts, he might arrive to a vast knowledge by the means of his
experiments; for certainly experiments are very beneficial to man. In the next
place, you desire my opinion of the Book called, The Discourses of the Virtuosi
in France: I am sorry, Madam, this book comes so late to my hands, that I
cannot read it so slowly and observingly, as to give you a clear judgment of
their opinions or discourses in particular; however, in general, and for what I
have read in it, I may say, it expresses the French to be very learned and
eloquent Writers, wherein I thought our English had exceeded them, and that
they did only excel in wit and ingenuity; but I perceive most Nations have of
all sorts. The truth is, ingenious and subtle wit brings news; but learning and
experience brings proofs, at least, argumental discourses; and the French are
much to be commended, that they endeavor to spend their time wisely,
honorably, honestly, and profitably, not only for the good and benefit of
their own, but also of other Nations. But before I conclude, give me leave to
tell you, that concerning the curious and profitable Arts mentioned in their
discourses, I confess, I do much admire them, and partly believe they may
arrive to the use of many of them; but there are two arts which I wish with all
my heart I could obtain: the first is, to argue without error in all kinds,
modes, and figures, in a quarter of an hour; and the other is to learn a way to
understand all languages in six hours. But as for the first, I fear, if I want
a thorow-understanding in every particular argument, cause, or point, a general
art or mode of words will not help me, especially, if I, being a woman, should
want discretion: And as for the second, my memory is so bad, that it is beyond
the help of Art, so that Nature has made my understanding harder or closer then
Glass, through which the Sun of verity cannot pass, although its light does;
and therefore I am confident I shall not be made, or taught to learn this
mentioned Art in six hours, no not in six months. But I wish all Arts were as
easily practiced, as mentioned; and thus I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIII.
MADAM,
COncerning your Question, Whether a Point be something, or nothing, or between
both; My opinion is, that a natural point is material; but that which the
learned name a Mathematical point, is like their Logistical Egg, whereof there
is nothing in Nature any otherwise, but a word, which word is material, as
being natural; for concerning immaterial beings, it is impossible to believe
there be any in Nature; and though witty Students, and subtle Arguers have both
in past, and this present age, endeavored to prove something, nothing; yet
words and disputes have not power to annihilate any thing that is in Nature, no
more then to create something out of nothing; and therefore they can neither
make something, nothing; nor nothing to be something: for the most witty
student, nor the subtilest disputant, cannot alter Nature, but each thing is
and must be as Nature made it. As for your other question, Whether there be
more then five Senses? I answer: There are as many senses as there are
sensitive motions; and all sensation or perception is by the way of patterning;
and whosoever is of another opinion, is, in my judgment, a greater friend to
contradiction, then to truth, at least to probability. Lastly, concerning your
question, why a Gun, the longer its barrel is made, the further it will shoot,
until it come to a certain degree of length; after which, the longer it is
made, the weaker it becomes, so that every degree further, makes it shoot
shorter and shorter, whereas before it came to such a degree of length, it shot
further and further: Give me leave to tell you, Madam, that this question would
be put more properly to a Mathematician, then to me, who am ignorant in the
Mathematics: However, since you are pleased to desire my opinion thereof, I am
willing to give it you. There are, in my judgment, but three reasons which do
produce this alteration: The one may be the compass of the stock, or barrel,
which being too wide for the length, may weaken the force, or being too narrow
for the length, may retard the force; the one giving liberty before the force
is united, the other enclosing it so long by a straight passage, as it loses
its force before it has liberty; so that the one becomes stronger with length,
the other weaker with length. The second reason, in my opinion, is, That
degrees of strength may require degrees of the medium. Lastly, It may be, that
Centers are required for degrees of strength; if so, every medium may be a
Center, and the middle length to such a compass may be a Center of such a
force. But many times the force being weaker or stronger, is caused by the good
or ill making of the Powder, or Locks, or the like. But, Madam, such questions
will puzle me as much as those of Mr V. Z. concerning those glasses, one of
which being held close in ones hand, and a little piece being broke of its
tail, makes as great a noise as the discharging of a Gun: Wherefore I beseech
you, Madam, do not trouble my brain with Mathematical questions, wherein I have
neither skill, learning, nor experience by Practice; for truly I have not the
subtilty to find out their mystery, nor the capacity to understand arts, no
more then I am capable to learn several languages. If you command me any thing
else I am able to do, assure your self, there is none shall more readily and
cheerfully serve you then my self; who am, and shall ever continue,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIV.
MADAM,
I Have heard that Artists do glory much in their Glasses, Tubes, Engines, and
Stills, and hope by their Glasses and Tubes to see invisible things, and by
their Engines to produce incredible effects, and by their Stills, Fire, and
Furnaces, to create as Nature does; but all this is impossible to be done: For
Art cannot arrive to that degree, as to know perfectly Natures secret and
fundamental actions, her purest matter, and subtilest motions; and it is enough
if Artists can but produce such things as are for man's conveniences and use,
although they never can see the smallest or rarest bodies, nor great and vast
bodies at a great distance, nor make or create a Vegetable, Animal, or the
like, as Nature does; for Nature being Infinite, has also Infinite degrees of
figures, sizes, motions, densities, rarities, knowledge, etc. as you may see in
my Book of Philosophy, as also in my book of Poems, especially that part that
treats of little, minute Creatures, which I there do name, for want of other
expressions, Fairies; for I have considered much the several sizes of
Creatures, although I gave it out but for a fancy in the mentioned book, lest I
should be thought extravagant to declare that conception of mine for a rational
truth: But if some small bodies cannot be perfectly seen but by the help of
magnifying glasses, and such as they call Microscopia; I pray, Nature being
Infinite, What figures and sizes may there not be, which our eyes with all the
help of Art are not capable to see? for certainly, Nature has more curiosities
then our exterior senses, helped by Art, can perceive: Wherefore I cannot
wonder enough at those that pretend to know the least or greatest parts or
creatures in Nature, since no particular Creature is able to do it. But
concerning Artists, you would fain know, Madam, whether the Artist be beholden
to the conceptions of the Student? To which I return this short answer: That,
in my judgment, without the Students conceptions, the Artist could not tell how
to make experiments: The truth is, the conceptions of studious men set the
Artists on work, although many Artists do ungratefully attribute all to their
own industry. Neither does it always belong to the studious Concepter to make
trials or experiments, but he leaves that work to others, whose time is not so
much employed with thoughts or speculations, as with actions; for the
Contemplator is the Designer, and the Artist the Workman, or Labourer, who
ought to acknowledge him his Master, as I do your Ladyship, for I am in all
respects,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and faithful Servant.

XXV.
MADAM,
YOur Command in your last was to send you my opinion concerning the division
of Religions, or of the several opinions in Religions, I suppose you mean the
division of the Religion, not of Religions; for certainly, there is but one
divine Truth, and consequently but one true Religion: But natural men being
composed of many diverse parts, as of several motions and figures, have diverse
and several Ideas, which the grosser corporeal motions conceive to be diverse
and several gods, as being not capable to know the Great and Incomprehensible
God, who is above Nature. For example: Do but consider, Madam, what strange
opinions the Heathens had of God, and how they divided him into so many several
Persons, with so many several bodies, like men; whereas, surely God considered
in his Essence, he being a Spirit, as the Scripture describes him, can neither
have Soul nor body, as he is a God, but is an Immaterial Being; Only the
Heathens did conceive him to have parts, and so divided the Incomprehensible
God into several Deities, at least they had several Deitical Ideas, or rather
Fancies of him. But, Madam, I confess my ignorance in this great mystery, and
honor, and praise the Omnipotent, Great, and Incomprehensible God, with all
fear and humility as I ought; beseeching his infinite mercy to keep me from
such presumption, whereby I might profane his holy Name, and to make me
obedient to the Church, as also to grant me life and health, that I may be able
to express how much I am,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVI.
MADAM,
SInce I spoke of Religion in my last, I cannot but acquaint you, that I was
the other day in the company of Sir P. H. and Sir R. L. where amongst other
discourses they talked of Predestination and Freewill. Sir P. H. accounted the
opinion of Predestination not only absurd, but blasphemous; for, said he,
Predestination makes God appear Cruel, as first to create Angels and Man, and
then to make them fall from their Glory, and damn them eternally: For God, said
he, knew before he made them, they would fall; Neither could he imagine, from
whence that Pride and Presumption did proceed, which was the cause of the
Angels fall, for it could not proceed from God, God being infinitely Good. Sir
R. L. answered, That this Pride and Presumption did not come from God, but from
their own Nature. But, replied Sir P. H. God gave them that Nature, for they
had it not of themselves, but all what they were, their Essence and Nature,
came from God the Creator of all things, and to suffer that, which was in his
power to hinder, was as much as to act. Sir R. L. said, God gave both Angels
and Man a Free Will at their Creation. Sir P. H. answered, that a Free Will was
a part of a divine attribute, which surely God would not give away to any
Creature: Next, said he, he could not conceive why God should make Creatures to
cross and oppose him; for it were neither an act of Wisdom to make Rebels, nor
an act of Justice to make Devils; so that neither in his Wisdom, Justice, nor
Mercy, God could give leave, that Angels and Man should fall through sin;
neither was God ignorant that Angels and Man would fall; for surely, said he,
God knew all things, past, present, and to come: wherefore, said he, Free Will
does weaken the Power of God, and Predestination does weaken the power of man,
and both do hinder each other: Besides, said he, since God did confirm the rest
of the Angels in the same state they were before, so as they could not fall
afterward, he might as well have created them all so at first. But Sir R. L.
replied, That God suffered Angels and Man to fall for his Glory, to show his
Justice in Devils, and his Mercy in Man; and that the Devils expressed God's
Omnipotency as much as the Blessed. To which Sir P. H. answered, That they
expressed more God's severity in those horrid torments they suffer through
their Natural Imperfections, then his power in making and suffering them to
sin. Thus they discoursed: And to tell you truly, Madam, my mind was more
troubled, then delighted with their discourse; for it seemed rather to detract
from the honor of the great God, then to increase his Glory; and no Creature
ought either to think or to speak any thing that is detracting from the Glory
of the Creator: Wherefore I am neither for Predestination, nor for an absolute
Free Will, neither in Angels, Devils, nor Man; for an absolute Free Will is not
competent to any Creature: and though Nature be Infinite, and the Eternal
Servant to the Eternal and Infinite God, and can produce Infinite Creatures,
yet her Power and Will is not absolute, but limited; that is, she has a natural
free will, but not a supernatural, for she cannot work beyond the power God has
given her. But those mystical discourses belong to Divines, and not to any
Lay-person, and I confess my self very ignorant in them. Wherefore I will nor
dare not dispute God's actions, being all infinitely wise, but leave that to
Divines, who are to inform us what we ought to believe, and how we ought to
live. And thus taking my leave of you for the present, I rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and Servant.

XXVII.
MADAM,
YOu are pleased to honor me so far, that you do not only spend some time in
the perusing of my Book called Philosophical Opinions, but take it so much into
your consideration, as to examine every opinion of mine which dissents from the
common way of the Schools, marking those places which seem somewhat obscure,
and desiring my explanation of them; All which, I do not only acknowledge as a
great favor, but as an infallible testimony of your true and unfeigned
friendship; and I cannot choose but publish it to all the world; both for the
honor of your self, as to let every body know the part of so true a friend,
who is so much concerned for the honor and benefit of my poor Works; as also
for the good of my mentioned Book, which by this means will be rendered more
intelligible; for I must confess that my Philosophical Opinions are not so
plain and perspicuous as to be perfectly understood at the first reading, which
I am sorry for. And there be two chief reasons why they are so: First, Because
they are new, and never vented before; for they have their original merely from
my own conceptions, and are not taken out of other Philosophers. Next, because
I being a Woman, and not bred up to Scholarship, did want names and terms of
Art, and therefore being not versed in the Writings of other Philosophers, but
what I knew by hearing, I could not form my named Book so methodically, and
express my opinions so artificially and clearly, as I might have done, had I
been studious in the reading of Philosophical Books, or bred a Scholar; for
then I might have dressed them with a fine colored Covering of Logic and
Geometry, and set them out in a handsome array; by which I might have also
covered my ignorance, like as StagePlayers do cover their mean persons or
degrees with fine Clothes. But, as I said, I being void of Learning and Art,
did put them forth according to my own conceptions, and as I did understand
them my self; but since I have hitherto by the reading of those famous and
learned Authors you sent me, attained to the knowledge of some artificial Terms,
I shall not spare any labor and pains to make my opinions so intelligible,
that every one, who without partiality, spleen, or malice, does read them, may
also easily understand them: And thus I shall likewise endeavor to give such
answers to your scruples, objections, or questions, as may explain those
passages which seem obscure, and satisfy your desire. In the first place, and
in general, you desire to know, Whether any truth may be had in Natural
Philosophy: for since all this study is grounded upon probability, and he that
thinks he has the most probable reasons for his opinion, may be as far off from
truth, as he who is thought to have the least; nay, what seems most probable to
day, may seem least probable to morrow, especially if an ingenious opposer,
bring rational arguments against it: Therefore you think it is but vain for any
one to trouble his brain with searching and enquiring after such things wherein
neither truth nor certainty can be had. To which, I answer: That the undoubted
truth in Natural Philosophy, is, in my opinion, like the Philopher's Stone in
Chemistry, which has been sought for by many learned and ingenious Persons, and
will be sought as long as the Art of Chemistry does last; but although they
cannot find the Philosophers Stone, yet by the help of this Art they have found
out many rare things both for use and knowledge. The like in Natural Philosophy,
although Natural Philosophers cannot find out the absolute truth of Nature, or
Natures ground-works, or the hidden causes of natural effects; neverthelss they
have found out many necessary and profitable Arts and Sciences, to benefit the
life of man; for without Natural Philosophy we should have lived in dark
ignorance, not knowing the motions of the Heavens, the cause of the Eclipses,
the influences of the Stars, the use of Numbers, Measures, and Weights, the
virtues and effects of Vegetables and Minerals, the Art of Architecture,
Navigation, and the like: Indeed all Arts and Sciences do adscribe their
original to the study of Natural Philosophy; and those men are both unwise and
ungrateful, that will refuse rich gifts because they cannot be masters of all
Wealth; and they are fools, that will not take remedies when they are sick,
because Medicines can only recover them from death for a time, but not make
them live for ever. But to conclude, Probability is next to truth, and the
search of a hidden cause finds out visible effects; and this truth do natural
Philosophers find, that there are more fools, then wise men, which fools will
never attain to the honor of being Natural Philosophers. And thus leaving
them, I rest,

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and faithful Servant.

XXVIII.
MADAM,
YOur desire is to know, since I say Nature is Wise, Whether all her parts must
be wise also? To which, I answer; That (by your favor) all her parts are not
fools: but yet it is no necessary consequence, that because Nature is
infinitely wise, all her parts must be so too, no more then if I should say,
Nature is Infinite, therefore every part must be Infinite: But it is rather
necessary, that because Nature is Infinite, therefore not any single part of
hers can be Infinite, but must be finite. Next, you desire to know, Whether
Nature or the self-moving matter is subject to err, and to commit mistakes? I
answer: Although Nature has naturally an Infinite wisdom and knowledge, yet she
has not a most pure and entire perfection, no, more then she has an absolute
power; for a most pure and entire perfection belongs only to God: and though
she is infinitely naturally wise in her self, yet her parts or particular
creatures may commit errors and mistakes: the truth is, it is impossible but
that parts or particular Creatures must be subject to errors, because no part
can have a perfect or general knowledge, as being but a part, and not a whole;
for knowledge is in parts, as parts are in Matter: Besides several corporeal
motions, that is, several self-moving parts do delude and oppose each other by
their opposite motions; and this opposition is very requisite in Nature to keep
a mean, and hinder extremes; for were there not opposition of parts, Nature
would run into extremes, which would confound her, and all her parts. And as
for delusion, it is part of Natures delight, causing the more variety; but
there be some actions in Nature which are neither perfect mistakes, nor
delusions, but only want of a clear and through perception: As for example;
when a man is sailing in a Ship, he thinks the shore moves from the ship, when
as it is the ship that moves from the shore: Also when a man is going backward
from a Looking-glass, he thinks, the figure in the Glass goes inward, whereas
it is himself that goes backward, and not his figure in the glass. The cause of
it is, That the perception in the eye perceives the distanced body, but not the
motion of the distance or medium; for though the man may partly see the motion
of the visible parts, yet he does not see the parts or motion of the distance
or medium, which is invisible, and not subject to the perception of sight; and
since a pattern cannot be made if the object be not visible, hence I conclude,
that the motion of the medium cannot make perception, but that it is the
perceptive motions of the eye, which pattern out an object as it is visibly
presented to the corporeal motions in the eye; for according as the object is
presented, the pattern is made, if the motions be regular: For example; a fired
end of a stick, if you move it in a circular figure, the sensitive corporeal
motions in the eye pattern out the figure of fire, together with the exterior
or circular motion, and apprehend it as a fiery circle; and if the stick be
moved any otherwise, they pattern out such a figure as the fired end of the
stick is moved in; so that the sensitive pattern is made according to the
exterior corporeal figurative motion of the object, and not according to its
interior figure or motions. And this, Madam, is in short my answer to your
propounded questions, by which, I hope, you understand plainly the meaning of,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXIX.
MADAM,
THe scruples or questions you sent me last, are these following. First, you
desire to be informed what I mean by Phantasmes and Ideas? I answer: They are
figures made by the purest and subtilest degree of self-moving matter, that is
to say, by the rational corporeal motions, and are the same with thoughts or
conceptions. Next, your question is, what I do understand by Sensitive Life? I
answer: It is that part of self-moving matter, which in its own nature is not
so pure and subtle as the rational, for it is but the laboring, and the
rational the designing part of matter. Your third question is, Whether this
sensitive self-moving matter be dense or rare? I answer: density and rarity are
only effects caused by the several actions, that is, the corporeal motions of
Nature; wherefore it cannot properly be said, that sensitive matter is either
dense, or rare; for it has a self-power to contract and dilate, compose and
divide, and move in any kind of motion whatsoever, as is requisite to the
framing of any figure; and thus I desire you to observe well, that when I say
the rational part of matter is purer in its degree then the sensitive, and that
this is a rare and acute matter, I do not mean that it is thin like a rare egg,
but that it is subtle and active, penetrating and dividing, as well as
dividable. Your fourth question is, What this sensitive matter works upon? I
answer: It works with and upon another degree of matter, which is not
self-moving, but dull, stupid, and immovable in its own nature, which I call
the inanimate part or degree of matter. Your fifth question is, Whether this
inanimate Matter do never rest? I answer; It does not: for the self-moving
matter being restless in its own nature, and so closely united and commixed
with the inanimate, as they do make but one body, will never suffer it to rest;
so that there is no part in Nature but is moving; the animate matter in it
self, or its own nature, the inanimate by the help or means of the animate.
Your sixth question is, If there be a through mixture of the parts of animate
and inanimate matter, whether those parts do retain each their own nature and
substance, so that the inanimate part of matter remains dull and stupid in its
essence or nature, and the animate full of self-motion, or all self motion? I
answer: Although every part and particle of each degree are closely intermixed,
nevertheless this mixture does not alter the interior nature of those parts or
degrees: As for example; a man is composed of Soul, and Body, which are several
parts, but joined as into one substance, viz. Man, and yet they retain each
their own proprieties and natures; for although soul and body are so closely
united as they do make but one Man, yet the soul does not change into the body,
nor the body into the soul, but each continues in its own nature as it is. And
so likewise in Infinite Matter, although the degrees or parts of Matter are so
thoroughly intermixed as they do make but one body or substance, which is
corporeal Nature, yet each remains in its nature as it is, to wit, the animate
part of matter does not become dull and stupid in its nature, but remains
selfmoving; and the inanimate, although it does move by the means of the
animate, yet it does not become self-moving, but each keeps its own interior
nature and essence in their commixture. The truth is, there must of necessity
be degrees of matter, or else there would be no such various and several
effects in Nature, as humane sense and reason do perceive there are; and those
degrees must also retain each their own nature and proprieties, to produce
those various and curious effects: Neither must those different degrees vary or
alter the nature of Infinite Matter; for Matter must and does continue one and
the same in its Nature, that is, Matter cannot be divided from being Matter:
And this is my meaning, when I say in my Philosophical Opinions, There is but
one kind of Matter: Not that Matter is not dividable into several parts or
degrees, but I say, although Matter has several parts and degrees, yet they do
not alter the nature of Matter, but Matter remains one and the same in its own
kind, that is, it continues still Matter in its own nature notwithstanding
those degrees; and thus I do exclude from Matter all that which is not Matter,
and do firmly believe, that there can be no commixture of Matter and no Matter
in Nature; for this would breed a mere confusion in Nature. Your seventh
question is, Whether that, which I name the rational part of selfmoving Matter
makes as much variety as the sensitive? To which I answer: That, to my sense
and reason, the rational part of animate or self-moving Matter moves not only
more variously, but also more swiftly then the sensitive; for thoughts are
sooner made, then words spoke, and a certain proof of it are the various and
several Imaginations, Fancies, Conceptions, Memories, Remembrances,
Understandings, Opinions, Judgments, and the like: as also the several sorts of
Love, Hate, Fear, Anger, Joy, Doubt; and the like Passions. Your eighth
question is, Whether the Sensitive Matter can and does work in it self and its
own substance and degree? My answer is, That there is no inanimate matter
without animate, nor no animate without inanimate, both being so curiously and
subtly intermixed, as they make but one body; Nevertheless the several parts
of this one body may move several ways. Neither are the several degrees bound
to an equal mixture, no more then the several parts of one body are bound to
one and the same size, bigness, shape, or motion; or the Sea is bound to be
always at the high tide; or the Moon to be always at the Full; or all the Veins
or Brains in animal bodies are bound to be of equal quantity; or every Tree of
the same kind to bear fruit, or have leaves of equal number; or every Apple,
Pear, or Plum, to have an equal quantity of juice; or every Be to make as much
honey and wax as the other. Your nineth question is, Whether the Sensitive
Matter can work without taking patterns? My answer is, That all corporeal
motion is not patterning, but all patterning is made by corporeal motion; and
there be more several sorts of corporeal motions then any single Creature is
able to conceive, much less to express: But the perceptive corporeal motions
are the ground-motions in Nature, which make, rule, and govern all the parts of
Nature, as to move to Production, or Generation, Transformation, and the like.
Your tenth question is, How it is possible, that numerous figures can exist in
one part of matter? for it is impossible that two things can be in one place,
much less many. My answer in short is, That it were impossible, were a part of
Matter, and the numerous figures several and distinct things; but all is but
one thing, that is, a part of Matter moving variously; for there is neither
Magnitude, Place, Figure, nor Motion, in Nature, but what is Matter, or Body;
Neither is there any such thing as Time: Wherefore it cannot properly be said,
There was, and There shall be; but only, There is. Neither can it properly be
said, from this to that place; but only in reference to the several moving
parts of the only Infinite Matter. And thus much to your Questions; I add no
more, but rest,

MADAM, Your faithful Friend and humble Servant.

XXX.
MADAM,
IN your last, you were pleased to express, that some men, who think themselves
wise, did laugh in a scornful manner at my opinion, when I say that every
Creature has life and knowledge, sense and reason; counting it not only
ridiculous, but absurd; and asking, whether you did or could believe, a piece
of wood, metal, or stone, had as much sense as a beast, or as much reason as a
man, having neither brain, blood, heart, nor flesh; nor such organs, passages,
parts, nor shapes as animals? To which, I answer: That it is not any of these
mentioned things that makes life and knowledge, but life and knowledge is the
cause of them, which life and knowledge is animate matter, and is in all parts
of all Creatures: and to make it more plain and perspicuous, humane sense and
reason may perceive, that wood, stone, or metal, acts as wisely as an animal:
As for example; Rhubarb, or the like drugs, will act very wisely in Purging;
and Antimony, or the like, will act very wisely in Vomiting; and Opium will act
very wisely in Sleeping; also Quicksilver or Mercury will act very wisely, as
those that have the French disease can best witness: likewise the Loadstone
acts very wisely; as Mariners or Navigators will tell you: Also Wine made of
Fruit, and Ale of Malt, and distilled Aqua-vitae will act very subtly; ask
the Drunkards, and they can inform you; Thus Infinite examples may be given,
and yet man says, all Vegetables and Minerals are insensible and irrational, as
also the Planets and Elements; when as yet the Planets move very orderly and
wisely, and the Elements are more active, nay, more subtle and searching then
any of the animal Creatures; witness Fire, Air, and Water: As for the Earth,
she brings forth her fruit, if the other Elements do not cause abortives, in
due season; and yet man believes, Vegetables, Minerals, and Elements, are dead,
dull, senseless, and irrational Creatures, because they have not such shapes,
parts, nor passages as Animals, nor such exterior and local motions as Animals
have: but Man does not consider the various, intricate and obscure ways of
Nature, unknown to any particular Creature; for what our senses are not capable
to know, our reason is apt to deny. Truly, in my opinion, Man is more
irrational then any of those Creatures, when he believes that all knowledge is
not only confined to one sort of Creatures, but to one part of one particular
Creature, as the head, or brain of man; for who can in reason think, that there
is no other sensitive and rational knowledge in Infinite Matter, but what is
only in Man or animal Creatures? It is a very simple and weak conclusion to
say, Other Creatures have no eyes to see, no ears to hear, no tongues to taste,
no noses to smell, as animals have; wherefore they have no sense or sensitive
knowledge; or because they have no head, nor brain as Man has, therefore they
have no reason, nor rational knowledge at all: for sense and reason, and
consequently sensitive and rational knowledge, extends further then to be bound
to the animal eye, ear, nose, tongue, head, or brain; but as these organs are
only in one kind of Natures Creatures, as Animals, in which organs the
sensitive corporeal motions make the perception of exterior objects, so there
may be infinite other kinds of passages or organs in other Creatures unknown to
Man, which Creatures may have their sense and reason, that is, sensitive and
rational knowledge, each according to the nature of its figure; for as it is
absurd to say, that all Creatures in Nature are Animals, so it is absurd to
confine sense and reason only to Animals; or to say, that all other Creatures,
if they have sense and reason, life and knowledge, it must be the same as is in
Animals: I confess, it is of the same degree, that is, of the same animate part
of matter, but the motions of life and knowledge work so differently and
variously in every kind and sort, nay, in every particular Creature, that no
single Creature can find them out: But, in my opinion, not any Creature is
without life and knowledge, which life and knowledge is made by the self-moving
part of matter, that is, by the sensitive and rational corporeal motions; and
as it is no consequence, that all Creatures must be alike in their exterior
shapes, figures, and motions, because they are all produced out of one and the
same matter, so neither does it follow, that all Creatures must have the same
interior motions, natures, and proprieties, and so consequently the same life
and knowledge, because all life and knowledge is made by the same degree of
matter, to wit, the animate. Wherefore though every kind or sort of Creatures
has different perceptions, yet they are not less knowing; for Vegetables,
Minerals, and Elements, may have as numerous, and as various perceptions as
Animals, and they may be as different from animal perceptions as their kinds
are; but a different perception is not therefore no perception: Neither is it
the animal organs that make perception, nor the animal shape that makes life,
but the motions of life make them. But some may say, it is Irreligious to
believe any Creature has rational knowledge but Man. Surely, Madam, the God of
Nature, in my opinion, will be adored by all Creatures, and adoration cannot be
without sense and knowledge. Wherefore it is not probable, that only Man, and
no Creature else, is capable to adore and worship the Infinite and Omnipotent
God, who is the God of Nature, and of all Creatures: I should rather think it
irreligious to confine sense and reason only to Man, and to say, that no
Creature adores and worships God, but Man; which, in my judgment, argues a
great pride, self-conceit, and presumption. And thus, Madam, having declared my
opinion plainly concerning this subject, I will detain you no longer at this
present, but rest,

MADAM, Your constant Friend and faithful Servant.

XXXI.
MADAM,
I Perceive you do not well apprehend my meaning, when I say in my
Philosophical Opinions Part. 1. c. 4.
, That the Infinite degrees of Infinite Matter are all Infinite: For, say you,
the degrees of Matter cannot be Infinite, by reason there cannot be two
Infinites, but one would obstruct the other. My answer is; I do not mean that
the degrees of Matter are Infinite each in its self, that is, that the animate
and inanimate are several Infinite matters, but my opinion is, that the animate
degree of matter is in a perpetual motion, and the inanimate does not move of
it self, and that those degrees are infinite in their effects, as producing and
making infinite figures; for since the cause, which is the only matter, is
infinite, the effects must of necessity be infinite also; the cause is infinite
in its substance, the effects are Infinite in number. And this is my meaning,
when I say Chapter 8.
, that, although in Nature there is but one kind of matter, yet there are
Infinite degrees, Infinite motions, and Infinite parts in that only matter;
and though Infinite and Eternal matter has no perfect or exact figure, by
reason it is Infinite, and therefore unlimited, yet there being infinite parts
in number, made by the infinite variations of motions in infinite Matter, these
parts have perfect or exact figures, considered as parts, that is, single, or
each in its particular figure: And therefore if there be Infinite degrees,
considering the effects of the animate and inanimate matter, infinite motions
for changes, infinite parts for number, infinite compositions and divisions for
variety and diversity of Creatures; then there may also be infinite sizes, each
part or figure differing more or less, infinite smalness and bigness, lightness
and heaviness, rarity and density, strength and power, life and knowledge, and
the like: But by reason Nature or Natural matter is not all animate or
inanimate, nor all composing or dividing, there can be no Infinite in a part,
nor can there be something biggest or smallest, strongest or weakest, heaviest
or lightest, softest or hardest in Infinite Nature, or her parts, but all those
several Infinites are as it were included in one Infinite, which is Corporeal
Nature, or Natural Matter.

Next, you desire my opinion of Vacuum, whether there be any, or not? for you
say I determine nothing of it in my Book of Philosophical Opinions. Truly,
Madam, my sense and reason cannot believe a Vacuum, because there cannot be an
empty Nothing; but change of motion makes all the alteration of figures, and
consequently all that which is called place, magnitude, space, and the like;
for matter, motion, figure, place, magnitude, etc. are but one thing. But some
men perceiving the alteration, but not the subtle motions, believe that bodies
move into each others place, which is impossible, because several places are
only several parts, so that, unless one part could make it self another part,
no part can be said to succeed into another place; but it is impossible that
one part should make it self another part, for it cannot be another, and it
self, no more then Nature can be Nature, and not Nature; wherefore change of
place is only change of motion, and this change of motion makes alteration of
Figures.

Thirdly, you say, You cannot understand what I mean by Creation, for you think
that Creation is a production or making of Something out of Nothing. To tell
you really, Madam, this word is used by me for want of a better expression; and
I do not take it in so strict a sense as to understand by it, a Divine or
supernatural Creation, which only belongs to God; but a natural Creation, that
is, a natural production or Generation; for Nature cannot create or produce
Something out of Nothing: And this Production may be taken in a double sense;
First, in General, as for example, when it is said, that all Creatures are
produced out of Infinite Matter; and in this respect every particular Creature
which is finite, that is, of a circumscribed and limited figure, is produced of
Infinite Matter, as being a part thereof: Next, Production is taken in a more
strict sense, to wit, when one single Creature is produced from another; and
this is either Generation properly so called, as when in every kind and sort
each particular produces its like; or it is such a Generation whereby one
creature produces another, each being of a different kind or species, as for
example, when an Animal produces a Mineral, as when a Stone is generated in the
Kidneys, or the like; and in this sense one finite creature generates or
produces another finite creature, the producer as well as the produced being
finite; but in the first sense finite creatures are produced out of infinite
matter.

Fourthly, you confess, You cannot well apprehend my meaning, when I say Part.
4. c. 10.
, that the several kinds are as Infinite as the particulars; for your opinion
is, That the number of particulars must needs exceed the number of kinds. I
answer: I mean in general the Infinite effects of Nature which are Infinite in
number, and the several kinds or sorts of Creatures are Infinite in duration,
for nothing can perish in Nature.

Fifthly, When I say, that ascending and descending Chapter 20.
is often caused by the exterior figure or shape of a body; witness a Bird, who
although he is of a much bigger size and bulk then a Worm, yet can by his shape
lift himself up more agilly and nimbly then a Worm; Your opinion is, That his
exterior shape does not contribute any thing toward his flying, by reason a
Bird being dead retains the same shape, but yet cannot fly at all. But, truly,
Madam, I would not have you think that I do exclude the proper and interior
natural motion of the figure of a Bird, and the natural and proper motions of
every part and particle thereof; for that a Bird when dead, keeps his shape,
and yet cannot fly, the reason is, that the natural and internal motions of the
Bird, and the Birds wings, are altered toward some other shape or figure, if
not exteriously, yet interiously; but yet the interior natural motions could
not effect any flying or ascending without the help of the exterior shape; for
a Man, or any other animal, may have the same interior motions as a Bird has,
but wanting such an exterior shape, he cannot fly; whereas had he wings like a
Bird, and the interior natural motions of those wings, he might without doubt
fly as well as a Bird does.

Sixthly, Concerning the descent of heavy bodies, Chapter 21.
that it is more forcible then the ascent of light bodies, you do question the
Truth of this my opinion. Certainly, Madam, I cannot conceive it to be
otherwise by my sense and reason; for though Fire that is rare, does ascend
with an extraordinary quick motion, yet this motion is, in my opinion, not so
strong and piercing as when grosser parts of Creatures do descend; but there is
difference in strength and quickness; for had not Water a stronger motion, and
another sort of figure then Fire, it could not suppress Fire, much less quench
it. But Smoke, which is heavier then Flame, flies up, or rises before, or
rather, above it: Wherefore I am still of the same opinion, that heavy bodies
descend more forcibly then light bodies do ascend, and it seems most rational
to me.

Lastly, I perceive you cannot believe that all bodies have weight; by reason,
if this were so, the Sun, and the Stars would have long since covered the
Earth. In answer to this objection, I say, That as there can be no body without
figure and magnitude, so consequently not without weight, were it no bigger
then an atome; and as for the Sun's and the Stars not falling down, or rising
higher, the reason is, not their being without weight, but their natural and
proper motion, which keeps them constantly in their spheres; and it might as
well be said, a Man lives not, or is not, because he does not fly like a Bird,
or dive and catch fish like a Cormorant, or dig and undermine like a Mole, for
those are motions not proper to his nature. And these, Madam, are my answers to
your objections, which if they do satisfy you, it is all I desire, if not, I
shall endeavor hereafter to make my meaning more intelligible, and study for
other more rational arguments then these are, to let you see how much I value
both the credit of my named Book, and your Ladyships Commands; which assure you
self, shall never be more faithfully performed, then by,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most obliged Friend and humble Servant.

XXXII.
MADAM,
SInce my opinion is, that the Animate part of Matter, which is sense and
reason, life and knowledge, is the designer, architect, and creator of all
sigures in Nature; you desire to know, whence this Animate Matter, sense and
reason, or life and knowledge (call it what you will, for it is all one and the
same thing) is produced? I answer: It is eternal. But then you say, it is
coequal with God. I answer, That cannot be: for God is above all Natural sense
and reason, which is Natural life and knowledge; and therefore it cannot be
coequal with God, except it be meant in Eternity, as being without beginning
and end. But if Gods Power can make Man's Soul, as also the good and evil
Spirits to last eternally without end, he may, by his Omnipotency make as well
things without beginning. You will say, If Nature were Eternal, it could not be
created, for the word Creation is contrary to Eternity. I answer, Madam, I am
no Scholar for words; for if you will not use the word Creation, you may use
what other word you will; for I do not stand upon nice words and terms, so I
can but express my conceptions: Wherefore, if it be (as in Reason it cannot be
otherwise) that nothing in Nature can be annihilated, nor any thing created out
of nothing, but by Gods special and all-powerful Decree and Command, then
Nature must be as God has made her, until he destroy her. But if Nature be not
Eternal, then the Gods of the Heathens were made in time, and were no more then
any other Creature, which is as subject to be destroyed as created; for they
conceived their Gods, as we do men, to have Material Bodies, but an Immaterial
Spirit, or as some Learned men imagine, to be an Immaterial Spirit, but to take
several shapes, and so to perform several corporeal actions; which truly is too
humble and mean a conception of an Immaterial Being, much more of the Great and
Incomprehensible God; which I do firmly believe is a most pure, all-powerful
Immaterial Being, which does all things by his own Decree and Omnipotency
without any Corporeal actions or shapes, such as some fancy of Demons and the
like Spirits. But to return to the former question; you might as well enquire
how the world, or any part of it was created, or how the variety of creatures
came to be, as ask how Reason and sensitive corporeal Knowledge was produced.
Nevertheless, I do constantly believe, that both sensitive and rational
Knowledge in Matter was produced from God; but after what manner or way, is
impossible for any creature or part of Nature to know, for Gods ways are
incomprehensible and supernatural. And thus much I believe, That as God is an
Eternal Creator, which no man can deny, so he has also an Eternal Creature,
which is Nature, or natural Matter. But put the case Nature or natural Matter
was made when the World was created, might not God give this Natural Matter
self-motion, as well as he gave selfmotion to Spirits and Souls? and might not
God endue this Matter with Sense and Reason, as well as he endued Man? Shall or
can we bind up Gods actions with our weak opinions and foolish arguments?
Truly, if God could not act more then Man is able to conceive, he were not a
God of an infinite Power; but God is Omnipotent, and his actions are infinite,
supernatural, and past finding out; wherefore he is rather to be admired,
adored and worshipped, then to be ungloriously discoursed of by vain and
ambitious men, whose foolish pride and presumption drowns their Natural
Judgment and Reason; to which leaving them, I rest,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

XXXIII.
MADAM,
IN obedience to your commands, I here send you also an explanation and
clearing of those places and passages in my Book of Philosophy, which in your
last Letter you were pleased to mark, as containing some obscurity and
difficulty of being understood.

First, When I say, Nature is an Individable Matter, I do not mean as if Nature
were not dividable into Part. 3. e. 13.
parts; for because Nature is material, therefore she must also needs be
dividable into parts: But my meaning is, that Nature cannot be divided from
Matter, nor Matter from Nature, that is, Nature cannot be Immaterial, nor no
part of Nature, but if there be any thing Immaterial, it does not belong to
Nature. Also when I call Nature a Multiplying Figure; I mean, Ibid.
that Nature makes infinite changes, and so infinite figures.

Next, when I say, There are Infinite Divisions in Nature; my meaning is not,
that there are Infinite Part. 1. c. 11.
divisions of one single part, but that Infinite Matter has Infinite parts,
sizes, figures, and motions, all being but one Infinite Matter, or corporeal
Nature. Also when I say single parts, I mean not parts subsisting by
themselves, precised from each other, but single, that is, several or
different, by reason of their different figures. Likewise, when I name Atoms,
I mean small parts of Matter; and when I speak ofPlace and Time, I mean only
the variation of corporeal figurative motions.

Again: when I say, Nature has not an absolute Part. 1. c. 13, 14.
Power, because she has an Infinite power; I mean by absolute, as much as
finite, or circumscribed; and in this sense Nature cannot have an absolute
power, for the Infiniteness hinders the absoluteness; but when in my former
Letters I have attributed an absolute Power only to God, and said that Nature
has not an absolute power, but that her power, although it be Infinite, yet
cannot extend beyond Nature, but is an Infinite natural power; I understand by
an absolute Power, not a finite power, but such a power which only belongs to
God, that is, a supernatural and divine power, which power Nature cannot have,
by reason she cannot make any part of her body immaterial, nor annihilate any
part of her Creatures, nor create any part that was not in her from Eternity,
nor make her self a Deity; for though God can empower her with a supernatural
gift, and annihilate her when he pleases, yet she is no ways able to do it her
self.

Moreover, when I say, That one Infinite is contained within another; I mean,
the several sorts of Infinites, P. 1. c. 8.
as Infinite in number, Infinite in duration; as also the Infinite degrees,
motions, figures, sizes, compositions, divisions, etc. all which are contained
in the Infinite body of Nature, which is the only Infinite in quantity or
substance, neither can the parts of Nature go beyond Infinite.

Also when I say, That Matter would have power over Infinite, and Infinite over
Matter, and Eternal over P. 6. c. 3.
both; I mean, that some corporeal actions endeavor to be more powerful then
others, and thus the whole strives to overpower the parts, and the parts the
whole: As for example, if one end of a string were tied about the little finger
of ones hand, and the other end were in the power of the other whole hand, and
both did pull several and opposite ways; certainly, the little finger would
endeavor to overpower the hand, and the hand again would strive to overpower
the little finger: The same may be said of two equal figures, as two hands, and
other the like examples may be given. And this is also my meaning, when I say,
that some shapes have power over others, and some degrees and temperaments of
matter over others; whereby I understand nothing else, but that some parts have
power over others. Also when I say P. 3. 6. 10.
, that outward things govern, and a Creature has no power over it self, I mean,
that which is stronger, by what means soever, is superior in power.

When I say P. 1. Chapter 3.
, That the Animate part of Matter is not so gross an Infinite as the Inanimate,
I do not attribute an Infiniteness to a part, as if animate matter considered
as a part were infinite; but my meaning is, that the Animate matter produces
infinite effects: For, it being the Designer, Architect, and Creator of all
Figures, as also the Life and Soul of all Creatures, it must needs be infinite
in its effects, as also infinite in its duration. But you may object, That a
part cannot produce infinite effects. I answer, It is true, if animate matter
should be considered in it self without the inanimate, it could not produce
infinite effects, having nothing to work upon and withal; but because there is
such a close and inseparable conjunction of those parts of matter, as they make
but one body, and that Infinite, none can be or work without the other, but
both degrees of matter, which make but one infinite Nature, are required in the
production of the infinite effects and figures in Nature: Nevertheless, since
the Animate part of Matter is the only architect, creator, or producer of all
those effects, by reason it is the self-moving part, and the Inanimate is only
the instrument which the Animate works withal, and the materials it works upon,
the Production of the infinite effects in Nature is more fitly ascribed to the
Animate then the Inanimate part of matter; as for example, If an architect
should build an house, certainly he can do nothing without materials, neither
can the materials raise themselves to such a figure as a house without the help
of the architect and workmen, but both are of necessity required to this
artificial production; nevertheless, the building of the house is not laid to
the materials, but to the architect: the same may be said of animate and
inanimate matter in the production of natural effects. Again, you may reply,
That the animate and inanimate parts of matter are but two parts, and the
number of Two is but a finite number, wherefore they cannot make one infinite
body, such as I call Nature or natural Matter. I answer, Madam, I confess, that
a finite number is not nor cannot make an infinite number; but I do not say,
that the animate and inanimate parts or degrees of matter are two finite parts
each subsisting by it self as circumscribed, and having its certain bounds,
limits and circumference; for if this were so, certainly they being finite
themselves, could not produce but finite effects; but my meaning is, that both
the animate and inanimate matter do make but one Infinite bulk, body, or
substance, and are not two several and dividable bodies in themselves, and thus
they may be divided not into two, but into Infinite parts; Neither are they two
different Matters, but they are but one Matter; for by the animate Matter I do
understand self-motion; and that I call this self-motion Matter, the reason is,
that no body shall think as if self-motion were immaterial; for my opinion is,
that Nature is nothing but mere Matter, and that nothing is in Nature which is
a part of Nature, that is not material; wherefore to avoid such a
misapprehension (seeing that most learned men are so much for abstractions and
immaterial beings) I called self-motion animate matter, or the animate part of
matter; not as if they were two several matters, but that all is but one
natural Matter, or corporeal Nature in one bulk, body, or substance, just like
as the soul and body do make but one man; and to avoid also this
misapprehension, lest they might be taken for several matters, I have upon
better consideration, in this volume of Philosophical Letters, called the
animate matter corporeal self-motion, which expression, I think, is more
proper, plain, and intelligible then any other: Neither would I have you to
scruple at it, when I say, that both parts or degrees of animate and inanimate
matter do retain their own interior natures and proprieties in their
commixture, as if those different natures and proprieties, where one is
self-moving, and the other not, did cause them to be two different matters; for
thus you might say as well, that several figures which have several and
different interior natures and proprieties, are so many several matters. The
truth is, if you desire to have the truest expression of animate and inanimate
matter, you cannot find it better then in the definition of Nature, when I say,
Nature is an infinite self-moving body; where by the body of Nature I
understand the inanimate matter, and by self-motion the animate, which is the
life and soul of Nature, not an immaterial life and soul, but a material, for
both life, soul and body are and make but one self-moving body or substance
which is corporeal Nature. And therefore when I call Animate matter an Extract,
I do it by reason of its purity, subtilty P. 4. ^. 3, 32.
and agility, not by reason of its immateriality. Also when I name the word
Motion by it self, and without any addition, I understand corporeal Motion; and
when I name Motion, Matter and Figure, I do not mean three several and distinct
things, but only figurative corporeal motion, or figurative self-moving
matter, all being but one thing; the same when I speak of Place, Time,
Magnitude, and the like.

Concerning Natural Production or Generation; when I say, The same matter or
figure of the producers P. 1. c. 22.
does not always move after one and the same manner in producing, for then the
same producers would produce one and the same creature by repetition, I do not
mean the very same creature in number, unless the same motions and parts of
matter did return into the producers again, which is impossible; but I
understand the like creature, to wit, that one and the same sort of particular
motions would make all particular figures resemble so, as if they were one and
the same creature without any difference.

When I say, Sensitive and Rational knowledge lives in P. 3. c. 15.
sensitive and rational Matter, and Animate lives in Inanimate matter, I mean
they are all several parts and actions of the only infinite matter inseparable
from each other; for wheresoever is matter, there is also self-motion, and
wheresoever is self-motion, there is sense and reason, and wheresoever is sense
and reason, there is sensitive and rational knowledge, all being but one body
or substance, which is Nature,

When I say, The death of particular Creatures causes Ibid.
an obscurity of Knowledge, and that particular Knowledges increase and
decrease, and may be more or less, I mean only that parts divide themselves
from parts, and join to other parts; for every several Motion is a several
Knowledge, and as motion varies, so does knowledge; but there is no
annihilation of any motion, and consequently not of knowledge in Nature. And as
for more or less knowledge, I mean more or less alteration and variety of
corporeal figurative motions, not only rational but sensitive, so that that
creature which has most variety of those perceptive motions is most knowing,
provided they be regular, that is, according to the nature and propriety of the
figure, whether animal, vegetable, mineral, or elemental; for though a large
figure is capable of most knowledge, yet it is not commonly or always so wise
or witty as a less, by reason it is more subject to disorders and
irregularities; like as a private Family is more regular and better ordered
then a great State or Commonwealth. Also when I say, That some particular
Knowledge lasts longer then some other, I mean that some corporeal motions in
some parts do continue longer then in others.

When I say, A little head may be full, and a great P. 6. c. 11,
head may be empty of rational matter, I mean there may be as it were an ebbing
or flowing, that is more or less of Rational Matter joined with the Sensitive
and Inanimate: And when I say, That, if all the heads of Mankind were put into
one, and sufficient quantity of Rational Matter therein, that Creature would
not only have the knowledge of every particular, but that Understanding and
Knowledge would increase like Use-money, my meaning is, that if there were much
of those parts of rational matter joined, they would make more variety by
selfchange of corporeal motions.

When I name Humane sense and reason, I mean such sensitive and rational
perception and knowledge as is proper to the nature of Man; and when I say
Animal sense and reason, I mean such as is proper to the nature of all Animals;
for I do not mean that the sensitive and rational corporeal motions which do
make a man, or any Animal, are bound to such figures eternally, but whilst
they work and move in such or such figures, they make such perceptions as
belong to the nature of those figures; but when those self-moving parts
dissolve the figure of an Animal into a Vegetable or any other Creature, then
they work according to the nature of that same figure, both exteriously and
interiously.

When I say, That Place, Space, Measure, Number, Weight, Figures, etc. are
mixed with Substance, P. 3. c. 27.
I do not mean they are incorporeal, and do inhere in substance as so many
incorporeal modes or accidents; but my meaning is, they are all corporeal parts
and actions of Nature, there being no such thing in Nature that may be called
incorporeal; for Place, Figure, Weight, Measure, etc. are nothing without Body,
but Place and Body are but one thing, and so of the rest. Also when I say, That
sometimes Place, C. 14.
sometimes Time, and sometimes Number gives advantage, I mean, that several
parts of Matter are getting or losing advantage.

When I say, an Animal or any thing else that has exterior local motion, goes
or moves to such or such P. 5. c. 51.
a place, I mean, to such or such a body; and when such a Creature does not
move out of its place, I mean, it does not remove its body from such or such
parts adjoining to it.

When I say, The rational animate matter divides it self into as many parts,
and after as many several manners P. 6. c. 8.
as their place or quantity will give way to, I mean their own place and
quantity: also, as other parts will give way to those parts, for some parts
will assist others, and some do obstruct others.

When I say, That the Nature of extension or dilation strives or endeavors to
get space, ground, or compass, P. 4. c. 34.
I mean those corporeal motions endeavor to make place and space by their
extensions, that is, to spread their parts of matter into a larger compass or
body. And when I say, That Contractions endeavor to cast or thrust out space,
place, ground, or compass, My meaning is, That those corporeal motions
endeavor to draw their parts of matter into a more close and solid body, for
there is no place nor space without body.

Also when I name several tempered substances and matters, I mean several
changes and mixtures of corporeal Ibid.
motions.

Also when I speak of Increase and Decrease, I mean only an alteration of
corporeal figurative motions, as uniting parts with parts, and dissolving or
separating parts from parts.

When I say, That the motions of cold, and the motions of moisture, when they
meet, make cold and P. 5. c. 4.
moist effects, and when the motions of heat and moisture meet, make hot and
moist effects; and so for the motions of cold and dryness: I mean, that when
several parts do join in such several corporeal motions, they cause such
effects; and when I say cold and heat presses into every particular Creature, I
mean, that every Creatures natural and inherent perceptive motions make such
patterns as their exterior objects are, viz. hot or cold, if they do but move
regularly, for if they be irregular, then they do not: as for example; those in
an Ague will shake for cold in a hot Summers day, and those that are in a Fever
will burn with heat, although they were at the Poles.

When I say, that hot motions, and burning motions, and hot figures, and
burning figures do not associate or P. 5. c. ^3.
join together in all Creatures: I mean, that the corporeal motions in some
figures or creatures, do act in a hot, but not in a burning manner; and when I
say, some creatures have both hot and burning motions and figures, I mean, the
corporeal motions act both in a hot and burning manner; for though heat is in a
degree to burning, yet it is not always burning, for burning is the highest
degree of heat, as wetness is the highest degree of moisture.

When I say, Warmth feeds other Creatures after a P. 5. c. 27.
spiritual manner, not a corporeal, My meaning is, not as if heat were not
corporeal, but that those corporeal motions which make heat work invisibly, and
not visibly like as fire feeds on fuel, or man on meat.

Also when I say, Exercise amongst animals gets Ibid.
strength, I mean, that by exercise the inherent natural motions of an animal
body are more active, as being more industrious.

When I say, That the passage whence cold and sharp T. 5. c. 45.
winds do issue out, is narrow, I mean, when as such or such parts disjoyn or
separate from other parts; as for example, when dilating parts disjoyn from
contracting parts; and oftentimes the disjoyning parts do move according to the
nature of those parts they disjoyn from.

Concerning the actions of Nature, my meaning is, that there is not any action
whatsoever, but was always in Nature, and remains in Nature so long as it
pleases God that Nature shall last, and of all her actions Perception and
self-love are her prime and chief actions; wherefore it is impossible but that
all her particular creatures or parts must be knowing as well as self-moving,
there being not one part or particle of Nature that has not its share of
animate or self-moving matter, and consequently of knowledge and self-love,
each according to its own kind and nature; but by reason all the parts are of
one matter, and belong to one body, each is unalterable so far, that although
it can change its figure, yet it cannot change or alter from being matter, or a
part of Infinite Nature; and this is the cause there cannot be a confusion
amongst those parts of Nature, but there must be a constant union and harmony
betwixt them; for cross and opposite actions make no confusion, but only a
variety; and such actions which are different, cross and opposite, not moving
always after their usual and accustomed way, I name Irregular, for want of a
better expression; but properly there is no such thing as Irregularity in
Nature, nor no weariness, rest, sleep, sickness, death or destruction, no more
then there is place, space, time, modes, accidents, and thelike, any thing
besides body or matter.

When I speak of unnatural Motions, I mean such as are not proper to the nature
of such or such a Creature, P. 7. c. 11.
as being opposite or destructive to it, that is, moving or acting toward its
dissolution. Also when I call Violence supernatural, I mean that Violence is
beyond the particular nature of such a particular Creature, that is, beyond its
natural motions; but not supernatural, that is beyond Infinite Nature or
natural Matter.

When I say, A thing is forced, I do not mean that the forced body receives
strength without Matter; but that some Corporeal Motions join with other
Corporeal Motions, and so double the strength by joining their parts, or are at
least an occasion to make other parts more industrious.

By Prints I understand the figures of the objects which are patterned or
copied out by the sensitive and rational corporeal figurative Motions; as for
example, when the sensitive corporeal motions pattern out the figure of an
exterior object, and the rational motions again pattern out a figure made by
the sensitive motions, those figures of the objects that are patterned out, I
name Prints; as for example, The sense of Seeing is not capable to receive the
Print, that is, the figure or pattern P. 3. c. 2.
of the object of the whole Earth. And again, The rational Motions are not
always exactly after the sensitive Prints, that is, after the figures made by
the sensitive motions. Thus by Prints I understand Patterns, and by printing
patterning; not that the exterior object prints its figure upon the exterior
sensitive organs, but that the sensitive motions in the organs pattern out the
figure of the object: but though all printing is done by the way of patterning,
yet all patterning is not printing. Therefore when I say, that solid bodies
print their figures in that which is more porous and soft, and P. 5. c. 23.
that those solid bodies make new prints perpetually; and as they remove, the
prints melt out, like verbal or vocal sounds, which print words and set notes
in the Air; I mean, the soft body by its own self-motion patterns out the
figure of the solid body, and not that the solid body makes its own print, and
so leaves the place of its own substance with the print in the soft body; for
place remains always with its own body, and cannot be separated from it, they
being but one thing: for example; when a Seal is printed in Wax, the Seal gives
not any thing to the Wax, but is only an object patterned out by the
figurative motions of the Wax in the action of printing or sealing.

When I make mention of what the Senses bring in, I mean what the sensitive
Motions pattern out of foreign P. 6. c. 13.
objects: And when I say, that the pores being shut, touch cannot enter, I
mean, the sensitive corporeal P. 7. c. 12.
motions cannot make patterns of outward objects.

Also when I say, our Ears may be as knowing as our Eyes, and so of the rest of
the sensitive organs; I mean the sensitive motions in those parts or organs.

When I say, The more the Body is at rest, the more active or busy is the
Mind, I mean when the sensitive P. 6. c. 13.
Motions are not taken up with the action of patterning out foreign objects.

When I say, the Air is filled with sound, and that words are received into the
ears, as figures of exterior P. 6. c. 29.
objects are received into the eyes, I mean, the sensitive motions of the Air
pattern out sound, and the sensitive motions of the Ears pattern out words, as
the sensitive figurative motions of the Eyes pattern out the figures of
external objects.

Also when I speak of Thunder and Lightning, to wit, That Thunder makes a great
noise by the breaking of lines: My meaning is, That the Air patterns out this
sound or noise of the lines; and by reason there are so many patterns made in
the air by its sensitive motions, the Ear cannot take so exact a copy thereof,
but somewhat confusedly; and this is the reason why Thunder is represented, or
rather pattern'd out with some terror; for Thunder is a confused noise,
because the patterns are made confusedly.

But concerning Sound and Light, I am forced to acquaint you, Madam, that my
meaning thereof is not so well expressed in my Book of Philosophy, by reason I
was not of the same opinion at that time when I did write that Book which I am
now of; for upon better consideration, and a more diligent search into the
causes of natural effects, I have found it more probable, that all sensitive
perception is made by the way of Patterning, and so consequently the perception
of Sound and of Light; wherefore, I beseech you, when you find in my mentioned
Book any thing thereof otherwise expressed, do not judge of it as if I did
contradict my self, but that I have altered my opinion since upon more probable
reasons.

Thus, Madam, you have a true declaration of my sense and meaning concerning
those places, which in my Philosophical Opinions you did note, as being
obscure; but I am resolved to bestow so much time and labor as to have all
other places in that Book rectified and cleared, which seem not perspicuous,
left its obscurity may be the cause of its being neglected: And I pray God of
his mercy to assist me with his Grace, and grant that my Works may find a
favorable acceptance. In the mean time, I confess my self infinitely bound to
your Ladyship, that you would be pleased to regard so much the Honor of your
Friend, and be the chief occasion of it; for which I pray Heaven may bless,
prosper, and preserve you, and send me some means and ways to express my self,

MADAM, Your thankful Friend, and humble Servant.

ETernal God, Infinite Deity,
Thy Servant, NATURE, humbly prays to Thee,
That thou will please to favor Her, and give
Her parts, which are Her Creatures, leave to live,
That in their shapes and forms, what e're they be,
And all their actions they may worship thee:
For it is not only Man that does implore,
But all Her parts, Great God, do thee adore;
A finite Worship cannot be to thee,
Thou art above all finites in degree:
Then let thy Servant Nature mediate
Between thy Justice, Mercy, and our state,
That thou may bless all Parts, and ever be
Our Gracious God to all Eternity.
FINIS.

