A New Years Gift to IMPOSTORS: OR, The Manifest of William the Third King of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, delivered and dispersed at the French Court,
etc. as an Overture to the General Peace, proposed about the later end of the
Year 1693. and concluded in 1697. Faithfully done out of the Original into
English, and now published by a true Friend to Truth and Justice, and
consequently to his King and Country.
THey, who in expectation of a Peace, seriously consider the Situation of the
Affairs of Europe, and who, without Passion, enquire into the chief Cause of
the Revolutions which disturb it, have not hitherto thrown it upon me, nor
imputed the Misfortunes of it to my Elevation to the Throne of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. None but the King of France and his
Partisans labor at this time to do it; none but they call me Tyrant and
Usurper; and, troubled at the Fidelity of my Subjects, obstinately persist in
continuing a War, which they undertook ^t out of Despair, and which is of my
Honor and Glory to make an end of.

They lay to my Ambition all the Disorders of Europe, and make me the Author of
the Rebellion of the English; they reproach me with having excited the famous
League of Ausbourg, and to ^ave driven from his Throne, in order to mount ^t my
self, an Illustrious and Magnanimous Prince, whom the Ties of Blood obliged me
to respect: in fine, they overload and blacken me with such a number of
Impostures, that I cannot, in my own Justification, but give the Universe an
account of my Conduct. Which that I may do with Ease, I need but represent in a
few Words what happened in Europe before the War, and hence infer in my Favor
what right Reason will naturally admit; by which alone it will appear, that far
from having had the least share in ^aising the Troubles Europe is involved in,
I have, on the contrary, sought all Occasions to calm them. Every one will be
convinced of the Sincerity of my Intentions, and the Justice of my actions will
gain over the Perfidies of my Ene^ies.

The Condition all the Kingdoms of Europe were in, in the Year 1688. is well
known: They, ^r the most part, enjoyed profound Peace. The ^mperor, the King of
Poland, and the Venetians, ^ntinued with Success their Conquest over the ^rks:
Hungary was retaken from the Infidels, ^d Belgrade, which the Imperialists took
with lord in Hand, opened to their Conquest a ^e Passage to the Head-City of
the Turkish ^mpire.

The Misfortunes of the One and Prosperity of ^e Other, touched the King of
France in a very ^ferent manner: He became sensible of the Dis^nce of the
Ottomans, and jealous of the Emperor's Victories. The Power and Policy of that
Monarch forbidding their further increase, put him upon the design of lessening
'em by hidden and indirect ways. His Honor would not permit him to appear
barefaced in favor of the Infidels; the Division he meditated was equally
against his Reputation and Character of Most Christian: But the Hereditary
Hatred of the House of France to that of Austria, carried it over the general
Good of Christendom, and over a Twenty years Truce newly concluded, which
promised to Germany a full Repose.

In view of an ensuing War, and with design to prosecute it, the Agents of
France at the Court of Maximilian-Henry of Bavaria Elector of Cologn, disposed
that Prince to demand, before his Death, a Successor of his Chapter: The
Canons-Suffragans, who composed it, being for the most part gained by the Money
and fair Promises of France, gave him Cardinal Fustemberg for Coadjutor: The
Forces of that Crown had at the same time in their Possession one of the best
Places of the Electorate, and after having furnished it with all sorts of
Ammunition, laid still till Heaven shoul'd dispose of the Elector.

After the death of this Prince, which happened the 3d of June 1688. the King
of France undertook to have Cardinal Fustemberg Recognized for his Lawful
Successor; but as the Postulation to the Coadjutorship was not accepted at the
Court of Rome, the Threatenings of the Pope and of the Emperor, obliged the
Canons to proceed, a second time, to the Election of a new Prince; where the
Count of Conis, in the Emperor's Name, proposed Prince Clement of Bavaria, with
the exclusion of Cardinal Fustemberg.

The Canons, to the number of 25, meeting in their Assembly the 19th of July
1688. divided in their Choice; 14 postulated the Cardinal, 9 the Prince of
Bavaria by virtue of his Brief of Eligibility, by which the Pope supplied the
defect of his Age, he being then but 17 years old: In all appearance the
Cardinal ought to have carried it; but the Contest being sent to Rome, the Pope
decided in favor of the Prince of Bavaria; though, to take the thing right, the
Postulation of the Cardinal was Legal and Canonical.

This partial Stroke provoked the King of France beyond measure, and
unseasonably confounding his Politics obliged him to declare himself openly,
and support with Honor his first Design and his first Intentions. To this end
he levied a powerful Army, which he sent under the Command of the Dauphin his
Son into Germany. This Prince meeting no opposition took Philipsbourg, Mayence,
Manheim, Spire and Frankendal; put all the Palatinate to Fire and Sword, and
destroyed that fine Country in so dreadful and terrible a manner, that one may
seek at this time for the four last mentioned Towns, in the very Place wherein
they stood 5 years ago.

The Reasons which that Monarch made use of to justify such barbarous
Hostilities, were not grounded upon the Quarrel about the Electorate of Cologn,
but on the late Elector Palatine's refusing to give the Duchess of Orleance an
account of the Estate fallen to her by the death of her Father.

This Elector seeing himself innocently the unfortunate Sacrifice of a powerful
Monarch, engaged the Council of Vienna and the Princes of Germany to revenge
the ill Usages he met with all from the Crown of France: They unanimously
espoused the Quarrel at Ausbourg; and the State of my Affairs required I should
enter into the League with them, the better to resist the first Efforts which I
foresaw would be Levelled against me.

I was then in England, whither the Troubles raised against King James, by his
Subjects, called me to be a Mediator and Arbiter betwixt them; and perhaps
would have accomplished it, had that Prince and his Subjects, reciprocally had,
more Deference for each other.

King James quietly succeeded King Charles the Second, his Brother, in his
Dominions, and the beginning of his Reign seemed to promise him a continued
Tranquillity. The Death of the Duke of Monmouth and the most part of his
Accomplices struck Terror into the most Desperate; and were it not for the
Design he formed to reunite to his own Religion, that of the Subjects one may
say, he might have been still upon the Throne, and that no Revolution could
have interrupted the Felicity of his Reign; but ambitious to render himself
absolute in a Monarchy depending of the Humors of those, who compose it, and
to fix a Constancy in a People naturally Inconstant; and to immitate the
Actions of a powerful King, without having the Means and Forces, like him, to
effect it; drew upon him that dreadful Crowd of Misfortunes, under which,
perhaps, his Head, after the Hereditary Fatality, would have fallen, had not I
taken Care, under Hand, to save it from his Subjects. The King of France, whose
Steps he intended to follow, was then endeavoring the extinction of Calvinism
in his Dominions: The numerous Troops he employed in that Work forced the most
obstinate to a speedy compliance: His Policy reserved this great Action, that
by the happy Success of it, his Glory might be completed. It was certainly a
Design becoming the Greatness of that Monarch, and the everlasting Peace which
he promised to himself after that Stroke, would never have been disturbed, had
he but by a refined Foresight, had the Art either to have kept within his
Kingdom the Leading Men among the Protestants by force of Reward, or had caused
them to be sacrificed without Mercy on the Frontiers, instead of suffering them
to go out on it.

But those unfortunate Fugitives carrying Misery, Desolation, and Terror every
where they went, looked upon England the only Place of Comfort and Ease to
their Misfortunes; thither they retired in hopes to find Tranquillity and Rest,
still bewailing the Cruelty with which they were forced to abandon, as one may
say, their Houshold-Gods, and their Religion.

King James at the same time takes upon him to re-establish the public
Exercise of the Catholic Religion all over England. The English, who had
before their Eyes the sad Example of the French Refugees, contented themselves
at first to murmur at the Design: The Novelty of it seemed strange to them, and
were fond of that Liberty of Conscience they had enjoyed for above Two
Centuries. But when they saw the execution of the Design pressed upon 'em
through the Ministry of the Jesuits; when they saw their Town's Privileges
taken away, the Bishops Imprisoned in the Tower of London, Friars
re-established in their ancient Convents, and those very Jesuits (the unlucky
Authors of all Mischiefs) in Possession of a College in the midst of the City
of London; then they generally, and in common Concert with the Nobility,
revolted. These to maintain themselves in the Church Lands whereof the Kings
Henry 8. Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth, put their Ancestors in Possession: The
others to secure their Privileges: Both together stirred by the implacable
Motive of Religion, that seldom fails to cause a Revolution, which is of
extreme Consequence to prevent.

The Revolters in the mean time seek for a powerful Protector and a
disinterested Mediator, and unluckily cast their Eyes upon me: They solicit
my passing into England, and hasten to the Succor of their Religion. I was
then in Holland at the Head of a numerous Army which I had raised, not for that
end, as I am unjustly reproached with, but to support in Germany the Interest
of Pope Innocent XI. against Cardinal Fustemberg, or rather, more properly
speaking, against France.

All the World knows how the Court of Rome solicited me at that time; the
Alliances she had with me by the Intrigues of Casonis, the Remittances of Money
I had from thence for the execution of this Design. All the World knows
besides, that the very same Court of Rome had chose me, above all the other
Princes of Europe, to oppose the Fortune and Greatness of the King of France: I
was promised an honorable Preferment which should crown me with Glory; and the
Power of the Enemy I was to oppose took up, at that time, all my Thoughts and
Care.

However the Necessities of England at that Juncture, seemed to me more
pressing than those of Cologn; and the Interest of a Religion so near and
common to my own, prevailed with me before the Interest of a Stranger under
Oppression: The Glory of reconciling a King and his Subjects, and of
reciprocally succouring both, weighed in my Mind over that of supporting in
Germany the Pretensions of a young Prince, whose Right, besides, did not appear
to me to be incontestable.

Upon this I passed into England, Landed my Troops without any opposition, the
People received me with open Arms: King James's Army insensibly deserted to me,
ranging themselves under my Banners; so that in a little time I found my self
in the midst of the City of London, absolute Master of all Things, without so
much as costing the Life of one single Man, or that any of King James's
Subjects had Loyalty or Courage enough to Fight one Stroke in his Favor.

Thus, in the midst of a People swelled with Rage and Hatred against their
King, I sent the Prince private Notice that they openly threatened him, and that
it was high time he should save himself. I consented to his Escape out of
excess of Regard and Tenderness, and not in view of any private Interest of my
own. I facilitated all Things for his Embarquement, and if he was taken the
first time, the very moment he was going about it, it was solely an effect of
the ill Fortune that attended him, and not of any Artifice or Subtilty I am
reproached with: The second time he had better Luck, and unthankful for the
Service I had rendered him, he stirred up the Most Christian King, and made him
declare against me, as if I had been guilty of a Misfortune which he ought to
have imputed to nothing but the Imprudence of his own Conduct.

The English, on their part, no sooner understood their King's retreat, than
they pretended his Flight to be a tacit abandoning the Crown, which, by
Disertion, he left vacant. The Convention assembled, seriously and sincerely
examined the Matter, and declared it a true Vacancy according to the Laws of
England, and consequently resolved to give themselves a new Prince; upon which
they offered me the Crown and Scepter, and constrained me to accept both; and,
against my Will, forced me to suffer myself to be proclaimed King, in all the
Forms and with all the Ceremonies accustomed. Obliged to yield to the Violence
of their Choice, I rendered my Self depositary of a Crown which I am ready to
abandon at any time the public Tranquillity will require it.

It Is near five Years that I Reign on this Footing, and France alone persists
to disturb me, and give me the odious Names of Usurper and Tyrant: Names no way
becoming a Prince of m(...) Character, and one would think that she harden(...)
at this time, in reference to me, as an Atonement or Penance for her having
formerly Negotiated with Cromwell, who was a right Tyran(...) and a true
Usurper. Can it be said hereafter tha(...) I have Usurped the Crown of England?
Shall be reckoned one Day in the number of those(...) Tyrants, she has so often
experienced the Barbarity of? An Usurper is one who, without any Right, assumes
to himself the Dignity of a Sovereign, enters into a Country with Violence
forces the People he has subdued to own him for their King, oppresses them
with Levies and Taxes, cements his new Throne with the Blood of the most
Illustrious of his Subjects, and upon the least Suspicion sacrifices to the
Security of hi(...) Crown and his Life those, whose Conduct migh(...) occasion
the least Umbrage. A Tyrant is one who, seducing his Fellow Subjects, declares
against his Prince and the Government of his Country, and who by excess of
Power and Success acquires and engrosses to himself alone the Sovereignty and
Dominion, and who according to his own Avarice and Fury disposes of all th(...)
Treasure of the People, whereof he himself is bu(...) a Member; and, in short,
whose Power generally ends with his Life.

Am I an Usurper? Am I a Tyrant? Can any one of those barbarous Qualities which
form the one, or the other, be observed in my Conduct? Am I born a Subject of
England? Am I got into it by Force or Violence? Have I overloaded its People
with Levies and Taxes? Can I be reproached with any of those brutal Actions
which darkens the Histories of the most Illustrious Conquerors? If I am neither
an Usurper nor a Tyrant, but Rightful and Lawful King of England, what Shame
can it be for France, at this time, to own me as such? She, who at other times
not only acknowledged such, but concluded Treaties of Peace, Alliance and
Commerce with 'em, as if they had been lawful Princes? But if this obstinacy of
France causes all my Pain and Trouble, if by her ways she alone has hitherto
opposed the Happiness of my Fortune; I have still this Comfort to see my Self
Recognized by all the other Princes of Europe, and to see my Ambassadors hold
the same Rank at their Courts, which those of England have always had. The
Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke of Savoy, the Princes of Germany, and the
States General, have voluntarily entered into a League together to support me
upon the Throne: They Will sooner perish, as I may say, then let me fall; while
my Enemies, by open Force, strive to wrest the Scepter from me. And when, on
the contrary, they will come to Reason and fair Means, I am of my self ready to
quit the Throne, in order to restore the Tranquillity of all Europe.

Let France gain as many Victories as she will, let her take Towns and Ships,
drowned the Frontiers with Soldiers, threaten all the Earth with an ensuing
Conquest; all that will but turn to her Ruin, because she is but one against
many. Let her examine her own inward State; let her behold, with Motherly Eyes,
the Dearth and Scarcity of Corn her Inhabitants are reduced to. In fine, let
her cease to delude, with the Power of her Money, a Prince who freely renounces
the Crown; and an Infant, who in a long time will not have Strength enough to
wear it. Let her also consider the number of Enemies she is surrounded with;
and let her measure the greatness of their Hatred to her, with that of her
Outrages to them. Let her look upon all her concluded Treaties violated, all
the Truces she has broke, all the Towns she has burnt, all the People she
has reduced to Beggary, and who demand Justice of Heaven for these Evils. Let
her at last seriously reflect on the unsteadiness of her own Conduct, and
she will find her self guilty of the same Perfidies she unjustly upbraids me
with, and whereof she accuses my Allies.

Would a Treaty of Peace secure unto us her Friendship, though, to obtain it, we
should grant her all her Pretensions? Would the Emperor trust to it, after
seeing her, in cold Blood, break a Truce of 20 Years, newly concluded between
her and him? Would the King of Spain send his Fleet to Sea with Safety, after
the Insult made in full Peace upon his Admiral Papachini? Would the Duke of
Savoy be more Civilly treated by her Minister? Would the Princes of Germany
keep their Countries and Privileges with Security and Freedom? And would not
the States General have cause to fear her Resentment and Revenge, in Hatred to
the generous Protection, and the powerful Succors which they have given me?

However, if it be resolved to restore Peace to Europe who require it, all the
World that seek it will be astonished at the Effort which secretly invites me
to it, when every one tells me that the public Good ought to weigh over my
private Advantage.

Let us therefore commit that happy Violence upon our Selves, and sacrifice my
Glory to this Repose; and let us at least by excess of Generosity, surpass
those, who have not been able to overcome us by their Arms.

To accomplish so fine a Project, and of so general an Advantage, I declare. as
to my part, I am ready to renounce the Three Crowns of England, Scotland and
Ireland, to abandon these Isles for ever, and give 'em up to King James, secure
the Possession of them to the Prince his Son, and to return to Holland quietly
to exercise the Dignity of Stateholder; if France will but on her part restrain
her self to the Execution of the Pyrenean. Treaty, and consent to annul all
subsequent Ones. His Most Christian Majesty knows that he never performed but
One Article of that Treaty, which without any other Proof is sufficiently
evinced from all that is passed since that time.

If Offers so reasonable and Proposals so advantageous be rejected, the evil
Consequences of their refusal ought not to be imputed to me: The Sacrifice I
make to the public Good is a sufficient Justification of me, and is a
Satisfaction to me in the midst of my Pains and Afflictions. I quit a Radiant
Crown and a Scepter Illustrious and Flourishing, to give them to another. I
descend of my own Accord, without Violence and without Constraint, from the
Throne, after having had the extreme Pleasure of mounting it, and Sweet of
commanding in it. I forsake Fortune, Honor, Glory and Triumph, to become
nothing, in re-assuming a private Condition. I become as it were a Phantom,
after having been something on the Theater of the World, and after having had
so much Suceess, whereof I ought now to enjoy the Benefit; I reserve no more
on it to my Ambition and Fortune than the Imagination and Shadow.

After this let my Enemies say what they will against me, let 'em form all the
Ideas to themselves they please, my Sincerity will give the Lie to all their
Impostures. They shall always find me ready to execute what I offer; and always
ready to restore, together with the Peace, the Tranquillity and Happiness which
they have lost.

FINIS.
Besides other States, Crown'd-Heads and Potentates, who then Complemented
Their Majesty's on the Birth of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales:
Nota Been out of the London Gazette of the Year, 1688.

Number, 2358.
Hague, June 29.
ON Friday last, the Marquis d' Albyville, Envoy Extraordinary of His Majesty
of Great Britain, Communicated to the Princess and Prince of Orange, the Happy
News of the Birth of the Prince, to whom he delivered at the same time His
Majesty's Letters. And the next day he had Audience of the States General, to
notify the same to them. The Here Van Zuylestein parted from hence yesterday
for England.

Whitehall, June 23. This Day the Sieur Zuylestein, who is come from her Royal
Highness the Princess and His Highness the Prince of Orange, to of the Prince,
had his first Audience of the King, being Conducted by Sir Charles Cottrel
Master of the Ceremonies.

Whitehall, July 1. The 28th past the Sieur de Zuylestein, who is sent from her
Royal Highness the Princess, and His Highness the Prince of Orange, to
Congratulate upon the Birth of the Prince, had Audience of the Queen; the 30th
of the Queen-Dowager; and this Day of the Prince, being conducted by Sir
Charles Cottrel Master of the Ceremonies.

Numb. 2367.
THe Sieur de Zulyestein has had his Audience of Leave of Their Majesty's, of
the Queen-Dowager, and of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, being
Conducted by Sir Charles Cottrel Master of the Ceremonies.

Add, That he was publicly Prayed for as Prince of Wales at the Chappel-Royal
at the Hague, till it was thought convenient to discontinue it.


