A New Year's Gift for Sir BARTHOLOMEW SHOWER.
SIR,
I Have hitherto chosen to succumb, and that for a long time, under Ill Usage
and Great Oppression, rather than to trouble the World with the History of the
Life of so inconsiderable a Person as I esteem my self; but you having now laid
me under a necessity of doing it, by vilifying me as you did the last Night in
the Committee of the House of Commons: I shall set about it, and essay my
Vindication against the wicked Misrepresentations of a foul-mouthed Orator, and
the hard Thoughts of some Good Men who have not rightly understood me and my
Case. And as an Introduction to it, do here lay before you and the World, the
underwritten Copy of a Letter, wrote by that Great and Good Man the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, to the truly Honorable the late Lord Chief Baron
Atkins; and when you have perused that, you stand obliged to pardon me, that I
subjoin a short Relation of some of the Pranks of Mr. Barth. Shower, which gave
him the Honor of Knighthood, and were the Ladder to his Preferment; and as I
ever thought, so I now tell you, that 'twas great Pity (to borrow from the
late Earl of Nottingham) that you had not had another sort of Advancement: And
I should rejoice to see you promoted according to your Demerit. Not to enlarge
at present, rest assured that I shall exert my self to quit Scores with you;
tho now I remain

Yours highly indebted, Tho. Percivall.
Ult. December. 1695.
London, April 28. 1685.
Honored SIR,
I Think my self obliged to give you some account of the Matter formerly
referred to your self and me, concerning my Lady Russel and Mr. Percivall,
against whom I had entertained some Prejudice upon the Reports concerning him;
but having now together with one Mr. Samuel Faircloth, made up the Account so
long depending between them, except some Law Matters which are referred to the
final Determination of Mr. Folks and Mr. Rawlinson: I must do Mr. Percivall
that right as to assure you, that he carried himself very fairly in this
Matter; was ready to rectify all Mistakes, and to yield to Justice and Reason
in all things we could desire him: And as he has a very good Understanding, so
for any thing that appeared in this Matter, I believe a just and honest Mind.
All that I can blame him for is want of Care in making up timely and punctual
Accounts, whereby there happened several Mistakes and Omissions to his own
Prejudice as well as my Lady's; which I hope are now rectified on both sides to
their mutual Satisfaction. This Testimony I do willingly give to Mr. Percivall,
to set him right in your Opinion, fearing lest what I said of him to you upon
Report, might have done him some Prejudice in your Esteem. I am heartily sorry
for your late great Loss; and rest, SIR,

Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, Jo. Tillotson.

To the Honorable Sir Edward Atkins, one of the Barons of the Exchequer.
A Copy of Mr. BARTHOLOMEW SHOWER's Address to King Charles the Second, as in
Gazette the 23d of June, 1681.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble ADDRESS of the Loyal Society of the Middle Temple.
May it please Your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, being sensible of the great
Blessings which this Kingdom has enjoyed, ever since Your Majesty's
Restoration, under your most Gracious and Indulgent Government, and most
especially in the constant preservation of the established Religion, our Laws
and Liberties; and this our Satisfaction being lately renewed by your Majesty
's MOST GRACIOUS DECLARATION, whereby your Majesty has been pleased further to
assure us of your continued Resolutions to have frequent Parliaments, and
govern according to the Laws: Which just Resolution of your Majesty, we doubt
not but your Majesty will continue, and constantly maintain, and therefore
think it our bounden Duty to declare to your Majesty and the whole World, our
Affection and Zeal for your Majesty's Person and Government, both in Church and
State by Law established, and that we will not be wanting with our Lives and
Fortunes, to serve your Majesty against your Majesty's and the Kingdoms
Enemies, who under specious Pretenses, and by poisessing the People with
groundless Fears and Jealousies, would bring us back into Confusion and
Anarchy. That your most Sacred Majesty may happily disperse and confound the
wicked Contrivances of evil and unquiet Men, who endeavor to disturb the Peace
and Tranquillity of your Majesty's Government; and that your Majesty may
continue a long and happy Reign over us, shall ever be the constant Prayer of
your Loyal and Obedient Subjects,

Barth. Shower, etc.

Now good Sir Bat, (for after this Famous Address, you ceased to be plain
honest Bat. Shower) bear with me that I do a little interrogate you about this
your Address, and in all Love answer me these few Questions.

1. Was there not Collusion in the Title of this your Address? What was this
your Society of the Middle Temple, did it in truth consist of more than your
own Self, and a very small Number of Irish Gentlemen and others not above 12 in
the whole?

2. Whether was not that very Gracious Declaration, a high Violation of the
Laws, and a Libel upon three of the greatest Parliaments the Nation ever saw?

3. As to Life and Fortunes? Whether you did not in strictness of Law forfeit
the first, by Signing that Address; and whether at that time the latter had
been worth the begging?

4. Whom did you then deem the Kingdoms Enemies, answer without Evasion or
Reserve, did not you intend the great and invaluable Earl of Essex, Lord
Russel, Col. Algernon Sidney, etc. whom such Addresses animated that your
indulgent King to murder, nay further did not you also mean the Lords and
Commons of the Oxford Parliament? Speak plainly Man and fear not, for to your
Comfort, there is an Act of Indemnity.

5. Did not that Learned and Honorable Society detest your fawning pernicious
Address, and manifest their Abhorrence thereof and of your Practice, by a
Counter Address? If so, was not that proposed and voted in the Middle Temple
Hall, and signed by almost the whole Body of that Famous Society?

Sir, in your answering these Interrogatories, please to allow a Friend to
caution you to have a special regard to Truth, especially in what you say to
the last, for you know I had the Honor to be one of that Assembly, and to put
my Hand and Heart to that Address, to the incurring your high Displeasure, nay
to the hazard of my Life and Fortune, which was then at least as good as yours:
By my next (for I find you and I are to fall into a close Carrespondence) I
shall send you a Copy of it; and then shall remember you, for what good
Services you rose in the World, and were in a way of getting the Devil and All,
had not the Happy Revolution stopped your Career. I know whom you succeeded as
Recorder of London; why that great Man threw it up; to what end you were put
in; and how you did the Drudgery of that Day to such Content, that you were to
have taken a Seat by the most remarkable Lord Chief Justice that ever sat in
the Court of Kings Bench ( Tresilian himself not excepted) I mean Wright; had
not his Majesty's, the then Prince of Orange's Glorious Expedition dashed all
your Hopes. Now seeing you were not found upon the Bench, it had been a Raree
Show to have seen you brought to the Bar together. Mistake me not, I should not
have rejoiced to have heard that you died together in Newgate, but how could I
have prevented it had you been ordered to be conveyed thence to --

But you having happily escaped by the Lenity of his Majesty's most Benign
Government, have since been again aspiring to that honorable Place of Recorder
of our Metropolis; and I care not if I take this occasion to tell the World
what you already know, and therefore spit your Poison at me, that I my self in
a Scrip of Paper, entered a Caveat against you, and you obtained not what you
then aimed at.

Before I conclude, I shall remark upon the Accusation you bring against me:
You say I have been a riding Commissioner for the late Elections. It is to this
Day remembered that I was taken up by your Friend Atterbury, and at the Council
Board criminated (as now I am) by the Lord Keeper North. He upbraided me that I
had been riding over the Kingdom to busy my self in Elections, to the
Disturbance of the King's Government.

I confess to you Sir, If it must be termed busying my self, I have done ut
potui, in abundance of Elections, for above 20 years past, as is well known to
many Members of this Parliament: But withal challenge you and all Mankind to
show that I ever acted for an ill Man, tho in the Days of Yore, we saw too many
such in Parliament. Now to reason the Cafe with you; why I beseech you, may not
I as lawfully solicit for a good Man, as you plead for any Man? It Is surely
at least as commendable to be industrious in the Service of Ones Country, as
for its Destruction. I defy you and all the World to prove that I have menaced,
or bribed any one Man for obtaining his Vote; nay that I have misrepresented or
disparaged any Man, further than by calling a Spade a Spade. I am very sure
that I my self stand at this instant at such a distance from Bribery, that I
can and do affirm, that in about four Months Fatigue, I have got nothing beyond
the comfortable Reflection, that I have engaged, totis viribus, in the Service
of my Generation, tho you now take the Freedom to vilify me for doing it.

Your next Charge upon me is that I drank King James 's Health; What now if I
should digress a little, and tell you a pleasant Passage: Being lately in
Company with one who usually associates with your old Gang; I began King
William 's Health, and Prosperity to his Government: The Tory having chatted
on, and forgot the Health and what Company he was in; very innocently, I verily
think, took up the Glass, and clapping his next Neighbor on the Shoulder,
said, Come here is King James's his Health, but instantly perceiving his Mistake
was not a little confounded. To return now to what we were upon, the heavy
Charge of my drinking King James 's Health. The Story in short was this,
finding there were some at East-Grinstead smelt rank of Popery, more of
Jacobitism, I had a mind to try the Parson, and in a jocose Humor said to him,
Come Doctor what if you and I should drink King James 's Health? you here have
the Truth of the Tale, and make your best of it.

Sir, I have intimated how I fell under your Displeasure; and having mentioned
the infamous Lord Chief Justice Wright, shall briefly declare how I incurred
his. In several Elections in the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridg, in
the blessed Reign of your Gracious King, I met and to his Face ever boldly
opposed this Sir Rob. Wright, and the Tory Interest, which he ever espoused.
The Wretch, to the astonishment of all good Men, (as a reward of his Villainies)
stepping gradatim through all the Courts of Westminster, to the Seat of the
Lord Chief Justice, made me feel the effect of his Fury, whereof my next shall
give you a full Relation, and indeed not only his own Revenge, but the Rage of
Jeffries irritated him against me, for clapping into Nath. Thompson's Popish
Intelligence, an idle Tale of an untimely Female squint-eyed Child. I am
however still, a sincere Lover of my Country.

And Your Debtor, T. P.


