A SERMON Preached at the FUNERALS OF The Reverend and Faithful Servant Of
Jesus Christ in the Work of the Gospel Mr. SAMVEL COLLINS, Pastor of the Church
of Christ at BRAINTREE in ESSEX.

Who Exchanged this Life for Immortality In the 77th year of his Age. In the 46
year of his Ministry there. In the year of our Lord 1657.


Preached By MATTHEW NEWCOMEN Minister of the Gospel in the Church of Dedham

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell for W. Weekley, at Ipswich, and are to be sold
by J. Rothwel at the Fountain in Cheapside, and Rich. Tomlins at the Sun and
Bible in Pye-corner. 1658.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERALS OF That Reverend and Faithful Servant of
Jesus Christ in the Work of the Gospel, Mr. SAMUEL COLLINS
ACT. 13.36. For David after he had served his own Generation by the will of
God fell on steep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw Corruption.


FUneral Sermons are much condemned by some in these Times; and Funeral
Speeches, Speeches in Commendation of the Deceased much more, yet certainly
there is a warrantable use of Both, though the latter of these has suffered
much abuse: Might the Practice of Antiquity, Introductio Realis. In quibus
Scriptura nihil certi definit mos populi Dei and instituta majorum pro lege
habenda. August. 1 Cor. 11.19.
and the Custom of the Church (which in things not precisely determined in
Scripture with the Apostle Paul are no contemptible Arguments:) might these, I
say, be heard, the Controversy would soon be ended. For it has been the
Practice of the Church of Christ ab antiquo to solemnize the Funerals,
especially of such as have been eminent in their Lives, with such kind of
Speeches or Sermons, as appears in the Writings of many the most Illustrious
Lights, especially of the Eastern Churches.

And for Warrant from Scripture, we have thus much to say,

First, For the People of God, when one of their Brethren or Sisters is taken
from them by the stroke of death, to assemble themselves together to give him a
Solemn and honorable Interment; This is undoubtedly and beyond all question
warranted from the frequent (I might say almost constant) practice of the
Saints in the Old Testament and in the New: Instances in the Old Testament you
have in the Burial of Jacob, and Aaron, and Samuel, and others, whom I spare to
mention, they are so numerous.

I shall only mention one in the New Testament in the Gospel Church, and that
is the Instance of Steven, Acts 8.2. Devout men carried Steven to his Burial,
and made great Lamentation over him. Though then it were a dangerous time
flagrante persecutione, the fire of persecution being newly broke forth upon
the Christian Church, and Steven being the Man that had been sacrificed in
those flames as the first fruits of the Gospel, yet they were not, they would
not be discouraged from this work of humanity and Christian Charity, but Devout
men carried Steven to his Burial.

Devout men:] It is likely there were more of them then would just serve to
carry his corpse to the Grave. If there were some that had so much zeal and
charity, and courage in them, as to carry him, questionless there were others
that had so much zeal, charity and courage as to attend him: Devout men carried
Steven to the grave, and made great lamentation over him. It is not then
unbecoming Devout men Godlymen, to accompany the corpse of a deceased friend,
brother, fellow Christian to the grave, nor to take up a Lamentation over him,
and say as the Prophet of Bethel over his fellow Prophet, Alas my Brother! 1
Kings 13.30. or Ah Brother, ah Sister, ah Lord, or Ah his Glory Jerem. 22.18.
This is clearly warranted, you see by presidents from Scripture.

This being warranted by president from Scripture, I assume in the second place
it cannot be unwarrantable for a Minister of the Gospel, when a company of
Christians are thus met together to attend a Burial to take that opportunity of
speaking to them from God and from his Word something that may be seasonable
and suiting to the present providence; something that may put them in
remembrance of their own mortality, and quicken them to prepare for death, to
improve the time of present life, or to lay hold upon eternal Life, etc. (Some
or all of which are the ordinary Subjects and the proper scopes of our Funeral
Sermons) for a Minister thus to do, cannot justly be thought unwarrantable;
certainly that charge, that solemn charge which the Apostle gives Timothy and
in him all the Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.2. To preach the Word, to be
instant in season and out of season, does more then warrant this. When is a
Sermon of Mortality in season, if not at a Funeral when an example of Mortality
does, ocules ferire, lie before our eyes? When is an Exhortation to prepare our
selves for death seasonable, if not at a Funeral, when a real spectacle of the
spoil and triumph of death is before our eyes? When is a Sermon to excite us to
make sure of Eternal life more in season then at a Funeral, where we see by
occular and evident experience how short, how vanishing, how uncertain this
present life is? But what should I stand discoursing any longer about this
particular, when God himself has witnessed from from heaven his Approbation of
Funeral Sermons by blessing them to the good of souls, as some of you, I hope,
can witness from your own experience. And not many days have passed since I
heard a Reverend and very successful My Revere^ Friend and Neighbor (...) John
Wall, ^ M. sometim^ preacher at M^chaels Cornhi^ Late at Brom^ly Magna in Esex.
Minister of the Gospel say, That he had seen the greatest fruit of Funeral
Sermons of all the Sermons that every he preached.

And for Funeral Speeches (3ly.) though I have not used them much nor shall,
yet I neither do nor dare condemn those that do use them, so it be done with
moderation, and with caution, and where there is indeed just cause of
commendation. For why may not I make a Speech in the praise of one deceased, as
well as another write a Poem in the praise of one deceased? Why may not I by
mentioning the virtues and graces, the usefulness and serviceablenesse of a
deceased Christian, labor to affect my own heart and the hearts of others
either with thankfulness to God for the graces bestowed on him, or with grief
for our loss in the withdrawing of him? 2. With holy Emulation to imitate and
follow his example and pattern: Why may not I do this in a Speech as well as
another in a Poem? and I am sure this latter has president in Scripture; thus
Jeremy lamented for Josiah and made Poems, Verses in memorial of him for the
people to sing, as you may read 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

Josiah was a man none like him. Well, be it so; what do you say then of Saul
and Jonathan? David you know wrote a Poem in the praise of them, you have it in
2 Samuel 1. The Beauty of Israel is fallen upon the high places: how are the
mighty fallen, etc? What shall we say of that Poem of David? was it a flash of
wit, a Pang of natural affection? God forbid that we should so think: was he
not rather guided by the same blessed and holy Spirit that inspired him in his
other Poems? surely yes; or this would never have been Legitimated and
Canonized in Scripture amongst the rest. From whence I infer, That it is lawful
and agreeable to the will of God, and the wisdom of his Spirit, to make an
honorable mention of such when they are dead, who have done things worthy of
praise when they lived.

So much for the Justifying of our solemn meeting and action upon this
occasion. I come now to the Text.

In this Chapter from the 16 verse to the 41, Introductio Textualis.
you have an excellent Sermon preached by Paul (not the first Sermon that ever
Paul preached but) the first Sermon of Paul's that ever the Holy Ghost put upon
Record. Preached at Antioch in Pisidia (so called to distinguish it from that
other Antioch which was in Syria) where the Name of Christian was first minted,
and the Disciples were first Baptized into the Christian Name, Acts 11.26. from
which Antioch it was that Paul was separated, chap. 13.1. and sent forth to
this journey, in which journey coming first to Seleucia, v. 4. and from thence
sailing to Cyprus, v. 4. after some time there spent in preaching the Gospel,
they came to Perga in Pamphilia, Built by Seleucus Nicanor.
v. 13. and from thence to Antioch in Pisidia, v-14

To this City Paul and Barnabas (guided by the Spirit of God) came and went
(says the Text) into the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day, and sat down. The
Synagogue was the place where the people of the Jews did ordinarily meet
together every Sabbath day for the reading of Moses and the Prophets, and the
performing of other duties of worship unto God. Hither Paul and Barnabas
resort, and here they sat them down as quietly and composedly as any other
that were present in the Assembly, offering no interruption nor disturbance all
the while the Scriptures were in reading.

And after the reading of the Law and of the Prophets, the Rulers of the
Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if you have any word of
Exhortation for the people, say on, v. 13. The Evangelist Luke here shows
(says Calvin) Non omnibus permissum fuisse loqui. Calvin. ad loc.
It was not free for any one that would to speak in that Assembly. But that the
work of Exhorting did lie upon certain men, even those whom the Evangelist calls
the Rulers of the Synagogue, it did belong to them after the reading of Moses
and the Prophets, to instruct and exhort the people out of that which had been
read. Therefore Paul and Barnabas do not presently as soon as the exercise of
Reading was finished fall a speaking, least by their over much hastiness they
should cause disturbance, sed modeste expectant, but modestly expect till they
have leave given them to speak; and that by those, penes quos publico consensu
Autoritas erat, to whom authority in the Synagogue did belong by public
consent the Rulers of the Synagogue, and they supposing Paul and Barnabas, even
by their countenance and garb, Non esse vulgares homines (as one speaks) to be
no ordinary men, Gualter. ad loc.
sent to them saying, Men and brethren, if you have any word of Exhortation for
the people, say on.

Calvin. ad loc.
We know, says Calvin, how corrupt the state of the people of the Jews was at
this time, and the Evangelist tells us afterward in the process of this
History, how proud and refractory these very Jews of Antioch were in rejecting
the grace of Christ. Yet thus much good, says he, remained still among them,
that there was Decency and Order in their Assemblies. [Quo magis pudenda est
deformis confusio quae hodie inter eos qui Christiani haberi volunt
conspicitur.] By so much the more shameful, says he, is that deformed
confusion that is seen at this time among those that would be counted
Christians. Gualter also takes notice of several things commendable and
imitable in this Jewish Assembly, as their coming together on the Sabbath day,
their demeaning themselves decently and modestly in their Assembly, their
reading of Moses and the Prophets, and in conclusion, Et illud quoque Laudem
meretur, etc. And this also is praiseworthy (says he) that no man among them
takes liberty to speak, unless he be lawfully required; therefore Paul and
Barnabas, though sent by the Holy Ghost, would not speak till called to it;
Minime itaque ferenda est Anabaptistarum intemperies, etc.

Being thus invited Paul stood up, v. 16. and beckning with his hand (as men
use to do that would bespeak silence and attention in those to whom they speak)
he said as follows to v. 41.

In which speech of Paul's, we have considerable, first, The Introduction that
Paul uses to his speech, v. 13. secondly, The Narration, or body of the speech
in the following verses.

First, The Introduction, in these words, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God,
give audience. Where mark the loving and respective Compellations that Paul
uses, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God! How does Paul (being a stranger)
know that there were any among them that feared God? The event showed
afterward that they were so far from fearing God, as they blasphemed him v.
45. But that was more then Paul knew. At the present Paul found them met
together in the worship of God, as men should do that fear God, and therefore
he hoped and judged the best of them; Men and brethren, says he, and all ye
that fear God, hearken.

Having thus Prefaced, he proceeds to his discourse, which discourse or Sermon
of Paul's, may, as one says, be well called, Pelargus ad loc.
A short sum or Epitome of the whole Scripture. But especially it is a History
of the manifold grace and mercy of God toward his Church and people.

First, In their Election, The God of this people of Israel chose our Fathers,
v. 17. Secondly, In his Magnifying them in Egypt, by the wonders which he there
wrought for them, And exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the
land of Egypt. Thirdly, In his bringing of them out thence, And brought them
out of it with an high hand, v. 17. Fourthly, In his Indulgence and patience
toward them in the wilderness, v. 18. And above the time of forty years
suffered he their manners in the wilderness. Fifthly, In putting them into
Possession of the Land of Canaan, v. 19, And when he had destroyed seven
nations in the land of Canaan, he divided their land to them by lot. Sixthly,
In Establishing a Civil Government among them, first, by Judges, He gave unto
them Judges, v. 20. And afterward (upon their desire) by Kings, delivering
that government, first to Saul, v. 21. Afterward they desired a King, and God
gave unto them Saul. But the Kingly Government was established by God upon the
house of David, v. 22. He raised up unto them David to be their King, etc. and
having recited these particular mercies of God to his people, he makes a great
leap from the days of David to the days of the Messiah, the Son of David, and
shuts up his Catalogue of Mercies with the mention of the greatest and freshest
mercy, namely Gods sending a Savior out of David's loins according to his
promise, v. 23. Of this Man's seed has God according to his promise raised unto
Israel a Savior Jesus.

Now this being the principal Nail that the Apostle had to drive and fasten in
that Assembly, he spends the rest of his Sermon in driving that Naile-home;
proving that this Promise made to David was fulfilled in the same Jesus, whom
their Rulers at Jerusalem Crucified: And this he proves, First, By John's
coming, as his forerunner, to preach Repentance according to the Prophecyes of
Isaiah and Malachie, v. 24 When John had first preached before his coming the
Baptism of Repentance to all the people of Israel. Isai. 40.3 Malach. 3.1.4.5,
6.
Secondly, He proves it by the express Testimony that John gave of him, v. 25.
He said, I am not he, but behold there comes one after me, etc. Thirdly, He
proves it by the fulfilling of the ancient Prophecies of Scripture in his cruel
and causeless death, v. 27, 28. For they that dwelt at Jerusalem and their
Rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voice of the Prophets which are
read every Sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him. And though
they found no cause of death in him, yet they delivered him to Pilate that he
should be slain. Fourthly, He proves the same thing by his Resurrection from
the dead, v. 29.30 And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him,
they took him down from the tree and laid him in the Sepulcher; But God raised
him from the dead, Which Resurrection of the Lord Jesus is proved,

1. By the Testimony of Eyewitnesses, v. 31. And he was seen many days of them
who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the
people.

And 2. He proves this Resurrection of Christ, by Testimonies of Scripture
foretelling his Resurrection, ver. 34, 35, 36, 37. Then you have the
Application of all this to the hearers in particular, v. 38, 39. And so the
Apostle concludes his Sermon with a serious admonition to his Hearers not to
despise nor reject this offered Grace.

In all which discourse and carriage of Paul you have nothing but what does
really evidence that Blessed and Holy Spirit, whose fruits are Love, Peace,
Gal. 5.22, 23
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Here is
not one bitter boisterous intemperate word in all this Discourse of Paul's.

How far are they from this Apostolical Spirit, that pretend in these times to
be the only Apostolical men, and to be guided and acted by as Infallible a
Spirit, as the Apostles themselves were: They will tell you, the Spirit moves
them, and bids them go to such a Town, to such a Meeting Place; Well: what do
they when they are there? Do they sit as Paul and Barnabas did, and demean
themselves with gravity and reverence becoming such an Assembly? No, but carry
themselves in such a proud, scornful wild, disdainful manner, that their very
presence is a disturbance to the whole Congregation. Do they wait till they are
invited and called to speak, as Paul and Barnabas did? No but as soon as the
last word is out of the Ministers mouth (if not before) they blow their
Trumpet, sound their Alarm, bid defiance to him, his Doctrine and Calling.

And when they speak, what? Do they use sober, meek and gentle speeches, as the
Apostle Paul here, Men of Israel, and all ye that fear God. Do they bring
clear evidence, Scripture Arguments, and solid Reasons, as the Apostle Paul
here does? No, but break out into bitterest railings and cursings, condemning
for Hypocrites, and Damned, and full of the Devil all but themselves. Whether
these men be acted by an Apostolical Spirit or by a Diabolical Spirit, whether
their Tongues be touched with a Cole from the Lords Altar or set on fire of
Hell, it is easy to judge, if it be true which our Savior says, Mat. 12.37
By thy words thou shall be Justified, and by thy words thou shall be Condemned.

Out of this whole Discourse of Paul's I have made choice of the words of the 36
verse to insist upon at this time, and upon this Occasion. But David after he
had served his Generation, by the will of God fell on sleep, and was laid unto
his Fathers, and saw Corruption.

Which words are a prevention of an Objection that might be made against a
Scripture which the Apostle in the verse immediately foregoing had cited out of
the sixteenth Psalm to prove the Resurrection of Christ, in these words, Scopus
Verberum.
Thou shall not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Now lest the Jews
should in their hearts object that this place might be spoken by David of
himself, the Apostle Anticipates this, and shows that this place cannot be
competent to David properly and directly, but only as he was a Type of Christ,
and by way of participation, as he should, together with the rest of the godly,
be raised up by Christ. For David after he had served his own Generation by the
will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw corruption.

In which words we have considerable first, Divisio Textus.
the person spoken of, David; secondly, the employment of this person, he
Served; thirdly, the Object on which he bestowed his pains and service, his own
Generation; fourthly, the moving, or ordering, or regulating cause of this, the
will of God; fifthly, the issue and event of this in three particulars, first,
he fell on sleep, secondly, he was laid to his Fathers, thirdly, he saw
corruption.

David, a man whom God found out and framed according to his own heart,
Explicatio Verborum.
and took from following the Ewes great with young to feed and Rule his people
Israel, whom God advanced from a mean and low condition to the highest Pinnacle
of honor, setting his Throne higher then the Kings of the earth. Psalm 89.27


He Served, not Himself by an Exorbitant, Arbitrary Government, as his
predecessor Saul had done, but he served Others, he served All, he served his
own Generation.

That word Generation, is a word of frequent and various use in Scripture. I
shall not lead you through them all, I shall only give you notice of four or
five,

First, Sometimes it signifies a Succession of men begetting and propagating
one another, so in the first of Matthew there are reckoned from Abraham to
Christ two and forty Generations, that is, Successions of children standing up
in their fathers rooms.

Secondly, Sometimes it signifies All the men that live together at the same
time; so Genesis 6.9. it is said of Noah, That he was a Just man and perfect in
his Generations, that is, among, the men of that Age wherein he lived.

Thirdly, It signifies men of a like quality and disposition, though they live
in several ages and periods of time, as Psalm. 14.5. God is in the Generation of
the righteous. And Psalm. 24.6. This is the Generation of them that seek thee.

Fourthly, Sometimes it signifies a family or nation; so Mat. 24.34. Verily, I
say unto you, this Generation shall not pass till all these things be
fulfilled. Which words cannot be understood of that particular Race of the Jews
which were living upon the earth in our Saviors days, for they are passed
away long ago, but must be understood of the people and nation of the Jews in
all their decurrent successions. And the meaning of the words must be this,
That whatever devastations and desolations should come upon Jerusalem according
to the Predictions of that Chapter, the Jews should yet remain a People, a
Nation distinct from all other Nations, though scattered among them all the
world over, even to the coming of Christ in Judgment. That whereas other
Nations living among strangers become incorporate with them in a few
Generations, only the Jews wherever they live still remain a Nation distinct
from all other Nations. And this is the sense of the word Generation in that
place. So Matthew. Flacius Clavis Script. part. 1. ad verbum. De sensu buj^ Loci
qui plur^ velit Consulat Commentario^ in primi Gerhardi continu^tion em
Harm^niae.
In this place it is to be taken in the second sense. David served his own
Generation, that is, that company of men with whom he was Contemporaneous, who
lived all the same time that he himself lived. Unless you will add a

Fifth sense of the word, whereby it signifies the age or term of life, which
sense some contend for in that forementioned place, Matthew. 24.34. and so the
meaning is, David served his own Generati- that is, David was an useful,
serviceable man all the days of his life, even to his dying day, for David
after he had served his own Generation by the will of God, fell on sleep.

By the will of God, or by the counsel of God, (...), which Incisum or branch
of the Verse is variously pointed in several Coppies; some cut it off from the
foregoing words and affix it to the word following, and making a Comma at the
foregoing word (...), they read it thus (...), By the will of God he fell on
sleep. So Arias Montauus in his Interlineary. And so some other Coppies; and
this Punctation Erasmus followed in his Latin Translation. But Beza rejects
this pointing wholly, and says, Haec distinctio neque in vetustis codicibus
reperitur, neque ulla ratione nititur. Neither does Stephanus take any notice
of it in his Variae Lectiones upon the New Testament. Therefore the more true
and right reading of the Text seems to be that which our Translation follows,
wherein that Phrase [By the will of God] is annexed to the words foregoing, and
the Text thus read, For David after he had served his own Generation by the
will of God, fell on sleep.

And yet even so read, the words as Camerarius has observed, have' (...)
quandam, a kind of Ambiguity, although so far from being hurtful that it is
profitable, for that phrase by the will of God, may be referred either to the
Generation, and so the meaning is, David served that Generation which it was
the will and counsel of God to cast him upon. Or else it may be referred to the
service that David did to his Generation, and so the meaning is, David served
his own Generation, not after his own will, or fancy, or humor, or the humors,
fancies or wills of other men, but after the will of God, For David after he had
served his generation by the will of God, fell on sleep.

Fell on sleep,] That Is a Phrase often used in Scripture to signify death,
especially of the Righteous, it is usually said of them, as of David here, he
fell on sleep.

And was laid to his Fathers] That phrase is often also used in Scripture of
the Burial and Interment of the Saints, he was laid to his Fathers.

And saw Corruption,] That is, his body rotted in the grave: Videre significat
sentire aut experiri aliquid.

The words (like Joseph) are a fruitful Branch, Deductio Doctrinarum
from whence might be gathered many comfortable and profitable doctrines, as
namely,

1. First, In the general from the mention which the Holy Ghost here makes of
David, which you see here as in other places of Scripture is altogether
honorable, here is no mention of any dis-service David did his generation. Not
one word of his being the occasion of the death of 85 of the Lords Priests in
one day, they, their wives and their children; Not a word of his defiling
Bathsheba or murdering Uriah, or Numbering the people which cost the lives of
seventy thousand in three days. Not a word of any of this, but only what an
useful serviceable man he was.

Thence observe in the first place, That God values those that are in Christ,
and have repented of their sins, not according to the evil but the good that
has been in them.

Secondly, and more particularly, That several particular persons have their
several particular generations to serve in. David here in the Text served his
generation, so Noah his, so Moses his, so Paul his: The service that Noah did
would not have been proper nor suitable in Moses his generation, nor Moses in
David's, nor any of them in Paul's. Several persons have their several particular
generations to serve in.

Thirdly, That particular generation which every person is to serve in is
allotted him by the counsel and will of God; For David after he had served his
own generation by the will of God; it is not by chance that men are cast upon
the generation they live in; men are not thrown into the world by God as we
cast Counters out of a bag, neither knowing nor regarding which comes first,
which last: No, God who does all things in number, weight and measure, he, from
Eternity, has appointed and allotted unto every man the Age and Generation he
shall serve in. Act. 17.26. He has made of One blood all Nations to dwell upon
the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitations.

Fourthly, It is a great honor to the greatest man upon earth to be
serviceable to and in his own generation. David though a King, yet this is
spoken of him by way of Praise and Commendation, He served his own generation.

Fifthly, It is a good man's honor to be serviceable to his generation his whole
time: David served his geneeation not an Apprentiship only, or three
Apprentiships, as Jacob served Laban, but his whole Life time; he served his
generation till he fell on sleep. His serving his generation was not like
Tiberius his Quinquennium.

Sixthly, The Rule of our serving our generation must not be our own will nor
the will of men, but the will of God: For David served his own generation by
the will of God.

7ly, There is a time when all our serving of our generation shall cease and we
shall fall asleep: For David after he had served his own generation by the will
of God, fell on sleep.

Eighthly, The death especially of the righteous and godly it is a sleep.

Hoc ex varia^ Lectione.
Ninthly, The time of men's sleeping the sleep of death it is determined and
appointed by God: David fell on sleep by the will of God.

Tenthly, God will have his children serve out their generation before they
dye: It was not the will or counsel of God that David should die till he had
served his generation.

Eleventhly, Men by death are laid to their Fathers: Eunt ad plures was the
Heathens phrase of death, Eunt ad patres is the Scripture phrase: David fell on
sleep and was laid to his fathers.

Twelfthly, and lastly, All that ever dyed or shall dye (except the Lord Jesus
Christ) all else even the greatest and holiest must and shall see Corruption:
David, a King, yea, which is more, a Saint, and which is yet more, a Prophet,
yet he saw Corruption. Only the Lord Jesus Christ, because he saw no Corruption
in the womb, he saw no Corruption in the grave; because there followed no
Corruption of sin upon the union of Christ's Soul and Body in his Conception,
there followed no Corruption of body upon the dissolution of that union. But
David after that he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on
sleep, and was laid to his Fathers, and saw Corruption.

So that you see my Text, like Jacob, out of whose loins issued twelve sons; or
like Elim, where the people of Israel met with twelve wells: Or the five
particulars of this Text are like those five leaves (of which you read in the
Gospel) which being broken multiplied into twelve baskets full. I shall empty
but one of these Baskets for your entertainment at this time, and lead you but
to one of these twelve wells for your refreshing, and and that is the Doctrine
which is the fourth in order, and was laid down in these words, Doctrina
elaboranda.
That it is a great honor to the greatest upon earth to be serviceable to and
in his own generation.

David, though a King, though a Saint, though (in some sense) a King of Saints,
yet this is spoken of him in his praise, He served his (or in his) own
generation.

Explicatio Doctrine.
In the Original it is (...), the word signifies not a verbal superficial
complemental service, such as our Times abounds with the profession of, (your
servant Sir, is in every man's mouth) but a Real, Painful, Laborious service.
The word (...) most properly signifying one that takes pains and tugs at the
Oar. David found the Church and Commonwealth of Israel in a Crasie, Leaky
condition, and he labored hard and took pains to serve his generation, and to
bring that weather-beaten bottom the generation was embarked in, into safe
Harbor.

The words is used Act. 20.34. to signify to serve by way of relief: These
hands (says the Apostle) (...) have ministered to my Necessities, and, the
necessities of them that were with me. So David served his own generation; that
is, he ministered to the Necessities of his generation. In Acts 24.23. it
signifies Courtesies. and Offices of Love, where it is said, Felix commanded
the Centurion to keep Paul, and let him have his liberty, and to forbid none of
his friends (...), to minister to him, to do any office of Love to him. So
David (...), did many offices of Love to his generation, and this was his
praise and honor. This is as it were Engraven by the Holy Ghost upon his
Tombstone in stead of all other Encomiums, he served his own generation. And
this every man how great soever should look upon as his greatest honor, saying
with Maximinius the Emperor, Quo major sum eo magis laborare cupio, The greater
I am the more work I desire to do. And make that his Motto which was once the
Motto of the Prince of Wales, Ich Dien.

You may consider David in a threefold capacity; first, in a Private Capacity,
as a Member of the Jewish Commonwealth; secondly, in his Politic Capacity, as
a King in Israel; thirdly, in his Ecclesiastical Capacity, as a Member of the
Church of the Jews; and in all these you shall find David doing eminent service
and Offices of Love for his generation.

First, In his Private Capacity, David served his own generation several ways;
I will instance only in three, which are imitable and attainable by other
private persons:

First, David as a Private person did serve his generation by bewailing the
sins and provocations of the Time and Age wherein he lived. So Psalm 119.136.
Rivers of tears run down mine eyes because men keep not thy Laws. David does
not only now and then drop a Tear, but mourns constantly, mourns impetuously,
until his tears (like the waters in Ezekiel) swell into a River, and that (not
only for his own sins, but) for the sins of others; for the sins of the Times:
and that was one special service and office of love done for his generation.
Thus Lot was serviceable to his generation when he lived in Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.8.
Thus Ezra was serviceable to his generation, Ezra. 9.6. Thus Jeremiah, Jer.
4.6. Thus the godly in Ezekiels days, Ezekiel. 9.6. It is Eminent Service done in
and to our generation to bewail the sins of it.

Secondly, David as a Private Person did serve his generation by making
intercession and supplication for them, by thrusting himself into the gap and
interposing himself between the wrath of God and the poor people. So 2 Samuel
24.17. Lo I have sinned and I have done wickedly, let thy hand I pray thee be
upon me and upon my fathers house. David here offers his own neck to the Sword
of Divine Justice to save the people. This was a powerful Intercession, an
excellent Service done to his generation, upon which the Plague was stayed.
David here did by the Angel, as the Angel did by Abraham, when Abraham had
stretched out his drawn sword over Isaac to slay him, the Angel catches hold
upon his sword and stays his hand: So here the Angel had stretched out his
drawn sword over Jerusalem to destroy it, and David comes and catches hold of
the sword and stays the Angel and saves Jerusalem: this was excellent service
done to his generation. Thus also Moses did serve his generation, Exo. 32.31.
Number. 16.40. Thus Samuel, thus Jeremiah, 1 Samuel 12.23 Jer. 18.20. Dan. 9. Ezra 9
thus Daniel, thus Ezra, thus the holy men of God from time to time have done
service to their generation.

Thirdly, David as a Private Person served his generation by walking before
them in the example of an holy, unblemished, beautiful Conversation. God, you
know, every where gives this Testimony of him, That he was a man after Gods own
heart: So Eminently Exemplary was the life of David for holiness and
uprightness, as that it is made the Standard and Measure of the uprightness
of others. And all that followed after him in the line of succession are
reputed either good or bad, according as they walked or walked not in the steps
of their Father David. David led the way and set the copy of a holy life not
only to his own generation, but to the generations that succeeded after him.
And thus every godly Christian may and must serve their generation. Being
harmless and blameless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation among whom you shine as Lights, Phil. 2.15
Every Christian man and woman the worse the generation is in which they live,
the better they should strive to be; that they might be as so many Stars in a
dark night, shining before others, and guiding their ways by the light of a
gracious and holy Example. So did David, and thus served his generation in his
Private Capacity.

Secondly, In his Political Capacity, as a Magistrate, as a King: David served
his generation by administering Judgment and governing righteously, Psalm. 75.2.
When I shall receive the Congregation I will judge uprightly. Psalm 101.8. I
will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off evil doers
from the City of the Lord. Thus Phinehas also served his generation, Psalm
106.30. Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment, and so the plague was
stayed. David in the whole course of his Magistracy served his generation by
making the peoples good the public good, the good of the generation in which
he lived, the end of his government, and not his own Pomp and grandeur. In
which respect it is said of him, Psalm. 78.72. That he fed (or governed) the
people according to the integrity of his heart; whereby he attained that
happiness that few Kings and Princes that ever were in the world have had
besides him. That the people found no fault at all with any thing he did in his
Government. But whatsoever the King did pleased the people, 2 Samuel 3.36. Why?
Because the people evidently saw that whatsoever the King did he sought their
peace, and prosperity, and welfare in it. Thus he served his generation in his
Political Capacity, as a Magistrate.

Thirdly, In his Ecclesiastical Capacity, and as a Churchmember: David served
his generation in the things of Religion and of the worship of God. For,

First, Whereas before the days of David Israel had been destitute of the Ark
of God: 1 Samuel 4.21
(the visible Testimony of Gods presence among that people, and so their glory)
The Ark had now for a long time been a stranger to Israel, and for a longer
time been a stranger to the Tent and Tabernacle which was its resting place.
David was the first man that made the motion for bringing back the Ark to the
Tabernacle of the Lord, 2 Samuel 6. And when they were discouraged in their first
attempt by the breach which God made upon them for a miscarriage and
irregularity in that action, David's heart was so set upon the work that he
could not be taken off, but after a little pause he sets upon it a second time
and with a great deal of joy and triumph brings the Ark home to Jerusalem,
though not without the slighting and scorn of his own wife Michol.

Secondly, Thinking it an unbecoming thing for himself to dwell in a house of
Cedar, 2 Samuel 7.3
when the Ark of God dwelt in Curtains, he resolved with himself to build an
house, a Temple for the Ark of God to dwell in: And although God expressly
forbad him to do this, because he had designed another hand for that work; yet
such was David's love to, and zeal for Religion, that he prepares all materials
needful for so Magnificent a work. Now I have prepared (says he, 2 Chro. 29.2,
3) with all my might for the house of my God, gold, and silver, and brass, and
iron, and wood, and onix stones, and stones to be set, glittering stones, and
stones of diverse colors, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones
in abundance. Thus David as a Member of the Church served his own (and after)
generations in the things of God, in the promoting of Religion and the worship
of God. And thus Ezra and Nehemiah, thus Zerobabell and Joshua served their
generations.

Yet further, David as a man extraordinarily inspired by God, did serve his
generation by Composing Psalms to be sung publicly in the worship of God which
are upon record as parts of holy Scripture, and by Methodizing and Regulating
the worship of God as to the courses of the Priests and Levites, and the
several offices that each of them were to attend upon in their Courses, 1 Chro.
23. As also by drawing up and delivering unto Solomon the Scheme or Platform of
the Temple which Solomon was to build. All which things referring to the
worship of God, David took upon him to order, not simply as he was a King, but
as he was a Prophet, one extraordinarily and infallibly directed by God in
these particulars, as may be collected from 1 Chronicles. 18.12. where it is said,
That David had by the Spirit the Pattern, etc. And again, verse 19. All this,
said David, the Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me. So that
this President of David may not be drawn in Exemplum by other Godly Princes;
and it is (pace tantorum virorum dixerim) a mistake in some who would give unto
the Magistracy a kind of a Supreme and Legislative power in Sacris (which is
indeed the sole Preogative of Jesus Christ) from this example of David. But
unless all Magistrates had the same extraordinary Spirit and Office that David
had, they may not presume to do as David did. And yet Princes and Magistrates
have enough still in David's Example to imitate and to serve their generation.
He in all his capacities, Private, Public, Civil, Religious, did serve his
generation with the utmost of his abilities, Ordinary, Extraordinary; O that
others would do so! it would certainly be their praise and honor as it was
David's here. It it an honor to the greatest upon earth to be serviceable to
and in his generation.

Confirmatio Doctrinae a Ratione.
And it must needs be so, because that Man who serves his generation does good,
and makes it his design to do good, not to some few, but to many, yea, to all,
so far as it is possible for him in his Sphere and Capacity to attain. And
hereby first, Evidences the richer stock of Grace. Secondly, Fulfils the end of
his Creation; And thirdly, Comes nearest those beings which are most excellent;
and all this is honorable.

First, (I say) Such a man as serves his generation, the more service he does,
the Richer stock of Grace and Goodness he evidenceth to be in him: Bonum quo
communius co melius. That Conduit that is able to supply a whole City with
waters, certainly has a more full Spring then that which can supply but one
street. The Sun which serves all the world with light certainly has more
fullness of light in it then ten thousand Candles set up all at once. So here,
that man that can do good and be profitable and servicable not only to himself
( Job 22.21.) to his own family and kindred, Qui sibi nequam cui bonus.
but to the whole Age and Generation he lives in; that man has a rich Spring
and Fountain of goodness in him. Certainly it is a great honor to such a man.

Secondly, Such a man in some measure fulfils the end of his Creation, which is
to glorify God in being good our selves, and doing good to others, to all as
much as in us lies. And this the very Heathen could see. Non solum nobis nati
sumus sed Partem Patria, etc. So Cicer^ before him. Plato.
And therefore the more generally and universally serviceable any man is in his
generation, the nearer he comes to the End of his being; yea,

Thirdly, The nearer he comes to those beings which are most excellent: There
is nothing in the whole visible Creation more excellent then the Sun in the
firmament; nor nothing more serviceable, giving light, and warmth, and
influence to all the creatures under heaven. Among all the creatures of God,
visible or invisible, none more excellent then the Angels; no, nor none so
Serviceable; Heb. 1.14. Are they not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to
Minister for the good of them that believe?

4. Yea, The Lord Jesus Christ himself, who (as Man) is the first begotten of
every creature, higher then the Angels, yet he took upon him the Form of a
servant, Phil. 2. And professes, That he came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, Mat. 20.28. Yea, and now that he is in Heaven exalted to the highest
top of Majesty and Glory, Far above all principalities and powers, and every
name that can be named, yet still he continues the Minister of the Elect. And
(with all Humility and Honor to his Blessed Majesty be it spoken) Serves them
as their High Priest, making continual Intercession to God for them.

5. Yea, God himself as he is Primum and Optimum the first and best of beings,
so he is the most Communicative: He gives to all life and being, Act. 17.23,
28. He upholds all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. He is good, and
does good to all, Psalm 145.9. And therefore the more generally and universally
good and useful any man is, the more like he is to Angels, the more like to
Jesus Christ, the more like to God himself. It cannot therefore but be a great
honor for any man to serve h^^ generation, which is to be a Common blessing, a
Public good, and so to be like God himself.

I have given you briefly the Explication of the Point, Applicatio Doctrinae.
I come now to the Application of it.

And here I might in the first place take up a bitter Lamentation, 1. (...).
or rather Reprehension against multitudes amongst us that are very faulty in
reference to this great duty of Serving their Generations.

First, Some there are that live wholly to themselves, mind only themselves and
their own private good and interest. All their cares, thoughts, studies,
affections are confined to themselves, centred upon themselves; they mind not,
regard not the good of the Age and Generation they live in; they ear not how
things go in public, sink or swim, so they may abound in ease, wealth and
prosperity; all their care is to enrich themselves and greaten their Families.
Mark what the Holy Ghost says of such a man, Psalm 49. v. 11, 12, 13, 16, etc.
Their inward thought is, That their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all generations, (And that is all they take thought and care
for, and therefore) they call their Lands by their own Names; as if they made
account by this device to Immortalize their names, and Consecrate them to
Eternity, as much as if they had been the most serviceable men that the earth
did ever bear. But what says the Holy Ghost? Ver. 12
Nevertheless (for all their calling their Lands by their own Names) Man being
in honor continues not: he is like the beasts that perish. He perishes and
his memorial is perished with him. Psalm 9.6. His remembrance shall perish in
the earth, and he shall have no name in the street, Ver. 13
Job 18.17. This their way is their folly. Whatever it be in the eyes of men,
it is mere folly in the sight of God for any to think to perpetuate their names
by heaping up Lordships, and Manors, and Towns, and Calling them by their own
Names, this their way is their folly. Yet their posterity (as very fools as
themselves) approve their sayings, tread their steps. Against this folly the
Holy Ghost gives the godly a Caveat, v. 16. Be not thou afraid when one (that
is, such an one as he had been speaking of before, one that seeks not the good
of his generation, that seeks nothing but to greaten himself and his family.
Let it be no temptation to thee when such an one) is made rich, when the glory
of his house increases. For when he dies he shall carry nothing away: his
glory shall not descend after him. Though while he lived he blessed his soul,
(saying with that fool in the Parable, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, take thine ease, cate, drink and be merry) yet none else blessed
him. And men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self. Men, that is,
some men, will praise thee, flatter thee to thy face when thou do well to thy
self, yet he that serves not his own generation, shall go to the generation of
his fathers, he shall never see light etc.

Secondly, Others there are who are so far from serving the age and generation
wherein they live, that they serve themselves of the age and generation they
live in. These are such as make an advantage to themselves of the troubles and
calamities of the times wherein they live, and build their own Nests upon the
Public ruins. These in stead of serving their generation, are the Plague and
Scourge of the generation they live in: Woe unto him that builds a Town with
blood, and establishes a City by iniquity, etc. Hab. 2.11.

3. Again, Others in stead of serving the generation wherein they live, they
are the shame, the burden, the reproach, Ulcus et Carcinoma, the scab, the
plague of the generation they live in. Such are all profane ungodly persons,
drunkards, swearers, adulterers and the like. How do these serve the generation
they live in? or what do these serve for? but only to poison and infect the Age
in which they live with their vicious conversations, to fill up the measure of
its iniquities, and make it run over, and to hasten the wrath and vengeance of
God upon themselves and the Age they live in.

But I had rather spend that little time that remains in a second Use; 2.
(...).
and that is to exhort every one of you, seeing the greatest honor that the
greatest upon earth can have is to serve his generation, O be exhorted to lay
out your selves, your utmost, your all for the service of your generation.
Whatever God has blessed you with, devote it all to his service, and the
service of your generation.

Has God blessed you with able parts? Lay out them for the service of your
generation; so did David the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost which he had
received.

Has God blessed you with able purses? grudg not them to the service of your
generation. David did not, but prepared with all his might silver and gold,
etc. for the building of the Temple.

Has God given you Power, Interest, Authority in your generation? Improve that
for the service of your generation; so did David his: serve your generation in
your Private and Personal Capacities every one of you. And such as God has set
in public places, serve your generations in your Public Capacities. First,
Serve your generation in your Private and Personal Capacities

First, By bewailing the sins of the generation you live in; that you may all
do, and that you should all do: and never did any generation call for tears
more then ours.

Secondly, Serve your generation by standing in the gap; by pleading with God
to turn away his wrath from this generation: Never more need then now, never
fitter opportunities then now.

Thirdly, Serve your generation by the example of an Holy and Gospel-becoming
Conversation. Never was that more needful then now, when the woeful miscarriages
of many Professors of the Gospel has made the very Name of the Gospel and the
Reformed Religion to stink in the nostrils of the Nations that are round about
us, and has hardened the hearts of many amongst our selves. O now labor to
shine as lights in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

Especially those of you whom God has set in Public and Eminent places, in
the Magistracy and in the Ministry, set you as Lights in a Candlestick, Stars
in an higher Orb: O how should you willingly (with the Apostle) spend and be
spent in the service of your generation, 2 Cor. 12.15. One of the German
Princes took for his Device a Candle burning in a Candlestick with this Motto,
Ernestus dux Lunebergensis ex Phillipti locis Manlionis.
A. S. M. C. hoc est, Aliis Servio, Meipsam Consumo; I Serve Others, and Spend
my Self. So should every one whom God has set in public place say and do.
Even spend himself in serving his generation. To move you to this consider,

First, It will be an Honor to you in Life, in Death, and after Death; yea it
will be a comfort to you at the day of Judgment and when you come in heaven,
that you did not spend your days in vanity, that you did not live telluris
inutile pondus, but served your generation.

Secondly, Consider, you have but a Little Time to serve your generation in: It
is but a Span but an Inch of time that you have to do service in.

Thirdly, Consider there are but few that seriously and conscienciously attend
this work. We may take up the complaint of the Apostle, Phil. 2.21. All seek
their own; or that of Rabbi Simmeon, Nathanielis F. Dies brevis and opus multum
and operarii pauci, Drufiii Apophthegmata Ebraorum.
es merces multa and Paterfamilias urget: The Time is short, the Work is great,
the Laborers few, the Wages ample, the Master urgent, therefore Dum vires
annique siunt, etc. while time and strength serves, serve your generation.

Fourthly, Consider the number of those who serve their generation diminishes
and decreaseth daily: God has lately taken away not only in other parts of the
Nation, but here in Essex many excellent and serviceable ones in the Magistracy
and in the Ministry. Men that were public Blessings. And now last of all his
faithful servant, the Reverend Pastor of this place, Transitio ad Celebrationem
Defuncti.
Mr. Samuel Collins, whose exceeding eminent serviceableness to and in his
generation, I think, envy it self cannot deny, I say it again, Envy it self
cannot deny but that he was, A man exceeding serviceable in his generation; if
any should, the stones of this place, yea, the stones of your streets and the
walls of your houses would confute them. For who was the instrument, under God,
of laying the foundations of Religion and godliness among you? was it not Mr.
Collins? Who was the means of directing you into some kind of order and form,
as it were, of civil government in this Town, and thereby into a way of more
vigorous suppressing disorders, and more comfortable providing for your poor
then is almost to be found again in any town in the County? Who laid the
platform of these things amongst you? was it not Mr. Collins? Who was the
occasion of building many houses (and as I have been informed, some whole
streets in your Town) by increasing the number of your Inhabitants? was it not
Mr. Collins? the sweet sound and savor of whose Ministry invited many from
other places to come and seek a habitation among you, so that whatever he were
to others, yet it cannot be denied but he was to you, a man serviceable in his
generation.

Nor can it be denied but he was serviceable to others also: His usefulness was
not confined to one, but diffused it self into many places. Not to speak of the
good he did by his own Sermons preached abroad, how many Congregations have
cause to bless God for him, on the behalf of those faithful and godly
Ministers, which he procured to be sent to them, by the interest he had in
those persons of worth and honor to whom by present Laws the Jus Patronatus did
belong?

Yea, how many have cause to bless God for the Ministers that were brought up
in his family, under his Eye, Care, and Tuition, who have since proved eminent
and worthy instruments in the Church of Christ? I think scarce any man now
living in England was more serviceable or more happy in this kind then he.

And I could have wished (had it been the good pleasure of God) that this
employment that is now cast upon me, had fallen upon the hand of some one of
them to whom this Reverend Father might have said as aged Paul does to his
beloved Son and Scholar Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.10. But thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience,
persecution which came to me at Iconium, at Antioch, at Lystra, what
persecutions I endured, but out of them all the Lord delivered me. I would this
work had fallen upon the hand of some of these who might have been Testes
Domestici and quotidiani, daily and Domestic Witnesses of his Conversation
among you.

For my part I was but a child when he was in the strength and glory of his
Ministry. But thus much I remember, that when I was a child Mr. Collins of
Braintrie was among those men, those Ministers whose Names God had made
precious among his Saints.

Since I came to man's estate it has been my unhappiness that I have been
almost a stranger to him, having opportunity only to give him seldom and short
visits. But what I have learned either by my own observation or by the
observation of others, that I shall not spare to speak; not so much to his
praise as to the praise of God, from whom comes every good gift, and every
perfect giving. And I know not better what particulars to instance in then
those, concerning which the Paul appeals to Timothy, Thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, etc.

The first thing I shall instance in is his Doctrine: As Demosthenes said
Pronunciation was the first and principal thing in an Orator; so Doctrine is
the first and principle thing in a Minister. I shall therefore first begin to
speak of that.

I had the happiness sometimes to be his hearer; once (I remember) some twenty
years ago, drawn by the fame of the man, I came a Journey (of many miles) to
sanctify a Sabbath here, and to enjoy his Ministry, when I neither knew him
nor any in this Town, nor he, nor any here knew me either by face or name; and
I received a great deal of satisfaction in the Doctrine I heard from him then,
and so I have done as often as I have had opportunity to hear him since. And I
appeal to you who have been his hearers (as I think some of you have been) all
the time of his going out and coming in among you, was not his Doctrine always
sound? did he (in all the forty and six years of his Ministry among you, did
he) ever broach any Error, or vent any one Heterodox or private Opinion? Nay,
was he not always a strong and zealous opposer of them? You that were his
gravest and most Judicious Auditors speak, and I know you will say his Doctrine
was always Sound; yea, and not only sound, but Profitable, Powerful,
Successeful: Witness those many souls that God gave in to his Ministry, and by
his Ministry in to Christ, some whereof are now in heaven blessing God with him
and for him; others are yet living in New England, and some I hope are yet
living in Braintree, who must (if they will not be unjust and unthankful) say,
That though they had many iustructers, yet in Christ Jesus this was the man
that begat them to God through the Gospel. His Doctrine was Powerful
Successeful.

And in this Doctrine he was Diligent, Painful, Laborious, Constant: For forty
years together and above he preached ordinarily thrice every week, besides his
Sermons preached abroad, and occasional Sermons at home. And even to this last
winter (till it pleased God to give him a Supersedeas by that sore sickness
which at length served him with a Quietus est in death; till then, I say) he
continued to preach constantly and ordinarily twice every Sabbath day. I
profess I have wondered that he had strength of body to do it, being almost
fourscore years old, and that he had liberty of Spirit to do it, his Ministry
(even His) meeting with the same disrespect and discouragement that the labors
of the rest of Gods Ministers generally meet with in these sinful, slighting,
unthankful days. But God had vouchsafed him a singular blessing, that even in
his old age he was fat and flourishing, Psalm 92.14. His Understanding,
Invention, Memory, Utterance and other Ministerial parts, they were as lively,
as fresh and nimble now in his old age as in the prime of his years (at least I
may say they were more fresh and lively in him then in many of us who are far
younger men.) That as it is said of Joseph, His bow abode in strength. It is
recorded of Moses as a singular and memorable thing, That when he was one
hundred and twenty years old, his eye waxed not dim, and his natural strength
was not abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. And is it not as rare and memorable concerning this
faithful servant of God, that when he was almost one hundred years old lack
twenty, the eye of his understanding waxed not dim, nor his spiritual strength
abated? But I see I must not bestow thus much time in Engraving every piece of
this good man's Character: I proceed therefore to the next mentioned by Paul,
and that is his Life, Thou have fully known my Doctrine Life, etc.

2. The Life and Conversation was not only Unblameable and without Rebuke, but
Holy, Exemplary, Edifying. He was none of those that did with the Stoics,
(...) speak well, but do ill: Having Jacobs voice, but Esau's hands. He was
none of those Statuae Mercuriales, that serve only to point others the way to
heaven, but never move one foot in that way themselves. But as he preached so
he lived: His Doctrine was the Rule of his Life, and his Life was the Example
of that Doctrine. I may say of him as Bernard does of his Humbertus, Factitium
vobis Sermonem in omni fama sanctitatis servus Dei exhibuit: This servant of
God gave you a Practical Sermon continually in his whole Conversation.

3. And this his Life and Conversation declares what his Purpose, his (...) was
(which is the third thing there mentioned by Paul) in his entering into the
Ministry, his purpose was not to seek great things to himself; No, no: you
cannot but know that time was when the Stairs of preferment were of as easy
and open access unto him, as they are now to some others. And though he never
sought preferment, yet preferment sought him: And if places of greater Eminency
and greater Profit could have tempted him, Braintree had never enjoyed his
Labors so long, nor been to bewail his loss now; But as Gregory NaZianZene
preferred his little Village where he was Pastor before populous and eminent
Cities, so he this Town of Braintree. He was resolved, Hanc spartum Ornarc. He
had purposed, resolved, devoted himself, a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and your servant for Christ's sake; you were in his heart to live and to dye
with; you were his first, his only Love. O that none of you had ever given him
cause to complain with the Apostle, The more abundantly I love the less I am
beloved. In reference to this holy man, and what befell him in this
Congregation, I have often thought upon that in Exodus, where it is said, There
rose up another generation which knew not Joseph. O, Sirs, if you had all known
(as some of you did) what service he had done for this poor Town, what a state
when he came first hither he found Braintree in, and what a state and degree of
eminency in profession and outward prosperity he (or rather God by his means
and Ministry) had advanced it to, I am confident you would all have pai'd him
the just Tribute of Love and Reverence in his Life, and Honor at his Death
which many of you did and do.

I go unto the next particular and that is Faith: Thou have fully known my
Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith. He was none of those, Qui frigide and
Jejune de fide disserant, that do discourse of Faith unto others coldly and
overly, Tanquam de terra incognita. But as Tertullian speaks of the Prayers of
the Primitive Christians, so it is true of his Preachings, They were tanquam de
Pectore; His Sermons came from the Heart, he was a Preacher that could say with
the Apostle John, 1 Epist. 1.1. That which we have seen with our eyes, and have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life, declare we unto you.

The next thing the Apostle instanceth in is Long-suffering: Now the
Long-suffering of this Holy man, if it were not sufficiently tried in the time
of his Health, if the forty six years time of his Ministry in this place, and
the variety of trials he met with in that time from men of several tempers and
spirits; if that were not trial enough of his Long-suffering, yet the many
weeks of his sore and tedious affliction was. For many weeks was the hand of
God heavy upon him in a sore Quartane Ague. And in all that time he never
uttered one unbecoming word, but lay quiet, contented, cheerful in the frame of
his Spirit all the time of his sickness, till it pleased God to put an end to
his days. Here was Long-suffering.

For his Charity, though I say nothing, I am sure there are enough who will
proclaim it: I believe there is scarce a poor man or woman in all your Town but
will acknowledge that in him they have lost one of their best Friends, one of
their most ready, cheerful, tenderhearted Relievers of their necessities that
they had in all the world.

There is one thing more in these Ministerial Perfections summed up by the
Apostle, and I know that some of you watch to hear what I will say of that, and
that is Patience. And may I speak the truth, I never heard any thing laid to
the charge of this holy man in all my days but some defect in this particular,
some want of Patience. Now suppose that this charge were true, why? may not the
want of this one particular Grace be over-lookt where there is such a full
confluence of other Graces? What Man, what Saint is there living upon the face
of this earth, that wants nothing? This Holy man of God (say some) wanted
patience; and are there not other men that want the wisdom he had, the gravity
that he had, the sobriety that he had in the use of meats, and drinks, and
apparel, the charity that he had? the modesty and humility that he had? And
yet all these can be over-lookt in them, only this one want of patience must be
objected against him. But I beseech you tell me (some of you) what was this
want of patience and in what cases? For there are cases wherein to want
patience is not a fault but a duty: there are cases in which good men, holy men
may not be patient, cannot be patient, ought not to be patient. Even Moses
himself, the pattern of patience, the miracle of patience, having to do with a
froward and gainsaying people, has much ado sometimes to keep the bounds of
patience, yea, meets with some occasions in which he dares not but show some
impatience. If the people in his absence set up a golden calf and worship it,
patience can hold no longer; then how impatient would Moses have been if this
had been done in his presence and before his face? If the people despise and
loath the Manna of the Lord, if Cora, Dathan and Abiram will rebel against the
Lord by taking to themselves an Office about the Holy things, to which the Lord
has not called them, and so make a Schism, a Sedition among the people; Moses
cannot, must not be patient in these cases. Now I beseech you, what were the
cases in which this servant of the Lord showed any Impatience at any time? were
they properly his own concernments? when people withheld his Maintenance from
him was he impatient then? Did he molest any? Did he hale them before the
Judge? When people despised him, opened their mouths in scornful, reproachful
manner against him (as many delight to do against all the Ministers of Christ
Jesus) was his impatience then? Being reviled, did he revile again? Surely no:
but if when he saw people slighting the precious Manna of the Word, setting up
the Idols of their own brain in stead of Gods Ordinances, sowing Schism and
division among the people committed to his charge; if upon such occasions as
these his Spirit was stirred in him, shall this be imputed as a fault to him?

-- Nam quis Iniqua
Tam Patient Gentis tam ferreus ut teneat se.
This leads me to the last thing, Persecutions and Afflictions which he
suffered: Not from the hand of Public Power; from that his own Integrity and
Prudence, and (principally) that hand which upholds the Stars in his Church,
preserved him all his days under all that variety of changes that has passed
over us. But I mean Persecutions and Afflictions from private hands: Not at
Listra, Iconium, and Antioch; not among Heathens and Jews, but at --

But I will draw a Curtain here: The Lord has now delivered him out of them
all; and I will not make these wounds recrudescere.

The Lord look upon this poor Town in Mercy, and overlook all the failings and
miscarriages of his people in it; and send a man among you (if it be his good
pleasure) that may continue as long with you as this holy man did: And may do
as much good among you as he in his Generation; that though he find you
divided, may unite you, and may restore you to your pristine state of Beauty
and Unity, wherewith God had sometimes dignified you. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

