AN ORDINANCE OF His Excellency and Council For the establishing Courts of
Judicature for the ease and benefit of each respective City, Town and County
within this Province of New York.
WHEREAS His most Sacred Majesty by his Royal Letters Patents bearing date the
Eighteenth day of June in the nineth year of His Majesty's Reign, did amongst
other things therein mentione^, give and grant unto his Excellency Richard Earl
of Bellomont Captain Gene^al and Governor in chief over the Province of
New York, etc. Full power and Authority with the Advice and consent of His
Majesty's Council for the said Province to erect constitute and establish such
and so many Courts of Judicature and public Justice within the said Province,
and Territories depending thereon, as his said Excellency and Council shall
think fit and necessary, for the hearing and determining of all Causes, as well
Criminal as Civil, according to Law and equity, and for awarding Execution
thereupon, with all reasonable and necessary Powers, Authority, Fees and
Privileges belonging to them, his said Excellency the Governor, by and with
the ^dvice and consent of his Majestits said Council, by virtue of the Powers
and Authorities derived unto them, by his said Majesty's Letters Patents. Does
by these presents ordain, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority aforesaid.
That every Justice of the Peace that resides within any Town or County within
this Province, are by these presents sully empowered and authorized to have
cognizance of all causes cases of debt and Trespasses to the value of forty
shillings or under which causes or cases shall and may be heard tried and
finally determined without a Jury by every Justice of the Peace residing as
aforesaid, he taking to his Assistance at the time of hearing and determining
such causes and cases of debt and trespasses to the value aforesaid, one of the
Freeholders of the Town or place next. to where the cause or Action does arise,
the process of warning shall be by Summons under the hand of the Justice,
directed to the Constable of the Town or Precinct, or to any deputed by him
where the party complained against does live or reside, which summon being
personally served or left at the Defendants House or place of his abode, two
days before the hearing of the plaint, shall be sufficient Authority to and for
the said Justice, ^d as aforesaid, to proceed to hear such cause or causes, and
determine (...) the Defendants absence, and to grant execution thereupon
against the Defendant^ Person, or for want thereof, his Goods and Chattels,
which the Constable or his deputy of that Town or Precinct shall and may serve.

A(...)is said ^ency and Council do by these presents further ordain, That
there shall be kept and holden a Court of Common Pleas in each respective
County, within this Province, which shall be holden in each respective County
at such places in each Respective County, as the General Sessions are usually
held and kept, and to begin the next day after the Sessions of the Peace does
end and terminate, and then only to hold and continue for the space and term of
two days and no longer. And that the several and Respective Courts of Pleas
hereby established, shall have Power and Jurisdiction to hear, try and finally
to determine all Actions or causes of Action, and all matters and thing,
tryable at common Law, of what nature or kind soever.

Provided always, and it is hereby ordained, That there may and shall be an
Appeal or removal by Habeas Corpus, or any other lawful Writ, of any Person or
of any Action or Suit depending, and of any Judgment or Execution that shall be
determined in the said respective Courts of Pleas upwards of Twenty Pounds, and
of any action or suit wherein the Right or Title of any Freehold shall be
brought in dispute or upon trial.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be
held and kept at the City of New York, a Supreme Court o^ Judicature, which
Supreme Court is hereby fully empowered to have cognizance of all Pleas Civil,
Criminal and M^xt, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever as
the Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer, within his Majesty's
Kingdom of England, have or ought to have, in and to which Supreme Court all
and every Person and Persons whatsoever shall or may, if they see meet,
commence any Action or Suit, the Debt or Damage laid in such Action or Suit
being upwards of Twenty Pounds, and shall and may by Certiorari, Habeas Corpus,
or any other lawful Writ, remove out of any of the respective Courts of Mayors
and Aldermen, Sessions of the Peace or Common Pleas, any Information or
Indictment there depending, or Judgment thereupon given, or to be given in any
Criminal matter whatsoever cognizable before them, or any of them. As also all
Actions, Pleas and Suits, real, personal or mixed, depending in any of the said
Courts, and all Judgments thereupon given, or to be given. Provided always That
the action or Suit depending or Judgment given, be upwards of the value of
Twenty Pounds, or that the Action or Suit there depending or determined, be
concerning the Right or Title of any Free hold.

And out of the Office of which Supreme Court at New York aforesaid, all
process shall issue out under the Test of the Chief Justice of the said Court,
and to which Office all Returns shall be made, which Supreme Court shall be
holden at the City of New York on the first Tuesday in April, and on the first
Tuesday of October, annually, and every year; and each Sessions of the said
Court shall only continue for the space of five days, and no longer. And one of
the Justices of the said supreme Court shall annually, or once in every year,
if need shall so require, go the Circuit and hold and keep the said Supreme
Court for the City and County of Albany at Albany on the first Tuseday in May;
for Vlster and Duchess County on the third Tuesday in May; for the County of
Westchester, the last Tuesday in June; for Kings-County, the first Tuesday in
August; for Queens-County the second Tuesday in August; for the County of
Suffolk the third Tuesday in August; for the County of Richmond the second
Tuesday in June. Which Justice when he goes the Circuit shall in each
respective County be attended with two or more of the Justices of the Peace, at
least, during the time of two days whilst the said Court, in the Circuit, is
sitting and no longer.

And it is further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the Justices or Judges of the several Courts aforementioned, be and are hereby
sufficiently empowered and authorized to make, ordain and establish all such
Rules and orders for the more regular practicing and proceeding in the said
Courts, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as all or
any of the Judges of the several Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas and
Exchequer in England legally do

And it is also further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no persons
Right or Property shall be by any of the aforesaid Courts determined, except
where matters of Fact are either acknowledged by the parties, or Judgment
confessed, or passes by the Detendants fault, for want of plea or answer,
unless the fact be found by the Verdict of twelve men of the Neighborhood, as
it ought to be done by the Law.

And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the General
Sessions of the Peace shall be held in each respective City and County within
this Province at the times and places hereafter mentioned, that is to say, For
the City and County of New York at the City-Hall of the said City, four General
Sessions of the Peace annually and every year, upon the first Tuesday of May,
the first Tuesday of August, the first Tuesday of November, and the first
Tuesday of February. For the City and County of Albany, three General Sessions
of the Peace at the City-Hall of the said City, annually and every year on the
first Tuesday of June, October and February. For the County of Westchester, two
General Sessions of the Peace, annually and every year at Westchester on the
first Tuesday of June and December. For Vlster and Duchess County two General
Sessions of the Peace annually and every year, at Kingston, on the first
Tuesday of March and September. For the County of Richmond, two General
Sessions of the Peace annually and every year, on the first Tuesday of March
and September. For Kings County two General Sessions of the Peace, annually and
every year, at Flatbush on the second Tuesday in May and November. For Queens
County two General Sessions of the Peace, annually and every year, at Jamaica
on the third Tuesday of May and September. For the County of Suffolk two
General Sessions of the Peace, annually and every year, at Southampton on the
last Tuesday in March, and at So^thold on the last Tuesday of September. Which
General Sessions of the Peace in each respective City and County aforesaid
shall only hold and continue for the space and term of two days, and no longer.
Always provided, and he is further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing herein contained shall be construed to infreinge upon the Rights and
Privileges of the respective Courts of Ma^ors and Aldermen of the City of
New York and Albany, but that they and each o^ them may hold and keep their
respective Courts of Mayor and Aldermen after such manner and ^orm as they are
accustomed to do, and to hear and determine all matters brought before them, as
formerly accustomed, any thing to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding. In Testimony whereof His Excellency and Council have caused
the great Seal of this Province to be hereunto annexed, at New York this
fifteenth day of (...) in the eleventh year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord
William the Third, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1699.

Pursuant to an Order of Council we do Report, this to be a proper Scheam for
erecting the Courts of Judicature of this Province, which is humbly submitted,
W. Smith, John Guest, Ja. Graham.



