Geffery Mayor.
Martis xiio die Octobris, 1686. Annoque RR. Jacobi Secundi Angl. etc. Secundo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Newcome to print his Sermon preached at
Guildhall-Chappel on Sunday Morning last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
this City.

Wagstaffe.

IMPRIMATUR,

October. 14. 1686. Hen. Maurice, RRmo in Christo Patri ac Dno^ Wilhelmo
Archiepisc. Cantuar. a Sacris.

Peccata in Deliciis.

A Discourse of Bosom Sins.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR And Court of Aldermen, AT Guild Hall
Chapel, October the 10th, 1686.

By PETER NEWCOME, M. A. And Vicar of Aldenham in Hertfordshire.

LONDON: Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Geffery. Lord Mayor of the City of London,
And to the Court of ALDERMEN.
My LORD,
IN Obedience to your Lordship's particular Desire, as well as the public
Order from the Court to me, I here present you from the Press, what your
Lordship was pleased so much to favor with your liking from the Pulpit.

The Discourse is rustic, plain, and purely practical; and was designed, not
so much to work the Head, or tickle the Fancy, as to affect the Heart, and
reform the Life to a real and universal Uprightness before God; which end if it
answer, I am not at all sollicitous how it may fare in other respects.

That the Blessing of God may attend both it, and the Government of this City,
is the hearty Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, PETER NEWCOME.

A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor at Guild Hall Chapel.
PSALM. 18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from Mine
Iniquity.


ORder and Method, in Spirituals as in Temporals, is the Life or Action; that
which facilitates and succeeds our Enterprise, rendering it both pleasant and
profitable to us. We might certainly become much better Men, and much sooner
too, did we but begin at the right end, and proceed regularly in a good way. A
neglect whereof doubles our Task, and disappoints mightily our Labor. This
therefore is of vast consequence for us all to learn, (even the best and
shortest way to be Good) which the Words before us may instruct us in; as
declaring not only an Evidence of the Psalmist's Vprightness, but intimating
also the successful Method of his attaining thereto; which was by keeping
himself from his Iniquity; I was also upright, says he, before him, and I kept
my self from mine Iniquity.

A due Abstinence from our Own Iniquity, as it is the Effect, so it is a
certain Cause of a Religious Vprightness before God.

The first step, or likeliest method to become effectually Good, is diligently
to keep our selves from our Own Sin.

This Position as the words afford us, so shall I endeavor to illustrate, by
briefly insisting on the following Particulars.

Own Iniquity. keeping our selves from such Sins especially, in order to our
becoming Upright before God.
The first of these I begin with; which is,

I. To explain what we are here to understand by a Man's Own Iniquity: Because
every Man, it is evident, since that first fatal laps from Human Innocence, does
remain a bruised and corrupted Being; having a Principle of Vice within, which
does strongly cncline to all Sin: So that what ever Enormity we at any time
stand guilty of, it may most properly be termed our Own; it proceeding from our
own Choice and depraved Inclination; nor can any thing but himself challenge a
Propriety therein. But even yet, All Sin is not in the same degree apparently
his. Every Crime cannot claim an Equal Interest in him. The Appetite of the Old
Man is not without its Longings too; discovering a greater lust after some Food
more than others; never moving with an equal pace toward every Sin. Some it
craves after with a greater thirst, pursues it with more eagerness, and
swallows it with more delight and gust than it does others. Some it singles out
and makes special choice of to follow and prey upon with the most earnest
Delight and sensual Sweetness: Hereby owning it more peculiarly his own; the
Sin which he chiefly respects, to which he most ordinarily conforms himself,
and is most conversant in; and to which therefore he makes all Occasions and
Circumstances, Friends and Acquaintance, Religion and Conscience; all the
Powers both of Soul and Body, and outward Estate, tributary and subservient.
Thus in the Body of Sin, as in the Body Natural, there is ever some one
prevailing Humor which shows it self, and lords it over the rest. And
therefore, as good Men, tho they have the seed of every Grace in them, yet some
one may be be said to be their's in an eminent manner above the rest (as
Abraham was eminent for Obedience, Moses for Meekness, Job for Patience). So
wicked Men, tho they have the seed of every Sin in them, ( Jews and Gentiles
being all under Sin, as the Apostle argues, Romans 3.9. i.e. all alike corrupt by
Nature) yet does not this Corruption operate alike in all Bodies; but in every
particular Person it vents it self in one way rather than another. Whence it is
that we find also wicked Men marked out in Scripture for their several Sins;
Cain for his Murder, Simeon and Levi for their Treachery, Corah and his Company
for their Rebellion, Nebuchadnezzar for his Pride, Manasses for his Cruelty,
Balaam for his Covetousness. Some vicious Humor or other ever gets the
predominancy in all Constitutions. Every Man has his Peccatum in deliciis,
some sweet Morsel which he roles under his Tongue and is loath to spit out. Even
as in every Man's Body there is a seed and principle of Death, yet in some
there is a proneness to one kind of Disease more than to another; so, tho in
every Man's Soul there is (naturally) the seed and principle of every Sin, yet
has every Man his Inclination to one kind rather than another; and this is
that which we are here to understand by His Iniquity; as being so in a more
peculiar and eminent manner, so as no other Sin besides it is. Consider we
therefore,

II. Whence this comes to pass; From what Cause it proceeds that every Man thus
singles out his particular Sin. This I conceive to be from one, or possibly all
these following.

1. From the Natural Constitution and particular Complexion of Bodies. 2. From
distinct and particular ways or manner of Education and Breeding. 3. From the
present Age or season of Life. 4. From particular Callings or Professions of
Life. 5. From the present Outward Estate or Condition. And, 6. Lastly, From
Custom and long Usage.
1. The Natural Constitution and particular Camplexion of Bodies, will be apt
to incline Men to particular and suitable Sins. For the different and various
Humors, of which Human Constitution is composed, are ('it is evident even to
common Experience) never in any Man mixed so equally but that one does abound;
which (as it gives denomination to that Man's Complexion, so) like a strong
Biass, inclines the Affections to what delights and pleases mostly it self.
Hence comes it that every Man is not alike inclined to every Sin; but this Man
loves what another loathes. A Man of a dull and torpid Disposition we observe to
be seldom ambitious; and one of a quick and active Spirit as seldom idle. The
Choleric Man is not obnoxious to those Evils which Melancholy does hatch; nor
the Melancholy to those which Choler is apt to ferment into. Every Humor is
not nourishing to every Sin, nor can every Sin be fit entertainment for every
Humor. Therefore not only do Men, according to their several Humors to be
gratified, apply themselves differently to the Body of Sin (Sin affording
different Viands suitable to the Appetite to be feasted, as the Plant does;
whereon we may see the Be feeding on the Flower, the Bird on the Seed, the
Sheep on the Blade, and the Swine on the Root). But the Enemy likewise applies
his Temptations, according to the Humor he is to allure; suiting his Weeds to
the nature of the Soil he sows upon; which is one Reason why they grow so rank,
and increase so fast.

Nor does it hence become any just Excuse for the Sinner to say, for his Sin,
It Is his Inclination to do thus and thus; because where Grace has had its
Work, all prevailing Inclination to that which is Evil, is turned a quite
contrary way, even to that which is Good; and the predominant Humor, which
before biased us to such a darling Sin, being now regulated and refined,
strongly inclines to its contrary Virtue. Hence this is called, most properly,
A Conversion, because the Change is so remarkable and mighty; making us quite
other Men to what we were before, (of another Inclination and Disposition): As
good Physic, purging out all Depravity, and turning our loathing only to that
which is really wholesome. So that it is no Excuse for a sick Man to vindicate
the irregularity of his Appetite by, to say, It is his Inclination; since it is
wholly owing to the Depravity of his Inclination, which aggravates his Crime,
in that he neglects such Medicines as might correct it. For do we think God
will excuse us, because we sin with an Appetite and strong Inclination? Does
not this rather inhaunce our Guilt (since God, has shown us what is good, and
wooed us to accept it, and offered his Grace to work in us a Will thereto, and
yet after all this) to commit Sin with Appetite and greediness?

If therefore it be our Constitution that has endeared any Sin to us, then is
our Constitution still unsanctified, and this is our own fault, and if not
amended, will be our certain Damnation, but can never be our just Excuse.

The sum is this. The Complexion, it is certain, of every Man's Body has
(naturally and while unsanctified) a very great Influence on our Souls, to draw
them to that particular Vice (in an especial manner) which is fitted and
accommodated particularly to its frame, and wherewith it self is mostly
delighted. Nor is this any Excuse for our being seduced, because being
regenerated by the Grace of God, our Complexion will be new molded, and may as
strongly incline us to the contrary Virtue. Hence therefore (as a predominant
Grace, so) a predominant Sin, you see, may come to rule and govern peculiarly
in us.

2. A predominant Sin may arise and reign in us likewise, from the distinct and
particular ways or manner of our Education and Breeding. For this being the
frame of our future Growth, we usually prove just as it works us. And therefore
any little Vice, taught and indulged in our tender Years (the season of our
Education) is very apt to stick by and govern us as long as we live. If they,
who should in our Minority govern us, either set us any bad Example themselves,
or suffer us to follow them that do, the Contagion, it is odds, will always hang
about us, and the Habit increasing with our Years, become Ours in a very
eminent degree. Any little bruise or scisure in the young and tender Plant,
shows it self, we see, a great fault and blemish when it becomes a full grown
Tree. It Is the wise Man's Advice therefore, upon this Consideration, that we
should Train up a Child in the way he should go, because, Prove. 22.6.
when he is old he will not depart from it. Men's Minds in Childhood are much
like their Joints, pliant and tractable, which being distorted by any ill
accident then, will ever, it is odds, remain so afterward, and the Deformity
much increase with their Age and Strength.

And this methinks (by the by) should be sufficient caution to all, Parents and
others, with whom the Education of Youth is entrusted, carefully and betimes to
sow the seed of Virtue in their Souls; lest, through their neglect, some
cunning and merciless Sin wind it self with their Education into their future
Practice, and take a full possession of their Hearts; and so not only prove
their Master it self, but draw in more as bad as it self, and never leave the
Man (who will hence, sure, have reason to curse his Guardians) till they have
hurried him to Perdition, and buried him in the unquenchable Infernal Flames.
Again,

3. Another Ground whence a particular Sin may show it self eminently Ours, may
be, possibly, our present Age, or season of Life For Sin, commonly, varies its
complexion with our Bodies; and that which is predominant in us at one time,
may become extinct and quite laid aside at another. The Appetite changes, we
know, with Age; and Sin will change with the Appetite; So that we love and
nauseate, just as our season of Life prompts us. Thus Levity and Inconstancy
are observed to be Vices peculiar to Childhood; Wantonness and Prodigality to
Youth; Pride and Stateliness to Manhood; Covetousness and Frowardness to Old
Age. As the Nations, in times of darkness, had each of them their particular
Idols, which they worshipped alone, and neglected others, (tho they all agreed
in dishonouring the one only true God) So every stage or season of a Sinner's
Life, has it is adored and darling Polution; which tho it expires therewith,
yet reigns while that lasts, and is ever succeeded by a new Age and Lust
together. For indeed, if the Devil had but one Bait to allure us by, we should,
when we had but once past over the season it was accommodated to, be out of the
possibility of sinning any more; the alteration of Age rendering the beloved Sin
of the past, nauseous to the present state or season of our Life. And therefore
has that subtle Enemy multiplied his Snares by the number of our Years, and
dogs them in a circuit from one Vanity to another, till Death surprise
frequently the Presumer. Thus a new Deputy he still sets up to the Humor of
the Times, which (that his Government may never grow uneasy) he ever continues
to change therewith; so that there is no Inter Regnum in the Kingdom of
Darkness; one Sin or other is continually enthroned, which is renewed and
changed with the Times, and so remains ever beloved, and the People's darling.
Again,

4. A Sin may become peculiar and eminent in us further from our particular
Calling, or Profession of Life. For every Employment is accompanied with its
particular Temptation; (the Devil having way-lay'd us in every Path, and hid
his Snares for us under every Concern we can apply our selves unto) insomuch
that it sometimes proves hard to leave such a Sin, unless we quite forsake the
Employment it haunts. The Merchant therefore, is most of all concerned to ward
off allurements to Deceit and Lying especially, Ministers to Flattery, and
Magistrates to Bribery and Injustice, and the Soldier to Rapine and Violence;
these becoming, from those their several Callings, the Sins they stand most in
danger of, and are peculiarly theirs, as they are so employed. Of this last
therefore, St. John Baptist had so warily observed this, That being demanded
what the Soldiers should do, Luke 3.14.
he warns such especially that they should do Violence to no Man, neither
accuse any falsely, and be content with their Wages; their Employment addicting
them to these Sins especially: So that Violence, Revenge, and Murmuring, may
justly be called the great Sins of the Camp, they naturally accompanying that
Employment; showing themselves, (without great, and more than ordinary care) in
those especially who are exercised therein. And as thus then to our Callings;
so farther,

5. A predominant Sin may owe no less its rise and greatness to our present
outward State or Condition. Thus in Poverty, may we observe Envy, Rapine, and
Discontent cry the loudest; in Prosperity, Pride, Arrogance, Oppression and
Ambition lord it over the rest. Pleasures, expected or enjoyed, are apt to
thrust out of the Heart the thoughts of God, and all sense of Goodness. And
Wealth too casts it self into some Idol Sin, which we presently fall down
before, and are ensnared to worship. Those that will be rich, says the Apostle,
fall into Temptation and a Snare, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and
Perdition. Thus, whatever Condition we are in, we still meet with Temptations
therein, strongly soliciting us to peculiar and proper Sins thereto. Once more,
(and to conclude this Head)

6. Lastly, Particular Sins may become peculiar and predominant in us also,
from Custom and long Usage. For Custom, (being the Genius, or Spirit of Action)
introduces a Nature, Facility and Delight; so that a Sin which can once plead
this, has as strong a Title to us, even as our very Nature it self, and as
difficult too to be shaken off. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, Jer. 13.23.
or the Leopard his Spots? (says the Prophet) then may ye also do good, that
are accustomed to do Evil.

Custom introduces an inseparable Union, and makes the Sin it waits on, not
only Ours, but we indeed that Sins; for so the Scriptures represent us, as
Slaves to such Vices, having sold our selves to do wickedly, and being led
Captive by Satan at his pleasure. We are not only bound by such Sins, but
robbed likewise of all our strength whereby we should break loose from those
Bonds: so that we must continue to the commission of accustomed Sins, upon the
very same account that the Historian extravagantly said Cato was virtuous, quia
aliter non potuit, because he could not otherwise. Every Repetition of any
Action, is like a Blow from the Hammer on the Nail's Head, which the more we
multiply, the further is it driven by it, and the harder to wrench out again.
Custom rivits the Sin to our practice, rendering it thereby so peculiarly ours,
that we shall scarce ever have the Heart or Resolution to leave it: Time and
Use will have so bent and cnur'd our Inclination toward it, that it becomes as
hard to be rectified or turned from it, as a Body bowed down by Age, is to be
recovered to its youthful streightness.

These and the like Temptations then, every Man may find, by a small
observation of himself and others, whereby Peculiar and Reigning Sins (which
are the great Obstructors of our Vprightness before God) are introduced. These
are the Avenues by which the Usurper enters our Hearts. In so many places are
we assaultable, and lie open to Infernal Malice.

And since then it thus appears, that every Man has his Peculiar Sin, and by
what Means; it is but time that we now proceed to consider particularly What is
ours, in order to the keeping of our selves from it, that we may become Upright
before God: And this is the Subject of our next General Head; which is,

III. To consider how every Man's Own particular Sin may be discovered, and
distinguished by him from all his other Sins,

To this end, such Characteristicks as these are wont to be given us of it.

1. The Sin that is peculiarly Ours, we may know by its commanding Power, by
its Guards and Attendants. A reigning Sin never sits solitary. This great
seizure in the Soul, like a great Wound in the Body, draws all the bad Humors
about it. So that all our other Sins are but Streams emptying themselves into
this Ocean. All are subservient to it, and drudg for it. Thus, for instance, in
the Worldly Niggard, where Covetousness reigns, Lying, Deceit, Oppression and
Injustice are ready, upon all occasions, to act in subserviency to it. And in
the Unclean, where Lust flames, Consumption of Fstate, Body and Time are ready
to be cast in for fuel. Thus the predominant Sin is ever attended by all our
other Sins, and therefore, that to which we find our common Sins mostly
directed, and which gives Life and Motion to them, that is our peculiar, our
darling, our reigning Sin.

2. This we may farther discover by our easiness to be overcome by it. We don't
find those struglings and relentings in this, which we cannot for our Lives
avoid in the commission of other Sins. For all Sin indeed, is uncouth and
uneasy to the Mind of Man at first; and there are few Sinners so monstrously
depraved, but they will even yet startle at the Practice of some Sins; whereas
there are other (and perhaps no less heinous) Sins, Job 15.16.
which they can drink down like Water, (as the Scripture phrases it) with
greediness and delight at the first motion. Thus you may observe it with the
Common Swearer; who possibly does abhor the very thought of Murder,
Oppression, or Covetousness, and declaim too against them as much as any Man;
yet so easily is he induced to (what many other Sinners do as much startle at
and abhor) the Profanation of the holy Name of the great God in idle Oaths,
that he is (as he himself will not rarely confess) insensible of it, and knows
not when he swears: And the reason is apparently this, This is his reigning
Sin, and the shame and difficulty which was in it at first, is now, by
familiarity and custom, quite worn off; but the other Sins which he boggles at,
are not his familiars, and therefore remain yet strange and uggly to him. Hence
the Apostle calls this our familiar Sin, in opposition to all our other Sins,
Heb. 12.1.
The Sin that does so easily beset us, i.e. The Sin we are the most prone to,
and can commit with the least sense of guilt and shame. Such Sins we may
certainly apprehend and mark them for our Own Iniquities; our easiness to admit
them arguing our Acquaintance, our Love and near Relation. But,

3. Such Sins may, again, be discerned by our Impatience of any Reproof for
them. There being no surer nor shorter way of discovering the most secret
Affection to any thing, than by speaking ill of the thing beloved. For Love,
like the Fire, will be apt to sparkle upon every disturbance. No Man will
endure to be reproved for what he loves. What we hate, or are indifferent
toward, we esteem as alien, and think our selves not concerned for what befalls
it; but what we affect and make our Darling, we look upon as part of our very
selves, and espouse its Concern and Fortune so nearly, that a Reproof here
reflects upon our selves, and does engage us to resentment. Thus Herod could
hear St. John the Baptist gladly (as the Text informs us) till he preached
against his Herodias, and then he could not bear it. We may think therefore,
what Sin it is, which we can least of all endure to hear of; which makes us
most apt to be angry at the Man that reproves it, and that we may conclude is
our Beloved, our Darling and Peculiar Sin. The which we may discover, moreover,

4. By our Desire and Endeavor to conceal it. Because what we love and are
loath to part with, we are apt to be unwilling to be known we have it. Love has
ever so much of Jealousy, as to affect Privacy. So that if we but then consider
with our selves, what Sin it is we are the most afraid should be publicly
known; which we would not (for the World) be deemed guilty of; which few or
none suspect, and which we endeavor to hide from all; by such our care to keep
secret, we may easily come by the sure discovery of our Darling Lust. And so
again, we may discover it,

5. By our readiness to plead for and excuse it, by the most fair Pretenses and
plausible Arguments, upon almost any Occasion. No Man will be wanting to play
the Advocate for what he loves. Every cunning Shift and Design are Attendants
to Our Iniquity. Thus the Covetous may we hear extolling wise Frugality and
good Husbandry; and the Luxurious Magnificenee, Pomp and Gentility, only for
the sake of those Darling Vices of theirs, which they shape by these Virtues.
They will still be endeavoring to cover Vice's Deformity with Virtue's Mantle;
shuffling that under the name of this; calling Vice Virtue, or anything, rather
than part with what they affect. So that but observing the tendency and drift
of such Men's Discourses, one may easily trace out the Beloved Sin, for whole
sake they design the Panigyrick.

6. This Sin, likewise, we may discover, by considering what Sin it is which
above all other, we could wish (or be content at least) that it were no Sin.
For all Sin being naturally so deformed and opposite to the Beauty of Holiness,
it is not possible that any thing, but an ardent and peculiar Love, can make
any Man boggle to part with it. And therefore, when the Young Man in the Gospel
(being informed of the necessity of parting with his Affection to the World, in
order to his obtaining Heaven) went away sorrowful; it was doubtless, Mat.
19.22.
because he was hugely enamored with his wide Possessions, and could heartily
have wished his Love thereto, and hopes of Heaven, consistent with each other;
and troubled he was because they were not: Covetousness, upon this, appearing
to be the Sin he loved, his darling Lust. For had he not been strangely in love
with that Vice, he could never have desired it to have been otherwise than what
it was. And when he saw and understood so positively, that he must resolve to
part either with it, or his hopes of Salvation; nothing but a blind and doting
Affection could have disturbed or delayed his Resolution. To wish therefore,
that such a particular Sin, we might however still love, and live in, without
Sin; argues our (more than ordinary) love for it, and it is predominancy over
us. Nay, yet farther.

7. The Sin that is, in an especial manner, our Own, may yet be discovered by
its readiness to distract us most in holy Duties. For our Mind being
continually bent toward it, is apt to stand so, even when we most strive to
bend it the quite contrary way. A Sin, by being accustomarily loved, becomes,
in fine, even as natural to us, as the quality of Cold to Water: And therefore,
as this when heated (tho never so hot) still is working it self toward its own
natural Temper; so we, tho never so much warmed by our Devotion, are apt
quickly to grow cool again, and when we do so, we ever work toward the Sin
that is most familiar to us. We cannot long continue from our accustomed
Temper: It will still be working against, and chilling all opposite Heat and
Fervor. That is the Sin, which is Ours therefore, which our Hearts work most
toward, and which disturbs and distracts us most in Holy Duties. Once move,
(and to conclude)

8. Lastly, That Sin which we are apt to think on first in the Morning, and
last in the Evening, is, moreover deemed, likely enough to be ours. For our
first and last Thoughts are observed to discover very much of the temper and
affection of the Mind. What we love most, we usually make our first and last;
give it entertainment first in the Morning, and take our leave of it last in
the Evening. Thus where the Love of God prevails; good Men have experienced it
working in their Hearts, especially at these seasons. With my Soul, Isa. 26.9.
(says the Prophet Isaiah) have I desired thee in the Night, yea with my
Spirit within me will I seek thee early. Our Evening and our Morning Thoughts
are a Tribute indeed, due only unto God. Every one ought to begin and end the
day with him, and offer most devoutly both the Morning and the Evening
Sacrifices of a Thought (at least) unto him. Thus, When I wake (says the
Psalmist) I am still with thee: Psalm. 139.18.
And, by Night on my Bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves, Cant. 3.1
sings the Spouse in the Canticles. God, as he is the Alpha and Omega in
himself, so ought he to be unto all his People also: and whatever therefore
does possess it self of our first and last Thoughts, that usurps, as it were,
the Seat of God, and exalts it self in the Soul, above all that is called God.
It reigns over us instead of God; and is most notoriously therefore, our
Predominant and reigning in.

Thus, by these plain Rules, may one easily be directed to discover and
distinguish our Darling, our Bosom, our reigning Sin. Which having once found
out, our next concern must be to quit it; abstinence from such Sins being the
first step to real Goodness. I haste therefore to my last general Head. Which
was,

IV. Lastly. To show you the necessity of keeping our selves from such Sins as
these, especially, in order to our becoming upright before God. For tho the Sin
you love, possibly, may be but one; yea, and that (in your own esteem at least)
but a very little one; yet is there an Absolute Necessity of your Resolving to
part with it especially, and above all others; And bending all your Forces
against it alone, to try this Method of the Psalmist's for your becoming
Upright before God. For, consider,

1. Tho your Peculiar Lust may, possibly, be but One, yet it is Sin however. It
is a Transgression of the most reasonable, just and holy Law of God and
Religion: And consequently a stain and blemish of our Natures; the reproach of
our Reason and Understanding; the disease and deformity of our Souls; the great
Enemy of our Peace; the cause of all our Uneasiness, and Fears, and Troubles;
yea, and that too, for which even the Son of God was forced to die a most
shameful and painful Death, that it might not be our Unavoidable Ruin. This is
the least we can say of any Sin: And tho, then, your Sin be but one; yet has
it, you see, a monstrous Aspect, and God cannot approve of it, tho but single;
and we must therefore keep our selves from it, before ever he will accept of us
as upright before him. But,

2. If the Sin be but one, then you may consider that it is by so much the
easier to part with, and the more reasonable to relinquish it. He that is bound
with a strong Cable, or multitude of smaller Cords, may pretend some Necessity
for his Thraldom from the strength of his Bonds; But he that is tied with one
single Thread, (such as one Resolute Struggle would be lure to break) he is
Prisoner only to his own either Sloth or Humor: And who will pity his
Captivity, where it is so apparently his own Choice? Do not therefore say, My
Sin is but one, and therefore I need not leave it: But, My Sin is but one,
therefore I need not keep it. So single a Pleasure one may dispense with, and
find no great miss. This single Profit one may resign, and 'twill be no breach
in one's Estate. And if my Savior has required a Renunciation of all my
multitude of Sins, tho never so dear, shall I scruple to renounce one, and that
in my own esteem but a very small one? Nay,

3. We may yet argue higher, and from the singleness and smallness of the Sin,
deduce the inhancement of the Guilt. Great Acquisitions carry some Temptation
in their face, but despicable Prizes do rather avert than tempt. 'Twas
therefore the sign of a Common Harlot to be hired with a Kid, Genesis 38.17. And
sure he must be of a strange prostitute Soul, that can adulterate for such low,
trivial Wages. To dishonor God, tho the whole World were to be gained by it,
were great Impiety; but to do it for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread
(upon such trivial inconsiderable terms) himself brands as a yet higher pitch
of Profaneness, Ezekiel. 13.19. And sure, it argues a very light esteem of God,
indeed, when one poor, contemptible Lust shall be able to over-poize him in our
Hearts. Like wretched Judas, this is to betray our Lord for a contemptible
Piece. A Smile, a Word prevails more than the Love and Bounty of our Creator:
And do we not then deserve to perish? Nor,

4. Is the Folly less than the Profaneness. For the most Doting Affection,
when it is summed up, can amount to no more than this, viz. That it makes a Man
expose himself to the greatest Pain, and the greatest Loss, for the thing
Beloved. And this is most visible here; Hell being certainly acquired, and
Heaven as certainly forfeited by one Sin as by many. And then, tho there may be
odds in other respects, yet what is there in this, between us more modest, and
the most Licentious Sinners, but that We put the very same value upon one,
which the other do put upon many Sins? Which renders our Folly but so much more
apparently the greater, because we sell our Souls so much the cheaper. Let Men
pretend then, what they will, in extenuation of their Bosom Sin; that they are
not so profane as many others; that they neither have so many nor so great
Sins to answer for as their Neighbors; that setting aside, possibly, some one
foolish Custom they have took up and are addicted to, they can challenge all
the World to accuse them of any; they denying themselves in most of the Sins,
they can see others commit with greediness: yet (notwithstanding all this) so
long as they harbor but one Beloved Sin, they are certainly as miserably
cheated in their bargain as others, and are no less guilty of the most
egregious Madness. For, it is apparent all the Love which other Men scatter and
distribute upon several, they have united and concentered in this One Lust And
when then, the parting with one Sin might save their Souls, surely it is a
doting Passion indeed that will make Men hazard their Salvation for it. Alas!
if our Sin be but One, let us never be so foolish, so stark mad as to be damned
for it: To make it the price of all those Pleasures which are at God's
Right Hand for ever-more: Of that Fullness of Joy, which Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor ever yet entered into the Heart of Man fully to conceive. But
since it is but One, let us never be so rediculously fond as to be undone for a
Trifle; but with the upright Psalmist, resolve rather to endeavor,
henceforward, to keep our selves carefully from it. And that, more especially,
because,

5. Tho it be but One, yet it is the most malignant and mischievous one that
can be harbored. There Is no Sin among the whole mass of Vice, which we have
more reason to relinquish than our peculiar Sin, because none is capable to do
us more Mischief. And that,

(1.) Because this we have made our intimate, and have not that Jealousy over
it, which we can have over other Sins. This is our Bosom Intimate, is got into
our own Quarters, shuffled with our own Forces, entered our Holds and Defenses;
and mixes in all our Counsels, having full power of our Affections, and
therefore may easily do us the most injury; it being observed that the Risque
is ever the greatest when the Foe is thus, Rebel and Traitor too. A false
Friend is certainly the worst Enemy: And therefore, when the Heathen Man prayed
unto Jupiter to save him from his Enemies; one that overheard him did, not
impertinently sure, mend it with a more needful Prayer, viz. That Jupiter would
save him from his Friends. He rightly thought that they might do him more harm,
because he trusted them; but as for his Enemies, he would be sure to look to
himself, for receiving Injury from them. It Is the Sin which lurks in our Bosom,
and which we make but too much our Familiar, which we had need most to beware
of, as not having a more spiteful Enemy than it, because a false Friend. For
farther,

(2.) It Is this very Sin alone, which is the greatest Obstacle to our through
Reformation. It Is here the work sticks and can go no farther. It Is the plucking
out the right Eye, and cutting off the right Hand, (a rending out Lust as dear
to us as the most necessary Member we have) that makes the Terms of Salvation
so hard a saying. It Is easy to be good, so far as we have no Inclination to
thwart; but all the difficulty of Conversion lies in Self-denial, which is a
kind of (...) [Self-Murther] which we naturally abhor and dread the thoughts
of. Thus the Young Man in the Gospel tells our Savior, Mark 10.20.
that he had kept all the Commandments from his Youth; yet when our Lord
required moreover, the parting of him and his Bosom Sin, saying, One thing thou
lackest, Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the Poor, -- and
come and take up thy Cross and follow me; here he sticks, being sad at that
saying, and went away grieved, for he had great Possessions. His inordinate
love for the things of the World (which was his Iniquity) was the Sin that
bafled his Conversion. This therefore, we must especially beware of, as being
the fatal Rock we all split upon, that miscarry in our Voyage to Eternity. Tho
therefore, the Sin be but one, yet it is the only one that hinders our
Conversion, and is therefore the most carefully of all others, to be avoided
and opposed by us. For farther,

(3.) While we retain and harbor it, it is certain all our Religion is rendered
vain and worthless by it. It taints all the Good we do, and renders all that
little Religion we pretend to, but a maimed, deformed thing; hateful to God,
and as uncomfortable to our selves, as to be without a Leg or an Arm. St.
James's Aphorism holds in this case, James 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one point only, he is guilty of all. He that allows
himself to break one Precept, keeps none; but will be reckoned guilty of those
things which he does not commit. For tho his Sin may be but one, yet it is
contrary to that sincere Holiness, which God has indispensibly enjoined us;
and his sparing of that, does evidence his hatred against the rest to be false
and pretended only. For God has not given any Man Authority to pick and choose
his Duties, or to leave and spare a Vice, because it is one he particularly
loves. He that does so, although he live never so careful and severe a Life in
other respects, yet all his Vprightness comes, in reality, only to this, viz.
He has a Mind to but one Sin; and those Sins he cares not for, he forbears;
but this one he has a mind to, that he commits. And is not God then (think we)
mightily beholden to him, that there is but one way of provoking that does take
with him; and therefore, he must allow him what he has an Inclination to, and
pardon him because he abstains from what he does not like?

The voice of Obedience is, that we keep all the Commandments, and the language
of Repentance, that we depart from all Iniquity; and therefore all the Virtues
in the World, cannot wash off the Guilt of one unrepented Sin. Mic. 6.7.
Shall I give my firstborn for my Transgression (says the Prophet) the Fruit
of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? Shall I bring my Alms, my Devotion, my
Tears; nay, all the Good that ever I have done? All, alas! will vanish at the
Guilt of one Sin, and melt before it, as Wax before the Sun. For every Sin is,
as Seneca called Alexander's murdering Calisthenes, Crimen Aeternum, an
everlasting Sin, which no Virtue of our own (without a full, complete
Repentance) can ever redeem. One Fly is sufficient to taint the whole Box of
sweet Ointment. And what a pity is it, and cruelty to our selves (since we have
not, God knows! any of us, much true Goodness to boast of) to taint and
frustrate the little we have, rendering that utterly insignificant, which at the
best, amounts to so little? We must therefore, beware of harboring, tho but
one beloved Sin; because, this One (of so mischievous a Nature is it) will
spoil and frustrate all the Good we have, or pretend to. Nay,

(4.) This one Beloved Sin, tho but one, yet will it moreover, if we do not
part with it, obstruct, grieve, and at last drive away the good Spirit of God
from us. For that is an Holy Spirit, and where it is suffered to have its
kindly operation, it has ever its Fruit unto Holiness, uniformly supressing
all Sin; and therefore, where any one continues in force and vigor, it is
manifest that such operation of Grace is obstructed: And where it is obstructed
long, thence it is next of all withdrawn. For, my Spirit (says the Almighty)
shall not always strive with Man. Genesis 6.3.
The pure Spirit of God cannot dwell in a Soul that is subject to Sin. It can
endure no such Inmate: They can no more dwell together, than Light with
Darkness. For Christ to dwell, by his Spirit, in any Heart that cherishes a
Vice, were for him again (as one expresses it) to descend into Hell. Therefore,
by harboring any Sin, we resist the Grace of God; and by refusing to let
Christ rule entirely in our Hearts, we put our selves at once out of his
Government and Protection; having all those spiritual Aids withdrawn, which
should either assist us to Good, or fortify us against Ill; and like Out-lawed
Persons, are consequently exposed to the merciless Outrage of every Fury-Lust
that will assault us. For herein appears farther, the mischief of harboring,
tho but one Bosom Sin; that, tho it be but One. Yet,

(5.) It is apt to multiply and produce many more. For Vice is always teeming
and very fruitful; and tho there be no Blessing annexed to it, yet it does
strangely increase and multiply. As there is a Connection of one Virtue with
another, so Vices are linked together; and one Sin draws many after it. When
the Devil tempts a Man to commit any Wickedness, he does as it were lay a long
Train of Sins; and if the first Temptation take, they give fire to one another.
All Vice stands upon a Precipice; and to engage in any sinful Course, is to run
down the Hill, and then no Man can stop himself when he pleases. It Is a fond
thing for any to think to set bounds to himself in any thing that is bad; To
resolve to sin in number, weight and measure; That he will entertain only this
one Sin, and bar out all the rest: Alas! our Corrupt Hearts put once into a
ferment, tho but by one Sin, yet are they like the Raging Sea, to which we can
set neibounds, nor say, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further. One Sin, tho
never so little, in the Heart, has full power to call in what company it
lists: It Is like those little Thieves, which being put in at the Window, set
the Doors open to all the rest. For the same reason may be equally inducive to
all Sin; As the repulsed Vices may otherwise complain justly of great
partiality, when as bad as themselves are still spared and cherished; so this
points them out a way to attaque us more prosperously: For let them shape
themselves but to our Humor, put on the Countenance of our Beloved Sin, and
they need not doubt of as free an admission.

Thus unhappy is the Case of him who entertains any one darling Sin; his
Enclosure is broken down, and he lies then common; He is left destitute of a
reply to any Temptation, and like a bashful Person, will be in danger of
yielding, because he is ashamed to deny. And sure then, this unhappy
fruitfulness of Sin may be a strong Evidence of the Necessity lying upon us all
to run away from every Sin; and dread to retain any one evil Spirit, as that
which may bring in upon us many more worse than it self. Which, tho it should
fail to do; we (beyond all expectation) continue in one posture (hugging but
our one Bosom Sin) and not be tempted to grow worse, yet we may conclude, it is
because Satan finds we need it not; And we have little reason sure to be proud
of that Virtue, which the Devil himself will allow us; Or to think our selves
good enough, when we are as bad as he wishes us. For,

(6.) This one beloved Sin is sufficient, even by its own single weight, to
sink us into Eternal Perdition. One Wound may be as mortal to the Soul, as it
proves often to the Body. A Tempest is not always necessary to sink the Ship; One
treacherous Leak may do it in the greatest Calm. Our Adversary well knows that
while he holds any part, God will have none, and so the whole falls to him of
course. Therefore can he permit Men, we see, not only to cashier some one
single Sin, but whole sholes together, and yet not fear the sinking of his
Interest in us. He may trust us, even as far as he did that Young Man in the
Gospel, who was pronounced not far from the Kingdom of God; and yet so long as
there is but any one unmortify'd Lust that may send us away sad from Christ,
his Tenure will remain firm enough. And this indeed, is the Devil's main
advantage, that he can hold fast by the smallest Thread. And whereas to our
Bliss, a Conspiration and Union of all Virtues is required; Our Ruin may
spring from any one solitary Crime. Many Rounds make that Ladder whereby we
scale Heaven, whereas one step serves to precipitate us into the Abyss of Hell.
Any one Sin therefore, gives us into the possession of Satan, and leaves us at
his will and pleasure, to be led away finally to Destruction.

Thus Unhappy it is in the power of any one indulged Sin to make us; If
appearing, upon all these accounts, to be the most malignant and mischievous
one that can be harbored; and the greatest Obstacle to our becoming upright
before God; So that if we have any love for our selves, any desire for our
spiritual interest, we cannot but charge our selves with care to keep our
selves from it. Much more might the Love of God constrain us, because (which
may serve as a further Evidence of the Necessity of our quitting these Sins
especially.)

6. Be they never so dear, we should part with them the rather, because the
greater instance it will be of our Love and Sincerity toward God. The offering
of our Darling Isaac is a most signal Instance of Divine Love; Now, says God to
Abraham, I know thou love me, Genesis 22.12.
seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thy only Son from me. To part with Sins
we care not for, is only an Instance of Self-love; but to deny Self for
another's sake, evidences true love for him. And who then, that has any spark
of Christianity left in him, would not be forward to show as much love as ever
he can toward God; who has always been, and still is daily expressing so much
Love, in innumerable Instances, toward him? Let the Sin therefore be never so
dear; the dearer it is, the greater instance will it be of our loving God, to
keep our selves from it, in obedience to his Command, that we may become
upright before him. And indeed, if we would have God believe that we are
sincere in loving him, we can do no less than give him the Precedence in our
Affections. However (to conclude all) if there be no Ambition of Love to
allure; yet, it may be, there may be some fear of Wrath to afright us from such
Sins. Therefore seriously consider,

7. Lastly; How dear each darling Lust is like to cost us if (after all that
has been now said to evidence the necessity of our leaving it) we will still
keep it. Send up your Thoughts into yonder Regions above, and view well that
fullness of Joy, those Pleasures that are at God's right hand for evermore; and
tell me what Sin (tho never so palatable) can recompense the loss thereof? Nay,
cast down your Looks into that Bottomless-Pit of Horror; where you see there
that multitude of Souls stretched upon the Rack of Despair; the never-dying
Worm gnawing and feeding upon their Vitals, and the great God of Mercy
laughing, without Mercy, at their endless Calamity: Mark whence you hear those
dismal Shrikes and Groans, those blasphemous Cursings, that dolorous weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth; and soberly consider, if you can be content
to share for ever in these (and ten thousand times ten thousand more Miseries
than I can tell you of) for the nauseous Embraces of a treacherous Lust? What
is there, (good God!) in any Bosom Sin, that can tempt us to part with the Joys
of Heaven, and incur the Pains of Hell so willingly? What is there in this
Idolized Sin of ours, which should exact such costly Sacrifices? Would it not
be easier, and more our Interest too, to part with any Sin, rather than Heaven?
To endure the short Agonies of a Revulsion of the dearest Lust from our Hearts,
than the horrid Despair of a Damned Ghost for ever? To thwart a foolish and
unreasonable Inclination, than lie roaring, to Eternity, upon the Rack of a
Revenging Conscience? Is there, really, any proportion between our abstaining
from the Pleasures of Sin that are but for a moment, and our being excluded
those of Heaven, and all hopes of Happiness for ever? Alas! If it be hard and
difficult to contend now with one evil Habit; to struggle with one stiff and
obstinate Inclination; how severe will it prove to dwell with Everlasting
Burnings, and suffer the dire Effects of an Unappeasable Vengeance to all
Eternity?

Wherefore, since we are under an absolute necessity of enduring the one or the
other; let us, in the Name of God, act like Men, and of the two Evils, choose
that which is most tolerable. Let us throw aside (tho with never so great
difficulty and pain) the Sin, especially, that does so easily beset us. Let us
(without the least Mercy and Pity to our selves) tear it out from the closest
Embraces of our Inclinations: And, (that we may not only evidence, but most
effectually and speedily render our selves sincere and Upright before God, and
so escape the Miseries reserved as a Portion for ail Hypocrisy) let us, with
the Psalmist, resolutely and diligently, henceforth, keep our selves,
especially, from Our Iniquity.

Which God grant we may all of us successfully accomplish, for the Sake and
Merits of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Sermon on 1 John 5.4. [This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even
our Faith.] preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guildhall
Chapel, July 18. 1686. by James Fen, M. A. and Vicar of Goudhurst in Kent.

A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface, upon the Sixth Chapter of St. John;
showing, that there is neither good Reason, nor sufficient Authority, to
suppose that the Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation from it.

Grotius his Arguments for the Truth of the Christian Religion, rendered into
plain English Verse.

All sold by J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.


