An Act for Granting to their Majesty's the Rate of One Penny per Pound upon
all the Real and Personal Estates within this Province of New York, etc. To be
allowed unto his Excellency the Governor, for the Care of the Province,
November the 12th, 1692.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, in all humble and dutiful
Acknowledgement of their Majesty's most Gracious Favor and Regard to the
Subjects of this Province, by Commissionating and Appointing over them, a
Person to be their Governor, who is endued with most excellent Qualities, and
has given most signal Demonstration of his constant Loyalty and Fidelity unto
their Majesty's, by his prudent care and conduct, since his arrival into this
their Majesty's Province, and who by his unwearied vigilence has visited the
Frontiers of the same, and has put them into such posture as that all the
Subjects are in safety, though environed with a powerful Enemy; In the deepest
Sense thereof become humble Suppliants unto their most Excellent Majesty's, and
pray that they would be graciously pleased to accept, as a token of their most
Loyal and Sincere Affection unto their Majesty's, and their Government
established here, One Penny for every Pound value of all the Real and Personal
Estates of all and every the Freeholders and Inhabitants within this their
Majesty's Province and Dependancies; and do likewise humbly pray, that your
most excellent Majesty's would be pleased to give and allow the same unto
Benjamin Fletcher Esquire Capt. General and Governor in chief in and over their
Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories thereon depending, in America,
and pray that it be so enacted,

Be it therefore enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That there be
Assessed, Levied and Collected One Penny for every Pounds value of all the Real
and Personal Estates of all and every the Freeholders and Inhabitants within
this Province and Dependencies, to be assessed, levied, collected and paid in
manner and form following, that is to say, The one half or moiety of the
aforesaid Assesments of One Penny for every Pounds value of all the Real and
Personal Estates, as aforesaid, to be assessed, levied, collected and paid unto
their Majesty's Receiver General at New York, at or before the first day of
September next, which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Three, and the other half or moiety of the said Assesment to be paid
in like manner at or before the first day of September then next following,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four.

And for the more due and orderly Collection of the Assesment aforesaid, Be it
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen within
the City of New York for the time being, and the Mayor and Aldermen within the
City of Albany for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace for the time
being, for the several and respective Counties within this Province, for the
several Counties respectively, for the which they shall be Justices of the
Peace, do within six Months after Publication hereof assemble and meet together
in the Court Houses, for the several respective Cities and Counties, or such
other place or places as they shall agree among themselves, and shall there
order, That the Assessors and Collectors for the several and respective Cities,
Towns Mannours, and Liberties, within their several Jurisdictions, for the
assessing, collecting and receiving of the Public Rates, for the defraying of
the Public and Necessary Charge of each respective City and County aforesaid,
be the Assessors and Collectors for the assessing, collecting and receiving the
Rate of One Penny per Pound, as aforesaid, as to the said Mayors and Aldermen
and Justices of the Peace shall seem meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect, and do not elect annually, or once
every year Assessors and Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
respective Mannours and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to elect Assessors and Collectors, for the assessing
their respective Mannours and Jurisdictions, and for the Collecting the same,
according to the intent and direction of this Act; Then and in such case the
Justices of the Peace of the County where such Mannours or Jurisdictions are,
Are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors, for such Manors and Jurisdictions as shall neglect and refuse as
aforesaid; which Assessors and Collectors shall, to all intents and purposes,
observe the directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace, for the respective Cities and Counties,
Manors and Jurisdictions, have and shall have Power and Authority by Virtue of
this Act, each of them by himself, to administer an Oath to the said Assessors,
Well, Truly, Equally and Impartially, in due Proportion, as it shall appear to
them, according to their best Understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of the respective places, for which
they shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen Assessors and Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or
unequally or partially assess or refuse to make such Assesment, as by this Act
is required, or shall deny, neglect or refuse to collect any Sum or Sums of
Money, in form aforementioned assest, that then and in such case, it shall and
may be lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the Cities and Counties
where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue of this
Act, are required and empowered to do the same by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals, to commit such Assessor or Assessors, Collector or Collectors so
denying, neglecting or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to
collect, as aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bayl or
Mainprize till he or they make Fine and Ransom to their Majesty's, as aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what degree or Quality soever he or they be, within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay, and ratify the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector, by Virtue of
a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace for the City or
County where such Offender shall dwell or reside, who by Virtue of this Act are
Required and Authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrant, to levy the same
by Distress and Sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chartles, returning
the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the Sum assessed, and Charges of
Distress and Sale being first deducted.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby Required,
Empowered and Authorized to take effectual care that this Act, and every
Article and Clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent and
meaning thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to do, perform, fulfill
and execute all and every or any the Duties, Powers and Authorities, by this
Act required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, fullfilled or
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Excellency, the Governor
and Captain General, and Council, or before any of their Majesty's Courts of
Record within this Province, he or they shall suffer such pain, by Fine and
Imprisonment, as by the direction of the said Governor and Captain General, and
Council, and the Justices of the said Courts, shall be adjudged.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any time
hereafter against any Person or Persons, for any Matter, Clause or Thing, done
or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so Sued
or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue,
Not Guilty, and give this Act, and the special Matter in Evidence; and if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer Discontinuance or Virdict to pass against him, the Defendant and
Defendants shall recover Tribble Costs, for which they shall have the like
Remedy, as in case where Costs by the Law are given to Defendants.

Provided always, That no Mayor, Alderman or Justice of the Peace shall be
troubled, sued or molested for any Omission, Offense or Neglect by Virtue of
this Act, but within the space of one Year after such Omission, Offense or
Neglect, and not any time hereafter, any thing contained herein to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Always Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the several Collectors of each respective City and County, as aforesaid, shall
have liberty to pay the several respective Sums assessed, as aforesaid, at the
Time and Days aforesaid in Current Money at New York, or for want thereof, in
good, sufficient and merchantable Provisions at the current Market Price.

FINIS.

