Observations UPON MR. Walkers Account OF THE SIEGE of Londonderry. WITH SOME
REMARKS On the Great and Memorable Actions there done.
Licensed, October 4th. 1689.

J. F.

ENvy is the inseparable Concomitant of Great, and Brave Men; all extraordinary
Performances are attended by Obloquy, and Censure. No sooner does the
prosperous Sunshine upon any Generous Enterprise, but Clouds of Malice,
Medisance, and Detraction obscure the Glory of the Undertaking; and Love,
Charity, and Respect, degenerate into Hatred, Despite, and Contempt.

It is not long since the Eyes of all England were fixed upon the Success of
Londonderry: The Protestants solemnly wished for its Preservation, as the last
Pledge of their Security, and Restitution: The Papists eagerly longed for its
Rendition, as the infallible means to complete their universal Design; and an
uncontrollable Opportunity to possess Ireland, to invade Scotland, and embroyle
England* To say nothing of the Protestant Interest through Europe, on which the
Fate of that Place had an undoubted Aspect, and Influence.

At that time, all men were prompted with a Curiosity to observe, and wonder,
that so mean a Place could make so Vigorous a Resistance against so terrible a
Siege; that a Rabble of raw un-disciplin'd men could know how to make such
prosperous Sallys against a Formidable Army, commanded by Officers of great
Name. It was the Talk of every Meeting, Club, and Table; every man was
inquisitive to understand who was the Commander, and Governor of that City;
and when it came to be known, that Mr. Walker was the man, a thousand Questions
were started about his Birth, Education, Function, and Inclinations, all men
admiring at such prodigious Actions, which no Age, nor History can parallel,
and which create a Credibility even in the most improbable Romances. No less
liberal were they in their Applauses and Commendations, extolling his Fame in
Verses and Panegyricks, publishing his Effigies in Printed Cuts, tossing his
Name between Printers and Hawkers, and making it the Subject of News-Letters,
and Gazets; while every man, according to his Fancy, proportioned a Reward to
his un-requitable Merits: It seemed, as if London intended him a public Roman
Triumph, and the whole Kingdom to be Actors, or Spectators of the Cavalcade. At
last he arrived; the King received him graciously, and conferred on him a Mark
of His Favor, and Esteem; the Lords of the Council, and several of the
Nobility caressed him with abundance of Kindness, and Respect: the Prime
Citizens treated him with all the Demonstrations of Joy, and Gratitude; and the
Vulgar even stiffed him with Gazing, Crowding, and Acclamations.

Amidst this Warmth of Honor, and Satisfaction, some malignant Exhalations
have been raised, to darken and obscure the Reputation of this most celebrated
Person; and invidious men have sought Inventions to disparage his Veracity, and
vilify his Credit; and stirred up a Dust, which possibly may reverberate on
the Eyes of them that caused it, but can with no Reason, or Justice, affect him.

Mr. Walker being by his best and nearest Friends pressed to write a Narrative
of the Memorable Siege of Londonderry, was with much Reluctance persuaded to
it, because it was impossible to emit a Succinct and exact Narration of so many
various and unusual Adventures, without mentioning the Errors, and
Miscarriages of some concerned in that Affair on the one hand; and on the other
hand, without doing Violence to his own Modesty, in becoming the Herald of his
own Praises. Nevertheless, out of such Notes, and Minutes, as he had by him,
and set down upon the Place, he digested all matters into an orderly Account of
the Siege, industriously omitting the Honor due to himself, in many particular
Actions; and passing over, or very tenderly touching upon such things as really
are unaccountable, and unexcusable. So that I dare boldly say, there never was
a Discourse of that Nature (wherein such un-exampled Occurrences, so many men
of different Humors, Persuasions, and Designs, must of necessity be taken
Notice of) written with so much easiness, calmness, and indifferency; and with
so little Reflection.

Yet after all this, the Spirit of Envy and Detraction is seen in our Streets,
and some men will be dissatisfied, only to gratify their own Perverseness. One
finds fault with the Form and Method of the Narrative; another cavils at the
Contents and Passages in it; never considering, that the Sincerity of a true
and impartial Relation will not admit of such Subterfuges of Art and Rhetoric,
as are necessary to support a Fancy, or Fiction: Neither is it easy to
represent a Story with such a Face of Impartiality, as the Beholder can espy no
Spots, or Wrinkles in it. Some out of an incredulous Stiffness will not believe
that a Person bred up in Study and Learning, conversant only in Books, and
accustomed to the Pulpit, should so wonderfully (as it were by an Enthusiasm of
Military Skill) discharge the Part of a Veterane Soldier, and a GENERAL: But
it is certain beyond all Color of a Just Contradiction, that no man ever yet
performed so difficult a Task with more Prudence, Moderation, and Dexterity;
convinceing the World by his Example, that Learning and Valor are not
incompatible; that Wisdom, Sagacity, and good Conduct, accompanied by a clean
and natural Courage, are sufficient Qualifications to make a Great Commander,
without the Aid of Discipline, Exercise, and the Art of War. Others taking
Notice, that Colonel Baker (who indeed was a brave Man, and a good Soldier) is
mentioned as his Colleague in the Government; and that other Officers and
Gentlemen have been Sharers in the Fateigue and Dangers attending the Siege,
seem to grudge and repine, that the Honor of those extraordinary Achievements
should be attributed solely to him; and judging that the Pecuniary Reward
presented to him, ought with more Reason to be distributed, and divided among
his Fellow-Actors. I shall say nothing to derogate from those Worthy Persons,
who have so commendably acted, and suffered for their Religion, and Country:
But when men shall coolly consider, that the Officers and Soldiers of that
Garrison are the Object of the Kings especial Care, and that by continuing them
in Commands, or daily Pay, they receive a Recompense answerable to their
Merits; while Mr. Walker being by his Function incapable of such Employments,
could not depend upon a growing Subsistence; they must ingeniously conclude,
that His Majesty did not testify His Acknowledgments to him with less
Prudence, than Generosity: The further Effects of which, if he had not by his
invincible Modesty resisted, he had before this time been established in a
Station of great Eminency, and considerable Profit. And howsoever the Sum may
bear the Show of a Reward proportionate to his Service: I dare aver it is far
short of his very Sufferings, and will not reach to the refunding of what he
has lost in his Houses and Personal Estate, by Fire, Plunder, and other
Outrages done by his, and our implacable Enemies.

But all these Objections are but squibs and flu^ts, the extravagances of
passionate and inconsiderate men, and such as are strangers to the Business, to
the Place, and to Him: Hitherto, I have had no further Trial, than to avoid the
single Attacks of a particular displeasure, doubt or dissatisfaction; I am now
to encounter a Legion; I hear a Volly of Whispers and Murmurs, and some
pragmatical men would pretend to interess a whole Party; though I persuade my
self that men so Discreet and so Judicious, will not concern themselves in such
Altercations. It is observed, that in the Account given of the Siege of
Londonderry, a very black Character is infixed on a Nonconformist Preacher,
page 21. where it is said, that Mr. Osburn was a Spy upon the whole North,
employed by my Lord Tirconnel: that in another Place (viz. page 57.) where the
Ministers of the Church of England are enumerated and re-counted by Pole; there
is only a slight mention made of the Nonconforming Ministers to the number of
seven, but not the least hint of one of their Names. In the Vindication of this
passage, I shall desire the Reader fairly and equally to consider the Occasion.
Mr. Walker, when he had given an Account, that there were Eighteen Clergymen
in the Town of the Communion of the Church (ascribing no more to them, than
that in their turns, when they were not in Action, they had Prayers and Sermon
every Day) he proceeds gentilely, and Impartially to commemorate the Carriage
of the Seven Nonconforming Ministers, giving them this Encomium (beyond that
he said of his own Brethren) that they were careful of their People, and kept
them very Obedient and Quiet; and having a Design Rhetorically to enforce their
Commendation, he could not more Artificially insinuate it to their Advantage,
than by marking the plain Disparity in the behavior of their Brother Mr.
Osburn, who in his Letters, Messages and Discourses, was Reported to Entertain
Sentiments very much different from theirs. I shall not at present say any more
of Mr. Osburn, than what is already said; but I desire every man, who is not
biased by prejudice or prepossession, quietly to consider, whether Mr. Walker
(pen't up within the Walls of Londonderry, deprived of all Information and
Intelligence both of Public Affairs, and the Actions of Private Men) seeing a
Letter from a Person generally known, and an Eminent Leader of a Party,
discovering an admission into the Presence of the Popish Lord Deputy (the great
Engine and Operator in the ruin of Ireland) an Intimacy with him, and a Trust
and Commission derived from him, whereby he was directed to cajole the poor
distracted and disanimated Protestants, with the Terror of Conquest, and
Military Execution on the one side, in case of Opposition; and the delusion of
hope to be secure under a Protection, in case of Submission, and a tame
Surrender of their Arms, and Horses: I say, whether Mr. Walker, perusing this
ambiguous Letter, and observing the pernicious Effects of it, upon the
generality of the People in Vlster, especially those of the writers Persuasion,
whereby they were influenced to a stupid and fatal Compliance ( as if the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance may be taught on fit
occasions, even by such as dissent from the Church of England) had not reason
to suspect his Candor, and too apprehensive, and become very jealous of his
Integrity: If this Argument will not suffice to justify Mr. W's. assertion (who
in the whole Narrative is not provoked to fix a positive Character on any other
Person but him) there may possibly be more demonstrative Proofs ready to be
produced, which nothing but querulous Murmurs, sophistical Evasions, and
unhandsome Reflections can Extort from him. For assuredly, neither he nor I
retain any Inclinations, but what tend to Moderation and Unity; Earnestly
wishing a perfect Agreement and Understanding among all Protestants. As to the
other part of the Expostulation, why eighteen Names of the Ministers of the
Communion of the Church of England should be distinctly recited; and of seven
Nonconforming Ministers not one should be remembered; I have only this to say,
that since those Gentlemen did not think it fit to join with Mr. Walker in the
Church, and possibly their Inclinations did not dispose them to meet him upon
the Walls, or accompany him in his Sallies; it is no way strange or improbable,
that their Names should be altogether unknown to him; neither can he be
suspected purposely to overlook the naming of them, since he has remembered
them generally with so ingenious a Description of their Care and Concernment
for their Flock. Nay, to put it out of all Doubt, and beyond the reach of
Murmur it self; let it be taken Notice of (I am well assured of what I say)
that when Mr. Walker gave His Majesty an Account of the Affairs of
Londonderry, he Heartily and Impartially represented the Action and Service of
those few Dissenters in the Garrison, and recommended them to the KINGS
Favors, equally with the rest.

Some Remarks upon the Great and Memorable SIEGE of Londonderry.
IT is so ordinary a thing in the World, to ascribe unusual Success and
Prosperity in great Undertakings, to the Supernatural Operations of
Providence, that every Country, and every Religion will at some time boast
their Title, and share in it. The Mahometans put in their Claim to this, as
well as Christians; and the universal spreading of Popery has presumed to
inculcate that as an especial Mark of Divine Approbation, which others have
looked on, only as a Permission of Vengeance for the Sins of those who
Professed the true Religion. Miracles are ceased, yet it is no solecism to call
such Occurrences Miraculous, which come to pass without means, beyond hope,
contrary to expectation, where no humane Art or Strength is greatly
contributory; but the Finger of God is plainly visible and discernible in all
the Performances, and Transactions. And that Londonderry, (and consequently
the Protestant Interest) has been under the peculiar Protection of the
Almighty, preserved by un-foreseen Accidents, and wonderfully Delivered from
their Rage who gaped for their Destructions, and presumptuously assured
themselves of Victory: I shall endeavor to demonstrate by the few following
Remarks, which serve as so many Links to compose one Chain of Miracles.

1. The inexcusable oversight of the Earl of Tirconnel, who, to super-erogate
in his Zeal to serve the Late King, withdrew the whole Garrison out of
Londonderry, not leaving so much as a Sentinel on the Walls, or a Soldier at
the Gates; nor remembering to supply that removal by a New Potent, till People
were awakened by their imminent Danger, and warned to consult their Safety.

2. The courageous and seasonable Resolution of the Inhabitants of Londonderry
to shut their Gates, and deny Entrance to a numerous swarm of Irish and
Highland Papists, who were just ready to enter, and at such a time, when the
Protestants through the Kingdom were disarmed, all Forts and Garrisons (except
Londonderry) in the Hands of the Papists, the whole Army of the same cue, Mass
celebrated in every Town, and no way left to give a check to the accomplishment
of their Unchristian designs, and frustrating their Plot of a general Massacre;
but by preserving that Place in the Hands of the Protestants.

3. The Return of the Forces under the Command of Col. Cunningham, sent to the
Relief of Londonderry, without Entering the Place or Landing. It being morally
certain, that if those Forces had Landed under the Command of Experienced
Officers, those brave and hardy Men, who have so signalized themselves by their
Valor, had been superseded from Duty, and perhaps obliged to take the Field;
and it may without offense be doubted, whether those, who were to succeed them,
would have given so advantageous an account of their Actions.

4. The desertion of the Place by the then Governor, and (by his Example and
Encouragement) the withdrawing of so many Gentlemen and Families into England
and Scotland; whose continuance there, would quickly have consumed the
Provisions in the Place, and obliged them to an untimely Surrender.

5. The precipitancy and oversight of Col* Luna, in deserting the Place, and
leaving above 400 Barrels of Powder in the Magazine; which he ought not to have
done, when he thought the City was not Tenable, but that very Store, thus by
Providence over looked, and left behind, has Defended the Place, and
contributed much to the Destruction of the Enemy*

6. The unanimous suffrage of the People in Electing and Constituting Mr.
George Walker their Commander in Chief; than whom they could not have pitched
upon a Person more completely adapted to so caprichious an Employment; being a
Man of Exquisite Parts, having a neat Dexterity in accommodating the humors of
the Rabble; a discreet Temper in moderating the diversity of persuasions; a
prudent managery of the common Provisions; a vigilant Care in the order of
Guards, Watches and Exercise; and an undaunted Courage in Leading them on to
the most hazardous Enterprises.

7. The departure of the most part of the Citizens and Inhabitants, who being
unaccustomed with the dreadful Treatments of War, might probably have been
induced to a Treaty of Surrender, in hope to save their Lives, their Houses,
and their Goods. And in their stead, the Arrival of so many Strangers from all
parts of Vlster, of whom the Garrison was composed; who being enraged by the
loss of their Estates and Goods; and being made desperate by their Confinement
to that place, from whence there was no possibility of Retreat, or Escape; they
have performed such Actions, as no Arm of Flesh would ever have achieved,
without a Divine Support.

8. The Arrival of Four Hundred and Eighty Barrels of Powder, with other
Ammunition, and Two Thousand Arms, at such a time, when the absolute scarcity of
such Provision must necessarily have obliged the Inhabitants to Submit to their
Enemies, upon the First Investing of the Place.

9. The Retreat of the Forces from Colerain, which being a Place no way
Tenable, they must have been exposed to Rout and Ruin; whereas by their
admission into Londonderry, the Garrison became recruited and reinforced by
many good Men.

10. The Treacherous Proceedings of the Enemy, as that of Lieutenant General
Hamilton, who having promised and agreed that he should not March the Army
within Four Miles of the Town, made an orderly Approach to the Walls, during
the very time of the Treaty: The Barbarous Murder of Captain Cunningham, after
being taken Prisoner, and Quarter given; the Firing of an Hundred shot at Mr.
Walker, when he went out upon their hanging up a White-Flag, and their
Invitation to a Treaty; their dishonorable breaking of Parol, in detaining Mr.
White and two others, with their Boat, who were sent out upon the Enemies
desire, that they might have leave to come to them; Lastly, The Discovery of
their Oath and Resolutions not to keep Faith with the besieged, and to break
whatever Articles should be made with them; which one of their Party, a
Prisoner in the Town, declared upon mere Conviction of Conscience, and a Horror
of their perfidious Dealings.

11. The falling of a Bomb, designed for Destruction, but by the direction of
Providence, lighting in such a Place, where by tearing open the Ground, a great
many Sacks of Meal were discovered, which there had been buried; upon the sight
of which, the People were Encouraged to make a further search in the Back-sides
and Yards, and found as much Provision as served to Supply the Garrison for a
whole Month. The Error of the Enemies Bombardeir, in casting a great Bomb
beyond the Walls, which falling into a Mine, where the Enemy were busy at
work, destroyed several of their own Men, and utterly frustrated that Design.

12. The many bold and successful Sallies made by a mingled Company of fresh,
untrain'd, unexperienced Men, against an Army of Twenty Thousand well
Disciplined, well Armed, well Mounted Soldiers, animated with their
uninterrupted Proceedings, and confident of Reducing that poor neglected Place,
by Storming or Starving; whereof you may see some Instances in Mr. Walkers
Account of the Siege of London Derry, page 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 33, 38. And
which is very admirable, in all these Rencounters, and during the whole Siege,
there were not above Eighty Men of the Garrison cut off, while between Eight
and Nine Thousand of the besiegers fell and perished.

13. The Proclamation set out by the Late King James, inviting all Protestants
to return to their Dwellings, and remain under his Protection, had an Effect
contrary to his intent, and helped to keep Londonderry from falling into his
Hands. For taking hold on this occasion, above Ten Thousand Protestants, of the
most infirm, and most unserviceable (who yet had Mouths and Bellies) went out
of the Garrison, and by that means the Provisions lasted the longer.

14. The barbarous and most inhumane driving the Protestants before the Walls
of Londonderry, is not only remarkable, by their Dismission and their Escape
from the Guns of the Town, which fired upon them; but that in their retreat,
the Governor handsomely and undiscerned, shuffled in among them above eight
Hundred poor Protestants, Women, Children, and unserviceable Men, which in a
few days must have perished in the Streets.

15. The wonderful and supernatural Courage of the very Women in the Town, who
showing no token of Fear or Dismay, appeared upon the Walls, upon every
approach of the Enemy, regardless of the Bullets flying about them, running to
and fro to furnish the Soldiers with Powder, and bringing Stones to supply
them toward their better Resistance.

16. Nay, even Famine and Sickness contributed to the Preservation of the
Place. For had it not pleased God (the Disposer of Life and Death) to take out
of the World seven or eight Thousand of the besieged by such ways; the whole
Number must inevitably have perished by want, or submit to the Arbitrary Terms
of faithless and merciless Men.

Lastly, The most opportune Relief brought to them at the very pinch of
Extremity, when they only reckoned upon two Days Life, and had only Nine lean
Horses left, and among them all, but one Pint of Meal to each Man, and of Seven
Thousand Five Hundred Regimented Men, only Four Thousand Three Hundred
remaining; whereof at least one fourth Part was rendered unserviceable. The
wonderful breaking or passing the Boom (which the Enemy had laid cross the
River) by the Skill and Valor of Capt. Michaiah Browning, who, under God,
saved Londonderry, by the loss of himself. Had these things been effected
sooner, men would have been too apt to boast of themselves, to ascribe their
Deliverance to the Strength, Conduct, and Courage of their Relievers: Whereas
now it is undeniably Evident, that God Almighty condescended to watch over that
poor City, and to Rescue that Remnant of Protestants, from utter Destruction,
when they were not capable to help themselves. He only did it then, and He
would not do it sooner.

LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1689.


