Observations upon the Constitution of the Company of the BANK of ENGLAND, with
a Narrative of some of their late Proceedings.
THIS Company might be of continuance to Posterity, and of very great use and
benefit to the Kingdom and Government, were it settled upon just and equal
Foundations, fenced by Impartial Bylaws; but being Founded in Division without
alteration, it will soon resolve into a Faction for Private Advantage, and
consequently not of long duration, to the Prejudice of the Nation, whose
Benefit will thereby be at an end; for as Union is the Life of Government, so
Division is Mortal to it.

The Company, according to their Printed List, consists of above 1200 Members.

Instead of making Virtue and Merit the Qualifications for Employment, of which
the Community are the best Judges, these 1200 are divided by their Stocks under
five several Qualifications (to wit) those of 4000. 3000. 2000. 500. and under
500 Stock.

Out of the First, which is in Number about Fifty, the Choice of the Governor
is confined.

Out of the Second, which is in Number about Sixteen, the Deputy may be chosen,
but is not capable of Election thereunto under 3000 l. Stock.

Out of the Third, which is in Number about 100, may be chose 24 Directors, who
being added to the Governor and Deputy, is called the Court of Directors, in
whom Thirteen being a Quorum, is the sole Management of all the Concerns of the
Company; and having engrossed to themselves the Choice of all Officers, with
their Rewards of Sallaries, do thereby render so small a Number subject to the
Temptation of Corruption.

This Court meets once a Week, and then chooses a Sub-Committee of Five out of
themselves for the Week following, Three thereof being the Quorum.

The Fourth Qualification, which is in Number about 600, they being joined to
the three first Qualifications, are called a General Court, and allowed Votes
in the Choice of Governor, Deputy, and Directors, and colourably to give
Sanction to what else the Directors please to bring before them; which
Privilege to the 600 signifies little, in that the three first Qualifications
consisting of above 150, holding altogether, as chiefly concerned, and being
diligent in their Appearance; this together with their Authority from having
the disposing of Places of Profit, will be always an over-balance for the rest;
for many of the 600 thinking little better of themselves than bystanders, will
be careless in appearing at General Courts.

The Fifth Qualification, to the Number of near 450, are disqualified so much
as to any Vote in that called the General Court, but yet qualified and made
liable according to their Stocks for the Debts and Damages of the Company,
contracted by Mismanagement or otherwise, which seems to be against Common
Justice and Equity, that they should be made liable to Actions for Debts, which
they could not have any hand in contracting.

Thus of above 1200 Members, there are by the present Practice no more than
about 150 made capable of any Trust in the Management of 2400000 l. or more,
there being about 450 Members disabled as to Voting in the General Court, to
the end to Engross the Management of all into a few Hands, for their Particular
Advantage.

The Directors were pleased to call a General Court to choose a Committee to
prepare Bylaws, which was composed of both Parties (i. e.) of the 150 and 600,
for under these Denominations I understand all having Votes in the Company.

Some of the first were very troublesome in the Committee, as biased in the
promoting the Private Interest of the Directors, telling the Committee, they
must not displease them, and refusing to be satisfied except they could have
their Wills in behalf of the Directors (as in opposing the Yearly falling off
of Eight Directors) which spent four or five days in Debating, Voting, and, as
was thought, the Settling thereof, before some would acquiesce; endeavoring in
that time by Private Solicitations to make a Party against Falling off, and
never gave over their struggle about it, till One in behalf of the Directors
undertaking to answer all the Reasons for Falling off, was after he had done,
told by a Member of the greatest Authority in the Committee, that he had not
answered any one of the Reasons; that then they were Publicly silent, but ever
after labored Privately the obtaining their Ends by the General Court, when
the Matter should come to them for Confirmation.

A General Court was summoned for Confirmation of the Bylaws; but before the
entering upon the Work of the Day, it was moved, That the Court might consist of
all their Members, as well of those under 500 Stock, as above, and that for
these Reasons.

First, because all and every Subscriber and Contributor is by Act of
Parliament Incorporated by the Name of Governor and Company of the Bank of
England, and that who the Parliament had made Free, the Court could not
Disfranchise.

Secondly, because the Act of Parliament makes all and every Subscriber and
Contributor liable to the Debts and Damages of the Company, which is not to be
supposed the Parliament intended by such as they thought good to Disfranchise;
for an Act making those liable to Debts that could not have any hand in
contracting them, seems to be against common Justice and Equity, which cannot
be imagined the Parliament would be guilty of.

Against these Reasons, the King's Commission and Charter were urged, and that
they had the Opinion of Council for them in it. To which, with all due Respect
to the King's Charter, etc. it was replied, That the King in his Laws speaks
the Wisdom of the Nation, and by his Charters the Dictates of those that sue
for them, which may be Selfish, for Private Interest; and therefore desired
that Council might be Publicly heard; for when Subjects have published Acts
for their Guides, they have no reason to forsake them for unpublished and
subsequent Charters, etc. But the Motion for making the General Court to
consist of all their Members, and hearing Council upon it, was not hearkened
unto; however I suppose this is sufficient in Answer to their alleged Charter,
etc. For though the Act, page 344. gives the King Power by his Patent to
appoint Circumstantial Rules, instancing, as an Example, for Transferring and
Assigning the Interest of Particular Persons, yet it is observable, that the
Incorporating Clause in page 344. as well as the Clause relating thereunto in
page 350 and 351. follows the Clause for Circumstantial Rules, and do not give
the King Power of destroying Essentials, as in Disfranchising those the Statute
has made Free.

The By-Law, making it unlawful for the Governor or Deputy to continue above
two Years successively, had not the least Opposition in the Committee, nor was
ever spoke against by any one Member thereof; but because that in some measure
did disagree with the not falling off of Eight Directors, in that if the
Governor and Deputy fall off in two Years, why not eight Directors yearly? The
General Court was prepared (though never mentioned before) to except against
that By-Law, when it should be made use of as a President for the other.

The great Industry of the Directors Friends in the Committee for preventing
the Law for falling off, and after their not prevailing therein, their getting
it rejected by the General Court, makes it necessary for the Vindication of the
Committee, to Publish the Reasons moving them to do what they did, and to leave
the Judgment thereof to all unbyassed Persons. Which Reasons are as follows:
First, Because it is the undoubted Interest of the Company, to make as many of
their Members as they can qualified for the Service of the Corporation, and not
be confined to a few. Secondly, Because it will beget an Emulation in the
Directors to signalize their Serviceableness to the Company, when their
Continuance will depend thereupon. Thirdly, Because should the Directors agree
together to Vote for each other, and engage their Friends to do the same, they
may in a little time make the Directorship an Office for Life, and then think
themselves the Company's Masters, as being the only Persons necessary for their
Service, and consequently expect unreasonable Rewards, as one of them in
Coffee-Houses began betimes to express himself therein. Fourthly, Because
without some such Method as this for changing the Directors by a Rotation,
their Friends may be apt to tell you, you cannot lay them aside without
ungratefully Affronting them, as perhaps they will miscall it. Fifthly, Because
it will probably preserve in the Directors a due Respect to the Community, and
prevent their Lording it over their Fellow Members, of which they have already
given reason to be Jealous; for when upon their Dissatisfaction the Committee
did one day Assemble on purpose to hear their Exceptions to what was then
before them; and when the Committee was prepared to receive the Directors with
all Respect, they broke up and went away before their usual time, and that
without the least Excuse for such their scornful Disappointment, as if the
Committee were their Vassals, and owed all their time to them; and one of them
assumes in Print an Addition, in no kind belonging to him otherwise than as
presuming a perpetual Directorship will give him a Right thereunto.


During the several days Debate about falling off, it was by the Directors
Friends insisted upon,

First, That it was against their Liberty, to restrain them in their Election,
though they know the Constitution is a Restraint of 5/6 Parts, confining them
in their Choice of their chief Officers to less than Part, of which had they
considered, they could not have made this Complaint: Besides, those that know
any thing of Government, know that nothing is more ordinary than such
Rotations; and the same is also practiced by our East India and African
Companies.

Secondly, That the Committee was not to displease the Directors, telling them
sometimes, that they were angry with the Proceedings of the Committee, as if
they had been only the Directors Journey-Men, not at Liberty to act their
Conscience in behalf of above 1200 Members, rather than the particular Private
Interest of 24 Directors: But I do not think they were all guilty of this
Bandying, but that it proceeded mainly from those of lest Merit, as being
Jealous of their own Deserts.

The foregoing Reasons were offered to the General Court, which after some
Opposition by the Directors Friends, as not coming to them by Order of the
Committee, were read, and without taking any of them into Debate, the Directors
(contrary to common Equity) not withdrawing in a Matter concerning themselves
(though demanded) their Presence had that Influence, even upon those who
applauded the Reasons whilst reading, that when put to the Vote, whether the
By-Law for Yearly falling off of eight Directors should be rejected, they durst
not, or at least thought it not Prudence so far to offend the Directors, as to
give their Vote in the Negative; and according to the present Practice, the
Directors being in no danger of change, and having it in their Power to
gratify their Creatures by Places and Sallaries, will be always able to carry
in the General Court whatever they please; and prevent the making any Bylaws,
though never so Advantageous for the Public, if Prejudicial to their Private
Interest. But I would not be understood by any thing here said, to Reflect upon
the Directors in general; for it must be confessed, that some of them are
Persons of very great Worth, and of more Honorable Principles, than to be
guilty of the Selfish Complaints the Committee was forced to encounter.

And now upon the whole, whether this Constitution excluding for Private Ends
near 450 Members all manner of share in the Government, and yet make them
liable to the Debts and Damages of the Company, which (of above 1200 Members)
renders all save about 150 incapable of any Trust; which gives the sole
Management of 2400000 l. or more, and the choice of Officers, with their
Sallaries, to the Court of Directors, ought not to be altered? As also whether
the Constitution is more equal and just than when restrained, ought not to be
laid open to every Subscriber and Contributor, according to Act of Parliament,
without other Qualifications than Virtue and Merit, leaving the Judgment
thereof to the Community, who are generally the most Impartial Judges, as
appears by the City's Elections, which never or rarely failed of a Virtuous
Choice, when Arbitrary and Tyrannical Designs and Arts do not interpose. For
though Substance may be Security to Private Creditors, nothing less than
Integrity, Honesty, and Self-denial can be such to Government, and the true
Interest of a Community. Wit and Sense are necessary Qualifications in the
Management of Humane Affairs, but without Honesty they are the more dangerous
and mischievous.

I believe this Constitution, as it is now settled, is an Original not beholding
to any President whatsoever. And thus I leave all to the Judgment of the
Reader, and those whom it may concern, whether any have Reason to value
themselves upon being the Projectors of a Constitution so unjust in reference
to near 450, and unequal to above 5/6 Parts of the whole Body, or no.

FINIS.

