THE COMPLAINT OF English Subjects, Delivered in Two Parts.

First Part, Is the Complaint, of the Poor, Middle, and Meanest sorts of
Subjects, concerning their Bodily Assistance.

Second Part, Is the true Christians Complaint, against Vice, and Wickedness,
for the good of their Soul's health.

ALSO, Werein is set forth, the Late prodigious Growth, of Atheism, Errors, and
Vice: With a Call to Repentance.

As also, How needful it is, in these Times, for every one of us, first of all,
to look into our own Hearts, and endeavor to amend what is their amiss.

And Lastly, A Brief Discourse, concerning our Late Unfruitful, and Cold
Summers: As also, what is thought to be the real Causes of it, by way of
Opposition, to the Opinion of Astrologers.

By Richard Newnam of Tiverton in Devonshire.

Prove. 30.14. There is a Generation, whose Teeth are as Swords, and their
Jan-teeth as Knives, to devour the Poor from off the Earth, and the Needy from
among Men.

Prove. 31.9. Open thy Mouth, judge Righteously, and plead the Cause of the
Poor, and the Needy.

Prove. 20.28. Mercy and Truth, [preserve] the King; and his Throne is upholden
by Mercy.

Ecclesiastes 4.1, 2, 3. Eccles. 5.8. Come see, and Read, and ponder well,
behold,
I Will show you Dross, that is mixed with pure Gold;
See that with care, this Gold, from dross, you sever,
Do, as I say, and you (may) live for ever.
London Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1700.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here undertaken the doing of that, which was the Duty of some one, or
other, that is much more Eminent, and better Learned, than I am: For mean was
my Education, and Scholar I am none, farther than the English Tongue, and that
I understand but Imperfectly. And therefore, through weakness I may err, in
many of my Expressions, but (however) I hope the most Learned, and the most
Ingenious, will have so much respect for me, as to deal with me, in the
Examination of my following Discourses, as the upright Judge does, in the
Examination of Witnesses, who regards (more) the Truth of their Evidences,
than the manner of their Dialect, when spoken but with a homebred Tongue: For
Truth, is Truth still, as well that which is spoken in a plain Dialect, and
homely Speech, as that which is spoken in the most highest Rhetoric, (or) most
sweetest Eloquence. It is only Plain Truth, and Naked Truth, that I now intend
to speak; and only such Truth, as has in it, true Honesty, true Christianity,
and true Loyalty.

Thus refering to your Judgments, and Censures, these, and all other of these,
my following Discourses or Sayings, with all humble Submission, and true
Devotion, subscribe my self, as really I am, obedient to my Superiors, truly
Loyal to my King, and a Well-wisher to my Country, whilst I am Yours

Richard Newnam.

THE Epistle DEDICATORY.
To His Most Gracious Majesty, William the Third, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; And also, to the most Honorable
Parliament these I most humbly dedicate.
AND now with all humble Submission, say, what I have here done, I think is but
my [Duty] so to do; for the strict Ties (of the Oaths) of Allegiance and
Supremacy, requires me (not to conceal) any thing that may prove detrimental to
my King and Country. Your Majesty is much abused, the Country most grievously
injured, and oppressed; their Trade is merely lost, and in their Estates and
Minds they are much decayed; and this at last (must needs) be highly
Detrimental, both to Your most Gracious Majesty, and the most Honorable
Parliament, and to all others, that are Your Majesty's true Loyal Subjects. And
therefore, however, so illy, or foolishly, I have either managed, or worded,
this my following Treatise, yet nevertheless, I hope, Your Greatness, will be
pleased to accept of my Good Will, as these are intended by me, no otherwise,
than for the Advantage, Honor and Safety, of Your most Gracious Majesty; as
also, for the general Good of all Your Majesty's faithful Subjects, who I fear,
are now much more liable to the malice of Enemies, than otherwise Your Royal
Self, or they could ever have been, had not such men, as I have herein
described, done, from time to time, such things, as they always have done, yet
nevertheless, by the Power of the Almighty God, and Your Assistance, it is yet
an easy matter, to amend what is amiss, and thereby wholly put a stop to all
the Designs of Your Enemies, which God by his infinite Power, with Your means,
grant it to be done, is the earnest Prayer of him, who is Your Majesty's true
Loyal Subject, and the Honorable Parliaments devoted Servant,

RICHARD NEWNAM.

AND now before I proceed on the main of my Discourse, by way of Introduction,
I shall give you a brief Account of the Heads of all my following Discourses.

And first of all, herein is set forth the Great Abuses, that of late has been
done, and still is done, both to Your Majesty and the Country, by means of the
undue Execution, of Your Majesty's and the late Parliaments several Acts, made
for the raising of the several Sums of money, from time to time, on the several
Lands and Stocks, of all Your Majesty's Subjects within this our Nation.

2dly, The unspeakable Losses and Damages, that of late has, and still does,
lie on our whole Nation, by means of the most Wicked Actions of some men, who
in the time of the Revolution of our late Coin, made even as it were a mere
Prey, on all Your Majesty's good and faithful Subjects, and thereby made
themselves extremely Rich, and our Nation in general very Poor. And also,
herein is set forth, by what means they accomplished their wicked Designs, as
also, how they Truckt, Bartered, Changed, Sold and Disposed, the greatest part
of it, and where they lodged it at last.

3dly, How all manner of Trading is decayed, and even as it were merely come to
nothing; and all this is mostly occasioned, in and by the means, of the several
Losses and Damages, which all sorts of honest Tradesmen, of the middle and
meaner sorts of them, have received in and by the Revolution of the late Coin,
which has ever since put them to great streights, through want of money, so as
that by means thereof, they are now many Thousands of them, throughout England,
for ever made incapable of a comfortable Living here on Earth, except some
speedy Course be taken for their Relief.

4thly, How sorely and grievously the Taxes of Births, and Burials, do gaul and
pinch, the poor and meanest sorts of Your Majesty's good Subjects. But on the
contrary, herein is set forth, how desirable a thing it is, for the Rich and
great Ones of our Nation, to have the opportunity to pay Birth-Taxes: And also,
for Death-Taxes, amongst them, how then it is in their own power to make
themselves no losers, by any such Taxes, as shall at any time hereafter become
due from they, or any of them.

5thly, What a most wicked Trade is now of late sprung up, and used amongst
some Evil-minded men, who Buy and Sell all sorts of Corn, in and by such
Clandestine ways and means, as that thereby, they will always create a Dearth,
on all sorts of Grain in the midst of the greatest Plenty; and this to the
Poor, is now a present Sorrow added to their former Affliction.

6thly, That notwithstanding all those hard and dear times, that of late has
been, and now is, yet all this does not stop or turn the Hearts of our Mobb or
Vagabond sturdy Poor, who are now become more bold, impudent, profane, and
wicked, than ever yet before: Also, some Reasons are showed why they are so
now, more than heretofore in times past.

7thly, How all my several Discourses; are to my self all known Truths, by true
Information given me, and by experience tried, and by way of Observation made
on men's Actions, here with us in our County of Devon. Also, herein is set forth
a short Comment on our late and unfruitful Cold Summers, which we have had for
some considerable time past, Year after Year; for which Causes some
Astrologers, pretend to show the true Reasons of it: But by my self, their
Reasons for that are denied, and my own Reasons in opposition to theirs, are in
my following Discourses inserted.

8thly, I have contracted, the sum of all my several Discourses, in a few plain
low style English Verses, whose Sound and Dress, are easy, plain and simple:
but without Compounds, of any Fraud, or Flattery; and so I most humbly offer
them, hoping they may be rightly understood, and justly applied, as they are by
me (Truly) Loyally, and Innocently, set forth for the Good of all Men, here in
o^^ Nation.

The Complaints of the poor, middle, and meanest sorts of English Subjects, etc.
And now may it Please Your Most Gracious Majesty, and the Honorable
Parliament:
THese had been long since presented unto your Greatness, had I not been from
time to time continually prevented, by being much Exercised with many Troubles,
which of late Years I have labored hard under them; which Troubles were
brought on me, partly through the means of these our late hard times, as also
by a mixture of some other Calamities, which the Hand of Providence was pleased
to cast upon me. And though I have good reason to complain, as to my own
particular part, yet it is not my own Cause, that I take on me now to vindicate;
but the Causes of many others, whose conditions are far more deplorable than
mine. But however, as my self am a great Sufferer, therefore I cannot otherwise
but commiserate the conditions of such, as are far greater Sufferers than I now
am: But should this long continue, then it is much to be doubted, that at last,
we may be all Sufferers alike; for the prevention of which I have taken upon
me, after much delay of time, to offer you these, which had been more fit to
have been presented long ago. But besides these my troubles, before mentioned,
I must ingeniously confess, that I have delayed the doing of it mostly, because
hitherto, until now, I had always on my Spirit a continual awe and dread, which
made me cast up within my Breast many doubts, fearing lest through weakness, or
ignorance, I should herein offend so great Authority, as I acknowledge Your
most Gracious Majesty and the Parliament are: For when I considered with my
self on the greatness of your Power and Wisdom, as also, on my own mean
condition, and weak capacity, it did always make me dread the thoughts of doing
of it. And thus under this great fear, I have delayed much time; and yet, I
could never avoid my having much Contemplation about it; for many and often
have been the times, that I have controverted in my own thoughts on the
Convenience, and Unconveniencies of this Work, until at last I came to this
Resolve; first with my Heart and Tongue, to commit my works unto God; and next,
with my Hands and Pen, I would offer them to the Judgments of Men: And I was
encouraged so to do; after I had well considered that saying of Solomon, in
Chapter 16 of Proverbs, verse. 3. it is there said, Commit thy Works unto the
Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. In hopes of which I further say;

Great Sirs, think it not strange, that so mean a Person as I am, should take
upon me to write unto you in this way and manner; for no Man can do any thing
but by permission, or instigation; It is God that permits me, and the Spirit
of Truth that justifies me to say, That if ever there were a time to speak in
due season for England's Good, I think now is the time; And it may be high
time, yet hope not past time. Though great may be the Troubles of our Land,
because great are the Sins of our Nation, and most grievous are the Burdens
that do now lie on the poor, middle, and meanest sorts of Your Majesty's
faithful and true loyal Subjects, by means of some unworthy Men, I mean some of
the late and now present Assessors and Commissioners, who have abused that most
noble and honorable Trust put in them, and conferred upon them by Your Most
Gracious Majesty, and the late Parliament; and instead of performing that
Trust, by a just and due Execution of Your Just Laws, they have even as it were
by mere Violence, oppressed Your middle and meanest sorts of Subjects; and
instead of doing Justice to all Men, have eased themselves, and have laid the
Burden on such as could not, nor cannot bear it, to the utter Ruin of many
Thousands throughout England: And also, have thereby lessened Your Majesty's
Revenues from time to to time, I believe, at least, some Millions of Money,
which might have been justly risen to Your Majesty's use, barely and only on
the several Taxes of Four Shillings and Three Shillings the Pound on Lands and
Stocks, if the Rich had but from time to time paid proportionably to their
Abilities, as they always have from time to time compelled Your Majesty's poor,
middle, and meaner sorts of Subjects to do.

And I do aver it for a Truth, that in the Town of Tiverton in Devonshire, such
Matter s as aforesaid, said, were, and always are, so unjustly carried: And
there are many Men in that Place, that then were, and now are, worth some
Thousands of Pounds in their Stocks, particularly each Man of them; and yet
then were, and now are rated but for Two hundred Pound Stock each particular
Man. And also, there are in our said Town of Tiverton aforesaid, some Men, that
then were, and now are worth in stock Ten thousand Pound each Man; And some
that are reported to be worth in Stock twenty thousand pound each man, and yet
were not, nor are not rated for more than a few hundred pounds Stock each man,
of the Richest sort of them, as I am credibly informed. And also, in their
Lands, all of them were so undervalued, as that they were, and now are Rated no
higher for them, proportionably, then they were rated for their Stocks; And
yet, at the same time, they Rated the several parcels of the Lands and
Tenements of Your Majesty's middle, and meaner sort of Subjects, to the full
height and value of all, or most of them. And this sore and grievous
Oppression, is not only used and still practiced in Tiverton in Devonshire, but
as far as I can understand, is continually used and practiced all England over:
and such Evil Doings can never be well-pleasing in the Eyes of God, or in the
sight of good Men; for to do Justly, and to love Mercy, is but our Duty, with
humble submission, in obedience to the Laws of God. And it is the duty of every
Man so to do, according to that estate or degree which he is placed in, here in
this World; the truth of which is verified by the mouth of the Prophet Micha,
as you may read it in Chap. 6. verse. 8. He there says, He has showed thee, O
Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do Justly,
and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And also, agreeable to this
is that most excellent Command of our most great Lord and Master, our Savior
Jesus Christ, as we may read it in the 7th Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel,
verse. 12. these his own Words, Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the
Prophets. And thus from Christ's own Words, we may see that the doing of
Justice to our Neighbor, and upright dealing between Man and Man, is highly
necessary toward every man's Salvation.

But here a Query does necessarily arise; and the poor, middle, and meanest
sorts of Your Majesty's true Loyal Subjects may say, Have those Men, whom we
complain against, done by us as they would be done unto, had their Cause been
ours?

I say No: and consequently I say again, they have not showed themselves like
true Christians, nor can I think such Men to be true Protestants, or true Loyal
Subjects: And though they have said, and do say, that they will hazard their
Lives and all that they are worth, for the sake of Your Majesty, and the
Protestant Religion; yet I can not believe them: for can any Man serve God and
Mammon all at one time? or can such Men be true Protestants, that will do such
vild and abominable things, which the very Heathens abhor? or can such Men be
truly Loyal to the King, when at the same time they do as it were merely rob
him of his just Revenues. And then by their unjust dealings, to save their own
Cash, do even as it were merely undermine Your Most Gracious Majesty, (out of
the love of many) of your middle, and meaner sorts of Subjects, who otherwise
in Your Defense, and by Your Majesty's Command, and the most Honorable
Parliaments assistance, would bravely Brannish the Sword over the Heads of all
Your Enemies, and stoutly fight the Battle in and for Your Majesty's defense,
if any farther occasion should be for it, as already they have done; for were
not Your Majesty's Armies of late mostly filled up by and with Your middle, and
meaner sorts of Subjects? And was it not they that stood the violent Shocks of
Your Majesty's Enemies? And again they will stand it for you, except in the
mean time too much Poverty make them weak handed, or unwilling. And if their be
not a speedy stop put to the current of such Actions, as I have here mentioned,
then it is much to be feared that an Enemy in process of time may take advantage
of it; and then, if occasion should be for it, to serve Your again, Your
Majesty may find too many of Your poor, middle, and meaner sorts of true Loyal
Subjects, feeble-hearted, and weak-handed, and not capable to do Your Majesty
that service, which otherwise they would do You.

And thus I have, in some measure, truly and plainly, discovered to Your
Greatness, England's present Malady: But the Remedy, with all numble
submission, I leave to the great Understandings and Care of Your Most Gracious
Majesty and the present Parliament: And now consequently cannot otherwise but
say as follows.

He that speaks plain, has in his Heart no guile,
But he is most false, that hates when he does smile:
Some such perfidious Souls on Earth there be,
But such a Soul shall not be found in me.
[Prov. 14.25, 28, 34. Prove. 20.28.] But, Secondly; There are several other
Great, and Grievous Crimes, and other Wicked Actions, that of late were, and
now are continually committed, done, and suffered to be done amongst us, some
of them are too notoriously known, and yet go unpunished; and others of them
not so publicly known, and therefore such Offenders think themselves out of
all danger of punishment: But however, it may be necessary to lay open all
these Crimes and Actions to more public view, than yet perhaps they have been
known; and that because it may be (in some measure) a means to abate their
courage, and to stop them from running on in a full Carere of other Wickedness,
which such Men will be always doing in and by, some way or other. Besides, it
is some satisfaction to the loser, to know where his Goods are, and who the
Thief is, although it be past all possibility of having them again, yet if such
Offenders, after they are known, can be brought to condign punishment,
according to their several deserts, then 'twill be for the better. But however,
to set forth all their Actions in perfect Colors, as they really are, I am at
a loss, for my capacity cannot fathom the bottom of them; I shall want Words to
express them, or if by my capacity I could paint them out to the Life, yet I
think it not convenient to do it now, because I want both time and room: For my
design now is to offer to Your Majesty and the Parliament but a few Sheets; but
if I should undertake to set forth all those several Crimes, and other wicked
Actions in particulars, then I must make this my Work swell to a considerable
Volume.

And now finding that 'twill be too tedious to persist on all the particulars
of such Crimes, and other wicked Actions, therefore I will mostly proceed on,
and endeavor to set forth the generals of such horrid Crimes, and other wicked
Actions, as aforesaid. And the first Crime that I shall endeavor to set forth,
shall be the most horrid Frauds, Cheats, and Perjuries, that too many of our
Nation were guilty of, in the time of the Revolution of our late Coin: And
also, shall endeavor to set forth the manner and way, how they acted their
Frauds, Cheats, and Perjuries, and the several ways and means they then took
for the accomplishing of them; as also, where they lodged all their Frauds,
Cheats, and Perjuries at last.

And now for the better Explanation of it, first of all, Metaphorically I say;
This devilish Trade had its first Rise and Growth from Clippers, and False
Coiners of Money, who laid their Heads together, and consulted how they might
have a trade: And then immediately up started a subtle Fellow amongst them,
and said, Gentlemen, the People say that no manner of cracked Money will pass
any longer: But if you will be ruled by me, we will make it all pass one way or
other. But then says another of the Company, How can we make all manner of
cracked Money pass, for some is cracked almost through; and such cracked Money
as that cannot be made to pass. But then again says that cunning subtle Fellow
that first started the Question; Pray Sir, hear me; Does not all manner of
Clipped Money pass without any objection made against it, though never so small?
And there is a great deal of good broad Money that is but a little cracked, and
some of it not quite to the Ring: and what if it be cracked home to the Ring,
all such Money we can Clip, and afterward it will pass currently: And then all
such Money as is deeply cracked, we can melt down, and new Coin it and Clip it
afterward. But then presently up started an expert false Coiner, and said,
What need we give our selves double trouble? Why, do ye think that a piece of
Money is not to be new made, in imitation of old clipped Money? No, Sir, (says
the Clipper) I beg your Pardon, (says the False Coiner) He Is a bad Artist to
his Trade that cannot do that. Then replied some other of the Clippers; I
believe, Sir, you your self cannot do it. Then the False Coiner replied again,
Sirs, I will warrant to do it artificially and completely; and in the doing of
it, I will not use six pennyworth of Silver in a Shilling, and but little more
than nine pennyworth in Half a Crown, and yet he shall be a good Artist that
discovers it; and if it do look somewhat courser in the Eye of an Artist, the
Country will not take notice of it: But on the whole, at such a rate as I have
told you, I will make all such Money passable, without objection. Nay, (said
the whole Company) if you can do so, our Business is done. Then says that False
Coiner, Gentlemen, rest your selves contented in this matter; by me you shall
see it done, and therefore let us now talk no more about it. Come, drink about,
for our Trade will now and than afford us a Glass of Sack. Ay, (says another of
the company) and a Rope to boot for some of us, if we have not the more care
on it. Tush, (says another of the same Company) we must all venture that. And so
with a merry Fit of Laughter amongst them, they all cast off the thoughts of
Hanging for it: And thus they all agreed. And then by their Maker, they all
swore Fidelity to one another; and then (shaking each other by the Hand) they
all unanimously promised each other, never to discover one the other, if any of
them were taken in the Fact. And so unanimously they went on with their Trade,
some to Clipping, and some to False Coining; the latter of which it is supposed
there was abundance of it made, and in a littie time, such sorts of Money
became very plenty, and it was scattered all England over in great abundance;
and for a short time it procured a very quick, brisk and vigorous Trade: But
note, Trading was then encouraged, only to put off this small Money, which was
then the only current running Money in our Nation. And it is supposed by some,
that for the love of putting off such sorts of small Money, brought Guinnea's
to so high a Price; for there came down here into the Country pretended
Merchants, and gathered up all the Guinea's that they could get, and exchanged
changed such Small Moneys for them: And also, 'twas said, that then at that
time, there were many Men with Seventy Pounds of Broad Money each particular
Man, bought One Hundred Pounds of this then Small current Money, which yielded
the then Buyers the full value of One Hundred Pound of Lawful Money of England:
And thus those Money-Buyers were at that rate supplied, as often as they then
had occasion for it. And was not this a cursed Trade for such Men to use, that
have sworn to be true both to the King and County, and that profess themselves
to be both Loyal Men, and Protestants?

But now again, before I can proceed any farther, I must Answer a Question,
which seemingly sounds in my Ear, and methinks I hear some say, Where could
those Clippers have all those vast and great Sums of Money to Clip; all of i^
could never be their own, and therefore it must be that they were supplied by
some great Monyed-Men?

To this I Answer: Undoubtedly they were so supplied by many of our great Money
Masters, who were very Rich; or such as have always to command vast and large
Sums of Money, as great Bankers, great Usurers, great Merchants, and some other
great Receivers of Money; and also some great Rich Tradesmen of other
Callings: For all these sorts of Men have always by them, or at their commands,
great and large Sums of Money. And also, they all of them, had a more
commodious way, and better opportunities to put off all such Clipped and False
Coined Money, than any other sorts of men could have had, if there then had
been any other sorts of Men that then would have taken on them the like
Devilish Trade. But now upon the whole, I say, I am apt to believe, that many
of those Clippers, and some of those False Coiners, that have been justly
executed for such Facts, were but the hired Servants of some such Men, as are
before mentioned, yet trusty Servants to such Masters; for they would rather
dye with a Lie in their Mouths, than confess who set them on work.

And here I cannot otherwise, but comment on th^^, ^^d say, Great pity it is,
and by all good M^^, undoubtedly, it is much lamented, that we should be so
unhappy to see the Devil and such wicked Men more truly served, (by these their
wicked Servants) than God and our King is served by too many thousands of our
Nation, that outwardly to the World profess much Zeal toward God, and much
Loyalty toward our King; and yet are not in their Hearts so faithfully zealous
toward God, or so loyal toward our King, as those poor Wretches, that so
justly suffered, were to their most wicked Masters; I mean such Rich men, as
aforesaid, and the Devil.

But now again, I seem to hear the sound of a Voice, that does propose to me
this Question, W^o are those Men that have thus wickedly done? What are their
particular Names?

To this Question I now Answer, and say; As for their Names, I do not readily
know all of them; but some of them I think I may know: However, I must at
present most humbly beg Your most Gracious Majesty and the Parliament to excuse
me, though I do not now mention the Names of those Men that have thus done, whom
I may know, and that for this Reason; if I should here name them particularly,
and after that, I should fail of such assistance, (as I now expect) to
withstand such potent Enemies, then I am apt to believe, after such failure,
their Money, which answers all things, will drive my Truth to the Wall with
disdain, when such gross Offenders shall walk the broad Streets in Pomp, with
praise and honor amongst Men; and then it shall pass for truth, as if they
were Innocent, and my self Guilty of accusing them maliciously, and wrongfully.
And by my own experience I can speak it for a truth, That I have known the like
of this, which I now doubt of, done in other Causes; for with my Eyes and Ears
have I seen and heard some Men for large Fees, devoutly Plead for wrong Causes,
and at last, have by their sophistical and crafty Arguments, overthrown Truth;
and therefore I think no Man ought to blame me for endeavoring to be as Wise
as a Serpent, whilst I intend to be as harmless as a Dove.

But methinks I hear another Question asked of me, which is this, Were there no
other sorts of Men concerned in such Frauds and Cheats, as you seemingly lay to
the Charge of some great Brankers, great Usurers, great Merchants, great
Receivers of Money, and some other great Rich Tradesmen?

To this I Answer; I am apt to believe there were then concerned in such Frauds
and Cheats, about such Moneys, as aforesaid, some Men of all sorts of Trades,
Occupations, or Professions, that then had Money, or drove any manner of Trade,
had a snack of the Benefit of it, more or less, some way or other; and so at
last, some sorts of all such great and small Traders on Money, as aforesaid,
agreed altogether to make a clear scrable, or scramble of it, (if I may so call
it,) or more plain, I mean every one of these Traders on Money, both the
Sellers and Buyers of it, every one of them, caught what profit they could out
of it, during the whole time, which they could have for so doing and so at last
amongst them, they have made our Land a poor England to many thousands of Your
Majesty's poor, middle, and meanest sorts of true Loyal Subjects: For by these,
and some other suchlike ways as these are, such (and some other such like vile
Miscreants) have made themselves extraordinary Rich, and also thereby brought
the major part of Your Majesty's middle, and meanest sorts of good Subjects
into great straits and extreme Poverty: And is there no way to remedy this in
time, ever it be too late? Pray, great Sirs, I most humbly beg of You, for
God's sake, and for Your own sakes, now take Compassion on the poor, middle,
and meanest sorts of true Loyal Subjects.

But here an Objection may arise, and it may be said, I cannot think that the
middle, and meanest sorts of People could be such Losers, in and by the
Revolution of our late Coin; for it did not then lie s^ much in their Hands,
but most of it then lay in the Hands and Custodies of Rich Men?

To this I Answer; I acknowledge that most of the late Coin then did, as the
new Coin now does lie mostly in the Hands of Rich Men; and that the poor,
middle, and meanest sorts of People then had, and always consequently must have
the least share of our Coin in their custody; yet that does not any way make
void, or disanul my Assertion: For though the poor, middle, and meanest sorts of
People had then the least share of it, whilst it was passable, yet by the
cunning contrivances of some Rich Men, and also by the Clandestine Ways of some
other such men as I have herein beforementioned, and in some measure
described, they at last, some by one way, and some by other ways, cast almost
the whole Loss and Burden of it on the middle and poorer sort of People in our
Nation.

And now (for the full Proof and better Manifestation of this) I must of
necessity now descend into some Particulars, which I cannot well do at this
time, having (as I have already said) neither time nor room to specify them
in, except I should proceed to make this my Work swell to be a considerable
Volume, which I am not now willing to do, nor perhaps will Your Greatness then
have time nor patience to peruse it: And therefore I must forbear to proceed on
so many particulars as I could offer, and must now cut short my Work, and first
of all answer the last forementioned Objection.

And now in Answer to it, I say; After that such Men (as aforesaid) had
scattered all, or almost of all the such Moneys, as aforesaid; then at a jump
presently they cried it down, and would not take it in any manner of Payment,
or for any manner of Commodity, long before the several Limitations of Your
Majesty's then Proclamation for the taking of Clipped Moneys was expired; and by
that means, the greatest part of such Moneys then lay in the middle and meanest
sorts of Trades-mens Hands, and in the hands of their poor Servants; and also
(much of it) lay in the Hands of some Gentlemen and their Servants; as also in
the hands of Farmers, Just manholders, and the poor Servants under them. And
thus, amongst all sorts of People, such small Money, as aforesaid, was
scattered and then lay in their Hands for a while, until they grew weary of it,
for it was then of no more use to them than Bullion: But then in a little time
after that the Shopkeepers, such as were by trades Grocers, Mercers, Woollen
and Linnen-Drapers, and all other sorts of Dealers, in any other sorts of
Commodities, gave out their Commissions, or Proclamations, by Word of Mouth,
that they would then take all such sorts of small Moneys for Goods, though never
so small; And though no bigger than a Grain of Wheat, was the very words of some
of them, as I was then Creditably informed: And yet nevertheless, they would
then take it for Goods, until such a time was past, which they then limited;
And then presently after that, all sorts of People, both of Cities, Towns,
Villages, Cottages, and all the remote Country-dwellings, hearing of this, were
glad of such an opportunity to put off their Bad Money, and then such
Tradesmen had for a while a swinging Trade indeed, and profit enough by it,
far beyond all manner of good conscionable gain; for they all of them, from one
to the other, then took Eighteen Pence for that Commodity, which at other times
they would willingly have sold for Nine Pence, Ten Pence, or Eleven Pence; and
also took Half a Crown for that Commodity, which at other times they would have
sold for Fifteen Pence, Sixteen Pence, or Seventeen Pence: And by this way some
sorts of People, did then put off their small Money; But the Poor and meanest
sorts of People could not then spare their such Money to buy Commodites with
it; for they Poor, Miserable, and sad Distressed Souls, then wanted it to buy
Bread; and therefore they, (poor Creatures) instead of buying of Commodities,
they were forced to sell their Money; and for their Shilling, each of them
could then have but six pence or seven pence for it, if it were of the smaller
sort; and but eight pence, nine pence, or ten pence for the very largest
Shillings, after the time was over that such Old Money would not pass.

And now I could descend into particulars, had I time and room, to let Your
Most Gracious Majesty and the Parliament know, how many times these poor Souls,
then sold their small and larger sorts of Money from time to time, and over and
over again it did then come round to their Hands, and that by means of such
wicked and clandestine ways, as they the Grocers, Mercers, and other
Money-buyers then did use, only to gratify their own base covetous Desires.
And thus were the Poor then at that time most grievously oppressed; for always,
as often as ever this Money came to their Hands, though round, round and round
again, yet still they the said Poor were then forced to put it off by a losing
way; for then at that time, for every Shilling, they then did twelve or
fourteen pennyworth of Work for it, before they had it. And then again, they
must fell this Shilling for six pence or seven pence, if it were a small
Shilling; and the Half Crowns then yielded them but sixteen pence,
eighteenpence, or twenty pence: And thus the Poor then sold their Money to the
then Money-buyers, which same Money-buyers did then constantly supply those
Searge-makers with Money, who kept those poor People on work; and that in and
by this way and manner, as I shall herein presently endeavor to set forth.

And first of all I say, the Serage-makers by trade, they then, by reason of
the scarcity of Broad Money, were then forced to take Bills instead of Money,
for their Searges; and then they (those Searge-makers) did then exchange such
Bills with the Shopkeepers, as Grocers, Mercers, and other Tradesmen, who did
then supply the Searge-makers with Money; and that in and by this way and
manner, as follows.

When they the Searge-makers, or any of them, had occasion to exchange a Bill,
either of ten pounds, twenty pounds, or thirty pounds value; then the
Searge-maker, went to one of those Grocers, Mercers, or other Tradesmen, and
gives in his Bill present in Hand, to be paid in Twenty, Thirty, or Forty
Shillings a Week, Week after Week, until the full value of his Bill be paid
him: But now note, this Bill so given by the Searg-maker, was then presently
good to the Grocer, Mercer, or any other Tradesman, as any Current ready Money
in their Pocket, though he the said Grocer, Mercer, or any other Tradesman, then
paid the value of this Bill to the Searge-maker, but by Twenty, Thirty, or
Forty Shillings by the Week.

But now again, here lies the mean Query of the matter; In and with what sort
of Coin did those then Mercers, Grocers, or others, then pay the Searge-makers
for their Bills so given to them?

To this I Answer; They the then Grocers, Mercers, or others, did then pay such
Bills to the then Searge-makers all in such Money, as they or any of them then
bought from the Poor, Hourly, Daily and Weekly, which Moneys did not cost they
the said Grocers, Mercers, or other buyers of Money, above eight pence, nine
pence, or ten pence, (the Shilling) and yet, they (the said Grocers, Mercers,
and other such Buyers of Money) had then that little Conscience within
themselves, as to pay back again from time to time, to the Searg-makers in
their Weekly payments, for their Bills, the same Money which they then bought
up, at such cheap Rates, Hourly, Daily and Weekly from the Poor, from time to
time; I say, the same Money, they the said Grocers, Mercers, and other such
then buyers of Money, did then pay it unto the Searg-makers, in its full value,
as it was first coined for; which same Money the then Searg-makers, were forced
then to pay it unto their Poor Laboring Servants also, in its full value, as
it was Coined for, and that because they the then Searg-makers so received it
for their Bills, in their Weekly payments, from those said Grocers, Mercers,
and other such Money-buyers as are before mentioned, in my foregoing Discourses.

But now again, here comes the Tradegy of the matter at last, for 'twas the
Poor Laboring Servants that then were the greatest Losers all the while; for
they Poor Souls, every Week had some of the same Money came round to them
aagain, which Moneys, they aways bought very dear; and yet then were forced
always to fell it very cheap; for then when it circulated round to the said
Grocers, Mercers, and other Shopkeepers hands again, then they would give the
aforesaid Poor for their such Moneys, but barely their old Prices for it, which
was but eight pence, nine pence or ten pence for their Shilling; and thus by
such ways and means, as I have herein described, such Moneys, as aforesaid,
consequently and constantly came round, and round, and round aagain, and again,
to the sore loss and damage of Poor distressed Labors, as I have herein
described, whose Gauled Backs, have yet on them putrified Sores to this very
day, by means of such most grievous Burdens, as were then laid upon them, And
thus by such Clandestine ways and means, as I have herein described, then did
many Rich covetous Cormorants, with their Devilish Wheels of Craft, then break
the Poor to pieces. O most abominable Wretches! that had then in them no more
Charity for their then Poor Starving Fellow Creatures: And are not such Actions
as aforesaid, grand Oppressions, and such Profits and Gains, are they not most
abominable Extortions? or are not such things absolute Grindings of the Faces
of the Poor? And yet notwithstanding all this, such Oppressors and Grinders of
the Faces of the Poor, think themselves safe, because they think within
themselves, that no Law can Reach them to punish them for it; But however the
Just God of Heaven will at last, give them, and all such as them are, their due
Rewards. But yet again, I say, I cannot otherwise but admire at the Impudence
of such vile Miscreants, that have done such things, and yet, at the same time
have then professed themselves to be precise Christians, and true Protestants,
and also devout Loyal Men; But let any Judicious Man, or Men, judge what
Principles such Men then were of, or may now or hereafter be of, as to matters
of Religion; and as to their Loyalty they then were, and low are, and I believe
hereafter will be, pure Subjects indeed, even such as will turn any way, that
either the Wind or Tide, of their own base Interest, will most easily drive
them.

But again, during the whole time of the scarcity of Money amongst such poor
People as aforesaid, yet Corn, and all other necessary Provisions, were then
extreme dear; and therefore how could it be otherwise, but hard Times with such
poor Creatures. O! were not those Times mere Starving Times? yes, they were,
and I believe that then at that time, many Hundreds, if not Thousand,
throughout England, gradually were then nearly Starved to Death; for with my
own Eyes did I then see, in our said Town of Tiverton, in Devonshire, many
Poor, Weak, Languishing Creatures, then walking up and down the Street, and
many of them in a short time after that Dyed, whose Distempers originally, (I
believe) first proceeded from no other Causes than from the want of Necessary
Food; which Food such poor Creatures, whilst alive, could no way have it, for
want of Money: For Charity was then, as it is now, very Cold. But for Corn,
although it was then so very dear, yet there was then enough in our Land, and the
then Corn-sellers could then aford their Corn at reasonable Prices, but they
would not. And thus by the means of some Men's obdurate Hearts in them times,
many were then mearly Starved to Death, in the midst of an indifferent Plenty;
for throughout our Land one where with the other, we have always hitherto had
enough of all sorts of Provision, though not in such great Plenty, as in times
past we have had, and I do heartily wish, that at last our Sins may not bring
on us a Scarcity indeed, Read the whole 5th Chap. of Jeremiah throughout, but
more particularly observe, verses 4.5. and 25.

And therefore, Great Sirs. I most humbly Beseech you, for God's sake, and for
Christian Charity sake, as well as for your own dear sakes now forthwith take
some compassion on the Poor, Middle, and Meanest sorts of true Loyal English
Subjects, who are yet driven to great straits, and many of them now, at this
present time, under great Wants.

But now again, after all the then scattering abroad such (before mentioned)
diminished and corrupted sorts of Coin, you may find by my discussing
Arguments, and by my proposing and answering of Questions, it now seems very
likely, that then at last, a great quantity of that corrupted Coin was again
reduced into the Hands of such Buyers of Money, and other such Tradesmen, as I
have already beforementioned.

And now the next Query that naturally flows from all my former Discourses, I
think must be this; What did those several Shopkeepers, and all those other
petty Buyers of Money then do with such Money (as aforesaid) at last?

To this I Answer; I believe all of them well knew, beforehand, how to put it
off then at that time: And I am apt to believe also, that they (all of them)
then had Commissions from some great Bankers, or great Receivers of Money, or
great Merchants, or great and small Custom-Officers, or some other Officers of
or belonging to the Duty of Excise; or some other great Rich Men, that could
lend great Sums of Money to some other Men to buy up such small Money for them;
for I am sure some of those Men that then bought up great quantities of such
small corrupted Money, were then very poor in themselves, and had then no stock
of Money of their own; and therefore it must be that such poor Villains as then
bought up such great quantities of this then small corrupted Coin, did then buy
it up, to and for the uses of such Rich Men, who would not then appear in such
Actions themselves in Person; but by and with their Money, they did then
appear, and then gave Commissions to such poor Villains to buy up all such
small Moneys as they could get for them. And for the manifestation of the truth
of this, I am apt to believe that there are some Men that can give testimony of
the truth of all that I have here said: But they will not. And again, I say, I
am apt to believe, that there are some other Persons, that will tell the truth
of all that they do know, in, or of such matters, (as aforesaid) if at any time
they are thereto called so to do.

But now upon the whole, I say again, I am apt to believe that such sorts of
great Rich Men, (as aforesaid) had at last amongst them, by some way or other,
all the then such small Moneys, that the Money-buyers, Grocers, Mercers, and
other Shopkeepers, then bought up and so received from time to time: And also,
I am apt to believe that some of those then Money-buyers, and Shopkeepers, did
then put off their such Moneys on very good terms, and with great profit,
especially such of them as could stay for their Money, until the
Money-Merchant's returns could come about: But the then petty Chapmen of the
Money-buyers, and other small Shopkeepers, that could not for bear their
Money, until the great Money-Merchant's returns could come about, such as them,
were the^ forced to put off their such Moneys for smaller profit, and that only
because they could not then stay for their Money, until the said
Money-Merchant's returns could come about.

But now again, methinks I now hear a suppositive Question asked of me, and it
does now seem to sound in my Ears, as if I did now hear some one say to me,
Suppose such Men, as are beforementioned, did then so get in all, or almost of
all the then Moneys, as aforesaid, into their own Hands or Custodies, what
could they then do with it?

To this I Answer; I cannot tell all the ways that they then had for the
putting off such small Moneys at last: But undoubtedly they all of them had
then a way for it, or otherwise they would not then have been so greedy after
it, as they then were in the getting in of it then into their own Hands.

But now upon the whole of this Argument, if I may be permitted to spend my
Thoughts upon it, and speak my own Opinion in and about the whole matter, as I
verily believe it to be; Then I will say, that I believe some of the aforesaid
such Moneys, was then paid into Your Majesty's use for Customs, and some for
Excise, and some for Taxes, and some by way of Lones; and so then at last, some
by one way, and some by other ways, it was all, or almost all of it, lodged in
Your most Gracious Majesty's Exchequer, and there (I believe) was at last found
much to light. But the Perjuries of such Men, as might not then do Your Majesty
and the Country right; they, for ought I know, are lodged in Hell, and there to
abide until the great Day of Judgment, and then may rise again as Witnesses
against them, except (in the mean time) such Men make Restitution for the great
Wrongs they have done, whilst they are here living upon the Earth.

And now to conclude this second part of my Discourse, I cannot otherwise but
say, that amongst all those evil and most pernicious mindedmen,
(beforementioned) and in some measure ^escribed, there was not then amongst
them, as much as one of them, that I do call here by the Name of Your Majesty's
poor, middle, and meanest sorts of true Loyal Subjects, then any way concerned
in these (beforementioned) most horrid and wicked Actions: But they who were
then concerned in such aforesaid wicked Actions, were Men of ^ther Ranks, and
Degrees, and Qualifications in their Minds, as well as in their then such
Actions: And in their Estates, they (many of them) then were, and now are
considerably Rich; though not so very Rich as some in the World are; but I mean
some of them then were, and now are, such a sort of Rich Men, as we poor
Country-Folks here amongst us do call them rich, topping, towering Men; and
such Men as have all of them taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and
they do say, all of them, that they will fight for Your Majesty and the
Protestant Religion, and the good of their Country. But who can believe them?
if those Reasons which I shall here now offer, be but well and duly considered.

And now I say, it is visibly seen, and by their Actions too notoriuosly known,
that such Evilminded Men, as aforesaid, have always had from time to time,
base, wretched, and Self-intrested Hearts; and to save their own Money, they
will do almost any thing in the world; and also, in and by a base,
Hypocritical, Undermining, and Clandestine Way, they will use all manner of
Fraud that their most Wicked Hearts can invent, to get Riches, although at the
same time (in their own Hearts) they must then needs be sensible that such
Actions are the ready ways and means to pull down true Religion, and overthrow
the King, and ruin our Country: And therefore, I say, can any Soul believe,
that such Men, as will for the Love of Money, deceive our King, and ruin our
Country, that they will ever fight for the Protestant Religion, and King, and
Country; no, no, for I am apt to believe that they will rather, every man of
them, forsake the Protestant Religion, and leave our King and Country to the
mercy of an Enemy, than fight for any Religion, King, or Country whatsoever:
And therefore I think it not safe for any one, to put to much Trust in any such
Men, that at the best are but like great Sticks, that are so much rotten, as
that no man may dare venture the weight of his whole Body upon them, unless he
be so careless of himself, as that he does not value a Fall to the Ground by
them. But however, amongst such men, some of them perhaps will fight with a
Thief in the Night, rather than they will lose all their Money; and that only
because such men adore and love their Money, more than they do love God or
Religion, the King or Country; for such men seldom regard any one's good but
their own: Nay, in fine, I say, if all things are but well and duly considered,
such men do not at all, by doing such Actions, truly love themselves. And thus
I end the second part of my Discourse.

But 3dly. There is one other fore Grievance which of late has, and now does
continually damnifie all Your Majesty's Poor, Middle, Meanest sorts of
Subjects; and that is, the loss of Trade, for ever since the time that, that
most cursed Trade of Buying and Selling of Money was first set up, all other
honest Trades have ever since been decaying; But if such vile Miscreants had
then been such good Men, as to have then Employed all their Stocks in a way of
honest Trading, to keep the Poor then on Work, than for ought I know, Trading
might have continued good to this Day; or if they had then at that time, but so
Employed their Wits in making all manner of honest shifts, to keep the Poor on
work, as they then did in studying out all manner of knavish Ways, that ever
their base covetous Hearts could then think on, to make a mere prey on the
Poor, only to gratify their own unsatiable desires, that they then had after
their filthy Lucre, and most unconcionable Gain; Then certainly, their would
never have been such miserable Times as then were and now are to this very day:
For when Men's Actions do please God, then his Blessings do commonly attend such
men's undertakings; But when Men, under pretense of doing all manner of Good, ^o
then all manner of Evil, what then can such Men expect from the Hands of God,
otherwise than his Wrath to follow them, until it has overtaken them. And
therefore, I now advise all such Men as have so done, forth with to repent them
of their Evil doings, and also to make speedy Restitution, in the best way and
manner, that they now can make, lest the Cries of the Poor do at last ascend up
into Heaven, and from thence bring down Vengeance on Earth, and on the Heads of
such Men, as have thus from time to time so oppressed the Poor; for they
certainly, did by their cursed Money-trade destroy all other Trades; And
therefore at their Doors it ought to be laid; though the sad effects of it does
yet still remain on the now living Poor to this very day.

But again, such covetous Rich Men, as aforesaid, did then so act, as if they
had then been wholly bent to bring future Poverty upon our whole Nation, for
they then took all advantage for their own Profit on all sorts of People, but
more especially on the Poor, Middle, and Meanest sorts of People, and that
because they could more easily then make a Prey of them, than of others; and as
if Sorrow had been then on purposs added to their Afflictions. So then those
great Losses came on the Poor, Middle, and Meanest sorts of People, in the very
time of their greatest Need; for Taxes then were very high, and hoar heavy on
them, and then it was in that very nick of time, that those vile Men made their
Market on them, and a Prey of them. And besides all this (sad times) it was
then for the Poor, because then they had not half so much work as they could
do, nor scarce half the worth of their Hire for it when they had done it; for
then most of the Poor of our said Town of Tiverton in Devonshire, wrought by
way of Truck; and instead of Money for Work, they had then most of them only
Commodities, as Kersie, Drugget, Serge, and Linnen-Cloath, or the like of other
Commodities: But then, after they had received such Commodities for their Work,
in leu of Money, then after that they spent much of their time in going abroad
to Sell such Commodities; And then when they had Sold them, many times they had
for them but little more than half the Value of them; and then, with this
little Money they did buy Bread, after the rate of Ten, and Eleven Shillings
the Bushel for Wheat, and Four or Five Shillings the Bushel for Barley.

And now judge you, Great Sirs, were not those ^^es mere Starving times? Yes,
God knows to many poor Souls then found them so, who are now in their Graves;
and hard times it is still, with many of the Poor now living. And therefore, I
now most humbly beseech Your most Gracious Majesty, and the Parliament, to
believe me in what I have here said, for it is the very Truth.

But 4thly. I cannot otherwise but make known to Your Most Gracious Majesty and
the Parliament, this sore Greviance also, and that is, how heavy, and sorely,
the Taxes of Births and Burials, has of late, and now does lie on the Poor:
But as for Persons of Quallity and other Gentlemen, as also (many other Rich
Men) that want Children to Enjoy what they have, it must needs be great comfort
to them, to have the opportunity to pay Birth-Taxes; and if Death-Taxes be at
any time due from any of them, then they can very easily pay it without any
manner of loss to themselves, if they will but observe this rule for it, first
to reckon with themselves how much Money their Death-Taxes will amount to, and
then so much Money as their Death-Taxes come to, they may very well keep back
and save it, out of the Extravagant Expenses of their Funerals; And that way
they will be no Losers at all by their paying to the King Death-Taxes: But for
the Poor so to pay, is to them very grievous, for there are many Thousands in
England that have not the Alms of the Parish, that are in such miserable
Conditions, by means of the late and present hard times, that they have scarce
Swaddling-Cloathes to wrap up their new Born Babes in, when they come into the
World, nor scarce Money to buy Bread for such little Ones, as they had before:
And then some times, it may be that some of those poor little Innocent
Creatures dye merely for want of such Necessary Food, as they should have; And
then their comes both to one time Birth-Money and Death-Money to be paid; and
pay it they must; And this drives such Poor to great streights, for then some
of them are forced to sell some of their Houshold-goods to raise Money to pay
such Taxes? O (sad) it is with them, and beyond my capacity to find Words
suitable to set forth all their Grievances and Troubles, which many Thousands
in England of late have, and now do Labor under them.

And therefore I will trouble Your most Gracious Majesty, and the Parliament,
no farther in these Discourses, but will conclude all their Complaints of this
nature, in these one or two true Stories, which I heard, as it came from the
Mouth of one that was a Gatherer of the Taxes for Births and Burials.

And now, first of all, I say, in our Town of Tiverton, in Devonshire, there
was a Poor Man that buried a Child, and when the then Receiver ^f Burial-Taxes
came to him for the Tax-Money, ^ue on the Death of his Child, he (the poor man)
paid the said Money; and then the Re^eiver of such Tax-money, looked round about
the Poor man's House, to find a Place to lay his Book ^n, that he might then
write down the said Poor Man's Name, and the Sum he then received from ^his
poor man. But he the then Receiver of such Tax-Money, seeing in this poor man's
House neither Table, Board, Chest, Bench, or Stool, or any place for him to
rest his Book on; he then said to this Poor Man, I think I must go away, and
not write down thy Name now; for here is no place ^n all thy House for me to
write upon. Then this Poor Man hearing that, replied, Pray Master don't you go
away, and not write down my Name; for if you please Master, I will turn me
about, and stoop forward, and then you may rest your Book upon my Back, and so
write down my Name, and how much Money you have received from me. And so this
poor man immediately so stoopt down, and the Receiver of such Tax-Monies did
then rest his Book on the said poor man's Back, whilst he the Receiver wrote
down the poor man's Name, and the Sum he then received of him. And thus I end
my first true Story.

My second true Story is this; There was also a poor Widow Woman of our said
Town of Tiverton, who had buried several Children within some short time
together: And when the then Receiver of such Tax-Monies came to her House for
such Taxes, she the poor Widow Woman had not the Money at that time to pay him:
But she promised the then Receiver to bring the said Money to him at his own
House, as soon as she could get it; which in some time after that, accordingly
she did: But then immediately after she had paid such Moneys to the then
Receiver of such Taxes, she the poor Widow Woman wept betterly, and then
solemnly protested to the then Receiver's Wife, That then at that time she had
not one pennyworth of Provision in her House, not could she then command one
Penny more in the whole World to buy Bread for her self or Children, then left
living; the thoughts of which made she the poor Widow Woman, again at that time
weep most bitterly; and then wringing her Hands together, with her Eyes lifted
up to Heaven-wards, she then with great grief uttered these words, Good God!
was there ever any such thing as this ever done in the World before until now?
And then forthwith, she the said poor Widow Woman, went homeward, bitterly
Lamenting her self.

And now upon the consideration of this, I cannot otherwise but say,
Undoubtedly the Cries of many of our good, poor miserable Souls have already
ascended up into Heaven; and therefore, ^ope, their Cries will now forthwith
be heard ^n the Ears of Men on Earth, and so speedily ^ave some Relief.

And now, 5thly. I cannot otherwise, but make ^nown to Your Most Gracious
Majesty, and the Parliament, how one other most horrid Crime ^ath of late been
committed, and still is continu^ly used and practiced by too many Men, in our
^ation, which Crime is a most wicked Trade, ^^at for some Years past, and now
present, is ^uch used; And that is, to buy up vast and great ^uantities of Corn
beforehand, only to Regrate upon it, and so by such means do create a Dearth,
^hen there is a Plenty in our Land, and their ^ay and manner of doing it, is
this; As soon as Harvest approaches, that the Countryman can ^^e how Corn is
sped in kerning; Then presently our Rich, Covetuous, close-Fisted Gentlemen,
and Rich clownish grubing Farmers, and some Rich Covetuous Merchants, that
neither Plow nor Sow: all those sorts of Men then take their Recreation to ride
and walk abroad to overlook their Neighbors Fields, as well as their own, and
then ^hey observe who has the best Corn, as well as whose is the worst; And
then when they have thus fully viewed the Country round them, then in the next
place they make it their Business, to go to the several Houses of their
Tenants, and other Justman-holders, that are not so well stockt in Money as
themselves are, and then raise a dispute about Corn, how it is kerned, and also
what Fields are well kerned, and what Fields are but lightly kerned. And then
after this, the next Question that those Country-Gentlemen, or Farmers, or
Merchants, or other Buyers of Corn do ask, is what Rate they think Corn will
sell at by the Bushel the Year following? Then the poor honest Tenant or
Justman-holder speaks plainly his mind, as he then thinks by the goodness of it
as it then appears in the Fields, when Harves is just at hand, and the Corn
past the danger o^ Rust or Canker, and very good, only left to the Mercy of
God, and the Weather, and so he give his Judgment what he thinks the Price by
the Bushel will be the Year following. But then replies the Country-Gentleman,
or Farmer, or Merchant, or other Buyers so concerned, Tush Man, cannot go to
such a Price, as thee tells of, for Corn (...) well sped. But then says the
poor honest Countryman, Indeed Master (with his Hat off, and scratching of his
Head) methinks, Master, it should go (...) the Price by the Bushel that I tell
you. No, no, (says the Rich Country Gentleman, or Rich Grubin^ Farmer, or
Covetous Merchant,) it will not go (...) that Price this Year. But come (say
they, or an^ one of them) what need we any more talk about this What wot thee
take for all the Corn thou have i^ Ground this Year; for to have all thy Money
together (perhaps) will do thee a great kindness. To which the Poor Countryman
answers with a smile, and all this while (perhaps) his Hat is off; and in his
Hand, (or) he holds it behind his Poll, (or) under his Arm; and then says,
Money altogether, (Master!) will do me more kindness than to carry it into the
Market, to sell it out there by the Bushel. And thus such poor Country men,
only reserve for themselves as much Corn as they think may be enough to serve
their turn, both in Bread and Drink, and so sell away the rest all to a lump;
and ^umping Bargains they have (many of them) that buy up Corn in this way and
manner: For the poor honest Countryman reckons to himself now he can afford
it, according to the Rent he ^ays for his Ground; and according to the cost he
has laid out in it: And thus such poor Countrymen are very well contented
with such honest Gain.

And thus, by such ways and means as these, some such Men, as aforesaid, have
of late Years ^ought up great and vast quantities of Corn; and ^hen, when once
such Men have got it into their Clutches, they will not suffer it to be brought
unto the Markets (until) such times as their Corn is spent, that do usually
bring in Corn to apply the Market. And thus, by means of such Men, and such
Actions, as aforesaid, our Markets of late Years have always looked thin of
Corn, ^n the midst of Plenty. And if this be always ^uffered, for such men so
to do, (then) there will ever hereafter be, a continual Dearth on Corn, let
what plenty soever come, (yet) notwithstanding that, we must expect it always
to be very dear; for by these, and other suchlike ways as these are, such Men
will get almost all the Corn in our Land, every Year, Year after Year, into
their own Hands; and then they will have their own great Prices for it, or they
will keep it back out of the Market from time to time, and from year to year,
until it does become Moldy, (or Musty) and almost ready to Stink, so as that
it will be then scarce fit for the use of Men, or until Rats and Mice have
devoured a great part of it.

And thus those greedy Cormorants lay up Provisions for Rats and Mice, and
thereby (merely) starve many good Christians; and all this is for filthy
Lucre's-sake, and to heap up to themselves the Treasures of this World, which
at last they must leave it all behind them, and so depart hence with a gauled
Conscience, by means thereof (or at least) have a Curse on it, unto the third
and fourth Generation of their Posterity: And the truth of this I must believe,
because God himself has said in his Second Commandment, That he will visit the
Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation
of them that hate him. And who are they that hate God? (Why) such as grind the
Faces of the Poor, and make their Prey on the Needy, and laugh when their
Calamity comethy upon them. And such Actions as these, (such) Corn-sellers, as
aforesaid, have oftentimes used toward the Poor, when they have come into the
Market to buy their Corn of them; for with my Eyes I have seen such
(Corn-sellers) very rude toward poor People, and because they would not come
up presently to their great Prices, they the said Corn-sellers, (some of them)
have with their Hands, thrust them off from their Corn-Tubs, and then, after
such hard usage, they the poor Corn-buyers, have mildly said, (to the
Corn-sellers) How can you in your Conscience ask so dear for your Corn? But
then that word ( Conscience) has put the said Corn-sellers into such Choleric
Fits, as that then they have presently took those poor People by the Arms, and
by their violent strength, have thrown them off from their Corn-Tubs, to the
very Ground it self; and then in a little time after their Choleric Fits were
over, (then) they would (Impudently) Brazen out the said Poor with Laughter,
and then floutingly drive them away with their brutish Language, saying, Go
farther; away about your Business: Are you come to tell us of our Consciences?
We will have our Prices for our Corn, or you shall have none of us. These, and
many suchlike Actions as these, with my own Eyes and Ears, have I oftentimes
seen, and heard them so do, and so speak.

And is not this a hating of God, to deal with his poor Creatures (in such)
servile ways and manners, as I have herein from time to time, and from Argument
to Argument, set forth and described? Look in Prove. 14.31. there Solomon says,
He that oppresses the Poor, reproacheth his Maker: But he that Honors Him,
has Mercy on the Poor. Look also in Prove. 17.5. it is there said, Whosoever mocketh
the Poor, reproacheth his Maker; and he that is glad at Calamities, shall not
be unpunished. Again, I say, He that is Charitable to the Poor, loves the
Lord, and his Alms are acceptible, as if it were done to God himself: See in
25th Chap. of Saint Matthew's Gospel, verse. 40. it is there said, Verily, I say
unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me. And thus we may see from Christ's own Words,
when any thing either of Mercy or Justice is either shown or done to any of
God's poor People, God takes it as done to himself: And if so, then
consequently this must follow, that all manner of Wrongs, or Violences, that
are any way done to God's poor distressed Ones, are by God himself, so deemed
and taken, as if it were done to Himself; as may be seen in the same 25th
Chapter of Saint Matthew's Gospel aforesaid, beginning at the 41 verse, and so
onwards to the 45th verse, which 45th verse says, Verily I say unto you,
inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.
And now again, I say, then consequently it must follow, that whosoever shall
see any of God's poor distressed People Hungry, and give them no Meat; Thirsty,
and give them no Drink; Naked, and clothed them not; Sick, and in Prison, and
visit them not, are guilty of the most highest Ingratitude: For was it not God
himself that first gave to every Man all that he has? Why then should any Man
be so ungrateful, as to deny God, some part of his own when he thus requires it
to be given to his poor distressed People, (especially) seeing by that way, God
is willing to receive it, as if it were given to himself: And for the further
proof of this, look (also) in the 19 Chapter of Proverbs, verse. the 17. it is
there said, He that has pity upon the Poor, Lends unto the Lord; and that
which he has given, will he pay him again.

But these things, few Men now do take into their Consideration; for in this
our Age, Men are now come to that height and degrees of Cruelty, that they then
were who lived in the Days of the Prophet Amos, as you may see in his 8th
Chapter, verse. the 4th and 5th, it is there said, Hear this O ye that swallow up
the Needy, even to make the Poor of the Land to fail, saying, When will the
New Mood be gone, that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the
Balances by deceit. And for better satisfaction, you may Read the whole 8th
Chapter of the Prophet Amos, and there you may see what sore Judgments are
threatened on such a People as so do.

And now last of all, I Recommended (and offer) to the serious perusal of all
Men, the whole 28th Chapter of Deuteronomy, and there may be seen what
Blessings the great God of Heaven and Earth, has in store for such as do well,
as may be seen in the first verse of that Chapter, and so onwards to the 15
verse. of the said Chapter, and then Read on to the end thereof, and there you
may see, what (Curses) God will power down on the Heads of all those that will
(continually) persist on in their Evil ways.

But again, although in the Eyes of most Men, the greatest loss and danger of
those (Mischievous) Actions, beforementioned, are past and over; yet, I am to
believe, that the most (malignant) part and direful effects of them are yet to
come, for by Observation of things past, both in Natural and Supernatural
Causes, it has been by experience found, that when the Causes have been out of
the sight of all Men, and (memory) of some Men, yet their Effects have been
found and felt afterward; And to make this more plain by way of similitude, I
say, with my Eyes have I seen a fair flourishing Orchard, with delicate
Blossoms sprouted out with great Life and Vigor, and very likely to produce
much Fruit to the Owner thereof, who (seemingly) upon the first sight of it,
did then depend upon having much Fruit that Year; but then, by the means of a
few Frosty Mornings, or with some Blasts of Lightning, was either withered,
(or) Scorched, and so lost and gone, which when the Owner thereof saw it, he
did then within himself much contemplate about it, (although) to outward
appearance, it was not then to be discerned by his countenance, that he was so
very much concerned, at his then present loss, for after he had then well
considered within himself, he then said, Come, I have a good stock of old Syder
left, and for Apples, I believe we shall not want them very much, for I
believe, I shall have some though not so many, as I was in hopes of, yet enough I
hope, to make some Christmas-pyes, to feast my Friends. But then afterward it
so happened, that this Gentleman's Old stock of Syder was well nigh spent
before Winter came on, and when Christmas came, he had no Syder to give to his
Tenants, and other Friends, that then came to visit him, nor Apples enough to
make Christmas. Pyes, to feast them; and then this Gentleman began publicly to
lament the loss of his Blossoms, and that because by means thereof; he (then)
could not accommodate his Tenants, and other of his Friends, so well, as
otherwise he would have done, if his said Blossoms in that Springtime before,
had come to their full Perfection, as to have produced good and well ripened
Fruit: For this (Gentleman) whom I mean (I say) he is a true generous spirited
Gentleman, and such a one as is willing to oblige all Men, and to do right to
every one, is my real belief of him.

Again, I say, there was a certain Rich Man, who had in his Possession several
Mannours of Land, which were all well stockt, both with Horses, Cattle, and
Sheep; and also, he had by him much Treasure; and to manage these his Temporal
Affairs, he had many Servants under him; some of those Servants were very
faithful to him; but others of them were as unfaithful to him, and yet so
smooth and subtle in their way, as that they could not be by any way discerned
from them that were faithful Servants to him; though at the same time (by a fair
and Friend-like smiling kind of way) they did (Clandestinely) take from him
much of his Treasure: Which Losses, the said Rich Man could no way discover, or
avoid them in along time after he had received them. But at last, (in process
of time) this Rich Man ^ound that his Treasure was much wasted, and ^hen he
called his Servants to account for it; and ^hen they, (all of them) both Good
and Evil, the Faithful and the Unfaithful, gave in their Accounts, which seemed
to the Rich Man, all Plain and Just; and yet at the same time, He (the Rich
Man) well knew that some of them were Unfaithful faithful to Him: But how to
distinguish them one from the other, he could not tell, but much troubled he
was about it; and Cause enough he had for it; for he then felt the Effects of
such Losses (as Time) had almost worn quite out of mind.

But now, upon the whole of this matter, what can I say more of it than this,
such Evil-doings as these, sometimes will be; (and yet) no Man can help it. And
therefore, if any Man knows himself to be abused, and cannot help himself, (so
well as he would) yet nevertheless I think it is but Prudence in any such man,
if he does endeavor by all manner of Lawful Means to help himself as well as
he can, or may, in any Equitable Way. And now in reference to this matter, I
cannot otherwise but say as follows.

Such Sharking Wits, like (Weather-cocks) with the Wind,
So nimbly turn their Faults, no Man can find:
But Time will come, when All Things shall be known,
And then such Wits (shall) quite be overthrown.
[ Read the first Psalm of David; but more particularly observe the sixth
Verse. And now may it please Your most Gracious Majesty, and the now Honorable
Parliament: By diverse Ways and Methods, Arguments and Similitudes, both
Metaphorically, and Really, I have endeavored to set forth to Your Greatness,
the several great Abuses (done) from time to time, both to Your most Gracious
(Majesty) and the Country; amongst which of them, the Poor, Middle, and Meanest
sorts of them, have the greatest Reason to complain: And to whom shall they
complain, but to the Powers that are ordained to rule over them? And who are
they, but Your most Gracious [Majesty] and the Parliament? And therefore I hope
Your Goodness, and Greatness, (both) will be pleased (now) to lend an Ear to
their Complaints, and forthwith think on some way or other, that some Speedy
Course may be taken for their Relief: And in so doing, it may be, for ought I
know, not only a means to Relief their great Necessities, but also (a great
means) to strengthen Your most Gracious Majesty against all Your Enemies: And
therefore it is, that I have now taken upon me (to offer) unto Your Greatness
this Treatise, which had been more fit for some Eminent Person to have
undertaken it, than for so mean a Person as I am. But I thought it an
indispensible Duty, and very needful for some (one) or other to do it, and I
have long waited to see whether any one would do it; and then not finding (or
knowing) any one that has so done, therefore it was that I now at last
resolved on the doing of it: But whether I have done it to the content of all
Persons that may have the reading of it, I cannot tell; for I know my Capacity
to be such, as to want Words to please some Critical sorts of Men: But however,
I am well contented (in this my low Station) and mean Degree of Knowledge: And
I think my self more happy in being only able to Speak Truth Innocently, than
to be able by Sophistical Arguments, to baffle Truth Eloquently.

And again, I must say, there are some Men in the World, that have in them
Accute Natural Parts, and are endowed with sharp Understandings; and also,
there is bestowed on them great Riches, and all manner of Humane Learning, and
yet they Exercise their high acquired Parts, (mostly) in studying out Critical
Points, and Philosophical Arguments, that thereby they may be the better
enabled (only) to confound Reason, and wrest Truth: But such Men, as have only
in them such Parts, and only use them to such Ends and Purposes, to such, and
only such, I say as follows.

Such Men are grown so Worldly Wise,
Good Men they hate, and them despise;
Such men now act (so) craftily,
That Good Men (must) Mere Beggars dye.
But mark the End, what comes at last,
When Earthly Days are gone and past;
Dives and Lazarus does them tell,
Beggars have Heaven, Rich Gluttons Hell.
[ See Luke the 16th Chapter, verse. 22, 23.] And now to conclude, I say, by
means of my thus doing, I am very sensible of it, that thereby I have (so
openly) exposed my self, that I am now as a Mark to be shot at by such
Evil-minded Men, as I have here in this Small Treatise of mine, in some measure
described: And therefore I hope, Your most Gracious Majesty, and the Honorable
Parliament, will now be pleased to accept of my good will, and to protect me
against all such Men, as will not only Snarl at me for thus doing, but (Bite)
me if they can; and after that, rend me to pieces also, if ever it shall lie in
their power so to do. But however it be at last, yet I hope (God) by his
Providence, will so far protect me in what I have done, as that he will give
them no farther power over me, than to be able to chew the Cud of Envy within
themselves, and keep their Malice as Prisoners within their own Breast; for the
just God of Heaven does know, that by my putting forth of this little Book,
that I aim at nothing more than his Glory, and the good of all Men, of all
Ranks and Degrees whatsoever.

And so I conclude this First Part of my Work, and farther say, (and now) from
the very bottom of my Heart, I say, God bless Your Most Gracious Majesty, and
the Honorable Parliament, and also preserve our Nation from the Malice of all
our Enemies, and all other Calamities whatsoever, that are any ways likely to
attend us, is the Prayer of Your Majesty's true Loyal Subject, and also the
Honorable Parliament's devoted Servant,

Richard Newnam, of Tiverton in Devonshire.

And now again, I say, may it please Your Most Gracious Majesty, and the
Honorable Parliament, this Second Part of my Discourse, with all humble
Submission to Your Greatness, these I also Dedicate, and farther say, as
follows.
Great Sirs,
AS in my foregoing Discourses, I have endeavored to set forth unto Your
Greatness, the several Complaints and Grievances of the Poor, Middle, and
Meanest sorts of Your Majesty's true Loyal Subjects, as they have relation only
toward their Bodily Assistance: So in these my following Discourses, my whole
design is now, to offer unto Your Goodness, the great Complaints and sore
Grievances of all others of Your Majesty's good and true Loyal Subjects, as
they have relation only to the Good and Welfare of their Soul's Health: For the
Spirits of all such Good Men, are now most sorely and grievously oppressed, by
means of the prodigious growth of Atheism, Errors, and evil Examples, from
whence springs forth all manner of Wickedness, Filthiness, and Lewdness, as
Profanation, Swearing. Cursing, Lying, Murders, Thefts, Sodomies, Buggeries,
Incests, Drunkenness, Gluttonies, Whoredoms, Adulteries, Fornications,
Chambering, Wantonness, Lasciviousness, Loose Looks, Unbecoming Behaviors,
mimical ^estures, and Obscene Talks, in all manner of Communications, in these
our daily Businesses. For now all chaste Ears and Eyes are always (and ever)
continually anoyed with the hearing and seeing of such most abmoniable, filthy,
and frothy Discourses and Actions, so as that Good Men cannot hear them without
great regret and gaul of Spirit within them.

And all those beforementioned Evils, (must needs) proceed from such Wants, as
I shall now forthwith nominate unto Your Greatness.

And first of all, I say, such Evils, as aforesaid, did first proceed through
Men's want of a True Faith in God, and a true Reverence of God.

2dly, Through want of Men's having within themselves, good Hearts, and good
Consciences, both toward God and Men.

3dly, Through want of the due Execution of such good Laws as are already made
for the Upholding of Virtue, and for the Suppressing of Vice.

And now, Great Sirs, according to the best of my capacity, as far as God shall
be pleased to enable me, I shall now endeavor to set forth all these my
following Discourses, nakedly, plainly, and innocently, without having in me
any manner of Self-Intrest, Pride, or Vain glory, Envy or Malice, against any
man or men whatsoever. And the like of this I have already said and done in my
other beforementioned Discourses; for therein I have not (wittingly) or
willingly, by any manner of Expression, or Expressions, that I know of in the
least given any Offense, to any good man, or men, whether Prince, Potentates,
or Subjects; but with an innocent open Heart, without any manner of mental
Reservation, with my Pen, I have written to the best of my Knowledge, so far as
I thought it might be convenient for me to do, the very naked Truth, and not
otherwise.

And now again, I say, as I have in these my beforementioned Discourses, always
observed such Ways and Methods to the best of my Endeavors, so likewise now in
these my following Discourses, I will endeavor as much as in me lies, to give
no Offense to any man, or men whatsoever, any farther than the speaking of
naked Truth may give. And therefore, however it may be resented by some me^, or
all men, yet nevertheless what I do now intend to speak, shall be the naked
Truth, according to the best of my Knowledge, and real Belief within me, as God
and my own Conscience can testify for me.

And now I come to set forth to Your Goodness, the Sixth general Head of my
Discourse, which I mentioned to Your Greatness in my before-said Introduction,
to the main of my whole Discourse, and all the beforementioned Heads therein
contained, I have already insisted on the Particulars of them, and in these my
beforementioned and several Discourses, have therein finished them. And now by
God's assistance, I shall endeavor, to the best of my power, to set forth to
Your Greatness and Goodness, the several Particulars of them, beforementioned,
General Heads, which I have not yet discoursed upon at large by way of
Particulars.

Part II.
AND now Sixthly, I must say, such things as I now do intend to discourse of,
[are] as I think, all very necessary to be thought upon, and are of a far more
higher Concernment, than any thing yet, that I have offered in any of my
before-going Discourses: And the first thing that I shall offer to the
Consideration of your Greatness, is this.

That notwithstanding all those hard and dear Times, which of late have been
and now are, yet nevertheless, all this does not any way work upon the Hearts
of our Profane and Sturdy Poor, I mean such Poor, as are known by the name of
the Mob, or sturdy Vagabond Poor, of our Nation, who are (now) become so
notoriously Wicked; as that any one would (almost) think that Hell it self, is
let loose amongst them, and the very (Fiends) thereof invisible Actors with
them, if not really in them. (O!) such things as these are sad to think upon,
to see, that notwithstanding all these several Calamities, which some of them
have known from time to time, and have so much Muffered under them; yet all
this has not any way in the least turned them from their Evil Ways, and
Profane Living; for it is known that some of them that are now thus so
notoriously Wicked, have been under great Wants, from time to time; and yet
notwithstanding all these great Wants which they have known, yet they do not
now want Hearts to conceive Mischief, nor Hands to act it, nor Tongues to
entice others to do the like.

But these are not the Poor, that I have in my beforementioned Discourses, so
much lamented and pitied; and if I may now be but permitted to speak my
opinion in this Cause, concerning such a Mobb of sturdy Vagabond Poor, or of
some other suchlike vile and profane Atheistical Spirits, then I will say
(that I think) there can be no Laws made to severe on this side Death, to
punish all such most notorious, (wicked) and profane persons, as do now even
as it were seem to swarm in this our Nation.

But here a Query may arise, and it may be said, From whence first sprung all
those Vices and Wickednesses which do now even as it were reign predominant in
this our Land; and that not only amongst the Mobb, and Vagabond sturdy Foor,
but to much amongst (almost) all Sorts, and all Ranks, and all Degrees, and all
Sexes, and (almost) all Ages of these our People (in this our Nation;) for the
very Infant, even as it were, is now become (so profane) as is the Old Man.

To this I Answer; All those wicked and profane Actions, that are now so much
used, and put in practice, both by Men, Women, and Children now amongst us,
first came from Atheism Error, and Evil Examples.

But first of all I say, it first came from Atheism, for when once any one
comes to deny God himself, what thing is there in the World that such a one
will not do next? I say, such a one will do any thing whatsoever that his own
mischievous Heart at any time conceives to do, be it what it will: And indeed,
much it is to be lamented, to see Atheism in this our Age, to become such a
vast and mighty Tree as now it is, that was but a few Years since but a young
and tender Plant, and but just peept up above the Earth, after it had lain so
long under Ground, and was always trodden down under Foot by all Good Men in
former Ages, who would never any way permit it in the least to appear above the
Earth: And although many of the Ancient Heathen-Philosophers in their days, did
plant this most pernicious Root of Atheism in most places of the World, which
took deep root here in England amongst us; for their have always, and ever
since that time, remained amongst us some such Atheistical Spirits, who have
always, and ever since, endeavored to the very utmost of their powers, from
time to time, to cherish and nourish up the growth of this Atheistical Root,
from which springs forth that most damnable Doctrine, which teaches such
wicked Men to deny all future Beings: But yet nevertheless, notwithstanding all
that, yet did the good Men of Old, by their good old Ways and Practices, walk
in such good old Paths of Righteousness, which were all both plain and smooth,
and they were so many of them, that then this root of Atheism had no room to
spring up in this part of the World; for if at any time then it did but begin
to appear, it was then presently trodden down under Foot, and spoiled. But now
of late in a few Years, it has been in this our Nation very much fostered up
amongst us; and now at present, still is continually fed with that Fat and
nourishing Soil of all manner of filthy Avarice, Profaneness and Hypocrisy;
by means of which this most pernicious Root of Atheism is now grown up, and
even in these our days is now become a mighty Tree indeed, whose very Boughs
spread both far and wide, and the Leaves thereof do now begin to overshadow the
Glory and Brightness of the true Protestant Religion, and Gospel of our most
Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is yet by some good men's
endeavors, (devoutly) upholden within this our Land, which God of his great
Mercy always grant unto us, (and amongst us) to send many more such faithful
Laborers, to prevent the farther growth of this now mighty Tree of Atheism,
that so at last, for want of future nourishment, it may at last (perish by the
root) and so at last dye evelastingly away, is my Prayer.

But 2dly, I say, from this pernicious Root of Atheism, springs forth Errors:
For no sooner can a Traveller be out of his right way, but he must (inevitably)
be in a wrong Path, that will lead him aside, or backwards, so that by means
thereof, it may be a long time before he will be able to reach to his
Journeys-end. Again, I say, Natural Philosophers do hold this for a Maxim, tha^
there is no Vacuum in the Globe of the whol^ World; (which if so) then
comparatively I may say, that in the whole Body of Divinity, ther^ can be no
Vacuum, but it must be full of Truth or Truth mixed with Error. Again, I say, a^
likely a thing it is, that if Truth in any Cause Matter, or Things whatsoever,
fly from, or give ground to Error, then consequently Errors will step into
Truth's Ground, and so possess Truth^ place; which things of late Years, by sad
experience, has been found to true: For through the Erroneous Lives of some
Men, that do profess themselves to be true Church of England Men, (Truth) by
means thereof, has of late Years been a great Sufferer, (whilst) Errors in the
mean time has gained great Applauses amongst sim^le and weak Ones. And no
wonder is (...) made of it, if we do but consider how man^ (...) there be, that
do profess themselves to be of, and for, and belonging to the Church of
England, that can say no more in the defense of their Faith, than to say, Here
is a Health to the Church of England, with confusion to all them that are of
any other Opinion. But such Expressions and Sayings are not only foolish and
brutish, but they are very uncharitable also; and the Doctrine of the Church
of England teaches such Men (as so say) better Principles; for it teaches all
Men to have Charity for all Persons, and all sorts of People, as well for such
(as are not of that Faith) as for those that are within the Pale of that
Church: And therefore, I say, great pity it is, and much to be lamented, and I
my self cannot otherwise but be much troubled for it, to see, and hear, such
(a) most worthy, honorable, excellent, (and) authentic Religion, so much
slighted, undervalued, and despised, as now our most honorable Church of
England is, by many poor, simple, (and weak Creatures) who through want of
Right Understanding, stumble at Truth, in the very plain Ways and Paths of
Righteousness it self; and that only because some of the Pastors of our Church,
are now become (foolish) brutish, and very loose Livers, throughout their
whole Lives and Conversations: But the greater is the shame to all such of them
as so do, and so live; and a great Account one Day for it they must all give.
(And now) with all my Heart I could wish, that all such Evil Members were cast
out of our Church, for they do merely thereby [Eclipse] the very Glory of our
Religion; and such Men cannot be otherwise but like great Stumbling Blocks,
which still lie in the very middle way of our Church-Paths, which leads toward
our several Sanctuaries, and thereby keep back many Simple Ones from going to
hear God's Word truly preached, by other worthy Members of the Church of
England, whose Lives and Conversations, have always adorned their Preaching:
But yet nevertheless, notwithstanding all this (yet) such are the weak
Capacities of many People, that when they see such Stumbling Blocks lie in the
way before them, and just in the very Church-Path it self, (then) rather than
they will step over them, or endeavor to avoid them, by their going onward by
either of the sides of them, (they) will rather go back again, (or) turn in, to
some other unknown ways, wherein it may be at last, they many of them do
stumble indeed, and many times thereby fall in Headlong into that most
dangerous Gulf of Atheism it self: And such things as these, I my self do much
lament them, as I my self am one of that Faith, which is of, and belonging to
that Church, known by the Name of the Church of England; from which Faith I
hope I shall never waver.

But again, it may be said, What, are there none that do live in Lewdness, and
lead wicked profane Lives, but such Men as are called by the Name of Church of
England Men?

To this I Answer; There be some of all Opinions and Professions, that are
altogether so vile, and as filthy in their Lives and Conversations, as any
Churchmen whatsoever, (only) they have a way of carrying it off more privately
to the World; for what they do, is more secretly, and more Hypocritically; so
that I cannot decide the matter, (so) as to say which is the worst of them,
(both of them) and all of them, are all to bad; and I heartily wish, that they
may all and every one of them amend, and turn from their evil ways, (as I my
self) shall endeavor to amend my own evil ways; for I acknowledge my self to
be a great Sinner

And now I say to you my Native Countrymen, of our Town of Tiverton in
Devonshire, spare me not, but either exclaim against me (or reprove me) in or
for any thing that is Evil, that you either know (in me) or of me, or against
me; and if it be true, that you lay to my Charge, I will patiently bare your
Reproof, and endeavor to amend what is in me amiss, to the best of my power;
and for what is wanting in my self, to be enabled so to do, I shall desire God
to assist me, so as that I may be the better able to eschew all manner of Evil,
and follow nothing but what is Good: And the same Resolution (in every thing) I
advise all and every of you, and all other Persons whatsoever, that hope to be
saved in and through the Love of God, and the Merits of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ) you all of you, and every of you ought to take; which Resolution
so taken, and so put in Practice, then we shall all of us (at last) reap the
benefit of it, and not otherwise.

But again, something more I must say concerning Errors, and Erroneous Livers,
and that is this; I say, take this for certain, that amongst all our Opinions,
Sects, and Religions, their are some Errors: For their is but One true God, but
One true Religion, but One true Faith, and but One true Way, to serve this true
God. (Then) how can so many Ways as we profess, in and about matters of
Religion, be all and every of them true? [This] to the Eye of Sense and Reason
cannot be, (nor to the Eye of Faith either, can it so appear to be.) And
therefore I must say again, [Errors] are crept in amongst us, and we do even as
it were cherish them in our Bosoms, only to gratify our Pride, [or]
Vainglory, [or] Self-Interest, or to show our Natural Parts: And under
pretense of rooting out of this thing called Error, many do plainly show to the
World, that they aim at nothing more than what I have but just now said; for
how many Volumes have some Men writ to reclaim Errors? and when they have all
done, by their [Works] it has then plainly appeared, to the Wisest and most
Judicious Men of our Age, that what they have so much cavilled about, has been
at last (more) about indifferent Words, than matter tending to the Salvation of
Souls: And at last, when they have all done, they have (then) committed more
Errors in their several Disputations, than ever they amended with all their
Epistles, (Writings) or large Volumes. And moreover, I must say, that some Men,
by such Epistles, Writings, and Volumes, have thereby laid open a wide [and
broad Path] only fit to lead poor weak capacitated Souls to destruction, for
thereby they have merely confounded the plain honest Understandings of many
People, who have read all over their Cavilling Discourses, and then at last for
want of a right Understanding of them, have said, We see how all those
Scepticks, or Sectaries, differ in all their Points about matters of Religion,
and some of them lead as loose Lives as any other People whatsoever; and
therefore we will believe in none of them. And so consequently embrace all
manner of Evil, and at last, believe in the Doctrine of Atheism it self, and in
their Hearts then say, if not with their Mouths, That there is no God to call
them to Account; for say they, (these simple poor weak ones) If such Men, of
all Religions, did agree in their Opinions about God, and the ways of
Godliness, we should then think there were [a God] to punishus, for our Evil
Doings: But we do see (they do not agree) in such things: And besides all this
(say they) in and by their Loose and Erroneous Livings, ^tis plainly seen that
they themselves [do not believe] in that God which they teach us to believe in:
For then ^ay those simple ones, If such Men did really be^ieve in God, as they
profess they do, then they would ^read the thoughts of offending that God: Or
if they ^id in themselves really believe, that there is such an Everlasting
Burning of Hellfire [prepared] for all ^uch Men as live loosely and carlesly,
then (certainly) ^one of them would ever live (in known Sins) nor ever ^^ve
such wicked and debaucht Lives as many of them do, amongst all sorts of
Professors. And then they, those ^oor weak simple Souls say again, [Religion]
that ^ust needs be but a mere Bugbear, to keep the vulgar ^ort of People in
awe.

And therefore I must say again, that I think, it would be much the better way,
for all such Men, as do spend (so) much time, in (...) mere Contradictions, and
many other unnecessary Controversies, [now] to spend the remaining part of
their most) precious time, in Preaching down Sin and Wickedness, and in
teaching their several Flocks, the ways of Virtuous Living, [and also] by their
future Lives and Conversations, [always] from time to time, endeavor to the
utmost of their power, to adorn that Doctrine, which they preach to others,
with their own Virtuous Living, and in all their several doings, be always
striving to discharge their Consciences in their several Duties, both toward
God and Man. And then all such Errors as are now crept in amongst us, (with
many other Evils) will vanish, and dye away for want of future Nourishment.

But such Complaints as these [made] by so mean a Creature as I am, may be but
little regarded: And therefore I will now offer unto you Solomon's own Words
for it, which I think has some relation to these Discourses of mine, (here in
beforementioned) read Eccles. 12.12, 13, 14 it is there said, And further by
these my Son, be admonished, of making many Books there is no end; and much
Study is a weariness of the Flesh. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole
matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty (...)
Man; for God shall bring every work [in to Judgment] with every secret thing,
whether it be good, (...) whether it be evil.

And thus I have endeavored to set forth unto you, how that from Atheism comes
Errors; and also, that loose Living does always still enlarge the Territories
of Atheism: And then, thus consequently from Atheism and Errors, must spring
forth that dangerous, and most malignant Root, called Evil Examples; and this
is the next thing that I shall now insist upon.

And now I say, that Evil Examples may fitly be compared to a Wilderness-like
Country, that ^ath in it more Woods and Forests, than good Pasture-Ground, or
Tillage-Land; but yet however the same Wilderness-like Ground, wherein these
Woods and Trees grow in, if once they be thoroughly rooted out, with all the
rest of the Briars and Thorns, that grow amongst them; ^hen that same
Wilderness-like Ground in time ^ay be as fit for good Pasturage, or
Tillage-Land, ^s any other whatsoever. But then this must be ^one by the
industry of good Husbandmen, or ^therwise in time, such Woods and Forests
to^ether with such Briars and Thorns, which grow amongst them, may at last
overrun and spoil that Ground next thereto belonging, which is now fit or good
Pasturage, or good Tillage-Land: And ^his I speak Metaphorically.

But now more really and plainly concerning Evil Examples, I say, too many of
them there are ^ow in this our English Nation, for they swarm, and ^re now very
numerous, (nay) almost beyond number, or at least, so Beast-like odious and
pro^hane, that no Man, that is a good Christian, or ^ut a moral honest sober
Man, but must be afraid) or ashamed to name them, [except] meet ^ecessity, upon
some extraordinary occasions, ^ompel him so to do.

But so it is, that they now reign predominant in this our Nation, to that
height and degree, so as that there are some of all Ranks, Degrees, Sexes,
Ages, Professions, and Callings, corrupted by them some way or other, more or
less: For instead of Virtue and Chastity, is used Chambering and Wantonness:
And instead of Hospitality and Charity, is used Fraud and Oppression: And
instead of Fasting and Temperance, is used Gluttony and Drukenness. And instead
of Meekness with true Religion, is used Pride and Hypocrisy: And instead of
Prayers and Supplications, is used Cursings and Swearings: And instead of
saying, God save us, it is now (almost) a general saying, God D -- m-us: And
instead of saying, Christ have Mercy upon us, it is now a general saying, The D
-- vil confound us. O! what most horrid Sins are these! for Men to call on him
that made them, to damn them; and also to call for the Devil to confound them,
that is always seeking about like a Roaring Lion to devour them, and would soon
make them his Prey, if God out of his most bountiful Mercy toward poor frail
Sinners, did not confine him within his Bounds, beyond which he cannot go. But
however, notwithstanding God's great mercy toward all men, yet it will be the
gretest Prudence in every one of us, to have great care within our selves, how
we do offend this great God, that in the first place created us, and still
hither to has preserved us, lest we should at last provoke him to great anger.
O! how would such profane Wretches look, if God should in the very Moment of
Time, given unto such Men, what they in their outrageous Passions call for. Oh!
think upon these things, all ye Black mouthed Swearers and Cursers, that do by
this most abominable way of Swearing, and Cursing thus profane God, and would
your own Souls: O! you that do so vehemently belch forth from, your bottomless
Pits within you, such Burning Oaths as if the very Sulphrous Matter of Hell it
self were in a Flame within your own Breasts. O! such Wickedness as these
alone, are enought to pull down God's Vengeance upon us: But more-especially
when all the other of those our Accomplicated Sins and Wickednesses, of our
whole Nation are conjoined altogether, with those most abominable Oaths and
Cursings, what then can we expect but the Viols of God's wrath, at last to be
poured down upon us. Except by our true Repentance and Amendment of Life, we
endeavor to prevent them; By putting a speedy stop to these our most horrid
Crimes, which Daily and Hourly we commit against God, (otherwise) it is much to
be doubted, that our Land (at last) may become a Wilderness indeed.

But again, it may be said, There are good and wholesome Laws made to prevent
all manner of Wickedness; And what can there be more done to prevent such
evils, than there is done already?

To this I answer; There are good and who;lsome Laws already made, and
sufficient enough to punish all manner of Vices; but there are now but few
Complainers against Vices, and Wickedness, for some are afraid to Complain,
because (perhaps) for so doing they doubt thereby, they shall reap to
themselves nothing but evil-will and disdain. And then others there are, that
areas much ashamed to complain; and so by means of some such, and such other
like things, these good and wholesome Laws are not put in due Execution, as they
ought to be. But why such things as these are, should be so, I cannot tell,
(except) it be, because there is a general Corruption, crept into the Natures
of most Men, which makes the Wicked so concientious toward the Ungodly; or if
they do accuse one the other, they will not stand the Trial of it, but just
like the Scribes and Pharisees, when they brought the Woman taken in Adultry,
before our Savior Jesus Christ, and then said to him, Moses in the Law,
commanded us that such should be Stoned; But what say thou? The Christ
answered them, He that is without Sin, amongst you, let him first cast a Stone
at her; Which neither of they (the said Scibes and Pharisees) did do; because
every one of them (was convicted in his own Conscience) to be as great a
Sinner, as the Woman whom they had then taken in Adultry; and so their own
Guilt made them at last, to leave her without prosecuting any further against
her; and like guilty offenders, sneakt all away, and left the Adulterous Woman
all alone; But when Christ observed that, he said unto her, Woman, where are
those thine accusers; has no Man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And
Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go and Sin no more. See in the
8th Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, beginning at the 3 d. verse, and so on ward
to the 12th verse.

And now to apply these things to our selves, I think I may without giving
offense to any one, (say) that it would be best of all, for all sorts of Men,
that know themselves to be guilty of any manner of Crimes, or other Wickedneses
whatsoever, first of all earnestly to seek God in Prayer, and to beg of him his
assistance, that he now will be pleased to give them such hearts, as may be fit
for true Repentance, and then also endeavor to the utmost of their power, true
amendment of Life, and then undoubtedly, all such of us as are now ashamed to
accuse on the other, might at last be forgiven, or at least excused, as the
Woman taken in Adultry was, provided on such (conditions) that well all of us,
would fully resolve never to commit any such most ha^nous Crimes or other
Wickednesses any more; which if we could but so do, then we might at last, all
of us, for so doing, in and through the Merits of our most blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, be justified by the Law of God, and then we should have
no need to trouble, or fear the Laws of Men.

But again, I say evil Examples have been so many of them in this our Age, that
their(production,) in number, are now become (almost) innumerable, for they
have swarmed many a time [over,] and over again, and now many (Colonies) of
them are sent abroad, to inhabit our Land all over, in every Creek and Corner
of it; (O) what is it, that Example may not do, either in reference to what is
Good, or to that which is Evil; for it is not observed, throughout the whole
course of Nature, that every thing after his kind, endeavors to produce it is
like: Does not Love beget Love? And do not Courtesies require Kindness? (or on
the Contrary) does not hatred beget Hatred? and do not wronged Persons, often
times seek Revenge? And then, from one quarrel another does still arise, until
a World (almost) are all by the Ears, fallen out with one and the other; and
that only by such means, as when like to like does agree, and join with each
party, and that accordingly as by their own nature within them (they are either
inclined) to Love or Hate. And is it not further observed, that the Sober, and
true Religious, and honest Plain-hearted Man, delights in the company of such a
one as he knows himself to be! Yes, if he can tell where to find him out, he
will have his company. But farther, it is not also observed, and by experience
found, that Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, Thieves, Liars, secret
Underminers, and Clandestine Deceivers, and all other sorts of dissembling
Hypocrites whatsoever, do naturally desire each others company, and do
oftentimes Flock together! And they need not seek very far for Company, for
there are so many of them now in this our Age, as that they crowd together,
almost as thick as Earthly Atoms in the Air, which cannot well be seen, but
only when the Sun shines in through the little Holes or Chinks of a Door, that
encloseth a dark Room. And indeed and in truth, I may very well now say, that
such evil Men as aforesaid, do always delight to be in dark Rooms, and they do
[not] love Light, nor do they any way desire, that the Son of Righteousness
should ever shine into their Rooms amongst them; for then they know that all
their black Deeds will be as plainly seen by all men, as Earthly Atoms are seen
in a dark Room, by the Power and Strength of the Sunbeams, when they are so
contracted together, and sent through such little Holes, Chinks, or Craneys of
such a Door, as it is beforementioned.

Again I say, Evil Examples are very malignant in their own Natures, and that
many ways, as by woeful experience it has been oftentimes found, for when the
Father is a common Drunkard, the Son oftentimes does prove to be the like; and
indeed, according to the course of Nature, it is not much to be admired at, for
Custom is a second Nature, and some men do by Custom, bring up their Children
so to do, as they love to do themselves; for when the Son goes to call his
Drunken Father home from the Alehouse, or Tavern, he will then make his Child
drink several times (perhaps) much against his Stomach, and then when the Lads
squemish Stomach loathes the taking in of so much Liquor, then the drunken
Father says, (How) Sarrah, cannot you drink? (what) you don't know what is good
for your self; Come drink it all up Boy, and I Will make you love good Liquor as
well as my self; for I find it to be a great Comfort to my Heart. And this way
the Drunkard in time, makes his Son to become as common a Drunkard as himself;
But again, sometimes if so comes to pass, that the Son of a Debauch Lascivious
Father, in the days of his Infancy, makes some observations of his Father's
lewd Actions, though at that time (perhaps) for want of Reason, he is not capable
to think it to be in his Father, any way Immodest, or Evil; But then after
that, when he the Son comes to see more Years in the World, and is then
somewhat more Ripened in Age, and his own wanton desires begin to display
themselves, within his own Breast. Then (perhaps) he begins to recall to mind,
the former Actions that he had oftentimes seen, by his Lascivious Father, and
then thinks he within himself; Why may not I my self do the like? And thus
through want of good Examples, he is prone to all manner of Evil, and then he
the Son, presently lets loose the Reins of his Will, to run into all manner of
Wickedness. And thus such Evil Examples, are oftentimes the chief secondary
Causes, that have corrupted so many Thousands, of our brave Vigorous Young Men,
so as that thereby, at last many of them have paid the Debt which they owed to
Nature, with their untimely Deaths, and instead of a Christian Burial in the
Churchyard, they have been thrown into a most shameful Grave, under the
Gallows.

Again, the same may be said concerning Mothers and Daughters, for if the
Mother, throughout her whole Life and Conversation, be Vitiously given to all
manner of Lewdness, and Wickedness; Then it is a rare thing, to see the Daughter
of such a Woman truly Virtuous; though sometimes, now and than, it is known, that
Wicked Parents have had good Children, and good Parents, have had Wicked
Children, but much more often it is known, that good Education and good
Examples, has often times changed the corrupt Natures of many, so as that by
mean^ thereof, they at last have become tollerably good* that otherwise would
have been most notoriously Evil, and by this also, may be seen, what Effect
Good or Evil Examples, can produce. The like also, concerning Good and Evil
Examples, may be said between Masters and Servants, for if the Master be a
common Swearer, it is much if the Servant is not also tempted to break out now
and than with an Oath, although originally he was otherwise taught by his Honest
Parents, for did not good Joseph learn to Swear by the Life of Pharaoh, after
he had been but a little while in the Egyptians Court, and it may be, he had
heard many of the Egyptians oftentimes so to swear; see Genesis the 24th
Chapter, verse 15.

But farther, concerning Evil Examples, I must say the greatest danger of them
all, is when they are found in Magistrates, and Ministers, for they hereby do
not only (corrupt) single Persons, or peculiar Families, but whole Cities,
Towns, and Villages.

But again, The next thing, that will come in this my way of Discourse, I think
will be to endeavor to set forth the sad and direful effects, of such Evil
Examples. And now I farther say, the Evil Examples that have been to frequently
shown in this our Age, by almost all sorts of People, of all Sexs, and Ages,
have been the only secondary Causes, that has infused into our Hearts; this
now general reigning Corruption, by means of which (many ways) we have highly
offended God. And therefore I now (believe) that the Almighty, Maker of Heaven
and Earth, now forth with does expect from every one of us, a true and hearty
Repentance, with the amendment of our Lives, and Restitution made to those whom
we have any way wronged, or otherwise we may for ought I know, (to soon) feel
the weight of God's Wrath powered down upon us, but yet nevertheless, by
experience it has been found, that before the Almighty God, has pouered down
the Viols of his Wrath upon the Heads of the most Wicked, and vilest Sinners,
[he] out of his great Mercy, (has hitherto) always given them warning before
hand, by the Signs and Tokens of his displeasure, made manifest unto them both
in Heaven and on Earth. And if I mistake not, I think the manifestation of such
Tokens, of God's displeasure against a Nation (have) or might, of late Years
been plainly seen in England: But however, when God is displeased with any
Nation and People, that it is then his Good will and Pleasure, to give Warnings
before he strikes, is plainly to be made manifest; and to prove this, I need
not use many Arguments, for both Divine and Moral Histories are full of such
Presidents:

And the first of them that I shall offer to you, for the proof hereof, shall
be that of Josephus, in his Moral History, concerning the City of Jerusalem,
who, if I mistake not, therein says, That a Flaming Sword for a considerable
time appeared over that City, before the Destruction of it: And if the
Impenitent Jews had then at the sight thereof, truly Repented, who can tell but
God might have had Mercy upon them. But they did not Repent, and therefore at
last they felt the sad Effects of it.

But 2dly, Divine History says, That the Wickedness of the Old World caused
the Flood to be brought upon them; and yet God in his Mercy then gave them One
Hundred and Twenty Years to Repent, as you may read in the 6th Chapter of
Genesis, verse. 3. But they of the Old World in all that time, did not Repent;
and therefore at last they were all drowned in the Flood; see in 7th Chapter of
Genesis, verse. 12.

Again, I say, Nineveh was a great City, and the People thereof very Wicked;
see Jonah, chap. 1. ver. 2. For their Wickedness was grown to that prodigious
height, that it ascended up to Heaven before the Lord, and therefore God
pronounced his Judgments against them, by the Mouth of the Prophet Jonah: But
as soon as Jonah had Preached the Word of the Lord unto them, and told them,
Yet forty Days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Then they presently Believed,
and Repented from the highest to the lowest of them; and therefore God showed
them Mercy, and repented of the Evil that he had said (he would do unto them;)
see in Jonah, chap. 3. from the first verse to the end of that Chapter.

And thus we may see, that God does first of all show himself a God of Mercy,
before he does show himself to be the God of Justice.

And therefore I may now (justly) and truly say, without giving offense to any
Man, that God has been, and still is, very Merciful to us here in England,
(and that) in his forbearing of us, in all these our Infirmities, with great
Patience: For is not our Land now become a very sinful Nation? (O) what
Wickedness is their in the whole World, that is not (now) acted, done, and
committed here in England amongst us; (for now) in this [our] Age, (home) to
this very day, do not we continually (wallow) in the profane, wicked, foul,
filthy, shameful Sins of Sabbath-breaking, Hypocrisy, Pride, Whoredoms,
Sodomy, Murders, Blasphemy, Swearing, Cursing, Flattering, Lying, Frauds,
Perjuries, Thieving, Oppression, Unjust Dealing, Covetousness, Self-intrest,
with all manner of Undermining, Falsehood, and with Hearts full of secret
Mischief, striving by all manner of false ways, (Clandestinely) to deceive and
undermine our fellow Creatures; and (yet) at the same time, with a Judas-like
Kiss, or Counterfeit Smile, profess themselves real Friends [to him] or them
[whom he or they] at that very time, intend to deceive. (O!) what greater
Wickedness than these can there be in the whole World? And such Wickedness, as
these, do not only continue amongst us, but [now] they do superabound
abundantly, beyond measure, all England over.

And therefore (I say) both from Reason, and Scripture, rationally and
divinely, we may all of us [think] our selves to be as great Sinners, as any
were in the Old World, or in any other Nation, ever since the World began, who
have been destroyed for their Sins: And therefore ['tis now] high time for us
all to Repent, and Amend our Lives, for who can tell what may follow these our
most great and grievous Sins? And it is to be questioned, whether our Sins may
deserve that Mercy from God, which the Ninehvite's then received from him; for
they, the Ninehvite's, immediately Repented at the Preaching of the Prophet
Jonah, as you may read it in the 12th Chap. of Matthew, verse. 41. But for our
selves, it is much to be feared, that our Impenitent Hearts, are now much like
the Hearts of the old Jews, who were too much hardened to repent; which if so,
who can tell, how soon we may feel the severe Judgments of God amongst us; for
we are as great Sinners as any of they were; look in the 13th Chapter of Saint
Luke's Gospel, the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5th verses, and there you will find, that
when some told Christ what great Sinners the Galileans were; Jesus answered
them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans? I
tell you Nay: But except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those
eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye they were
Sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: But except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And thus we see, the Jews had warning
from Christ himself, and yet they did not Repent. And now are not we in England
warned to Repentance? and that not only by Signs and Tokens from Heaven and
Earth, but by the Holy Bible, the written Word of God, wherein we may see by
all the Commandments of God, and Jesus Christ, and by all the sayings of the
Prophets, and the Preachings of the Apostles, that all such horrid Sins as we
now daily commit, and live in them, are most abominable in the Eyes of the
Almighty God: And therefore, it is now high time for every one of us, from the
highest to the lowest, to Repent, and turn us, every one of us, from our Evil
Ways. And though we have not (now) amongst us, in these our days (personally)
the Prophets, and Jesus Christ himself, and his Apostles, to teach us and
reprove us, yet we have to this very day, left unto us, by divine Records, for
our Doctrine, for our Instructions, and for our Reproof, all their Holy
Sayings, and Preachings. And besides all this, we cannot to this very day,
pretend to make any excuse for it, that we have not sufficient warning given
us, to Repent us of all our Evil Doings; for God be thanked for it, still to
this very day, there are not wanting in our Church of England, many good,
devout, and most eminent Preachers, that do constantly show themselves like
good Pastors, and are faithful Shepherds over their Flocks; and every
Sabbath Day, do by their most powerful and pressing Arguments, use their utmost
endeavors to persuade Sinners, and to reclaim them from all their Evil Ways,
exhorting them to true Repentance, and Amendment of Life; and also, to
endeavor always to live in Obedience to all the Laws of God, and all the
Commandments and Sayings of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And then
for the better performance of it, they are not wanting, to offer up their most
devout Prayers (to Almighty God) for his Blessings to remain upon them. These
Pastors, and only such good Pastors as these are (are now) the only true
Moses's, and Aaron's that are now left on the Earth, to stand in the Gaps, and
Ways, in which destruction comes; and there do lift up their most devout
Hearts and Hands, and interceed unto the Lord for us. And thus by their
Prayers, together with the Prayers of all other true devout Christians, God's
most severe Judgments, (have hitherto) been stopped from falling down upon us:
But after all those Signs, and Tokens, and Warnings (if at last) we will be
like the Impenitent Jews, and will not repent us of our Evil Ways, then our
Punishments will be only from our selves: (...) to prevent all such Evils, let
us now ^^^^^w^th repent us from the very bottom of our H^^r^s, as the
Ninevite's did (and also) that we may be the better, enabled so to do, let us
now forthwith (first of all,) every one of us look into our own particular
Hearts, and see what is there amiss, and amend it: And after that, to the very
utmost of our power, (evermore) shun all manner of Evils, and then we may (yet)
hope for Mercy at God's Hands; but otherwise, no less can be expected from him,
but his most severe Judgments to be poured down upon us.

And now Seventhly, I say, from the Holy Bible, which I believe to be the
written Word of God, and from the Experience of my own Actions; as also from
the observation and experience of many other Men's actions, that I have known,
or have heard of, from the Mouths of credible Persons, I have grounded all
these my former Discourses; from which Fountain has flown all that I have said,
wherein I have endeavored to set forth the several wicked Actions, of almost
all People, here within this out Land or Nation: And with these our Actions
[God] is not well pleased, as does appear by the several Signs and Tokens of
his Displeasure, which may be seen plainly, if we look no farther than [this]
how every Year, (Year) after Year, now of late, one part or other of our Land,
has failed of having plentiful Crops of Corn, much more than usually it has
heretofore, in some Years past, before these now late scanty Years for formerly
I have known for many Years together, we have had plentiful Crops, Year after
Year: But it is much to be doubted, that, that time of fullness of Bread, made
us fat, as that we thereby only grew Wanton and Lascivious, and so consequently
have run into all manner of Evils: But now, it seems to appear to [me] that God
has of late been pleased to try us with a Scanty, thereby to see how every one
of us would behave our selves under it; and it may be also, to see whether the
Poor would thereby become truly Penitent; as also, to see whether the Rich
would be Charitable: For indeed it appears so to [me] both by the Eyes of
Reason and Faith, as if God of late Years had so ordered things to be, (only)
to try us in and by these Ways and Manners of dealing with us: For by
observation of late Years, it has been found, through the most part of our
Land, that if in one part of our Land, their has been an indifferent plenty
(then) for that other places have so much failed. And then again, these Places
of our Land, that have failed that one Year, (have had indifferent Plenty the
next Year (following) that Year of scanty. [Or thus] again I say, they that
have had a plentiful Crop of Corn, (when others) have had the same (Year) but a
scanty Crop; then the next (Year) following, they that have had the Year before
(a scanty crop) have had then their plentiful Crop: And then they that had the
Year before their (plentiful Crop) have had their scanty Crop for it. -- But to
explain it more short, take it thus; I say (generally) of late Years, by
experience it has been found, (he) that had a plentiful Crop of Corn (the one
year) had a scanty Crop for it the next Year following. So that upon the whole
of the matter, it does appear to me, by Reason, as well as by Faith (to
believe) that the [Almighty] has of late, so measured out all his Blessings,
only to try the Hearts of Men, that it might be seen by their Actions what
their Behavior toward God and Men would be, and how far their Charity would
extend to one another. [But again,] I have observed (also) that notwithstanding
the Almighty's displeasure with us, yet in the general, we have had enough,
every Year throughout our Land, one where with the other, of all sorts of
Grain, and of all others sorts of Provisions; but Men have not distributed it
abroad in our Nation, as God would have had it done, for instead of Charity to
their Neighbors, they have made a mere Prey of them, and have also sought out
wicked Inventions, merely to grind the Poor even as it were to dust: And
therefore it is that I doubt, that for those things God has yet a Controversy
to be disputed with such men as have by several ways and means, before
mentioned, thus oppressed the Poor and Needy; and that do put their trust more
in their god (Mammon) than they do in the Great God of Heaven: But let such Men
know, that, that God, that made them to that end and purpose, to do good in
their Generation, can destroy them for their Wickedness in a moment; read the
whole Chapter of the Prophet Obadiah, but more particularly observe these
following Verses of that Chapter, which I have quoted at large, in the 3d and
4th Verses thereof, it is said, The pride of thine Heart has deceived thee,
thou that dwell in the clifts of the rock, whose habitation is high, that
says in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? Though thou exalt
thy self as the Eagle, and though thou set thy Nest among the Stars, thence
will I bring thee down, says the Lord. And in the 6th, 7th and 8th Verses it is
said, How are the things of Esau searched out? How are his hid things sought
up? All the Men of thy Confederacy have brought thee even to the Border? the
men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee; they that eat thy Bread, have laid a Wound under thee; there is none
understanding in them. Shall I not in that Day, says the Lord, even destroy
the Wise Men out of Edom, and Understanding out of the Mount of Esau? And in
(...) 10th V rss, it is said, For thy violence against (...) there Jacob, shame
shall cover thee, and thou sh^^ be cut off forever. And also, in the 15th Verse
it is said, For the ^ay of the Lord is near upon all the Heathen; as thou have
done, it shall be done unto thee; thy Reward shall return upon thine own Head.

And now again, I say, if any of our Star-gazers, who are called by the Name of
Astrologers, shall read these my Discourses, they will say of me, He has
written like a Fool; for we know that all such disorderly seasons, as have been
of late Years, comes from no other Causes, than from the natural Influences of
the Heavenly Bodies, according to their own due Courses, as they were by God
himself first ordained, for them to continue in, without any alteration (only)
as to Time, and Motion, they vary in their several Revolutions, and so then
consequently, it must follow, that from time, to time, the Seven wandering
Planets, must be every Year, Year after Year, always variously placed, in their
several Positions, and as variable in their Conjunctions, or Oppositions, or
Squares: And then, as they have relation, more or less, in these their several
Positions, to all those other innumerable company of Fixed Stars, (so)
accordingly) they do always bestow (their several Influences) upon the Earth;
or to express my self more plain (I say) that accordingly, as all the Heavenly
Bodies, (are in their several Positions, and Courses, either Benignally, or
Malignally inclined toward us, even so the Seasons of the Year must always be,
and otherwise they cannot be: And this I take to be the Opinion of our
Astrologers (in this cause) now stated.

Again, the like also, they say of any man's Nativity, That from the Influences
of the Stars, all things are ordained, and appointed out for them, and what
shall betide them here in this World; and therefore, whether it be good, or
evil, they say, Men must be contented with their Fate. And so it appears by
their (Opinion,) that every one by the Influences of the Stars, must be either
Good or Evil, more or less, in their several Degrees, and Qualifications, of
their Minds, as well as Rich or Poor in Fortunes; for I do not understand, that
they do any of them (make any exception) in these things; and if so, then those
Astrologers make room for Atheism also. And indeed, great pity it is, that so
many Wise Men, in Worldly Affairs, should be so ignorant in that point, as to
put any Confidence in such Lying Fops, as many of them are, whose very [
Predictions give themselves (Contradictions) by which any Man may see, that
they all of them err in their Art or Judgment, in such high degrees, as that
the best of their Predictions; deserve to be despised, and contemned, for
thereby they do pretend to know the very Secrets of God himself, which is
impossible for any Man to know; and I question, whether the Angels in Heaven do
know what shall betide every Man on Earth, until God himself is pleased to
reveal such things to them, when he sends them forth as his Messengers, to
execute his Will either in Mercy, or Judgment, to good or evil Men, whilst they
are here upon the Earth: And therefore if such Secrets are not known to Angels,
how came they to be known to such Men, (as call themselves Astrologers) who are
in themselves, some of them, almost as bad as Devils; and I had no need to have
said, almost as bad, for the very Devils themselves believe and tremble: But
such Men as do pretend to this great Art in Astrology, some of them, have as I
have been told, denied the very Being of God himself. But however, I will
always own and honor all such Men, as have this great knowledge, of the
Motions of the Heavenly Bodies (provided) they do not go beyond their Last, or
Station; for they are very useful to us (all) to know the Times and Seasons of
the Year. And I hope some of them do believe in the (one) and only true God,
and also, do allow him to be the (only) whole and sole Creator of Heaven and
Earth; and that he can and does many times alter and change the Courses of
those Heavenly Bodies, for to serve his own purpose (how) and when he pleases,
(or) otherwise, it would be very sad, if all of them should be Atheistically
minded: But I have more Charity for some of them, than so to think of them; but
for any of their absolute Predictions, I take them to be very vain, and
foolish, and think it great Folly, in any one, to fear them, or any way, in the
least, to depend upon them; for certainly, no Man can tell, what shall betide a
Child, by his knowing the very Minuit of the Hour that he was born into the
World; for such things as these, are Secrets, which are known to none but God
himself; and I do aver it, that it is above and beyond the Art of any Man in
the World, to foretell punctually, every thing that shall betide any Man here
in this subluminary World: And such things as these some Astrologers pretend to
foretell; and some Men there be now living, that do put too must trust in them,
and seem to plead for the certainty of their knowledge; for say they, Some of
them do ramble very right in some of their Predictions. To which I answer, The
greatest Fool in Nature, may sometimes by chance, answer aptly to some
Questions; but it is very rare that they do so, and it is altogether so rare a
thing, to see or know any of their Predictions, to fall out so patly to their
purposes, as Fools do sometimes by chance so patly answer the Questions put to
them. But as to the truth of any of their Predictions, they are very uncertain
things, and much more uncertain, than any Lotteries whatsoever; for in them,
there are certainly some Prizes, for the many Blanks that do belong to them:
But there is no certainty at all, for the very truth of any of the Astrologers
Predictions whatsoever, that they shall really come to pass, as they predicted
it. But however, for Argument-sake, I think it fit to compair their
Predictions, to be somewhat like unto Lotteries, as to the uncertainties of
them; for a Man may loose, much Money to a Lottery, before he may get one
Prize; and yet notwithstanding that now and than by the turn of an accidental
Die, after many throws, there may at last turn up a Prize. And so amongst so
many of their Predictions (now) and than, accidentally, some things may happen
to fall out, to be somewhat like, what they had before predicted in such dark
Problems as they usually utter them, which have also in them a very large
relation, to many other common Accidents, that usually do fall out many times:
But then if any of these Accidents agree with their Predictions, (then) the
whole World is not untold of it, by themselves, (although) at the same time,
those Astrologers, by their foreknowing Skill, knew nothing of the (reality) of
such things, that it should certainly come to pass: But their Predictions are
so variously expressed, that they will bear several. Constructions, And (by that
way) Chance-medlee, may bring to pass, now and than, some little things,
something like to what they predicted, which the Astrologers will be sure to
catch at, and will say, That, that was the thing they meant in their
Predictions, when (perhaps) 'twas never in their thoughts bfeore, (only) they
will allow it to be so, when any such thing so falls out to serve their turn.

But again, (if I mistake not) the very Foundation of all their Art, is
grounded, on no better bottom, than from the observation of Ancient
Astrologers, who did then, in their days, both quote, and chronicle, the
several Positions, of the heavenly Bodies, and the Effects which ensued in
their time, and so have left it down to our Posterity, That it was their
Judgments, that when the heavenly Bodies, should be at any time, after their
time, in the same Positions, that they were (then) in their time, that (then)
the same like Effects would follow again, that did happen to be and fall out in
their time, (whilst they were then living) which (president) is to me no
sufficient Reason, nor can it, as I think, be a sufficient Reason to satisfy
any rational Man; for li^^e Causes have not always their like Effects, as may
be seen in many things throughout the whole Course of Nature, (and in such
things too) as is plainly within our selves known for certain Truths. For I my
self have sometimes made Observation, of some red louring Evenings, just after
Sunset; and such Signs as these, some say, are tokens of a very foul
Rainy-day, the next day following: But yet it has not happened to be so
always; though this I have observed of it, that sometimes such a very wet Day
has followed such an Evening. But then again, I have observed, that as often
it has fallen out to the contrary. Again, I have observed, that sometimes in
an Evening, the Sky has been very clear, and the Air very calm, and after
that, the Sun has set very gloriously, and some Weather-mongers do say, (that)
is an infallible sign of a Fair Day, next to fellow; and yet oftentimes it
falls out, that we have had the very next day, a very wet Rainy-day. -- The
like also may be said concerning the Winds, for the North and East Winds are
usually cold and dry; and the South and West Winds usually more warm and moist,
and more inclinable to Wet Weather: And yet sometimes, the South and West
Winds, are somewhat dry and cold, as the North and East Winds are sometimes
more warm and moist; and in these things, as well as in many others that I
could mention, all, like Causes have not their like Effects. But again, as to
the Weather, how uncertain a thing that is, every one knows, that has (Eyes) to
see the variable changes of it, and yet our Astrologers will take it upon them,
to foretell it to the whole Country: And indeed, I must say it, that it is a
foul shame to all our Astrologers, to write so many genteel Complements, if not
Lies it self (about the Weather) for some of them, do point blank, say wet
Weather, when at the same time, the Weather proves to be very dry: And when
they say very Cold, then it does very commonly fall out to be very Warm for the
time of the Year: And when they downrightly say, Snow or Sleet; then most
commonly, according to the season of the Year, it is then very fair and warm;
but when they say fair Halcyon days for a long time together, then methinks I
am sure of Rain, because by woeful Experience, I have found it so in my Journeys
on Horseback, when I have been several times, soundly Wet in through all my
Clothes, in to my very Skin, and the Rain has then dropped out of the Elbows of
my Coat-Sleeves in the time of their Halcyon-days; and therefore, I Will depend
no more on their Halcyon-days, for constant Fair Weather. -- But again,
Astrologers will say, That there is not that certain Rule, for the Knowledge of
the Weather, as their is for the Calculating of Nativities: For say they, the
innumerable Company of Stars, (are fixed) and move not at all, but in their
grand Motion, and the Seven Planets, keep their due Courses, (always) according
to their several Motions: But as for those lower Airel Regions, they are
oftentimes loaded with putrified Atoms, and much moist matter, with other
combustable Stuff which is always on where or other (huft) and (puffed) to and
fro, and with great violence (tossed,) up and down, here and there, in those
lower Regions of Air; for when the (Air) which is in it self pure, does find it
self thus burdened, then it will by course of Nature, endeavor, to free it
self, and never rest quiet, until it be done: And therefore, no wonder is to be
made of it (at all) although we Astrologers do so very much fail in these our
Predictions about the Weather.

To this I Answer, (and say) you (Masters) and Astrologers, what you do now
offer in your defense, concerning your Mistakes, in and about the Weather, I
must confess, that it does appear to me, to be very rationable, and I apt to
believe, what you say in this matter, may be very true: But yet, however
(Gentlemen) I must tell you, that you are much to be blamed, to put such Tricks
upon the poor ignorant Countrymen, that do put so much Trust and Confidence in
you, and believe all that you say in your Almanacks about the Weather to be
true. And I believe, many of them, do so order their Business, as to Plow and
Sow their Seeds, at such times as your Almanacks, tells them that they may
expect Fair Weather: But then, when those Countrymen find themselves (so
disappointed) with such wet Weather, as that they are hindered both from Plowing
and Sowing their Seeds; then it may be some of them may be apt enough, to say
their Prayers backward, on the behalf of their Almanack-Makers; for indeed,
they are many of them ignorant enough, and very profane also, for I have been
credibly informed of a certain Countryman, whom I very well knew, that on a
certain time (said) when he had Corn out in the Field, in Harvest-time, and
when his Corn was dry, and fit to be housed, and then sudden Rain came on it
again; then be, who was the Owner of the Corn, with a morose voice and frowning
ill-lookt Countenance, cast up his Eyes to Heavenwards, and very Foolishly,
Bruitishly, and Profanely; or Atheistically then said these Words, (Ay) (do)
God Almighty, do, spoil all, do so; do. And therefore, I say, you Masters, and
Astrologers, if such men are so apt to blaspheme or mock at God himself, when
the Weather does not please them, what is it that they will not say of you
Astrologers, when they find how often you have deceived them with your false
Predictions about the Weather.

But again, I must have the other touch, with you Astrologers, about your
Predictions. And now I say, I have heard, that there has been observation made
(of two Children) who were both born in one (hour) of the same Day, and as
near, as it could be guest at, within a Minuit or two's time; and also, they
were (both) equal in Parentage, and Fortune, as to their Birth, and yet, they
[both] had not, equal Fortune in the World alike, for one of them, it is said,
lived but poor and meanly; but the other grew very Rich and Wealthy, (although)
the Man whose Fortune was to be poor, was altogether so well accomplished, as to
natural parts, and every way so temperate a man, and altogether so frugal, in
his Worldly business, as he could be, that was born into the World, with him
that grew so rich: (And therefore) pray Mr. Astrologer, what was the Reason,
why one of them was so Poor, and the other so Rich?

Mr. Astrologer. I Will answer you Sir, to this; the Reason was, because they
were not Born both together in the same Minuit, or Moment of time; for one
Moment may make some alteration, in such Causes; for if they had been both Born
into the World (in one) and the same Minuit, or rather Moment of Time, then I
do aver it, that they would both of them, have had very nearly (if not) equal
success in those their Worldly Affairs.

Author. Sir, was this the very Reason, why these Men were so different, in
their worldly Fortune?

Astrologer. Yes, Sir, that was the very reason of it.

Author. I do not believe it: But however, provided, it be true, that every
Man's good or evil Fate, does depend upon that very critical point of Time,
pray Sir, where is that Man or Woman in the World, that is either Father or
Mother, of any Child, whose Nativity you have ever calculated, that could ever
tell the very Exact Minuit, or Moment of Time, of their Child's Birth?

Astrologer. Yes Sir, very well, there be them that have observed the very
Minuit.

Author. By what rule, Sir?

Astrologer By Clocks, Watches, and Sun-Dials, or by the Courses of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars.

Author. But what if the Sun, Moon, or Stars, are not to be seen, either [by
Day] or by Night, by reason of dark, thick, gross Clouds, that may interpose
between us and them, so as that neither of them could, or can, or may be seen
at the time of the Birth of any Child? or how can you, or how will you, or how
could you, ever know the very exact Minuit or Moment of Time in such Weather?

Astrologer. Why, then we must trust to Clocks, or Watches.

Author. Ay, surely, that way you must needs be deceived, in the knowing the
very exact minuit, or moment of the time, of any Child's Birth: For where is
that Watch, or Clock to be found in the whole World, that does always keep the
true time of the Day and Night (so exactly) as not to fail, in one minuit or
moment's time? Or if there could be any such Clock, or Watch (made) that would
keep time so (exactly,) where is that Man in the world, that can set any Clock
or Watch, so exact to the very time, of the Day, or Night, as that he does not
err in one minuit, or moment's time, according to the very real time (of the
Day or Night) and exactly agreeable, to the time, as by the Courses, and
Motions of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, it is measured out (and divided?)

Astrologer. There are Men, that can make a Watch, or Clock, that will
constantly carry the true time, of the Day or Night, when it is once but truly
set by the Sun Dial, I say to a moment of time.

Author. Sir, I do not believe that; though for Argument-sake, if I allow it so,
yet I have this to say; Pray, Sir, where is the Man to be found, in the whole
World, that can measure the Heavenly Orbs so (exactly,) as from that Rule, to
be able to set, any Sun-Dial, so (exactly) true, as that it shall show the very
(exact) time of the Day, exactly, agreeing with the (exact) time measured out,
by the [due] and daily, and nightly, Courses of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

Astrologer. Sir, there be them, that can do these things, which you question
the truth of it, whether you will believe it, or not.

Author. Sir, I must say still, I do not believe, that any man in the world,
can make any such Clock, Watch, or Sun-Dial, that will keep true Time (exactly)
and equally, not erring one moment of time, from the true time, of the day or
night, as it is exactly measured out or divided out by the Courses, or Motions
of the Sun, Moon and Stars. And therefore, upon the whole of this our Argument,
I must say, (provided) that I could allow that there is such a thing, as Fate,
or Destiny, and that it is decreed, by the Courses of the Stars, every one's
Fortune, what it shall be here in this Sublunary World; yet Sir, this must
needs be a thing, beyond your knowledge, and impossible for you ever to know,
the certainty of it; for you your self do allow in Argument, that for the doing
of it truly, without erring, in your Predictions, that you must know, the very
moment, of the time, of any one's Birth (whose Nativity) you will pretend to
calculate (exactly;) and that exact and unerring time, is not to be found out:
And therefore, I say, that Art must needs fail in its perfection, which has an
Error in its Foundation; and such an Error, there is, in the foundation of your
Art of Astrology. And now upon the whole of your Arguments, (I find) that you
Astrologers, are as certain of your Art, in reference to your Predictions, if
you could but find the very moment of the time, of any ones Birth, as that
great Artist was, in the strength of his Engine, who said, That he could by an
(Engine) remove the whole (mass) of Earth out of his place, provided, he could
but find a firm Foundation, to rest on, or (fix) his Engine upon it.

And now to conclude our Discourses, I say, no such Foundation could ever be
found, for such an Engine to rest upon; nor can I believe, that the very exact
moment of time, can ever be found out, for you to work by it without Error; and
therefore, it is certainly so, that you must needs err, and fail in all your
Calculations and Predictions whatsoever, and there is no more truth, in any
thing you say, concerning Predictions, than their is in that which you say
about the Weather; and every man, that has ever made Observation on time past,
(does know) how shamefully, you all of you, and the best of you Astrologers,
have of late Years, failed in your Predictions; and you your selves do well
know, that the whole Art of Astrology, is merely fallible, only you must for
Self-interest-sake, endeavor, to maintain, and uphold it, because (perhaps)
your very livelihood much depends (upon) the using of this fallible Art; and
all your Predictions in time (are found) to be mere idle, foppish, foolish, and
vain Sayings; nor can I think any man wise, that does, or will, put any trust
and confidence, in the certainty of your Predictions, or in any other Sayings
(of you Astrologers) in or about any such matters, as is beforementioned,

But as for Astronomy, that I will allow, to be a noble, lawful, and honorable
Science; for they plainly demonstrate, what they pretend to know, and for the
most part of it, the truth of it, is, effectually found; but as to any thing
concerning the Art of Astrology, I think it, not worth the while, to discourse
you, any more about it; and so fair you well, Sir.

Astrologer. Pray, Sir, before we part, let me ask you a Question; What say
you, is the reason, why those two Men were so unequal in their Worldly
Fortunes? (seeing) they were both equal in their (Births) Parentage, Parts,
Education, and in all manner of Qualifications; and also, were both born into
the World, in one and the same Hour, and Minuit as it were, they both of them,
came into the World together.

Author. Sir, I will Answer your Question: The reason of it (was this) God)
that made them, and sent them both into the World (at) or nearly at one and the
very same time, he for Reasons best known to himself, thought it not fit, to
give them an equal share alike of worldly Goods, or such things as we call
Riches, (although) he was then pleased, to make them both equal in
Qualifications, as to their natural temperaments of Body and Mind, [and that]
because it was his pleasure so to do, [or] it may be [God] that foreknoweth all
things, did then foresee, that a mean condition, was best for him, to whose Lot
it fell to; for Riches are not always the best Gifts to some men, and (yet)
there is no harm in them, if they are not abused in the ill using of them: But
this I know, some men that have them, may do much more good with them, than
they do, if they would but do as they are required; but their own covetous
Hearts will not permit them so to do: And for ought I know, therefore it is,
that God does oftentimes, permit some Rich Men, to be ensnared, by the means
of their own Riches. And what a strickt charge [Christ] himself gives to all
men, to avoid Covetousness, and the Evils of it; you may read it in the 12th
Chapter of St. Luke's Gospel, verse. 15. these words, And he said unto them,
Take heed and beware of Covetousness, for a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses. Again, I say, is it not oftentimes
seen, how Riches puffs up some Men into Pride, and makes them oftentimes
undertake, the doing of many unjust things, which many times, brings them into
the Snares of a temporal (and shameful Death) and therefore, I say again, that
(God) foresees, that Riches are not the best Temporal Gifts for some men, and
for ought I know, Riches are withheld from some men, in a way of Mercy, as
they may for ought I know (be given) to some other Men, in a way of Judgment:
But to whomsoever they are given, (yet) they are given to them, (only) for to
do good with them, in this their Generation; which if they do not so do, (then)
it will be required at their Hands, for these things, are their several
Talents, and God gives these Talents of Riches to whom he pleases, to some
more, and to some less: But (yet) nevertheless, he always requires from every
one, even as he has given to him, for even so as his Talent is, even so
thereafter he ought to improve it; for where much is given, much is required:
read the 25th Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, beginning at the 15th Verse, and
so onwards to the 31 Verse.

And now, I say again, It is the Will and Pleasure of the Almighty, to deal
with us his Creatures, as he pleases, and to give [us] of these worldly
things, more or less, as he thinks (is) or may be best for us: And that was the
reason (why) one of those two Men, which were born into the World, even as it
were at one and the same time, was but poor and mean, in reference to temporal
Riches, whilst the other (might,) for ought I know, superabonnd in his
abundance. But who shall dare ask God, Why do thou so? For may not God, do
with his own what he pleases, and give to every one (more) or less, as he
pleases. Yes, he may, and he does bestow it (where) and (how) he pleases, and
from his Hands alone; by his divine way of Providence, comes all our Riches,
or Poverty, [excepting] what the mere Sluggard brings upon himself; for he
shall be clothed with Rags, (as the Wise Man says) for God does require a
means to be used by all men: But however, without God's Blessings, to the
Means, which we use, all our Labor will be in vain; for it is not he that
rises in the Morning early, nor he that goes to Bed late, (or) eats the
Bread of Carefulness; (Nor) can any Man, by his care, wisdom, or strength
alone, procure to himself these worldly things; for see what Solomon says
concerning this matter, in the 9th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, verse. 11. -- I
returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the swift, nor the
Lattel to the strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but Time and Chance happens to
them all.

But again, you Astrologers, (perhaps) may question and say, Pray Sir, what
does the Wise Man (mean) by his saying, But Time and Chance happens to them
all? For by these his own Words, it seems to us, as if they were spoken in
favor of our Science.

Author. Sirs, this Question I will endeavor to answer you also; and now I
say, Solomon, by them Words, does not mean any such Chances, as you Astrologers
do say, does betide every man, according to his Fate, or Destiny, as it was
decreed above, and that [only] from the overruling Power, which you say, the
Stars have over every Man here on Earth, (accordingly) as the several Positions
of them, were in the very Minuit, or Moment of timet he of every man's Birth.
For Solomon, in another place of this his same Book: declares expressly against
you, and in effect by his Words there expressed (to me) it does plainly appear,
as if he had there positively meaned, at that very time, when he writ them
Words, that, that art of Astrology, as you now profess it, and practice it,
then was, and now is altogether unattainable, and impossible to be known, by
any Man that ever was, or ever shall be upon the Earth; look in Ecclesiastes,
Chap. 8. Verse. 17. And there you will find, Solomon's words to be these as
follows; Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out, the
work that is done under the Sun: Because though a man labor to seek it out,
yet he shall not find it; yea further, though a Wise Man think to know it, yet
shall he not be able to find it out.

And now upon the whole of our Arguments, between us, I farther say, Away with
all your Predictions, for I cannot otherwise but abominate them; for these
things which you pretend to know, are the very Secrets of [God] himself, and
past your finding them out. And therefore it is not worth my labor, to
discourse you any more about it, [for Seeing] is Believing; and every Year, we
find all your Predictions, so far from truth, that I think any of them not
worth any man's Observation, (otherwise) than to laugh at them, and not to
depend on them; nor can any man truly believe in God, that does believe and put
trust in any of your Predictions; for how can any man believe in [God] that
will not believe in the Holy Bible, which is God's Word, and speaks directly
against such ones as you are, as you may read it in the 47th Chapter of the
Prophet Isaiah, verse. 12, 13, 14. It is there thus written, Stand now with
thine Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have
labored from thy Youth, if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou
may prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy Councils: Let now the
Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators, stand up and save
thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the Fire shall burn them up, they shall
not deliver themselves from the power of the Flame. And thus by the written
Word of God, you may see what a vain thing Astrology is; for all the Prophets
of the Lord exclaimed against it.

And now I say upon the whole of this my Discourse, concerning Astrology, or
Astrologers, both from Reason, and Scripture, it does plainly appear to me,
that the whole Art of Astrology is fallible; and therefore it must needs be a
vain and foolish thing, in any Person whatsoever, to put any trust or
confidence in any of their Predictions, or in the Predictions of any other Men,
that are professors of any other suchlike vain Sciences. And so for the
present, I take my leave of you Astrologers, until it comes in my way to
mention your Names again.

And now by the course of Argument, I think it comes again in my way, to speak
something more concerning our late Unfruitful Years, and therefore I shall say
farther as follows.

Both from Reason, and Scripture, it does appear to me, that our late Long
Winters, cold Springs, cold Summers, Wet Harvests, and Unseasonable Sowing
times, which has been of late Years, [was not] wholly from the Natural Causes
of the Heavenly Bodies, as they were from the Creation, first ordained in their
Courses: But, that it was from the immediate hand of God; (not) but that I will
allow, that the Celestial Bodies, do bear rule and govern over all our
Terrestrial Bodies; and that their several Influences, many ways, do either
afflict, or comfort us, while we are here on the Earth, as may be Daily,
Weekly, Monthly, and Yearly seen, in and by the Revolution of that most
glorious Planet the Sun, which for ought I know, may be the Center, and there
placed, because it might be the better able, and more fit to distribute and
send abroad his comfortable Beams; for we find by his warm Influences, that all
Creatures here on Earth, both Rational, Sensative, and Vegitable, are comforted
and cherished, as soon as it approaches toward us: And so on the contrary, we
see, and find, that for want of the warm Influences of the Sun, all compounded
Material Bodies whatsoever, that have in them Life, and are subject to
alteration, do pine and droop, when it withdraws his comfortable Beams from us.

Again, I do not say, but that all the rest of the other Heavenly Bodies, have
their shares, in the bestowing of their several Influences, on all such Earthly
Bodies, as aforesaid, (one way) or other; for I believe [God] might make them
for that use, as well as for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and Years:
But the most secret use of them, is [only] known to God himself, and it is
impossible for any Man, to reach to the true knowledge of such things, as
Astrologers pretend to know. And therefore, I say again, it is idle and
foolish, for any one to put trust in Astrologers Predictions; for it was only
[God] that at first created all those Heavenly Bodies, and it is (only) he
himself that governs over them, and rules them in their several motions, how
and which way he pleases, and he alters all their several Influences when he
pleases, and how he pleases, (and that) to and for what Uses, or Purposes, he
pleases; as we may see it made manifest in his most Holy Word in several
places, and by several Presidents; and the first that I shall quote you to this
purpose, shall be that of Joshua, in whose Book I find, that the Gibeonites did
by a subtle way obtain their Peace with Joshua, who by his League then promised
that the Gibeonites should live; and also therein I find, that the Princes of
the Congregation of the Children of Israel, swore unto the Gibeonites also,
that they should not be destroyed: And more I find, that after the Children of
Israel understood, by what an undermining way, they had obtained their Peace;
then they were in great wroth with the Gibeonites, and the Children of the
Congregation of Israel, then murmured against their Princes, because they had
Peace with the Gibeonites; and yet nevertheless, notwithstanding that Peace, I
find that the Congregation of Israel would have destroyed the Gibionites, had
not the Princes of their Congregation told them, that they might not touch the
Gibeonites, because they the Princes had sworn unto them the Gibeonites, that
they should live; as you may read it at large in the 9th Chapter of the Book of
Joshua. And from thence I observe this also, that their is a most sacred tie
(in Oaths) and that God does expect from all men, that all manner of legal
Oaths, made and sworn, to good Intentions, as they have relation (only) to the
Glory of God, and the Good of all Mankind, should be always performed, and kept
unviolated, as we may see by this League and Oath, between the Children of
Israel and the Gibeonites: And though the Gibeonites did at that time, by such a
beguiling kind of way, obtain their League of Peace with the Children of
Israel, yet it was somewhat excusable in them, because they did it (only) to
save their Lives, and not to save their Money, for they the Gibeonites, offered
up both themselves and all that they had, saying to Joshua, And now behold, we
are in thine Hand, as it seems good and right unto thee (to do unto us) do;
as you may read it in the same 9th Chapter of the Book of Joshua, verse. 24, 25,
26, 27. Again I say, that action of the Gibeonites, is to be thought somewhat
the more excuseable, if we do but consider with our selves how good and
faithful Abraham, did the like, when for fear of Death, he said to the
Egyptians, that his Wife Sarah was his Sister, and also Abraham himself
persuaded Sarah his Wife to say the like also, to the Egyptians, look in
Genesis, Chap. 12. verse. 13. and so onwards to the end thereof. But again (I
say) good Men's Evasions are no sufficient Warrants to allow evil Men in their
most Notorious Wicked Actions; (And) there is a vast difference between Men's
evading of Truth (only) to save their own Lives, and that, of being Guilty of
Perjuries both toward God and Men (only) for to get (or) save a little Money;
for that Sin, of evading Truth, (only) to save (Life it self) may be forgiven,
in and through the Mercy of God, barely, by a true Repentance for it: But
Frauds, and Perjuties, are not forgiven (by Repentance alone) for Restitution
also, must be made to such People, as by their Frauds and Perjuries, they have
any way wrouged. But I must leave this necessary digression, and now proceed
onwards to set forth my now designed matter: And so I say, I also find, that
when the five Kings of the Amorites, went up to Encamp before the City of
Gibeon; (then) the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the Camp of Gilgal,
saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save
us, and help us, for all the Kings of the Amorites, that dwell in the
mountains, are gathered together against us. And then I find (immediately) upon
the Gibeonites request, Joshua with all the mighty men of valor, ascended from
Gilgal; and then the Lord, to encourage Joshua, said unto them, Fear them not,
for I have delivered them into thine hand, there shall not a man of them stand
before thee. And thus Joshua was encouraged by the Lord, and therefore he went
up from Gilgal all Night, and came suddenly upon them; and then, as the
Scripture-Text says, The Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them
with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way, that goes to
Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Mak-kedah. And more, the Text
says this, And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in
the going down to Beth-horon, that the Lord cast down great Hailstones from
Heaven upon them, unto Azekah, and they died. And then the Text says, in these
words, [They were more] which died with the Hailstones, than they whom the
Children of Israel slew with the Sword. And more the Text says, Then spoke
Joshua to the Lord, in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before
the Children of Israel; and be said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou
still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. And the Sun stood
still, and the Moon stayed [untill] the People had avenged themselves upon
their Enemies. And then the Text says, Is not this written in the Book of
Jasher? So the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go
down, about a whole Day. And there was no Day, like that before it, or after
it, that the Lord hearkened to the Voice of a Man. All this at large you may
read it, in the 10th Chapter of the Book of Joshua. And now the use that I
shall make of this, is as follows.

And first of all, I find, that notwithstanding the Gibeonites several
evasions, which they used in making up their League of Peace, with the Children
of Israel, yet God was pleased to own them, (because) he knew, that the
Gibeonites in their Hearts believed in his Word, and dreaded his People Israel,
and what they then did, [God] himself (knew) that it was not to deceive the
Children of Israel of any of their worldly Riches, or to do them any bodily
harm; (but) that it was (only) out of an innocent fear, to save their own
Lives; for they then thought with themselves, that if they should then have
appeared plainly unto Joshua, that then they should not have obtained their
Peace with Israel: And by this we may see, that in all things, God observes the
Wills of Men, and that he takes for their Deeds, whether it be in things that
are good, or whether it be in things that are evil.

2dly, I find, that at any time whatsoever, when God shall think it fit, he can
then (immediately) augment, or diminish, the Forces, (or) Influences, of all
the Heavenly Bodies, (or) change, or stop the courses of the Sun, Moon, or
Stars, (or) he can continue, (or) alter the whole Frame of Nature; and from
(order) turn into disorder, all the other Elementary parts of this World
whatsoever, and how often soever, and that to what use or purpose soever,
whether in ways of Mercy, or Judgment. And therefore, I say again, that it must
by these Arguments consequently follow, that all these our late Unfruitful
Years, were by the (immediate) and Providential Hand of God so ordered to be;
and Not by the Natural Courses of the Heavenly Bodies (only) and accordingly to
their first Ordination, as our Astrologers do affirm it so to be: But how
disagreeable, such Opinions are to the Word of God, I say judge ye. But the
Word of God is true, (and) thereby I have made it manifest, that the Art of
Astrology is a fallible Art; and for the better Confirmation of it, I cannot
well omit that President of good King Hezekiah, for when the Prophet Isaiah
told him, Thus says the Lord, Set thy House in order, for thou shall dye, and
not live. Then immediately Hezekiah turned his Face to the Wall, and with
Prayers, and Tears, pleaded with God, [how] he had walked before him, in Truth,
and with a perfect Heart: Which prevailed so far with the Lord, that he altered
his Decrec, and before Isaiah was gone out of the middle Court of the House or
Palace of King Hezekiah, the Lord commanded the Prophet Isaiah, to return back
to Hezekiah, and to tell him, That the Lord had heard his Prayer, and seen his
Tears, for which he would heal him of his Sickness, and also on the third day,
he should be able to go up into the House of the Lord; as also, that the Lord
would then add unto the Days of Hezekiah, Fifteen Years: But Hezekiah having on
his Spirit some doubt, desired a Sign, whereby he might know, that the Lord
would heal him; which desire of good Hezekiah God complied with, and gave him a
Sign, which was, that the Sun should go backwards ten Degrees; which thing was
made manifest, by the Shadows going backwards ten Degrees, after it was gone
down ten Degrees in the Dial of Ahaz, as you may read it at large, in the
second Book of Kings, the 20th Chapter, from the beginning of that Chapter,
unto the 12th Verse. And this I offer at large (only) to prove, that God can as
well (now) in our days, take off the warm Beams, and most comfortable
Influences of the Sun from the Earth, by way of Judgment, on the Wicked, as
well as to make the Sun go backwards from his Course, by way of Mercy, for a
Sign (only) to satisfy the doubt of one single Man, and that (because) he had
in him an upright and perfect Heart.

And now, I say, by this place of Scripture, as well as in several other places
of Scripture, we may see, that Prayers, and Tears, prevailed much with God,
when they have been offered up unto him, with a true, devout, and sincere
Heart; for were not David's Prayers heard by the Lord, and his desires, granted
unto him, from time, to time, when he Prayed, that he might be delivered out of
his Afflictions, and from the Malice of his Enemies; read all his Psalms
throughout, and in many of them, you will find, how much, David depended upon
Prayers, and how often from time to time, David's request was granted to him by
Prayer. Again, I say, read the first Chapter of the first Book of Samuel, but
more particularly observe the 10th verse, and so onwards to the 21st verse, and
there you may find, how much the Prayers of Hannah, the Wife of Elkanah,
prevailed with the Lord, when they were by her offered up with Tears, in the
bitterness of her Soul; and although Ely the Priest, thought she had been
drunken, yet at the same time, she was earnestly muttering within her self in
Prayer, and though her Lips only moved, yet in her Heart she spoke unto the Lord,
and desired of him a Man-child, which God in process of time granted unto her,
and not only a mere Man-child, did the Lord give unto Hannah, but such a
Man-child, as afterward became an excellent Prophet of the Lord, whose Name
was Samuel: And after that, I find (besides Samuel,) Hannah had by her Husband
Elkanah, several Sons and Daughters, as you may read it in the 2d. Chapter of
the 1st. Book of Samuel, verse. 21. And thus we may see by those Presidents
offered, and mentioned in these several Scriptures herein quoted, and also, by
several other places of Scripture, the like Presidents may be found, and by all
of them it may be plainly seen, how much Prayers, and Tears, have always, from
time, to time, prevailed with God, when they have been offered up unto him,
with true, devout, and sincere Hearts; and therefore, I think, it would not be
amiss, but rather think it very necessary, and needful for us all, with true
devotion, now to offer up our Prayers with Tears, and desire God to give every
one of us, a Heart fit for true Repentance, and Amendment of Life; which if we
would all of us so pray, and endeavor so to do, then no question might be made
of it, but that God would yet show us mercy, and then we should have the
Blessings of the Lord return upon us, which now seems to be departing from us;
Read the second Chapter of the Prophet Joel, verse. 12, 13, 14. Therefore also
now says the Lord, Turn ye even unto me with all your heart, and with fasting,
and with weeping, and with mourning. And rent your heart, and not your
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. Who
knows if he will return and repent, and leave a Blessing behind him, even a
Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering unto the Lord your God?

But again, I say, that God does sometimes by the disorder of the Elementary
Parts of this World, bring upon the Earth, Dearths and Famine it self, (is
plain) by what God himself made known to Pharaoh in his Dream, for God did not
only make known unto him, that he would bring a Famine upon the Land of Egypt,
but by what means the Famine should come, was also made known unto Pharaoh in
his Dream, (and that to be) by means of unseasonable Weather, as violent
East-Winds, which should blast and wither the Cornfieldsd, so as that they
should come to no perfection, to bear Corn for the Egyptians to have Bread out
of them; as you may read it in the 41 Chapter of Genesis, the 6th, the 23d, and
27th verses.

Again, I say, that God [hath,] and yet [can] by his immediate Power, that he
has over all the Elementary Bodies, alter and change the Weather, as he sees
most fit, either by way of Mercy, or Judgment, is plain: And also, that it is
men's Iniquities, that does oftentimes provoke God, to bring upon the Earth,
Dearths, and Wants, and Famine it self, is plainly to be seen, and understood,
if men would but consult seriously within themselves, these following
Scriptures, which I shall here quote unto you, which you may read at your
leisure, Jeremiah 5th Chap. verse. 24, 25. Ezekiel 4th Chap. verse. 16, 17. Hosea
2d Chap. verse. 8, 9. Read Joel the 1st Chapter, all over from the beginning, to
the end thereof. Amos 4th Chapter, verse. 6, 7. And lastly, look in the 14th
Chapter of the Prophet Ezekiel, verse. 12, 13, 14. It is there thus written, The
Word of the Lord came again to me, saying, Son of Man, when the Land sins
against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon
it, and will break the Staff of the Bread thereof, and will send Famine upon
it, and will cut off Man and Beast from it: Though these three Men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own Souls by their
Righteousness, says the Lord God.

And thus we may see, that when Men, by their Iniquities, do provoke God to
anger, then, in his Wrath he immediately, changes and disordereth the Heavenly
Bodies, or other Elementary Parts of the World, as he pleases: And thus
working by his own secondary Causes, as he thinks most fit, he can when he
pleases, with hold these good things of the World from us; and also, from this
last Text of Scripture, just now here quoted, we may observe, that when the
black Deeds of the Wicked, are many, and that they are so much overgrown, that
they do superabound; then, the Prayers of the Righteous can prevail with God
(no longer) to prevent the pouring down of his Judgments upon the Heads of
Wicked Men: For then, the Prayers of the Righteous, (only) for the deliverance
of their own Souls, shall be heard, and not for the Souls of the Wicked. And
now I say again, these beforementioned Scriptures do make it out plain, That
all Disorders, both in Heaven, and Earth, from time, to time, are always
performed, by the immediate Hand of God, and [not] as Astrologers say (only)
from the Courses of the Stars, as they were ordained to be in their first
Creation.

And therefore I must now say again, that no Astrologers, (or) any other Men,
of any other (vain) Sciences whatsoever, (can foretell) by the Courses of the
Stars, (or) by any other way whatsoever, what shall fall out, or come to pass,
either of Plague or Famine, (or) what shall be the event of Wars, (or) who
shall have the Victory, (or) foreknow, by the Calculating of Nativities, what
shall befall any Man, or Men, (or) what Years will be fruitful (or) unfruitful;
for all these things are Secrets, and only belong to God himself, and not unto
Men, except out of his own goodness, and mere pleasure (in Mercy) to some of
his own chosen Ones, he is pleased to reveal these his Secrets, to such Men, as
he thinks most fit, to pour out his Spirit upon them, to that purpose, and for
that end, to preserve his own People, as may be seen in that of Pharaoh; for
God did not forewarn Pharaoh, King of Egypt, of what he was about to do,
(wholly) for the sake of Pharaoh himself, or for the Egyptians sake; but
(mostly) for the Advancement of Joseph, and then consequently, for the
Preservation of all the Children of Israel: And therefore it was, that none of
the Magicians, or any of the Wise Men of Egypt, could interpret Pharoah's
Dream, for it was only God's chosen One, that could do it, who was Joseph, and
that not of himself, but by the Inspiration of the Lord, as Joseph himself
(acknowledges) in this same 41 Chapter of Genesis, and the 16 verse, It is
there said; And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me, God shall
give Pharaoh an answer of Peace.

Again I say, that the Revelation of Secrets, does only belong unto God, and
not unto such Men as are called Astrologers: But when God thinks fit, [he]
reveals them to his own chosen Ones, as you may read in the third Chapter of
the Prophet Amos, verse. 7. these words, Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but he reveals his secret unto his Servants, the Prophets. And thus you may
see by this Scripture also, it is plain that all Secret Things belong only to
God himself, until such times as he is pleased to make them known to some of
his own chosen Ones, and that [only] upon some Extraordinary Occasions, in
order, to and for, the preservation of God's Holy Ones, as may be seen also, in
that of God's preserving the holy Prophet Daniel, on several occasions, and
that, by several ways and means, how he was from time to time, preserved by
God, and also made an Instrument to preserve other good Men, as you may read it
in the second Chapter of the Book of Daniel, verse. 13. thus written, And the
decree went forth, that the wisemen should be slain, and they sought Daniel,
and his fellows, to be slain: And that only because the Magicians, and the
Astrologers, and the Sorcerers, and the Caideans, could not Interpret, unto
King Nebuchadnezzar, his Dream; (therefore) Daniel and his Fellows also, must
be slain with them: But then, (God) for the manifestation of his own Power, as
also, for the preservation of Daniel, and his Fellows, (God) was then pleased
to reveal that Secret unto Daniel, which God himself had then before revealed
unto King Nebuchadnezzar, and yet, at that time, God was pleased to deny unto
King Nebuchadnezzar the remembrance of his Dream, and that (only) because God
himself would make it more manifest, that it is himself only, that does, (or
can) reveal Secrets, and that only and immediately from himself, (or) by the
Mouths of his own Chosen Ones; and this Daniel himself acknowledges, as you
may read it in Verse 30. of this said Chapter, it is there thus said, But as
for me, this Secret is not revealed to me, for any Wisdom that I have more then
any living: But for their sakes that shall make known the Interpretation to the
King, and that thou might know the thoughts of thy heart. And thus you may
see, how Daniel himself does own the Power of revealing Secrets, to be in God
above, (and himself) to be but the Instrument of it, as it was revealed unto
him, from God, for which Daniel praised God; and also, he acknowledges, that
all Power, all Secrets, and all Seasons, and all People, even Princes as well
as Subjects, are in the disposing Hand of God, as you may read it, in this
second Chapter of the Book of Daniel, the 19th, 20th, 21, 22, and 23 verses.
And thus Daniel, and all the rest of the Prophets of the Lord, they do all
agree, that it is from the (immediate) power, of God alone, that all Seasons
are changed, whether to Order (or) disorder, fruitful (or) unfruitful, wet (or)
dry, for it is only God that causes it to Rain upon one Field, and not upon
the other; and it is only him, that gives a plentiful Crop of Corn to one Man,
and a scanty Crop to another Man; and therefore (consequently) it must follow,
that it is God alone, by his immediate Power, that has of late changed, the
smiling Influences of the Heavenly Bodies, and of late Years, has made them
look frowningly upon us; (and) him alone it is, that of late, has even as it
were changed the whole: frame of Nature, (by means of which,) we have of late
had, Year, after Year, but indifferent crops of Corn, which we Men (attribute)
it, to no other Cause, than from the disorderly Weather, which we have had of
late Years: (And there are but few Men) that look to the Hand, from whence it
came; or that it was only for our Sins, that God has of late so disordered the
Weather: But be it for what it will, it is God that has done it, and Time will
make manifest, whether it be in a way (of Mercy) or Judgment.

And now I think, it remains needful, that I should give some Reasons
(wherefore) I have written so much against Astrologers, and other Men of vain
Sciences. And (therefore) my Reasons for it are these: By Experience, I find,
that now in our Age, there be a great many People, and some, that do think
themselves Wise Men, that do now give more heed, unto what Astrologers do say,
than they do to what God himself says unto them in his Word; for it is now
become a common thing, amongst them, to go to Astrologers, to have Questions
and Doubts, Answered and Resolved; as also, to know what Success they shall
have in their Undertakings: And also to know, what Days are good, or evil, for
the undertaking, of any material business; and if so doing, be not a forsaking
of God, or at least, a falling off from God, let any rational, or divine person
judge. And great pity it is, that such Men, should have that liberty to act as
they do, because, what they do pretend to perform, does take with many Vicious
and Simple Ones; and when once some Atheistical Wretches, that have in them but
a few Thundering Eloquent Words, and that they do but affirm the truth of
Astrologers skill, in such matters, then that does much encourage others, that
are but of weak Capacities, to believe in them likewise: And so by this way,
more room is made for Atheism also.

And thus, by several ways, and methods, I have endeavored to set forth unto
Your Greatness, by what means Atheism, Errors, Evil Examples, and other Vices,
are now grown to this most prodigious height: But the Remedy of all these
things, I must leave to the great power of the Almighty God, and to the great
Understanding, and Care, of Your most Gracious Majesty, and the Honorable
Parliament.

And now again, before I conclude, I cannot otherwise but say, that I am apt to
believe, that their will not be wanting some Men, that will be ready enough to
cavil with me, or at least, rail upon me, for my undertaking this Work. and
perhaps, they may say, For what Reason does such a one as he take upon him to
Discourse about Matters of Religion, and State Affairs? For he himself
confesses, in his Epistle to the Reader, that his Education, was but mean, and
Scholar he is none, farther than the English Tongue; and therefore, how dare
such a one as he, take upon himself, to speak, or preach at this rate?

To these suppositive Objections, I shall endeavor to Answer.

And first of all I say, That in this Work of mine, I have done nothing at all,
that has in it, in the least, that I know of, any thing of the nature of a
daring Faculty; for with all humble submission, (both) with my Heart and
Tongue, I have endeavored (always) so much as in me lies, so to speak, as not
to offend (any) in their several places of Authority, or any other honest
conscientious Man or Men whatsoever. And as to State Affairs, I have not at all
concerned my self with it, any farther, than to give in unto Your Great Powers,
a true Information against Frauds, Cheats, Oppression, and Vices. And now, I
say (God) who is the searcher of all Hearts, does know, that in and by the
setting forth of this whole Treatise in both parts, I aim, at nothing more than
the glory of God, the honor and safety of the King, and the good and welfare
of all good Subjects. And according to the Apostle Paul his saying, in his 16th
Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, verse. 19. To the best of my Capacity I
can truly say, that in the doing of this, I have only endeavored to be wise
concerning what is good, and I am simple in any thing that is or can be evil in
the doing of it.

And therefore, I hope all Men whatsoever, will have so much Charity for me, as
to believe me, (in what I here say;) for the God of Heaven does know that I
speak the truth.

And now, 2dly, I say, as to Preaching, this Treatise of mine, (I think) has
not in it, in the least, any thing of that nature, that may any way (properly)
be called Preaching; for I dare not, take upon me, to mention any particular
Scriptures, (only) to raise other Discourses from them, (nor) do I take on me,
to raise from them Doctrines, (or) Observations, (but) I (only) use them as
(supports) to strengthen these my several Arguments; and that (only) on such
several occasions (as their is) as I think) extraordinary occasion for it; and
that (only) to stir up the Hearts of men, to do what is good, for I think with
my self (this,) that though some men, may not believe these my Arguments alone
(yet) my hope is, that when my Arguments, are agreeable with God's Word, that
then, Men may the sooner embrace them, and believe in them, But as for
Preaching, I dare not think my self, any way qualified, so to do; yet
nevertheless, I think, that this my Treatise, may modestly deserve, the Name,
or Title, of a Friendly Admonition; and for such a thing as that, with all
humble submission, to better Judgments, I presume so to offer it: And in so
doing, I hope I have not done any way amiss in it, for it is our Imcumbent
Duty, every one of us, to advise and admonish one another, and in so doing, we
ought to do it, in Word and Deed, with all our Hearts, in the name, of the Lord
Jesus, without respect of Persons, as we may read it, in the 3d. Chapter of the
Epistle of Paul to the Colossions, the 16, 17, 23, 24, and 25. Verses. And also
to the same purpose, you may read it in the second Epistle of Paul to the
Thessalonins, the third Chap. the 13, 14, and 15 Verses.

And now, I most humbly Beseech, the Great God of Heaven, to bestow his
Blessings, upon these my weak Endeavors, and also, to give you all a Right
understanding, of this my Poor, Mean, yet, well intended Treatis (now offered
unto Your Greatneses) with an Heart full of Integrity, and true Loyalty, both
toward God, the Protestant Religion, my King, and Country.

I am Your Majesty's Loyal Subject, and the Honorable Parliament's devoted
Servant Richard Newnam of Tiverton in Devonshire.

And now at Last,
With all Humble Submission, and true Loyalty, I here present unto Your Most
Gracious Majesty, and the Parliament, the Abstract of my whole Treatise, which
I have endeavored to set forth in these plain, low style, following Verses,
whose Sound, to the most Learned, and Eloquent, (must needs) be very uncouth,
(yet) are in their own simple Nature, truly Cordial: And if but rightly
applied, as they are by me (Innocently) offered then I shall gain my desired
end, in hopes of which, I farther say,
WE have, of late, found (Nature) out of frame,
The Stars, looked Blunt, the Sun shined not the same,
To warm the Earth, as did, some Years ago;
Summer from Winter, we did (hardly) know,
But by green Leaves, (which) did to us appear,
To show, the Revolution, of the Year;
But Grass, Herbs, Fruits, came scant in their due Season.
What Star-gazar, (can) give for this, a Reason?
'Twas, from disorder, of the (Heavenly) Bodies.
But how, or why, past knowledge, of such Noddies,
As took on them, (such) Secrets to discover;
They failed, in that, as they (do) in the Weather.
As Gadbury, in the late, James's his Reign,
To him, predicted Conquest, all in vain,
And so Partridge, the French King quite cried down,
And meant, as if he needs, must lose his Crown:
Which, if he had, then England, might Rejoice.
But more i will say, now, with a cheerful Voice,
God grant, our King, by God protected be,
Not fear, nor trust, doubtful, Astrology.
But now again, to my, intended Theme,
We yet may feel, what God, by this does mean
Men's wickedness, God's Blessings, do withstand,
And bring, sore Evil's, on a fruitful Land. Read the 5th Chap. of Jeremiah,
more particularly the 25th verse.

O England, leave, thy Swearing, Cursing, Damning, Matthew 5.34.

Thy monstrous Pride, thy Drunkenness, and thy Whoring, 1 Cor. 6. Chap. 9.10.
Jer. 5.8.

Thy Cheating, Thieving, Filching, and False Coining,
Thy Undermining, Falsehood, and Purloining, Amos 5.12.

Do thou not Fawn, Flatter, Lie, Bribe, and Juggle:
Such, Evil Deeds, may bring, on thee, much trouble: Read Amos 8. the whole
chapter.

Stop now in time, God's Eye looks on thy score Amos 9.8. 1 Pet. 3. Chap. 12.

When it is full, he will visit thee therefore Jer. 5.29.

More Dearth, great Want, more Troubls, not less one jot,
May fall on thee, if thou Repent thee not. Amos 4. the whole chapter.

Be thou now wise, to play, the surest Game,
Serve God in Heart, and not only in Name: Prove. 23.26. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Deuteronomy. 6.5.

Be Faithful, Just, Upright, in every thing, Amos 5.24.

Give the poor Subject, right, so give the King;
Give God his due, the like, give unto Caesar, Luke 20.25.

Take thy own due, do right, unto thy Neighbor, Luke 6.31. Luke 10.27, 28.
Prove. 22. Chap 22, 23.

Fear thou God, honor the King, wish all men health,
Relieve the Poor, love thy Neighbor, as thy self, 1 Pet 2. Chap. ^7.

Men rule on Earth, but God, does rule in Heaven,
Expecting Men, to act, both plain, and even. Romans 13. the whole chapter.

AND now, may't please, Your Gracious Majesty;
My Muse, prompts me, to sing another alay:
For with my Soul, (in love) I write to You,
And now, will say no more, than I think True. Prove. 14.25.

If You have Foes (whose) hatred, You may dread,
Its now high time, poor Subjects, to regard:
In your defense, by Foes, they will (not) be Branded,
If Poverty, don't make them, too weak-handed:
But pinching, pineing, starving, Misery, Prove 14. Chap. 18. and 28.

Hereafter (may) drive, some, from Loyalty.
Some Men there be, that have, abused Your Trust,
Which makes the Poor, within them take disgust.
Your Laws are just, Your (Taxes) just, but then
Unjustly laid, on some, by Unjust Men. Prove. 14.34.

The God of Heaven, Justice, does command,
And, so do You, that now, do rule our Land: Mi^ah 6.8.

But Men pervert it, for to serve their Will,
Their own base Lust, (and) Hearts desire fulfill. Prove. 20.26.

It Is now, high time, the upright, Scale to sway,
Which tottering hangs, (and) Breaking every way. Prove. 20.28.

Grand Sir, I Have said, what I think, to be true,
Much more would say, that may prove good to You,
If that I might, But, once, permitted be,
To speak the Truth, before, Your Majesty.
From my House at Tiverton in Devonshire, June the 6th, School.
And Last of all,
For the good of this Great, and Honorable City of London, as well as for the
Country, I cannot otherwise but offer unto Your Most Gracious Majesty's, and
the Parliament's, Consideration, this one thing more.
DUring the whole time, of my now being in London, I have always taken my
Victuals, from the Cooks, as many other Lodgers, Travelers, and Strangers,
daily do the like. And thus, when People from all Places, both from City and
Country, resort to such Houses, they are apt to complain, and tell, how
extremely Dear they pay for every thing: And such Complaints, as these, many
times, from the Mouths of all sorts of People, I have oftentimes heard: And
many of those People, who are altogether Strangers to me, have said in my
hearing, That if it were not, for some greedy-minded Men, that do make a
continual Trade of it, to forestall Markets, [Provisions] would not have been
(altogether) so dear here in London, as of late they have been, and now at
present are. And it is now a common thing, for Country Grasiers, to take up
their abode here in the City of London; and when they know of any Cattle that
is coming up to this City, and that the Drivers, or Owners thereof, are not so
well acquainted with the Prices of Cattle, what they will yield here in
London-Markets. [Then] those Grasiers, which take up their abode here in
London, only to make advantage of all such Opportunities, when they know of the
coming up of such Cattle, then they meet them in their way, upon the Road,
(perhaps) thirty, or forty Miles from London; and so buy up such Cattle there
upon the Road; and after that, drive them to London, [and then] fell them much
dearer, than the first Owners of them would have sold them, if they had drove
them into London themselves: And the like Fore-stalling, or Engrossing Trade,
is also continually used, in buying up beforehand all other sorts of
Provisions whatsoever, here in London: And in all England over, it is now
become a common Trade, so that it is thought that there are [now] in England
more Engrossers, Hucksters, and Regrators, than of any other (one) Trade
whatsoever. And in fine, to say all, in a word or too, such Doings, as these,
are now become the very Bane of England; for it will always create a continual
Dearth on all sorts of Provisions: And what is this otherwise, (than) a taking
away the Staff of Bread, and the Stay of Provisions, from the Poor and Needy;
[or] do not such things as these, (prove) to many poor People, (at last) a mere
lingering Death it self; for it is they poor Creatures, that at last, pay for
all. For they have neither their due Weight nor Measure, in any thing that they
buy, from such Huckstring Regrators. And all such Engrossing Trades, are of no
better use to England, than to make fat, and puff up in Pride, a mere Brutish,
Heathenish, and Swinish sort of People, to the mere destruction, or almost
starving of many honest, sober, and temperate Christians, who have in them
honest Minds, and tender Consciences, and brave generous Spirits: And such Men
as these, cannot take Liberty of Conscience to shark, in those hardtims, as
other Irreligious and Ungodly Cormorantes, will always do; and therefore it is,
that (now) in those days, honest poor Men, are most of all driven to the Wall
with Poverty; and the days are now come, wherein an Honest Man can hardly live.
And all those things are (only) through Men's want of the Grace of God, and want
of Christian Charity to one another; for their is ye^ enough in our Land, of
all things, only Men (will) to gratify their own base Pride, and Covetousness,
Overreach, Cheat, Coufen, and Starve one another. And after all this, can we
think that God will not visit us for these things? Or can we, both by Reason,
or Scripture, expect any farther Blessings from the Hands of God, so long as we
continue to live in these known Evil Ways. (Oh) let us have a care, for tho
Sentence against Evildoers, is not speedily executed, yet at last, it will
surely be done upon us, unless in the mean time, we repent, and forsake our
Evil Ways: See what Solomon says in his 8th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, 9, 10,
11, 12, and 13 verses. And these things also, with all humble Submission, I
leave to the Consideration of Your most Gracious Majesty, and the most
Honorable Parliament.

I rest in true Love, with all Humble Obedience, Your Majesty's Loyal Subject,
and the most Honorable Parliament's devoted Servant, Richard Newnam.

FINIS.
Courteous Readers,
IN looking over this Treatise, I have observed some Letteral Faults, which
will not much alter the Sense of these Discourses, if the Courteous Readers
will but be pleased to favor these Lines, and use (rightly) their own unbyased
Reasons, in their perusal of them: But however, for the better satisfaction of
all People, I have printed this Errata, by which, with a little Care and Pains,
you may be satisfied in any of the Faults, which you may discover in the whole
work.

PAge 3. line 26. for onlv read only. page 9. in several placees for cracked,
read cracked. page 36. line 32. read buy their Corn. page 41. line 4. for it
read if. page 42. line 20. for tme read time. page 52. line 8. for uphoden read
upholden. page 49. with the Letter [I] at the bottom of the same Leaf, should
be marked in the Folio 57, and so onwards accordingly; but this mistake is not
worth your observation, because notwithstanding that, yet the Discourse of the
whole Treatise leads on in its due and orderly method page 59. line 11. for
Genesis 24 chap. 15 verse. read 42 chap. 15 verse. page 61. line 5. look Genesis
7 chap. verse. 12. and so read onward to the end of the Chapter. page 75. line
27. read I am apt. page 84. line 26. for timet he, read the time.


