NEWS FROM SEA OR, The Taking of the Cruel PIRATE, BEING A full and True
Relation how Captain Cewsicke, alias Dixon, alias Smith, an Irish-Pyrate took
an English Ship of 500. Tuns called the Saint Anne, Laden with D^als from
Norway belonging to Captain Shorter, and putting 18. Men that they found aboard
into a small Boat without food, Compass or tackling, barbarously exposed them
to the mercy of the Sea, where they must certainly have Perished, had not a
Dutch Ship by Gods providence taken them up, and set them on shore in Norfolk,

AS ALSO How they carried the said Ship into Aberdeen in Scotland, and borrowed
219. pound on her lad^ing where she was soon after seized, And the said Pirate,
and 13. of his men since taken near Lee, and brought up to the Marshalseas in
South-warke, where they now remain Prisoners.

LONDON; Printed for R. W. 1674.

NEWS from SEA, OR The Taking of the Barbarous Pirate.
AMongst all the rapacious violencies practiced by wicked Men, there is scarce
any more destructive to Society and Commerce then that of Piracy, or Robers of
the Sea, whence in all Ages they have been esteemed, Humani Generis hosts,
Public Enemies to Mankind whom ^very one was obliged to oppose and destroy,
as we do Common v^rmine that Infest and trouble us. ^ut this particular Art
which lately happened, is aggravat^d ^y so many Cir^umstances as may render it
superlatively wicked and abominable.

The Persons that Committed this Piracy were for the most part Iri^h men, Their
Captain G^o^ge Cewsicke, al^as Dixon, alias Sm^^h, for by ^ach of t^ose Names
he sometimes passe^, he was one that long has followed the Trade as it is on
probable grounds suspect^d, and it is said not long since took some Ships in the
same manner in the West Indies, He had a small well built vessel being an
Excellent Sailer, which during the late Wars he Cruised up and down with on the
Coasts of Scotland and took several good Dutch prizes, since the Wars concluded
between our most Gracious Sovereign, and the States of the United Provinces, he
pretends to have g^t ^ Com^ission from the F^ench King, to make booty of what
Fl^mi^h or Spanish Merchantmen he could m^et with, but it seems if he saw an
opportunity he never stood to inquire, whence or whose your Ship but acco^ding
to the Proverb, counted all Fi^h that came to h^s Not.

F^r a^out a month since being abroad a Cruising ^o the No^thwards with three
and tw^nty stout ^^solute fellows fit for his purpose aboard him, he met with
a large Ship of our own belonging to London of a^out 500. Tunns, coming home
from Norway laden with d^al, All or the most p^^t of her Cargo belonging to one
Captain Shorter, a very ^onest worthy G^^tl^m^n, liv^ng ^ear the Barge-house,
o^ the Bankside, This vess^l they Attacqued, and soon board^d her, and (...)
th^mselves Masters of her, which being done t^^y took Eighteen men that they
found Abo^^ (...), and without any respect to them as they were their fellow
Subjects, or the least appearance of humanity or compassion, put them into a
small Pinke which they had taken before and riffled, but first took away all
her Tackling, and so without any food to sustain them, or Compass to direct
them, or Tackling to assist them, most barbarously committed all those eighteen
Souls to the mercy of the Ocean, at a Considerable distance from any Shore,
where they must certainly, and Inevitably have Perished, either being famished,
or Cast away, or Split to pieces, had not God in his most Gracious providence
preserved them, and sent them Relief: for after they had been Tossed and Driven
to and fro at the pleasure of the wind and w^ves, for above two days, and two
nights, a Dutch Ship Sa^ling by, upon their making signs and complaints of
their (...) Con^i^^^n took them in, and set them the next day on Shore in
Norfolk.

In the mean time the Jovial Pirate with his fatal bo^ty mak^s all sail to the
North-wards, and in few days arrives at Abe^deen, where he Carries in the
Merchant-man, and co^fid^ntly relates, that he found her floating on the Sea
with no person aboard her, near the Shore, and that he supposed she might run a
ground in a late Tempest, and thereupon all her men abandond her, and that
afterward the wind veering about she might work her self off again; but to
what part she belonged they know not; but pretended her to be an Hollander,
which se^med more probable, because she was Dutch built, being taken in the
former War, and that they having a French Commission; and meeting her as
aforesaid, She was lawful Prize. All her bills of Ladeing being made away on
purpose to favor the design.

At Aberdeen they remained some time, and pretending a present want of money,
borrowed two Hundr^d and nineteen pounds upon a part of the Dea^s, and so w^nt
out again to Sea, intending to come in again in few day^, and make Sale of the
Ship and the rest of her Ladeing.

But the poor men whom they so exposed to destruction, as aforesaid, being as
we have said, got safe to Land, Immediately post up to London, and acquaint
their owners with their unhappy disaster, and withal describe the Ship, and
persons that did it. Hereupon Advertisements were sent abroad to all the
neighboring Ports of England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and Holland,
relateing the marks of the ship so unduely taken, and desireing that if she
were brought into any Port, she might be secured, This coming to Aberdeen, they
found all Circumstances agree so exactly, that they could not but Conclude this
to be the very Ship intended, and thereupon His Royal Highness Officers thereof
the Admiralty Seized her, and gave notice thereof last week in the Gazzet, For
Master Shorter, or others concerned to prove their Right.

Our piratical Caper having by some means got some intelligence of those
proceedings, resolves to come no more at Aberdeen, but stands away directly for
the Thames, and boldly comes into Lee in Essex, to wash and Tallowe, with he
did, and lying on shore with his ships Crew for some time, Spent their money at
a most extravag^nt rate, as indeed they might w^ll afford, if they might but
have been Suffered to go on with their Trade. But, alas! the Squib is now
almost run to the End of the rope, and they mu^t come to Account for their
unjust Actions for notice being given of Such p^rso^s being at Lee, the
Marshall belonging to the Admiralty is ordered to go down to Seize them; but
came to late, for they were just Sailed out of Lee River down to the Buoy in
the Nore, and So beloved had they made themselves by their generous Spending in
the Town, that Scarce any body there would either believe or assist him;
Hereupon he got two of his Majesty's Yatches to pursue them, and the wind
having for two days been contrary, they were not got forth to Sea, but were by
them overtaken near the Buoy in the Nore aforesaid, and the Captain and Twelve
of his men were abord taken Prisoners, and Sent up to the Marshalseas in
Southwark, the usual place of Confinment for Malefactors tryable by the Court
of Admiralty, it is exp^cted they will shortly be brought to Trial, It Is doubted
whether they had any French Commission at all, but if they had it was all as
bad, Since they could have noe pretense by virtue of that to take an English
Shipp, besides it is well known that his Sacred Majesty's foreseeing in his
princely wisdom the Inconveniences likely to arise, was graciously pleased
Some time cence to publish his Royoll Proclamation, strictly prohibiteing All
his Subjects from Serving any foreign Prince or State;

The Names of these brought in and now lying in the Marshalsea, are
George Cewsicke, alias Dixon, alias, Smith, Captain. Michael Fitz Gerrard.
Maurice Fitz Gerrard. Daniel Corketing. Richard Thursby. John Roach. William
Collingwood. Abell Owen. Darby Moyling, Gerrard Cunden. Iohe Gilgin. John
Swellwin. Gerrard Stakes. James Daunton.
FINIS.

