THE TRUE CHARACTER OF A Town BEAU.
By T. O. Gent.
A Town Beau is a Bundle of Vanity, composed of Ignorance and Pride, Folly and
Debauchery; a silly hussing Thing, three parts Fop, and the rest Hector; a kind
of walking Mercers Shop, that shows one Stuff to day, and another to morrow,
and is valuable just according to the Price of his Suit, and the Merits of his
Tailor; a Spawn of Gentility, that inherits the Vices of his Ancestors, and is
like to entail nothing but Infamy and Diseases on Posterity: His first Care is
his Dress, and next his Body, and in the fitting these two together, consists
his Soul and all its Faculties; his Trade is making of Love, yet he knows no
difference between that and Lust; and tell him of a Virgin at Sixteen, he shall
swear then Miracles are not ceased: He is so bitter an Enemy to Marriage, that
one would suspect him born out of lawful Wedlock, for he never hears Matrimony
named, but he sweats and starts as bad as at the Salute of a Sergeant; but for
the most delicious Recreation of Whoring, he protests a Gentleman cannot live
without it; and vows Mahomet was a brave Bully, and deserves to be worshipped,
because he had the wit to make his Paradise a Seraglio, and the Joys of it to
consist in plump Wenches, etc. The Devil has taught him Chemistry, whereby he
can extract Baudry out of the most modest Language; so that he makes Cato speak
it, and turns Admonitions into Obscenity. His Mind is a Room hung round with
Arctine's Pictures, and the Contemplation of them is all his Devotion; every
thing with him is an Incentive to Lust, and every Woman, Devil enough to tempt
him; Covent Garden Silk Gowns, and Wapping Wastcoateers are equally his Game;
for he watches Wenches, just as Tumblers do Rabbets, and plays with Women, as
he does at Cards, not caring what Suit he turns up Trump.

All his Talk is Rhodomontado and Bounce, calling a Nobleman Jack as
familiarly as his Footboy, and seldom naming a Lord, without adding, My
Cousin; whatever he does, he cries it is like a Gentleman, and indeed it is only
like it, as a Broker's Ware is to a Mercer's, or Long-Lane compared to
Cheapside; for he is a Wit of an Under Region, that does but Zany the True,
Brave and Noble, grossly imitating on the Low Rope, what the other does neatly on
the Higher: He confers Titles of Honor on all his shabby Companions, to create
himself the greater Esteem with his Landlady (who adores him as a more
accomplished Knight, than she ever met with in Parism^s, or Amadis of Gaul:)
And when he is going to take a Run with a common Crack in the Park, s^^e us he
has an Assignation from a Lady of extraordinary Quality. His Hangers on call
him Man of Blood, and by his own Report, he is as stout as a Turkey-Cock, yet he
never was in any Service but building Sconces, nor Duel, but with his own
Footboy or a Drawer; for he is so prudent, as not to exercise his Courage
against any that dare turn again; and has got more Bastards, than ever he made
Fatherless Children; yet perhaps at first he will be saucy, and bluster like
the four Winds in Painting; but if you begin to be as high as he, strait the
Buckle breaks, and then he swears, -- I Gad, Sir, I ever honored you, but you
are a passionate Gentleman, and will not understand a Jest.

Think not, because I repeat so often, he swears, that I tautologize in his
Character, it is only to make the Picture more like the Life, for all his
Discourses are buttered with Oaths, which he uses (Euphenice gratia.) He seems
a Kinsman to the Man in the Moon, for every Month he is in a new Mode, and
instead of true Gallantry (which once dwelt in the Breasts of Englishmen) he
is made up of Complements, Cringes, Knots, Fancies, Perfumes, and a thousand
French apish Tricks, which render him only fit to be set on a Farmer's Hovel to
scare away Crows: He places his very Essence in his Outside, and his only
Prayers, are, that his Father may go to the Devil expeditiously, and the Estate
hold out to keep himself and his Miss in a good Equipage. He thinks it the
rankest Heresy in the World, to believe any Man can be Wise or Noble, that is
in plain Clothes; and therefore looks down with Contempt on every body, who
does not wear as fine and as fashionable Clothes as himself.

To trace him ab Origin, his Breeding was under the Wing of a too indulgent
Mother, who took a world of pains to make him a Fool, and attained her End at
the Age of Discretion: at School he learned only how to rob Orchards, and the
Generosity of Bribing other Boys to make his Exercise, and staid at the
University just long enough to commence Drunkard, and get by heart the Name of
his College to vapor with; from thence he posted to one of the Inns of Court,
but in four years time never read six Lines in (...), for he loved a Flacket
better than a Moot Case, and was more in his Mercer's Books, than in C^^s or
(...); for Learning he says is Pedantry, unbecoming a Gentleman, and Law, a
thing fit only for Gown men that have no way of raising a Fortune, but by
setting, two (...) Gentlemen) John a Nokes and John a Styles together by the
Ears; and thinks the seven wise Men of Greece mere Ignoramus's to one that
understands the Humors of the Town; it is but wearing fashionable Clothes,
talking loud, and laughing at all one does not understand, and the Business is
done.

His whole Library consists of Books of Complements, Drollery, half a dozen
Plays, and a Bundle of bawdy Songs in Manuscript; yet he is a shrewd Linguist:
Impudence he calls the Boon Assurance, and Unmannerliness the Genteel
Negligence. He talks nothing but Intreagues, Gusts, Garnitures, Repartees,
Banter, and such modish Fustian, which he hedges in on all Occasions, or indeed
without any, and if you bar but forty Words, you strike him dumb. He admires
the Eloquence of Son of a Whore, when it is pronounced with a good Grace, and
therefore applies it to every thing; so that if his Pipe be faulty, or his
Purge gripe too much, it is a Son of a Whore Pipe, a Spawn of a Bitches Purge:
For new minted Phrases, he has much enriched our Language; 'twas he first
brought, I beg your Diversion, into fashion, and may have a Pattent for the
sole Use (as first Inventer) of that noble Complement: Let me be damned, and my
Body made a Grid-iron to broil my Soul on to Eternity, if I do not, Madam, love
you confoundedly.

Till noon he lies abed, to digest his over-night's Debauch, and then having
dressed himself, and paid half an hours Adoration to his own sweet Image in the
Looking-glass, he trails along the Streets, observing who observes him, to the
French Ordinary, where he swills his Paunch with good Cheer and Wine, and tells
at Dinner how his Physic worked last Night, and swears never any Clap plagued
him half so much as that he has now upon him; cursing his Doctor for a quacking
Bastard, that understands a Gentleman's Disease no more than a Farrier: After
this, the Coach is called to hurry him to the Playhouse, where he advances
into the middle of the Pit, struts about a while to render his good Parts
conspicuous, pulls out his Comb, careens his Wig, hums the Orange-Wench, to
give her her own Rates for her China Fruit, and immediately sacrifices the
fairest of them to the Shrine of the next Vizor-Mask; then gravely sits down
and falls half asleep, unless some petulant Wench, hard by, keeps him awake
with treading on his Toe, or a wanton Complement; yet all on a sudden, to show
his Judgment, and prove himself at once a Wit and a Critic, he starts up, and
with a tragical Face, damns the Play, though he has not heard (at least
understood) two Lines of it: However, when it is done, he picks up a Miss, and
pinching her Fingers, in a soft Tone, and with Looks most abominably
languishing, he whispers, Damn me, Madam, if you were but sensible, and all
that -- of the Passion I have for you, and the Flames which your irresistible
Charms have kindled in my Breast, you would be merciful, and honor me with your
Angelical Company, to take a Draught of Loves Posset at the next Tavern. But if
he finds her honest, and cannot prevail, then he cries aloud, Damn ye for a
Puritannical Whore: What make, you in the Pit here? the Twelve-penny Gallery,
with Camblet Cloaks and Foot-boys is good enough for you; and so raises his
Siege, and leaves her.

Whither he goes next, I dare not follow him, for it is certainly a Bawdy House;
by what Name or Title soever it may be dignified or distinguished: Here he
meets a Squadron of his Fellow Beaus, and having heightened their Spirits with
Jollity and Wine, they are fit for any thing but Civility; and when they
vouchsafe to ramble homewards, about One or Two a Clock in the Morning, they
set up the dreadful S^. Sa. more dangerous to meet than an Indian Running a
Muck. In these heroic Humors, has many a Watchman had his Horns battered
about his Ears, and the trembling Constable been put besides the Gravity of his
Interrogatories, and forced to measure his Length upon the Ground: The first
Man they meet, they swear to kill, and set all the Women on their Heads, and
so they proceed till the Rattling of broken glass Windows, the Shricks of
distressed Damsels, and the Thunder of their own Oaths and Execrations fills
all the Neighborhood with Horror, and makes them verily conclude, that the
Devil and all his Lifeguard are going a Processioning.

Next Morning, his Tailor, his Mercer, his Haberdasher, and his Semstress,
stand like a Guard of Switzers about his Chamber Door, waiting his Up-rising;
to avoid the Gauling of whose small Shot, he instantly dispatches a Light
Horseman to call Mr. Glyster-pipe his Apothecary, who encountering this
desperate Band of Creditors only with two or three Glasses, as though that day
he had purged, drives them all to their Holes like so many Foxes; for the Name
of Physic is the only Amulet against a Dun, and a sufficient Quietus est to
any beleaguered Gentleman.

Thus the Iliads of our Beau's Accomplishments may be cramb'd up in a
Nut-shell. His three Cardinal Virtues being only Swearing, VVenching and
Drinking, and if other Men's Lives may be compared to a Play, his is certainly
but a Farce, which is acted only on three Scenes, the Ordinary, the Playhouse
and the Tavern. His Religion (for now and then he will be prattling of that too)
is pretended Hobbian, and he swears the Leviathan may supply all the Leaves of
Solomon, yet he never saw it in his Life, and for ought he knows, it may be a
Treatise about Catching of Sprats, or new Regulating the Green-Land Fishing
Trade: However, the Rattle of it at Coffee-Houses, has taught him to laugh at
Spirits, and maintain that there are no Angels but those in Petticoats, and
therefore he defies Heaven, worse than Maximine: Imagines Hell, only a
Hot-house to flux in for a Clap, and calls the Devil the Parson's Bugbear, and
sometimes the civil old Gentleman in Black. He denies there is any essential
Difference betwixt Good and Evil, deems Conscience a thing only fit for
Children, and ascribes all Honesty to Simplicity, and an Unpracticableness in
the VVays and Methods of the Town.

By these Extravagancies does he signalize himself above common Mortals, and
count all other Dunghill-spirited Fops, that are not as madly wild and wicked
as himself. Thus is Civility, Virtue and Religion hooted out of the World, and
Folly and Atheism exalted and promoted: For this is the Bell-weather of
Gallantry, whom our younger Fry of Gentlemen admire for a Hero. And by these
Arts does a Man now adays come to be counted a Person well bred, and fit for a
generous Conversation, though in truth, it is only his Estate that guides his
Vanity, and his Purse that can compound for his Follies; for of himself he is a
painted Butter-fly, a Baboon usurping Humane Shape; or to use his own silly
nasty Phrase, Mine A -- se all over. And so I leave him behind me, till I meet
him next time, either in the King's- Bench-Walks, or an Hospital.

London, Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1692.


