THE OBSERVATOR VINDICATED, OR AN ANSWER TO Mr. SMYTHIES's REPLY TO THE
OBSERVATOR: Together with a brief, but just, Censure on his SERMON annexed to
it.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1685.

AN ANSWER To Mr. Smythies's Reply TO THE OBSERVATOR.
SIR,
HAVING lately seen a Pamphlet of yours, entitled a Reply to the Observator;
together with your Sermon annexed to it, and finding by the Title Page thereof,
that it had run through no less than three several impressions; I thought
verily that there must be something more than ordinary in it, in that it went
down so well; and that that sure must needs be a very choice dish, which the
Stationer had thus thrice served up in so short a time. This whet my appetite
to see what was in it, and made me greedily set my self to the reading of it.
But no sooner had I gone through some few pages thereof, but I presently found
it to be nothing else but Cramben ter coctam; a nauseous publishing of that
thrice, which no ingenious man would have cared once to have had a sight of;
and indeed had it fallen only into the hands of such, it must have grown stale
upon the Printers; who, instead of being at the trouble of a second, and third
impression of it, must have been at some pains for the getting off the first.

But the unthinking multitude are yours, and the Stationers best friends: for
these swallow down any thing, just as men do Pills without either chewing or
tasting them; and therefore as they have swallowed three impressions of your
Pamphlet already, so they may threescore more; and yet no man, that understands
himself or what he reads, be inclined to think any thing the better either of
you, or of what you write.

But to let you see, how little you have advantaged either your cause or
person, by exposing your self in print as you have done; I doubt not but to
make it plainly appear to every impartial Reader (you your self being one of
them) that your Reply to the Observator, is so far from vindicating you, in the
matter charged against you, that it confirms the charge, and more fully proves
it on you. Thus when you are charged for breaking the Orders of the Church, in
the matter of Sponsors, what is it that you say in your own Vindication? why,
you tell us of a story of your going to the Bishop, to know his pleasure about
it; but what does all that tittle-tattle of your going to the Bishop signify?
but only to tell us plainly, that you did indeed break the Orders of the
Church, but not without his Orders for it. This is the first time that I ever
heard a Bishop had power to give such Orders: he may indeed, by virtue of the
Canonical obedience I owe him, order me to observe the Rules and Canons of the
Church; but, by what power or authority he can appoint or permit the breach of
them, I understand not. When therefore you went to the Bishop, to consult with
him about this affair; you had been better advised, had you gone and consulted
with the Rubric of the Common Prayer; which is the unquestionable rule you
ought to go by: of the Authority whereof if you do in the least doubt, let me
advise you (instead of going to the Bishop to consult about it) to go and
consult with the two Acts of Parliament for the Uniformity of public Prayers,
and Administration of the Sacraments: and then consider with your self, whether
any single person's authority can dispense with the observance of that, which
is not only confirmed and ratifyed by the whole body of the Clergy, the Church
representative, but is likewise incorporated into the Laws of the Land, and has
the Supreme Power of the Nation for its Establishment. But Oh! the invincible
necessity of complying with the humors of the people! which is such as no law
can control, or withstand the force of: and therefore if Mahomet will not come
to the mountain, the mountain must go to Mahomet; if the people will not submit
to the Government, there is no help for it but, the Government must submit to
them.

But you have something farther yet to offer in your Vindication; which is,
that you have often, both from the Desk, and the Pulpit, commended the practice
of the Church; and answered the Objections of the Dissenters against it: But
had you not the Bishop's Orders for that too? or did you do it of your own
accord? if you did, the Church is infinitely beholding to you for your
commending the practice of those things, which she has positively enjoined the
performance of: as if a commendatory discourse of yours in such things, were
more to be regarded, than the Churches Authority, in her positive injunctions
of them. But to commend what the Church has commanded, is not all that you have
done on her behalf; for you have likewise answered the Objections of the
Dissenters against her; and yet, such obstinate people are they, that they will
not be answered by you; for you tell us, that, upon the present Vicar's
requiring the Orders of the Church to the duly observed, and your compliance
with such Orders, the Dissenters (notwithstanding you have so well answered
their objections) will not be brought to comply with them; but either send for
Non conformists to Baptize their children, or let them remain unbaptiz'd. But
now, since you are so good at answering Objections, I desire you to answer one
of mine: now the thing, which I Object against you, is your justifying your
self, in breaking the Orders of the Church, by your having the Bishop's for it.
For how does his Orders, for breaking those of the Church, justify you in the
breach of them? does his being criminal make you ever the less guilty? how you
have answered the Objections of the Dissenters, I know not; sure I am, that
your own dissent, in the particular you are charged with, cannot to God and
your own Soul be answered by you; unless you repent of it: other means, to
acquit your self by, I know not of. But of this there appears nothing at all in
your Reply; but rather much the contrary: for there though you tell us of your
ready compliance with the present Vicar's Orders, who has required that the
Orders of the Church be duly observed, (and God's peace, and the Churches be
with him for it) yet I perceive something, as well as you; which is, that you
are still hammering upon the ill consequences, that will follow upon such
observance, and thereby plainly show, that it is not the Orders of the Church,
but those of the present Vicar you have regard to. So that had you but such
another Vicar to consult with, as you had formerly; you would certainly be at
your old Nonconforming tricks again, (which I find you have a months mind for)
and think a compliance with the humors of the people to be much more
necessary, than obedience to the Orders and Constitutions of that Church, which
(by trimming in it) you would be thought to be a sound member of. And thus you
see, how well you have Vindicated your self of the first crime charged against
you; your christning without Sponsors: which, by your own confession, you stand
charged with, and have not as yet, by any thing you have said, acquitted your
self of the guilt of.

I come now to the other thing charged upon you; which is your christning
without the sign of the Cross: and here likewise you own the matter of fact,
but positively deny, that the Orders of the Church were broken by it. Now in
asserting this, you assert a manifest falsehood; the opposite whereto is a most
plain and evident truth; which is, that the Orders of the Church were broken by
you; and that more ways than one. For first, that which you make to be the
cause of your omitting the sign of the Cross, (to wit, the gaining of a
Proselyte) is a thing not allowed of by the Church, which permits the omission
of it, only in the case of private Baptism, and then only for expeditions
sake, as to the present use thereof. For if the child, who is after this sort
Baptized do afterward live; she requires that it be brought to Church; where,
after the Congregation is certified of its being duly Baptized, the Minister is
to demand the Name of it, of the Sponsors; which being by them pronounced, he
is to proceed to take their engagement for it; and then, saying the words
prescribed for the sign of the Cross, to sign it with it. Now how well you
observed the Orders of the Church in this particular, let any man judge; nay,
be you your self the judge of it. This is (...), the first manifest falsehood,
in your asserting, that the Orders of the Church were not broken by you, in
what you did, but this was not the only thing, you broke the Orders of the
Church in. For in the 2d. place it appears plainly, by what you say, that your
private Baptism was only the public Baptism administered privately: otherwise
what do you mean, by saying that the reason of your omitting the sign of the
Cross was only to gain a Proselyte to the Church? when, in the case of private
Baptism, the present use of the Cross is no ways enjoined you by it: but then
only in case the child do live to be afterward brought to Church; as has been
abovementioned. Which being most undoubtedly true; how should the omission of
that, be a means to gain you a Proselyte to the Church, the use whereof, in the
present case, is no where enjoined you by it? It Is plain therefore that your
private Baptism was only the public Baptism administered privately. So that
this is another particular, wherein the Orders of the Church were broken by
you. And therefore, by your being so positive in asserting that they were not,
you give your self the lie; which a man, that will be so uncivil as to give
himself, must take, and there is no help for it. But then, in the 3d. place,
what a most preposterous course, did you take to gain a Proselyte to the
Church, by an action that bears a direct opposition to the Rules and
Constitutions of it? here again your action gives you the lie, and flies
directly in the face of you; and the honesty of the one, is the best comment on
the integrity of the other: that is, your breach of the Orders of the Church
plainly tells us what Proselytes you are for gaining into it; such as, like
your self, are Nonconforming Conformists: who are some of the worst Enemies
the Church has; in that they herd themselves in it, only to lay it waste, by
breaking down the enclosures of it. These are such Proselytes, as the Church
had never greater reason, than now, to be afraid of; and therefore ought the
Governors and Pastors thereof, narrowly to observe the motions of those, who
are the gainers of them.

As for the other thing you are charged with, namely, your omitting to pray for
the Duke of York; I must say this in abatement of your charge; that you are not
in this particular (as you are in the other two) guilty by your own confession.
For here we have you positively denying the matter of fact, and bringing some
hundreds of your constant Auditors to attest the truth of what you say; of
which I was none; and therefore cannot say one way or other, having never so
much as heard of your name, before you had exposed it in Print; and made it
public, to your own shame, and disgrace. But though I am thus a perfect
stranger to your person, yet having studied men, as well as books, and
endeavored to understand the one by the other; give me leave to tell you, that
if the Proverb, Ex ungue leonem, be true; that is, if a man may know the Beast
by his paw; I have seen enough under the hand of one Mr. Smythies, Curate of
Cripple-gate, to convince me that he is not a man of that temper he pretends
himself to be; but may shrewdly be suspected to be a Woolf, only in Sheeps
clothing. And therefore, whether he omitted to pray for the Duke, or no, it
matters not; who, questionless, had the bill of Exclusion gone forward, would
have more readily excluded him his prayers, than ever he put any person into
them.

As to your valuing your self upon your being called Tory, in the days of
Whiggism; let me tell you, that the very worst of Trimmers now, would have
passed for such in those days: but there being since an alteration in the
times, but none in you; you must remain, what you were then, a rank Trimmer
still. But you value not opprobrious names, you tell us, so long as you are
faithful and industrious in the discharge of your Office. Very industrious
indeed in you have been in the discharge of it; even to the going beyond the
bounds of your duty, and fetching a compass out of the Pale of the Church, to
bring your Proselytes into it. But now how faithful you have been in the
discharge hereof, let the forementioned instance of the course you took to gain
a Proselyte, be a most pregnant and convincing proof. There is another thing,
you tell us, is objected against you; and which, by means of some spiteful
people, as you call them, came lately to the ear of his Majesty, and that is
your being an associate with Dissenters: now those spiteful people, as you
term them, would from any man's mouth, but that of a spiteful Trimmer, have
been termed Loyal. But how do you justify your self in this particular? why,
by telling us, that in your being so, you are no greater a friend to
Phanaticks, than our Great Master was to Publicans and Sinners. But how does
our Savior's conversing with these, justify your conversing with Dissenters?
you must not reckon them amongst Publicans and Sinners; for if you do, as great
a friend as you are to them, they will, I can assure you, be none to you. Our
Savior's example therefore, in the present case, stands you in no stead at
all; it had been much more to your purpose to have found him conversing with
the Scribes and Pharisees; who were righteous much after the same manner your
Phanaticks are; in that they were Separatists (as their very name imports) upon
the account of the good opinion they had of themselves, and of their being
better, and holier than other men. Now our Savior (and by the Authority of
whose example you think to justify your self) was so far from associating
himself with those, that he every where declines it; and, instead of treating
them kindly at any time, denounces no less than eight several woes at once
against them; for their Hypocrisy: and, at another time, tells them plainly,
that he came not to call such righteous persons, as they were, but sinners to
repentance. So that you see, our Savior's kindness to Publicans and sinners
will not justify yours to Republicans and Schismatics. These being those
disorderly walkers the Apostle (2 Thessalonians. 3.6.) injoyns you to withdraw your
self from, which, however strictly there enjoined you, is that you cannot well
do; lest you should want Compurgators for your Loyalty: neither are they
willing, I believe, that you should withdraw your self; lest they should want
one for themselves: which is such a kindness as you cannot in gratitude deny
them. For, according to the Proverb of Scabunt se mutuo muli, one good turn,
you know, requires another. But now, after all this great love and kindness
owned betwixt you and the Phanaticks; how comes it to pass, that you have the
confidence to tell us, that the greatest kindness, you ever did for any
Dissenters from the Church, was for a family of Papists; whose whole estate was
unjustly kept from them, by a Protestant Dissenter? Now what you did for these
Papists, was nothing more than purely an act of justice: and is the doing any
man common justice, such a mighty act of kindness in your esteem? it is so, it
seems, when done to a Papist. And therefore lest your party should take this
ill at your hands, and think you Popishly affected for it; you presently tell
us, that you think you could as soon be a Jew, as a Popish Christian. Now, was
this well said, or no, do you think? might you not have used a little softer
expression? and said, that you could as soon be a Turk, as a Popish Christian?
(for the Turks, you know, have some small Reverence for our Savior; whereas
the Jew has none; but spits in his face, and treats him with scorn and
contempt) And would not your Tekelites have liked that expression, altogether
as well as the other; I am apt to believe they would; however you must have a
care of complying too far with the humors of the people; lest such compliance,
as brought you once to omit the sign of the Cross, for bringing a Trimmer into
the Church, bring you at last to omit the Cross it self, for bringing the Jew
in thither.

In your next Paragraph, you tell us, that you have suffered in your
reputation, by being kind in the distribution of other men's Charity, (where you
were not limited by the Donor) to all that were in excessive want, without
respect had to the Opinion of any. But now, notwithstanding this Profession of
yours, I much question whether, if a Jew, or Popish Christian had come in your
way, you would not (unless limited by the Donor) have been kinder to the one,
than to the other; or at least made it cross or pile, which should have been
relieved by you. And now, after all this, you are pleased to tell us, That you
are content to suffer in your good name; since this has been the lot of diverse
others, who are a thousand times more deserving than your self. That there are
diverse in the Nation ten thousand times more deserving than your self, is a
matter that very well deserves belief; as being a thing past all manner of
doubt: but now, that such as these, have suffered, in like manner, as you have
done, is far enough from being alike credible: and therefore, before it gain
credit with me, I must have some farther proof of the truth thereof, than
barely your saying of it. However, supposing it to be true; does their
suffering the same with you, make your case one jot the better or theirs ever a
whit the worse? Our Savior himself was in the very same condemnation with the
two Thieves, that suffered with Him; and yet, I hope, you will not say, that He
was ever the less Innocent, or they ever the less criminal? the application is
easy and obvious; and therefore I leave you to make it. But some of the most
eminent Divines of the Church of England have been falsely accused, you say;
well, supposing again this to be true; I ask you again, whether their being
falsely accused, does make your accusation ever the less true? If it does not,
to what purpose is it mentioned by you? unless it be slily to insinuate the
truth of your own innocence, from the falsehood of their accusation: but this is
a cheat too gross to pass upon any man; for who would think ever the better of
a Malefactor, who, to salve his reputation at the Gallows, should say, that it
was many an honest man's fate to be hanged, as well as his? the application
here likewise is very easy; and therefore are you again left to make it. So
that you see, it is not the hard rubbing your crimes, against other men's
innocence, which will fetch off the guilt of them.

As to the Magistrate you speak of, on whom some think, as you tell us, that
the Observator has been throwing his dirt, all, that I have to say, is this;
that the Observator's business is not to throw dirt upon any man, that does not
deserve to have it cast on him: in whose farther Vindication (as to what I have
seen of his papers) give me leave to tell you; that there is no dirt, that he
has thrown upon any man, but what will, in your endeavoring to wipe it off,
stick close upon your self: there being not a person in the whole herd of the
Faction, reflected on by him, whom he has not treated, with more civility, than
he deserves: and therefore when you tell us of some, whose Loyalty, and
Conformity to the Laws of God, the King, and the Church, lie more in their
talk, than in their practice: if, among those some, you reckon the Observator
for one; I must tell you plainly, that I heartily wish, and that for the sake
of all those Laws you mention, that your Loyalty and Conformity to them, had
lain half so much, either in your talk or practice, as his has unquestionably
done in both. Here therefore, instead of wiping off the dirt from your
Magistrate, you are casting it on the Observator, but 'twill not stick there.
For he is a person of too untainted a reputation for his Loyalty, ever to have
it Fly-blown by the breath of a stinking Trimmer.

And now, Sir, to answer those few questions, which you sedately propose to the
Observator. The first whereof is, whether if men's calmly treating the
Protestant Dissenters, speaks them Trimmers, his wonderful mildness and
gentleness toward Popish Dissenters does not make him justly liable to the
charge of Trimming? to this I answer; that the charge of this wonderful
mildness and gentleness of his toward the Papists is a most malicious slander.
However for the proof hereof, you instance in his endeavoring to sham and
ridicule the Popish Plot; and for making good the truth of this, you refer us
to the Observator, Aug. 30. this Observator I have consulted; and find it to be
so far from ridiculing the Popish Plot, that it gives us a true state and
account thereof: and therefore if you had taken a quarter of that pains for
lessening the Phanatick Plot, which he has done for giving us a true state of
the Popish one; (which is by you maliciously called shamming of it) you had
taken infinitely too much: there being that vast odds between them; and ten
thousand times more proof for the one, than for the other. Hitherto therefore,
there appears no such wonderful kindness of the Observator toward the
Papists. But what shall we say then of his being ready, on all Occasions, to
do that justice to the Papists, as to acquit them of the Murder of the late
King, by laying it on the Phanaticks? this sure, though an act of pure justice,
yet being done for the Papists, must, in your esteem of it, pass for a
wonderful act of kindness toward them. But what now? if he has been thus
wonderful kind to them, must he presently, to purge himself of the suspicion
of Popery, or of being Popishly affected, declare, as you have done, that,
notwithstanding the justice he has done them, he could as soon be a Jew, as a
Popish Christian? No, there is no need for it: he has taken a much better course
for the clearing himself from being a Papist, having taken the Sacrament on it,
that he is none. And therefore, though he should own a greater kindness for the
Romish Church, than for the Jewish Synagogue, and own likewise a greater
charity for those, that pay too much reverence to the Cross, than for those,
who treat it with scorn and contempt; yet will none, but a Trimmer of a
Protestant, ever think him the more inclining to the Church of Rome, or believe
him to be a Trimmer for it. When therefore you demand of him, whether you may
not speak to him in his own dialect, and in most of his own words as follows;
why this is right Trimming, etc. I answer, no; for those words, as used by him
to you, are most pertinent and proper; but as used by you to him, are plainly
ridiculed by you; and sound no better out of your mouth, than those words of
the Apostle, of obeying God rather than man, do out of a Phanatick's; which
words, when used by the Apostle, were most significant; but out of the mouth of
a Phanatick (who, under the pretext of Conscience of obeying God, rather than
man, obeys neither) are intolerable.

Your 2d. demand of the Observator is, whether he did more foolishly, or
spitefully, in asking, whether, by the Prince of this World, he meant the King
of Great Britain, or the Prince of the Air? in answer to which, I demand of
you, whether you did more foolishly, or Phanatically, to suggest, as you do,
that the Laws of Christ, and the Laws of the Land, are at odds with one
another? and that the putting the latter in execution against the Dissenters,
is a cruelty inconsistent with the mildness and lenity of the former?

Your 3d. demand of him is, whether his supposing (as he often does) that men,
who have once imbibed Phanatick principles can never become sincere
Comformists, be not to suggest, either that the Arguments to Conformity are of
little or no force, or that the Clergy are too weak to urge them? to which I
answer, that it suggests neither: but the thing, it plainly suggests to us, is
the incorrigible obstinacy of the Faction; who have the stubbornness of the Jew
in them: and therefore as soon may we expect, that the Ethiopian should change
his skin, and the Leopard his spots, as a factious and thorough-pac'd Phanatick
become a sincere convert.

As to your 4th. demand of him; wherein there are several impertinent Queres
tacked together, I answer, that, in his taking notice of Seditious and
Phanatical discourses from the Pulpit, he neither assumes to himself the Office
of a Bishop, nor charges them with the neglect of it: but, like a worthy
Patriot, strenuously maintains the Post he has undertaken; and makes good the
character of a Loyal and Faithful Observator: who having heretofore diligently
observed every motion and step, which the Faction made toward the late
Rebellion, raised by them, is every way the fittest person (as being the best
able) to judge of the like steps and progress, they are now making and setting
on foot again, toward the raising of another. Such a Spy, as this, is
exceeding useful in the Government, for Observing the motions, and behavior
of such, as, under a pretext of supporting, slily endeavor the Subversion of
it; and therefore may very well be allowed, in some cases, to animadvert on the
Discourses of the Pulpit; as for instance, in the Case of the Dissenters
Sayings, where he has meddled with the Discourses of the Pulpit to some
purpose: and what if, to these Sayings of the Pulpit, he should, in the next
Edition of them, add some of yours from it? might not all this now be done by
him, and yet he neither go beyond the bounds of his own duty, or charge the
Bishops with the neglect of theirs? but all this is done, you say, upon no
better evidence than the tales of Gossipping Busy-bodies, or malicious people;
now, if the tale be true, what matter's it, who tells it; and what if some are
as busy in bringing their help to quench a popular flame, as others are to
kindle it? and when the flame is begun, and the Faction has put the Government
into a tottering condition; what if some are as ready to support it, as others
are to shake and undermine it? whilst, under a pretense of bearing one another
Burdens, they are putting themselves into a readiness of posture for bearing
away the Government it self upon their shoulders. And indeed it is but saying to
the Faction at any time, instead of the Philistines, that the Papists are upon
them; and, Sampson like, they are ready to arise, and unhinge the Government,
and to bear away with them the main supporters thereof; all fear and reverence
toward their Superiors, together with religion, property, liberty, laws and
all.

As to your fifth demand, I answer, that the Observator's reflecting on some
Doctors of our Church, for dedicating Books to the Earl of Shaftsbury, (that
Tony of a Peer) cast no unmannerly reflection upon his Majesty for making him
his Lord Chancellor, when he did: but for you to make such a question, is,
doubtless, sawcily to intermeddle in affairs you understand not: for his
Majesty, who is a Wise and Understanding Prince, did, questionless, very well
understand the temper of the man, at the time he conferred that High Honor on
him. But what if his Majesty thus raised him up, either to lay the greater
obligations to loyalty on him, or for the same cause that God did heretofore
Pharaoh, that his disloyalty to his Prince might be the more conspicuous by his
fall? (as Lucifer's that fell was) or for other reasons of state, and ends of
Government best known to his Majesty? must Titus Oats, and others of his
Fraternity immediately fall to making an Idol of this Chancellor, by
worshipping of him? when his Majesty saw this, and that the people fell a
bowing to him, and he again to the people; and that they mutually worshipped one
another; it was high time, His Majesty thought, to break this Idol of a
Chancellor in pieces, or rather, by throwing him down to the bottom of
contempt, to make him burst in sunder with discontent. In relation to whom, all
that I have to add farther, is heartily to wish that, since a double portion of
his unquiet spirit still rests among the Faction, the curse, which befell him,
may likewise befall them; and that the envy, which the Faction have at the
prosperity of His Majesty's late good success in his proceedings, may be the
rottenness of their bones, as the like envy in him was the rottenness of his.

As to your sixth Quere, wherein you ask the Observator, Who that Trimmer was,
who being judicially interrogated about somebodies receiving the Sacrament, and
after several interrogatories, replied that it was sitting, but very decently?
I have nothing more to say, but only to tell you, that since you boast of
those vast numbers, you have brought to the Sacrament, and of their exact
Conformity to the Orders of the Church in their receiving of it; I desire to
know of you, whether to gain a Proselyte to the Church, you never did in that
particular break the Orders of it? that is, never administer the Sacrament to
any, that could kneel, in any other posture than that of kneeling? now if, by
the Oath you have taken not to administer it otherwise, you will tell me, that
you are ready at any time to take the Sacrament on it, that you never did; you
shall then be discharged from all suspicion of being the above mentioned
Trimmer: but till I know, that you are ready to purge your self after this
manner, you will shrewdly be suspected, either to be that individual Trimmer,
or at least one of his Fraternity.

In your last Quere to thc Observator, you ask him, whether it were not more
advisable, that, for the future, he should suffer those to live in quiet, who
are no less loyal, but far more peaceable than himself? To which I answer, that
this is nothing else, but to beg the question; by taking it for granted, that
he has not done, what you say is most advisable: but let one single instance be
produced to the contrary; and I Will undertake for him for the future, that he
shall take your advice. Wherefore, since you tell us, that no good man will
ever think, that Rebels or Disturbers of the Government can be too severely
lashed by his pen; let me desire you for the future, not to be so sensible of
the smart, when you find them lashed by it. And thus I have answered the
several questions, proposed by you to the Observator, and might now therefore,
take leave of your Reply to him; but that I there find some other little things
objected against him; the first whereof, is his profanely entituling one of his
Papers, An Edifying Discourse concerning bearing one another Burdens; now,
how come your discourses to be so sacred, that the Observator cannot use one of
them for his Title Page without profanation of it? Again, another objection
against him, is, that his Papers are commonly read by a sort of men, who take
occasion from them to revile and censure any whom they dislike; and that
thereby very innocent persons greatly suffer in their reputation. Now supposing
this true; are his Papers one jot the worse, because some men by misapplying
them, abuse and make an ill use of them? no man sure, will say they are: for
then the Scriptures themselves, the very best of Writings, may be impeached, as
well as his; for these likewise are read by a sort of men, who take occasion
from them to censure the worship of the best Established Church in the whole
World, and to revile and vilify the discipline and Government thereof: but now
the Scriptures surely are herein no ways blameable, nor is the ill use, that
some men make of them, to be in any wife charged upon them, any more, than it
is to be charged upon the wine, that some men are so wicked, as to debauch
themselves and others with it. So that you see, innocent persons may be
traduced by means of the Observator's Papers, and yet the Observator's Papers,
be all that while very innocent of the abuse of them. Again, you tell us
farther, that there are some, who have suffered by his pen, who yet have been
very kind to his purse: but what is this, but to tell us, that the Observator
is no Mercenary Scribler? none, that may be bribed to write in favor of any
man, who is not as hearty a lover of the King, and as true a Friend to the
Government, as himself is: but as for all such, as are so; let them be but once
known to him, and whether they are kind to his purse, or no, I Will undertake
that he shall be so to them. Others again you tell us of, who, to your
knowledge, have had a great honor for his Name and Family, and yet have been
traduced by him: now here again, I must undertake for him, and tell you, that
if there be any such, as you speak of, and who likewise have a just esteem for
him upon the account of his steady and unshaken loyalty to his Prince, (which,
to the immortal honor of his Name, ought never to be forgotten) and yet have
suffered from his pen, or been traduced by it; he shall, not only heartily beg
their pardon for it, but shall for the future, court their friendship; and have
the same honor and esteem for them, which they have for him.

And now, you having thus let fly at the Observator, and discharged your self
of all your rancour and malice against him, (but with no better success than
one that lets off a Gun, which by reason of the foulness thereof, recoiles upon
himself) you tell us in the conclusion of your Reply, that you hope he will,
ever long, either be persuaded, or commanded to forbear his publications; ar at
least leave Ecclesiastical matters and persons to whom they belong. In answer
to which, all that I have to say, is; that since he meddles with nothing either
in Church or State, but what the interest of both obliges him to meddle with;
none that wish well to either, will hope as you do; but rather believe that it
were Sions and Jerusalems interest (for whose sake you tell us you cannot be
silent) that such as you were put to silence. And whereas you tell us, that you
doubt not but in a short time, many Dissenters will understand their errors
and become lovers of the Church; give me leave to tell you, that I hope many in
a much shorter time, will understand the Dissenters themselves, and be not
only true lovers of the Church and State, but of the Observator likewise for
the sake of both; whose interest he has all along so heartily embraced and
maintained, and in the defense thereof has bravely stemmed the torrent of a
most violent and impetuous Faction, and stood the shock of a turbulent and
rolling multitude; out-vying, as it were, hereby the immoveableness of the rock
it self: in as much as the madness of the people (the rage whereof he has born
the violence of) is more boisterous and raging, than is the Wind and Waves.
Hereby likewise, making up the character of Horace's just and upright man; who
stands so immoveably fixed in his station, as not to be thrown from it,
although the Orbs themselves crack and fly in pieces about his Ears.

And thus having done with your Reply, and vindicated the Observator from the
malicious calumny of it; I come now to make some brief reflection on your Sermon
annexed to it; and here indeed to deal ingenuously with you (which is that
which in your Preface to the Reader you desire of him) it is not the plainness
of it, which I dislike in it; but that spirit of Phanaticism, which it savours
of, and which runs through the whole of it. But the Sermon, you say, shall
speak for it self; and so it does; and says just as much for it self, as you do
for yours: that is, it plainly tells us, to what party it belongs; and who they
are it is designed for the service of. Whatever Discourses therefore of this
kind, you publish in your own Vindication, will to every impartial Reader,
appear no other, than so many several Parts to the same Tune of Trimming.
Wherefore instead of making any particular animadversions on your Sermon, I
shall make this general one for all; that it is a piece calculated for the
Meridian of the Faction of London and Middlesex, but may without any sensible
alteration, indifferently serve for any Conventicle of this Kingdom whatsoever:
of the justice of which reflection I leave every impartial Reader to judge; and
you to think as you please of,

SIR, Your, etc.

FINIS.

