NEWS from Bishops-Gate-Street. Being a True RELATION Of a most Barbarous and
Bloody MURDER, Committed by one Jacob Turner, a Broad-Weaver; upon the Body of
Mary Turner his Wife; in Lamb-Alley, in Bishops-Gate-Street.
With an Account of the Coroners Inquest, who sat upon the Deceased, on Friday
the 18th. of this Instant January, 1688/9. Who brought in the said Turner,
Guilty of Willful Murder.
MAny and Notorious are the Murders, that of late have been Committed by diverse
wicked Persons, and in sundry manners: But none more to be lamented, than this
(...) Horrid and Unnatural, as those of Husbands on their Wives, etc. (...)
deplorable Instance, of which (good Reader) be pleased to ^^ke as follows:

In Lamb-Alley, in the Parish of St. Botolph Bishops gate, at the House of one
Mr. Vowel, a Victular, over against the Sign of the Last; Lodged for some
considerable time, one Jacob Turner, and his Wife Mary. He was Born in the
Parish of St. Mary White-Chappel, of honest Parents, being carefully brought
up; and when capable, was by his Industrious Parents bound an Apprentice to a
Weaver; but being very loote and dissolute youth; as soon as the Term of his
Apprentiship was expired, he betook himself to these Extravagancies, which in
this Age (alas) are to predominant, as well as Epidimical. Notwithstanding all
this, he had the happiness to Marry with a Virtuous and Chaste Maid, with whom
he has lived these 22 years; and by whom God has blessed him with a Pious and
Dutiful Daughter, now almost 21 years of Age: However these Blessings were not
esteemed by him, as sent by an overruling Providence: But being instigated by
the Devil, perpetrated this deplorable Murder on the Body of his Wife, in the
manner following.

On Wednesday the Second of this Instant January, 1688/9. About three in the
Afternoon, this said Turner being drinking at the Sign of the Lamb, in the
aforesaid Alley, and wanting Money to discharge his Reckoning; he sent one to
his Wife (who was then a Nurse to one Mrs. Freeman a Broad-weaver in the same
Alley) but she not having wherewith all to comply with his demands, he
immediately went to his Lodgings, at the aforesaid Victualing House; where
sending for his Wife, she presently came to him, whom he led up Stairs; and
after many Curses and Oaths, and other Abusive Languages, he fell a Beating of
her; and she stooping down to save her Face, he took up a House Knife, that lay
by him on the Table, and struck her with great violence into the Ribs, under
the Right Shouldier, which immediately occasioned a great effusion of Blood.

After which having some ^em^^se, he feignedly caught her up in his Arms;
telling her, he having done her business. would now do his own; but (poor
Woman) she Innocently begged of him not to do any violence to himself; but
immediately he in a great Passion, stomping and raving, his Landlord ran up
Stairs with his Son, who coming into the Room, found him the said Turner, in
the middle of the Room, in a very Impudent and Bravado Posture, with his Arms
extended, and accosting his said Landlord; cries out, I have done her Business
(meaning his said Wife.) The Landlord, replied to him, Turner, now you have
done bravely; now you will be hanged: upon which words, Turner took up another
Knife, and made at Mr. Vowel, his Landlord, swearing he would do his Business
too; but Vowel and his Son over-powring him, took the Knife from him, and
quelled him: Many Women of the Neighborhood, coming in, got the Woman to Bed,
and sent for one Mr. Litchfield the Elder, a Neighboring Chyrurgion, and
Turner himself run in his Mad fit, for Mr. Litchfield's Son assronting the Old
Gentleman, and forcing him to give place to his Son; who having let her Blood,
and applied suitable Medicaments to her, was asked by the Company, whether the
Wound would prove Mortal, but would give no positive Answer, but said, he much
feared her Recovery; notwithstanding, the Ignorant Neighborhood, took no Care
to secure him; and he as impudently went about his Business, without any
Remorse or Concern, for what he had done, she, the said Mary Turner, lay
Languishing from the Second day of this Instant, to this last Wednesday, being
the Sixteenth; during which space of time, this Villainous Monster of a Man,
behaved himself very impudently, both to his Wife, and the Neighbors, that
discoursed and reasoned with him, in endeavoring to lay before him the
Heynousness of his horrid Crime; but he replied, only with Oaths, Curses, and
Blasphamous Expressions: and instead of having the least Remorse of Conscience,
avowed several times, that if it were to do again, he would do it; and further.
That he had more Persons Business to do, besides her, his said Wife.

As soon as the Neighborhood, found his Wife was Expiring, they procured a
Constable, and seized him, at a small Alehouse, at the Sign of the Feathers in
the Artillery-Lane; who, perceiving the Constable coming, with his Long Staff,
came out to him; very impudently, saying, I am the Man, who, I suppose you seek
after; I am ready to go with you; who immediately, (he being taken in the Tower
Liberty) carried him, before the Right Honorable, the Lord Lucas, who
committed him to Prison, where, he continues, in order to his Trial, that he
may receive the Just Punishment, for so Barbarous, Bloody and Unnatural
Murder; and last Night, being the Eighteenth Instant, the Coroners and Jury,
sat on the Deceased Body, and brought in Jacob Turner Guilty of Willful
Murder. And thus Reader, I hope this may be a warning to deter others from
committing the like Crime.

This may be Printed, 1689.

LONDON, Printed for Stephen Draper.


