NEWS FROM GUILD HALL, Or the Combat of the Giants.
SO many Improbable Stories have been writ of Giants in former Ages, that this
will seem rather a Romance, then a Combat, let it be never so Real. And though
it be Prodigious in it self, yet since there are less Absurdities and fewer
Contradictions in it, then in some Dying Speeches, I know not why I should not
be believed as well as any Father Confessor of Poland or Hungary, especially
having almost all the Eyes and Ears of this Incredulous Town, Witnesses to the
Combat, to testify the Truth of this Relation.

On the last Day, the Debate was held about the Address for Surrendering the
Charter, there was such a Noise in the Hall as has not been heard, since the
last Memorable Riot. Alace for the poor Charter says one, alace for our
Freedoms and Lives, says another, Liberty and Property, is no more when we
cease to be Freemen, we must part, we will not part with our Charter. This
Acclamation of the Masters Alarmed the Master-Prentice, who cried a Fart for
the Charter, let 'em take it, and much good do 'em, shall we complain for being
Freemen? Now we may Drink, Swear and Whore, as well as Sir Thomas himself, and
Commit Trespass with our Neighbor Pul^en without the forfeit of our
Indentures. A Butchers Wife Swore, while she was in the Flesh, she would Trade
in the Flesh, and dispose of her on in despite of the Charter, to whom a
Fish-Mongers Wife made Answer, Right Neighbor, Charter or no Charter, I will
not beat a Farthing of my old Rate either of Fish or Flesh, to the best
Customer in England, God Bless His Majesty. Our own is our own still, and we
will use them to our best advantage.

In this Fury and Distraction they Ran about the Streets all the Day and Night,
till about two a Clock in the Morning, when Expecting all things to be at Rest,
but the Watch, and Midnight Goblings; there was such a Noise in Guild Hall as
Frighted all the Neighbor-hood, Watch and Constables, for your must Understand,
the two Guardian Giants (alarmed at the former Cries, or Inspired by the Genius
of their different Partys,) were got together by the Ears; at every Stroke that
was made the House Shook as with an Earthquake. All the Glass Windows round
about were Shivered to Pieces, and several Chimneys were blown down.

This dreadful Combat of the Giants was occasioned on a difference about the
Surrender of the Charter, Roymond, the Tory Giant Asserting and Justifying the
Kings Rights, and Routal, the Right and Liberty of the People, which with the
Dreadful threatening and Clashing on either side, made such an horrible Din and
Clutter, as had not been heard since the last Election of Whig Shrieves.

The Constable and Watch finding their Bills too weak to withstand the Giants
Clubs, went to the Exchange to Reinforce their party with New Auxilliaries.

In the mean time, the Battle continued with great Vigor on both sides.
Roymond stood on his St. George's Guard, being rather willing to Defend
himself, then Destroy the other, while Routal ^ay'd about him, as if he had
been Mad, throwing in upon him, Point and Edge. At last Roymond having Disarmed
the other and got his Svvord, generously offered him his ^^vord, on this
Condition, that he would own his Being afterward to his Clemency, only
granting him some other Regalities for the future, in Token of his Victory:
When Routal more full of Malice then Submission thus Replied.

No Proud Roymond, I Scorn to Submit, though to my Master, the Turk shall Submit
to the Emperor, and the Rebels in Hungary to their Native Sovereign, sooner
then I will Submit on these Terms. My Life I scorn to owe to him that has
taken that from me, which is Dearer then that my Liberty, you offer me my
Sword, and tie up my Hands from acting. I Will have all or none.

Ungrateful Wretch said Roymond, is thy Sword with thy Life in my Hand, and
does thou refuse my Favor, prepare thee then for the last Stroke, Thus thy
proud Head shall go to the Ground.

Quarter, Quarter, Noble Roymond, said Routal, now I find I am really
Conquered, I must Submit, spare me till I make my Will; a few last words, and
that is all. No time for Canting Speeches now, said Roymond, thou wilt lie at the
last Minute. But I give thee time to Name thy Trustees.

Routal. Jenks, Jekel and Hubland, I make my Executors, to receive all my Debts
to be Distributed for carrying on the Cause, and to revenge my Innocent Blood,
and all my Arrears in the Hall to Purchase a New Charter. To Hinton, I leave all
my Bills and Money at Cent per Cent, to break for me, when I am gone, and
Compone for 12. Pence in the Pound, to make a Pension for Perkin, Armstrong and
Ferguson, and the Interest to Hubland the Jew (since Conventicles are going
down) to Build a Synagogue for the Saints.

To Pa -- A. and Du -- I leave my Dominion in Guild Hall to stand there in my
place, as the chief and perpetual Supporters of his Body Uncorporat. To Sir
Thomas P -- I leave all the Reversion of my Stock in the Chamber of London if
he has yet any left unspent, to keep up his Reputation amongst the Whores, and
Act the Tory in his Cups till the Whig comes again into Play. To Cor -- I Will
bequeath my Thrashing Pole with the ball and Iron Spikes instead of a
Protestant Flayl and to Sir To. C. -- my Punniard to carry in his Pocket
instead of the Protestant Dagger that Peeps out and betrays him. To Beth --
being as Signal for Hospitality as Loyalty, I leave a bended Nine Pence to
entertain the Corporations, and Freemen on the next Election of Whig Sheriffs.
To Cor I leave Five Groats to write my Elegy, and as many more to Curtis for
Printing it, to be paid out of the Pensions for carrying on the Cause, if there
be any Remaining, and to Doctor B -- Four-Score Guennies of the same to Write
my Speech, which will Serve as well after as before my Execution.

What do you Bequeath to me, said Roymond, my Sword, replied Routal, to cut off
my Head, or if you will spare my Life, to give me the Honor to Wear it in your
Service, with this Generous Submission, said Roymond, thou have Conquered the
Conqueror, take thy Life, but the Svvord I will keep in my own Hands, to
Dispose of as I think Fit, and as I shall find thee Deserving for the Future.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1683.


