News from Guild Hall: OR AN ANSWER TO THE ADDRESS Answered, etc.
SIR,
THough I neither know the Author of the Address nor your Worship, I hope a
third man may make bold to read you both, and observe you if he please.

As for his Undertakings, I fear the Truth you find in it has netled your
fancy, and having touched you in a sore place has made you Kick. He may give
you the promised account of his personal particulars himself, if he think you
worthy of it, and if his meaning be Popish, as you say, (for it is no news now
for one to say what he would have others think) Let him and his gravity go down
in sorrow to his Grave.

For your part, all your Railery I shall pass over with this, that you are an
excellent proficient in the Art of Scolding; and have showed so much of the
imposing confidence lately practiced at Guild Hall, that I pass you either for
a Leader or Teacher of the furious drivers there; Yet I commend your ingenuity
above the Drolls of Jack-Pudding, for your scraps of punning, for the wit in
them, seem a Collection from better Farce and Comedy.

After you have spent good part of your Page in Balderdash, you dandle an Irony
into a Paradox, I suppose for sport only; but I shall not vindicate nor reprove
the Author for charging folly upon the Testifiers of the Plot since their
discovery; Though I hope you will give me leave to pray to God the Author may
be mistaken.

Your next Paragraph is so plain a misapplication, that you deserve to be
hiss't at by the Schoolboys. Can you forge Popery no better than so? Must the
Effigies of Christ here needs be Idolatry? You forget that God made man after
his own Image; was this for the shape of his face? And it seems you are to
learn that Humility, Charity, forgiveness of Injuries, Glorifying God, etc. are
the Image of Christ. But it is no news to see Texts strained to particular
humors; you would show your self some body, by nibbling at the Writings of
Fathers, but at the same time your Nonsense exposes your very bottom.

At last you come to the matter, with your tumults undetermined by whom caused,
and by this destroy the Reputation of your whole Cause; I can scarce doubt but
that you were at the Hall because your style speaks you to be one of the
Insinuaters where you had nothing to do, to help run down the more modest, but
whether you were or not you must needs be better informed; and since you mince
the matter I will repeat it to you. Is it not most plain that before now there
has been endeavors for Election of persons disaffected to the Government, and
particularly the last year by surprise, and giving private Intelligence to
particular friends of the Cause, to be sure to be there, to carry it of a
sudden; And if the discretion of the Magistrate, had not let it take wind by
deferring, in all probability it had been accomplished, when at last your
Friends were many of them forced to disown it with shame, but why? Because it
was not carried. Is it not as plain that the same party did before this
Election insinuate to all their Friends, and oblige them to the utmost, for the
Election of the only persons they resolved on, and accordingly (though the
first Election of them were void for non-qualification) yet, at it again, for
the same, and made it their business by private correspondence to flock to the
Hall first, to take up the forwardest Room; And by violent clamor and
discourse to keep out and discourage any that should oppose them, that none
might be heard but themselves? Was there ever seen such rudeness, hollowing,
and shouting, amongst persons under a Civil Government? Durst any man offer for
any others (though never so Worthy) but he was presently condemned, flouted and
abused for a Papist? As if most noise had most right. Try (if you would do your
Cause good) to find a President, when the Magistrates of London were ever so
actually affronted, vilefied and abused to their faces, to the grief of all
that think they owe Magistrates any respect, and who were they that did all
this? Every modest man that was there I am sure knows very well, and might have
wished himself elsewhere; If you think our eyes are not to be believed, apply
your self to the Poll-Book, where on your side no doubt you will find some well
meaning men, but withal, the whole Tribe of Presbyterians, Anabaptists, etc.
form Dan to Bersheba, down to the poor Quaker inclusive; Why was all the noise
for a Poll presently? But because your Friends knew they had supplanted, run
down, and scared away a great many honest men, that could not dispense with the
clamor, that a great many other expected it and avoided it, and you were then
sure to carry it. I pray what becomes of the Liberty of the Subject we talk so
much of, if noise and violence must prevail?

You would have done the City a great kindness in prescribing a better
preservative of our Liberties, than a deliberate Poll, and many wiser men than
you or I, fear that days work will cause the trouble of more Polls than your
Poll and mine are worth; for since probably the like violence will be at other
times, who would not rather procure a Poll to be demanded that they may Poll at
leisure, than contend in the Hall amongst such uncivil company.

You speak of a fair Election by the Body of the City, this is a poor old
insinuation, but how shall you or I know the mind of the Body of the City but
by every man's free Vote without disturbance; And why might not the Sheriffs,
make use of their privilege to adjourn the Poll, that every man might do so? In
all likelihood the same persons will carry it nevertheless, (and for ought I
know worthy enough, and others might be the like) But you are in great part
beholding to your false reports of the foul play you had in the Hall, the loss
of Privileges, and I know not what, but you know very well that not a man of
you, could assign to any indifferent person, in what either was, And (though
that struck a great stroke in the business at first,) yet you know, as people
were undeceived, the Cause apparently flagg'd.

As for the qualifications of the Gentlemen you would have Elected; you do not
say they were qualified at first, though by Law they ought to have been so, and
if I should at a particular occasion comply with a Law I had been willing to
neglect, or be pardoned crimes by Act of Parliament though I were not
reprobated by Law as you say; you would nevertheless know me, and I believe
think me fit to be trusted little the further, not to give you more natural
Examples: I think therefore you had better have left your Act of Parliament
out, and your Queries thereupon, unless you had given satisfaction of the free
and liberal conformity of your Friends to the Laws they and we are so much
benefited by; And how it comes to pass, that all the Sectaries that make use of
and Idolize so much Law as they have occasion for, and every day pick holes in
the rest, are so unanimous for these and no others.

You would patronize the Design for Election of those Gentlemen, under the
Church of England, but I wonder you are not ashamed to assert so false a thing.
You would have us believe you a Member thereof, when the drift of your writing
plainly looks another way; I believe indeed upon a fair Election, those of the
Church would have had no more to say, but is there any thing more obvious than
that those who were guilty of that zealous disturbance, were not so, sure you
think a Gown makes a man unknown, is it not plain that all Dissenters are the
complainers that it passed not at first? Do we not find it so every hour, and
the contrary on the other side; Find me one person if you can that has the
least hand in, or is glad of, the base Pamphleting and throwing dirt at the
Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson (whose Books none of you all are
worthy to carry) but that he is of your side, as to the Election: And surely
none that wish well to the Church, can without grief see those two Pillars
thereof, that have been and are so Famous through all Europe for their opposing
Popery, by their incomparable Preaching and Writing, insomuch that for want of
Argument the Papists have been ready to use the Poniard upon their Persons,
exposed and squib'd at as they are, and rather than a hole shall not be found
in their Coats, with sharp nails to claw them in hopes to tear one; but all
will not do, You only teaze your own Talons.

For your last Paragraph, if I could at first word believe you, I could shake
hands and be friends with you, since you so hastily wish confusion to the
Designers of Popery or a Commonwealth; I wish as heartily the like, and that I
could believe you, but I wish likewise, that some better satisfaction were
given by you and the rest of your Friends, who pretend so much the Kingdoms
good, that no such thing is aimed at; Popery makes all the Noise, and all is
Popery forsooth that is not with you, but in your Books or discourse by your
good wills, not a word of a Commonwealth. When I find your Writers and
Teachers assert Monarchy to the purpose, and endeavor as much to Write and
Preach the people out of conceit with a Commonwealth, as you do to fill their
heads with fears and ill thoughts of all proceedings by those above you and I,
then we and many others, no doubt, shall be happy in a much nearer Unity and
Reconcilement. In the mean time you stand severely suspected, knowing you are
so, and not endeavoring to vindicate your selves.

FINIS.

