(...) FROM EPSOM: OR, THE Revengeful Lady; Showing how a Young Lady there was
Beguiled by a London-Gallant; who when he had done, boasted of the Conquest,
(...) which unworthy Fact, she Wittily revenged her self of the Tell-Tale; And
made a Capon of a Cockney. A Novell. Written (though I say it) according to the
Exactest Rules of Fancy and Judgment: In Imitation of Monsieur Scarron.

By Poor-Robin, Knight. Vindeita.

Nemo magis gaudet quam Femina, Juven.
Printed in the Year, 1679.

The Revengesul Lady: OR, The Tell-Tale, EUNUCH'D.
THere was a Gentleman in this Town of a complete Wit, and pleasant Behavior,
a Person very fortunate in the Love of Women, and in all respects very
Oblieging toward them, save that he wanted the government of the Tongue; for
no sooner could he receive a Closet-kindness from his Mistress, but he would
instantly boast of his success, and that with such Circumstances as added most
to the glory of the Conqueror, without any regard to the Reputation of the
Vanquished; which dissolute kind of carriage, as it could not but be taken very
unkindly from the Ladies, so at last it proved very unfortunate to himself.

GOing this Summer to Epsom, whether for the delight somness of the Air, the
benefit of the Waters, or the pleasure he took in the Company, I know not, nor
is it material; but being there, he became acquainted with a young Lady,
beautiful in her Person, and pleasant in her Conversation. This Spark of
London, had scarce been twice in her company, but from the success he had
always met with, he concluded her his own, and accordingly suiting his
addresses to his confidence, he applied himself to her in a more familiar way
then became the slenderness of his acquaintance, or the nature of his pretense;
which attempt so far incensed her, that if ever he should offer the like
incivility again, she protested he should never see her more. He somewhat
surprised with the unusual, (and therefore unexpected) coyness, had a months
mind at one time to have called her proud slut, and to have Antidated her
thereat by leaving her immediately; But upon better consideration, finding so
much beauty in her (...), and Majesty (...) anger, he thought it more policy
to dissemble his present resentment, then to frustrate his future hopes, and
therefore in excuse of himself, he began to swear very liberally, That he
offered that rudeness only to try her modesty, he confessed he had sometimes
made use of those Town-fooleries for the Diversion of such as liked the humor;
but for his part he neither hoped nor believed that a person of her
Circumstances could be plea^'d with such a kind of Dalliance; assuring her
withal (as far as Damme's would do it) that in compliance with those strict
rules of Chastity she professed to walk by, he would never for the future speak
or act any thing but what might correspond with the most unblemisht Virtue.
Which protestations of his somewhat cleared up her clowdy Brow: and though she
could hardly be Friends with him that Afternoon, yet she told him upon his
better behavior for the future, that he might still hope not to be turned out
of her service. Hereupon our gallant began to proceed with more Caution in his
designs, and to bear a greater respect to her than formerly, behaving himself
so modestly in his expressions, and so obliegingly in his actions, that he
gained a more than ordinary esteem from his Dearest, and he had at last so far
won upon her by the art ficial disguise of chastity, that she would many times
trust her self alone with him in her chamber, at hours so unseasonable, as
might have created a suspicion of any Woman's virtue but hers. This when our
vig^lant You^gster had perceived, he thought it in vain to daily any longer,
resolving to take the Fort by Treachery, if he could not do it by Treaty, and
in order thereto concluded upon the following Adventure.

Prevailing with her one day to take a walk in the Park, and coming to a shady
bank (no matter for the purling Streams, and Warbling Chori^hers,) they sat
down in a place very agreeable to the innocence of her design, and but too
convenient. (...) of prittle prattle they had, but that one (...) will be so
inquisitive to ask how I came to hear it. But Discourse they had, that is
certain; and it is a hundred to one but that 'twas one Love Story or other, for
at last it came to this; The young Gentleman gathering a blade of Grass, and
applying himself to the Lady, asked her if she could break it with her hands;
There Is no question to be made, but replied Yes: But without many I^s and
And's, it came to a wager (which the most judicious affirm to be a Bottle of
Claret,) that he would tie her Thumbs so fast with it, that neither by the
strength of her Arms nor her wit, she should be able to break or untye it: This
concluded on, he palm'd a Green Ribbon upon her, made so artificially like a
blade of Grass, that it could very hardly be distinguished; and with this tied
her Thumbs so firmly, that to her great admiration she was forced to confess
the Wager lost: but he like a fair Gamester to give her a revenge, offered
another bottle, that if she would suffer him to put her arms over her head, she
could not kiss her Elbow. Loosers you know play commonly without fear or wit,
for she had no sooner consented, but she found not only the wager lost, but
something else she valued I cannot tell how much more, in a great deal of danger;
for the Adventurer taking her at this advantage, began to use a forced
dalliance, and to apply himself to her in a pretty familiar way that he had,
which I shall leave every man to guess at, by what he would have done had he
been in his place: As to the Ladies I know they will be warranting the sad toss
she was in, and at the same time both pitying and envying her Condition.
Therefore to disappoint neither one nor the other, the Story says she cried out
Murder, but withal, that she Dyed only in the phrase of modern Poets; for she
quickly came to her self again, being only a little overheated, like a Colt
newly backed, by endeavoring to throw her Rider; and complaining (...) desire
her Gallant (unkind as he was) to Unlace her Gown, and to give her the benefit
of the air, bitterly upbraiding him all the while with the baseness of the
action; what have you done, quoth she, inhumane Ravisher? ungrateful wretch
that you are! first to bind me, and then to rob me of my greatest Treasure. He
not caring to make much ado about nothing, prithee be quiet (says he) and i will
repay thee with Interest, look you do then, replied the tenderhearted soul,
and so giving him her hand, they walked very lovingly home again to perticipate
of her loosings.

Hitherto all was well, and like enough to continue so, if this babbling Coxcomb
could but have held his Tongue; but he had the vanity of some other (indeed
most) Gallants, whose humor is so far from concealing any successful amor,
that they will boast of kindnesses they never received, rather than not gain
the reputation of being debauc'd: so he, big with the conceit of what he had
done, found an opportunity (or indeed made one) of telling the whole adventure
the same evening to an old Crony of his, that had been a constant admirer of
his continued success. This Gentleman it seems had been an ancient servant of
the Ladies, I mean had attempted to debauch her for a long time; and therefore
upon the relation of the whole matter, the person being named, and the action
described at large, it is but rational to suppose him a little concerned, not
only that he should be disappointed in his hopes, but outdone at his own
weapon: And to manifest that he was so, though he seemingly Laughed at the
pleasantness of the adventure, yet he resolved upon the first opportunity, to
discover the abuse if it were a Lie, or if truth, to put in for the later-match
of her affection. The day following, meeting with her either by search or
accident, though she never cared for his company or address, he prevailed with
her by some importunity to hear this unwelcome story, which (...) and being a
little helped by the impertinence of the Relator, she gained time to recover
her senses well enough to persuade him the story was false, resolving at the
same time to cry quits with Mr. Tell-Tale when time should serve, but for the
present not to seem to take notice of the Discovery. And for a day or two after
pretending a greater fondness to her Gallant for the sake of what had past; it
was now her turn to desire him to take a walk to the same place they were at
the other day, to which he readily consented; and I defy the crossest Reader
in Christendom to suppose otherwise. Being come to a place she chose out as
most convenient for the design in hand, she desired him to sit down, and after
a little amorous impertinence, thus began to insinuate with him: Love, says
she, shall I tie thy hands as thee did mine the other day, but you are so
strong i will do it with my Gatter instead of Grass, this was easily consented
to: Ah you Rogue, continued she, i will tie your Legs too, 'twill be no
hindrance, Sirrah; Ha* this was but a modest request: Now my Dear, says she,
put your hands over you^ head as I did; that done, she takes an opportunity to
tie them fast to the stump of a Bush; the Fellow all this while pleased with
the Conceptions he had of the amorous Stratagem, lay stock still, absolutely
imagining her design to be much like his, in what resemblance the diversity of
the Sex was capable of; But, silly Ass, he found himself damnably deceived, for
by the austerity of her countenance, he found anger a passion more predominent
in her then Love, especially when she began to threaten him in a more
unpleasant dialect then perhaps became either her Sex or quality; for though in
civility we may call it chiding, in plain terms 'twas no better nor worse then
downright Scolding; The Names she had dissembled over but even now, she again
repeated, but in such a tone as quickly gave him (...) Rogue you, I Will teach
you to Kiss and tell; could not (...) content to debauch me, but you must
Scandalize me to? to rob me not only of my virtue, but likewise of my good
name* I Will make you an Example for all such Villains as you are. More she said
to this purpose as near as I can guess, (for to tell you the truth I did not
hear her) and to make her words good she drew out a very sharp Penknife, now,
says she, what would you think Mr. Cock^y if I should make a Capon of you? and
hang me if I don't show the Londoner such a trick, he shall remember the
Country all days of his life; with that she gave him such a touch of Love, in
the part that your Almanack-makers call Scorpio, and your Anatomists Scrotum:
that it is verily said by sober personages, that he never had a mind to Wench
after: So rising up from the poor Eunuch, the Ironical Baggage did so raunt at
him, that some writers affirm it went to the very heart of him: alas Sir, says
she, how you bleed! What are you wounded? I fear you have been fighting for my
sake, I have a pair of Blood-stones here, pray take 'em and hang 'em about your
Neck, while I run and send you a Chyrurgion, which it seems she did in kindness
to herself, not to him: The Chyrurgion making a speedy cure of his Wound, the
Lady at the same time, in some measure salved up the wounds of her reputation,
for she has sealed up the mouth of the Actor so close, that it is generally
believed he will speak no more of this matter; so that though the story be very
true, in the general as I have related it, yet as to the particular persons
concerned, I desire you would not urge me to the discovery of them, for I
protest I k^ow not who they are.

FINIS.

