News from IRELAND, TOUCHING THE DAMNABLE DESIGN OF THE PAPISTS in that KINGDOM
to Forge a Sham-Plott upon the PRESBYTERIANS: BEING The DECLARATION of WILLIAM
SMITH Gent. Maintaining his late EVIDENCE against St. Lawrence a Popish Priest,
who would have Suborned him to have Sworn the same.
I Am so well satisfied in my Conscience, that I would not put forth these
Lines to a Public view, were it not for that others are concerned: As for my
self I value not the Aspersions that any have or can raise against me, because
I know my own Innocence to be a sufficient Testimony, maugre all the false,
scandalous and lying Reports that have been hatched, or that are now contriving
against me; but when I consider that my Credit (which ought to be dearer to
every man than his Life) lies at Stake; and that ill-affected Persons, who
neither value what they Say or Act, are using their sole Endeavors to render
me Ridiculous and a Perjured Person; and also Vent their malicious and
reproachful Aspersions on guiltless People; I thought it convenient, in
Vindication of my self, and those I shall herein after mention, to demonstrate
to the whole World the Abuses done me, least by a continued Silence, I might
give advantage to my Enemies to Proceed in their Villainies. And now I Declare
in the Presence of God, that I have No other End in the Writing hereof, than to
Justify and Clear my self from the injurious Censures and fabulous Discourses
of some Papists, who (as I am Informed) have Reported and given out, that
whereas I Swore to an Information against one St. Lawrence a Popish Priest,
which Business was Tried at the Kings Bench Bar, on the 25th day of November
last past, before Judge Jones, who at that time alone Sat Judge of the said
Court: and although my Information, and what I then Swore to, was, and is a
real truth, yet the Jury found him Not Guilty; I do not allege or say any
thing against the said Jury, or any of them, for indeed those I knew of them,
are worthy and Eminent Persons; yet no doubt my want of Council to manage the
said Trial on my behalf, made it appear otherwise than it was; for let the
whole World Judge, whether there was not great advantage on St. Lawrence's
side, when he stood by, never spoke one word either pro or con, but had three
or four Councillors all along to Plead for him, and I had no Assistance but
that of my Self: Not to insist any longer in this nature, I hear since the said
Trial, that the abovementioned Papists have spread a rumor abroad, as if I had
Recanted all my Proceedings aforesaid, and that I should Confess my self to be
heartily Sorry for the same, and that I was set on by others; nay, they presume
to confirm it by Reporting that I have sent a Petition to his Grace James Duke
of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of this Kingdom of
Ireland, (to the same effect) and that I should therein Acquaint his Grace, who
it was that set me on to Swear against St. Lawrence, desiring his grace to give
me a Pardon for so doing: all which Sayings are false and very great untruths,
for I never did Recant, nor intead any such thing; if I had, I should be the
most vile Creature upon the Face of the Earth; in the first place to Swear to a
thing, and afterward deny what I had Sworn to: And as to a Petition sent by me
to his Grace, it is easily resolved whether he did receive any such from me, or
whether he did ever receive a Petition at all in my Name: It Is true, a little
before his Graces last going to Kilkenny, I did employ one to deliver him a
Petition, which was not at all delivered, for I have the same still by me; and
whether or no that be the Petition discoursed of, I know not* but that all
People may (If they please) be Satisfied with the Contents of it, I have here
Inserted a true Copy of the same, and can bring Credible Witnesses to prove it:
the said Petition is as follows, viz.

To his Grace James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant General, and General
Governor of the Kingdom of Ireland.
The Humble Petition of William Smith Prisoner for Debt in the Marshalsey of
his Majesty's four Courts Dublin.
Humbly Shows,

THat your Petitioner did lately give in an Information against one St.
Lawrence a Popish Priest, the Contents of the said Information (among other
things therein contained) was, that the said St. Lawrence would have Suborned
your Graces Petitioner, positively to Swear to a Presbyterian Plot, which said
Business was on the 25th day of November last past Tried at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, and the Jury at their return brought him in not Guilty:
whether the fault was in your Petitioners want of Council to manage the
business in behalf of your Petitioner, he cannot say; but certain it is, St.
Lawrence had at the least three Counselors to Plead for him, notwithstanding
your Graces said Petitioner will take it upon his Death, that his Information
against the said Priest, was, and is really true; but since the above Trial,
some of the Priests Evidence have grossly abused your Petitioner, by calling
him a Rogue, and a Perjured Rogue: Not to enlarge upon the aforesaid matter, he
your Graces Petitioner humbly implores, you will be pleased to order the
Marshal of the above Marshalsey, to bring him before your Grace, he having a
matter of great Moment and Importance to Impart to your Grace, it being a thing
which will be Satisfactory to you, (as he humbly conceives) desires his said
Request may be Granted:

And as in Duty bound he will Pray, etc.

Now I refer this to any rational Person, if there be any thing of a
Recantation of what I have done in my Proceedings against St. Lawrence,
(included in the above recited Petition;) but if the Devil has been so
prevalent to tempt me to a Recantation, (as they allege) I would willingly
know to whom in such manner I have declared my mind; and if any Person will
justify it, or whether I gave it in Writing under my Hand; if so, it is an
easy matter to produce it, but if it can be made appear, I will be content to
Suffer the Punishment justly due to those that are guilty in the like kind: Why
should I say more of it, when without dispute, had they a real Ground to talk
so of me, they would quickly make it apparent, I know, (so great is their Zeal
to, and for their Ghostly Father;) they only speak of me as they would have it;
they are much mistaken, I Will never Acquit the Guilty, and Accuse the Innocent:
I am not for their turn, no, nor to be allured by a plenary Indulgence, nor the
hopes of being Sainted by them will not do; Neither am I in the least Related
to their Jewish Witnesses, to Swear and Forswear the same again in a days
time, or less: In fine, (No Ego tibi Absolvo, etc.) shall cause me to go from
the truth: And here by way of digression, I very well remember some time after
the happy Discovery of the Damned and Hellish Popish Plot by Dr. Titus Oats,
etc. I was then held in great Estimation by several Papists in a certain place
in this Kingdom, and one day one of their Priests and I being in Company
together, I told him that I much admired any Roman Catholic would appear as an
Evidence against those of their own Religion: who replied, You know not the
mystery of it, time will make you more sensible, and this at last will be
fathered upon Shaftsbury and his Gang, meaning the Presbyterians, etc. We had
other Discourses at that time, which I shall here omit, till a more apt
opportunity; and the rather, since I intend nothing more by this, but only to
give a general Satisfaction, that I Swore nothing against the said St. Lawrence
but what was truth, and from which I will never Recede: For I had rather Perish
(nay worse if any thing can be) for truths sake, than by denying it obtain
innumerable Riches: For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole World and
lose his own Soul? And although the Papists are pleased disingeniously, as also
dishonestly to slander and reproach me, yet do I take but little notice of
them, because if we do but look back into their Actions, it is easily discovered
how many Tricks and Contrivances they have both Studied and Practiced, and to
no other end, intent or purpose, than to disparage and make Invalid real
Evidence, that so they might obscure from being made known their Notorious,
Inhumane and Hellish designs: for certain it is, those that Act any thing in
Defense of his Majesty, or preservation of the Protestant Religion, or to
detect their black Designs, are either brought upon the Stage, and Witnesses
Suborned to Swear against them, that they Conspired the Death of the King, and
to introduce an Arbltrary Government, etc. Or else they are Barbarously
Murdered, as was that Worthy and late English Martyr Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,
who for all the Pretensions they have made use of to blind the Eyes of the
vulgar sort, by saying he was accessory to his own Death, by running a Rapier
through his Body; yet was his Life undoubtedly taken away by those bloody
Miscreants: For those that are so Impious to be culpable of such Contrivances,
will be so cunning as to Study some Shift or Equivocation to evade it, if their
Villainies should come to be called in question, yet let them use all their
Shifts, Sham-plots, Subornations, and likewise Employ all the help and Subtilty
of their Crafty and King-killing Jesuits, to put the burden and weight of
their Diabolical Confederacies upon the poor Protestants; I say notwithstanding
all those devices, the Omnipotent God is so just, that in due time he will
unmask all their Proceedings, and Paint them and their Rogueries out in their
own Colors: in the interim let us content our selves with this ordinary
Gramatical saying, Quicquid sub Terra est in Apricum proferet Etas: It Is
strange to think what Assurances these Caterpillars of the Earth proposed to
themselves for the Extirpation of the Protestant, and Reestablishment of their
bloody Romish Religion: and albeit so many of their Fathers have Suffered by
the hands of public Justice, the just rewards of their Demerits; yet how
confidently do they endeavor to wipe off their too too deep dyed Guiltiness,
by Proclaiming it a Presbyterian Plot, and that the Dissenters of the Church of
England were dissatisfied with the Kingly Government, and their old Rebellious
tricks of raising a Civil War was beginning again. To that I answer, If it were
so, they Condemn the gravest Senators that ever were, and upbraid them with
Injustice; I mean the Learned and Judicious Judges etc. of England; for had
there been no Popish Plot, Coleman, Langborn, Whitebread and the rest, would
not have taken their last Farewells at Tyburn for it: But some Simple Ignorant
People will object, that such Learned men as they, would not have wronged their
poor Souls just at their going out of the World, by Protesting themselves as
free as the Child newly born, from those Crimes they died for, if they knew any
thing to the contrary: To such Objections I say thus, that not long since my
self and a worthy Gentleman who dyed very lately, being together in Company
with a Popish Priest, and discoursing this point of those that dyed in England,
(which I just now mentioned) without a general acknowledgment of the Crimes
they died for, the said Priest told us, that just before their Executions, they
Confess all and every thing to some Father Confessor or other, who immediately
Absolves them from all their Sins whatsoever, and gives them power to deny all
in public at their said Executions: (the Priest that told me this, was one
Vicar Mackaw, and the Gentleman then in my Company Dr. Wyat) and for so doing
they are assured to be Cannonized for Saints, and Recorded as Martyrs in their
black Registers at Rome. I presume Persons of Loyal and honest principles, well
wishers of his Sacred Majesty and the Protestant Religion, needs not require
much time to understand and dive into the mystery of their Endeavoring to
throw off the whole Plot upon the Presbyterians, as is aforesaid, by reason
it is so near of Kind to the usual and Accustomed policies of those sort of
Cattle (I mean the infamous famous Jesuits) who aim at nothing so much, as to
breed a Dissension betwixt our Dread Sovereign and his Subjects, (which God
grant never may be) that they may like Wolves appear in Sheeps Clothing, and
inwardly Smile at our Misfortunes, and on a sudden Strike home that blow they
have so long desired, nay, endeavored to Accomplish; but I do not doubt, at
least I hope, that the People of England are so firmly grounded in their
Loyalty and Obedience to their most Gracious King, and also so sensible of the
Miseries that attended them in the late unhappy and unnatural differences, that
they will Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes in the Defense and Right of his
most Sacred Person, against all Rebellions and Plots whatsoever. I suppose I
need not say anymore at present concerning the Inveteracy of the Papists in
general against the Protestants, it being well known in these Times; yet I
thought it necessary to Insert this, that by reason of Dean Burges's coming to
visit me, and confirm me in the Protestant Religion, they have been pleased
since to say, that he was something too busy with me about St. Lawrence's
Business, and that they believed he much Encouraged me in it: To such Reports I
answer as follows, viz. The said Dean Burges never came to me but he
Discoursed much to the ensuing purpose, That if the Information given in by me
against St. Lawrence were true, in the Name of God I should go on with it; on
the contrary said he, if it be a thing of your own devising, Confess it humbly
before God, and ask him Forgiveness, (perhaps he may Forgive you;) if it be a
false thing, you will be a miserable Creature; and oftentimes he said, As he
would not Encourage me in an unjust Action, so would he not Discourage me in a
Just; however mind, you have a Soul which must once render an Account to God
for all your Actions both good and bad: And how far the same Dean was from
setting me on to form my Information against St. Lawrence, let the Reader
judge: for I take God to Witness, he knew nothing of it, till after the said
Priest was in Custody; and if I am not much mistaken, he was at that time in
the Country, (where his Benefits lies.) Another thing of the aforesaid Dean
comes afresh into my Memory, viz. He told me several times before he
Administered the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper to me, that it was better
for me to Eat and Drink so much Poison, if I had Injured St. Lawrence, and
should come to the Table with such Guilt upon my Conscience. In the next place
these Papists declare, that what I did, was to get my Enlargement, and that I
was hired to it by the Presbyterians, which is like the rest of their
Aspersions; for God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and before whom I
must one day give an Account, well knows that I neither did it in hopes of a
Liberty, or any other temporal Reward, nor was I set on, advised to it, or had
the least Encouragement from any Soul breathing, but that it was my free and
voluntary Act, and that I had no other end in doing of it, than to discharge a
good Conscience, and that I may be the better understood, I beseech God that I
may never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor to enjoy Everlasting Bliss, if
ever I saw Mr. Harrison or Mr. Jack the Persons that St. Lawrence would have
Suborned me to Swear against, from the time of my Creation to this very day, to
the best of my knowledge: neither did I ever so much as receive a Letter from
them, or either of them. I further hereby Certify and Declare, that I know
nothing of any Plot, Contrivance or Design against our most Gracious King, or
the Government either in Church or State, but that of the Papists, whose
devilish treacherous and bloody Stratagems, I humbly beseech that God in his
due time will Convert to their own Destructions. Should I write ten times as
much more as is contained in this Paper, it would all be tending to one and the
same Effect: therefore I shall conclude; but first humbly Pray the Almighty to
send length of Days, Health, Wealth and Prosperity to our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, etc. And in Testimony of the truth hereof, I have hereunto set my Hand
this

11th day of February, Anno Dom. 1681. William Smith.
Witness, George Harrison, William Boswell, William Stuart, Nathaniel Dancer,
Quintin Moore.


London, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682.


