THE OBSERVATOR Proved a TRIMMER: OR, Truth and JUSTICE VINDICATED, IN The
HISTORY of the MURDER OF Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, And the Several POPISH SHAMS
Since made Use of to amuse the World about it.

BEING A Full Answer to certain late Pamphlets, Entitled, OBSERVATORS; Wherein
the Evidence of that Gentleman's being Murdered by Papists, is very falsely
Stated; and the Positions and Practices of the Church of Rome, too favorably
Represented.

Humbly Dedicated to the CLERGY of England.

The fourth Impression Corrected.

Non recipit Mendacium Veritas, nec patitur Religio Impietatem -- D. Hill.
LONDON: Printed for J. Allen, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. 1685.

TO THE Most Reverend Right Reverend And Reverend
CLERGY OF THE Church of England, By Law Established.
My Lords! And Venerable Sirs!
AS these Animadversions are made Public without the least malice to the
Person of the Observator, or design to gratify any Faction, or undervalue any
Services his Papers may have heretofore done the Church or State; But to
Rectify certain things which he has lately advanced, that may (if they pass
uncontrouled) prove injurious to the Honor and Interest of both; so they
address not to you for Protection, any further than your Justice and Piety is
always wont to favor Truth. And therefore (humbly cast at your feet) are
submitted to your grave and impartial Considerations and Censure; as being
under God and His Majesty, the Watchful Overseers, whose especial Concern it is
(in your several Stations) to take Care Ne quid detrimenti Capiat Ecclesia.

AN ANSWER TO Some late Pamphlets, ENTITLED, OBSERVATORS, In which the
Evidence of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's being Murdered by Papists, is grossly
misrepresented, and maliciously slandred.
IT IS one of the Observators own Maxims, That nothing but Print can answer
Print; [ Obs. Vol. 1. Numb 473.] Therefore not only excusable, but necessary to
Print a few Honest Loyal Animadversions on some late Printed passages of his,
which are false and scandalous, concerning the Murder of Sir Edmbundbury
Godfrey. For since the Observator (after so many desperate and unsuccessful
Attempts of others) is pleased once more to bring that Affair upon the Stage,
(though not in any Judicial Course or Form, but by way of Argumentation and
Libel) and make that Gentleman's Assassination a Subject of his Sport and
Railery, and expose the belief of his being killed by Papists, as ridiculous in
the highest degree; since he was so liberally exercised his Talent on the
Witnesses, and musters up a multitude of imaginary Contradictions, which he
avows they positively have sworn to, etc. What remains, but that we take leave
to examine the weight of his Allegations, the occasions, Proofs, Circumstances,
and Ends of all this unseasonable noise and Clamor? And if we find them to
have no Color of Truth or Probability, and that they are mere Malicious
Imputations; We hope it will be no Offense modestly to tell the World so much,
and demonstrate the Particulars thereby doing Right, (as much as lies in a
private Capacity) to injured Truth. and the Honor of our Country; checking the
Progress of Lies and Shams, and rescuing the present Age from such confident
Delusions as well as preventing their Influence on Posterity.

But in this whole Disquisition the Reader must excuse us from that Gaiety of
Humor, which usually sparkles in an Observator, (especially where there is any
Witness of the Popish Plot in the case) and renders his Scribbles so taking
with the Mobile of Witlings; for there are Gallants that can laugh at
Trajedies, and scoff even at mnipotency, and Ridicule the most sacred and
serious things; yet certainly, amongst all that are (in good earnest)
Christians, or Loyal Subjects, Murders and Assassinations; Oaths upon the Holy
Evangelists, Solemn Examinations before his Sacred Majesty, and his most
Honorable Privy Council, and afterward in the House of Peers, (one of the
most August and Honorable Courts under Heaven) the legal Proceedings of Sworn
Judges and Juries, in case of Life and Death, and the Execution of Convicted
Murderers, are matters which as they should not rashly be determined of,
censured, questioned or meddled with by any private persons; so much less ought
they to be made the common Theams of wanton Droll, and scurrile Buffoonry.

But lest any already should have forgot, or in after times be ignorant of the
mature Cautions, vigilant and prudent Proceedings used in the Examinations
touching the Discovery of the beforementioned Gentleman's Murder, and against
those Executed for the same, and other public Transactions that have since
happened, relating thereunto; I think it convenient in the first place to give
a brief, yet true and impartial state, of the matter of Fact.

On the 6th of September, 1678, Titus Oats did repair to Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, being one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, and before him did
swear to his Information touching the Popish Plot; yet without permitting him
then to read the Particulars, only assuring him in general that it contained
matter of Treason, and other high Crimes; and that his Majesty had a Copy of
it. On the 28th day of the same month two more of the said Copies were sworn to
by the said Oats before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey who then would needs keep one
of them, having never before perused the said Information. [See Mr. Christopher
Kirkby's Narrative of the Discovery of the Popish Plot to his Majesty, p. 2.
and 3.

On the 12th of October following, Sir Edmundbury going forth as he used to do,
and not returning at night, not being heard of for several days, his Servants,
Friends, and the whole Town were much alarmed thereat; But many Stories were
industriously buzzed up and down about him; You cannot but remember (says the
Reverend Dr. Lloyd, now Bishop of St. Asaph, in his Funeral Sermon, October. 31.
which was before any Discovery made of the Murderers) You cannot but remember
the dust that was raised in the week when the search should have been made;
Those Calumnies, and those various Reports that went about it, were on purpose
to hinder the Discovery. One while he had withdrawn himself for Debt, another
while he was Married, and not very decently; another while he was run away with
a Harlot, even what the Father of Lies put into their Heads; at last when they
knew what they intended to do with him, they prepared you to expect it by
giving out, THAT HE HAD KILLED HIMSELF; you know how impatient they were to
have this believed; I was told it some Hours before the Discovery, that he was
found with his own Sword through his Body, others could tell that he had two
Wounds about him; These things were found to be true some Hours after. (So far
that excellent and Reverend Person.)

For on Thursday, October. 17. near the Evening, the Body was accidentally found
in a Ditch, near Primrose-Hill, with his Sword run through him, his Gloves and
Scabbard lying not far off on the Bank, Gold and Silver in his Pocket, nothing
missing but his Band and Papers.

The next day the Coroner having impanelled a Jury, and viewed the Body with
the Assistance of two able Surgeons, the Inquest found upon their Oaths,
that certain Malefactors unknown feloniously and of their Malice prepensed, had
strangled and choked him, whereof he dyed; Whereupon his Majesty issued forth
his Proclamation for discovering and apprehending the Murderers, with a
gracious Proposal of Five hundred Pound Reward, and Pardon to any one of them
should discover the rest.

Sometime after Mr. William Bedloe coming in, did, (amongst other things
relating to the Popish Plot) make some discovery touching this Murder: But
most part of what he deposed therein, was but the words of others, viz. what Le
Phair, Pritchard, Welsh, Koins and another, (all five Jesuits) had told him;
only as to his own knowledge he swore that he saw the Body after it was
Murdered, lie in a Room at Summerset-house on Monday night, October the 14th.

On the 21 of December. following, one Miles Prance, a Goldsmiths in Princes
Street, and then a Roman Catholic, was upon the suspicions of one of his
Lodgers or Neighbors, suggesting that he had lain out of his house about that
time of Godfreys Murder, though in Truth the same was a fort-night before)
taken up by a Warrant, and waiting in the Lobby by the Parliament House in
order to be examined, Bedloe coming by, and not knowing that he was already in
Custody desired that he might be secured, and charged him possitively to be
concerned in that Murder, remembering his face again, as being one present when
the dead Body was shown to him the said Bedloe as aforesaid.

And the next day, and the days following Prance discovered the Circumstances
of the Murder from his own knowledge, charging Girald and Kelly, (two Popish
Priests) and Green, Berry and Hill; to have been actually concerned therein,
which three last were sound, but the two Priests and one Vernat (who was
charged as Privy to the Murder) made their escapes, and to this day stand
outlawed for that Murder and Felony.

Both Bedloe and Prance were diverse times Examined before his Sacred Majesty,
and the Council, before Committes of Lords and Commons, and the Bar of either
House of Parliament; and all appeared so well satisfied in the Coherence and
truth of their Evidence, that the five hundred Pound Reward promised to the
first Discoverer, was accordingly paid to Bedloe, and also both their Pardons
were granted, and it was thought fit to bring the said Green, Berry and Hill to
their Trial, where at the Kings Bench Bar the 10th of February, 1679 after a
full and fair hearing, upon the Evidence of the said Bedloe, and Prance, and
upon the Oaths of several other Witnesses, corrob orating the same in diverse
material points, and upon hearing what could be objected about Prances
pretended Retraction, and what else could be alleged either against the
Evidence, or for the Prisoners; They were all three found guilty by a Jury of
Knights and Gentlemen of good Quality.

And it is remarkable, That the Court was so fully satisfied, that when the
Verdict was given, Sir William Scroggs then Lord Chief Justice, publicly
expressed it in these Words:

Gentlemen, You have found the same Verdict that I would have found if had been
one with you; and if it were the last Words that I were to speak in this World,
I should have pronounced them GUILTY (Trial. p. 86.)

And the next day when they were brought to receive Sentence, his Lordship
repeated the same thing to them, when they pretented their Innocence in these
word; We do not expect much from you, and it is no great matter; for your
Confession will do us but little good, but only for your selves; we regard it
not otherwise, because the Evidence was so plain, THAT ALL MANKIND IS
SATISFIED; there is no SCRUPLE in the things; -- Every one that heard your
Trial has great satisfaction, and for my own particular, I have GREAT
SATISFACTION THAT YOU ARE EVERY ONE GUILTY [Tryal p. 88.] So Judge Wild in his
Speech before the Sentence, averrs, That they were founa guilty upon a clear
and pregnant Evidente, to the satisfaction of all good men that were
indifferent; [Tryal at. 89.

Accordingly the said three Persons were soon after Executed, and though
(according to the usual manner of persons of their Religion, after Absolution,
especially where the Honor of their Church is concerned) they pleaded
Innocence to the last; yet the formal Speech found in his Pocket, with the very
words whereof he began to harangue, and went on as sar as he had Con'd it by
Heart, which was testified by his own Wife not to be of his writing; and in it
self showed a malicious Spirit in the Inditer toward the Evidence and the
Court, in Language above Hills capacity, makes it most probable that their
denials were only the Dictates and Injunctions of some of their Priests, See
Hills Speech, with the Animadversions thereon, Printed by Authority.]

Here by the way it may be noted, That whereas the PAPISTS have since given out
that Berry was always, or at least dyed a Protestant, [and if I do not much
misremember, the Observator in some of his Papers (for I have neither leisure
nor inclination to review his Fardel for the certain number) does make the same
Suggestion] the same is notoriously false, for he had many years been a Papist,
chiefly lead thereto for Lucre, and to get an Employment, as he acknowledged to
Mr. Smith the Ordinary of Newgate: It Is true, he did a little before his
Execution declare to the said Mr. Smith, -- That he did not believe many things
which the Doctors of the Romish Church teach as necessary to be embraced for
Articles of Faith, which is no more than what many other Papists will affirm;
which shows them to be either Hypocrites, or at least that all the boasted
Certainty and unity amongst them is Lies and Cheats) yet the said Berry neither
in Prison, nor at the Gallows, would ever disown the Romish Church, nor in the
least declare himself a Protestant.

The whole Proceedings in this most weighty Clause having been so solemn and
deliberately weighed, sifted, examined and inspected by the highest Authority,
and so many several Judicatures, and prudent Assemblies; and the Eyes of all
the Nation being from first to last fixed and intent thereon, if ever in any
case private Subjects ought to acquiesce in a public legal Determination, it
must certianly be here.

But of so mighty a concernment to the Papists and their Designs; was it to
have the Murder removed from their doors, and such Loyal Peaceable and modest
Subjects they are, when their Interest is concerned, that they have been
restlesly employed in throwing dirt and scandal on the Government, and its
clear and upright Proceedings herein; and spare no pains nor Art to effect it.

It Is pleasant to observe by what variety of Tools, and on what different
pretenses and contradictory Mediums they have moild and toild to shuffle off
the indeligible guilt from their Party; but as the incomparable Papinian, told
the Emperor Caracalla, when he required him to palliate by an Oration the
killing of his Brother, That it was more easy to commit, than excuse a Murder;
so hitherto all their Attempts have been vain, Just Providence (as we doubt
not, He will ever do, that is the Avenger of Blood, and God of Truth) turning
all their Lying and Crafty Invention to their greater shame and confusion.

One of their first Attempts (besides railing at the Witnesses in several
Libels) was as I remember, in a Printed Pamphlet, Entitled, Reflections, etc.
about the beginning of July, 1679. Wherein by advancing several notorious
Falsehoods, and thence (like our Observator) deducing plausible, but altogether
fallacious Arguments, blind hints, and Inuendo's, they endeavored to raise
jealousies and suspicions upon a Noble Protestant Lord, [The E. of D.] who
being then not only Confined, but under a popular Odium, they thought (it
seems) that the most groundless improbabilities would be believed of him; The
persons that handled that villainous Paper to the Press, that good Catholic
Gentlewoman that Midwif'd it abroad, and distributed them, and the Printers
(one that refused, and another that did it) are not unknown; or if they were,
by the thing it self, the Language, Arguments and Scope; it is evident, that it
came out of the Roman Forge, hammered on purpose to serve a turn for that
Party; But the same soon after being fully detected and confuted by the
publication of Mr. Kirkbies Narrative, vanished like an ignis fatuus, and left
only a loathsome stinch of Popish Impudence behind it. [ See Kirkbies Narrative,
and the Impartial State of the Case of the E. of D.]

After this, about the month of September, 1680. comes Mrs. Celier, a Roman
Catholic too, and flusht with an acquital, she had then late before obtained
on an Indictment of Treason; she publishes a Libel, Entitled, Malice Defeated,
etc. (owned by her, but supposed and charged in Print to be written by Munson a
Condemned Popish Priest, then in Newgate; which was never that I know of denied
or disproved) wherein amongst many other impudent reflections on the King, and
the Protestant Religion, and the public Justice of the Nation: She affirms,
Prance to have been Rackt and grievously Tortuard in Newgate, and thence would
insinuate, That all his Testimony touching Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder,
was by those means extorted from him, for which Seditious Libel (upon the
Prosecution of Mr. Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press) being brought to
Trial at the Old Baily, on Saturday the 11th of September. 1680. upon a full
hearing, That false and scandalous Allegation of Prances being Rackt or
Tortured, being fully disproved, and she not so much as offering the least
shadow of Testimony to make it good, she was found guilty; and on Monday the
13th of the same month, Sentenced to be put on the Pillory three times at
several places, and fined 1000 l. and so stand Committed in Execution till the
same paid; Accordingly she did stand on the Pillory, and remained a
considerable time in Newgate, and how at last she became discharged, I have not
inquired. But these words of (the then) Mr. Baron Weston who chiefly managed
her Trial, are worthy an Observators notice, (viz.)

There was a horrid barbarous Murder Committed here, and which certainly did
fix the Accusation of the Plot fuller upon them [the Papists] then all the
Evidence that was given besides: The Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey a
Magistrate, who in doing of his duty, was most barbarously Murdered, and BY
WHOM is Evidenced by one Prance; It has been the whole Labor of the Party, to
cast his Murder upon other persans, and take it off themselves, for they find
if that Accusation stick upon them; it is a thing of so Heinous a Nature, that
it will make the Popish Party odious to all Mankind. And therefore this they
Labor at MIGHTILY, and this Task she has taken on her self, etc.

The next that Tampered with this matter, was one Fitz-Harris an Irish Papist,
(since Executed for Contriving a most Horrid and Treasonable Libel) who to save
his own Stake when desperate, offered at the same Game started by the Author of
the Reflections, beforementioned; And upon his Oath, there was a Bill found by
the Grand Jury against one Depree or Depuy, (or some such name) and the E. of
D. as Accessaries before the Fact; upon which Subject, the OBSERVATOR, Numb.
141. has this Gloss -- You cannot forget what Stickling there was amongst the
true Protestants themselves, to ease the Papists of the Murder, and turn it
upon that Noble Earl, who is known to be a Protestant of the Church of England,
even of the highest form -- That the Earl is a Protestant, I never heard
denied, But the OBSERVATOR would have done well to have named those true
Protestants that made this Stickling to case the Papists, and burden that
Noble Lord; He says indeed, Numb. 141. That a near Relation of Sir Edmund, was
Foreman of the Jury which found that Bill; what he designed to insinuate by
this, is not hard to guess.

But as the thing it self is utterly false, the Foreman of that Jury, being no
nearer a Relation to Sir Edmund, then to the OBSERVATOR, viz. a small Cozen to
both on Adam's side, so upon inquiry, I cannot hear of any Relations to the
Martyred Gentleman, but what (were like himself) sound Protestants of the
Established Church of England.

But what means the man, when in the same Paper he says, The charging of my
Lord at that time of the day, looked as if THEY were still groping after the
Truth of the matter; And was constructively improved into a tacit discharge of
the Papists? -- No Mortal certainly, but the Papists themselves, except it
should happen to be the Observator; who has showed himself so ready to improve
that way any thing (though never so inconsequent or Extravagant.)

2. As to the Charging of the Earl here intended, it is plain, 'twas done by
Fitz Harris, a Traiterous Irish Papist; which I suppose Mr. Observator could
not be ignorant of, being to this day no stranger to a near Relation of his,
who (as I have heard) forfeited what Estate he had, for being concerned in a
certain Scuffle in Ireland, between Whig and Tory about the year 1641. wherein
a small parcel of about two hundred thousand Heretics had their throats cut --
But let that pass.

The Truth of the story which the Observator thus constructively improves to a
tacit discharge of the Papists from the guilt of Godfrey's Murder, is thus:

Fitz-Harris upon his Arraignment in the King's Bench for his Traiterous Libel,
having put in a Plea to the Jurisdiction of that Court, because an Impeachment
he alleged, was pendent against him in Parliament; The Court on the 11th of
May, 1681. Overruled it, and gave him notice to prepare for a Trial on the
ninth of June following; On the 13th of May, a motion was made for Fitz-Harris
to be brought up by Habeas Corpus to the Bar, to give Evidence against the
before mentioned De Pree, touching the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; The
Court took time till next day to consider; And then awarded a Habeas Corpus;
upon which being brought up May the 16th, and sworn; he was ordered to give his
Evidence to the Grand Jury in open Court, where he told a long story: And the
Bill before mentioned, was found upon his positive Oath; what other Grounds the
Grand Jury had for finding it, I am not to inquire; but if there were leave in
such Cases for Conjecture, it might justly be supposed, that the Jury
remembering the former attempt of the Papists in their Libel of Reflections; and
that the Witness was of the same stamp and party; were desirous to see what
could possibly be offered to maintain it, that the Truth might be sifted to the
utmost, and the Innocence of the Accused have a public Vindication: Whereas
should they have refused to find the Bill, the Romanists would then undoubtedly
have improved it constructively to a tacit discharge of their Party, and cried
out of a stoppage of Justice. But so little started was that Honorable Lord,
that immediately, (as I am credibly informed) he exhibited a Petition, that he
might speedily be brought to Trial thereupon.

Now by what Constructiveness any Honest Protestant should improve this fair,
deliberate, judicial procedure into a tacit discharge of the Papists from the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, because a known Papist, in hopes to save his
own Neck, swore such and such Protestants were Accessory, I am utterly
ignorant; tho yet the OBSERVATOR has published it in Black Letters, as a
special hint to those Folks he writes unto, or for that they may take more
notice of, and further improve it upon occasion.

Only this is further to be noted, That the same Fitz-Harris in his Examination
before Sir George Treby, and Sir Robert Clayton, March 10. said no more than
that Depuy told him, That the Murder was Consulted at Windsor; and that in
April, 1680. Kelly told him at Calais, that he was one of the persons concerned
in the Murder, and that the same was done much in manner as Prance had related
it. -- And the very next day was Fitz-Harris removed from Nevgate to the Tower,
and there kept close Prisoner; so that it was impossible any of those THET whom
the OBSERVATOR seems to aim at by the Title of true Protestants, could put him
upon any such villainy, as he afterward deposed touching this Affair. *

Another Irishman, one Magrath steps in, pretending, there were those that
could make it appear, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey Hanged himself, and that one
Mr. Moor (who was Sir Edmunds Clerk) cut him down: Which matter being examined
at the Council board, May 26. 1681. the said Magrath was found to hold
Correspondence with Mrs Celier and the Popish Priests in Newgate, touching this
matter, though he solemnly vowed he had no Acquaintance with them, and the
whole appeared to be a false and malicious Contrivance: Whereupon he was
required to find Sureties, and so that Project likewise fell to the ground:
[See the Appendix to Thompsons Trial, printed by Authority, p. 40. where also
is an Affidavit of the said Mr. Moor, utterly confuting that scandal; and it is
reported the same honest Gentleman has since or lately been interrogated or
Examined about the same business, but still persisteth in his former Testimony.

Not yet discouraged, one Thomson that called himself the Loyal Intelligencer,
but by others was commonly styled The Popish Printer: How justly I know not;
but as I hear, he is at this day (or very lately was) in Newgate for Printing
Popish Books or Libels, against his Majesty's Supremacy: the Protestant
Religion and Government.) This Thompson I sav, about February 1681/2;. And in
several succeeding Months, by the Instigation of Pain and Farewell, the latter
of which stands charged upon Oath in Print, to have been a Trustee for the
Traitor Fenwick a Jesuit, some time since executed, [ See the Appendix to
Thompsons Trial, Fol. 50 and 51.] undertakes the business by several Scandalous
Printed Letters to Prance on that subject, wherein asserting many untruths, as
that the Coroner and Jury were first of Opinion, and declared. That Godfrey was
Felo de se, That there were Cakes or Gobbets, of blood found in his Clothes,
and near the place where the Body lay, That the Clothes, Belt, and Scabbard,
were Weather-beaten to rags, and his Eyes, Nostrils, and corner of his Mouth,
were Fly blown, and that his Shoes were clean, or glazed with his walking on
the Grass, and Grass seeds observed to stick in the seams of his Shoes; And
(amongst the rest) alleging all that the Observator now musters up (viz. That
Bedloes Evidence before the Committee of Lords) and Prances in Relation to this
Gentleman's Death, were as different as the East from the West; for one dogs him
out of St. Clements, the other decoyes him from Charing Cross; One swears he
was strange l'd with a Handkerchief, near the Stables, going to the Waterside;
the other, that he was smoothered with a Pillow, in a Room in the great Court
in Somerset house; One says, that he took Horse at So hoe; the other that he
took Coach at Clarendine House, with many other such like Contradictions; And
from these and the like Allegations, the said Letters raised Arguments to
invalidate the whole Evidence, and insinuate that the Gentleman Murdered
himself; Which Letters are at large recited in the Trial of Thompson, etc.
[from page 10, to page 18.]

These pretended Letters were first rationally Answered and Confuted; But
Thompson in his Iutelligence, Observator, News-book, (or what you please to
call it) still persisting in his Impudence, and boasting what wonderful matters
he could make appear by a Cloud of undeniable Witnesses; he was at last
summoned before his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, where having
declared his Authors, they were committed to Newgate, and Mr. Attorney General
ordered to Prosecute them at Law; And accordingly soon after, an Information
was Exhibited against them by Mr. Attorney, wherein after the Recital of the
Conviction of Green, Bery, and Hill; upon the Evidence of Bedloe, Prance, John
Brown, Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Skillarm, and Nicholas Cambride; and the
flying of Girald, Kelly and Vernat. As also having recited the Inquesi taken
before the Coroner, it is charged;

That the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farewell, well knowing
the Premises, and being Persons devilishly affected, devising, practicing, and
with all their Strength, Intending the Peace and common Tranquillity of the
Kingdom of England to disturb, and as much as in them lay, the due Course of
the Law, to destroy subvert and elude, and the Justice of this Kingdom of
England, to defame and scandalize; and as well the said Miles Prance, William
Bedloe, Jonathan Brown, Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Willarm, and Nicholas
Cambridge, as the said Jonathan Cooper, and the honest and lawful men Sworn
upon the Inquest aforesaid; upon view of the Body aforesaid; to bring into the
greatest Hatred, Contempt, and vile Esteem with all the Kings Subjects to deter
the Kings Subjects from sinding, detecting, and proving the Designs of PAPISTS
against ur Lord the King, and the true Religion now by Law established; and
impiously and wickedly devising and intending them the said Gerald, Dominick,
Kelly, and Philbert Vernat from undergoing the Pains and Sentence by Law upon
them to be inflicted, for the Murder aforesaid; and to aid and assist them
(although they beguilty) to be found not guilty thereof; and so deceive and
begiule the Kings Subjects in the Premises, with their False Affirmations and
Arguments: and cause and procure that it should be believed and esteemed, that
the said Green, Berry, and Hill, the Persons for the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, as before said, Convicted and Executed, had been Convicted and Executed
Unjustly; and that the said Sir Edmundbury Godfry was Felo de se, and himself
had Felloniously Murdered: They the said Thompson, Pain and Farewell, their
most impudent, wicked, and diabolical Intentions to fulfill and perfect,
afterward, to wit, the 23 of February, in the 34th year of the Reign of Our
now Sovereign Lord the King, at the Parish of St. Mary Le Bow, London; with
Force and Arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, and Diabolically,
made and Composed, and caused to be Printed, a certain false scandalous Libel,
Entitled, A Letter to Mr. Miles Prance, in Relation to the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; in which Libel, (amongst other things) is contained, etc.
[Reciting then the most material Passages of the said Libel]

Which Case being brought to Trial, June 20. 1682. after a mighty Expectation
raised by the confident Papers daily Printed by Thompson, the Defendants were
not able to produce any Testimony that had the least show of Truth or Religion
To justify those Allegations, but on the contrary, generally their own
Witnesses, made against them. For Example:

First, About the pretended Blood, found near the place where the Body lay; One
William Balson a Witness Swears, that on the Friday, coming back from viewing
the Body at the White-house, (whether it had been carried over Night by the
Constable, after it was found ( They showed me in a Ditch where they said lay
some Blood, I cannot say it was his Blood; but I Will assure you, The Blood
looked to me, like Blood that was left there, rather than any thing else.
(Thompsons Trial page 22.) So Mr. Lazingby, one of their Witnesses Swears, The
Blood that was, was some four yards from the Ditch, I put my Finger into it,
and smelt to it, and it smelt like that which comes from a Body after a
Fortnights time dead, rather than a Weeks: My Lord! It was Blood and Water; the
Water will separate from the Blood: Ibidem, p. 25. [Here note, that probably
some of the Murderers or their Agents that Conveyed the Body thither, after
they heard it was found, and removed into a House, might privately the next day
lay some Blood near the place, the better to color their designed Lie, That he
Murdered himself.]

2. The Witnesses produced by the Defendants, all agree, Sir Edmundbury to have
been Strangled; Thus Fisher swears, He looked as if he were Strangled, and his
Neck was so weak, that you might turn it any Way; p. 22. So by the Surgeons,
by them produced, Mr. Chase -- my Lord! I believe he was Straugled, for I don't
believe, that those Injuries that were offered about him, could be after he was
dead, (page 23.) And Mr. Hobbs -- Indeed My Lord! I thought he was strangled,
that was my opinion, (Ibidem) See Mr. Lazingby -- He appeared to me to be
Strangled, and that which strangled him was kept about his Neck till he was
very cold, (page 25.) And that from the upper part of his Neck to his Stomach
and Breast, was very much discolored and black, and his mouth was discolcured:
Now (says he) when ever a man is bruised, whilst he is Alive, or whlist he is
Warm; the part after the Person is dead, will soonest Corrupt, (page 26.)

3. As for the story of Fly-blows, there was no Proof, but the contrary; and
Brown swears, that Farewell would have him say so, but that he never did say so;
page 24.

4. It is observeable, that as Thompson in his Libels had not omitted this
Topic, now improved by the Observator; (viz.) The difference between the
Evidence Mr. Bedloe gave in the House of Lords, and the Evidence that Prance
gave at the Trial of Green Berry and Hill; So Mr. Farewell desired he might
prove Copies of the Journals; And my Lord Chief Justice that then was replied,
You shall make any proof you will. -- But Mr. Farewell, though he caused one
Stanly to be sworn, to prove those Copies, did presently ('it is supposed by
advice of his Council, knowing how vain any such thing would be) go off from,
and declined that Proof; and all that they had to offer being heard, My Lord
Chief Justice delivered himself in these Words:

Gentlemen, I did give him [speaking of Farewell who seemed the chief Person in
this Intrigue] leave to go into what Evidence he would in this Case, net that I
thought it materiale for if he could have PROVED NEVER SO MUCH, yet his MALICE
had been NEVER the LESS, to have gone and aspersed the GOVERNMENT; What had he
to do to meddle with it? To what purpose should he write Books concerning the
matters of Government? To traduce the Justice of the Nation? The People had
suffered as Malefactors? If they had suffered INNOCENTLY, he ought to have done
no such thing as this is, he did design and would (no doubt of it) have been
very much satisfied, if he could have made but some probable Evidence that Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey killed himself; and I was desirous to hear what they would
say for themselves: But you hear what a kind of Evidence it is; Not a Witness
he has called, but it is as much against him as can be, and does Evince it
plainly, that the man was killed by Strangling; And so the Evidence was upon
the Trial of Green, Berry and Hill, if he could have raised a Doubt about it,
yet his offense had not been Mitigated by it; for a private Person is not to
Arraign the Justice of the Nation: But I was willing to hear what could be said
in the Case; whether a Doubt could be made in the World, that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was not Murdered and you see how his veay Evidence has in all things
coufirmed the Evidence that Prance has given, that he was killed, and that by
STRANGLING, I must leave it with you Gentlemen, they are three in this
mischief, it is a Combination of them to astront the public Justice of the
Nation; And what is the end of it? The end of it is, to make people believe
there is no Popish piot: But it is plain, He was killed by the popish party; As
Prance upon his Evidence against Green, and the others Attested; But if they
could have made it out. That he killed himself, all of them would have cried
out, The Popish plot was a sham, nothing but a thing raised by the Protestants
against the Papists, and all the Plot must have gone for nothing, Gentlemen, I
do leave it with you, etc.

The matter was so plain, that the Jury without stirring from the Bar, found
them all three Guilty.

The Prisoners were not brought to Sentence till the third of July, 1662.
Between which time and the Trial, Thompson having in his Intelligence took upon
him to give an Account, as if Justice had not been done them, (though they had
as much time and liberty given them by the Lord Chief Justice to call their
WITNESSES, and examine who they would, as they could desire) therefore for
further satisfaction the following AFFIDAVITS of WITNESSES for the King that
attended the Trial, but were not then called, were read in open Court, the
first was of Captain Spence, a tall black Man, and in person very like Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; in these words

Spence's Affidavits.
Richard Spence, Citizen and Upholder of London, living in Arundel-street in
the Strand, in the Parish of St. Clements Dane, in the County of Middlesex;
having been twice sub-pena'd to give Evidence for the King upon an Information
exhebited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and
John Farewell, and not being called at their Trial to give Evidence in open
Court, makes Oath; That upon Thursday the tenth day of October, 1678, it being
the Thursday before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was missing from his House in
Hartshorn-Lane in the Strand, as he this Deponent was coming from St. James 's
Market, to go to his own House, about seven of the Clock at night, there were
then at the Watergate at Somerset House, five or six men standing together,
who laid hold on this Deponent as he was passing by them, and they taking hold
of both this Deponents Arms, dragged him down about a yard within the
Watergate of Somerset House, it being dark; but one of the said men, which
this Deponent believes to have been HILL; (for that this Deponent knew him very
well; as also his Master, Doctor Godwyn) cried out and said, This is not he:
upon which they immediately let this Deponent go.

Richard Spence.
Jurat the 10th of July, 1682.

Coram me W. Dolbin.



Then John Oakly's Affidavit was read.

John Oakly, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex; Servant to Mr. Robert Breeden of Hartsshorn-lane, in the said Parish
and County, Brewer: makes Oath, That on Saturday the 12th day of October,
1678. about eight or nine of the Clock in the Evening, he was in the City of
London, in the Company of his Father Robert Oakely of Bissiter, in the County
of Oxon, Maulster: And his Father came with him as far as Ludgate, where they
parted. And this Deponent going homewards to his master Breedons-House, coming
by Sommerset-House in the Strand, when he came near the Gate of that House,
which leads down to the Waterside, commonly called the Watergate, which was
about nine of the Clock at night, he there saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and past
close by him, and put off his Hat to him; and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, put off
his Hat again to him. And after that this Deponent had passed beyond Sir
Edmundbury, he this Deponent turned about, and looked upon him again, and Sir
Edmundbury Gopfrey stood still, and there was a man or two near Sir Edmundbury:
And this Deponent further says, that he knew Sir Edmundbury Godfrey very well,
for that he saw him almost daily pass by his Master Bredoons-House in Hartshorn
lane, going or coming from his own Dwelling House, which was also in
Hartshornlane: And this Deponent further says, that about two or three days
after, when the Rumor was, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was missing, he
acquainted his Fellow Servant Elizabeth Dekin, that he saw Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey near the Watergate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, that very
Saturday night that he was reported to have been missing from his House in
Hartshorn-lane: And this Deponent further says, that he told the same thing to
his Uncle Ralph Oakely of the Parish of Little St. Bartholomew, about a week
after the time that Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Body was found, and also that he
told the same thing to his Father the aforesaid Robert Oakely, and to several
others, in a short time after.

John Oakely.
Jurat. 22. die Junii 1682.

Coram me. John Moor, Mayor.



Note in this Appendix to Thompsons Trial, p. 43, 44, and 45. You may see four
Affidavits, (viz.) of Elizabeth Dekin, John Breedon, Ralph Oakely the Uncle,
and Robert Oakely, corroborating this last Affidavit, and all proving that the
Deponent did, both before the Body was found, ahd soon after, relate to them
the substance of what he had now sworn therein.

The Affidavit of Robert Forset.
Robert Forset, of Maribone in the County of Middlesex, Esquire; having been
twice Subpaena'd to give Evidence for the King, upon an Information exhibited
in the Crown-Office, against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John
Farewell; and being not called to give Evidence in open Court, makes Oath, That
Tuesday the 15th of October, 1678. Being the Tuesday that Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey was missing: He this Deponent was a Hunting with his Pack of Hounds, at
the very place where the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was afterward found,
and beat that very place with his Hounds, and the Body was not then there, nor
any Gloves nor Cane thereabout; the said Deponent further says, that the same
day Mr. Henry Harwood, requested him this Deponent, that he would let him have
his Hounds the next day after, being Wednesday, and be would find that Hare
they could not find on Tuesday, or Words to that purpose: And this Deponent
further says, That he the said Harwood has several times since affirmed, that
he did accordingly Hunt in the same place, and beat the same Ditch, and said,
that the Body was not there that Wednesday at Noon, which said Henry Harwood is
newly dead.

Robert Forset.
Jurat 1. Die Julii 1672.

Coram me W. Dolben.



After these Affidavits were read, the Court proceeded to Sentence; which was,
That Thompson and Farewell should stand in the Pillory at the Old Palace-yard at
Westminster, and each of them pay an hundred Pound, and to be imprisoned till
they paid it; And Pain only Fined an hundred Pound. Accordingly Thompson and
Farewell did stand in the Pillory with this Writing over their Heads.

For Libelling the Justice of the Nation, by making the World believe, that Sir
EDMUNDBURY GODFREY Murdered himself. But now as if all these things had been
transacted in a Corner, or were utterly forgot; as if still (against the
Testimony of so many Records) the manner of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder
were as uncertain as the story of Brute, or a Popish Legend of St. Kit, or the
eleven thousand Virgins, comes the witty Observator, and (not to mention
several of his former squinting reflections, in defiance both of Iruth, and all
those wholesome Laws whereon these former Criminals had been punished, does in
three Papers, one dated September 29. 1684. another the first of October, the
third the sixth of the same month, under take, and by a few bold dashes of the
Luxuriant Pen, by his single Authority to Reverse (in effect) the whole
Proceedings.

But what News does this illuminated Author bring? Can he assign any other
manner of the Gent lemans death? Can he discover any other Murderer? Can he
name any other time or place when or where the Honest Magistrate was brought to
his untimely end? No, he pretends not to any thing of all this, for you must
note his general work is to pull drun, not to Edify, to Digg a Pit, not to
cover it, to amuse, and not to satisfy; If you will be but so Courteous to
believe, That the poor, ever-harmless, ever-innocent, ever-loyal Papists had no
hand in it, the business is done: But if he cannot so much as offer any
probable Account of the Murder, nor has any new matter to Communicate; to what
purpose does he trouble himself and the world, or indeed (with all submission
be it spoken) what has his Worship to do with it at all? Yet I Will warrant you,
he has some secret reasons, some valuable (though no good) Causes and
Considerations; but I doubt the Reader must turn back to the before-recited
preamble in the Information against Thompson, etc. if ever he will truly
understand them.

Not to defile Paper with a particular Repetition of the Ribaldry, (as he
himself delervedly calls his own handy work) the Substance of all these three
Observators, (bating the lewd Expressions, as, Let us hear the Child of
Perdition open against the man of Sin, Observator, 141. and the like
Profanation of Holy Writ) is, to show his Faculties in giving us a new Lesson
on the old String, Tuned to his hand by his dearly Beloved Fellow Laborers,
Thompson and Farewell; for though they (Bunglers as they were) could make no
Music on it, he doubts not but to Tickle it so sweetly, that like a second
Orpheus, all the unthinking Brutes and Logerheads about Town, shall dance to
his Harmony; The Scope and Sum of all I say, is to new vamp the old baffled
Calumny, viz. That there were Contradictions in the Evidence given upon Oath,
by Prance and Bedloe, touching the manner and Circumstances of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey's Murder, and consequently that the whole is a Fiction, and no way
deserving Credit; That the two youngling Witnesses agree not in their Tale, any
more than the two Elders, in the Accusation of chaste Susanna: And although
neither King, Lords, Commons, Judges, nor Jury could not perceive any thing at
all of these palpable Oppositions, and damnable Interferings; yet the
Observator, like a second Daniel forsooth, has found out all the Roguery.

Thus he tells the World, [Observator Numb. 145.] That Prance and Bedloe, are
directly at you Lie, and you Lie. Again -- If four thousand Parliaments should
believe, Two point blank Contradictions to be both true; (as that is the present
case) I should beg leave to be excused -- Ibidem, -- Let the Witnesses be what
they will, if they swear Backwards and Forwards, or disagree upon any
considerable Points among themselves, I would not (as a Gentleman said, upon
better Light, and second thoughts, in this very case) I would not I say Hang a
Dog upon such an Evidence, Observator (...) -- And so he goes merrily on,
pretending to recite by way of Dialogue, Prauces and Bedloes Testimony; in
Observator 141, 142 and 145. And according to his fashion, represents them as
directly thwarting one another.

But notwithstanding the Observator, is upon so pleasant a Pin, The disereet
Reader will consider of what weight and moment this matter is How much the
Honor of the King and Kingdom is therein concerned, and what Consequences
attend it As,

1. If Godfrey's being Murdered by the Papists can by any Artifices be brought
into Suspicion, made a doubt, or rendered uncertain, one of the greatest
Demonstrations of the Popish Plot will be taken off: Therefore, nothing can be
a greater Service to that party, than such an Attempt, and they are the only
people that can be gratified thereby.

But on the contrary, if that Murder does undeniably lie at their door, where
it is fixed by Law; Then all these shuffling illegal Practices, to stifle the
belief and memory thereof, (as barbarously as they did his person) are but so
many fresh and pregnant Arguments, both of their guilt in that Assassination;
as also, of the certainty of their HELLISH CONSPIRACY, in Subservience to
which, the MURDER was first Committed, and ever-since is so daringly
endeavored to be palliated.

2. How much it will reflect (should the Observator be Credited) on the Wisdom
and Goodness of his Sacred Majesty, (known to be one of the most quick-sighted
and justest Princes living) and upon his most Honorable Privy Council, and the
whole house of Peers: That they none of them should ever discern these palpable
notorious Corrtradictions, that the Observator talks of; for if they had
perceived them, it cannot without a civil Blasphemy, be imagined, that they
would have suffered such Witnesses to have escaped unpunished; much less would
his Majesty have parted with five hundred Pounds to Bedloe, or permitted three
honest In nocent men to have been Executed on a Testimony not fit to Convict a
Dog.

3. As the Reverend Judges are Members assistant in the house of Peers, and so
cannot be ignorant of what Depositions Prance and Bedloe had there given in, so
being by our Laws bound to be (as it were) of Council with the Prisoners, (on
which score they are allowed to Fee none, at least as to matter of Fact) they
seem obliged in Conscience to have taken notice of such Contradictions, if any
such there had been; And indeed, what the Observator would now make pass for
Contradictions, were (in effect) Sworn by the said Bedloe and Prance, on the
Trial of Green, Berry and Hill, as well as in their former Depositions before
the Lords; so that the matter by him now raked up, (bating his own Forgeries
and Prevarications) were then properly before the Court, who were so far from
judging that the same did invalidate their Evidence, that they declared their
Testimony to be thereby much strengthened; or could it possibly be supposed,
that these Contradictions were then by any oversight unreguarded by the Court,
it is an amazing thing that no one Judge, nor one noble Member of the Lords
House, should either not have the Sagacity to observe, or the Courage to
remonstrate to his Majesty those Incoherences in the Evidences, and to have
besought the best natured Prince in the World for a Pardon or Reprieve at
least, till the matter might have been more fully Examined.

4. How can we imagine but in all that time, between the Prisoners Commitment,
(I mean Green, Hill, etc.) and their Trial, some of their Friends might have
had recourse to the Lords Journal, and thence taken Authentic Copies to
confront the Witnesses, or that Farewell, etc. that alleged and brought a
Witness to prove such Copies, would not have insisted to have the same read,
and not totally have declined that part of their business, if they had not been
conscious that no relief could thence be expected in a Court of Judicature,
however they might serve their, (or now the Observator's) turn, pretty
conveniently to stuff out Libels, or a muse such of the Rabble as are willing
to be deceived?

5. What strange Apprehensions will this be apt to beget in Foreigners minds
of our English Justice, if such gross Absurdities as the Observator would make
them believe, be swallowed in our Courts of Judicature, and men's lives thus
taken away? And what Triumphs will the active and witty Jesuits hence erect to
themselves, and to the scandal of the Protestant Religion, in places remote,
and after-ages; and justify all by the authority of the Observator?

6. How pernicious and choking may this bold Example, if it should escape
unpunisht, prove to all judicial Proceedings? For how reserved and loath will
many people be to give Evidence against, Try or condemn Malefactors of Power or
Interest; If after the Law and Justice has had its due Course, they shall lie
under the Lash and Examen of every private Mercenary Scribbler (for though I
have all the Deference I ought to have for the Observator's Quality, yet in
such Cases and such Methods I know no privilege he has above others) if it
shall remain in every man's power that has Confidence enough to write a Book, to
Arraign or call to review and reverse, or brand with scandal all the most
solemn proceedings with Impunity.

Where Is the Dignity of the Law, (as Mr. L'Estrange says well) or the security
of the State, if every foul-mouthed Libeller shall be at liberty to Arraign
Authority gratis, and to make what Whores, Rogues and Traitorrs they please? [
L'Egrange no Papist, p. 2.] What Traitor, what Murderer shall at any time be
Executed, but if he have any witty Friend or Confederate surviving, may at this
rate be Sainted and made a Martyr, or celebrated as an Innocent, and all the
Judges, Juries and Witnesses exposed even to the highest Odium and Contempt, as
often as any Factious Writer has a mind to show his dexterity in managing a
Goose-quill, and get money for a Pamphlet?

7. The OBSERVATOR seems to be the less excusable in that he had Recent
Examples of the Laws just severity against such Practices; could not the
thoughts of Madam Celier, and Nathanael Thompson's Fate restrain him from
Embarking in the like designs? Could he so soon forget how a certain Fellow was
notably whipped, and Curtis pillored and fined for publishing a Paper reporting
that some Persons acted the late Lord Russel's Ghost? Was not Mr. Braddon's
Punishment fresh in memory, for intermedling about the Earl of Essex's Death,
after the Coroners Inquest had found him felo de se, or Sir Samuel
Barnadiston's being fined in a great Sum for missrepresenting (though but in a
private Letter) the late horrid Fanatical Conspiracy? If therefore it shall
appear that the Observator, in defiance to Truth, and all those Proceedings,
has deliberately, and that in Print, and more than once or twice,
unnecessarily, and upon design, called into question the manner of Godfreys
Murder, after it was settled by Law, and forged Contradictions (which really
never were) in the Evidence, and slandered the Witnesses, and by Consequence
abused his Majesty, and the whole House of Peers; nay, the Justice and Honor
of the Nation, and thereby Exposed it (as much as in him lies) to Contempt
abroad, and the unjust scandal of lying under the guilt of Innocent Blood at
home; What Animadversions he ought to be liable to, is with all humility
submitted to Authority. Nor will what he subtly insinnates, Observator, 145.
That neither OATS nor his CASE, nor his PLOT is the fame at this day which it
was at their first appearance: but the Contradictions, the frauds, and the
Complicated Iniquities of Fiction and Canfedracy, which time has since brought
to light, have given us a full and clear discovery of a thousand things, which
to the four Parliaments lay quite out of sight -- This I say will not at all
relieve the Observator; for how true (or rather false) soever the same may be,
as to the Popish Plot in general, (which here I intend not to Examine) yet as
to the Murder of Sir Edmunabury Godfrey, I must avow, That neither time, nor
the Observator's Industry (after five years active Endeavors) have not brought
one fyllable, one Circumstance to light that may in the least seem to
invalidate the Evidence, which was not known and apparent at the Trial of
Green, Hill and Berry; But on the contrary it is notorious, that a multitude of
matters, Testimonies and Circumstances, have been discovered; which every way
strengthen, and abundantly Confirm the Evidence of Bedloe and Prance there
given.

Since therefore such fatal Consequences, dishonorable to the King and
Kingdom, attend the Observators Suggestions; And that as he had no Right, so he
could have no honest Loyal Design to intermeddle therewith, even supposing them
true, what then will you say, if they are utterly groundless and false?
Certainly next to the Murder it self, or that Cause which occasioned it, there
could scarce either a more audacious or mischievous wickedness be attempted.

Now to demonstrate that the Observators Clamours are as groundless as
malicious, shall be our next Eudeavour.

And indeed it is quickly done, for there is one Continued thread of Fallacy (or
rather Forgery) runs through all his Cobwebb Contexture, which being once taken
notice of, there will not remain the least color of argument in all his three
Papers, to weaken the testimony; For wherever Bedloe swears what Lephair, etc.
told him; the Observator very wittily, (but how honestly let others judge)
omits that part of the deposition, and puts it, as if Bedloe had positively
swore it of his own knowledge, and so therewith Confronts Prances testimony,
and then tragically cries out O Rogue! O Rascal! See how they contradict and
give each other the Lie.

It Is also fit to consider the Observators Vouchers; how does he prove the
depositions of Prance and Bedloe before the Lords? Why forsooth from a certain
Pamphlet wherein I perceive the Gentleman is well read) Entitled, Series,
which I confess, (living in the Country) I had never heard of, till I found it
here so often cited; and thereupon coming to London, and inquiring in
Pauls-Church-Yard and Fleet Street, I understood it was a Night-Bird, rare to
be met with; but at last I got a sight of it, and found it so far from being
published by any Authority, that the very Printer and Bookseller both, were
either afraid or ashamed to own it, or affix their Names. And although Mr.
Observator, for the greater credit of the business -- Cries -- See Series, or
the Journal of the Lords; [OBSERVATOR, Numb. 141.] whereby craftily he would
inveigle his Reader, as if that Pamphlet were the Journal of the House of Peers
Printed, yet the thing it self has more Grace and Modesty, and has not a word
of the Lords Journal in all the Title. And indeed to every Judicious Peruser it
will appear by its disorder, mistakes, frequent Blanks, etc. to be only a
Rhapsody of the Papers then fluttering abroad in Coffee-houses, or the
Collection of some Sage News-writer in those times; and if I am not
misinformed, was when it first crept out (in 81.) questioned by Authority. To
what kind of Animalls does this Sire of an OBSERVATOR write? Is the man swelled
to that dotage of vanity as to expect an Apochryphal Anonimous Libel should
pass for Authentic? How does it appear that these are true Copies? That there
are no omissions nor ignorant mistakes, or willful Forgeries? Must the Judicial
Proceedings of a Nation be unravelled; Murderers acquitted, Assassinates
skreen'd from Justice, and the deserved Odium of their bloody practices; the
Reputation of the Dead, and Credit of the Living, be villified and branded with
Perjury, upon the words of a Lewd Pamphlet, that in the year 81. escaped the
Press in Hugger-mugger? And especially when the Pamphlet it self, does not
pretend to give the words of the Depositions, For so says Series, p. 40. Bedloe
being brought to the Lords Bar, made a large Narrative to this EFFECT -- And p.
167. -- Frances being sworn, did declare TO THE EFFECT following; -- Yet now
the Observator screws every word of this loose, uncertain account, and thence
would run down all their Evidence.

But let us for once, and only by way of supposition, take it for granted, That
Bedloe and Prance did upon their Examination, depose just as his Beloved Series
relates, yet it will no way Impeach the Truth or Credit of their Testimony; nor
prove any Contradictions therein. For the truth is, however Series has used
them, yet the Observator has grossly falsified the testimony of Series it self;
for when Series is so far honest, as to tell us, that Bedloe all along swears,
That Lephair, etc. TOLD him so and so; The Obseroator not only leaves out that,
but adds, that Bedloe SWORE POINT BLANK so and so. As for example, Series, p.
51. This Deponent then asked Lephair, how they got him thither, and where they
found him? Lephair TOLD HIM, that himself Walsh and the Lord Bellasis
Gentleman, met Sir Edmundbury by the King's Head in the Strand, etc. Now this
Question -- and Answer, the Observator, Numb. 141. suppresseth, and represents
Bedloe swearing Lephairs answer thus: Captain Bedloe gives it upon his Oath,
That Lephair, Walsh, and the Lord Bellasis met Sir Edmundbury by the King's Head
in the Strand, crossing the Street, about five of the Clock, etc.

And the same Artifice the Observator uses throughout all his Citations from
Series, which I need not stand to repeat, let any man that has a mind to it
compare that Book with the Observator Quotations from thence and if he do not
blush for the Observator, I may without breach of Charity, pronounce him
insensible of Truth or Justice. For can there be a more palpable Prevarication
than to change Hipothetical Assertions into Categorical, and represent what
Bedloe swears, only as the Relation of others, as a positive Declaration of his
own Knowledge?

So when Series, page 167. mentions Prance's Evidence, setting forth the
Motives Gerald and others made use of to engage him in the Murder, it adds,
that he (the said Prance) did consent thereto; and the rather for some Malice
that he bore to the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, who about two years before,
when he was troubled at Hicks-Hall, about Parish-duties, did not consent to his
discharge, as another Justice did; but said, The Queen had not power of
Protecting her Servants: Whether Prance did declare any such thing, depends
wholly on the Credit of Sertes, which is not worth a button; but however, the
Observator has quite altered what Series said of it, and tells the world, Numb.
141. That the reason given by Prance for his consenting was, because Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey would not consent to discharge Gerald, when he was troubled
at Hicks-Hall about Parish-duties, and repeats that Falsification again,
Observator 142. which could not possible be a mistake of the Observators, being
contrary to the Scope, Sense and Grammar of the Words, as related by Series;
but was no doubt perverted on purpose with a Design to make Prance seem to
swear such an Absurdity, as that Gerald (a Strooling Priest) should be in
trouble about Parish-duties: In short, if the Observator had but Printed the
several Depositions which he talks of, entire, even as they are related by his
Oracle Series, it would have plainly appeared, that there was no Contradiction
between the Evidence of Prance and Bedloe, but rather that each confirms the
other, and lays the guilt of the Murder more strongly on the Papists. For,

1. This variation in their Account, Prance charging Gerald, Kelly, Green,
Hill, and Berry, to be actually concerned; and Bedloe naming Walsh Lephair,
etc. to have treated with him about it, is an undeniable Argument, That Prance
and Bedloe had no Correspondence, for had there been Confedracy in the Case,
they would undoubtedly have laid their Stories more agreeable.

2. On the other side, this shows how zealous the Popish Party were to destroy
this Worthy Magistrate. and how many were privy to it; they would be sure to
have Tools enough, (though the under Instruments not acquainted with each
other, at least till the jobb was over) that if some failed, the other should
hit.

3. As for what Lephair told Bedloe after the Murder committed, about the
manner of their meeting Sir Edmundbury Godfrey and decoying him into
Somerset House, and the persons concerned in it, they were undoubtedly in
themselves lies; But what is that to Bedloe? Who only upon Oath relates their
Words; I think it is no wonder, that such as would contrive a Murder, should
invent Falsehoods; who ever is well acquainted with the Fathers of the Society,
and their Doctrines and Practices, knows they are not wont to be Slaves to
their Words, and that their Stories are far from being relied on as Oracles.

4. But here steps in Farewell alias Thompson's Letter to Prance, with an
Objection, that Lephair, etc. were under no Temptation to misinform him; -- I
Answer, how do we know that? For though we are not obliged to find Reasons for
Jesuits telling of their Lies, who are known all the world over to be men of
Intrigue, and might have twenty Crotchets and Designs in their heads herein,
which we cannot imagine; yet there is no necessity we should rather blast an
Evidence upon Oath, and shuffle over an apparent Murder, then conceit those
holy men would be guilty of teling a few Lies, because we cannot see how they
were necessary to their secret purposes? However, if we consider the whole
Case, it will be easy to guess at their Design.

They had treated with Bedloe to be concerned in the Murder, (though then not
naming the Person) and he promised to meet them for that purpose at
Somerset House, on the twelfth of October at night, but failed; This might
raise some Suspicions of him: However, to engage him as deep as 'twas possible,
Lephair appoints him to meet on Monday night, and then told him the business
was done, proposes a Reward if he would help to carry off the Body, and showed
him the same, having first told him the before mentioned long (but false) story
of the manner of the Murder; and conjured him upon the Sacrament he had lately
received, to be there again that night, about eleven or twelve a Clock, to help
off with the Body, which they said they would carry out in a Chair, and put it
upon himself, and that the Porter was to sit up to let them out, etc.

Now the design of telling him these false Circumstances of the Murder, might
very well be, That if he should offer to discover, (whereof they might have
some certain Suspicion for the Reasons aforesaid) then he charging it upon
wrong persons, (viz.) Lephair, Walsh, etc. They no doubt were well provided
with Testimony where they were all that very Night the murder was done, and so
would have thrown off his Evidence.

And finding that Bedloe did not come that Monday night at eleven or twelve a
Clock, according to his promise, they grew more jealous of him, and deferred
the carrying out of the Corpse till Wednesday following, Which answers all the
Observators Taatle, numb. 141, and 142. on that Subject, which he would make a
mighty Contradict of, as if whereas Prance swears, the Body was not carried out
till Wednesday night, Bedloe should depose that it was carried out an Monday;
Whereas Bedloe swears no such thing, but that they told him, or said, they had
agreed to carry it out then; but he replied, it would be too soon, and that
eleven or twelve a Clock would be better.

And that they were under some such Suspicion of Bedloe, especially after his
second failing on Monday night, may be presumed from their removing the Body
the next night into another Room, where it had not been before, as Prance sets
forth, Trial p. 19.

How much the Court was satisfied with the Truth and Co-herence of the
Evidence, (and so far from apprehending any Contradictions, that on the
contrary they judged the same wonderful Agreeable, as far as the nature of the
Case would bear) appears (besides what we cited before) by these words of the
Lord Chief Justice to the Jury, upon the Trial of Green, Berry and Hill, Fol.
80. It is hardly possible for any man to invent such a Story; for Prance it is
I believe; I find it is no hard thing for the Priests to contrive such an
Action, but for Witnesses to agree in so many material Circumstances with one
another, which had never conversed together, is impossible; If all this had
been a Chimera, and not really so, then Prance must be one of the most notable
Inventors in the World, and there must have been the mightiest chance in the
World, that Mr. Bedloe and he should agree so in all things, and that the Maid
should swear that Hill was there that Morning, and that the Constable should
find the Body just as they had told Prance they had left him; so that upon the
matter you have two Witnesses almost in every thing; for Mr. Bedloe seeing him
in the place Murdered, is a plain Evidence that the thing was done; and all
the other Witnesses speaking to Circumstances, both before and after, makes the
Evidence plain, that these were the men that did it* And I see nothing
in-coherent in all Mr. Prances Testimony; I would noturge this so, if I were
not satisfied in my own Conscience that the Relation is true. Thus the Lord
Chief Justice to the Jury.

It is farther to be noted, That Bedloe on his Deathbed when he was on the
Brink of Eternity, and was satisfied that his Dissolution was very near, did
with repeated Asseverations avow the Truth of all his Depositions; And (as I
find it in an Account soon after Published, of his Death, by Randal Tailor, and
which I never heard was questioned or confuted) did to the Right Honorable the
then Lord Chief Justice North, (now Lord Guilford and Keeper of the great Seal)
declare amongst other things, That whatsoever he had Declared to the King and
Council, and the secret Committee, and at the SEVERAL TRIALS upon Oath were all
true upon the Word of a dying man; Adding these Emphatical Expressions, That he
expected no Crown of Martyrdom for lying, as the Papists did; but what he said
was sincerely true, as he was shortly to appear before the Great Jehovah, the
Maker of all Flesh; where he should stand with a clear Conscience, as to all
matters of the Plot, wherein he had given Evidence. -- This was Monday August
16. 1680. and growing weaker and weeker, on Wednesday Night was taken
Speechless, but on Thursday night his Speech being restored, one standing by,
again asked him, If he were satisfied in his Conscience as to what he had
sworn? To whom he Answered, That as he hoped for Salvation, all that he had
sworn about the Plot, was just and true; and that he had rather Omitted than
Augmented any thing he had given in Evidence. This he spoke the very Night
before he dyed, and after he had been in a Trance several hours; the next day
August 20. 1680. about two of the Clock in the Afternoon he expired.

And so notorious in Bristol was this his last Assertion of the Truth of his
Evidence; That there were Escutcheons fixed on his Hearse, with this
Inscription in Black Letters, in a Field Argent.

Testimonium quod vivens Exhibuit, Moriens constanter Obfirmavit;

The Testimony which he living Exhibited, dying he constantly did Confirm

And is it not hard, very hard, inhumane and uncharitable, as well as bold and
reflective on the public Justice, for the Observator (now four years after
this Persons death, and near fix since the manner of Godfreys Murder was
settled by Law,) to come with the Negromancy of a Company of palpable Tricks,
actuated and raised by the Demon of Drollery, to load the deceased with
opprobious Names, and render that Solemn Testimony of his, and all those
Reverend Authorities that gave it Credit, Contemptible, and Ridiculous, and as
much as in him Lies) Odious?

As for Prance the other chief VVitness, be being as much a Stranger to me as
the Observator himself; I love not to make needless Apologies for People I am
acquainted with, only I cannot but observe.

1. That the Observator has moil'd and toiled most heartily for some years to
Blacken him, but after all I do not see that he has so much as Charged him with
any thing that can be pretended to invalidate his Evidence; and if he cannot do
that, all the rest is impertinent Libelling, even supposing the matters were
true.

2. That the Observators common places against Prance about Brass-Skrews,
cheating her Majesty in the Antipendium, etc. are wholly fictious and
scandalous, I am confident all men of sense will conclude, that shall read the
Book set forth by Prance about Christmas last, entitled, A Postscript to the
Observators First Volume, etc. Wherein those Clamours are so fully, modestly
and undeniably Confuted by Reason, Affidavits, and all kind of Competent
Proofs, that it was a plain Demonstration, how unable the most witty Slanders
are to stand before plain naked Truth; and must wonder at the forehead of an
Observator, that can repeat those baffled Calumnies, after he was therein so
clearly Convicted of Falsehood and Scandal.

3. It Is the most accountable thing in the World, That Prance bred a Romanist
almost from his Cradel, so zealous in that persuasion, all or most of his
Relaations such; A man who had his whole Trade and Dependency on that Party
(For besides his work at her Majesty's Chapel, which was very considerable,
the main of his other Employment came from Priests and Papists) And a Tradesman
of Substance in the World; for he averrs, and makes it very probably appear, in
his Book before cited, p. 5. That he was worth a Thousand Pounds when taken,
(and consequently might perhaps be a better man in Estate than some Observators
at that time) And that he came not in for Lucre of moneys, appears likewise in
that he did not take the Advantage of his Majesty's promised Reward of 500 l
but stood out still till he was taken, and charged; Nor is it so much
pretended, that he then received any Affronts from his own Party, the Romans;
but was in great esteem with them, so that it could not be out of Malice or
Revenge; I say it is the most unimaginable thing in nature, That a person thus
Circumstanced, should falsely accuse himself in a most detestable Murder, and
contract the guilt of three innocent men's Blood, and bring a scandal on that
Church he then loved so well, to the apparent hazard of his Life and Credit,
and Destruction of Temporal Advantages; if it had not been upon the horrors of
Conscience and Convictions of Truth, it must certainly be impossible he should
have done all this.

4. Since the Observator is so zealous in his Repetitions, that to support his
vain Shams, he recites Observator, Numb. 142.145. and again, 169. what he had
more than enough said Numb. 141. I hope the Reader will pardon if we briefly
Recapitulate here the several Evidences that have Coroborated the Truth, and
makes it as conspicuous as the Sun in his Meridian Luster, that Justice Godfrey
fell by Popish hands, and in that manner Prance relates.

1. It Is most plain, that Sir Edmundbury was apprehensive of his being
Assassinated by Papists, Esquire Robinson, Prothonetary of the Common Pleas, A
Gentleman of unquestionable Reputation, deposes positively, that on the seventh
of October, but five days before the Murder; Godfrey discoursing with him
about the Plot, and the Examinations by him taken, said he should have little
thanks for the same, and that he was afraid the Depth of the matter was not
found out; and then added these observable Words, -- Upon my Conscience, I
believe I shall be the first Martyr.

Secondly, That both Green and Hill had been at Godfrey's house, the former
about a fortnight before, the latter, on the very morning that he was missing,
(agreeable to Prance's Evidence of what they had told him) is sworn by Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's Maid Servant Elizabeth Curtis, who also swears, that Hill
had on that morning, the very same Clothes which he wore at the Bar, and he
acknowledged that he had not changed his Clothes, Trial page 40. She also
deposes, that others about that time, came to their house with strange notes,
which her Master Sir Edmundbnay said, he did not know what to make of.

Thirdly, The Intimacy of Gerald, Kelly, Green, Berry and Hill, with Prance,
and their frequent Meetings at the Plow-Ale-house about that time is proved,
both by the Master of the House, and his Servants; Trial page 41, and 42.

Fourthly, That Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Neck was broken; And that the Wound or
Wounds given by the Sword, run through the Body when found, were not the Cause
of his Death; That having on then a Flannel Wastcoat and Shirt, neither of
them, or any of his Clothes were penetrated, is testified by two able
Surgeons that viewed the Body.

Fifthly, That Sir Edmundbury Godfrey about nine of the Clock, October, 12.
1678. (the very time Prance mentions) was seen come along the Strand by
Somerset House, and toward the Watergate stopped to speak with somebody, see
Oakly's Affidavit before recited.

Sixthly, That the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey in the Ditch or his Stick and
Gloves on the Bank, where he was found on Thursday Evening, were not there on
Wednesday, See the before recited Affidavit of Squire Foaset and Nathaniel
Thompsons Narrative, Printed on his own view, and written by his own
Directions, immediately after the Body found, recited in Thompsens Trial Fol.
49. Though afterward the same Thompson as beforementioned, had the Impudence
to publish Libels, not only contrary to Truth, but even his own particular
Knowledge, and Printed handiwork.

Seventhly, What Prance had long before declared of the Meeting at Bow after
the Murder, and reading the Paper of the manner of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Murder, is wholly Confirmed by two Witnesses, and particularly, by Evan,
belonging to the house, who swears that they pulled out a Paper and read it,
and named Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's name, and whilst he was at the door,
somebody came and threatened to kick him down Stairs -- Just as Prance said in
every particular. Consider all these and many other Circumstances, in the
Trials of Green, Berry and Hill, of Celier and Thompson, etc. And let any
reasonable man judge, whether there be yet any doubt to be made by whom or how
Godfrey was Murdered? Especially if he at the same time reflect who and of
what stamp the only Persons are, that have endeavored to render it dubious,
(viz) an Anonimous Paper of Reflections, famous Mrs. Celiers, Fitz-Harris,
Magrath, both Irish Papists, the now-more-then-ever notorious Thompson,
Farewell, etc. and after all, tho most bold, and yet (to the praise of the rest
of the Intriguers, be it spoken) in this matter, the most empty and triffling
Observator.

Upon whose Papers (on this Subject) unworthy a Gentleman's Pen, I should not
have bestowed so much pains, did I not observe, how much they are Cried up, and
greedily swallowed by many half-witted people, that esteem every thing he
writes as Authentic as sacred Oracles; and think all that oppose or detect his
Scandals of any kind, must needs be Phanaticks, Whiggs, and Enemies to the
Church of England as by Law Established.

Now what a friend to the Honor of the Government the Observator is, has
partly appeared in this matter; And what regard he has to the Church of
England, his Outrages and Reflections on several Worthy, and every way
Conformable Divines, may Evidently Domonstrate; And especially the whole Scope
of most of his late Papers wherein pretending to expose an Imaginary Trimmer
for the Dissenters, of his own making; he himself really acts broad-faced, a
Trimmers part for the Papists.

It Is far from my intent, (who have been Educated in, and esteem it my greatest
honor and happiness to continue a Son of the Legal Established Church of
England) to espouse the Cause of Schismatics, of either side, (for such the
Papists are, as well as others) But as all the World knows that good Church
(like every Virtue lying between Extremes) has many years been troubled with
two ill Neighbors, the one aiming at her Throat, the other renting off her
Garments; I mean the Politic Faction (for I can scarce afford it the name of a
Church) of Rome, on the one hand, and Protestant Dissenters (under several
Denominations) on the other; The former quarrelling with her Doctrines,
Vnchurching her, and -- Denying Priesthood to her Bishops and Ministers; nay,
even Salvation to any one of her Members, living and dying such: The latter
(for the most part) owning her Doctrinals, Church-ship and Ministry, and (as
far as I know) none of them denying the possibility of Salvation to her dying
Members, but scrupling certain Rites and Ceremonies (on all sides amongst us
held to be Indifferent) which they pretend or think, are without sufficient
Warrant from Gods Word enjoined, or made necessary to Communion with her. And
on that, or some such like score, allege they dare not join themselves with
and in her.

Now as it seems not very difficult to determine, which of these is, or ought
to be accounted the worst, most dangerous and Irreconcilable Enemy to the
Church of England; so it is most suspicious, that a person that pretends to be
the eneral Champion for the Church (as well as State) yet defends her but on
one side, and whilst he skirmishes her own Revolted or disaffected Infantry,
takes no notice of the other Zanzummim Host of her old avowed and inplacable
Adversaries; nay, one that whilst he flourishes fair Colors of zeal for our
Church, makes it his business to raise Mutinies in her Tents, and is highly
beloved and applauded in, if he hold not Correspondency with that formidable
Camp of her Enemies; whom he never engages, but upon all occasions, rather
appears a Mediator, a Panegyrist, or an Advocate of and for them; It Is very
suspicious, that such an Undertaker is rather a Spy than a Champion, an
Underminer or Betrayer of the Protestant Church, to which he pretends, rather
then a Cordial lover or Asserter of it. I desire not to be believed upon Nude
Averments, or partial, wrested, false applied, or imperfect Sentences; let
every man that wears the Name of a Protestant, make but use of his own Eyes,
his own Ears, and what Reason an Judgment God has lent him, upon these Words
of the Observator. Vol. 2. Numb. 145.

Trimmer. Do not the Papists hold it Lawful, nay, and a Point of Duty to
destroy the Heretics?

Observator. The Argument flies in the face of ye; for it is the very Principle
of the Phanaticks, against the Papists; But in one word, to make a Popish plot
on it, you must first prove the Fact: Secondly, The congruity of that Practice
to the Positions of the Papists. not to the Positions of here and there a man,
but to the Authoritative Positions and Concinstous of the Romish Church, and
the Conform Sentiments of the Members in General of that Communion,

Trimmer. Is not all this PROVED clearly to ye?


Observator. No, No; NOT AT ALL, nor CLEARLY.


These are the very Words of the Observator, and whether the most wity Jesuit
in Europe, could have Trimmed it away more clevery for the Papists, is left to
every Protestants Consiedration.

1. It Is here asserted, that the Phanaticks hold it lawful, nay, a Point of
Duty also, to destroy Papists; -- Now it may be worth while to inquire whether
the Observator had not a design to brand all Protestants, particularly, our
English Government, for making the necessary Penal Laws against the Papists;
for I challenge him to prove or instance in any Protestants, either of the
Church, or Dissenters from it, usually called Phanaticks, that ever held or
declared it lawful to destroy or take away the Lives of Papists; as, or because
they were such. I say, let him name any one that has so done, not to tie him
up to Authoritative Positions, and Conform Sentiments in general, which he
requires, where he fears the Romans may be pincht.

But on the other side, that the Modern Church of Rome holds it Lawful, nay a
point of Duty, to destroy all that she calls Heretics; and this not only by
their public Magistrates, in Judicial Decrees and Sentences, but if that
cannot be obtained, by any Private Hand, (that is) by Clandestine Murders and
Assassinatious; and this too not only against private Subjects, but Princes,
(even their own) that are Heretics; and that the Church of Rome, and her
particular Members, with her Approbation, have practiced accordingly, is so
nororious to every man tollerably acquainted with the Roman Canons and Decrees,
or History of Europe for these last seven or eight hundred years,; that to
stand long in proving it, I fear would render me suspected to be like the
Observator, one that has abundance of Leisure, and Scribbles for so much a
Sheet.

But least I should seem to those unversed in Church History (who I perceive
are the Observators Admirers) to swagger over (by this general charge) what I
cannot prove, be pleased to take these few Testimonies, (from amongst a
thousand more that I could offer) and those too from as good Law, and as
Authoritative as any Edicts of that Church.

1. That the third Council of Lateran, held by Pope Alexander the third; and
the fourth held under Innocent the third: And the Council of Constance, (all
which are owned by the Romanists to be general Councils) do decree, that the
Goods of all Heretics, if they be Laymen, shall be Confiscated.

2. That Heretics shall be Imprisoned in Fetters and Iron Chains till the
Church have passed Sentence on them. Council Constance, Session, 45. By the
fourth Lateran Council, all Kings, Emperors, etc. are commanded to Expel and
Extirpate all Heretics out of their Territories; And adds, that if any
Temporal Lord neglect to do so, he shall be Excommunicated, and if he stand so
one Year, then the Pope may pronounce his Subjects to be discharged from their
Obedience, and Expose his Territories to be enjoyed by Catholics, who having
exterminated the Heretics, shall possess it without all Contradiction: And
moreover, that they who under the Badge of the Cross will set themselves to
Root out Heretics, shall have and enoy a full Remission of tall heir Sins.

3. That Heretics shall be duly punished by the Secular Judge, they shall take
them away by a Damnable Death, says another of their Decrees, [ Conc. To. 11.
p. 619.] and so was, and to this day is, the constant Practice in Italy, Spain,
etc.

4. That Persons, yea Princes, upon the Charge, and even the supposal of
Heresy, or where the interest of Holy Church has required it, may be Murdered
by private hands, appears by the Assassination of two French Monarchs in the
last Age, various attempts against Queen Elizabeth, and the matchless
Gunpowder Conspiracy against King James; most of which Treasons were promoted
and approved of by the Pope, and some of the Traitors honored as Saints by
their Church; not to mention a thousand other and some more near instances,
which the Observator shall hear of, whenever he calls for them, if he dare
contest this point.

2. The Observator says -- To make a Popish Plot, you must First prove the
Fact, Numb. 145.

Answer -- Good Sir! At whose Bar? The King and his Council, and the Lords and
Commons of England in four Parliaments, have heard the Proofs, and upon a
strict Scrutiny, becoming their Wisdom, and the weight of the matter, were
satisfied, and have declared it a Popish Plot, and an horrid and damnable Plot
too; But still Mr. Trimmer-maker, Mr. I know not who of an Observator, it seems
is not satisfied. Let him but have the scanning of it over again, and he, by
the art of Legerdemain, and Prestee begone, will make nothing on it: what pity
'twas that he was out of the way, or lost in a Dutch Bogg, whilst these matters
were under the consideration of our Supreamest Councils and Judicature; that
He, the ONLY HE in the World that could do the Feat, was not here to enlighten
us.

But, Alas! this inspired Man was absent, and who knows but three or four
thousand Guinies in 79. might have satisfied his Hungry Scruples as much on the
one side, as the like or a greater Illumination did in 83 and 84, on the other.

3. To make a Popish Plot on it, the Observator says we must prove the Congruity
of that practice [of Plotting and Destroying Heretics he means] to the
positions of the Papists, not to the positions of here and there a Man; But to
the Anthorative Positions and Conclusions of the Church of Rome, and the
Conform Sentiments of the Members ingeneral of that Communion, and THIS (he
says) is not clearly, nor at all proved.

This Paragraph is all over the Quintissence of St. Omer, Trimming, Shamming,
Lies, Scandal and Prevarication, all close heaped up together. First, here is
the Innocence of the Church of Rome's Principles Asserted. Secondly, All the
Modern Divines of our Church, that have opposed Popery, scandalized as Dunces,
that understand not their Adversaries Doctsines, nor able to prove what they
themselves have generally asserted, but such ill men, as wilfully slandered the
Papists in that matter. Thirdly, Here Is the Old Juggle, whereby Papists have
endeavored to solve or excuse the odious Tenets of their Schoolmen and other
Writers, when they do not find it for their turn to justify them, (viz.) That
they are the positions of Private Men not owned by the Church. Fourthly, He
makes it impossible ever to prove a Popish Plot, unless we can prove the
Congruity thereof, not only to the Authoritative Positions of that Church, but
also to the Conform Sentiments of the Members in general of that Communion. And
at this Rate when shall we have done? If we must Summon all the Papists in the
World, to know their Sentiments, when not one in a Hundred, nay a Thousand of
them scarce, know what they hold themselves.

As to the first and second of these particulars, viz. the Roman Principles, or
That that Church holds it lawful, and a piece of duty to destroy Heretics;
it is an amazing thing that any man in a protestant Livery, should have the
Confidence to deny it or to averr at this time a day, that the same is not
clearly, no not at all proved.

Quae Regio interris nostri. non plena Cruoris?
What Spot of Ground in all the world is free;
From Bloody Marks of Popish Cruelty?
The Learned Dr. Moor (Divine Dialogues, p. 161.) gives a specimen of Roman
Catholic good Nature -- Pope Julius the Second (says he) by his pragmatical
planting and pulling up, and Transplanting, is said to have been the occasion
of the Slaughter of Two Hundred Thousand Christians, in the space of Seven
Years; That one Popish Massacre of France, within the space of Three Months,
amounted to an Hundred Thousand; Nay, P. Perionius avers, That in France alone,
in that great Persecution against the Albingenses and Waldenses, there were
Murdered no less then Ten Hundred Thousand Men; From that time to the
Reformation, no small Number was made away by the Sword, by Fire, and other
Tortures; from the beginning of the Order of Jesuits, till the Year 1580.
Balduinus reports, That there were about Nine Hundred Thousand of the Orthodox
Christians Murdered: That is, within the space of Thirty or Forty Years;
within a few Years in the Low Countries alone, the Duke of Alva cut off by the
Hand of the Hangman, Thirty Six Thousand Souls of the Protestants, and the Holy
Inquisition, as Vergerius Witnesses, (one well acquainted therewith) in less
than Thirty Years space, consumed a Hundred and Fifty Thousand, with all manner
of Cruelties: Insomuch as that Learned and Judicious Person, Mr. Joseph Mede,
is of opinion, that the Papal Persecution does either equallize or exceed the
Destruction of Men made upon the Church, by all those Ten Famous Persecutions
under the Pagan Emperors; and yet there has been a Considerable Accession made
since to this Bloody Catalogue, in Piedmont, and Ireland, if not in other
places. So far that Learned Doctor.

After such stupendous Butcheries acted throughout Christendom, by the Church
of Rome, merely under the Notion of Suppressing Heresy, comes the Merry
Observator; and would persuade us that good mumping Lady had never a Tooth in
her Head; She Plot? She Murder? No such matter; you must prove the Congruity of
such Practices to her Positions and Conclusitions too, or else by the Mass he
will not allow us one Inch of a Popish Plot.

Well, to humor the Gentleman, we have given him a few instances both of her
most charitable Authoritative Positions, and her congruous Practices, they that
would see more, and that this Congruity of Principles and Practices in the
Church of Rome is clearly proved, and 'twas so before the Observator was born;
Let them read the Learned Mortons Discovery of Romish Positions, and the
Defense thereof, dedicated to King James; and Whites way to the Church, and
indeed almost any of our Ancient Divines in their Promelicks against the
Papists, and of late the Right Reverend Bishop of Lincoln's accurate Treatise;
and the Judicious Deans of Paul's and Canterbury, in several of their respective
Writings, whereby the falseness as well as Scandalousness of this the
Observators Assertions will appear: And as to what relates more particularly to
Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey's Case, I shall crave leave to recite the Words of the
Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph in his Funeral Sermon, p. 29. 30. As to the
Doctrine of the Jesuits, in plain terms, (says that Reverend Person) to
slander another Man in defense of their own Right or Honor, especially for one
of the Fathers, to do it in Defense of the Society, some hold it plainly
lawful, some say it is a Venial Sin; for the Proofs you may find them together,
in the fifth of the Provincial Letters; If so, what should hinder those Men
from raising all these Reports of this person, since it was in defense of
themselves and their Sect; if they Killed him. -- Secondly, That it was their
interest to Kill him, it is manifest, if they have any designs against the
Government. And if either his Life would have hindered, or discouraged them in
it: Or if his Death would discourage others, from being active in their places.
But that it is the interest of their Sect, and of their Church to subvert the
Government, and that they for their parts design it now at this present; I
think that this is SO PALPABLE, that I should but loose time in proving it.

Thirdly, That they hold it Lawful to Kill in such Cases; for this, it is so
plain delivered in their Writings, as any Article of Faith is in the Creed;
they say first in general, to Kill another is Murder indeed, if you do it for
Revenge, or any such sinister end. And therefore you must be sure to direct
your intention aright; and so by directing the intention, tho you do the same
act, it is not Murder.

For Example, if one threaten to publish grievous Crimes of my self, or of my
Order, when I have no other way to escape this, I may lawfully Kill him; And
it is plain, that I have no other way, if he be ready to charge me or my Order
before Men in Authority, says Jannerus. In like manner one may kill another,
if it be in defense of his own Goods, or of the Goods of his Society, says
Lessius, if one endeavors to take away any Life, by revealing a Secret Crime,
I may Kill him; nay, if he endeavors but to take away my good Name, by
revealing a secret Crime, I may kill him, says Lessius; and the same says
Falliusius. Now who that knows what Information our friend had against them can
doubt but they might lawfully kill him by those Doctrines.

I know what any Jesuit would answer to this; they would say, That these
Doctrines are some of them delivered as being only speculatively true, that is,
they are true in their own Nature, but they are not practice sequendae, that
is, in respect of the Consequences they are not to be reduced to practice: and
why so? If they be speculatively true, why then are they not to be practiced?
They themselves tell you why, they would cause Disorders in the Commonwealth:
Lessius has a better reason, because if one practice them, he may be Hanged
for it. The mean while, if one can do it so secretly, as not to disturb the
Commonwealth, (and then to be sure, he shall not hang for it) in that Case it
is to be practiced, according to their Doctrine: Or if not, whilst it is
speculatively true, that the thing it self is no Sin, who that knows this, and
has a mind to kill another, and sees his occasion, will make any scruple of
the practice?

Yes, (they will tell you) the Pope has forbidden it in that Decree of the
year 1665. which is set down in the end of the last Roman Index: To their shame
be it said; these Doctrines are forbidden indeed, but not as being untrue, nor
as contrary to Gods Word, or having any Immorality in them: Now then? He says
they are adminimum scandalosae, at least apt to give offense, (no doubt they
are, if we Heretics come to know them) and therefore he charge them upon
their Obedience to himself, that they must not practice these Doctrines; had he
said upon their Obedience to God, that had been a dangerous word, it would have
made them afraid to practice them even in his own Service; he would take heed
of that, not to spoil that which may be a useful Doctrine: But he forbad it
forsooth upon Obedience to himself! which is such a restraint that the Pope may
take off when he pleases, and how can we tell when he does, or does not? That
which is in his own power secretly to do, or not to do, we have only this
measure by which to Judge: He will do whatsoever he sees best for the Catholic
Cause; if he sees it best for the Cause, we shall live; if not, you see it is
no Sin to Kill us, even the Pope being Judge; so that we hold our Lives at his
Courtesy. -- Thus that Reverend Prelate.

What say you now, Mr. Observator? Is not this clear proving that the
lawfulness of Plots and Assassinations when against Heretics, or it may make
for the Catholic Cause, are Positions of the Church of Rome, insomuch that the
Pope will not at any rate condemn them absolutely, but only suspend their being
practiced during his own pleasure?

Vain and Fallacious is therefore your third pretense, that these are but the
Positions of here and there a man, not Authoritative Conclusions of the Roman
Church; pray tell us in your next, what you mean by the Church of Rome? If the
Church Virtual, (as they call it, and thereby intend the Pope) or the Church
Representative, whereby they understand such Councils as they own to be
general; both these we have proved, do allow and Command the Destruction of
Heretics: And where shall we find the Authorized Tenants of that Church, if
not in the public Writings of her Divines? Sure you are not ignorant that the
Church of Rome, has Licensers, Inquisitors, and Indexes Expurgatory: If she do
not then authorize such Doctrines, how come they to swarm in the Writings of
her most Eminent and most Honored Doctors? Why are not these Books suppressed,
the Authors punished, the Opinions Anathematized? Qui non prohibet cum potest
jubet: He that connives in such Cases, justifies.

The Observators last Limitation, That we must prove such Positions to be the
Conform Sentiments of the Members in general of that Communion, is ridiculously
Extravagant: Does he himself use the same method toward others? And how vain
were it for us to seek such Conform-Sentiments amongst the Romanists, when
notwithstanding all their boasted Unity, and infallible Art to preserve it, yet
will they have as many fewds and differences amongst themselves, as can be
found amongst any or all sorts of Protestants?

Nor is there, I do verily believe, a greater consent amongst them in any one
Article, than in these points, That all Protestants are Heretics, and that
dying such, they are incapable of Salvation, and that Heretics are to be
destroyed; or if there be amongst them any of softer and more charitable.
Sentiments in their private thoughts, yet as they are imbarqued in that Church,
where the only Compass they sail by, is to believe implicitly as the Church
believes, though they do not explicitly understand what it is, they are tied up
to believe any particular Dogma's obtruded upon them by their Ghostly Fathers.
Most true and notable to this purpose are the words of the late Lord Chief
Justice Seroggs, at the Trial of Green, etc. Fol. 83. -- You must say and
believe as your Priest will have you; and in such Actions as these, as your
Priest suggests to you, so does the Devil to your Priests: You are upon the
matter Necessitated to what they will have you think, for though your Priests
preach up Freedom of Will, yet they allow none to the Understanding; they hold
you may do good or evil, but will not suffer you to understand Right and Wrong,
for you cannot be perfectly theirs, if you have any thing of your own to guide
your selves by. I know that every body of that Party is apt to say, their
Priests own no such thing: But it is Notoriously known to all the World, that
they both print and practice it: What, shall any of you dispute the Power of a
Pope, says a Jesuit, or of the Pope and Council, say the most moderate
Priests? Have you power to say, how far you will be a Papist, and how far not?
You may as well bound the Sea, and bid it go so far and no farther, as Limit
the Popes Authority. -- No Gentlemen! It Is the fault of your Doctrine, and it is
a monstrous Mistake in you, if you think that you have any power over your
selves whilst you continue in their Persuasion: -- Let no man tell me, Oh Sir!
We desire none of these Mischiefs you talk of: What, not if Religion requires
it, or if the Pope says it does? Has not the Council of Lateran defined that
every Popish Prince ought to root out Heresy, upon pain of Damnation? Can you
go and tell the Pope how far you will believe, or what you ought to do? You may
as well tell me, that if he were once with us, and had the Power he once had,
he would leave us to Our Selves; and that if he had the same Ability, he would
not have the same Tyranny.

I shall conclude this particular with that Asseveration of the Judicious King
James, in his Speech November. 1605. That as it is not impossible but many honest
men seduced with some Errors of Popery, may yet remain good and faithful
Subjects: So on the other part, none that knows and believes the Grounds and
School-conclusions of their Doctrine, can ever prove good Christians or
faithful Subjects.

This being so, the Observators last Limitation, that we must prove such
Positions to be the conform Sentiments of the Members in general of the Church
of Rome, is neither possible nor requisite. Must we Examine all the Papists in
the World to know their conform Sentiments in general? And what if some, or
many of them do not believe them? Yet since they are of the Romish Communion,
and these are the Doctrines of their Schools, and their greatest Divines, of
their Councils and their Popes, and they are bound implicitly to believe as
their Church believes; As soon as these are manifested by their spiritual
Guides to be the Doctrines of their Church (which will be as often, and as soon
as these spiritual Politicians find them useful to their Cause) they must then
believe them, and practice accordingly.

Some of the forementioned Allegations are indeed very frequent in the Mouths
and Writings of the Jesuits, and other Emissaries of Rome, when they would
colourably Excuse their Party; But it is matter of Surprise to find them
mustered up, and insisted upon by a professed Protestant Gentleman, who could not
but know how false and frivolous they have been proved by sundry of our Learned
Church-mens unanswerable Polemicks.

Therefore though I have as much value and deference for the Observators
Person, and that Figure he makes in the World, as I ought to have; yet as I
cannot hinder many Loyal, Zealous, and ever-constant Sons of the Established
Church, from questioning whether some of his late Writings have shown him so
sincere a Champion for, and friend to that Church, as he would be counted; or
whether indeed, the Church of Rome be not more beholding to his Pains? So the
mischief is, That I know not how to Answer their Objections and Queries about
his playing the Trimmer for the Papists. And since the witty Gentleman himself,
though sufficiently provoked and challenged, has declined that Province, I am
half ready to despair of seeing it done by any other.

Observatori pudet haec opprobia nostro,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
1. It Is wonderful to see how sweet and gentle, how debonair and goodnatur'd
the Gentleman is every where toward the Papists, how tender of their Credit,
so ready and Laborious to Excuse them, even where no Excuse can be made for
them; as in their before mentioned Principles, and this very Case of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder; Which Attempts as they were unjust and illegal,
so could not possibly be any Advantage or Service to the State or Church of
England, but rather tended to the Scandal of both, and administering a causeless
occasion to their Enemies to Insult and Triumph; have not the Romanists, busy
Jesuits and Scriblers enough of their own? What need was there for the
Protestant Observator to foul his Fingers in being their Advocate?

2. It Is observeable that there is no love lost in the Case; no men more
zealously crying up and magnifying the Observator, than the Gentlemen of the
Roman Catholic Communion, and this not only in their common discourses, but in
Print; Thus in a nameless Pamphlet, Entitled, Oats's Manifesto, said to be
Printed for R. L. 1683. (which I think no man ever doubted to be written by a
Roman) in p. 25. [ speaking to Oates] is this swaggering Rhodomontado; -- The
Observator, a Person of that Eminent Learning, public Merit, and known
Fidelity to the Established Government and Church of England, that is so far
above thy Calumny as thou art beneath his Worth and Honesty; Surely the Devil
owed thee an ill turn when he Egged thee on to this Rashness; for what can a
Villain like thee, expect less than (...) sach a Head, sach a Heart, such a
Hand, as that of L'STRANGES? Suitable to this we find in a Pamphlet, Entitled,
The Paoquet of Advice from Geneva, Numb. 2. p. 10. L'Estrange is undoubtedly
sent from above, to Act here in this Generation, for the great good of his king
and Country; and to be -- Vere malleus Redellirm and Phanaticorum -- Which
last Pamphlet was discovered to be written by one Prat a Papist, and was
suppressed by the right Reverend Father in God, My Lord Bishop of London, as
scandalizing the whole Reformation, (...) of Exposing Presbyterians. -- In
brief, no man that Converies with Roman Catholics, can be ignorant how they
hugg, admire, and applaud the Observators Writings; and if I do not
mis-remember, he himself somewhere complains of his Neighbors, for taking
notice of the Refort of the Red-letter'd Tribe, etc.

Now if all this Love and Esteem from the Papal Party to the Observator, be
merely on the score of those Services he renders the Government and Established
Church; we must conclude those People wonderfully changed on the sudden, in
their Affections toward that Church and Government, which ever since the
Reformation, they have been eager to destroy; But we have little reason to
confide in their pretended Kindnesses, since at the very same time, they were
themselves contriving and privately spreading abroad Libels, highly derogatory
to his Majesty's just Rights and Government, and tending to the Scandal and
Subversion of the Church at present Established by Law; as appears by the late
discovery made at Nathaniel Thompson's, who was their Instrument, though a Spark
that pretended (in his Sphere) to as high a pitch of Zeal for the Church and
Government, as the Observator himself.

The Papists, and especially their Priests and Fathers of the Society, are men
that understand their own Interest, and are not wont to be Prodigal of their
Favors, but for valuable Considerations: And he that is their Friend, (let him
swagger never so much against the Phanaticks) must be a close Enemy to the
Church of England.

Tuta frequensque via est sub Amici fallere Nomen,
Tut a frequensque licet, sit via, Crimen habet.
It Is safe and frequent too, we see;
By feigned Friendship to deceive:
Safe and frequent though it be,
It Is KNAVERY, by your leave.
3. It Is Charged by some, that wherever the Observator speaks one word for the
Church of England, it is always Balanced, though not in direct Terms, by a
side-wind, for the opposite Church beyond the Alps: [Observator, Repr. p. 3.]
This I am fure may justly be affirmed, That the Observator himself does
effectually the same thing on the one side, which he taxes the Phanaticks for
doing on the other: For Example, Numb. 145. speaking to his property, Trimmer,
he says; There is another thing yet, that utterly spoils the falbion of your
Popish Plot, which is, that you take into it inclusively The popishly affected,
the Adherents to the Papists, the Masqueraders as you call them; And under this
Latitude the Church of England and the Church of Rome make up one Conspiracy.

Now to pass by the Insolency of this Expression, I shall only say, that it is
indeed certain, that those Terms of Popishly Affected, Adherents to Papists,
etc. have been used to very bad purposes, and that many Honest Worthy
Protestant Divines and Gentlemen have been slandered therewith, by persons that
have been carrying on Factious Designs; And the same was very wickedly done;
but what less does the Observator? Is it not plain by this new coined Canting
word Trimmer, he means persons Conformable, and visible professed Members of the
Church of England, but holding Correspondence with, or favoring the Fanatics?
So that to call a man a Trimmer, is all one as to call him Whiggishly Affected,
an Adherent to the Fanatics, or a VVhigg in Masquerade: Now since the
Observator bestows this Opprobrious Term of Trimmers on whom he pleases, of
either the Clergy or the Layety, as liberally as the Phanaticks can do that of
Popishly Affected; And since the Papists are as cunning and as malicious too at
Bottom against the Church of England, as the Dissenters can be for the hearts
of them; If the one carry on their design by abusing sound Churchmen, as
Popishly Affected, why may not the other also advance their designs of
subverting the Church, by Branding real Sons with the false Titles of Trimmers
or Phanatically Affected, and dividing the Church of England within it self,
into Parties and Factions, by spreading and affixing Terms of Distinction and
Reproach? For thus how easy would it be for the Papists to Ruin the Credit of
any Divine or Member of the Church of England, that shall zealously appear
against them? It Is but calling him a Trimmer, and presently the honest
Gentleman shall be Transformed into the shape of a Conspirator against the
King, and an Enemy to the Church, tho never so dutifully affected to each; and
thus as he complains, Observator 145. The true Sons of the Church of England
are by the VVhiggs Incorporated into that pretended Popish Plot; so it will
follow, that they may by his Arts be involved in the Odium of the Phanatical
Plot; which I have more deference to Truth and Authority than to call
pretended, as he does the Popish one. Do the VVhiggish Faction call an upright
Churchman a Papist in Masquerade? So does the Popish Faction call him a
Fanatic in Musquerade, which is alone a Trimmer: Do they declare the Papist in
Masquerade to be the more pernicious Enemy than the professed Papist? And has not
the Observator declared the Trimmers, and the Church-VVhiggs (as he calls them)
to be more dangerous than the open Fanatics? Your Mohammedan Infidel (says he)
is an Angel to your Christian Infidel: This Balderdash of a GOSPELLER, [The
very Nickname by which the Papists in Queen Mary's days, called the Holy
Protestant Martyrs in Reproach, as the Observator uses it here,] and a
TECKELITE, is of all others the most Diabolical Composition, Observe. 142.

4. Another shrewd sign of the Observators Trimming for the Papists, is, that
in the whole Course of his Papers, They are the only Party that have evermore
his good word, or of whom he altogether speaks well. The Protestant Dissenters
are very Mothers Child Traitors and Schismatics, Rebels and Atheists: In the
Church of England he finds abundance of Trimmers and Teckelites, which he says
are as bad or worse than the other. But that Observator is yet to be written
(or at least I have not seen it) wherein any Papist is Charged with, or so much
as acknowledged to be guilty of any Dissloyalty, ill design against the Church
of England, or other Crime; Unless it be only in a drolling way of supposition,
that he might have room for the more swinging Blow upon their Adversaries.

Nay, he is not only dumb himself of that side of his Mouth, but would Mazzle
all others too, representing all such as shall decry Popery, or speak of any
danger from that Coast, to be Enemies to the Government and Church of England;
And why I beseech you? Because some ill men have heretofore masqued seditious
designs with that pretext: A Goodly Reason! As if the Shepherds (in the Fable)
having been once or twice deceived with the Boys false Alarm, that the Wolf was
coming, were bound not to believe when he came indeed, and made actual havoc
of their choicest Lambs.

The Commons-House of that Long and Loyal Parliament, which began the eighth of
May 1661. and was continued above seventeen years, did on the 29th of April,
1678. (many months before Oats and his Plot, as the Observator is pleased to
call it, were heard of) complained of the danger arising to this Kingdom from
the restless endeavors of Priests and Jesuits, and other Popish Recusants; and
in their reasons drawn up for a Conference with the Lords on that subject,
amongst other things they speak of some Persons Popishly inclined, that had got
in Commission, and that in several Counties many Protestant Dissenters had been
indicted under the Notion of Popish Recusants, and the Penalties Levied upon
them, when the Papists there, had been either totally or for the most part
discharged; which they attributed to the Remissness of some Officers and
Ministers of Justice.

Now I desire the Observator to tell us whether those Loyal Senators, were
Whiggs or Trimmers, or disaffected to the Government and Church of England? If
he say they were, he will no doubt say the same of all the Commons Assembled in
Parliament at any time ever since Queen Mary's days; if he will acknowledge
them to be the Honest Loyal Protestant Church of England-Gentlemen, then it
will follow both that the Papists are a dangerous sort of Cattle; and that
before Oats made discovery of their damnable Plot, they were generally observed
to be arrived to a greater degree of Boldness than usual.

Besides, the Pick-pockets sometimes Cry, Look to your Purses; Yet I hope
there is no harm in the Caution, nor does it follow, that he is always a Knave
that gives it, but rather a Fool that will not take it: Whereas the Advancing
of such a Conceit, that none but Whiggs ever apprehended or speak of Dangers
from the Papists, is not only an insufferable Scandal to the Church of England,
and leading to her Ruin, (for it is not so much the Crushing of the Phanaticks,
as Her Subversion, that the Roman Party really aims at) but also tends directly
to the Encouraging Popery, the Eluding of the most necessary Laws made for its
Suppression, and discouraging of inferior Magistrates and Officers, from
putting them in Execution. He is certainly unwrothy of the Name of a Loyal Son
of the Church of England, that is not an Enemy to the Doctrines and Practices
of Papists, and does not upon all occasions as impartially, readily, and
effectually punish their Recusancy, as he does that of the Dissenters; seize
Popish Priests as diligently as Non-Con Ministers: and is not as active to
chastize the bold Resort of the one party to their Idolatrous Mass, severely
according to the Laws in force, as he would do the other for frequenting of
Conventicles.

Sure I am, if ever the Papists should get the uppermost, they would make no
difference between a Church of England Protestant, and the errantest Phanatick.
The Reverend Ridley that was for retaining the usual Vestments and Ceremonies,
as well as the zealous Hooper that declined the use of them, were both burnt in
one and the same year; Those that now Reproach each other to the wounding of
Charity and Peace, with the odius Names of Whiggs and Tories, if they will not
all become downright through paced Papists, must expect to mingle their Blood
and Ashes at the same Stake: And therefore, I see no Reason why we should make
any difference in favor of Papists, beyond other Dissenters.

5. Notwithstanding the Observators Invectives against Schism, and its ill
Consequences, yet his aim seems to be to have the Schism of the
Protestant-Dissenters from the Church of England still kept up, rather than to
have it Closed; or at least to have it determined rather by the utter Ruin and
Extirpation of all those Dissenters in his Majesty's Dominions, than by their
Conversion to a more manly Knowledge, and wiser thoughts about the
Indifferences in Question: [Solitudinem cum fecerit, Pacem vocabit;] For what
else mean his continual Excitement to Rigor, and exclaiming against all
Moderation or fair Treatment to such of the said Protestant-Dissenters as join
themselves to the Established Church? Are not such Courses likely to harden
People in their mis-conceived Prejudices? Can any thing more prevail with men,
and especially English Men, than Methods of Address and Kindness? And if in any
Case, certainly in matters Religious ought Love, and Compassion, and mutual
Condescentions to be practiced; and if toward any, much more to such as we
find inclinable and complying. But it is no very inviting Entertainment, if when
men do honestly frequent the Church and Sacraments, they must yet, and for that
very reason, do penance in the Observators Black Sheet, and be still worried
for Hypocrites. But why, good Mr. Observator! may not a Protestant-Dissenter,
reclaimed and Conforming, be supposed to Act as conscientiously as a Conforming
Papist? To the latter you never Object Hypocrisy, or Caution the Church or the
Government against him as dangerous; Though always bred a Papist and still
associating with such, yet if he has qualified himself a Protestant according
to Law, if any one talk of his being Popishly affected, he is an Enemy to the
Government and the Church, says the Observator; and why not He too, say I, that
calls all the Conforming Dissenters, (and many thousands that never were
Dissenters in their Lives) Trimmers, or Whiggs, that is, Adherents to the
Phanaticks? There must needs lurk some Mystery in this partiality, for
certainly whoever vies the Lives, Conversations, and designs of most of our
late Conforming Catholics, and compares them with the Conformists from the
other side, must needs own that the latter appear much more like Sincere
Converts to the Holy Doctrines, and excellent Devotions of the English Church,
than the other, who seem to have no regard thereunto in their Lives, nor indeed
any sense of Christianity; Adding nothing of Strength or Beauty to our Church
by their pretended Accession, but a greater weight of Sin and Scandal, by
obtruding themselves as her Members, when she abominates their practices; and
this the rather, because the very Principles of Papists allow them to dissemble
their Religion; which cannot be proved of any other Sectaries amongst us. Some
Popish Priests, ( says the Learned Dean Stillingfleet) have contended for it as
a thing lawful for them, not only to come to our Prayers, and hear our Sermons,
but to partake of our SACRAMENTS too, which they may allow, while they hope to
carry on their Interest that way; But if once (which God forbid;) the Tide
should turn with them, then the Old Laws of their Church must prevail, and
nothing would be thought so wholesome as an INQVISITION -- Dr. Stillings-fleet's
Sermon, September 21. 1673. p. 47.

Agreeable to which, is the Testimony of the Author of that Excellent Treatise,
Entitled, A seasonable Discourse of the necessity of maintaining the
established Religion, in Opposition to Popery; Published Anno 1673. who if I am
not misinformed, is the Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph before mentioned. Let no
man (says he, p. 34.) be so fond to hope for better Terms, or Liberty of
Conscience, if Popery should now prevail. Let us look into the World and we
shall see on all hands, that nothing is any where suffered to grow either under
or near that Sect: Where Protestantism has been so strongly fixed, as not to be
battered down at once; it has by degrees been perpetually Undermined. Witness
the Proceedings against them in Poland, and Hungary, and several parts of
Germany, the late Persecutions in the Valleys of Piedmont, and the Methods used
in France to demolish their Temples, and disable them from their Employments,
and almost Exclude them from common Trades. This we are sure of, whatever
Articles are, or can be made, of Favor and Compliance, it is somewhat more than
a probable Doctrine, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. The Jesuited
Romanist is at large by Equivocations to say any thing, and by directing of
Intention to do any thing; They can with a very good Conscience dissemble their
own, and pretend to the Protestant Profession; nay come to the Devotions of
Heathen Idolaters, and that from express License from his Holiness Pope Clement
the Eighth, upon Account of which, We may (says Tho. a Jesu de Convers. Infid.
p. 854.) be present without any scruple at the Rites and Divine Offices of
Infidels, Heretics, and Schismatics.

6. The Style and manner of the Observators Writing, is little accommodated to
the Gravity and Seriousness of the Church of England, in such weighty matters
as he often meddles with. Serious Humanists tax Juvenal, that whilst in his
Satyrs he inveighs against the Vices of his Age, he does it so broadly and
fulsomely, that he Teaches what he seems to Reprehend. Our Author in acting his
Whiggs and his Trimmers, uses oft-times such Language as no good, Loyal or
Modest men can read without Horror; And I believe he is the first Advocate for
any Church in the World that ever took the Liberty of Swearing so frequently in
Print, and talking so irreverently of matters of Religion and State, or of
wrapping up his filthy Conceits in Sacred Language, and abusing so much
Scripture Phrases to scoff and jeer with; I confess, it is an humor that is
very taking with the Gallantillo's of this Age, whereby they endeavor to make
themselves admired by the empty or less serious part of Mankind; The height of
this Persection is a little readiness in Profane Buffoonery, their Wit like
Fish and Touchwood never shining but when it Stinks or Rots; and now genteel
soever it may seem, it is no other Office than the ancient Romans put upon their
Slaves, when the Graver Persons had a mind at Banquets and other
Divertisements, to Relax and entertain themselves with Pantomines; and thus
what these Men cannot make out in solid or Learned Discourses, they supply with
Comical Droll, or Politic Farce, and prove or refute every thing by
Similitudes, and odd expressions, and so turn the most Pious and Serious things
into Ridicule.

Now the indulging and promoting of this Humor, contributes not a little
advantage to the Factors of Rome; for as it takes off the due Reverence of Holy
Word, (the only infallible Engine against Popery) and that seriousness of
temper (which should always possess our Souls in things of an Eternal
Concernment) so it corrupts the Judgment, rendering it volatile, desultory and
trifling, incapable of close strict Reasonings, apt to be inveigled with fumes
and fancies, fair shows, and specious pretenses, the paint of Rhetoric and
Gew-gaws of Sophistry; wherein the Master-peice or principal Talent of all the
Writers and Pleaders for Popery, does consist. And when the minds of our Young
Gentry and others are so far debaucht with this Itch of Vanity, Mockage, and
Impious Burlesque, as to account ingenious Railing a Demonstration, and Railery
and Fooling Arguments, and so become unsettled as to the practical Principles
of Religion, Reason, Morality, then are they fit disposed matter for the
Papists to work upon, and proselyte; For he that in Truth has NO RELIGION, is
the only fit Person to be brought to a Profession of THEIRS.

But here I expect the Observator should with loud Harangues Recriminate on the
other side, from his Ever-lasting Common-place-Book and Magazine, The
Dissenters Sayings, (how faithfully Collected, or how justly chargeable on the
whole Party of our Present Dissenters, I shall not here inquire; but must say,
That I conceive the Publication thereof in Print in French, might, for the
Honor of our Nation, and of the Protestant Religion, have been spared):
However what the Observator shall offer of that kind, will be to no purpose;
Recriminating others, is no excuse for himself: I am not Apologizing for any
Party therein guilty; but only aver, That the Church of England detests such
things; by whomsoever Practiced; much less does She allow Calumnies, or False
Accusations in any case, though against the worst of Men: (No, no, these you
have heard, are Maxims of the Jesuite's Schools.) And therefore what Regards
can the Observator either bear unto her, or expect from Her, whilst he uses
such dishonest Arts: As in this particular Matter about Godfrey's Murder,
where in one Observator, Numb. 142. he positively asserts at least fourteen
notorious Capital Untruths, and Untruths in Capitals, with his so many Ay Buts,
touching Bedloe's Evidence.

7. Lastly, The Observator has actually made Inroads upon the Church, and
defamed several of her able Divines, (by Name or plain Indigitations) every way
Conformable, and unblameable in their Doctrines and Conversations: Nay, he has
suggested, as if a Crowded Church, or Numerous Audience, were a Mark that the
Preacher there is a Trimmer, or Dissaffected Person; which is, at one Blow, to
stab the Reputation of all the most Able, Painful, and Excellent Preachers,
throughout the Nation: And whether this be to serve the Church of England, or
gratify her Papal Enemies, by dividing her within her self, as well as keeping
the Dissenters at a distance, that all may become the more easy a Prey to the
insulting Romenists, is not difficult to determine. There goes a Story, that
this Gentleman had the Vanity sometime since to style himself, THE GUIDE OF THE
INFERIOR CLERGY; it seems his Faculty is now improved into a Cersorships which
he thinks he may exert upon any honest Clergymen of the Church, (and some of
them, none of the most Inferior for Age or Parts, for Learning or Piety, for
Titles or Dignities) at his Pleasure; and where this New Ecclesiastical VISITOR
(of his own making) will stop, or upon whom he will bestow the Honor of his
next Castigations, who can foresee? Considering how causelessly, and yet how
rudel, he fell upon M^. SMITHIES, (not to mention Others) and withal how
weakly, and yet how insolently he defended it, in a Course of Calumny, and lewd
Language, undecent to be used to any Christian, much less toward a Minister of
the Gospel, and a Priest of that Church of which he owns himself a Member. Nay
such a Common-shore of slander is his Paper come to be esteemed, and so apt to
receive any idle stories, and vent them abroad again in Print, to the prejudice
of any persons Good Name and Reputation, that it is no unusual thing when two
Neighbors fall out, for the one to threaten the other -- I WILL PUT YOU IN THE
OBSERVATOR.

Thus (to use one of his own Witticisms) whilst the Club blow the Bagpipes.
and the Observator Twedles, the Nation is serenadid toward a Debauch with
false insinuations and daring Fictions; Factions and Animosities increased by
new- Coined Terms of Distinction and Reproach, the Justice of the Government
scandalled, Juditial Proceedings unravelled, misrepresented and Calumniated in
favor of Murderers and Traitors; The Church of England attacked, and
endeavors used to divide and weaken her; The Papists in all things justified
or excused, and their Traytorous Bloody Doctrines and Practices, Blanched,
extenuated, or untruly denied. And if there be yet any persons that will have
these things accounted Services to the Government, or the Established Church of
England, I must crave leave to suspect either the soundness of their
Understandings, or the Loyalty of their Affections to Both.

I shall conclude in the words of the late cited Seasonable Discourse, p. 36.
-- If we have any Love to our Religion, any obhorrence of the groffest
Superstition, Error or Idolatry, any regard for the Safety of his Majesty, any
care of our Laws, or our Estates, any Concernment for the strength, the Wealth,
the Number rf our Nation, any desire to hold the Freedom of our Conscience, the
Virtue and Honor of our Families, and lastly any Care of self-preservation, to
escape Massacres, and the utmost rage of Persecution; It will behoove as to
beware of the prevailing of that Sect, [the Papists] in whose successes we have
reason to expect to forfeit all these Interests, perish our selves, and
bequeath Idolatry, and Beggary and Servitude to our Posterity.

Whether all Honest-Church-of- England-Men will not (or at least ought not)
believe this Reverend Prelate, of that Church, rather than the Jiggs of an
Observator, is the Question.

Postscript.
THE Observator Numb. 145. falls foul upon Mr. Oats, for saving, The Popish
Plot was designed in 1670. and he believed it was so in 1666, etc. But if Oats
had never told us one Word, it would have been rational to believe, That there
has been a Popish Plot one foot ever since the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth,
when the Pope began to Thunder as Her, and charged all his Children to refrain
going to Church; which was the first Rise of Recusancy, Name and Thing: I say,
ever since then, there has been, and is without doubt a Popish Plot and
Traiterous Conspiracy on foot, and continually going on, in general to Subvert
our Established Church and Government, and introduce the Popes Supremacy, and
detestable Idolatries: (And of matters tending thereunto, as of Moneys raised
for promoting the Catholic Cause in England, or the like; Why might not Oats
see Memorials in some of their Records or Ledges Books, without incurring that
Train of Absurdities which the Observator (according to his manner, very
pleasantly, but very inconsequently) raises thereupon? Such a continued Plot to
have been, our Histories show; and Campion the Jesuit boasted, That as long as
there was one of that Society alive, it should not be desisted; Though true it
is, the several Scenes or Schisms of that Plot have been varied, and the
Mediums, Actors, and Methods changed according to the Oppertunities of Affairs,
and different Junctures of times, as might easily be Demonstrated.

But that they had some particular formed ill Design upon the Wheel against his
Majesty's Government, in the Year 1666. seems very evident from the Testimony
of one of their own Communion, (though not so thorough-pac'd as their high
Churchmen, as to the Popes Power over Princes in Temporals) I mean, Father
Peter Walsh, a Franciscan Friar; which because it also gives a Specimen of
Roman Catholic Loyalty, I shall here recite with the Occasion.

You must know then, that soon after his Majesty's Restoration, the Laws being
put in Execution against the Papists in Ireland, and they resolving to Petition
his Majesty for Ease therein, were advised to premise therein a Protestation of
their Loyalty, which was drawn up in these Words. [as recited in the said
Father Walshes History of the Loyal Formulary, Printed 1674. Fol. 7.]

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Remonstrance, Acknowledgment, Protestation, and Petition of the
Roman Catholic Clergy of Ireland.
YOUR Majesty's Faithful Subjects, the Roman Catholic Clergy of Your Majesty's
Kingdom of Ireland, do most Humbly Represent this their present State and
deplorable Condition; That being entrusted by the indispensable Commission of
the King of Kings, with the Cure of Souls, and the Care of their Flocks, in
Order to the Administration of Sacraments, and Teaching the People that perfect
Obedience which for Conscience Sake, they are bound to pay to your Majesty's
Commands; They are laden with Calumnies, and persecuted with Severity. That
being oblidged by the Allegiance they owe, and ought to swear unto Your
Majesty, to reveal all Conspiracies and Practices against Your Person and Royal
Authority, that come to their Knowledge; They are themselves Clamoured at as
Conspirators, Plotting the Destruction of the English amongst them, without any
ground that may give the least Color to so foul a Crime, to pass for probable,
in the judgment of any Indifferent Person.

That their Crimes are as Numerous and Diverse as are the Inventions of their
Adversaries: And because they cannot with Freedom appear to justify their
Innocenry, all the Fictions und Allegations against them, are received as
undoubted Verities: And, which is yet more mischievous the Laiety, upon whose
Consciences the Character of Priesthood gives them an Influence, suffer under
all the Crimes thus falsely imputed to them; It being their Adversaries
principal Design, That the Irish whose Estates they enjoy, should be reputed
Persons unfit, and no way Worthy any Title to Your Majesty's Mercy.

That no Wood comes amiss to make Arrows for their Destruction, for as if the
Roman Catholic Clergy, whom they esteem most Criminal, were or ought to be a
Society so perfect, as no Evil, no indiscreet person should be found amongst
them; They are all of them generally cried down for any Crime, whether true or
seigned, which is Imputed to one of them: And as if no words could be spoken,
no Letter written, but with the common consent of them all; The whole Clergy
must suffer for that which is laid to the charge of any particular Person
amongst them.

We know what Odium all the Catholic Clergy lies under, by reason of the
Calumnies, with which our Tenants in Religion, and Our Dependence upon the
Popes Authority, are aspersed; And we humbly beg Your Majesty's pardon to
vindicate both, by the Ensuing Protestation, which we make in the Sight of
Heaven, and in the presence of Your Majesty, sincerely and truly, without
Equivocation, or mental Reservation.

WE DO ACKNOWLEDGE and confess Your Majesty to be our true and lawful King,
Supreme Lord, and Rightful Sovereign of this Realm of Ireland, and of all other
Your Majesty's Dominions. And therefore we do acknowledge and confess our
selves to be Obliged, under Pain of Sin, to obey Your Majesty in all Civil and
Temporal Affairs, as much as any other of Your Majesty's Subjects, and as the
Laws and Rules of Government in this Kingdom, do require at Our Hands, and that
notwithstanding any Power or Pretension of the Pope, or See of Rome, or any
Sentence or Declaration, of what kind or Quality soever, given, or to be given
by the Pope, His Predecessors, or Successors, or by any Authority, Spiritual or
Temporal, Proceeding or derived from Him, or his See, against Your Majesty or
Royal Authority; We will still acknowledge and perform to the utter most of Our
Abilities, Our Faithful Loyalty, and True Allegiance to Your Majesty. And We
openly Disclaim and Renounce all Foreign Power, be it either Papal or
Princely, Spiritual or Temporal, in as much as it may seem able, or shall
pretend to Free, Discharge, or Absolve us from this Obligation, or shall any
Way give us Leave or License to raise Tumults, bear Arms, or offer any Violence
to Your Majesty's Person, Royal Anthority, or to the State or Government; Being
all of us ready not only to discover, and make known to Your Majesty and to
Your Ministers, all the Treasons made against Your Majesty or Them, which shall
come to Our Hearing: But also to lose Our Lives in Defense of Your Majesty's
Person and Royal Authority, and to resist with Our best Endeavors, all
Conspiracies and Attempts against Your Majesty, be they framed, or sent under
what Pretense, or patronized by what Foreign Power or Authority soever: And
further We profess, that all absolute Princes, and Supreme Governors, of what
Religion soever they be, are Gods Lieutenants on Earth, and that Obedience is
due to them according to the Laws of each Commonwealth, respectively in all
Civil and Temporal Affairs. And therefore, We do here Protest against all
Doctrines to the contrary: And We do hold it Impious, and against the Word of
God, to maintain that any private Subject may kill or murder the Anointed of
God his Prince, though of different Belief and Religion from His: And We abhor
and detest the Practice thereof, as damnable and wicked.

These being the Tenants of Our Religion in Point of Loyalty, and Submission to
Your Majesty's Commands; and Our Dependence on the Sea of Rome no way
intrenching upon that perfect obedience which by our Birth, by all Laws Divine
and Humane, We are bound to Pay to Your Majesty our Natural and Lawful
Sovereign; We humbly beg, Prostrate at Your Majesty's Feet, that you would be
pleased to Protect us from the severe Persecution We suffer merely for Our
Profession in Religion; leaving those that are, or hereafter shall be guilty of
other Crimes, (and there have been such in all times, as well by their Pens, as
by their Actions) to the Punishment prescribed by the Law.

This Protestation was consented to at London by one Popish Bishop of Ireland,
and several of the Catholic Nobility; But being sent into Ireland, the
generality of their Bishops and Clergy, though it were signified unto them that
it was His Majesty's desire and positive directions that they should sign it,
as an Argument of their purpose and Resolution to be more faithful to him
hereafter than they had proved to his Father, and though they were told that
such subscription must be the only Medium to procure them that ease from the
penal Laws which they desired, [ Walsh ibidem p. 20.] yet I say, the
generallity of their Clergy refused to sign it; And the said Remonstrance it
self was Condemned by the Theological Faculty of Lovain, as containing things
Repugnant to the sincere Professiou of Catholic Religion, and therefore
unlawful and detestable: requiring such as had subscribed, to Revoke it; and
none to subscribe under the guilt of Sacrilege, [ibidem. Fol. 103.] And the
Popes Internuncio from Brussels likewise Brands it, as invented for the
Seduction of Souls, and adulterating the Sincerity of Faith; And so likewise
Cardinal Barberini in a Letter on that occasion, avows, that it asserts things
contrary to the Catholic Faith, [Fol. 632.]

Well, after long shuffling and brangling, the Irish Clergy very much desired a
National Synod to debate and determine the point, which at last was graciously
condescended unto, and granted. (the First says Walsh, they had enjoyed since
Queen Mary's days; and we hope it will be the last, unless they had the Honesty
to make better use of it.)

Accordingly their Synod met at Dublin, which began the eleventh of June 1666.
and continued to sit fifteen days, but in all that time could by no arguments
or persuasions be prevailed with to pass this innocent and most just and
necessary Declaration, and so were commanded to dissolve by the Lord
Lieutenant. The reason of which their prodigious obstinacy, is thus rendered by
the said Father Walsh (who was all along present, a Principal Member of that
Convention, and who used a world of pains to have persuaded them to approve it)
-- They had (says he) before obstinately resolved against all Reason; The
Miracles and Revolutions they expected from the year 1666. Their Foreign
Intelligence and Expectations, and their Lying Prophecies at home, with many
other vain persuasions of their own, fixed them unalterable; These are Walshes
own words p. 703.

Here were MIRACLES and REVOLUTIONS, (that is a Change of Government, and a
Re-establishment of the Roman Catholic Religion) firmly looked for that year.
Here was FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE to that purpose held about the matter, and from
thence VAST EXPECTATIONS (His Majesty then actually engaged in a War with
France) And therefore they would not so far oblige the King, or disoblige the
Popc in so hopeful a juncture, as to subscribe this honest Profession of
Obedience to their Sovereign; so very favorably worded as aforesaid.

Behold here an illustrious and never to be for gotten Precedent of the so much
boasted Loyalty of Papists. And let the Observator take notice, these were the
Authoritative Proceedings of a whole National Council of Popish Clergymen; And
withal let the Protestant Reader remember that this was in that very year 1666.
(wherein about two months after this Catholic Synod in Ireland) the City of
London was laid in Ashes, by a Fire kindled by a French Papist (who for the
same upon his own Confession was Executed) and carried on, as was generally
more than suspected, by Popish Hands and Contrivances; Though the Observator has
labored hard to clear them from the same; But with as little sincerity, and no
more force of Argument, than he has used in the like Service for them, touching
this matter of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Murder. For instance, He would persuade
us that this Monsieur Hubert was a Protestant; It Is true, the Varlet after his
Condemnation, did once pretend so; but that the same was false, and said by the
injunction of some Priest, is very plain. 1. Because being immediately asked
whether he were an Hugonote (the common word whereby the French call
Protestants) he earnestly denied that (that word it seems was not in his
Bargain) 2. Being wished to Pray he only muttered over diverse times Pater
Noster, and Avia Maria, in Latin, and so suffered -- But this matter of
Londons-Fire, requires a larger Disquisition, which (God willing) may one day
see the light.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas the Observator in his Pamphlet that came out on the 8th. of December
Numb. 180. has maliciously and falsely represented and named Mr. Jenkins and
Mr. Delaune as the Two Licensers of this Book; which he tells his Reader (that
he may give the more Credit thereto) comes to him from one that Certainly
knows; And also that they gave their Judgment upon it That there was nothing
in it either against Church or State: This is to acquaint the Reader, That
neither Mr. Jenkins nor Mr. Delaune, did ever read, (or hear any one else read)
one line thereof, until it came out in Print: nor did Mr. Jenkins so much as
hear there was any such Book written, or in the Press, until he saw it Printed:
Which will be testified upon Oath, if need be. It may therefore well be
presumed one great reason why he is so concerned to find out or imagine an
Author and Abettors so circumstanc'd, is. That he may load them with Personal
Reflections, and thereby Elude the Answering of the Book: Since he has made bold
(as loyal as he pretends himself) to break the Act of Indemnity, that he might
reflect on Mr. Jenkins; having no other ground, than that some of the
Observators skulking Emissaries have given him information as abovesaid. But by
this Specimen of the Observators Truth, the Reader may see what Credit is to be
given to what he asserts with the greatest Confidence; as if there needed no
other Confirmation but the Observator's unquestionable Veracity.


