NEWS FROM New England, BEING A True and last Account of the present Bloody
Wars carried on betwixt the Infidels, Natives, and the English Christians, and
Converted Indians of New England, declaring the many Dreadful Battles Fought
betwixt them: As also the many Towns and Villages burnt by the merciless
Heathens. And also the true Number of all the Christians slain since the
beginning of that War, as it was sent over by a Factor of New England to a
Merchant in London.

Licensed by Roger L' Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for J. Coniers at the Sign of the Black Raven in Duck-Lane,
1676.

A True and Last Account of the Present Bloody Wars carried on betwixt the
Infidel Natives and the English Christians and converted Indians of New
England, etc.
THOSE Coals of Discention which had a long time lain hid under the ashes of a
secret envy; contracted by the Heathen ^ndians of New- England, against the
English; and Christian Natives of that Country brake out in June 1675. both
Armies being at a distance without doing any thing remarkable till the 13 of
December following; at which time the Siath^se^s and ^lymouth Company marching
from S^co^k, sent out a cons derable number of Scouts, who killed and took 55.
of the Enemy, returning with no other loss but two of our Men disabled, about
three days after came a perfidious Ind^a^ to our Army pretending he was sent by
the Sachems to treat of Peace, who was indeed no other but a Spy and was no
sooner conducted out of our Camp but we had news brought us that 22 of our
Straggling Soldiers were Slain and diverse barn^ and out houses, with Mr. ^er.
^ulls dwelling house burnt by him and his Treacherous confederates which wai^ed
for him. The next day as the ^on e^ick Army under the Condu^t of Major (...)
was Marching to Join with the Ma^^uset^, and lymouth Company; they were
assaulted by the ^n^ians, but without any los, they taking eleaven of the
Assailants Prisoners.

The 8^^^. of De^ember, our whole Army being united under the Conduct of Major,
(...) W. s^^, w^nt to seek out the Enemy whom we found (there then hapening a
great fall of Snow) securing themselves in a dismal Swam^, so hard of access
that there was but one wa^ for entrance which was well lined with Heathen In
^ans, who presently went out to assault us* but we falling in Pel-mell with
them; with much difficulty gained the Swamp where we found above 1500 Wig^wams
and by night, had possession of the fort; of which we were dispossessed soon
after by an unexpected recruit of fresh ^ndian^, out of an adjoining Swamp, but
our Noble Generals insatiable desire of victory prompted him to such brave
actions, that we following his example to the enemies cost, made our selves
absolute Masters of the fort again, Although we purchased our success at so
dear a rate that we have small cause to r^joyce at the victory; yet when we
consider the vast disadvantage they had of us in number, whom we collected to
have 4000 fighting men, and we no^ much more than half so many, we have great
reason to bless God we came of so well, our dead and wounded not a Mounting to
above 220, and the enemies by their own Confession to no less then 600. the
chief officers killed on our side were Capt. Dav nport, Capt. Johns^n, Capt.
Marsh^l, Capt. Gardne^. Capt. Gallop.

Captains Wounded were 4 vi^t, Sealey, Major Wats, and B^ad^o^d, Leiutenants
wounded were 4 v^z. Savage, T^n^, Vpham and Wa^^.

In this bloody Battle we gave so bitter a Relish of our English valor and our
converted Indians resolutions, that they dreaded our neighborhood and thought
themselves unsafe ti^l secured by six or seven miles distance from our
remaining Army, where they remained near a month not attempting any thing
considerable till the first of Feb. at which time a certain Number of them made
desperate through hungar came to Fal^k^e, a Little Town near Providence, and
attempted the house of one Mr. C^rpen^e^, from whom they took 20 horses 50 head
of Cattle and 180 sheep And set fire on a house at South-bury wherein were two
Men, one Woman and seven Children, on t e 41^. of Fe ruary the Christians
received private intelligenc^ from the nd^a^ who had Sculked ever since the
last Battle in certain woods situate a^out 30 miles from Mal^u^^, that they
were drawn up into a body and encamped in a well fortified Swamp, where,
notwithstanding the Indi^n a saulted the Rear, wounded four of our men, and we
killing so many of theirs that they thought fit to forsake their r fuge and
leave both it and their Wigwams to our disposal, who lodging in their Rooms
that night set fire to a 150 of their Wigwams next morning, and by this light
pursued them so lose that we ^ill'd diverse of them whom age or Wounds rendered
incapable of keeping up with their Companions, and resolving to continue the
quest with all the celerity immaginable, they led us to another Swamp whose
Rocky ascent propounded so great ^ difficulty to attain it, as would have
Staggar'd the resolution of any but a resolved Mind; but we attempted it with
the like resolution and success as we did the Last; the enemy by a speedy
flight leaving us in full possession of all they left behind them.

We Persued them two days after this encounter, but then (which was on the
18th Febr.) finding our men wearied with speedy marches, our provision scarce
through continual expense and no recruit, our horses tired, and our selves
hopeless of overtaking them who had great advantage of us in passing over Rocks
and through Thickets, which our Foot not without much difficulty could, and our
horse were altogether incapable to do; our Commanders after a Council of war,
resolved to fend the Massathusers and Plymouth Company to Mal^ur^ and the
Connect^cks Army to their own homes which was accordingly done. And Major Genr.
Wins^ow, only with two Troops to Boston leaving the foot at Malbury and
S^ut^^bury, who came home on Monday following and were all dismissed to their
several habitations except Capt. Wadworth who was left at Mu^bury in persuit of
the Enemy, of whom he destroyed about 70 Old Men Wom^n and Children who wanted
strength to follow the fugitive Army.

The Desperate heathens taking advantage of the dismission of three Disbanded
Companies, studied nothing but Massacres outrages, and treacherous hostillitie,
which within two days after those said Companies were dispers't they found
opportunity to commit in a Town called Nas^away which they set fire to and
burnt to t e Ground taking no less than 55 Persons into their Merciless
captivity, and because the reader shall understand the Damnable antipathy they
have to Religion and Piety, I would have him take notice how they endeavor to
Signallize their Cruelty and grati^ie their enraged Spleen chiefly on the
promoters of it; for of these 55 Captives the Minister of the Towns relations
made no less then 19 of them viz. Mrs. Ro^lo^son the Ministers wife and three
of his Children, her sister and sea^en ^hildren, and her sister Dr^w and four
Children. The Minister himself with his sisters husbands returning from Bo^ton
a little after the engagement to their infinite grief found their houses burnt
to the ground, and their Wives and Children taken Captive, nor was this
cruelty committed, as the extent or N^polus Vltra of their vengance, but rather
as an earnest of their future Bearba^ity For no longer than the next day after
three men Going out, with the Cart were seized on by these Indians, one of them
killed, and the other two not to befound, the day following at Cox^ord, they
burnt one house and murdered three persons.

In short, their outrages are so many and different, that I must entreat the
reader since they will not be brought into afluent Narration, to accept them
plainly and dyurnully according to the time, place, and manner as they were
committed, which is the only way to avoid omissions, and consequently to
Satisfy the inquisitive, who I suppose would willingly hear of all the
extremities have happened to the suffering Christians in this New England War.

On the 17 of Febr. therefore ye must know that the Town of Medfei'd was begirt
with a regiment of resoleut Indian, who assailed it so briskly, that maugred
all the resistance made by Capt ^acobbs who was then Ingarrison'd there with a
hundred Soldiers for its security, the enraged Heathens never desisted their
desperate attemps, Battering the Walls, and powering showers of Arrows into the
bosom of the Town, they had distroyed above 50 of her inhabitants and burnt 30
of her houses.

The 7th. of March following these bloody Indians marched to a considerable
Twon called Croa^on where first they set fire to Major Willards house, and
afterward burnt 65 more there being Seaventy two houses at first so that there
was left standing but six houses of the whole Town, the next day after two men
coming from Ma^bury to Southlury were slain: and the Sabbath day ensuing, these
destroying Ind an^ came to Plym^u^h where fixing only on a house of one Mr.
Clarks they burnt, and murdered his wife and all his Children, himself
Narrowly escapeing their cruelty by happily at that Juncture being at a
meeting.

On the second of ^pr l 1676. Major S^vage, Cap^ain Mosele^, Captain W^l^^am
T^r^or, and Captain V^b pal, with 300. men marching from Malb^row to Q^^bury,
where they had ordered the Conne^^^^e^ Army to remain in readiness against
their ^oming, which being effected, accordingly they joined forces, and began
their march toward Northampton, but by the way were assaulted by the Indians,
whom they repelled without any other damage, then only Mr. ^ue^ly wounded,
killing about 20 of the Enemies in a hot persuit after them.

The tenth Ditto, about 700 Indians encompast Northamp^on on all sides where
they fought very resolutly for the space of an hour, and then fled, leaving
about 25 persons dead upon the place, the Christians loosing only 4. men and 1.
woman, and had some barnes burnt, on the 12th instant they assaulted Warwick
with so unhappy a success that they burnt all the Town except four Garrison
houses which were left standing, six days after Captain Pierce Brother to
Captain Pe rce of London, with 55 men and 20 Christian Indians went to seek out
their Enemies, the Indians whom according to their Intelligence they sound
rambling in an obscure Wood, upon his approach they drew into order, and
received his onset with much difficulty, being in the end forced to retreat,
but it was so slowly that it scarcely deserved that Name, when a f^esh company
of Indians came into their assistance, beset the Christians round, Killed
Captain Pierce. and 48. of his men, besides 8. of the Christian Indians. The
Fight continued about 5 hours, the Enemy bying the Victory very dearly, but at
last obtained it so absolutely that they deprived us of all means of hearing of
their loss.

At Mal^row on the 12th Ditto, were several houses burnt whilst the miserable
inhabitants were at a meeting, and at Springfield the same Lords day, these
devilish Enemies of Religion seeing a man, woman, and their Children, going
but toward a meeting house, Slew them (as they said) because they thought they
Intended to go thither.

The 28th, of the same instant April last, Captain Denison collecting a
Regiment of 500 and 200 English Paquet Nimerass Indians marched out of New
London in search of that Grand somenter of this Rebellion. Anthony the Se ham
whom at last near the Town call d Providence he recovered, and after a hot
dispute wherein he killed 45 of the Sechems men, Took him their Commander
Prisoner with several of his Captains, whom they immediately put to death but
were at strong debate whether they should send him to Boston, but at length
they carried him to New London and began to examine him why he did foment that
war which would certainly be the destruction of him and all the Heathen Indians
in the Country, to which and many other interogatories he made no other reply
but that [he was born a Prince, and if Princes came to speak with him, he would
answer them, But none of those present being Princes, he thought himself
obliged on honor to hold his Tongue] This Answer though it might Challenge
their admiration, was not so prevalent as to obtain their pity.

Notwithstanding the Surviveing Sechems were not long in revenging his death,
for on the Sixth of May, they burnt all ^albor^w except three Garrison houses,
killed Capt. Jacobson and Leiuten^nt Prat, and two days after burnt 24 houses
in ^outh^ury, kill d several of the inhabitants who vainly expected Capt.
H^dworth and Capt. Br^okwel to their Relief; for these unfortunate Gentlemen
were intercepted by 700 Moo^ with whom they fought for the space of 4 hours
till not only they two but Capt. Sharp, and 51 Christians more lay dead upon
the place.

At Woodcock 10 miles from S^co^ch on the 16th M y was a little S^irmage
betwixt the Moo^s and Christians, wherein there was of the later three slain
and two wounded, and only two Indians Killed.

May 28. 1676. Capt. Denison and Capt. Evr^ with 50 English and about 150
Paquet Indians Scouting among the Woods in 8 days space killed 25 Indians and
took 51 prisoners, one whereof was Grandchild to Dunham who was killed by
Capt. Pierce in the enga^ement on the 26 May.

The number of Christians slain since the be inning of the late Wars in New
England, are 444. Taken Prisoner, 55

The number of Indi^ns Slain in this war is uncertain because they burn their
Dead, keepin^ their Death as a Secret from the Christians knowledge, but the
number mentioned herein is 910.

We have Received very late news that the Christians in New Engl nd have had
very great Victory over the Infidel Natives.

FINIS.

