THE Countermine: Or, A short but true DISCOVERY OF THE Dangerous Principles,
and secret Practices of the Dissenting PARTY, ESPECIALLY THE PRESBYTERIANS:
SHOWING That Religion is pretended, but Rebellion is intended.

And in order thereto The Foundation of MONARCHY in the STATE, and EPISCOPACY
in the CHURCH, are Undermined.

The Second Edition.

2 Timothy 3.6, 9. For of this sort are they that creep into Houses. But they shall
proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all men. By one who
does passionately wish the Prosperity of the Church, his King and Country.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Rose^ in Ludgate Street,
MDCLXXVII.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Reasons and Occasion of the following Discourse. The imminent
Danger of the Church and State, by reason of the restless Endeavors,
industrious Malice, and secret Contrivances of Dissenting Separatists. CHAP.
II. Of the Policy of the Enemies of the Church and State, to amuse us with the
old Stratagem of Fears and Jealousies of the Danger of Popery. Hereby they
ingratiate themselves with the Common People. The improbability that the Romish
Persuasion and Government should ever be established again in these Nations. If
it has of late increased amongst us, we are obliged for it to these Dissenters,
who have made those Breaches by which these Enemies enter. By these Fears and
Jealousies which they sow in the Minds of People, they endeavor to make them
hate the present Government and Governors, both in Church and State;
persuading them they are Popishly inclined, and Antichristian: And thus
secretly undermine the Foundation of Monarchy and Episcopacy. CHAP. III. An
Account of the Heads of the Factions amongst us, from whence we may conjecture
what their Intentions are: Of their way of Education in the Times of the late
Rebellion, in the Universities, or in the Army. Of their Lay-Teachers, and
Shop-Doctors; how they came by their Gifts and Talent in Preaching; the
Advantages they made of Religion in their Trades, the Employments they had
under the Usurping Governments, the Encouragement they had to invade the
Pulpit: The desire they have of an alteration in the present Government, to
recover their former Power and Profit. The great unfitness of these men to
Officiate in the Church, who are guilty of Sacriledg, Murder, and Perjury.
CHAP. IV. Of the Ways whereby they decoy others to be of their Persuasion. Of
the great pretentions they make to Zeal and Holiness. Of the great Veneration
they seem to have for the Scriptures; when yet they are directly against them.
Instanced in two Positive Commands, to obey Magistrates in the State, and those
that have the Rule over them in the Church. The unreasonableness of the Pleas
they make for their disobedience, which if allowed must take away all the Power
of Superiors, and cancel all the Duty of Inferiors. The Impotency of that
Plea of expecting express Scripture as the only Warrant for all our Actions.
The unpracticableness of it shown in a familiar and very possible Instance.
CHAP. V. Of the several Arts they use to gain Love, Credit, Esteem, and
Veneration. Of their Pretenses to Exemplary Piety in their Actions, Words,
Looks, Gestures, Habits. Of the way of their maintenance by Free Will
Offerings, the Advantages they have thereby over the Clergy of the Church; it
eases them of a great trouble, and preserves the love of their Auditors, who
l^ke this Gospel way, where they may at their pl^^sure withdraw their Bounty;
it secures them from the Penal Laws. Of the Advantages they m^ke of Punishment,
by calling it Persecution, of their seeming Constancy in suffering for what
they call Conscience; hereby they gain love, pity, and money: They make this
Persecution in infallible Mark of the true Church; the use the make of it, to
render the Government odious to the People, and to dispose them by degrees to
endeavor the alteration of the present, which they call Reformation. The same
Arts made use of to promote the late Rebellion. CHAP VI. Of their Endeavors to
insinuate themselves into the Favor of Persons of Quality: And that
notwithstanding their Flatteries, they are the greatest Enemies to Gentry,
Nobility, and Royal Dignity. Of the manner how they creep into Popular Places,
and the Arts they use to endear themselves to the People, by putting them out
of a good Opinion of their Lawful Minister. The Reason of their settling in
Market Towns, or Populous Villages, where there is not already some prevailing
Sect. Tradesmen lovers of Reading, and have time to peruse their poisonous
Writings. Hereby they propagate their Way, the Shopkeeper mingling and
retailing their Doctrines amongst his other Wares: With their design upon
Corporations in Future Elections of Parliaments. CHAP. VII. After they are
settled in such Place of the Manner of their behavior in the Meeting House. Of
their Extempore Prayer. Examined and ^^posed to open view, Of the Pretense they
make to gain Veneration, that they Pray by the spirit. The ill use they employ
it in, to make the set and appointed Forms of Public Prayers Nauseous and
Odious to the People. Proved from Scripture and the Express Commands of our
Savior, that it is not of Gods appointment, nor a fruit of the Spirit. By
Example of the most infamous and abominable Sinners guilty of Rebellion and
Witchcraft, who had this faculty even to admiration. Extempore Prayer shown to
be a mere Art, the way how they or any Person endued with a tolerable measure
of Confidence may attain to it. A probable Philosophical Reason, why they fancy
themselves inspired in these Enthusiastic Effusions. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Doctrines they chiefly insist upon, and in which they first instruct their
Hearers. And first of the Doctrine of absolute and irrespective Decrees of
Election and Reprobation; Of their Way of trial of their Followers, whether
they be the Elect, by knowing the punctual time of their Call, Repentance,
sorrow for sin, etc. The agreeableness of this Doctrine to their Followers,
whom for being such, they persuade that they are certainly the Elect; and that
they cannot fall totally and finally from Grace. Their signs of Election proved
false from Judas the Son of Perdition, who had all they make the infallible
Marks of Election, and something more, viz. Restitution, which they will not be
persuaded to. CHAP. IX. Of the great danger of this Doctrine, as they apply it.
First to themselves, it fills them with a groundless and false confidence of
the goodness of their Spiritual Condition: makes it almost impossible to
convince them by Reason or Scripture, though they live after the Flesh, in
Hatred, Envy, Malice, Disobedience, etc. but that they have the Spirit, and
live after the Spirit, and are new Creatures. It fills them with Pride, and
Pharisaical contempt of others; puts them into Security, the most dangerous
Condition a man can be in. CHAP. X. Of the ill Consequences this Doctrine has
upon the private Communities where it comes. From hence proceeds a certain
breach of Unity. No people so addicted to Debates, Envyings, Strife,
Backbitings, Whisperings, Slanders, condemning, censuring all who are not of
their Way, to be Reprobates, as these Separatists. Incharitableness and Atheism
hereby extremely propagated: they separate the dearest Friends; and by creeping
into Houses, and beguiling silly Women, divide those whom God has joined
together; they are curious and busybodies in espying out the faults of all
others; which they publish to make themselves appear the Elect, and all others
Reprobates. All this is done to fit them to act upon the public Theater of the
World, which they practice in private Villages, or where ever they dwell. CHAP.
XI. Of the wicked Design they have by the strength of this Doctrine, to
overthrow the present Church and its Government; which by their pretending to
be the Elect, who worship God in Spirit and Truth, they endeavor to make
Unlawful and Antichristian. This Doctrine contrary to Gods Promise to be with
his Church to the end of the World, and derogatory to his Honor. Of the false
aspersions they secretly cast upon the Church and the Public Service of God.
Of the Inconveniences of arguing with them, and the Advantages they make
thereof; their Impudence in boasting Themselves and Arguments invincible. Of
their Dislike of Places of Public Worship. Of the treatment they met with in
the time of their Power. The House of Prayer made a Den of Thieves. Of their
inveterate Hatred against Bishops and the Liturgy. Of the dangerous Tenent
they maintain, That all People, Princes and Magistrates, are bound to pull down
Antichrist, which with them is Episcopacy; and that if Princes will not, the
People may, if they can get Power into their hands; which makes them
continually grasp at Dominion. CHAP. XII. Of the desperate Influences this
Doctrine has upon the State and Civil Government. This Amazon Fury bred in
Rebellion, and ever since nursed up with Blood; proved from our own and all
Europe's sad Experience: This Doctrine inclines men to Aristocracy, or the
Government of a Commonwealth. Of the little kindness they have for Monarchy.
Salus Populi suprema Lex, their Fundamental Principle of Government, abused to
persuade men that the Peoples Election and Approbation are necessary Titles to
a Crown. That a King is Major singulis, minor universis, and may be deposed and
punished by the People: Proved from their Practice. The great Encouragement it
gives to Rebellion. The same Doctrine of Fatality taught by Mahomet, to inspire
the Turks with courage against the Christians. CHAP. XIII. Of their Doctrine of
the Necessity of Separation from the Wicked: which they teach in private, and
by their Example in public. The Uses they make of it; to know their Strength
and Numbers, which they always boast of, if possible, to bring Authority to
comply with their Desires. Hereby they ingross a trade amongst themselves. Of
their undermining Authority by making it Contemptible, by their daily
affronting it. Of the Unlawfulness of Separation, from the Example of our
Savior, and from Scripture. Separation by S. Jude made a Mark of Reprobation.
Jeroboam's Policy the end of their Separation. CHAP. XIV. Of their Exaltation
of Preaching, and the Reason why they do so. Of the great Veneration People
have for the Pulpit: The Advantages they make of it to gain the love of the
People for being so painful Laborers; dispersing their Doctrines; and
procuring Benevolences. Hereby they bring the Prayers of the Church to be
nauseous; accustom People to Variety and Novelty, and have opportunities of
displaying their Gifts and Abilities as well as in Extempore Prayer. The abuses
they put upon the Church, that it is against Preaching. A Vindication of the
Church from this Aspersion. Of the Primitive and Modern Preaching. It is
against preaching themselves and their own Interest and wicked Designs, that
the Church declares it self. CHAP. XV. A short View of some other of their
Doctrines. Of their Judaizing the Lords Day. Of their censuring all their
Ancestors, and even their own Children to Damnation. Their subtilty in deriding
all these Accusations, and disowning the Actions of the late Rebels, when yet
they tread in the very same steps. That they have the same designs, manifested
from their great industry in all New Elections of Members of this present
Parliament to get Voices for such as will be favorable to their Interest. A
probable conjecture, that they have had a principal hand in the late unhappy
differences between the two Houses; and of the great desire they have of a New
Parliament, and their Hopes when that shall happen. CHAP. XVI. Of the Artifices
which these men use to render all Applications ineffectual, by their tiring out
the Inferior Magistracy with their obstinacy. The Advantages they make of the
suspension of Laws, to fortify their followers; and persuading them it is a
particular effect of the care which God takes of them, and the Cause. That
place in the Acts of Gamaliel's counsel, If this work be of God, it will stand;
by which they frighten some, and endeavor to discourage all people from
meddling with them, considered and proved to be the word of Gamaliel a Doctor of
the Law, but not the word of God, because not universally true. CHAP. XVII. A
more particular Survey of their Policy in rendering all Expedients useless which
have been applied to reclaim them, from that place in Ezra 7.26. Of Capital
Punishments. Of Imprisonment, how they make it of advantage to them to confirm
their Cause and Followers, and to bring a general odium upon the Laws and
Government: their Evasions to escape Forfeitures. Of their Complaints of the
Injustice and Oppression of the Penal Laws. Of Banishment. A Coffee-house
Dialogue about it, betwixt Mr. Kinglove of -- and a Grandchild of Martin
Marprelate. CHAP. XVIII. The Heads of Separation brought to Trial by the
Scripture: proved to be false Prophets by their fruits, by the description of
them, by the time of their appearance; the signs given to know them by. Wolves
in Sheeps clothing. Their pretense to be the Ministers of Righteousness, the
way they would evade these Signs. Their Plea of Not guilty, because not guilty
of all, manifested to be vain; and such as if admitted, will clear all, even
Mahomet, from the guilt of being a false Prophet. CHAP. XIX. A further
pursuance of the Discovery; and that these men are false Prophets, from the
Description of St. Peter and St. Paul. St. Peter's (...), and St. Judes (...),
considered as particularly designed to show their infectious contagious
Doctrines. Of their despising Dominions, querulous, unsatisfied, and
complaining humor. A short Vindication of the Church from their malicious
Aspersion of being guilty of Idolatry. CHAP. XX. THE CONCLUSION.
THE COVNTERMINE; Or, a short but true DISCOVERY, etc.
CHAP. I. The Reasons and Occasion of the following Discourse. The imminent
danger of the Church and State, by reason of the restless Endeavors,
industrious Malice, and secret Contrivances of dissenting Separatists.
THERE never was any Age in which the Holy Church of God was more truly
Militant, than in the present. The envious Dragon, Rev. 12.12, 13.
knowing that he has but a short time, has summoned up all his Infernal
Militia, to make one great and vigorous attempt upon the persecuted Woman:
having forcibly driven her into the Wilderness, he throws out of his mouth
water as a flood, that if it be possible, he may cause her to be carried away
by those Deluges and Inundations of Errors.

IN a danger so eminent, every good Soldier of Christ Jesus is bound by the
Sacramentum Militare of his Baptism, to do the utmost of his endeavors, and
earnestly to contend for the Faith, Jude v. 3.
which was once delivered to the Saints: and not only be contented to stand
fast in that Faith, 1 Cor. 16.13.
but to quit himself like a man and be strong.

THAT Son must needs have little Courage, and less Duty, who can see a most
beautiful, tender, and indulgent Mother, prostituted to the barbarous rage of
her most implacable Enemies, and the murdering Steel ready to be plunged into
her innocent Bosom; and all that while stand gazing on; or spending that time
in childish and fruitless Laments, which he ought to employ toward her present
rescue and speedy assistance.

I am not ignorant, that whoever concerns himself with the present Enemies of
the Church, puts his hand into a Nest of Hornets; and had need to be well
guarded both with Law and Innocence, if he hopes to escape their stings; and
possibly that Consideration, together with the natural inclination of my Genius
above all other things to quiet and repose, might have been powerful enough to
divert me from this design, if some stronger Reasons had not put me upon it.

BUT lest by some in this scribbling Age I might be thought infected with the
common Malady, Scribendi Cacoethes: I do here enter my solemn Protest against
it; and that I had no other intentions in making my thoughts public, but to
satisfy the importunities of my own mind, by discharging that Duty I owe to
God and the Holy Church: And if I cannot prevent the common, and by consequence
my particular danger, I shall yet have the satisfaction that I have not by my
silence consented to it; nay further, that, it may be, even beyond my Province,
I have attempted to do it.

THE goodness of actions is not to be measured by their prosperous successes;
and if that fails to answer the expectation of my wishes and desires, I shall
yet have avoided the imputation of their folly, of whom the Historian tells us,
who were known silendo periisse, to have perished by either their imprudent or
wilful silence.

THE knowledge I have of the disproportion there is betwixt the Design and the
Undertaker, might also it may be discourage me from the Enterprise, if I did
not remember, that once a contemptlble Sling and ordinary Pebble, prostrated
the prodigious man of Gath, 1 Samuel 17.49, 50, 51.
and overthrew an Army, not less numerous or insolent than this with which I am
to encounter.

I cannot tell, whether some men's prevailing Fears, and the desire of that
security which they vainly hope to establish, by what they call temper and
moderation; or the over tender Charity of others toward their Who yet scorn
that Epithete farther than it serves their interest, and are Giants in their
own opinion, though in other men's, and in truth, more wilful than weak.
weak Brethren, have hindered them from speaking plain: But I have observed,
that most of those Prints which have of late days past the Press concerning
them, have been handled with as much niceness and caution, as men with naked
hands would treat the peevish Nettles, or armed Brambles.

MUCH has been said, written, and printed in Vindication of the Church of
England, her Rites and Ceremonies. But I find that these Apologies have always
been rendered suspected of partiality, and so made useless by the Heads of the
Separation amongst their credulous Followers: and being usually Books of a
greater Price than every man's Pocket could easily reach; and of a larger
content than either that or their capacity could without trouble contain; the
ordinary sort of people being willing to spare both the expense of their Money
and Time, never come to a clear understanding of the Controversies, but
determine their Judgments according to the opinions and censures of their
Heads, to whom they have wholly resigned themselves and their Faith. Now it is
most undoubted, that the Character which they will give of all such Writings,
is never free from partiality, or ever favorable to any thing that is against
their own Practice or Interest.

AND if at any time some of the more curious or inquisitive, startled with the
common Vogue, demand of their infallible Rabbi, what is his sense of the
Learned and Judicious Mr. Hooker, the pious Mr. Comber, or the late
incomparable both learned and mostest Mr. Falkner; or of any other Pieces of
that kind, so highly cried up by the Church of England-men? he will not fail to
do all he can to persuade them not to lose so much time in reading such frothy
stuff, which is nothing but untemper'd Mortar, to dawb over the Temple of
Antichrist, which notwithstanding all that can be done to support it, must
down, must fall very suddenly; and that they may much better spend their
precious time, in reading the godly Works of such or such a man, of his own
Opinion, with which Seditious Sermons the world is abominably pestered. But
that he may say something in answer to their Question; Hooker (of whom one may
by his actions probably conjecture he never read more than the Title Page) he
will tell them writ against some factious spirits in Queen Elizabeth's days;
but that concerns not them. And for the rest they will not want something to
say against them; which though it cannot enervate their masculine Arguments,
yet shall infallibly prejudice and sully either their reputation, or intention
in writing. The Friendly Debate is an extravagant Droll, Libertas Ecclesiastica
was penned in hopes of Preferment, the Companion to the Altar is no Companion
fit for them, the Rationale upon the Common Prayer, has no more Reason than
what it wears upon the Frontispiece. And though I do purposely conceal both my
Name and Capacity, and will not tell them whether I am a Layman or an
Ecclesiastic, nor shall all their industry find it out, if I can prevent it;
yet I do expect the same or worse treatment and measure from them, and to hear
their Random-shot whistle about my Ears.

LET them say or think who I am, or what they please of me; and were that all
the Liberty of Conscience they would desire or demand, they should not fail of
a willing and speedy gratification: and I cannot therefore be thought unjust,
if I expect the same liberty which I would grant to others. My intentions are
to deal plainly with them, and to proceed without favor or affection, so far
as I have the Warranty of Truth, and no further, to the best of my knowledge:
Neither will I be tedious, but dispatch what I have to say in as few words as
is possible; and as near as I can I will calculate it for the Meridian of all
Capacities, so as neither to endanger the weakest Brains, nor if possible to
displease the strongest: And herein I shall act like a Physician, of which
Profession (or an Apothecary) they may guess me if they please; and since the
Dose I am preparing is like to be very strong, I will give it in the lesser
quantity. I know it will work briskly, and be apt movere Bilem; make some
persons vomit abundance of Choler: and it may be that which is blackest upon
their Stomachs: in others it will strongly stir the Spleen, not so much to
Laughter as Revenge. If it does but in any measure contribute to the purging
out that Epidemick Scurvy in the Body Politic, which betrays it self by those
dangerous symptoms, of foul Mouths, stinking Breaths, and the looseness of the
Tongue more than the Teeth, in many persons; I shall be abundantly satisfied:
And if I may but see any good Effects, I am so little sollicitous for any
private or particular advantage, more than my share in the Public Good, that I
care not whether the Cause be ever known.

THERE is no Science so true as the Mathematics, one of its infallible
Demonstrations is, Maximum posse moveri a minimo: and upon that Basis I will
lay the foundation of my hopes; and how contemptible soever the first Mover may
appear, I will not despair, but that this little Wheel may give a Motion to
those which are far greater, and more powerful. A single hair if rightly
applied, may set that Engine at work, which will want nothing besides
Archimedes his convenient place to fix it upon, to remove the Terrestrial Globe
from off its Center.

CHAP. II. Of the Policy of the Enemies of the Church and State, to amuse us
with the old Stratagem of Fears and Jealousies of the danger of Popery. Hereby
they ingratiate themselves with the Common People. The improbability that the
Romish Persuasion and Government should ever be established again in these
Nations: if it has of late increased amongst us, we are obliged for it to
Dissenters, who have made those breaches by which those Enemies enter. By these
Fears and Jealousies, which they sow in the minds of the People, they endeavor
to make them hate the present Government and Governors, both in Church and
State, persuading them they are Popishly inclined and Antichristian, and thus
secretly undermine the foundation of Monarchy and Episcopacy.
IT is no uncommon Stratagem in War, to make false Assaults against a besieged
Place, thereby to call away the perplexed Defendants from that place where the
Storm is intended in good earnest. It were well if this were not our case: and
truly the present face and posture of our Affairs does not look much unlike it;
for though there seems to be the greatest distance betwixt Rome and Geneva, yet
herein they both agree, that they are our common Enemies: and whilst the bolder
Roman openly threatens us with an Assault, the crafty Presbyterian, with his
Confederate Separatists, are busy at the Mine; and I believe it is not my
single Opinion, That more places, otherways impregnable, have submitted to the
Will of the Conqueror by that Artifice, than by the open fury of the Cannon.
And so dangerous is the practice of that invention in a Politic sense, that
how contemptible soever an Enemy may appear, if in that Design they make an
undiscovered progress, there will never want some desperate Faux's to spring
their Mines; which if they succeed, will blow up all from the very Foundations,
and bury the best built Government in the World in its own Ashes and Ruins.

I have read of a City whose Walls were overthrown, without any other Enemies
or Engines, than the undermining Moles. Whether true or fabulous, it matters
not: sure I am if it be merely a Fable, the Moral may not be unuseful to us;
and though the Comparison may be odious, yet it is but too agreeable to a sort
of men, whose restless and mischievous Tempers and Opinions hurry them blindly
on, to the accomplishment of their ill Designs, by secret and underhand
Practices, so long as they are out of hopes to effect them by open Force and
Violence.

BUT they must know they are not so secret or secure as they imagine; and there
are a great many amongst themselves, who contribute not a little to our
assistance in Countermining of them: And if I might advise them, they should
not only be extremely cautelous how they entrust one another with the GRAND
DESIGN and SECRET, but even how they trust themselves: for Treachery and
Baseness are so natural to them, that they cannot forbear betraying themselves;
and let them Swear or Forswear, Protest and Verily as often as they please, yet
at one time or another their speeches will discover them to be Galileans: and I
fear, just such as he was before he obeyed the summons of the Cock, to go out
and weep bitterly, S. Peter. Mat. 26.75.
which they have likewise need to do.

ONE of the greatest Arts, by which they secure themselves, whilst they amuse
us, is to persuade the world of a strange growth and increase of Popery amongst
us; and that they are the only persons who stand in the Breach; and by their
Long Prayers, by their sound and Evangelical Doctrine, give a check to that
threatening Deluge and Inundation. This does extremely ingratiate them with the
Common People, to whom the Name of Popery is far more terrible than that of
Mahumetanism: and to make these Fears and Jealousies appear something more
probable, and not only conjectural, they do not scruple the lowdest Calumnies,
and plainly enough to intimate, that all things are in the greatest forwardness
to entertain this dreadful Revolution. All the eminent Prelates and Doctors of
the Church, being as they affirm, favorably inclined to that Faith; and some
of them already suspected to be secretly of that Persuasion. All our Prayers,
Ceremonies, Altars, Bowings, Vestments, and the other Decencies of Religious
Worship, are already Popish and Antichristian: and hereby they do not only
establish these Fears and Jealousies, Hinc spargere voces In vulgum ambiguas;
and quaerere conscius arma.
the Prologues to greater Mischiefs; but render all the Public Service of God
suspected, if not odious amongst the Populace.

AND I doubt not, but if a late Act of Parliament against Treasonable Language,
and some little Love they have for their Lives and Estates, did not repress
their Insolence, they would fix their Calumnies and Slanders upon the Persons
of the highest Character in the Nation: And it is neither Duty nor Allegiance
nor Modesty, but fear and self-love which does prohibit them from proceeding so
high.

NOW to my apprehension there is nothing does more plainly manifest the Vanity
of these Fears and Jealousies (and that they have another Design in dispersing
them abroad) than the use which they constantly employ them in. And that is
this:

THEY find by certain Experience, that to accuse any Persons, or any parts of
our Worship of Superstition or Popery, is an Expedient that never yet failed to
render them contemptible and hated to the Multitude: which is a clear
Demonstration that the Universal Genius of these Nations is an Enemy to that
Persuasion. Nor will the Romish Religion ever recover any tolerable credit, so
long as the Cruelties of Queen Mary's Reign, the Spanish Invasion in Eighty
Eight, and those threatened Inhumanities, the Powder Treason, the Inquisition,
or the late horrid Rebellion and Massacre in Ireland, which influenced that in
England, are either remembered or feared. All which makes it strongly
improbable, That any Prince or Government, either in Church or State, (who must
of necessity consult their own interest in the quiet and welfare of their
People) should attempt to introduce that Religion, to which the People their
Subjects, of all Degrees and Conditions, discover such a general aversion, and
universal detestation; and which therefore must create infinite troubles and
most desperate Inconveniences.

AND if it be well considered, we shall find that the Jesuits, and all the
Romish Factors have not been able for this last Century, Some persons are
strangely mistaken, if the Concilium de propaganda fide at Rome has not been
very helpful in setting those Divisions amongst us; for they know well enough
what that means, Divide and Impera, which employment these Dissenters take out
of their hands, as being the greater Artists in this Mystery of Iniquity.
so effectually to serve the interest of their own Affairs, as these Persons
have done; and if the Papists have made many or considerable Proselytes,
possibly they owe them to those Divisions which these men have made in our
Church, and not to any strength of Arguments they are able to produce, to
convince them of any Errouts either in our Doctrine or Discipline. And though
he must be a great Stranger in the Romish Transactions, who is ignorant how
great Dissentions, Heats, and Animosities are amongst the Religious of their
several Orders; and how great differences even about their main Question of
Transubstantiation, there are amongst their Doctors; nay how great Dissentions
have been amongst the Popes themselves, notwithstanding their pretended
Infallibility: yet the great Motive they make use of to induce any person to
return to the Faith and Obedience of the Church of Rome, is the strange
Discords and Divisions which are amongst us, and the great Unity which is (as
they falsely boast) only to be found amongst them; which Unity they urge as an
infallible Mark of the true Church.

BUT as I believe the Presbyterian, or any other Dissenter, has no real Design
or Intention to oblige the Church of Rome, though there is no doubt to be made,
but that by their Divisions they do extremely advance the Roman Interest and
Affairs; so I am satisfied that their aim is only to amuse us, and please the
People, till such time as they have made their Party strong enough against the
Church of England, of which they are in reality more afraid, than they are
either of the Pope or Turk, and could they but once come to be uppermost, and
have the power of the Sword, they would be so far from being afraid of St.
Peter's double Dagger, that if the Pope did not civilly leave them to the
management of their own Affairs, they would hazard to make the triple Diadem
shake; and I know they have strong hopes to destroy the Kingdom of Antichrist,
which when they had finished at home, they might have a temptation, having an
easier passage through the Streights, than Hannibal had over the Alps, to
invade Peter's Patrimony, and burn the great Whore of Babylon with fire, and
fulfill all the Prophecies in the Revelations, without the assistance of Kings,
though there it is said that they shall do it.

NOW if any persons will be so adventurous to follow me, I will endeavor to
lead them through their subterranean* Passages, and show their Contrivances,
and their secret Mines and Magazines of that white Powder, which though it
makes no noise, yet is not a whit less dangerous than that for which we
celebrate the fifth day of November; and which will at one blow overturn all*
Root and Branch of Liturgy, Episcopacy, Monarchy, and Liberty.

CHAP. III. An Account of the Heads of these Factions amongst us, from whence
we may conjecture what their Intentions are: Of their way of Education in the
Times of the late Rebellion, in the Universities, or in the Army. Of their
Lay-Teachers, and Shop-Doctors; how they came by their Gifts and Talent in
Preaching; the Advantages they made of Religion in their Trades; the
Employments they had under the Usurping Governments; the Encouragement they had
to invade the Pulpit: The desire they have of an alteration in the present
Government, to recover their former Power and Profit. The great unfitness of
these men to officiate in the Church, who are guilty of Sacriledg, Murder, and
Perjury.
LET us come therefore to take a survey of their Persons: from thence we will
proceed to their Principles; which will quickly lead us to the consideration of
their Practices.

AS to their Persons, we must consider them as that pleasant fellow divided the
World, into two parts, one of which was born to cheat the other; or according
to the more customary and familiar method; we must divide them into the Heads
and Body: for by the Way I must tell you, that these Factions have one
remarkable Qualification of a Monster, that to one Body there are many Heads;
all challenging Equality, though at the same time every one of them aims at
Priority. The Body being for the most composed of those who are deceived, I
shall not concern my self with them, as the Principal Subjects of this
Discourse: for if at any time, one of this Body advances so far as to be able
to deceive others, that Member presently starts up to be a Head. It Is these
Heads and their Hands that we have just reason to suspect and to be afraid of,
and with these therefore I chiefly intend to deal.

THESE Heads must likewise be subdivided (which is natural to them) into two
Classes; which Word will please some of them, though it may be the distinction
will not: They are either Scholasticks, or Laics, Literate, or Ignorant Heads.
The Scholasticks are such as either had their Education in one of the
Universities, or in the Army-Colledge, during the late precious times, when the
Saints bore the sway, and ruled these Nations with a Rod of Iron, viz. the
Sword: and with that Iron-Scepter broke their Enemies in pieces like a Potters
Vessel.

IF they are such as sucked the Breasts of either of the Universities, it is odds
but they are some of those who were nursed up immediately after their poor
Mothers had most outragiously been abused; when little nourishment was to be
drawn from them, that was not mixed with Blood; or however with some of that
Physic which the Mountebanks of the Age gave them, to recover that Health
which they had first taken from them: and it is well enough known that the
Virtue of the Medicine will pass through the Mother to the Child. This Physic
was their Pan-pharmacon, called the Solemn League and Covenant. Which was
afterward corrected with a Pill, called the Engagement to be true to the
Government, without a King or House of Peers: and the Dregs or these poisonous
and ill-prepared Medicines, stick as close to these men as their very Natures:
so that without the danger of being thought a Conjurer, it is easy to guess
what they are, and what they would be at? I Will lay my life on it they love the
Covenant and the dear Good old Cause, a great deal better than a Prince or a
Prelate; without which they have sworn to live; and whose utter Extirpation
(with The Ceremony of their taking the Covenant, by which it appears they are
not against all Ceremonies.
hands lift up to Heaven) they have so solemnly sworn and vowed: and their
Consciences are so infinitely tender, that they would not break their Oaths, to
gain the whole World (no more than Herod would do his) though never so impious
and unlawful. And yet these very Men some them, both Clergy and Laics, made
no difficulty in taking those detestable Oaths, to cancel all their former
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and Canonical Obedience, which they had so
often, as they made their Superiors believe, ex animo taken and sworn.

THEIR Brethren of the Armies Education, are indeed their sworn Brethren,
Simeon and Levi: it may be not altogether so well verst in Practical, but
Knockers in Polemical Divinity; they can pray two hours upon the Drum's head,
make as loud a noise as that when it is highest brac't; and it may be are as
empty too. These men can fire a Pistol in the Face of a Prince: can exercise a
Troop, both in Martial Discipline and Rebellion: These are spiritual Draggoons,
and can serve either as Horse or Foot. These were such, who for their Eminent
Gifts and Services, were diverse of them possessed of the fair Demesnes of the
Orthodox Clergy, and at his Majesty's late happy Restoration were forced to
quit both their Military Dioceses and good Livings: and no wonder then if some
of them out of necessity, and for a Livelihood; others out of Revenge, do now
persecute those Persons and that Way with their utmost Hatred, against which
they once fought, or at least encouraged others to fight, so heartily and
successfully. And these are their Antesignani of the first Rate, or rather
(...), The Sons of Thunder.

AND lest this precious Generation of men should perish, (for they are not
Immortal) the breeding of the Universities being corrupted with Surplices and
Subscriptions; some persons are so indiscreet as to commit a Son or Nephew to
their Tuition; or they pick up some hopeful young man (as they call him) whom
they educate in their Doctrines and Discipline: and thus take care that the
succession may be secured and propagated.

AFTER these come the Laics, Illiterate or Ignorant Heads; such as are merely
Mechanics: Of these some are such as were in actual Arms against their late
lawful Sovereign; and having run away from the more painful and honest Trades
in which their Parents or Masters gave them Education, in the Rebel Army
learnt the better Trades of War and Saintship, which at that time were
inseparably linkt together. Others of them are such whose courage it may be was
not so great, as to endure the sight of a naked Sword, the clashing of Armor,
the noise of the Cannon, or the other Terrors of War: but having the gainful
Employs of Sequestrators, Decimators, or Country Committee Men, or some
dependence on them, staid zealously at home to pray for those who were
courageously fighting the Lords Battles against the Mighty abroad: and by their
Rapine and Oppression, making long Prayers and devouring those Widows Houses,
whom their Companions murdering Swords had made such, in the first place to
make Provision for themselves, and in the next for their Confederates, who were
to bear the Heat and Burden of the Day.

These Fellows were great frequenters of Sermons, those things then called
Exercises; which indeed were very violent, and made such as used them sweat,
whilst they set their Lungs to sale, from the Pulpit to encourage Sedition and
justify Rebellion: To these Meetings, if they could write and read, to make
their Zeal the more observable, they never went without the necessary Utensils
of Pen, Ink, and a large Pocket writing-Book, which was then the high Mode of
the Religious and Godly. With such scraps of holy Nonsense as they there picked
up, they charitably feasted the Neighborhood; and after many vain Repetitions
of such fragments of their Collections to their own Families, and whoever else
would come to hear them, persuaded of their strange Gifts and Abilities, and
encouraged by the frequent flatteries and admiration of others, whose judgment
was of the same Standard with their own, they came at last to set up for
themselves, and in a little time to despise their Masters.

NOW and then you should have a Cobbler venture beyond his Last, a Chandler
finding out new Lights, a Grocer retailing Religion, a Blacksmith with a hot
spark of Zeal in his throat hammering out Hobnails and Heresy, or a
pragmatical Apothecary prating according to the Proverb. This Crew of
Shop-Divines, animated by the prevailing licentiousness of the Times, their
Ignorance and Impudence, with the help of some seditious Books, and an English
Bible, (which for want of understanding the Original they wrest, as all
unlearned and unstable men do the Scriptures, to their own sensne, fancy, and
damnation) launch forth boldly into the depths of Divinity, to become Fishers
for Men and Money: and with as much confidence as if they had the same
Commission from our great Lord and Master, Luke 5.6. Act. 2.41.
which his Disciples had to take the miraculous draught of Fishes or of Men.

NOR were the Advantages and Returns which they made in this Spiritual
Traffic, so mean or inconsiderable, but that still they did encourage new
Adventurers in the Trade; and also paid the first bold Undertakers sufficiently
for their pains. Such a man was then accounted a Confiding Man; that is, he was
fit for the use of the State, in the necessary and pious Employments of Rapine,
Sacriledg, and premeditated Murder; and hereby (which one would think very
strange) they got the Reputation of sober and conscientious men, just and
honest in their Dealings, which was no small step to many Customers, and by
light Gains and quick Returns to make a heavy Purse for themselves; though I
doubt not but they made many heavy Hearts and light Purses for other men; viz.
the truly Loyal Subjects, who for no other Crime were called Delinquents and
Malignants, and were accordingly treated in their Persons and Estates, as the
most notorious Malefactors, by these honest godly men: who for these
serviceable Cruelties and ill-gotten riches, came to be feared by all,
respected by many, though loved by few. And it was no uncustomary thing, to see
one of these pragmatical Peasants with his high shoes and Hobnails, in greater
Authority than the Right Worshipful, or it may be the Right Honorable of his
Parish. So great gain was the Godliness of those times, that it is no Miracle
if they long and breath so much to see those Gospel-Days again.

BUT lest I should be thought a little unkind in giving them the distinguishing
Character of ignorant Heads; though I could produce many Instances, one or two
shall suffice to make it appear that I am not injurious, but civil to them, in
concealing so many of their follies as I am able to publish.

ONE of these proud and insolent Ignoramus's being urged to pay some respect to
his Superiors, from the Example of St. Paul, who complemented the Roman
Governor with that respectful Address of most Noble Festus; found out this
cunning Evasion for his unmannerly Religion, that for ought he knew Most Noble
was the Deputies Christian Name.

ANOTHER of the same form, was so childishly ignorant, even in the Common
Sentiments of Nature, as to put the Question whether it was the same Moon, at
the place where he dwelt, as was in other places? and to admire her kindness
for traveling with him all one Evening; going if he went, and standing still
if he did so, to wait upon this younger Brother of Endymion. Nay so strangely
silly was this Animal, as by a pleasant conceited Gentleman, (who did it with
abundance of personated gravity and plausible Artifice) to be persuaded out of
his Christian Name: and yet this Fopp would swagger about Predestination and
Election as boldly as the tallest Doctor of the Tribe. And though I make no
question, but a great many of them may have far more natural cunning; not many
of them have much more Learning: Since I know it is not now to be hoped for by
a Miracle, and I am sure they are far enough out of the Road, and advantages of
obtaining it any other Way.

I will not say it is impossible, but I dare say it is very difficult to find a
Head of any faction or separation, who either was not bred up for some time, a
few days at least for the Credit on it, in one of the Universities, or one of
those men's Pupils who were educated in the times of Rebellion; when a Month
made any man of Gifts (for it was no matter for Parts) a Master of the Arts of
praying Extempore, and Preaching Pindariques; a Year was sufficient to proceed
to the Grace of Doctor; or by what was then called Grace to make him fit to do
the Work of one of their Evangelists or Apostles, and qualify him to preach
that Gospel which was able to convert Christians to Paganism, or something
worse. Or else generally you shall find them such who have been Reverend
Spiritual Curiassiers, or Chaplains to some of the Rebel Cohorts, or a Disciple
to some of them. A Sequestrator, Committee-man, or related to, and dependant on
them. A Favorite to some of the great and leading Men of those times, or
however acquainted with them, or some of those other sorts of ignorant,
conceited impertinent Mechanics; and take the Herring out of which Barrel you
please, for they are all of a price.

NOW, do not these look like men fit to be entrusted with the Management of the
Public Affairs of the Church, and the conduct of Souls to Heaven? of whom
some were Actors, most of them Abettors in all those abominable Sacriledges,
those horrible Depredations, and that Infamous Murder of the best of Princes,
the Lords Anointed, and their Lawful Sovereign; to whom they all owed and had
many of them sworn Faith and Allegiance, and have thereby added Perjury to the
rest of their Abominable Crimes.

WERE not these things matters of Fact and so notoriously known, that they must
have Faces of Brass to deny them, the Charge would be most uncharitably
scandalous: but I desire no other Testimony than that of their own tender
Consciences, and of all the World that knows them, to evidence the Truth as
well as Greatness of their Crimes.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ways whereby they decoy others to be of their Persuasion. Of
the great pretensions they make to Zeal and Holiness. Of the great Veneration
they seem to have for the Scriptures, when yet they are directly against them.
Instanced in two Positive Commands, to obey Magistrates in the State, and those
that have the Rule over them in the Church. The unreasonableness of the Pleas
they make for their disobedience, which if allowed must take away all the Power
of Superiors, and cancel all the Duty of Inferiors. The Impotency of that
Plea of expecting express Scripture as the only Warrant for all our Actions.
The unpracticableness of it shown in a familiar and very possible Instance.
IT is some kind of Miracle, that there should be such ill Men, and yet such
good and glorious Pretenses; but it is a far greater, that after all this, they
should be able to gain Proselytes, be followed, admired, countenanced and
esteemed almost to Adoration, by so many Persons. Our next Discovery must
therefore be, By what Arts and Methods they purchase that Reputation in the
World; and how they come to make so many Disciples.

HAD some Ages past over since the late Dismal Revolutions, one might imagine
such specious pretenses might prevail again, and the concealed mischief pass
undiscovered: But the Blood being yet scarce dry upon the Sand where they
acted the Real Tragedy, the Scars of those intestine Wounds which they gave
both Church and State being still visible and apparent, and the Ashes of our
former Fires so lately quenched, that they do not only still smoke, but are full
of hot and glowing Embers: one can scarcely tell how to judge otherways, but
that those Persons who do so industriously blow them up, and supply them with
the same combustible Materials, must be very desirous to re-kindle those
devouring Flames; and that a great part of those who are the Countenancers and
followers of these Men and their Persuasions, must have a Design to repeat over
again those Horrid Villainies, which were contrived either by the same Persons,
or at least such as were of the same Leaven; and carried on by the same Methods
and gradual Progressions, the very same pretenses of Conscience, Religion and
Reformation, with which now these present Dissenters act.

YET I dare not believe of so many as seem to love or like them, that the
greatest part would rejoice to see the Confusion and Desolation of their Native
Country: and I would be unwilling to fix that Design upon several, who I am
confident are Innocent of it. Nor do I think, that all the whole Party are
managed by Interest, or guilty of Hypocrisy: I am clearly of another Judgment;
and do believe it is a want of ability or means to discover those Dangers which
are closely concealed from them by the cunning Ringleaders of Faction, which
is the true Reason why they do so much admire and adore the fair outside and
specious appearances of these Men; who are like those (...), St. Luke s. 11. v.
44.
those dangerous vaults under the Painted Sepulchers: at whose outward Beauty
and Garniture whilst Men do with wonder gaze, they are not aware of the
Dangers of their inward hollowness, till they are irrecoverably fallen into it.

THERE is no question, but Goodness and Piety do command an Universal Love and
Veneration: insomuch that even those persons whose constant Debaucheries
declare them open Enemies to all Virtue, cannot yet forbear to pay a secret
Homage to those Men with whom they see her dwell. And this is the Lure which
these cunning Falconers know so well how to manage; and by it to reclaim the
greatest Haggards. But it is but a Lure, and would they well consider, when
they have with so much eagerness stoopt upon it, that it is only a few Gay
Feathers, and not a real Quarry, they would not so tamely take the Hood, and
give themselves up to that blind Faith and Obedience which is expected from
them.

I would willingly believe, that it is not the Wills, but the Understandings of
these Men that are to blame: and as I desire it were, so I should extremely
rejoice to be convinced that their Piety were real: But I shall never be
capable of entertaining the Persuasion, That any Person can truly Fear God, who
does not Honor the King: or that he can be a good Christian, so long as he
continues to be an ill Man. Nor can I be brought to believe, that he is a Child
of God, and loves God as he ought to do, who hates his Brother; unless they can
convince me that it is not Canonical Scripture which tells me, In this the
Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. And I am
very well satisfied, that it is no Work of Righteousness to refuse to obey God
in those lawful Magistrates and Ministers who arc of his especial appointment,
and his Vicegerents and Representatives: and to whom therefore he commands all
Obedience and Subjection should be given.

DID they lie under the hard Circumstances of invincible Ignorance of their
Duty, they would deserve Pity and Pardon both from God and Men: but being pressed
on all sides with such clear and irresistible Arguments from undeniable
Scripture, Law, and Reason, that they owe all Duty to their Sovereign, and all
Obedience to their Superiors in the Church; there is no color or pretext left
them, under which they can shelter themselves from the unavoidable guilt of
wilful Disloyalty, and Obstinate Schism.

I have often wondered to hear with what Veneration they will speak of the Holy
Scriptures; and to see how constantly they retreat to them as the most
impregnable Fortress for the Defense of their Opinions and Persuasions: how
peremptorily and frequently they appeal to them as the only indifferent Judges
and Arbiters of all Controversies and Differences in Religion: how zealously
and earnestly they plye the People with the great Duty of searching the
Scriptures, for in them they have Eternal Life: St. Joh. c. 5. v. 3^.
and yet all the World cannot persuade them either to believe or hear those
Scriptures, though speaking never so plainly against their Erroneous Practices.

I know no Commands more Positive than what our blessed Lord himself and the
Apostles of our Lord have given for their Obedience to Kings, even Heathen
Kings; St. Mar^ c. 12. v. 1.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as unto God the things
that are Gods. And let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 13. v.
1.
says St. Paul. And he enforces the Command upon them with the most dreadful
of all Penalties; Not imprisonment of their Bodies, confiscation of their
Goods, or Death (in all which they pretend to glory, and be more than
Conquerors): but with Damnation, of which (if they suffer it) they will have no
cause to Boast. And as if he had foreseen what shield they would oppose against
such a mighty Blow as comes from the allpowerful Arm of Divine Vengeance; he
takes away even that Defense, and tells them, it is a folly to pretend the
Obstacle of Conscience, since they must needs be subject not only for The word
(...) signifies Poena, vindicta, as well ac Ira. So. Romans c 3. v. 11. Is God
unjust ((...)) who takes vengeance?
Wrath, or fear of Punishment, but also for Conscience sake.

NOR is the other Command less plain and positive. Obey them that have the Rule
ever you; and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give an account. That there are such Persons who have a just Authority
over them, by the Fundamental Laws of the Land, is matter of undeniable Fact,
and these very Men having given their co^^^^t to those Laws, by their free
Representatives in Parliament, stand bound to the observance of them by their
own Act and Deed. Which manifestly shows the unreasonableness of their
disobedience. But further, that these Governors of the Church have that
Authority vested in them and derived upon them, by a continued succession from
Christ and his Apostles, is a Truth, which though they may stoutly deny; yet
they will never be able with all their skill to disprove, without a new Index
Expurgatorius: and such a one as must purge not only all the writings of the
Ancient Fathers, all the Records of time, all the Acts of the allowed General
Councils, but even the Bible, or at least some part of it out of the World.

ALL that they say for themselves to palliate such Notorious Disobedience, is,
That they ought to obey God rather than Men, which is undoubtedly true and
necessary in all such cases, as that for which it was first urged; where the
Commands of Men are contrary to the Express Laws and Positive Will of God: But
a most impertinent and frivolous Evasion, where the Impositions of Men are
either agreeable to the Will of God; or by being by him left altogether
undetermined, are therefore absolutely in the Power of his Deputies, the lawful
Magistrates to determine, this way or that way, as to them shall seem most
expedient. And therefore the Apostle commands, 1 Pet. 2. cap. ver. 13, to 18.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake.

SOMETIMES they will tell us (especially those whole Reason convinces them of
the impotency of the former Plea) that they are obedient so far as the
Impositions are lawful: that is, warranted from the Express Word of God, which
is amongst all Dissenters the most Universal Sanctuary, where their
Disobedience seeks, and, as they think, finds a most certain Refuge and sure
Protection.

LET them now show us, for the proof of this new Tenent, any one place of
Scripture, where all Obedience is limited only to what is expressly commanded in
the holy Canon. If they can, they have better Eyes than all the rest of the
World; and if they cannot, why do they destroy their Maxim by their own
Practice, by yielding Obedience to a Doctrine nowhere warranted by express
Words or Commands of Scripture? and this impregnable Fortification, in which
they think their Disobedience so securely retrenched, will, like the Walls of
Jericho, fall flat in an Instant, if we consider,

FIRST, That the Members of the Church owed all Obedience to their lawful
Superiors, both in Church and State, before some parts of the Scripture were
committed to writing; and long before they were collected into one Volume, and
so communicated to the dispersed Church. Now, before they were either written
or published, they could be no Rule for their Obedience; which, nevertheless,
was a Duty which they were obliged to perform, both as Men and Christians.

SECONDLY, If we consider, That, though the Scriptures are sufficiently able to
make the Man of God wise unto Salvation, in point of Faith and Doctrine; yet
they are altogether silent, as to the particulars of Discipline and Government.
Some general Rules are laid down; as, That every thing must be done with
Decency and in Order: 1 Cor. c. 14. v. 26, 40.
Now the Question is, what is Decent? what Orderly? and what Edifying? The
Scriptures cannot be the Arbiters of what they leave undetermined, nay, not so
much as mentioned: Who must then be Judges? Surely those Powers, and that
Authority, which are ordained of God; and established by the Fundamental Laws
and Constitutions of our Nation: and not these Men, nor indeed any private
Persons; who can show us neither Mission nor Commission, Succession nor any
other Authority, more than they may have obtained by Usurpation, to be Judges
over the Church of God. And their own Practice, when they were in Power, shows
the unreasonableness of this Plea; since what they deny to others, they did
then arrogantly challenge to themselves; viz. To determine the Times, and Modes
of Worship: and in their worthy Directory they did impose many things not
expressly commanded in Scripture, nor so much as encouraged by any ancient Usage
or Custom in the Church of Christ. Nay, the very making, and imposing such a
Directory, was by this Rule absolutely unlawful, as being nowhere commanded in
the Word of God. And what were all their Exercises, public and private Fasts,
and days of Thanksgiving for their prosperous Wickedness, but Times of Worship,
Prosperum scelus virtus vocatur.
(I dare not say of God) of their own, not the Scriptures appointment? So that
it makes it very suspicious, that they are of the same spirit with Diotrephes;
and that their prating with such malicious words, against their Lawful
Superiors, 3 S. John v. 9.
proceeds from that Ambitious Love which they have to Pre-eminence themselves,
which gives them such an aversion to those Humilities and due Submissions which
they owe to others.

THIRDLY, the impotency of this Evasion will most fully appear, if we consider
the Nature of Obedience, which is hereby utterly destroyed: for the very
Essence of Obedience does consist (not in disputing the lawfulness of the
Commands, but) in a willing and ready putting those Commands in Executions;
provided they are such as are not directly contrary to the plainly understood
and Positive revealed Will of God; or to the Universal and Common Laws and
Dictates of Nature and Nations; which none of those, to which Dissenters are
disobedient, can be proved to be. And the Subject of all Obedience, either to
the Laws of God or Man, usually consists in such things as are expedient to be
done in order to the public good, rather than agreeable to our inclinations,
which (though under the specious Name of Conscience) if they may be permitted
to be Judges, will emancipate all Mankind, and set them free from that Duty
which they owe to their Superiors: and it would be no more but pleading this
Corban against whatsoever is expected from them, and all the Obligation to Duty
is* immediately canceled. And I would gladly be satisfied, if this Doctrine
were Universally received and put in Practice, Deus fecit omnia pondere and
mensura, Sap. c. 11. v. 20, and therefore saw that every thing was veery good,
Genesis 1.31.
whether it would not quickly turn the whole World upside down, and in a few
Moments destroy that Beautiful Order, of which Almighty God was the Primitive
Author in Nature; and as St. Paul tells us, is no less in the Church? for God
is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints; and that Peace is never to be hoped for, had or enjoyed, without Order,
and Obedience to those Decencies which by a Lawful Authority are commanded, and
which therefore the same Apostle absolutely and universally enjoins: Let all
things be done decently and in order.

BUT to show the impracticableness of this Opinion in the common concerns of
Life, and much more therefore in the Religious, we will suppose that one of
these precious Men has Children and Servants, whom he has educated in the fear
of the Lord and instructed in the Way of Righteousness according to his own
Principles. He calls for his Son, and tells him, Son, such a Man owes me a
considerable sum of Money, this is the day for payment, pray go and receive
it for me, to supply my present urgent occasions. But replies the Son, Sir, how
do I know whether this be a just Debt? and unless I be satisfied in Conscience
that it is so, I dare neither demand nor receive it of him. Oh Son, says the
Father, Remember your Duty, and the Commandment, Honor thy Father, etc. and
from that Text he preaches him a long Lecture of the Necessity of Obedience,
and the many advantages both Temporal and Eternal which do attend it. Sir,
answers the Son, All this is true, and I am Obedient to you, and Honor you, so
far as the Scripture warrants me; but I can find no express Command in the Word
of God, for this you would have me to do; and unless I can, my Conscience will
not give me leave; for I must obey that and God rather than Man. Having such
ill success with his Son, whom he has made so good a fencer as to beat him at
his own Weapon; he betakes him to his servant, who has been sufficiently taught
that he must not be an Eye-servant, but serve with singleness of Heart as unto
the Lord: Pray, says he to him, go to my Grounds, and take up such a Horse,
carry him to the Fair or Market and sell him, but not under such a Price. Oh
Sir, answers the scrupulous and conscientious Servant, there is to be a Godly
Meeting at such a place, and I must go to hear such a Precious Man, who teaches
the most feeling, soul-saving, heartbreaking, sin-destroying Truths. But
besides, I know not whether the Horse be worth so much, or whether he is sound
Wind and Limb? and I am afraid lest I should cheat or overreach my Neighbor;
and indeed I dare not do it, for I would not wrong my Conscience to gain the
whole world, and lose my own precious Soul. So that, as far as I see, if what
he calls his Conscience does but suggest it, the Man will be the Master. And
this Liberty of Conscience is a most excellent thing to cancel all such
Contracts as Indentures, and if it were but as generally received and put in
practice, as it is preached in London, the Chamberlain of the City would be
eased of a great trouble: and Conscience would make more Freemen in an Hour,
than he can do in seven Years. It were endlese to recount all the Instances of
this Nature which might be brought, to show the unreasonableness,
ridiculousness, and dangerous folly of maintaining this Doctrine.

AS for that subtle piece of Nonsense of satisfying that Duty which they owe
to Authority, by Suffering, which they call Passive Obedience, I think it is
out of countenance already; or if it be not, I think it may very well blush,
when they rank themselves amongst Thieves, Murderers, the damned in Hell, and
the Devils themselves, all which are passively obedient to the Laws of God and
Men: that is, they suffer the just Punishments of their Disobedience to both.

THIS may appear a large Digression, and not much to the purpose of the
Intention of these Papers: But I thought I could not do these men justice, if
after the Character of their Persons, I did not endeavor to take away, from
them this Feather, with which they play so frequently, and tickle both their
own Mouths, and the Ears of others.

CHAP. V. Of the several Arts they use to gain Love, Credit, Esteem, and
Veneration. Of their pretenses to Exemplary Piety in their Actions, Words,
Looks, Gestures, Habits. Of the way of their maintenance by Free Will
Offerings, the Advantages they have thereby over the Clergy of the Church; it
eases them of a great trouble, and preserves the love of their Auditors, who
liket his Gospel-way, where they may at their pleasure withdraw their Bounty,
it secures them from the Penal Laws. Of the Advantage they make of Punishment,
by calling it Persecution; of their seeming Constancy in suffering for what
they call Conscience; hereby they gain love, pity, and money: They make this
Persecution an infallible Mark of the trite Church; the use they make of it, to
render the Government odious to the People, and to dispose them by degrees to
endeavor the alteration of the present, which they call Reformation. The same
Arts made use of to promote the late Rebellion.
LET us now examine by what Arts and Arguments they proceed with so much
success in the Returns they make of their Traffic for Reputation, Money, and
Disciples, and to pass for such precious godly men, and the only Soul-savers,
both in their Opinion, and the Thoughts of others, who follow them in
Multitudes.

WE must therefore understand, that what by the In-comes of the late Times,
when the Spoils of the Wicked, and the Riches of the Nation ran through their
Channels; and what by the present liberal Contributions of the Brotherhood; they
have as little Necessity as Opportunity to enrich themselves by impoverishing
others. What they did before, is both by Time and the surpassing Generasity of
their most gracious Prince, buried in Oblivion: So that now they have nothing
to do, but to promote the Good Cause and God's Glory; for I dare engage, that
Restitution of any thing formerly obtained by unlawful Means, is no part of
their Religion, nor ever raised the least scruple in the tenderest of their
Consciences.

THEY know well enough, that Example is more prevalent and convincing than all
the Precepts and Arguments in the world; and that he that would draw another to
be of his Persuasion, must first persuade him to believe that he is good, and
has a great love and tenderness for his concerns and eternal Welfare: And
herein lies their Excellency. It is their greatest care and constant endeavor,
to manage their Lives and Actions with so much cunning and artifice, that
Detraction and Envy shall have much to do with all their curiosity, to find out
any thing in the outside and visible part of their Lives whereof to accuse
them, excepting for their disobedience to Government; which though it be
unfledged Rebellion in the shell, yet they are so far from esteeming it
criminal or sinful, that therein consists the only differencing part of their
Religion from other Men. And for my part, I will in displaying this their
Masterpiece, and whatever else concerns them, do them all the justice and
reason they can deserve.

THAT they may therefore appear to be the most upright Men in their generation,
they are not only violent in decrying Sin in others, especially great and
scandalous, common and customary sins, Intemperance, and that Debauchery under
which the Nation groans; but they are all extremely vigilant over themselves:
most prudent and dexterous not only in avoiding the sins, but even the
occasions which may lead them into any disorders: And therefore, though they
appear wonderful courteous, and full of obliging smiles, yet they will rarely
converse much or long with any Company: and always choose to leave behind them
the great desire of their further conversation, rather than to importune and
nauseate with a tedious visit; coming to see you as a Physician for your Soul;
and staying, as if they had more Patients in their Round, and it may be only
for the Fee. Nor will they so much as come in any place where there may be
occasion or suspicion of Scandal or expense, unless in case of necessity, or in
their travels upon the road: they are as scrupulous of a Tavern or public
House as a Mohammedan, who by his great Prophet is forbidden the use of Wine. If
at any time they fall in accidentally with idle or extravagant Persons; they
will either by their silence or morose severity escape their persecutions; and
by a discreet Incomplaisance avoid those dangers and inconveniences, which hot
Discourses and hard Drinking precipitate so many Men into.

I do not charge them with these things as matters of guilt, and if these were
their only crimes, they were the most excellent Persons of the World: And
possibly the want of this necessary Circumspection and cautelous Prudence in
some of those who call themselves Sons of the Church, have done her the
greatest unkindnesses; and have given such advantages to her enemies, as they
could not have hoped for from all their own industrious malice and subtilest
contrivance: I wish they would seriously consider of it, and in time reform
such of their Actions, as make their Persons infamous, render their Profession
contemptible, their way of Worship suspected, and their good endeavors in
other things fruitless and ineffectual.

BUT to proceed, their very looks are modeled and composed to a settled
gravity, and almost affected austerity: Their eyes and hands are in company
often lifted up to Heaven, as if they were taken up with holy meditations, or
devout Ejaculations. They are usually sparing of their Language, and when they
speak, it is with such a particular way of a treatable and sententious
deliberation, as affords them liberty to weigh every word, and strictly examine
it, before it passes the sally-port of their lips; which likewise adds to the
belief that it is the Spirit that gives them utterance in their Extempore
Prayer, when (contrary to that custom which most think is nature in them) they
pour out their words, which like Jacob and Esau struggle for the right of being
the firstborn, as we shall take notice hereafter. The greatest part of their
Discourse is about Religious affairs, the great concern of Souls, for which
they express an infinite care and tenderness. Sometimes they will with
passionate sighs and expressions bewail the wickedness and abominations of the
present Age; and that not without some poisonous hints against the miscarriages
which they will intimate are to be found amongst Persons of the greatest Rank
and Eminency, as influencing the rest of their Inferiors by Example: and whilst
it may be, they only pretend to pity them, they really endeavor to make them
odious. Their very Habits, lest they should seem inclined to Pride or Vanity,
are usually mean enough; and for certain so remote from the present a la mode,
especially the Canonical, as to appear rather approaching to Antic, if it will
but keep them warm, as they tell such as happen to take any notice of it, that
was the original intention of Apparel, and therefore all that they expect from
it.

THEY rarely concern themselves with secular affairs, their Revenues being the
Free Will Offerings of the People; which they quicken now and then with a
gracious Exhortation: To do good and communicate, to distribute to the
necessity of the Saints, with which Sacrifices they tell them God is well
pleased, and no doubt then, but they are: and hereby they receive a treble
advantage.

FIRST, They have a great convenience for privacy and retirement: which they
are not sparing to publish they do wholly spend, or the greatest part of it, in
Prayer, Meditation, and taking pains to provide Spiritual food for the Souls of
Men.

SECONDLY, Hereby they gain and preserve the kindness of their Auditors, who
are so far from grumbling at their way of Maintenance, that they look upon it
as the only Gospel-way: and seem never better pleased with themselves, than
when they have done an Action so meritorious, as they pretend to believe the
supplying of their wants and necessities is. Though possibly (which these Men
are not aware of) it is because they are not obliged by Law to the payment of
those voluntary stipends, but are at liberty to stop their hands when they
please; and lessen or enlarge their Bounty and Liberality accordingly as the
Teacher edifies them; that is, as either he flatters their Humors and Fancies
in public or private: Or if there happens any dislike or disagreement betwixt
them, they may wholly withdraw their Purses and Persons from him and his
Congregation, and betake themselves to another, as I have seen it my self, and
do not doubt but it very fr^quently happens. And there is no way so effectual
as this, to make the Clergy most mercenary, base, servile and mean-spirited, so
as not to dare to say or do any thing which may displease a good Benefactor,
for fear of losing both himself, his money, and their own Reputation; which of
necessity follows their being forsaken of any of their Hearers, who will be
sure to lay the blame of their Change upon the want of ability and
unedifyingness of the Teacher, whom they have for those Reasons left, and made
choice of a better.

THIRDLY, Hereby they many times avoid and escape the severities of the Penal
Laws in their Pecuniary Punishments; having no visible Estate to levy an
Estreat upon: and as they will not by any Authority be suspended ab Officio, so
they are sure they cannot a Beneficio. One of these Teachers meeting the
Constable, who came with a Warrant to levy twenty pounds, for his holding a
Conventicle, of which he was in due form of Law convicted; pleasantly told him,
he might take his Distress if he could find any thing; but yet, says he, I
would have you understand I do not complain of Poverty.

WERE they to receive their Maintenance, as the Clergy of England do, by the
ancient and established way of Tithes, as their Revenues would be nothing so
large, so they would have less time to spend in their Studies, and more hatred
and ill will amongst their Parishionees; for it has been observed, that some
men of great eminency for Piety, Parts, and Learning, have not yet been able by
all those Accomplishments, to purchase the love of their Parishes; For which
there could be no other Reason given, besides their honest Care to take their
own just Right and Maintenance, according to the direction and appointment of
the Laws.

AND possibly we need not seek any further for the Reason of the common
disrespect, or contempt of the Clergy: for they lie almost under an unavoidable
necessity of being either poor or hated: If they will permit either
overpowerful Greatness, or the universal Covetousness of the ordinary rank of
People, to defraud them of the greatest part of their little Revenues, they may
pass for good, quiet and peaceable men; but must certainly be poor and
necessitous: which will infallibly render them contemptible in the esteem of
the greatest part of the world, which will never leave the humor of paying
their Respects proportionably to the Quantum quisque nummorum habet in Arca, to
the greatness of Riches, and not of Virtue. And if the Clergy endeavors to
redress this, by having recourse to the Laws, for the recovery of their just
Rights, they shall assuredly gain the Character of troublesome, litigious, and
covetous persons, and shall not fail to be for these false imputations really
hated: For all which troubles and inconveniences they are obliged to the
Doctrine and Practice of these Dissenters, in unsetling the minds of the
Multitude in the late Times of Libertinism: All which they avoid likewise
themselves, and are considerable gainers by the bargain.

AND now, what Person that looks no further than these fair Appearances, but
must judge most advantageously of these men? And there are not many of their
Followers that will give themselves the trouble of a further Enquiry, or more
narnow Search and Examination. Nay I am persuaded, that hereby a great many of
them do commonly deceive themselves into a strong belief of their own sanctity:
And though they do openly avow (if not by their Doctrine, yet by their
Practice) and justify the blackest of all Crimes, Rebellion, which is as the
sin of Witchcraft; and that stubbornness, which is as Iniquity and Idolatry, of
which they so vehemently accuse others, yet all this is done for Conscience
sake; and that pretense can by a strange Chemistry, turn the greatest Sinners
into golden Saints, and the most horrid Impieties, Sacriledg and Murder, as
they would make us believe, into acceptable services to God Almighty.

THOUGH in reality after all this, they have made no greater advance, and it
may be are not yet better than the Pharisees of old, Acts 26.5.
whose Sect was the strictest among the Jews; they were as strongly persuaded
of their own sanctity; they would make as long Prayers, Mat. 23.14, 15.
and devour Widows Houses too: They were as industrious to save Souls, nay
would do more than most of these will adventure at, compass Sea as well as Land
to make a Proselite; and I fear with the same success as these men do. I say
they are not yet gotten altogether so far, nor are quite so innocent: For
amongst all the Crimes our blessed Savior accuses them of, and condemns them
for, and for which he denounces so many fearful Woes against them, I do not
find that ever he charges them with the Guilt, or so much as suspicion of
Rebellion against Caesar, or any of his Prefects; or yet with Disobedience to
the High Priest, who was then their Ecclesiastical Superior. Nay further, we
may well suppose, that as in their Tithing Mint, Annise, and Cummin; so they
were exact in their Duty to all these by the design they had to entrap the Holy
Jesus with that Question, whether it was lawful to give Tribute to Caesar or
not? they being beforehand satisfied in themselves that it was, and resolved if
he should deny it, to accuse him of a Crime which they were well assured would
condemn him.

NOR in truth are they arrived to any higher Pitch, than it is very possible
for a Heathen, by the mere strength of Nature to perform; and some of them went
as far in Morality, if we may believe the Histories of their Lives, as it is
possible for Humane Nature to go.

BUT further, to discover how great Masters they are in the Art of Converting
every thing to their advantage, and by all ways to gain love both to their
Persons and Persuasions: Even Punishment, the original design of which is to
make all Crimes odious, as they handle the matter it adds a Luster unto theirs.
They never fear or feel the deserved Penalties of the Laws, but both in public
and private, they cry out as men upon the Rack: and if for their commiting a
spoil in Gods Harvest, Justice does but take them by the Ears, with their
hideous outcries they call all the compassionate Herd to condole with their
sufferings; and this must be called a Time of Persecution, and the
suffering-days of the Saints. Now the very Word Persecution sounds so
heathenish and unlawful, that it is impossible but they should meet with
abundance of Pity; and that we know is both the Parent and the Child of Love.
And it is no wonder if they glory in these Tribulations, and patiently take the
spoiling of their Goods, if they can be found, which they are sure will be
restored by the Bountiful Pity of their Congregations sevenfold in this Life,
and in the World to come God knows what.

THAT great constancy of Mind with which they appear to suffer, they may well
show, when one hair of their Heads is not touched. Their frequent talking of
resisting unto Blood, which I much question, whether they would in Suffering;
as for Doing we may from former Experience take their Word; and their many and
vehement Exhortations to Constancy, begets in their followers an opinion, that
they are not at all inferior to the Martyrs of the Primitive Times, or those of
later Days: and that therefore they are in the right Way, because they are
persecuted by the Wicked; for such are all those, who are not new-cast in their
Mould. And this makes the People redouble their Love and their Bounty: knowing
that if he that gives but a Cup of cold Water shall not lose his Reward, theirs
shall be exceeding great and full of Glory. Hereby they are sure they are not
of the World, because the World hates them; for they make what they call
Persecution, an infallible sign of the true Church; which is so great an Error
and Mistake, that if it be admitted there can be none False; for undoubtedly
Philosophy has not been without its Martyrs, and there is no Religion of Pagan,
Jew, Turk, as well as Christian, but has in their sense suffered Persecution;
that is, have been opposed, condemned, and punished, by the Laws of some Times
and Places.

BUT they have another Design, and the Project does but too commonly succeed
according to their Wishes and Intentions: for they do not only hereby purchase
to themselves Love, Riches, Pity, and Reputation; but they likewise inspire a
secret Hatred into the People against all Magistrates, from the Commissary and
Official, to his most Reverend Grace; from the Countrey-Justice of the Peace to
Sacred Majesty it self.

AND I am the apter to believe this, because in common Discourse, from the
Highest to the Lowest of them, I could never yet hear any one of them speak
kindly either of the late Blessed King CHARLES the Martyr, or of His present
Majesty, excepting for the Act of Indemnity, or the last Indulgence and
Toleration: Whatever Reason they had for the one, I am sure they had sufficient
cause for the other; and had they any Remainders of good Nature, Ingenuity, or
Generosity, they would think all their Duty and Service too little to express
their sensibleness and gratitude for that one Gracious Act; whereby they enjoy
their Lives, Liberties and Estates, all which they had so absolutely forfeited.
And though they dare not call the Master of the House Beelzebub, yet for
certain his Domestiques shall meet with far coarser treatment: if they are not
such as are visibly inclined to be favorable unto them, but discharge their
Duty by putting the Law in execution against them; presently they are
Persecutors, Blood-Suckers, Neros, Enemies to God and all Good Men; which all
must be restrained to those of their Party, who only are Good and Godly.

FROM hence the People come to a dislike of their Governors and Government:
from thence they proceed to wish it were otherways; and by degrees grow at last
familiarly to entertain those dreadful and desperate Resolutions, if they have
Opportunity and Ability, to make what Alterations they think good, not only in
Religious but Civil Affairs; not only to depose but murder Kings, and
extirpate Episcopacy Root and Branch; and indeed to commit all Villainies and
Disorders. Nor will they stick at any thing, which they are pleased to varnish
over with the pretense, and only the name of Reformation.

THAT this is no false Accusation, or Fiction of my own Fears or Fancy, any
Person may be easily convinced; and it is no more but looking backward to the
Times preceding the Fatal Year 1641, and those that followed, till the Happy
1660, and it cannot be denied but that these are Real Truths: and that these
are the certain Trains and Trenches, in which the Undermining Spirit of
Phanaticism then did, and now does most dangerously work.

CHAP. VI. Of their Endeavors to insinuate themselves into the Favor of
Persons of Quality: And that notwithstanding their Flatteries, they are the
greatest Enemies to Gentry, Nobility, and Royal Dignity. Of the manner how they
creep into Populous Places, and the Arts they use to endear themselves to the
People, by putting them out of a good Opinion of their Lawful Minister. The
Reason of their settling in Market Towns or Populous Villages, where there is
not already some prevailing Sect. Tradesmen lovers of Reading, and have time to
peruse their poisonous Writings. Hereby, they propagate their way, the
Shopkeeper mingling and retailing their Doctrines amongst his other Wares: With
their design upon Corporations in future Elections of Parliaments.
HAVING by the forementioned Artifices, and the fair Appearance of Holiness
they carry in their Lives, insinuated themselves into the good Opinion of the
Many; who it may be have never considered, what is the end to which these ways
of Dissension and Separation must at last lead them; and for all their
searching the Scriptures, have either not found or not understood that place of
the wisest of Mortals, My Son, Prove. 2^.21, 22.
fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them that are given to
change; for their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? Notwithstanding which and many like commands, notwithstanding all
former experience, having assured themselves of the People, who believe them
equally with (if not above) the Scriptures; their next endeavors are to obtain
the Bon-Graces of some of more Eminent degree: and this they do by the most
servile of all Vices, and most dangerous of all flatteries; telling them, That
this will render them truly honorable in the sight of God; and that the
Kindness and Countenance they show to his People, his poor, despised,
persecuted Saints, and suffering-servants, will hereafter purchase for them an
exceeding and eternal weight and Crown of Glory. Were there no Temptation in
that Word; yet the Ambition of being Popular has had great and dangerous
Influences upon some Men's Spirits: And if once these Men find that Inclination
predominant, they will be sure to touch that String which makes the Music. And
this they do not out of any real kindness which they have for Nobility or
Gentry; but to gain Credit, Reputation and Strength to their Persons and Party.
For you must know it adds not a little as they think to their Esteem, to have
the Coroneted-Coach stand waiting at the door of the Meeting House, though it
may be all that State is only to attend upon my Ladies Zealous Woman.

BUT however they know these goodly Elms are a safe shelter against a Storm,
and strong Supporters for these Ivy's to creep upon: Which may be no unfit
Emblem for these men; who for all their pretended Humility, will at the last
overtop the tallest Tree, and having lived upon its juice and moisture by their
overkind Embraces, will infallibly impoverish and insensibly decay it. And were
the Government of Presbytery, or any other Model of Faction established in the
room of the present Episcopacy; not only the Dwarf-Elders, but even the very
Jews-Ear Mushrooms which spring from them, would have a greater Power in the
Government than the noblest Trees of the Forest, or it may be than the Royal
Oak: And the High and Mighty Ministers every one be more absolute and
infallible in his own Parish, than his Holiness of Rome in his Oraculous Chair.
And to show you that they have as little kindness for Coronets as for Crowns;
it is but stepping into a Countrey-Conventicle, and there you shall hear them
loud enough cajolling those Common People with, 1 Cor. c. 1. v. 26.
Not many wise Men after the Elesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called;
But God has chosen the Poor: St. Jam. c. 2. v. 5, 6, 7.
I say God has chosen; Mark that! Whom has he chosen, Beloved? Why? God has
chosen the Poor. Ah Friends! do not Creat Men By Taxes, Subsidies, Royal Aides,
Polls, Hearth-money, Fines, 12. d. 5s. 20. l. 100.l. etc.
Oppress you? do they not draw you before the Judgment-seats? do they not
blaspheme that Worthy Name by which you are called? in derision naming you the
Saints and the Godly; do they not call you Fanatics and Rebels? Nay do they
not say you are Hypocrites and Deceivers? -- And after this Rate the Speaker
goes on till he is almost out of all breath and sense, in this cunning Way of
Railing against all Nobility and Gentry; and putting the Common People into a
good Opinion of themselves; thereby teaching them to despise their Betters: an
Humor to which the English Nation are but too generally and naturally addicted
and inclined, without any such Encouragements or persuasive Arguments.

AND now there is but one thing to be done, before we bring them to the Pulpit,
where we shall fee them fit their Doctrines to their Designs, and accommodate
their Principles to their Practice.

YOU shall usually have them first Itinerant, to gain the greater acquaintance,
and discover their Booty, and the most advantageous Place for a Station: having
therefore in some Corporation, Market Town, or Populous Village, made an
Acquaintance, or got a Recommendation to some Olivarian Tradesman, or forty-one
Common-wealthsman, thither they make their Visits. The first thing they enquire
after, is concerning the Minister of the Place, what he is? and how the People
stand affected to him? Amongst other Discourse they will wonderfully pity the
great want of faithful and painful Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard; at Night
some of the Neighborhood, who are judged worthy and to make Disciples of, are
called in; the good man is desired to go to Duty with them, which he does,
after having first put out the Candle, either for good husbandry, or for fear
it should go out with a snuff before he has done; or it may be, lest it should
quench the Light of the Spirit, and in Charity I would think (did I not know
them better, and that they have little acquaintance with Modesty) to cover
those blushes which justly may discover themselves, when he is at a loss or run
aground upon a little Nonsense. He keeps them it may be an hour or two in
attention to his zealous Tautologies: and these Bastards of his own Brain he
fathers upon the Spirit of God. The hearty thanks of the House is returned him,
which is one return of his Prayers he always aims at; and the Gifts are admired
for his own, and he for them, which but just before were the extraordinary
Emanations and Gifts of the Spirit. Some gracious discourse passes, which with
much kindness, and promises of mutual endearings, begins the acquaintance, and
concludes the interview for this time.

IF the Parson of the place be a mild well-tempered man, and favorable in his
judgment to their Way and Opinions; or one who has been brought to a partial
Conformity, rather out of fear to lose his Living, than to keep his Conscience;
he is drawn into the Conspiracy against himself; and by entertaining them
kindly, shall certainly advance his own Ruin, in the loss of the love, good
opinion, or interest he before had amongst his Parishioners. But if he be a
good brisk or learned man, one who both preaches and practices Conformity,
sober and pious in his Life and Conversation; then all their Cunning is set on
work, to find out something that may alienate the hearts of his People from
him: For without this due preparation there is nothing to be done, no coming
there: And many times this proves no difficult Task; for there being so much of
Meum and Tuum between the Parson and his Parishioners, they there find a Breach
ready made by which they may boldly enter. But if that Correspondence be good;
yet something must be done, something must be found out against him. If he
Preach but once a day, and Catechize in the Afternoons, he is Lazy, Idle, a
mere Drone, and has not that care for precious and Immortal Souls as he ought
to have: if he Pray as the Canon directs, or in any set-form near unto it; he
is a Formalist, and has not the Spirit of God. A mere Moral Man. But if he be a
great opposer of them, and their pernicious, dangerous, seditious ways and
Doctrines, he is a Man of a Persecuting Spirit, which is utterly contrary to
the Gospel; and that they are sure will do.

BUT if it hrppens either that the Minister be not a Man of Parts, or that he
be vicious in his Life, then they have little to do; and their Conquest is like
Caesar''s, with a Veni, vidi, vici, They come, they see, and overcome in an
instant: and no sooner can they display their Victorious Ensigns, but the
People fall unto them, Psalm. 73. v. 10. Transla. Eccles.
and thereout suck they no small Advantage; and their own Minister having
before been justly despised for his Ignorance and scandalousness, there will
need little trouble or pains to render him truly contemptible, and hated
amongst them.

AND here our Boanerges is, it may be, courted to fix; which, after having made
some difficulty to do, only to secure to himself the Contributions, and some
other conveniences, he will not fail to do, unless he have a call to some more
advantageous Place. Provided always it be a place Rich and Populous, and not
already taken up with fame other prevailing Sect and Faction; which plainly
shows their Design is to supplant the present Church, more than to propagate
that which they call Truth: otherwise they might as well endeavor to convert
them from their Errors, as the Churchmen from their Loyalty and Obedience,
which is all they do, or aim to do: And observe it where you will, you shall
never see them settle in a small or poor Village: It may be those People have
no Souls to save, or they are not worth the saying, or they must travail and
take pains for it? and since they cannot pay, must not have Salvation brought
home to their Houses. I have known one who for several Years has lived in a
Place well-stockt with a prevailing Sect, and where the Parson gave him
advantage enough, who yet never had any Congregation gathered there, but plied
every Lord's Day, and sometimes in the Weekdays, at a Market Town some Miles
distant; and by his pious endeavors, and painful preaching brought the People
of that Place, who before he came amongst them possessed great Unity and Loyalty,
to lose both; and to be of four or five subdivided and dissenting Churches; and
some of the Mechanics became such Eminent Teachers, as to contemn, despise,
forsake and vilify him, who first taught them the Trade.

I cannot forbear shooting my Bolt, let them shoot the Proverb at me if they
please: Is it possible to judge otherways of these Men, but that they are his
Seedsmen, who sowed the Tares amongst the Wheat? who therefore will not suffer
them to trifle, or spend their time to no purpose, (no more than he does, who
walks to and fro the Earth, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour),
or to sow that Ground over again, where he has already so promising a Crop
sprung up, and so plentiful a Harvest toward.

BUT they have further Policies in setting up in Market Towns, Populous Places,
or Corporations; of which, 17 Car. 2. c. 1. apud Oxon.
with very good Reason, they are disabled to be free, unless they will first
swear to renounce that Traitorous Position of taking up Arms against the King,
etc. which is against their Conscience, because against their design.

FOR, first, this sort of People, I mean Tradesmen, have more spare-hours than
they desire; they can write and read, and therefore like the Divertisement of
Books, because it does not call them from the Compter. Industry, and the Repute
of Honesty are many times their best Stock; and therefore they cannot choose but
love, and like such a Profession of Religion, as is like to entitle them to
Credit and Customers; and so, by bringing Grist to the Mill, in all probability
will enrich them; which is the general Temptation that induces this sort of
People to affect the Sanctimony of some Sect or Faction, which is most
prevalent near about them. And to make it clear that this is true: If ever you
find any one of these Mercenary Saints Sailing against the Wind and Tide of a
probable gain; I will be content to be thought a Fool for my conjecture.
Whereas the Countrey-Swain, whilst he runs the Yearly-Circle of his hard
Labor, has rarely either Time, Learning, or Money to spare, to gratify his
own Curiosity, or their expectancies, and unless he be a Freeholder can do
them no Service; and little then, if the Lord of the Manor where he lives be
an honest Loyal Gentleman: and therefore, they are too wise to Angle where the
Fish is not worth the Bait.

BUT secondly, Hereby likewise they come infinitely to propagate their Way; for
the Zealous Plum-Smith will not weigh you an Ounce of Pepper, but (unless his
Shop be full, and then Religion must give the Wall to Interest,) into your
Bargain you shall have a Pound of Edification, which is the Pack-thread and
Paper he binds us his Commodities with: and if he have time, he will give you
the Repetition, it may be, out of his Pocketbook, of what the precious godly
Man taught at the last Lecture, or Sabbath Day: or if you be so well-bred, as
the Phrase is, he will Treat you with a Pipe of Tobacco, only to persuade you
to come amongst them, and hear that powerful Man, who is as much beyond their
Parson, (though if he be a Customer, it may be he is a very good man too) as
sweet-scented Virginia is beyond St. Kitts. The simple Countryman thanks him
for his Love, and innocently accepts his kindness, sits down, blows out one
Smoke, but sucks in another far more dangerous and intoxicating: he is
persuaded, comes to the next meeting, hears and likes what he does not
understand; goes home, tells the fine story to his Neighbors, and decoys them
likewise into the Tunnel.

BUT lastly the great and Principal Design of all, and the most dangerous if it
be not in time prevented, is in such places as have the Choice of Burgesses for
Parliament, or where there are many Freeholders who have a Voice in the
Election of Knights, to make such a party as may over-poll the rest, and in
succeeding Parliaments may bring in such a number of Members into the house of
Commons, as may bring to pass their Wicked and Treasonous Designs: and I am
confident, so great has been their Industry in this particular, that they are
fully persuaded they are able to accomplish their Drift, if they could once
come to a new Election; and this is the Reason that all the Parties, especially
the Presbyterian, are so eager for a new Parliament. And that they have bid so
fair for the Dissolution of the Present, from which, being composed of so many,
wise, prudent, able, and truly Loyal Gentlemen, the have not the least hopes;
but are in the greatest dread imaginable, that by a Compliance with the
necessities of the Ring and Kingdom, they should still continue, and not only
enact something more severe against their restless Machinations, but by
supplying his Majesty with Money, cut off all their hopes, if they should come
to an Honorable Dissolution, for a future Parliament, to cramp the Crown, or
work upon the Necessities of the Son, to ruin him and the Church, as they did
with the same Engine his most Glorious Father: and that they were in great
hopes that this would be a short and the last Session of this most Loyal
Parliament, I think few will doubt who had any account count (so is to observe
it) what a numerous Concourse of all the Factious Heads, especially of the
Presbytery, there was to London, against the opening of the Sessions; which
appeared like an Army of Hungry Vulturs, hovering about, and ready to seize
upon it so soon as it should fall, and become a Dead Carcass ready for their
desired Prey. But as their hopes have met with a happy disappointment, so I
doubt not but it is the hearty wish of every Loyal Subject that long they may;
and that this Parliament, for the Honor, Safety, Peace, and Support of the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, and of the Best Church and Church Government in
the Christian World, may long sit and continue, by the honorable name of the
long Loyal Parliament.

CHAP. VII. After they are settled in such Places, of the Manner of their
behavior in the Meeting House. Of their Extempore Prayer. Examined and exposed
to open View. Of the Pretense they make to gain Veneration, that they Pray by
the Spirit. The ill use they employ it in, to make the set and appointed Forms
of Public Prayers Nauseous and Odious to the People. Proved from Scripture and
the Express Command of our Savior, that it is not of Gods appointment, nor a
fruit of the Spirit. By Example of the most infamous and abominable Sinners
guilty of Rebellion and Witchcraft, who had this faculty even to admiration.
Extempore Prayer shown to be a mere Art, the way how they or any Person endued
with a tolerable measure of Confidence may attain to it. A probable
Philosophical Reason, why they fancy themselves inspired in these Enthusiastic
Effusions.
IT is now high time to hear what our Man of God will say for himself: who
being accoutred with all these perfections, fixed amongst a Company of Wealthy
Tradesmen, whose Ears itch as much after Novelties, as their Fingers do after
Money; in despite of Laws, Reason or true Religion, he advances in the new
Meeting House, or a good large Private Room up into the Pulpit.

HAVING fitted the Cushion to the most commodious posture for the ease of his
Elbows, pulled out his Handkerchief, with which he intends to wipe off the
sweat; given the Uncanonical Cloak a twitch or two, or if the Weather be hot,
laid it aside, that he may not appear Lazy by thrashing in his Cloak: and which
is a sure sign that he is beginning to begin, having rolled his Eyes about, as
if he were falling into a Trance, he gently recovers himself into his Prayer,
which he faintly begins with a low voice, and languishing Tone, a soft and
deliberate utterance, which as the Holy Fire of his Zeal, comes gradually, by
Motion, to gather Heat; advances still higher and higher, till at length being
thoroughly warm, like a Pot with too much Fire under it, the Scum of his Brains
boils over, and he tumbles out his Expressions with that Ardor and
Precipitation, that every Word treads upon the Heels of another, and pushes it
forward: Nor does it import whether the Expressions be Congruous, or it may be
Decent, so long as they are but passionate and vehement; and at every third or
fourth Sentence, (to help the Pump) as loud as he is able, an importunate,
Lord! Lord! at which the People are strangely melted, some into Tears, some
into Sighs and Groans; which are the spiritual Hums and Plaudite's of a
Conventicle; and signify that the Man comes off very well, in Acting his Part
upon that Religious Theater.

NOW, though he pretends to hate all Forms, yet he is not without a Method; and
therefore he begins, with Confession: and tells God Almighty a parcel of
Notorious untruths in the Name of the People, and would persuade him that he
knows it too: Lord, thou know that we have been guilty of all manner of Sins
of Omission and Commission, which, it may be, to spin out the Hourglass, he
gives them a, Catalogue of. Some of which (for we will suppose them Christians,
and better Men than he does) the Hearers may be so far from being guilty of,
that possibly this may be the first time that ever they were acquainted with
their Names; and after this rate he goes on, through the several Parts of a
little Book, which he does not care to own, though he is not a little obliged
to it; and makes great and constant use of it, by Name, The Gist of Prayer;
which till I got a sight of, I thought they had got without Book, by the help
of the Spirit; who, I am sure, needs no such helps, to help his true Servants.

THERE is one general Rule which St. Paul gives for public Prayers, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2.
I exhort that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are put in Authority:
But for all his Exhortation, in a two hours Prayer, first or last, you shall
hear but little of that; or if the King be named, his Titles of Supremacy are
not recited, or at most but halfway: and if he be faintly acknowledged the
Defender of the Faith, it must not be said that he is Supreme in all Causes,
and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal: for you must know, a
Presbyter is as great an Enemy to the Supremacy, as a Papist; and challenges an
underivative-power, in Spiritualibus, from Christ himself, to whom the King is
but a Subject; and by consequence, even in all Temporals in ordine ad
spiritualia, to every petty Presbyter. Oh rare and absolute, and more than
Papal Church-Tyranny! O most excellent Arbitrary Spiritual Government! How
consistent art thou with Monarchy! and with that old and true Aphorism of
State, Imperium non patitur Duos. Empire is incompatible with Rivals, and it
must be aut Caesar aut nullus. Sometimes they will in general terms pray for
Him whom God has set over us; an Expression not without Malice, according to
that place in the Psalms, Set thou an ungodly Man to Rule over them. They might
as well say, Whom God has appointed or ordained to be over us, which is a
Scripture-Expression. But I fear they do not think or believe the King and his
Power to he of God's appointment; for if they did, they would endeavor to lead
a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty; and not think it
lawful to draw a Sword against him, or think such an Oath unlawful as would tie
their Hands from doing it; though with the nice distinction betwixt the King
and the Person. And let them but make it their own Case, I dare say, they will
not be willing to hang up the Presbyter, for fear you should also choke the
Man. This they have done, and that they would not be accounted Changelings, is
plain by their unwillingness to renounce the Devil and all his Works, the
Covenant and Engagement to live without King and House of Lords.

AS for our most Gracious Queen Katherine, James Duke of York, and the rest of
the Royal Family; the Bishops and Clergy; they never come in their Mouths, or
Memories; so that, either the Apostles general Rule, to pray for all Men,
especially for all that are in Authority, must be Iyable to an Exception, if
they think fit: or else Queens, Dukes, and Bishops are Nobody with them, or
not in Authority, that is, a lawful Authority; and indeed, that is it which
they would be at.

THERE is nothing which has gained these Men that Veneration, amongst the
Vulgar, which this Imposture has done; which they endeavor to impose upon
easy beliefs, whilst they pretend in these Extempore Effusions to be
immediately inspired by the Spirit of God; which all dissenters cannot be, and
I am afraid none of them are. 1 Cor. 14.14.
The Apostle St. Paul speaks of praying with the Spirit, but it is manifest
that he means there, that Miraculous Effusion of the Holy Ghost, who for the
better propagation of the Gospel gave them utterance in several Languages: and
let me but hear any one of these men pray in Latin, with that fluency as they
do in English, and I will believe they pray with the Spirit; though many of
them, it may be, if they could, do that neither in Latin nor English with
Understanding. But the truth is, the Book by which they were taught is not yet
made free of the City; and it would puzle Cicero himself, with all his
longwinded Sentences, to bestow the Idiom of his Language, in which he was so
great a Master, upon some of their Prayers, which are hardly tolerable true
English. Latin is a Language familiar enough all over Europe, and some of them
have been educated in it; (though with others it is the Mark of the Beast,) and
if they had truly the assistance of the Spirit, it were as easy for that to
teach them to pray in that Tongue as well as in any other: and when they can, I
shall willingly spare them the trial of Hebrew, Greek, Syriack, Arabic, etc.
mentioned Acts, chap. 2. But it suffices they say it is by the Spirit, and the
People who believe they speak as the Oracles of God, they believe it: and from
hence draw a Conclusion, that those Persons are the best men in the World,
having the Spirit in such an extraordinary measure above their Brethren.

AND this is not the smallest Engine which they make use of, to undermine the
Church of England, and to render the solemn Service of God contemptible: All
set Forms being, as they say, dull, dead, flat, and spiritless: though they are
in a great measure the express words of Scripture; and warranted by ancient
usage in the Church, if not from the Apostolical Times, at least from the very
next and immediate Age unto them. Yet one of their Disciples did not long ago,
in the presence of several witnesses, openly declare, That what we call Divine
Service, and the Worship of God, was Blasphemy; and the using those Prayers
blaspheming, not honoring or serving God; and since they are all learnt Jurare
in verba, we may well believe he spoke as he had heard, the true sentiments and
opinion of his Master.

NOW that we may discover the greatness of this dangerous and popular Cheat; we
will first make our Appeal to their own Judge the Scripture. Go we then to him
who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and to whom should we go but to him
who has the words of Eternal Life? And if we will hear him, he gives us an
express Charge against Battologies, S. Mat. 6.7, 8, 9.
and much speaking in our Prayers; and commands a short Prayer and a Form too:
Whatever long Prayers may be, he tells us they look like Hypocrisy and
Superstition, But when ye Pray say, Our Father, etc. And use not vain
Repetitions as the Heathens do; for they think they shall be heard for their
much speaking. Be not ye therefore like them: but after this manner pray. How
well they observed this Rule, we need trouble our selves no further to find
out, if we can but remember that it is not yet twenty years ago since the
Lords-Prayer was accounted unlawful, and by some scandalous, and indeed was
generally out of Fashion in the Pulpit; and so it is still amongst many
Dissenters: and yet then they would have us believe they prayed by the Spirit,
as well as they do now; and I believe they did, but it must be the same Spirit
which made Saul throw his Javelin at the Musician: For it taught them the same
Practice, not only to be angry with the Music, but to kill the Musicians, and
put all out of Tune. I am sure it could not be the Spirit of Christ which
taught them to break and despise a Command of Christ; for he tells us that
promised Spirit shall speak what he has heard; S. John 16.13.
and I hope they dare not say but this Command of our Saviors was one of those
things he had head: and was one of those Truths into which he was to lead them.

FURTHER, if we examine what are the Fruits of the Spirit; they are love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24. Ephesians 5.5.
faith, meekness, temperance, righteousness, and truth: but not the least
mention of Extempore Prayer. If we search what are the Gifts of the Spirit; or
the Gifts of God? we shall find the Gift of Continency, 1 Cor. 7.7. 1 Cor. 3.5.
Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 12.1.
the Gifts of Prophecy, of working Miracles, etc. but no Gift of Prayer. And
where the particular Gifts are enumerated, there is not one syllable of the
Gift of Prayer. Certainly if it had been a spiritual Gift, or a fruit of the
Spirit, it would not have been omitted.

BUT, secondly, let us appeal to Example: For if this be a fruit of the Spirit,
then all they who can or could thus pray Extempore, have the Spirit of God, and
are the Sons of God. This is as much a Demonstration as any in Euclid. Now will
I bring you such an Army of Saints, with Old Noll in the head of them, as shall
fight and pray with all Nations; Either these Saints. S. Oliver, S. Ireton, S.
Bradshaw, etc. prayed by the Spirit, and so were real Saints; or what they
prayed was not by the Spirit, and so they were no Saints, nor Extempore Prayer
any Evidence of the Spirit of God: Now let them take which of these they will;
I dare say they had rather Canonize Oliver, and his praying Legions, than not;
only as Affairs now stand it is not altogether safe: And if they shall refuse
both the Horns of the Dilemma; (as being sure to be in their sides, and too
sharp to be handled) they must teach us to distinguish, and know that they are
not just such Saints as the others, who had the knack exactly; prayed the same
Language almost Verbatim; made the same boasts of, and pretensions to the
Spirit, and I am afraid had the same Spirit, the same Uses to make of it, and
the self-same Ends and Designs.

I might bring many instances, but I will only add one, which is so remarkable,
that it will be sufficient to convince all those who are not resolved against
Conviction: and whereby it will appear, that this way of Extempore Prayer, is
so far from being a Gift of God, or proceeding from the Spirit of God, that it
may be a Gift of the Devil; and that such who are almost under an irreversible
Necessity of Damnation may have it even in Perfection. The story is thus: At
St. Ives in the County of Huntington, within the Memory of many Persons yet
alive, there was a Woman, whose name I do not very well remember, though many
in that place very well do: She was one of those, who for distinction were then
by themselves called Professors, by other Puritans; she was a great follower of
the upholders of the Presbyterian-Tenents, a constant frequenter of Godly
Meetings, and Religious Exercises: This Woman came to be so eminent, especially
in this Gift of Prayer, that she was generally admired, and looked upon as a
Saint of the first Magnitude: the noise of her Fame, and the boasts of her
Party, brought many Neighbouring-Ministers in the adjacent Counties of
Cambridge and Huntington, to hear her pray; which she did in that ravishing
manner, that they never parted from her without an Excess of Admiration and
astonishment. After some time, for what reason I am not able to determine, this
Holy Sister went over into New England, as about the same time many others did
for Liberty of Conscience; for a while she was there in the greatest Esteem,
and height of Reputation; but the Devil owed her a shame, and she him a Soul;
she was at last suspected and accused to be a Witch; was brought to a trial,
confe^^ her guilt, and that her contract with the Devil was, That in lieu of
her Soul which she did consign unto him, he should assist her with the Gift of
Extempore Prayer: after which confession, sentence past upon her, and she was
accordingly executed, as a most abominable Witch. Either now we must believe
that this Extempore Way is not an infallible sign of the Spirit of God; or that
the Devil has the Power of disposing of the Gifts of the Spirit.

BUT thirdly, I will appeal to these very men; let them speak the Truth and
shame the Devil. Is not this Way of Praying an acquisition? did not the
forementioned Book, or some Collections of their own of that nature, out of
Scripture, often hearing of others, and many secret Trials and Exercises
therein bring them by degrees to these perfections? or could they from the
first Moment of their Conversion pray thus? and they do as punctually remember
that time, as what they did Yesterday: and then if ever they had the Spirit of
God; and it was then as well able to help their infirmities as now, and they
stood more in need of it, and it would have been more visible and apparent that
it was not they but the Spirit that taught them how and what to pray: Did they
not with much pains and industry attain this which they call a Gift? let them
deny it if they dare: for if they will say they never used any of the aforesaid
means to help their Weaknesses, I will undertake to prove them the most
impudent affirmers of a Notorious Untruth: for many of their expressions are
sentence picked out of the Bible, which they read often over, with as much
respect to the getting praying Phrases out of it, and a great deal more than to
be informed of their Duty toward God and Men; and it were well if it were no
worse; but there is such a blend of fantastical, particular, and uncommon
words of their own Mintage, and such a medley of singularity of Incomes and
Outgoings, and In-dwellings, and I know not what, which like the Wild Gourds
spoil all the Pottage, and I doubt they will find there is Death too in the Pot.

I AM the most deceived, if for this purpose they do not stuff their Heads and
Memories, with Notions how to express themselves upon any sudden Occasion or
Emergency; and as I am informed by those who have tried both, and therefore
have reason to know, it is a far greater Ease, if a Man has the general Notions
of what he intends to speak, not to be tied to Numerical or Identical Words;
but to have a Liberty, to express those thoughts and Notions, according to his
present Pleasure and Fancy: Which if his Tongue be naturally smooth and
voluble, will make it less difficult for him to do it, even to admiration; the
charge of Generals being less burdensome to the Memory; than that of
Particulars: and besides it leaves the conceptions an unlimited freedom for
choice and variation; and affords many sudden hints, which by being followed
and improved with advantage, do many times infinitely surprise, both the
Speakers and Hearers, with a pleasing Novelty and agreeableness that Pleasure
begets a secret Joy, and that Joy dilates and expands the Animal Spirits, which
are the true Spirit of Extempore Prayer; and these having a strange Mechanism
and unexpressible Influence upon the Soul, do sometimes put it into such
strange and vigorous heats and raptures, as even makes a Man outdo himself and
his own expectations. I am persuaded that the want of understanding this piece
of Philosophy, which is none of that which the Apostle calls vain, and bids
beware of, lest it spoil us (though it might, and I hope will, spoil some of
their ill Designs) is the true Reason why they believe themselves to be acted
in these Heats and Transports, by the immediate Influence and Inspiration of
the Spirit of God.

AND this is the very Art of Prayer; and a mere Art it is, and no Gift, nor
Fruit of the Spirit: an Art which with a common Industry, provided a Man have a
competent stock of Confidence, any Person may arrive at, and grow prodigious
in: and the sooner, the more ignorant he is, because he will be proportionably
more impudent, and conceited of himself, his abilities and performances; which
is the true Reason, why so many silly Mechanics, who can hardly speak sense in
common Discourse, by hearing others pray at this rate, will steal their
Expressions; and with some small Instructions and Directions, with Time and
many private Trials, grow such strange proficients in the Trade. Nay, and I
will engage he shall have the Pride (or it may be it is the Arcanum of the
Craft which they are bound not to divulge) not to confess how he came by it; or
to undeceive those who shall wonder to hear so unlearned a Fellow pray so
fluently and fervently. And this adds not a little (amongst those who
understand not the Intrigue) to the common received Opinion, that it is a Fruit
of the actings of the Spirit of God. And the pulling of this Spiritual Inkle
out of their Throats, which they would persuade us came thither by a Miracle,
is one of the greatest and neatest, as well as dangerous pieces of Legerdemain,
with which these Juglers Hocus the vulgar and incautelous of the present Age.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Doctrines they chiefly insist upon, and in which they first
instruct their Hearers. And first of the Doctrine of absolute and irrespective
Decrees of Election and Reprobation; Of their Way of trial of their Followers,
whether they he the Elect, by knowing the punctual time of their Call,
Repentance, sorrow for sin, etc. The agreeableness of this Doctrine to their
Followers, whom for being such, they persuade that they are certainly the
Elect; and that they cannot fall totally and finally from Grace. Their signs of
Election proved false from Judas the Son of Perdition, who had all they make
the infallible Marks of Election, and something more, viz. Restitution, which
they will not be be persuaded to.
HAVING now done with the Prayer, let us proceed to the Sermon, and see what
their Doctrines are; for I do not intend to dwell upon their Texts, or trouble
them more than they usually do. As for the Reasons, though they pretend to
raise many, yet we shall see they have very little. The Use is what they most
generally insist upon, and it is the ill Use and Application of these Doctrines
that we come now to examine. This is their Form; so that I find they are for a
Form of Preaching, though against a Form of Prayer.

THE first Doctrine upon which they build their Foundation, and by which they
establish a perpetual Empire over all those who come to be of their Persuasion,
and which is of the most universal use unto them, is the Doctrine of absolute
and irrespective Decrees of Predestination, about Election and Reprobation: A
piece of Divinity so hard and knotty, that the sharpest Wits and soundest
Judgments have not hitherto been able in any tolerable measure to hew, smooth
or polish: And to me it appears, that Almighty God did design no great
encouragement to our curiosity, having afforded us so little light, either from
Nature, Reason, or Scripture, to make a full and perfect discovery of it.

COULD they be contented with it as the Scriptures leave it, and as the Church
of England in her 17 Article has most prudently and modestly left it in general
terms: S. Mark 1.15. Acts 2.^5 Acts 3.^
That all those Persons who by Faith, true Repentance, and an Universal
Obedience (at least in Intention, Will, and Endeavor) to Christ and the
Commands of the Gospel, do perform their part of the Condition of the New
Covenant of Grace, shall through the Merits and Mediation of the Son of God the
Savior of the world, receive Eternal Salvation. But that all those who
wilfully, 2 Thessalonians. 1. ^.^.
obstinately, and to the last, refuse to know God, and to obey the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, S. Mark ^. 44, 46, ^^* Mat. ^^.41. (...)
and from the glory of his Power; and shall suffer those endless and
intolerable Torments, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched,
which were originally prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Then we should
agree with them in the Common Faith of the Holy Catholic (or Universal) Church
in all Ages.

BUT this would not serve their turn, nor at all answer those Necessary Ends
which they have to employ this Doctrine about. 2 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6, 7. (...)
God himself says he would have all men to be saved, by coming to the knowledge
of these Truths; That there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men,
the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for All: the Apostle tells us
he was ordained a Preacher of this Doctrine, and that he spoke the truth in
Christ, and did not lie: but was a Teacher of the Gentiles in this Faith and
Verity. But say these new Doctors, no such matter! By his revealed Will, it may
be, God says so; but for all that, by his secret Will he intended otherwise,
and that it should never be so. I cannot but wonder how they came to be so well
acquainted with it! Besides this is a plain contradiction in Adjecto: for how
is it secret, if it be revealed to them? and if it be a secret which he has
reserved as his own purpose from Eternity, how dare they so openly proclaim it?
Were it never so great an Arcanum Imperii, I am sure it ceases to be so after
they once come to make a discovery of it or but to surmise that they have, and
they are but too prodigal in divulging of it far and wide. Known to God are all
his Works, from the foundation of the World. Acts 15.18
But as the Apostle says, Romans 11.34.
Who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been of his Privy Counsel?
that is, in those secret affairs, the knowledge of which is his uncommunicable
Prerogative, and which he has reserved within his own peculiar Jurisdiction;
from the knowledge of which he has excluded not only Mortal Men, S. Mat. 24.26.
S. Mark 13.32.
but even his own Son as a Man: for of that Day knows no Man, not the Son, but
the Father. Which made an Apostle who had been in the third Heavens, break out
into that Ecstasie of Wonder and Admiration; O the depth of the Riches, both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans 11.33.
How unsearchable are his Judicial Proceedings, and his Ways past finding out!
Now whether we should believe God or Men, let them be Judges?

BUT it is no matter, Let God say what he pleases, they are resolved to say
what they will, and what may please their Party, and serve their Interest: and
though the modest Apostle could say, Let God be true and every Man a Liar; Romans
3.4.
they say, what we affirm is true. I dare not think, much less speak the
consequence, though it follows most unavoidably from their confident and
positive Assertion: for there is but one Truth no more than one God: and of a
flat downright Contradiction (as this is) one part must of Necessity be false.

HAVING by their excellent Talent at Extempore Prayer, left no scruple, but
that they have the Spirit of God, and that being the Spirit which must lead all
those that have it into all Truth: the People are before hand prepared to
swallow down this Doctrine without any chewing or Examination: and in Truth as
they have cookt it, it is the most delicate and agreeable Repast, to the
Palates of those Souls who are so happy as to be treated at their Spiritual
Entertainments. For having first laid down as a Positive, Infallible and
Fundamental Truth, That God from all Eternity did Elect a Determinate Number to
Salvation, and that this number is but small, for it is but a little Flock;
Many are called, but few are Chosen or Elected: the next thing they have to do,
is to assure them who are their Disciples, that they are of this Happy Number,
who have the Seal in their foreheads, and whose names are written in the Book
of Life. Now the first step to this assurance is to use the means, for Faith
comes by hearing the Word of God; though if this Doctrine of unconditional
Decrees, be pursued to the uttermost, those means must be either unnecessary or
nonsense, by being the Decreed Conditions of an unconditional Decree. Now these
means, that is, this Soul-saving preaching is only to be found amongst them:
Theirs is the Land of Goshen, where the Sun of Righteousness only shines,
whilst all others are in Spiritual Egypt, and grope for the Truth, amidst such
Darkness as may be felt; and is next to the very Region of the Shadow of Death,
and utter Darkness.

BUT they are too wary to rest here, or to build so weighty a Fabric upon such
a slender Foundation: they know that the impious Herod heard S. John the
Baptist gladly, and did many things: And therefore before any one can be
assured that he is of the Elect, though never so diligent a Hearer, that will
not do, unless he be able to give an account of the exact, time of his
Conversion, and when it was that he was called of God and to God. S. Mark 6.20.
The Signs of this Calling are Contrition, Compunction, or a Trouble of Mind,
arising from a sight of their lost condition, as they phrase it: And they who
are able to inform them of the time of this Call, at such a Sermon, or such a
Night after my first sleep (though they did but dream so, it is enough) the
Lord was pleased to call me: All those who can do this, are pronounced from the
Infallible Chair, to be in a certain estate of Election, the Children and
People of God; and after a time of probation (which were needless, since they
cannot fall away) they are solemnly initiated into their Church, and enter into
a promise never to return back again to the Tents of the Ungodly, which might
as well be spared, if the rest of their Doctrine be true.

THIS alone were enough to ravish the hearts of those who do as firmly believe
it as the Gospel, and to fill them with joy unspeakable and full of glory: But
they have a Disert behind, which closes the Banquet far better than the
Egyptian Deaths-Head; and that is this: That they who are once thus elected,
can never finally and totally fall away from Grace, so as to be in danger of
Hell and Damnation; Romans 11.29.
for the Calling and Gifts of God are without Repentance: Could they prove
this, and that their Comment upon it were the true and genuine meaning of the
Text, this would be a happiness not inferior to the joys of Heaven; and which
for my part I think is only reserved to complete the Felicities of that blessed
place, where, and not before, we arrive there, all fears, tears, and dangers,
shall be wiped away.

THIS is their great Diana, not the Image which fell down from Heaven, but the
Image of Heaven it self which they all worship; and which brings them in such
fair Revenues, both Temporal and Spiritual (as they think) as outdoes not only
the poor hopes of Demetrius, and all his Fellow-Craftsmen, but the Riches of
both the India's, which are Dung and Dross in comparison of being thus
certainly found in Christ: And no wonder then if it raises such Tumults, when
it is opposed, or in danger of being lost.

THERE can be no Doctrine more pleasing to credulous and fanciful people, as
most of their Disciples are; and indeed so luscious is the high relish of it,
that those who have once gotten a say of it; are difficultly, if ever,
persuaded to abandon it, or in comparison of it not to contemn and despise all
others. But as it is thus infinitely pleasing above all the Fruits in the
Garden, so like that treacherous Apple, it is for that very Reason of all
others the most pernicious, both to the Souls of men, the quiet of any Society,
and the safety of any Government that dare oppose it.

I DO not intend to attempt a long and solemn Confutation of every particular;
in regard it has already been sufficiently done, by the Pens of many great and
learned Names: I will only therefore use a little of their own method,
undermine the Foundation, and leave the rest of their prodigious Babel to ruin
it self by the weight and stress they have laid upon it.

AND if we can but break these counterfeit Seals, and erase these Marks, we
shall cancel this false Passport to Heaven, and all those feigned Evidences to
the blessed Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and all those ill-grounded Joys
which are built upon the Hopes of that glorious Reversion will in an instant
vanish, if once we can prove there is a flaw and crack in the supposed Title:
And it may be the task will be so far from impossible, as not to prove
difficult.

SHOULD we grant them their first Position, that there is but a small and
determinate Number who are Elected, yet if we show that their Touchstone is
false, and will not distinguish Gold from Brass, all the Virtue and
Consolation, and that vain Joy in believing, will immediately vanish, in all
those who are not resolved with the strength of fancy, and prepossessed
Imagination, to supply the want of Reason: and for such, we must commit them to
Time and Hellebore, the Physic of madmen, for a Cure.

NOW their great and infallible sign of Election, being a knowledge of the time
of their Conversion, accompanied with Compunction and Contrition, a sense of
Sin, and sorrow for it; It is almost impossible for any Person at one time or
another, not to have experienced all this; especially if they have ever met or
been acquainted with Sickness, Danger, or any remarkable afflictive Accidents:
Or if they have formerly been gross and notorious sinners, as it is observed
many amongst their Converts (especially of the frail Sex) have been: for sin
will at one time or other throw off his gay Habit, and masquerading Jollity,
and appear not only with its proper ugliness and deformity, but with the
frightful attendants of Death, Judgment and Eternity, Tortures and Punishments
of the most dreadful shapes that Imagination grounded upon Reason and a just
Fear, or a present expectation, is able to invent. And there are few Spirits so
flinty, but such black and fearful Apparitions will make a very strong
impression upon: such as may easily produce all the forementioned effects, and
many more and greater.

BUT we will go further with them, and suppose all this conviction has been
occasioned by the Means, by hearing a sin-destroying, a heart-convincing
Sermon, which has impressed guilt upon their Consciences, with the highest
Aggravations, and greatest terrors. After all these sorrows and Agonies of
Spirit, which they make the certain Indications of the new Birth, or
Regeneration; nay, after open Confession, public Repentance, and something
beyond all that, the Person may still be in a state of Reprobation. Judas he
repented, S. Mat. 27.3, 4.
nay, his contrition and conviction, his sense, sight, and sorrow for his sin,
was so great and strong, that he publicly confessed he had sinned in betraying
the Innocent Blood: Nay, he went yet further than any of these Men ever did,
that I have heard of, for he made restitution of what he had unlawfully gotten;
he cast down the dearbought thirty pieces of Silver in the Temple before them
all, and by his clearing the Innocent, did endeavor to make what reparation,
for his Crime, he was capable of; and yet thought not that enough, for he went
away and hanged himself. I would not have any of them follow him so far; though
it is affirmed some, driven by these desperate Doctrines, have, and it is a
Miracle that many more do not follow his Example. But for all their Marks, I
believe they have not many of them read Origin (because he is one of the
Fathers, who amongst them pass for a Company of scandalous Popishly affected
old Gentlemen) nor will they easily be persuaded with him to allow Judas the
benefit of his Clergy; or take him to be one of their number who shall be
saved: and yet his Title to it, by all their symptoms, is as fair as any they
can make; and for all his being a Felo de se, being able to give so punctual an
account of the time of his Call and Conversion, and there being an
impossibility of final falling away from Grace^ I cannot tell what way, by
their own Doctrine, they will be able to exclude, even this Son of Perdition,
from a certain share and Interest in Heaven.

BUT besides him, I doubt not but there are thousands who if they would
ingenuously confess, have had great sorrows, strong Convictions, and horrible
Agonies of Mind, from the frightful apprehensions of Hell and Damnation, which
are always terrible to the thoughts of Men. Nay, I do not question but they may
have seriously repented, and made great resolutions, and some vigorous attempts
toward amendment and reformation in their Lives: who nevertheless, as S. Peter
says, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, after they have known the Way of Righteousness, and
tasted of the Powers of the World to come, have returned with the Dog to his
Vomit again, and with the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire:
which place, (if it be true, as I make no question but it is, and I hope they
dare not deny) will in a moment blow up this curious train of Imaginations;
That Repentance, Contrition, or a far greater progress toward Heaven, are
infallible Marks of Election; or that there is an impossibility of final
falling away from the Happy State of Grace.

CHAP. IX. Of the great danger of this Doctrine as they apply it. First, to
themselves; It fills them with a groundless and false confidence of the
goodness of their Spiritual Condition; makes it almost impossible to convince
them by Reason or Scripture, though they live after the Flesh, in Hatred, Envy,
Malice, Disobedience, etc. but that they have the Spirit, and live after the
Spirit, and are new Creatures. It fills them with Pride, and Pharisaical
contempt of others; puts them into Security, the most dangerous Condition a man
can be in.
NOW could I make a Sermon like one of theirs, and run on to nineteenthly,
Beloved, in showing the Dangers of this Doctrine; but I have no Design to
wire-draw my Application, as they usually have in theirs: I will therefore
content my self to recount the Chief, from which the rest do almost naturally
flow, and may be most easily conjectured.

FIRST, We will consider the Desperate Influences this Doctrine has upon
themselves.

SECONDLY, The Ill Consequences it has upon them, as they are Members of any
Private Community, Hamlet, Village, Town or Corporation.

THIRDLY, The Dangerous Effects it has upon the Church.

LASTLY, The fatal and portentous aspect it has upon the State and Civil
Government.

WE will begin with the desperate. Influences this Doctrine has upon
themselves: Hereby, poor Souls! (to use their own word) they are in the
greatest Danger of destroying themselves, and missing Eternal Salvation: to
which certainly nothing can contribute more than an unwarranted Confidence, and
groundless security. When they cry Peace, Peace, to themselves, then are men in
the greatest danger of sudden Destruction. They make not the least question,
but that they are of the Number of the precious Ones, the Elect of God; and are
sure that these Elect can never fall away from Grace, or be totally and finally
divested of an undoubted Title to Heaven and Happiness: which Doctrine, however
some of them in words may deny, and all of them in their Application do
generally confute; yet does most unavoidably follow the other of absolute and
unconditional Decrees; which all Dissenters in reality hold, whilst they affirm
themselves the only People of God, and all others Reprobates. And therefore in
this assurance of their being the Chosen and Elect of God, they possess the
greatest inward Peace and Tranquillity imaginable: The Consideration of that
Infinite Love of God, and his free and distinguishing Grace to call them, and
pass by the rest of Mankind; this particular and undeserved favor, which they
wholly monopolize and appropriate to themselves, begets in them a Reciprocal
Love to God: for if God so loved them when they were Enemies, as to send his
only begotten Son out of his bosom, purposely to save and redeem only a few out
of the whole Mass of Mankind in the World, of which few they are a part, when,
in the mean time, he passes by Millions more Wise, Mighty, and Learned, without
taking notice of them, or doing any thing for them, more than to harden their
hearts, that so he may take occasion to condemn them for refusing that Grace
and Mercy, which by reason of his Previous Decree they could not possibly
accept, How much then are these obliged to God for making such a difference?
How ought they to love God? This Love still increases their confidence and
security: they are therefore sure that this is the Hope which makes not
ashamed, which is the Anchor of the Soul; because the Love of God is shed
abroad in their Hearts: and at last they arrive at such a certainty as will not
permit them to have the least doubt, but that they are the Vessels who are
chosen to Honor, who by this Grace are fitted for future Glory. This fills
their Earthen Vessels brim-full of Satisfaction, and a Joy which upon all
occasions runs over at their Mouths; and to which they will tell you, could you
but once come to experience it, all other Comforts are far inferior: Now they
have sweet Communion and Fellowship with God; their Conversion is in Heaven;
nay, Heaven and all that is good and great, stoops down to dwell with them. And
thus these things, which are nothing but the pure Effects of this strong
Imagination, that they are the Elect, are to them infallible Signs of their
Election; and they think the Spirit bears witness with their Spirits, that they
are the Sons of God, by giving them this Joy in the Holy Ghost, and in
believing: and so the Mother begets the Daughter, and the Daughter begets the
Mother, like the Riddle of Ice and Water, in infinitum; a Simile not at all
unfit for such a slippery and unstable Principle, as is the Foundation of this
their Persuasion. But the mischief is, that all that ever you can say or do, to
represent unto them the danger they are in, signifies little or nothing, for
they look upon you to be carnal, and not able to discern such spiritual affairs
as this is.

BUT if you chance to tax them with Hypocrisy, which is but too common, you
cannot do them a greater kindness; for that convinces them beyond all other
Arguments, and confirms them in the opinion of their own truth and sincerity,
and that you are mistaken, since they know and do sensibly feel those real
Effects of Joy and Pleasure, which you would persuade your self and them they
do but counterfeit.

NAY further, they are so far from believing any body but themselves, that they
will not believe the Scripture, if that would persuade them that they do not
walk in the Spirit, or are not led by the Spirit; or that they have not yet put
off the Old Man, and the former vain Conversion, and crucified the Flesh, and
the lusts or desires and affections thereof.

CARRY them to that place of Saint Paul, where he tells us, what are the lusts
of the Flesh, and what are the fruits of the Spirit: Gal. 5.19.
Now, says he, the works of the flesh are manifest, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witcheraft, Murders, Drunkenness,
Revellings, and such like; all these they will tell you they have put off, and
are become new men; and all this we must believe, because in the outside of
their lives, they have quitted some scandalous and notorious sins, which before
they were guilty of; and have got an affected way of hard words, and talking
about Religion, some austerities of life in which they think all sanctity
consists, all which may be nothing but a Form or Fashion of Godliness; and in
which they have not yet outdone many Heathens, who were strangers to Grace;
and I am sure in their opinion shall be so to Heaven. But though they still
live, and it may be more than ever, in the most notorious allowance, and daily
practice of Hatreds, or Enmities, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife,
Seditions, or Factions and Divisions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, if not of
men's Persons, yet of their Fame and Reputation, which is as dear and tender as
life; all this is nothing: Tell them as often as you please, as the Apostle there
says, 1 Cor. 3.3.
Of which things I have told you before, as also in times past, that they which
do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, they will neither believe
him nor you. Tell them as he does the Corinthians, that whilst they are full of
strife, envyings, and divisions, one of Paul, another of Apollos, one of this
man's Congregation, another of that man's Church, they are yet carnal; they will
laugh at you, but neither credit him nor you. Tell them, that they who resist
the Supreme Magistrate, his Power and Authority, his Laws and subordinate
Ministers of Justice, shall receive to themselves damnation; they will answer,
they shall not, if they do it for Conscience sake: He says, Romans 13.2, 5.
they must be subject for Conscience sake; they say they must not be subject,
but ought to do as they do, and be disobedient: He tells them there is a
necessity for it, wherefore ye must needs be subject; from a necessity founded
upon Nature, Law, Reason, Policy, self-Interest, and Religion: they will reply
there is no necessity; nay, that it is a burden and oppression to Good Men,
Christian Liberty, and tender Consciences. How true they are, may be a
question: but it is none, whether they are not a sort of unmannerly Believers,
thus to contradict an Apostle, nay all the twelve, and Christ too, if they say
not what pleases them.

TELL them they despise Governments, 2 S. Pet. 2.5.
and therefore are presumptuous, self-willed, such who are not afraid to speak
Evil of Dignities, of the things they understand not, sporting or pleasing
themselves with their own deceivings, or with deceiving themselves, and that
for these things they shall utterly perish, they will not believe it concerns
them; but though they are manifestly guilty of the Crimes, they will be ready
to throw the punishment there or elsewhere mentioned upon your back.

IF St. Jude tells them there is a Woe against them, S. Jude 11. Number. 16.
and that they shall perish in the gainsaying of Corah, which was disobedience
to, and raising a Mutiny against Moses and Aaron, the Prince and the Priest,
and by the same Arts and Ways which they use, telling them they took too much
upon them, since all the People were holy, the Lords People, and had all, who
were gifted, as good a right to Govern as Moses, and to be Priests and offer
Incense as Aaron; pretending Abuses and Reformation, which has we see been the
old Stratagem to lead on Rebellion; it is all one, they will no more believe
you, than if you quoted the Alehoran to confute them. And thus in a confident
assurance of Heaven and Everlasting Joys (which they think themselves assured
of by virtue of their Election) they ride Post (and there is hardly a
possibility of stopping them) in the way that leads to everlasting misery and
Damnation.

NOR is the Doctrine of the impossibility of their final falling away from
Grace, less dangerous than the former, of which it is indeed a necessary
Branch; for hereby they receive encouragement to commit many lesser sins; and
under the pretense of Failings, the imperfections and frailties of Flesh and
Blood, to pass over with a slight Repentance many wilful Offenses; and take any
slight remorse for a reconciliation with God: Who because they believe he will
not suffer them to lie in sin, because they cannot dye in it, brings them to
Repentance; and how slender soever it is, he will accept of it from these his
particular Friends and Favorites. And thus they slightly heal their Wound, and
with an imperfect Cure skin over that Hurt, which festers and gangrenes
underneath, and is so much more dangerous, by how much the deeper it lies, and
they are less sensible of it. If this be not an Effect of this Doctrine very
frequent and common, sure I am it may be, being the proper and natural Result
of it; and which, as in the former, does likewise complete the Danger they are
in, all Arguments are in vain that are employed to convince them of their
Error.

I have read of a certain Page to a great Nobleman in France, who in the high
Frenzy of a Fever fancied himself the King of France; and during his pleasant
Delirium, was by his Lords Command accordingly treated and humored: And I have
heard of many Lunaticks and Melancholy persons who have really fancied
themselves to be Mighty Monarchs: It were an easier task to induce those to
believe the contrary, (for Time and Medicines have done that) than to persuade
these men, that they are not certain Kings and Priests in Reversion; though
that latter is a title they love so little, that it is a question whether they
will accept of any place in Heaven, if they cannot have it without that Name,
which they profess to hate, and never use but in derision of such who are so on
Earth, and in the highest probability of being such hereafter in Heaven. But
amongst all those who are upon Record in the Calogue of distempered Brains, I
know no Story that parallels that humor so exactly as his, who used to stand
upon the Pyraeum or famous Port of Athens, and seeing the Wealthy Merchants
Ships arrive there from several places of the World, he wonderfully pleased
himself with the belief that they were all his own; all their rich Cargo's
brought thither only for his use or pleasure, when in truth he had not the
least share or proporty in any of them. So these men fondly think that God
Almighty has stored up all the Treasures of his Wisdom, Riches, and Mercy, only
for them; that he displays all his Goodness and Bounties upon the World for
their sakes; and so arrogantly do they ingross all, that they persuade
themselves that Heaven, and all those inconceivable Pleasures, and unspeakable
Glories, were from all Eternity purely and solely intended and created for them.

THERE is so much pleasure in the enjoyment, and so little satisfaction in
renouncing this Opinion, that though it be but a mere Cloud, they will hug and
embrace it with that Ardor, and those Passionate Transports, as if it were a
real Juno, a Celestial Beauty; and would some of them scarce be divorced from
it, but with their Lives; which I am persuaded they would make no difficulty to
quit, rather than the pleasing Dream; and so much the more willingly, because
they believe Death to be the Undersheriff of Heaven, who is to put them into
immediate Possession of those dear Delights, those unexpressible Joys, which
they do with so strong an Imagination fancy are there laid up for them in
store.

AFTER all this I would not be thought to be of their Faith, who believe there
are no such things as assurance of Heaven, Joy in believing, or Comfort of the
Holy Ghost. I am very well satisfied that these are not Fictions, but the
greatest and most certain Truths; and that there is a great possibility of
enjoying a great Measure of them: But this Blessed Hope which is the Anchor of
the Soul, must be fixed upon firm and solid Cround; otherwise it will in our
greatest stress and necessity slip and come home to us, and endanger our Wrack
upon the Rock of Desperation; and therefore, this Joy and Comfort must be built
upon our Willing and Universal Obedience to all the Laws of God, and Commands
of the Gospel, in desire, will, intention, and endeavor, which through Faith
in the Merits of Christ, is only able to fill the Devout and Pious Soul with
those true Joys, and that Peace of God, which passes all understanding: and
this Universal Obedience I am sure these Persons cannot justly pretend to, so
long as they continue in that manifest, wilful disobedience to their Lawful
Superiors both in Church and State, which is so plainly contrary to the Will
and Positive Command of God.

BUT further, this Doctrine fills them with a spiritual Pride and Opinion of
themselves, which makes them despise all others: and certainly is one true
reason of their Separation, whilst though it may be their Words do not, yet
their Actions speak it out plain enough in the Language of those in Isaiah,
which said, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou;
Isa. 6: 5.
these are a Smoke in my Nostrils, and a Fire that burns all day, says God of
these Pretenders to Holiness, and Breakers of Union in his Church: Good
encouragements to Separation! and to persuade this sort of men that they are in
God's Favor, and his Elect and Chosen ones, he gives so good a Character of
them, and that their Actions are so grateful to him. Sure they overlook this
Text, or never soberly consider of it, or measure themselves by it; for if they
did, God Almighty would not have so many unrequired Pharisaical thanks from
them, as I question not but he has, That they are not as other Men, so, or so;
or even as this superstitious, Idolatrous Church of England Man; who for all
that, with his devout Litany, and humble Lord have mercy upon me miserable
Sinner, is in the judgment of him who shall be Judge of the quick and the dead,
like to go up to his House justified sooner than the boasting Pharisaical
Presbyterian Separatist, notwithstanding the large self-justifying Inventory,
of his own Perfections and Performances. There are few but would be of my
judgment in this particular, that these men are strangely puffed up with this
wind-Tympany of Pride, if they had but conversed with them; and seen how big
and swelled they look with self-conceit; or if they had but heard them vilify,
lessen, and despise all others, upon whom the best their Charily can bestow, is
a little scornful Pity; Alas! poor Souls! they are in blindness, Error, and
Ignorance, and do not see those saving Truths which concern their precious and
immortal Souls, or their everlasting Peace and Welfare.

CHAP. X. Of the ill Consequences this Doctrine has upon the private
Communities where it comes. From hence proceeds a certain breach of Unity. No
People so addicted to Debates, Envyings, Strife, Backbitings, Whisperings,
Slanders, condemning, censuring all who are not of their Way to be Reprobate,
as are the Separatists. Incharitableness and Atheism hereby extremely
propagated; they separate the dearest Eriends, and by creeping into Houses, and
beguiling silly Women, divide those whom God had joined together; they are
curious busybodies in espying out the faults of all others; which they
publish to make themselves appear the Elect, and all others Reprobates. All
this is done to fit them to act upon the public Theater of the World which
they practice in private Villages, or where ever they dwell.
FROM Themselves, let us pass to their Neighbors; and there we shall see the
ill consequences this Doctrine has upon them as they are Members of any
Community or private Society of Men. Hereby the Unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3.
which is the Bond of Peace and Perfection, is utterly destroyed; and
wheresoever this Doctrine once enters, there does immediately follow, as St.
Paul says to his Corinthians, Debates, Envyings, Wrath, 2 Cor. 12 20.
Strifes, Back-bitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults; innumerable Disputes,
great heats in discourse, and coolings in Charity; strong arguings, though weak
Arguments, from these men of perverse minds, condemning, censuring, judging,
reproving and reproaching all their Neighbors, who will not join with them,
and by running into the same Excess of Spiritual Riots, unlawful Meetings,
Conventicles, or Assemblies, under pretense of serving God, become new Men, as
they believe and speak themselves to be: all those who look not through their
Optics, are blind, the Wicked, and Reprobates. If for this talkative and
troublesome humors, any of their Neighbors reprove or rebuke them, presently
it is because they know nothing of God or of goodness: If hereby they purchase
the aversion of the Sober or more Judicious, the Prudent and Ancient, who will
tell them it was not so in their time; but there was more true love, faith, and
honesty, when there was less disputing about Religion; when men went all one
way to the Church and Heaven; and that it was never a good world since they
came into it: Oh! these are your formal Moral men, who are settled upon the
Lees: and hereby they fortify themselves in their Errors, because they know
the world must hate them; which Hatred they make another infallible Sign of the
true Church; and which is just such another as the former Mark of Persecution;
and if one or both of these are true, all manner of Thieves, Robbers,
Murderers, and combined Villains, must undoubtedly be of their true Church;
because they are hated of all men, except their Confederates; and justly
persecuted for their contempt and breaking of the Laws, as these men are, who
for all their fine pretenses, are no less Malefactors, nor less dangerous to
the public welfare of the State, than the other; and I am sure far more in one
sense, because they are more numerous and of worse design: And whatever they
may say, it is for that danger which the natural Principle of Self-preservation
teaches all men, it is for their doing so many ill Offices, setting Families
and whole Towns together by the ears, disturbing the peace and quiet of all
their Neighbors; it is for these and such like uncharitable practices, that
they deservedly pull those aversions upon themselves; and not as they vainly
please themselves, for their being Religious, which those that see through
them, and their Form of Godliness, to their wicked Intentions, say they cannot
see any true Religion in them at all; and cannot hate them for what they are
not guilty of.

NOR does this a little advance the increase of Atheism amongst us; and it may
be, we need not seek much further, for the true Reason of the great and
sensible Decay of Christian Piety in the present Age. I have known in some
places those who were of no particular Faction, nor had listed themselves under
the Standards of any Party, who yet forsook the assembling of themselves
together at the Church, the Prayers, and Sacraments; for which I could never
hear them give any other account, but that it was impossible to know which was
the right Way to Heaven, or the true Religion, whilst so many different
Opinions pretend with an equal Confidence that they are in the Right, and all
others wrong: and this sort of People wanting both Will and Abilities to judge,
are easily persuaded to dispense with all Religious Performances, their natural
inclinations having never very strongly bent them that Way; and should the
succeeding Age make but as considerable a step toward Heathenism, as the
present has done, we should stand in need of a Second Joseph of Arimathea, to
convert our Posterity to the Christian Faith, as it is said the first did our
Ancestors.

NEITHER has this Infection seized only upon the vulgar, but even those persons
who have been able to fly from other Plagues, have been surprised by this
Contagion; and possibly Leviathan, who is so much accused for debauching green
heads, has not made so many Proselytes to Atheistical Principles amongst the
tender and unsettled Minds of young Gentlemen, as the many Disputes and
Uncertainties which of late have by our Dissenters been occasioned about which
is the true Religion; where whilst every one boldly challenges the sole
acquaintance with Truth, they come all at last to be suspected of Falsehood; and
amongst so many glistering and well-set Counterfeits and Pebles, the true and
inestimable Diamond, by the difficulty of discovery, is in danger to be
mistaken, if not absolutely lost. And the young Gallant, whilst he makes it
his Pastime as much as Cock-fighting to set the Doctor of his Parish, as he
calls him, and a Quaker, Anabaptist, or Presbyterian into a dispute about
Religion; though he fancies the Rencounter very pleasant, and thereby gets a
fine Scene of Divertisement, yet he certainly loses all that little good
Opinion which before he had of Religion; and this together with his own loose
inclinations, and the fashionable humor of being irreligious, easily persuade
him, that it is nothing but a fine Device of Politicians, to keep the lower
part of the World in awe. Or if he has read the Poet, he believes him more than
the Gospel, when he tells him -- Primus in Orb Deos Timor fecit. The
Foundation of all Religion, was either Fear or Fancy. And are not these
glorious discoveries, occasioned and found, out by this New Gospel Light?

BUT to proceed; these persons are always curious and inquisitive to find out
the most secret Crimes of others amongst whom they live; and will never fail to
publish that in the open street, and upon the house top, S. Mat. 1^.15.
which was done in a corner; and they are so far from the true Christian Way of
private admonition directed by our Savior, that without waiting for
Reformation by those Degrees, they proceed immediately to a Dic Ecclesiae, and
tell it to their Church upon the first discovery.

LIKE the wily Serpent, they do commonly begin the Temptation with the Woman,
as being the weaker Vessel, yet having a strong Ascendant and influence upon
the Husband: and hereby do not rarely Verify the Apostles prediction, when
they creep into houses and lead Captive silly Women, laden with Sins, led away
with diverse Lusts: and it is the common opinion, that it is not impossible to
find amongst their Converts, more Women who either are or have been of ill, or
at least suspected Fame, than in many other places which go under a harder
Censure. But the good Woman becoming a New Creature, religiously cheats her
husband to help to maintain the Speaker; the Man first suspects, and after a
little Time discovers the Intrigue of his Wifes paying for this new invented
Leachery of her Ears; and as well he may, is not a little angry or displeased
at it. She tires him with perpetual Lectures, Repetitions, Admonitions and
Importunities; which makes his House or Shop uneasy to him, and either does,
or very probably may induce him to seek more agreeable Conversation abroad; and
whilst he endeavors to avoid her continual dropping in a rainy day, as the
wise man calls the Persections of a Contentious Woman, by choosing such places
and persons for his Divertisement, he may endanger the Ruin of his Soul, Body,
and Estate. And surely next to the debauching a Woman into forbidden Embraces,
I think this alienating of those two, whom God has made one, and no person has
power to put asunder either in Body or Mind, is a displeasure that must needs
be the most sensible Affliction to both Parties, and so much the more, if
formerly there has been an entire Love and kindness; when they shall come to be
so far estranged as to live in perpetual jars and discords; and whilst they
both strive to save the others Soul, run a manifest hazard of losing both; and
do most certainly lose one of the greatest designs and satisfactions of
Marriage, which is, that they may be mutual helps and comforts one to another.
The Heathen Poet could have taught them better Doctrine, where he tells them:

Foelices ter and amplius,
Queis irrupta tenet Copula
Nec malis divulsa Querimoniis.
And St. Peter tells the good Women the way to convert their Heathen Husbands
is by their chaste Conversation coupled with fear to offend them, and not by
perpetual ungrateful Curtain-Lectures.

THE wise King tells us, ATale-bearer makes strife; Prove. 26.20.16. c. 28.
and a Whisperer separateth chiefest Friends. And with these Talents they do so
abound, that the Coffee-Houses are not better stored with News, especially what
may advance the Defamation of all those, from the highest to the lowest, that
are not of their Way, or do oppose them. But above all, their aspersions are
thrown upon their Lawful Minister, if possible to make him odious to the
People, which they know if they can effect, it will be no hard matter to bring
them into their Confederacy. And having left him, because he will not leave the
Church and his Duty, nor forswear himself to please them, that they may appear
to have some Reason too for their deserting of him, they will not stick to
vilify, contemn, despise, defame, and scandalize, by all the ways they can
invent, true or false, it matters not: and herein their cunning is not less
than their malice; one blow at the Root, being worth a hundred at the Leaves or
Branches: and rather than fail, where nothing else is to be had, they will
content themselves with ridiculous Improbabilities. A Clergyman of my
acquaintance being called up to London upon the dispatch of some emergent and
important affairs of his; having, it seems, nothing to fix upon him besides,
they reported that during his stay there, he had his Pocket picked at the
Playhouse, of a considerable Sum of Money; which was, as they would have
people believe, a most remarkable Judgment upon him for his Vanity; but a far
greater Untruth, he having (as he solemnly protested to me) never had that
common piece of ill Fortune at London, or any where else, in all his Life; nor
for seven years before having seen a Play; though he thinks it far better, and
more lawful, than one of their Conventicles, where the Teacher picks the Money
out of their Pockets, all their Duty, Loyalty, and Allegiance, out of their
Hearts; and if they do not in time repent, they are in the greatest danger of
having the Devil pick their Souls out of their Bodies.

IT were endless to recount all the disturbances they make wherever they
come: and this being but the Prologue to greater Mischiefs and Inconveniences,
we will proceed to them; though to keep their hands in ure, they are like the
Gentleman's Servant, who being observed by his Master to be so light-finger'd,
that he never went any whither, but he stole something before he came away; he
gave him a strict charge not to meddle with any thing at a House whither he was
going to make a Visit; at his coming away, the Fellow took up a handful of the
Rushes with which the Hall was strow'd, and put into his Pocket; and his Master
demanding why he did so, he made answer, it was to keep his hand in ure. So
these men will play at small Games, Heads and Points, in their own Parish,
rather than stand out: and first grow well acquainted with making Parties,
Divisions, and little Mutinies, in the Town where they live, that so they may
be perfect at the Trade; and fit to set up; and Act their parts of the Tragedy
their Masters are composing, as soon as it is ready to appear upon the Public
Theater of the World. In a word, they are intimately acquainted with the
Jesuits Maxim, which they use against the Protestants, Fortiter calumniare,
aliquid haerebit: thus Englisht by a certain Lady, who was wont to use and give
this devilish Counsel to such as complained to her of any affront or injury
they knew not well how to revenge; Defame 'em, Defame 'em, some Body will
believe it: and whose Disciples and Followers they are, and what designs they
have, we may soon know, if we call to mind, that it was the advice of their
great Masters, when they were to draw up a Charge against the most innocent
King Charles the First, Let us blacken him, by all means, let us blacken him;
which they did to purpose, till their Cruelty gave him the Coronation Robes for
Heaven, died in the pure Scarlet of his own Blood. Nor do these of the Nursery
ever fail to put the Doctrine in practice; and all this they think they may do,
and that it is good and justifiable, being only against the Wicked, who are
God's (because their) Enemies: And that hereby they may make them appear such;
and manifest that they only are the Godly and Elect, and all other Reprobates.

BUT these are but slender attempts, and only in order to their Grand Design of
Religiously subverting both the Church and State: which let them protest never
so much against, and pretend themselves never so innocent of any such
Intentions, I shall never be able to believe but they do design. Others may do
as they think fit. But if I meet a Man at Ware going toward London, I shall
conclude that to be the Place whither he designs his Journey, though he tells
me he is traveling toward York: which if I were not well acquainted with the
Roads, I might otherwise be apt enough to credit; especially if I tell him he
is mistaken, and must turn back again; and I find he intends to deceive me,
telling me, I am mistaken, and that he is in the Right way, and his Wits too;
and knows better than I can direct him, whither he is going; which is the exact
humor of all these Barge-Saints, who tugg so hard at the Oars of Reformation,
and constantly Row one Way, and look another.

CHAP. XI. Of the Wicked Design they have, by the strength of this Doctrine to
overthrow the present Church and its Government. Which, by their pretending to
be the Elect who Worship God in Spirit and Truth, they endeavor to make
unlawful and Antichristian. This Doctrine contrary to Gods promise to be with
his Church to the End of the World; and derogatorie to his Honor. Of the false
aspersions they secretly cast upon the Church, and the public Service of God.
Of the inconvenience of arguing with them; and the advantages they make
thereof. Their impudence in boasting themselves and arguments invincible. Of
their dislike of Places of public Worship; of the treatment they met with in
the times of their Power, the house of Prayer made a Den of Thieves. Of their
inveterate Hatred against Bishops and the Liturgy. Of the dangerous Tenent
they maintain, that all People, Princes and Magistrates are bound to pull down
Antichrist which with them is Episcopacy; and that if Princes will not, the
People may if they can get the Power into their hands. Which makes them grasp
continually at Dominion.
LET us now come to examine the dangerous effects this Doctrine has upon the
Church: and how industriously, secretly, and with an unwearied and restless
constancy they undermine its Foundations; and with all their Power mightily
endeavor to overturn it. And wisely they do like their Predecessors make their
attaque upon that quarter of the Government which is most defenseless, and
unarmed, and by Ruining which they formerly gained the Town. Now that they do
really design this, is apparent from the New Model of Church Government which
they should introduce, and impose upon the Christian World, as the only true
and Evangelical way warranted by the Word of God: and for the Establishment of
which, they have so often drawn the Sword in Scotland, and England. For the
very design of building a new house in the same Place, necessarily implies the
pulling down of the Old one, as being decayed, useless and inconvenient.

Does not this new invention of theirs extremely conduce to the Glory of the
only Wise God? and confirm the Truth of his Promises, that he would be with his
Church to the End of the World; and that the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against it? When from the very time of his Ascension (if we will believe them)
for fifteen hundred years and upwards he never thought more of it. For sure if
he had, he would never have suffered Antichrist to rule in it so long: and in
all that time never reveal what was his Positive Will and Pleasure in the way
of his public Worship and Service, till this new Apostle- Fisherman found it
out in the Lake of Geneva, or in that other Lake which has no Bottom, which by
the fire and Brimstone with which it has set the World in Flames, one would be
apt to Guess; and that it came from the Angel of the bottomless Pit whose name
is in the Hebrew Abaddon, Rev. 9.11.
but in the Greek Tongue has his name Apollyon, and in the English the
Destroyer, and some will be ready to interpret it the Presbyterian. They may
talk what they will of the Mystery of Iniquity (which with them is Episcopal
Government and the Church-Hierarchy) which begun they say to work so Early: I
am sure, the woeful Experience of the greatest part of Europe, especially
England, can sadly testify that their way is the Abomination of Desolation; or
that which makes Desolate wherever it comes, which they would set up in the
Holy Place, or in the Place of the Holy Church.

But the thing is certain: for they are the Elect People of God, who were
predestined from all Eternity to be so, and therefore the true Church: and if
so; all others must be False. And to make this manifest and apparent; having
neither unless, a stat pror^tione Voluntas.
Reason, Antiquity nor Scripture to assist them, they are resolved to be their
own Friends; and since Fathers, Councels, and Scriptures are all Prrtial,
because the writings of Bishops in their own Cause; they can do the Work
without them. And though St. Peter tells them no prophecy of Scripture is of
private interpretation, St. Pet. 2. Ep. 1 Cap. 20 v.
and they are yet but Private men, and I hope will never be other: Yet will
they put them upon the Rack of their private Interpretations (and the prophecy
of the Revelations, for all the Curse at the End of it, more than any other)
till they wrest and Extort a confession from them that Episcopacy is Babylon,
etc. that is, such a sense as may advance their own Designs, and it is to be
feared Damnation; since the same Apostle tells all those do, who are unlearned,
unstable, 2 Ep. St. Pet. 1. v. 12.
or unfixed in the truth, as he uses the Word; which does exactly correspond
with the humor of these people, who after they have once left the Church, roll
from one Opinion to another, and are driven about with every new Wind of
Doctrine, and truly let them but alone, and they want neither Skill nor Will to
accomplish these and far more difficult Enterprises.

In General therefore they persuade all Men every where, that the present
visible Church is Antichristian, and Popish: a thing strangely made up of
outward Pomp and Splendour; Formality, Ceremonies and Will Worship, the
Inventions, Traditions and Commandments of Men, not at all agreeable to the
Word of God, or the naked and Primitive Purity and simplicity of the Gospel,
and the Truth as it is in Jesus.

These Controversies have been so learnedly debated; and they have been so
often baffled in all they could say for themselves, that I know no Plea that
has been left them, except Conscience, (which they will not part with) though
most people from their Actions Judge if they have any it is an Evil conscience,
and of the largest size in the World. Though the plain truth is, the thing
which they call Conscience, is commonly known and called by the name of
Wilfulness in Opinion; And is just like the Mother Viper, which when her young
Brood are hunted and in Danger, opens her mouth, and there secures them, and it
may be mortally stings the pursuers. I will not therefore repeat the Combat;
since they can never be so often thrown to the ground, but like the Giant
Antaens, they rise again and gather strength by their frequent foils. And
(though I would not have any one think I have an intention by what I say to put
my self into the number of those Worthies) I am persuaded, by the repeated
victories which the Champions of Truth have so often gained over them these
vanquished become victors; and the great Condescensions of so many Famous and
Learned Cheiftians as have undertaken to confute them, and have really done it,
has rendered them more considerable amongst the Vulgar than all their own
Abilities put together could have done: For Ignorant and credulous People must
of necessity believe that they are some body, and that there is something more
than Ordinary of truth in their Opinions; which emboldens them to affront
Authority, and to have the Courage to measure their Weapons with the most
Famous and Learned Persons of the Age. And by these Comabtes, these Triflers
purchase a real Victory Honor and Reputation, and triumph in their being
defeated by such glorious Arms.

And here it will not be amiss to inform all people of one of their Stratagems,
which never fails them, Vide their Reports of the Conferences at Hampton Court
before King James
nor they to make use of it: amongst the credulous Company of their fiends,
Followers and Disciples, they always boast themselves Invincible; and tell
them that such and such with whom they disputed were not able to resist the
Wisdom and Spirit by which they spoke: and though they will own their
Weaknesses, yet will they glory in the pretended Victory of the Truth. And by
disclaiming their own Interest in these great Achievements, and ascribing it
all to God, who has chosen the Weak and contemptible things to confound the
Great and Wise; they still advance their Reputation as being the particular
Favorites of Heaven, and the only Instruments which God is pleased to make use
of to carry on his Work, his great Work; which appears so much the more his own
wonderful doing, by how much the Means he imployes in it are despicable and
unlikely to Effect it. And hereby they insinuate and wind themselves into the
esteem and admiration of their Party: though others who observe them thus
cunningly crawling upon their bellies with a seeming humility, think it
discovers in them more of the subtle Serpent than of the innocent Dove.

But to go on, they will not be contented with Generals, but their attempts
descend to particulars; and therefore, as if they meant to fulfill the
prediction of our Savior against the Jewish Temple, upon the present Church;
there is not one stone from the Foundation to the highest Pinnacle, which they
would leave upon another, or do not endeavor to throw down: Not the Porch that
is called Beautiful, nor the Altar (sacred in all places, Ages, and amongst all
Nations and Religions except the Turks) can escape their Zealous Rage and Holy
fury. Their secret practices and aims are levelled at All; Root and Branch is
the Word of Ecclesiastical Places, Persons and Performances.

As to their dislike of Places, that is not so General: and I question not, but
if they and their Appennages were converted to their use, and sanctified by the
Word and Prayer, (for they must not be Consecrated, because that is a Popish
word, and Ceremony) they could dispense with any of them, except the
Cathedrals: which so long as they stand will put the World in mind of Bishops,
their true and Ancient Possessors. But yet some Dissenters who are no
Steeple-house Quakers, will speak most contemptuously of the Church of God
which is the House of God. 1 Timothy 3.15.
Nor indeed do any of them believe there is any such thing in them as a
Relative Holiness, though God tells them there is, when he commanded Moses to
put off his Shoes from off his Feet, Ex. 3 5.
for the Place whereon he stood was Holy Ground. And many Ornaments and
Vestments dedicated to his service are called Holy: Ex. 29.6.
As the Holy Crown or Mitre for the High Priest, Lev 16.4. Ezech. 4.14.
the holy Linen Coat, and holy Chambers where they laid these Holy things. But
these Men are not under Law, but under Grace. As if the great Obligations of
the Gospel, were intended to set us free from that respect we owe unto Almighty
God. Whereas common reason will tell us they ought rather to increase and
augment it. And I know not what is, if this be not (as St. Peter says) an
abusing of Christian freedom, 1 St. Pet. 2. Chap. 13.14, 15, 16.
and using it for a Cloak of Maliciousness; As all those persons do who will
not submit themselves to Government, and by Obedience Honor the King, which is
the way to show that they fear God. How little fear or respect they have for
either is but too plain. What will they say to you of the houses of God; are
they any more than other Places, Heaps of Wood and Stones? they are sorry that
they are not heaps of Rubbish too. Were they not all built by Papists, in the
times of Superstition, Blindness, and Ignorance? But some of them will yet go
further; and can afford them no better Title, they are the High Places, the A
pretty witty new name for a Church, it is to be thought from the Publicans and
Sinners that resort to it. Oh the happy Inventions of some Men!
Public, and the Places of Idolatry. One of these Venerable Men, riding not
long ago near a Cathedral of this Nation, took occasion at the next Meeting
(whither he was going to hold forth) to speak to this Effect, if not these
Words: Beloved, as I came hither, I saw that place of Idolatry, (naming the
Cathedral) Ah! poor Souls! A pitiful man I warrant him.
thought I with my self, that live in that place of Superstition, what will
become of you? but you, my friends, are not in darkness, but under the precious
Sunshine of the Gospel Light. And so he went on.

And in truth the treatment which these Sacred and Venerable Places met with in
the time of their Empire, is sufficient to convince us of that respect and
kindness they have for them. Our Lord upbraids the Wicked Jews, for making the
House of God (which was to be a House of Prayer for all Nations) a Den of
Thieves, and a house of Merchandise; what may we then think of those Men who
once made St. Paul's, (whose very Ruins are one of the Wonders of the World) not
only a public Exchange, and a Den of Thieves, but of Murderers? a stable for
Horses, far more innocent Beasts and less Brutish than their Riders, and if
ever there were Hippocentaurs in the World it was they, for the Horse and Man
were both of a piece.

It were a pretty Subject for a Romance (and so great was the impiety, that
future Ages will scarcely believe it any other) to relate the Pious Adventures
of the Knights Errant of those days; what fierce Battles they had with the
painted Glass Windows, with Christ and his twelve Apostles, the Saints and
Martyrs. Wherever they met with them they were sure to suffer in Effigy. How
many right Doughty Knights they overthrew, and killed over and over, after they
had been dead some Ages! only because their Superstitious Marbles, were in the
idolatrous posture of Kneeling, and more certainly Praying to some Popish Saint
in the neighboring window: In vain was it that they had taken Sanctuary in
those Holy Places; they could not protect themselves; nor be at rest till by
their looking like Skeletons, they gave an ample testimony to all that saw
them, that they were Dead, and as they thought beyond the hopes of a
Resurrection; though God be praised, in that particular they were no true
Prophets, and we have seen those dry Bones live and flourish again. Long may
they do so! Long live and flourish! And here I cannot omit a pleasant passage
which happened at a place where Ireton had his Quarters in the late times, and
which I have since seen; In his zeal against Images, at the Church whose
windows were very Beautiful, he made all the twelve Apostles and many other
Saints suffer a second Martyrdom, only the Picture of the old Dragon vomiting
the Flames of Hell out of his Mouth, was spared, and for old acquaintance left
entire, and undefaced; which was then by the Inhabitants taken notice of, and
who was his Saint; not without applying the proverb, Like to Like, quoth the
Devil to the Collier.

But had these Men power, I am satisfied they could make good use of the
Places, even the same that Judas would have had made of the precious Ointment,
Jo. 12.5.
sell them and give them to the Poor: and it is easy to guess who those are;
for though they abhor Idols, Romans 2.22.
as they account these places, yet they think it no Sin to commit Sacrilege:
and we may remember, that some of the Cathedrals were once exposed to Sale;
though as it was observed, the gains the purchasers made of their Bargains was
like Aurum Tholosanum, which made all those who had it die Beggars and
miserable.

But the Persons are their greatest Eyesore, being (as they complain) Goads in
their Sides and Thorns in their Eyes; the Houses and Inheritance might do them
good, if the present owners were but dispossessed of them: and at this they
strike fair, whilst they persuade the People all they can, that the present
Office of a Bishop, as it is in use in the Church of England, is a mere humane
invention: That by the Bible, Bishops and Presbyters are all one: That they
Lord it over the Flock of Christ; and that their Authority which with so much
Rigor they Exercise over the Church of God, and especially over tender
Consciences, and good Men, is a mere Tyrannical Usurpation upon the Liberties
of their fellow- Laborers in the Gospel. They are not altogether so busy upon
this Theme in Public, as formerly they were, when their Tongues were their
own, and there was no Lord over them; not so much as Sovereign Lord, or Lord
Bishop to restrain them, which were brave Days of Liberty indeed: But I make
no Question, but they ply it in Private; and I am the apter to believe it,
because the unwary now and then blab it out. And it was but the other day that
one of this Tribe, a little heated with discourse, could say before a great
many Persons of a contrary Judgment to his, What? do you think the Bishops fit
to govern the Church? undoubtedly He did not, nor do any of them: and had not
his fear pulled him by the sleeve, and given a check to his overforward Tongue,
no doubt but he would have produced all the strong Reasons of the Cabal for the
proving of the Negative. And this I dare confidently affirm, that there is not
one in a hundred of them who have drunk of this Poison, but hate the present
Office, if not the Person of a Bishop, who may have done them much Good, but
never any injury, and possibly one whom they never saw in all their Lives.

Did the Commons of England understand what great Immunities and Privileges
they possess, by the persuasions, and powerful influences of some former
Bishops upon our Kings and the Laws, they would find that they have a great
deal of Reason to Love and Honor the present Bishops for the sake of their
Predecessors.

My Design being not so much to pretend to the full Determination of
Controversies, as to discover the secret practices of these dangerous People: I
will not undertake the Quarrel, nor undervalue those Reverend Fathers of the
Church, by taking up the Gantlet for them; lest under the pretense of doing
them Justice, by my ill Managery of so great and good a Cause, I might affront
and injure both them and it. I was always of the Opinion, that every man is not
a fit Combatant for all Truths: and I have not yet shaken hands with that
Modesty which hitherto has made me esteem my self of their Number, who may want
Ability, rather than Will or Courage to do them service. And indeed as they are
sufficiently able, without calling Auxiliaries to their assistance, they have
already several of them vindicated their own Cause, Office, Institution,
Succession, and whatever does concern them, so learnedly fully and Effectually,
that it were but to light a Candle to the Sun, for me to go about it.

Leaving them therefore to the Management of their own Affairs, let us return
to our Propose: and having heard what are the Opinions of these Dissenters,
concernign the Places and Persons; we now come to take their Sense of our
Ecclesiastical Performances: for which we shall find they have as little
kindness or Charity as for the former.

All the Ceremonies of the Church which they tell tell the People are with us
the greatest part, if not the All of our Worship, are far from that Spirit and
Truth, which God seeks for in all those Worshippers that he approves. That they
are no where Warranted in the Word of God, and therefore unlawful. The Surplice
and other Vestments, (badges of Innocence, and distinctions of Degrees, or
Office,) are Rags of Rome. Bowing at the Name of Jesus flat Idolatry: kneeling
at the Sacrament the same: The Cross after Baptism, a vain and foolish piece of
Superstition, and a Relic of the Popish Crossing. In short, the whole Book of
Common Prayer, etc. a dull dead Letter, formal, having not the Power or Spirit
of Devotion: nothing but a translation of the Mass Book into English. Full of
Thank Calvin for his Tolerabiles ineptiae.
frivolous stuff, mere Porredge, and I know not what, for there is nothing that
may render the Service of the Church contemptible or Odious which they will
stick to say of it; and in so doing persuade us they do their Duty, and God
good Service.

How far they have successfully advanced in this Wicked Design is but too
Evident, by the General neglect of People in repairing to the Church, on the
Holy Fasts and Festival Days. Though they are enjoined by the Statute Laws of
the Land to be kept Holy; Ann. quarto and quinto Ed. Sexti st. 3.
as well as by the Command of the Church. And by which all people are enjoined
to resort to their Parish-Churches, to hear Divine Service, Anno. 1. Eliz. st.
2.
and to join in an unanimous and Uniform Worship of God. Anno 23. Eliz. st. 1.
Nor will they come to Church on the Lords Day in the afternoons, when they
have no pretense of the hindrance of their Secular Affairs; if there be only
Prayers and Catechizing, but not a Sermon, which as hereafter shall be shown,
is made the Essential part of all Religion.

Now all these Waters of Marah spring from the same Fountain. The Doctrine of
their being the Elect, and only people of God. For if they be, theirs is the
right way of worship, and all others false and vain. But that they are the
Elect you have already heard; and what infallible Marks their Teachers have
given them; and more than all that, have told them that undoubtedly they are:
which likewise has been confirmed unto them, by the Testimony of the Spirit
helping them to pray, and filling them with Love, and Joy in believing. And if
ours be false ways, and Will Worship, such as keep men in Error and Ignorance,
Blindness, Formality and Superstition, such as will certainly bring them to
Hell; ought they not think you, to promote Gods Glory (and their own) by
pulling down the Kingdom of Antichrist, and destroying the Brazen Serpent, when
it is abused to Idolatry. Undoubtedly they think it is their Duty; and not only
theirs, but the Duty of all Magistrates, Kings and Princes of the Earth, who
are bound to endeavor it; to hate the great Whore of Babylon and to burn her
with fire: and if they will not be so wise to receive this Instruction from
them; and so learned as to put this in Execution, the people may (if they can
get power) nay must endeavor it, with or against their Wills; for the Work is
the Lords, and Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently, Jer.
48.10
and Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from Blood; which is the true
Chain of their desperate Opinions and Practices: A most admirable Sorites, to
prove Rebellions not only Lawful but Necessary; and which you see is forcibly
backed with abused Scripture.

Thus one Error in the Foundation, multiplies into a thousand; and contrary to
the Rules of Architecture, is like an inverted Pyramid, the higher it rises the
wider it spreads; and one mistake in a Principle, is the Parent of innumerable
in the Practice. I will conclude this particular, with the following Apologue,
and leave the Application of it to every man's pleasure.

A certain Husbandman having in his Plantation a Vine, it grew wonderfully, and
did produce great plenty of incomparable Clusters, and of a most delicate taste:
some of his wise neighbors coming to see his Plantation; and perceiving the
Shoots and Branches so Luxuriant, they gave him advice to crop and prune it,
and to take off most of the largest and fairest leaves; telling him that the
Plant spent it self too much that way, and that all the good they did, was but
to make a little unnecessary Flourish, which might well be spared; that they
Beauty or Shade, could not make a recompense for the injury they did in drawing
away such abundance of the sapp and moisture from the Root, whereby they
hindered its Fruit, robbing it in great measure of they juicy nourishment. Upon
trial the Experiment does not succeed; the Fruit proves neither so fair,
plentiful, nor of that greateful flavor as formerly it used to do. But to give
him assistance in his design, the following Yea^ he spies upon one of the
Branches a fine wrought webb, charged only with a few little tender Eggs: his
Curiosity and Ignorance of what it was tempted him to let them alone; and to
see what they would come to. The heat of the Sun in a short time discloses a
brood of most curiously variegated Catterpillers, the honest man finds them
still lodged in their cunning enclosure, admires their Beauty and many-colour'd
nature Ammel; and thus argues with himself: Sure these Worms can do my Vine no
hurt, they look so finely and feel so soft: which arguments prevail with him
not to disturb, much Iess destroy them; Before he thought any more of them, or
looked again, they had overspread his Vine and devoured all the Leaves; and had
left the tender fruit naked and bare; which being thereby exposed to the
scorching Sun, the unkindness of the Winds and Weather, in a little time
parched and dwindled quite away: and if he had not used much industry he had
utterly lost his delicate Plant. Which for all his care and pains, did not yet
in several Years recover the damage it had sustained by these pretty silken
Guests. You need make no Question, but for ever after he knew them again at
first sight; and as soon as ever he spied a Webb but beginning to be spun upon
his Vine, he gave it a speedy Dispatch.

CHAP. XII. Of the Desperate influences this Doctrine has upon the State and
Civil Government. This Amazon Fury bred in Rebellion, and ever since nursed up
with blood, proved from our own and all Europe's sad Experience. This Doctrine
inclines men to Aristocracy, or the Government of a Commonwealth. Of the
little kindness they have for Monarchy. Salus populi Suprema Lex, their
fundamental Principle of Government; abused to persuade Men. that the Peoples
Election and approbation are necessary Titles to a Crown. That a King is Major
Singulis, Minor Universis, and may be deposed and punished by the People,
proved from their practice. The great Encouragement it gives to Rebellion, and
Courage to Rebels. The same Doctrine of Fatality taught by Mahomet to inspire
the Turks with Courage against the Christians.
LET us now see whether these Principles render them better Subjects to the
State than Sons to the Church? And I am afraid; we shall find them as
prejudicial to the safety of the one, as to the Peace and Tranquillity of the
other.

If it be rational to argue from Effects to Causes, we shall need no other
Demonstration, to assure us of the Dangerous natures of these Men and Opinions,
than the known and undeniable matters of Fact, so largely treated of in the
Histoty of Presbytery. Wherein is fully shown the Original, Rise and growth of
this pernicious Doctrine, the Mother of all those Younger Sects, Factions and
Divisions amongst us in matters of Religion.

It was begotten, born, and nur'st up at Geneva in Rebellion: and from thence
this Amazon Lady, this Penthesilea furens, Ducit Amazonidum Lunatis agmina
Peltis, Penthesilea furins, mediisque in millibus ardet.
marched attended with Fire and Sword, Ruin called Reformation in the Van, and
Desolation in the Rear; through the greatest part of Europe over a Red Sea of
Blood as well as Salt Water into Scotland, and from thence with the Directory
in one hand, and the Sword in the other, a Solemn League and Covenant, as
smooth as Oil in her mouth, when drawn Swords, War and Rebellion were in her
Heart, she came along with the Northern Army into England; and there spent her
force and fury, (and I hope her last and dying Efforts) upon these Miserable
Nations. So that one may truly say of this Doctrine as the Poet does of Comets.

Nunquam in terris spectatu impune Cometes. This new Light of the Gospel, how
bright and shining soever, was a portentous Blazing-star, which did not only
presage, but wherever its dreadful Beams displaid their Malignant Influences,
it did produce Sedition and Rebellion, Murder and Sacrilege, Desolation and
Destruction, Ruin and Confusion: The consideration of which dismal
Revolutions, methinks were enough to make the greatest Phanatique fall heartily
to his Litany, and pray Good Lord deliver us. If this be Religion; Sit anima
mea cum Philosophis: For I doubt not but a good sober Indians Hell, will be far
more tolerable than such Men's Heaven as were guilty of all these Mischiefs can
be without Repentance and Amendment.

I intimated before how little kindness they have for Monarchy, or indeed for
any Nobility, Gentry, or Magistracy, unless it be to countenance, patronize and
Support their Designs; and how inclinable they are to dislike and hate that
Government which opposes their Interests, or crosses their Intentions of a
Reformation, and possibly there are not many who would not be of my Persuasion,
had they but heard them speak with that feeling kindness as they will do of the
late times of Rebellion. Oh, how much Sin was suppressed, Godly Men encouraged,
and the Sabbath Sanctified, to what they are now in these Days of
Licentiousness! and undoubtedly that Aristocratick Government, or rather
Democracy, Anarchy or Confusion (for I know not what to term it, it was so
Mercurial) is still the Darling of their Memories. Oh! the happy days when
there was no King in Israel! but every man had liberty of Conscience, and did
that which was right and good in his own Eyes! Oh that sweet and precious Time!
that dear Liberty of Conscience, when there was no King, no Bishop, no Fines,
no Imprisonments for Religion, but the Gospel ran on Courageously conquering
and to Conquer! that is to say, when Club- Law and the Law of the Sword put
them out of the Danger of the Sword of the Law and Justice.

It is a most convincing Argument, that they think the present Government and
Governers, Tyrannical and Heathenish, when they do so often tax them with being
guilty of persecuting the People of God: and unless we are not only blind but
stupid, we cannot but perceive, that they do most Passionately wish and pray,
that the Kingdom may be the Lords, and that the Saints may Rule the World:
that is, once again have the Honor which Hugh Peter's applied to the then
Saints; To bind their Kings with Chains, Psalm. 149. C. 7.8.
and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron. And had they but Power, that the high
praises of God might be in their Mouths, whilst a two-edged Sword was in their
hands; no doubt is to be made, but they would be forward enough to fulfill
their part of the prediction, in Executing Vengeance upon the
Heathen-Governours, and punishment upon all the People who would not say or act
like them.

Let them now with their usual dissimulation, deny all such Intentions: and in
truth there is an unlucky Proverb that will hinder their Confession, for if
they confess this, they are sure to be hanged for Treason, as they well
deserve. Let them pretend never so much Innocence; all the World shall never
persuade me, till I am divested of my Reason, that there is any person who
would not willingly shake off that Yoke which is so uneasy to him; and which
as he verily believes, is unjustly and unlawfully imposed upon his neck.

Credat Judaeus appella. And however the ordinary sort of People whose prospect
looks little further than to morrow, may have no intentions that are so black
and dangerous; yet undoubtedly the Heads of the Faction, who have ever been
observed to be subtle and Designing men, are for an Alteration of the
Government Ecclesiastical and Civil; and they well know how easy it is to lead
a Populace by the Nose, with the plausible pretenses of Piety, Reformation,
Gods Glory, and Liberty of Conscience, to do what they please; by telling him
it is necessary to be done, for the attainment of those Ends. Thus have I seen
Clouds gather in the Sky, clothed with fleeces of the brightest Wool, and
shining with a counterfeit borrowed light, to which nothing was comparable but
the Sun that lent it: Who could but admire their glory, or suspect so much
light and whiteness to be Dangerous? and yet nothing is more common than for
such Glouds to be charged with the most dangerous and terrible Principles of
Thunder, Lightning, Storms and Tempests, which when ever they break out (which
is soon perceived by the Changing into black and growing numerous) then let
whatsoever is Eminent beware a Clap; the high Towers of Government, and
Steeples of Religion are sure to suffer for it. For,

Feriunt summos Fulgura Montes, Lightning the Artilery of the Sky
Strikes the Hills that highest lie.
I will make no scruple to apply the Comparison to these sort of Men; who as
St. Peter tells us in his plain description of them, are Clouds carried with a
Tempest.

And to make this evident, I desire all such whose Age will give them leave, to
call to mind whether they have never seen or heard that Salus Populi est
suprema Lex publicly asserted in Print, and abused to countenance the most
Villainous Actions: that the welfare of the People (of which these Men are the
only competent Judges) is above all Laws, Persons and Considerations
whatsoever: and that Kings (whose only true Title to their Crown, Contrary to
Scripture, By me Kings Reign; Proverb. The Powers that be, are ordained of God,
Romans 13.
is the Peoples Election and Approbation, and neither Succession, nor
ordination and appointment from God) and Kingly Government, if prejudicial to
that Fundamental Law may by the People be abolished, deposed, nay and punished
for such Delinquencies, even to the loss of Crown and Life. Have we not seen
all this done as well as said? Have you never heard, that a King is Major
Singulis, but Minor Vniversis? a little better man than Dick, or Tom, or Will,
if you take them barely by themselves in a Frock with a Cart-whip: but by your
Majesty's leave, good Sir King, you are not so good a man as Mr. Multitude.
Have you never known the Time, when the Commons of England were white Boys,
and stroak'd over the Heads with the tickling Imagination, That all the good
People of the Nation were a free born People, and I know not how many good
morrows, with which they were wont in those Days to cologue the World with a
Bait of a pretended Liberty into the Trap of a real Slavery? What they then
thought they boldly writ and spoke; and what they dare not now Speak, yet they
dare as boldly think, that being a freedom which they cannot be deprived of:
and undoubtedly they do so, and it is still their Judgment, their Actions speak
it most distinctly and plain.

It is not this or that King, but Monarchy in general that they are against; as
not being a Government for their Turn; nor any kind of Government by a Single
Person; and I am confident they did as much hate Oliver after he took upon him
to be a Single Protector, as before they loved him, whilst he was only his
Excellency, and their Renowned and Victorious General. It is a Commonwealth
that is their Darling, where every one is not without hopes of his being
uppermost, and that it may come to his Turn to have a Share in the Government.
And where amongst so many Elective Heads, they are sure to make a Party, and it
shall go hard, if not the Major: whereas one single Person can be but of one
Persuasion at one Time, and it is a thousand to one never of theirs, if he
consults his own Security, Settlement, Safety, Interest, or Glory, which
because it is Natural for all men to do, they cannot believe but he will. And
this is the reason of their Hatred of Monarchy, because they fear it; and
knowing how inconsistent their Principles are one with another; and that they
cannot both have the Government; they are afraid lest Sovereign Princes
awakened by their Danger, should by the most Rigorous Methods, ease themselves
of the Jealousy they justly entertain of such desperate Rivals and
Competitors; and this makes them likewise so industrious and restless in their
Endeavors, by making a Party, to overbalance the power of the Prince, and if
possible by force to wrest his from him, by which means they think it is only
possible to secure themselves from Ruin.

Nor will they ever quit these Persuasions so long as they hold to their
Principles, which for ought I see is like to be as long as they live. For if
they be the Elect People of God, and in the Right Way of true Worship and
Religion, they are bound in Conscience to promote and propagate it with or
without the consent of their King it is all one. As we daily see they do by all
their Actions and Endeavors. And they who in his Royal City, and before his
face are not afraid to Violate his Laws and Proclamations; will never fear the
sword of Justice, if once they are assured that their own is longer. And though
the Apostles teach no such Doctrine, nor the Holy Martyrs ever propagated the
Christian Faith or Church Government with any other Blood but their own, or
with any other Weapons but Prayers and Tears; these men are of another Opinion,
and can fight the Lords Battles, and Curse Meroz as bitterly as the Angel did
if they come not to help the Lord against the Mighty.

And for encouragement to fight, I know no Doctrine like this and that of
Mahomet, which whatever they may do in others, agree in this point; that the
Terminus vitae est immobilis: Every man's Fate is in unalterable Characters
written in his forehead. Those feeble and effeminate Asiaticks had never
carried their conquering Arms so far amongst the Hardy Europeans, if they had
not been inspired with this Doctrine of Fatality; and that if it be decreed
that they must Dye in this Battle, or in that Assault, it is impossible for
them to prevent it; and if they must escape and overlive it, they shall; though
they run upon the Mouth of the Roaring Cannon. And in which likewise they
agree, and have a further Harmony; if they fall by the Fatal Steel, or
undistinguishing Bullet; they do not only die in the Bed of Honor, but step
immediately into Paradise: which is but the just Recompense of those who
sacrifice their Lives, to propagate the Alchoran, or the Good Old Cause.

I do not now wonder to have heard those of the Royal Party say so often, that
the Rebels fought like Turks: since in this Opinion they were such. Besides
being the Elect, and fighting Gods Cause they acquire a new Courage from the
hopes they entertain, that he is obliged to protect them, and to fight from
them, that the Stars in their Courses shall fight against Sisera. And how far
such thoughts did Encourage our English Rebels, a people naturally bold enough
to attempt the most hazardous Enterprises, Let those Loyal Gentlemen testify,
who yet wear the Honorable Scars, which they purchased in the defense of their
King, Country, Laws, Liberties and Religion against those desperate Villains.
Let the many Cruel Battles, and desperate storms, hard marches, and hot
Engagements they underwent, let these be Witnesses: it was not all for Pay and
Plunder, though these were good Encouragements, But the Main of the Quarrel was
pro Aris, in their English, against Altars; for Religion and Reformation, the
Liberty of the Subject, which (if any thing can) will inspire a Coward with
Courage, and make him Valiant: And that the Cause was Gods, they never then
made any doubt: nor yet make any more scruple of it, than they do of their
Election.

And what kind thoughts they have of the present Magistracy you shall ghess if
you have any skill, Ex pede Herculem, to take the proportion of Hercules by the
print of his foot. One of these (and a Teacher I promise you) in some Company
where he thought he might be bold, lamenting the looseness and vitiousness of
the Times; and the blame being laid at the Door of the Inferior Magistrates,
who were so remiss in putting the Laws in Execution: Pray, says he, how can it
be otherwise, when there are none in Authority but the God-damm'ees? and though
no former Prince has so highly obliged them as his present Majesty by the Act
of Oblivion, and a General Pardon since; though possibly a better Temper and
milder Inclinations are not to be found amongst all Mankind; yet for all that,
I believe the Guards about White Hall (at which they grumble so often, calling
them a standing Army) are a greater Security for him than their Love or
Allegiance. And I make no dispute, but if they had Power proportionable to
their Desires; if he would not consent to their unreasonable Demands, and in
Effect depose himself, they would make bold in plain English to un-King him;
(and it may be something more) as well as his Glorious Father; whose Caution I
think therefore ought never to be forgotten, (...). The Lady Elizabeth's
Relation of what the King said to her immediately before his Death.
To Forgive them, but never Trust them. For what is a King to them if he be not
one of the Elect? and that he can never be unless he be of their Church; and
resolve to Establish their true and Evangelical Ways; from which he must
therefore be very far, so long as he suffers the Laws and his subordinate
Ministers of Justice to persecute these People, who are the Elect, the
undoubted Children of God.

(...) Sect. 16. upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book.
And as his late Majesty of blessed memory does in the forementioned Book, not
improbably Conjecture; Possibly that aversion they all have for the Public
Litturgy of the Church, is because it does so frequently pray for the King and
the Royal Family, to which in their Hearts they cannot say Amen. and that the
Conjecture is not wide of the Mark, this following Instance will in some
measure make apparent. One of this Gang being amongst other Company entertained
as a neighbor at a friends house, immediately as soon as Dinner was done he
steps out of the Room into a by- Entry, and a Clergyman who was present
returning thanks, and as is customary and commendable, closing his Grace with a
short Prayer for the Kings Majesty, the Queen, and Royal Family; this impudent
Fellow was by those who stood next the Door heard scornfully and maliciously to
say, when he came to that Passage; Oh! by all Means! if it were not for that
all were worth nothing: and indeed it makes me apt to think, that this is one,
if not the only Reason, why they account all the Prayers of the Church worth
nothing: for they are not yet arrived to that Perfection in Christian Religion,
to love or pray for their Enemies; in which number they never fail to put all
Crowned and Mitred Heads.

How directly contrary this Doctrine is to the Divine Philanthropy, the
infinite Love of God to all Mankind; and indeed to the whole Current and
Consent of the Sacred Scriptures; how dishonorable to God, and disadvantageous
to Christian Religion: are Subjects already largely and learnedly treated of by
other Pens. And if as they fell in my Way, I have lightly touched upon any of
them, it is only so far, as they were necessary to show how pernicious this
Doctrine of theirs is to themselves, and the salvation of their Souls; how
troublesome, unquiet, uncharitable, and unchristian it is amongst their
Neighbors. How destructive it is to the Church and Ecclesiastical Government,
Places, Persons, and Performances: and how irreconcilable and desperately
dangerous it is to the State of the present Royal Dignity and Government.

CHAP. XIII. Of their Doctrine of the necessity of Separation from the Wicked,
which they teach in Private; and by their Example in Public. These uses they
make of it; to know their strength and numbers, which they always boast of, if
possible to bring Authority to comply with their Desires: hereby they engross a
Trade amongst themselves. Of their undermining Authority by making it
contemptible, by their daily affronting it. Of the unlawfulness of Separation,
from the example of our Savior, and from Scripture. Separation by St. Jude
made a mark of Reprobation. Jeroboams Policy the End of their Separation.
LET us now proceed to a second Doctrine, which is he Spawn of the first, and
the Daughter of such a beautiful Mother cannot choose, but must be most
admirable fair.

Being the Elect People of God, those whom from all Eternity he has out of his
infinite Love predestined to Holiness and Happiness; though they are in the
World, yet they are not of the World: and therefore they must Separate from
Sinners, and be a peculiar. People, without which they think they are not
sufficiently zealous of Good Works: which in plain English is, That whosoever
will be of the Number of the Elect People of God, must have no religious
commerce with the rest of the World; (for all other he may:) and that a true
Title to Heaven is only to be hoped for, and had in their Church and Communion:
and by this means they advance the so necessary Point of Separation, or
Distinction of a Party; without which Instruments (their Spiritual Carnes and
Engines, to draw up the Stones, after they have hewed and fitted them by the
former Doctrine) they cannot go on with, or ever hope to finish the New Model
of their Church, so as to set up the Cornerstone, and with joy and shouting
cry Grace, Grace unto it; for they would only change his Grace of Canterbury
into his Grace of Presbytery. And this they manage with as little noise as
possible, and with the same Secrecy and Subtilty as the rest; though some
people say they can plainly hear the Axes and Hammers go perpetually, Psalm.
77.6.
which they lift up to break down the Carved Work of all the Houses of God in
the Land, in order to their setting up the Synagogues of Satan in the room of
them.

If you discourse with them, and put the Question, Whether the Church of
England is a true Church? and whether Salvation may not be obtained in
Communion with it? They will do all they can to decline the Question; and will
certainly dissemble their Opinion, by telling you, They dare not judge; every
man must stand or fall to his own Master: That they forbid, or hinder none from
coming to our Church, whose Consciences will give them leave. All which, is
only to avoid the Pinch of the Controversy, and is neither better nor worse,
but what the Apostle S. Paul calls Speaking Lies in Hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.2.


For it is evident that they think it unlawful; because they abstain from our
Church, and refuse Communion with us themselves: and should they speak never a
Word to their Disciples, Example is a Tutor sufficiently able to instruct them
in this part of their Duty. And that Man or Woman either, must have so little
natural Logic as to be mere Naturals, who cannot thus argue from Induction:
Such a man, or Mr. -- is a pious, good, and conscientious man, for he prays by
the Spirit, is painful and powerful in preaching Soul-saving Gospel Truths; Now
surely if it were not unlawful to go to the Church and hear those Prayers, or
receive the Sacrament, he would not refuse to do it, and abstain from them
himself: But he does abstain; Nay, might have kept or had a good Living, if he
would have conformed, which (Good Man!) he relinquished, or refused for
Conscience Sake. Therefore it is unlawful: and I cannot fear to err, or be
mistaken if I follow so good a pattern, such a godly man's Example.

But though in public they are always tender mouthed of what may either
discover their Wicked Designs, or bring them under the unavoidable penalty of
the Laws: and are not a little cautious and circumspect, where they are not
assured that all the Ears and Tongues of the Assembly are at their Devotion,
and therefore will not speak plainly or positively: yet they will deliver their
Sense so as to be well enough understood, That there ought to be no Communion
with the Wicked (and we know who they mean by that,) for what fellowship has
Light with Darkness, Rev. 18.4.
or God with Belial? and therefore come out of her my People, come out of
Spiritual Babylon and Egypt, and be not partakers of their Sins, lest ye be
likewise of their Plagues; which latter part of the verse explains the former,
and informs us how far our Separation is lawful, viz. from the Sins of the
wicked World; not from an outward Communion with the Visible Church. And though
there is no place suffers more frequently by their abuse of it, I know none
that favors them less, if they would put the right Construction upon it.

And though they may be thus squeamish in Public: yet in private discourse, and
where they are under the Rose, or dare be confident that they shall not be
betrayed, they will explain their meaning, and declare, that the Church of
England is Babylon, her Worship Antichristian, nay impious and blasphemous. And
this the Disciples propagate from one to another; and are not so wary as their
Teachers; but having more zeal than prudence, stick not to tell every body so,
with whom they fall into common converse and discourse: and this Doctrine is
usually left to the care of the Old Disciples, to whose charge the new
Proselyte is always committed; and they never fail in the ample discharge of
this Duty.

Should they propose it bare-fac't, the uncharitableness of it would at first
sight affright many, and discourage more; but this is Meat for strong Men, not
Milk fit for Babes: and therefore it is worth our observation, to see how
artificially and by degrees, they take their Novices from the Breast; and with
the common stratagem of Nurses they rub the beautiful Breasts of Consolation of
the Mother Church, with the bitter Wormwood of their false aspersions, or smear
them over with the sooty black of their own Calumnies, and so fright these
Younglings from that sincere Milk of the Word which is able to save their
Souls. It is always some considerable time before any Young Disciple does
absolutely forsake our Church and Communion; nor do they usually feed them with
this solid food of Separation, till by their unnatural biting of their Mother,
they manifest that they have Teeth: first he comes at the latter end of
Prayers, which by their tempering with him, he now begins to dislike: after a
while, having lingered about the Churchyard for the Watchword, he drops in
just as he hears the Psalm beginning to be sung, before the Minister goes into
the Pulpit: then it may be he will miss a day or two; and in time, as he grows
to a clearer Understanding of this Doctrine, that he is to have no fellowship
with the Wicked, and who those are: he totally leaves the Church; to which he
rarely returns, till he comes upon men's shoulders with his Heels forward, to
his own Funeral; except to hear a Funeral Sermon for a deceased Friend or
Relation. Sometimes the temptation of saying Twenty pounds, may persuade him to
come once in a Month, but then only to the Sermon: which being ended, he
tumbles out of the Doors, for fear he should be thought one of the Catholic
Church, by praying for it; or have any share in the Peace of God; which hating
in his Life and Actions, he will not suffer to enter into his Ears. Though, for
all his haste, this will not excuse the forfeiture, which by the express words
of the Statute is to be imposed upon all such as do not resort to their
Parish Church to hear Divine Service.

Now the advantages they receive by this Separation are principally these.

First, hereby they come to know their Strength and Numbers; and this adds not
a little to their confidence; and, as they believe, to their present Security
from Punishment, and future hopes of Tolleration, if not Establishment. And
whosoever does but take notice of the frequent boasts they make, how
Considerable a part of the Nation they are, must conclude, that the knowledge
of their Number, is one great and main end of their Separation: and that hereby
they seem secretly to threaten their Superiors, into a suspension of the
execution of the Penal Laws against so great a Party; whilst they sliely
intimate how unsafe it is to meddle with a Multitude, and disturb a Populace.

Secondly, hereby they come to know, and be known one to another; which begets
as much Love amongst them as they are capable of, who are all Slaves to
Vngenerous Interest. Nor does this knowledge of one another, a little advance
the affairs of the Trading part of them; of which sort of people their greatest
numbers consist: and who, it may be, became Proselytes only in hope of the
Custom of the Brotherhood, of which they assure themselves, if they be ready
Money- Customers, presently; and if not such, as soon as they can get clear of
the Debt-Book of the Wicked, with whom at present they are forced to deal: and
though some from experience are of another Opinion, yet they question not but
they shall have honest dealing and good pennyworths: and possibly this
engrossing and forcing a Trade amongst themselves, together with their avoiding
all troublesome Offices in the lower Sphere of the State, are not the least
encouragements to their Separation, nor the smallest steps to those Riches,
which they so much boast are amongst their Party; for I remember it was their
common discourse, that the great want of Money, and the sensible decay of Trade
for these last Years before the Toleration, was occasioned by their keeping up
their Money, or not giving down their Milk, being, it seems, in a sullen
Humor, because they were kept within the Pasture, and not permitted to make
all Common, or range into the Cornfieldsd. Though after all these brags, I have
not met with any person, whose observation has found Money more plentiful, or
Trading a Farthing better, even in the time of the Toleration.

But lastly, By this Separation they are sure to undermine the foundation of
all Government, which is the principal thing they always aim at, both in Church
and State; for by their departing from one, and Disobedience to both, they
bring their Power into question and contempt: and whilst they endeavor to
render them odious* tyrannical, heathenish and persecuting, superstitious and
unlawful, and yet escape unpunished, by the hopes of the like impunity they
encourage others to follow their example, and insult over the Laws; and to
esteem of all Power as the Frogs in the Fable did of their Wooden King. And
this is all in order to the accomplishment of their ultimate Design; which is
the subversion of the present Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in
order to the setting up a new one according to their own Phancies and Humors.

Now to demonstrate the unlawfulness of this Doctrine, it were enough to show,
that in Public they will rarely own it themselves; and will never charge the
reason of their Separation upon any of these ends, but upon the Ceremonies of
the Church: to which they pretend their Consciences will not give them leave to
submit. I think we shall cut the Sinews of this pretense, and show how feeble
and lame an Excuse it is; If we consider, That these Ceremonies, by their own
confession are acknowledged to be indifferent in their own Natures: and the
reason they give why they are unlawful, is because they are Imposed; the
Liberty of Conscience being thereby taken away. Now this is a most certain
truth, that an indifferent thing, when commanded by a Lawful Authority, ceases
to be indifferent, and becomes necessary: for all the Authority of the Church
to command or impose is only exercised upon indifferent things: What is
absolutely necessary is commanded by God; whatever is unlawful is forbidden by
him; so that they must of necessity either take away all Liberty from the
Church to impose indifferent things, that so they may have their Liberty,
(which is unreasonable to desire, and if granted them, would destroy that
Liberty which they would have) or they must deny the lawfulness of the
Authority that commands and determines indifferent things; otherwise let them
confess, that they seek for a knot in a Rush to maintain the Quarrel. But the
plain Truth is, the Use they have for this Engine of Separation, is to show by
their Example, that they believe the Authority which commands these things, is
no Lawful Authority; that therefore the impositions are not necessary, or
Obedience to them a Duty: for rtherwise I cannot think them so sottish but they
know it is; and I am satisfied, if they were in Power, they would use the same
Arguments to persuade to Obedience which now we do; though they have stronger
in their Budget upon occasion, than have been yet employed to make them obey.

But for a further manifestation of this Error, we will bring it to the
Doctrine of our Blessed Lord, S. Mat 13.29
in the Parable of the Tares. The zealous Servants were for a present
Separation and Extirpation of the Tares from among the Wheat: But the Wise
Master was of another judgment. Not so, lest they should root up the Wheat
also; and certainly as before was shown, this Separation of theirs, has not
failed of that effect; but has already rooted up much of the good fruits of
Charity, Peace and Unity out of the Church, and has left us the Tares of
Dissension in their room; of which we may well say, an Enemy has done this.
And whether this Doctrine, is pursued to the uttermost, would not lead them to
Extripation of the Tares, let their Holy League witness. For they all hold,
that Dominium fundatur in gratia, and the Wicked have only a borrowed Right to
whatever they have of Life and Fortune. And how easy it is for religious
Covetousness to persuade them when in Power, to invade the Rights of Sinners,
and spoil the Egyptians, will appear, if we call to mind former things, which
though the Gracious Act of Oblivion has pardoned them for; they will never
pardon the forced Restitution of the Kings, Bishops, Dean and Chapter-Lands.

But this being only a Parable may not be sufficiently convictive. Let us look
therefore for Example. St. Joh 13.15.
Now the Blessed Jesus, who tells us he was to be our Example, was so far from
Separation, or making Communion with Sinners a Crime, that it was one of the
greatest Objections against him, S. Matt. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.
that he familiarly converst eat and drank with them, and was a Friend to
Publicans and Sinners; S. Matt. 11 19
which accusation he did not excuse himself of, but justify, from the good
designs of thereby calling Sinners to repentance. Nor do we find, that ever he
separated Himself or his Disciples from the Communion of the Jewish Church,
though full of such Types and Ceremonies, as he came by fulfilling to abrogate:
but, as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Days; went up
to Jerusalem, to celebrate all the commanded Festivals, even to the last
Passover, at which he was betrayed. And further to show us, that we ought not
to break Unity or Communion with those who continue in the Visible Church; he
was as conversant with Judas as with the rest of the Apostles; and yet he knew
from the beginning, who it was that should betray him, knew Judas to be a
covetous Hypocrite, and worse than that, a Devil; and it is more than probable,
that he himself at the first Institution, gave the Holy Communion to Judas, as
will appear to any that reads that place of St. Luke, Chap. 22. from the
thirteenth Verse to the two and twentieth.

And for the lawfulness of Separation, let us hear St. Jude, who having given
us such a Character, as I shall hereafter show exactly fits these men, lest
their fair pretenses should still endanger our mistake, he concludes it with
this distinctive Note of Separation: These are they; if you know them by
nothing else you shall be sure to discover them by this; These are they that
Separate themselves; S. Jude 19
Sensual or Animal, having not the Spirit, for all their great pretenses to it,
unless Sedition, Faction, and Rebellion be Fruits and Effects of it, as before
has fully been made appear.

Could they prove us guilty of Idolatry, or that we err in any Substantial
Fundamental point of Religion, then their Separation would not only be lawful
but necessary: but, till they can do this, and convince us that we are not a
true Church, their Separation from us is unchristian, and unlawful; condemned
by Christ and his holy Apostles.

But all this is nothing: Their Religion must be such as well serve their
Interest, and cannot be Godliness, unless it brings in Gain; and should this
Doctrine once appear unlawful, down goes their Dagon, and loses both his Head
and Hands, and will be an useless Trunk, a mere Stump, and no longer a God.

The setting up the two Golden Calves was not the least Policy of Jeroboam the
Son of Nebat, 1 Kings 12, 26. to verse. 31.
who is rarely mentioned without that infamous Remarque, that he made Israel
sin; and that Sin was Separation from the Church, and Rebellion against his
lawful Sovereign. To go up to Jerufalem to Worship, will in time bring the
Kingdom back again to the House of David: and therefore the Calves must be
erected at Dan and Bethel. Not that Jeroboam was so sottish, that he did not
know that Idolatry and Schism, Revolting and Rebellion were unlawful; but
something was necessary to be done to preserve his ill-gotten Crown; and the
People had formerly been strangely fond of a Calf, and two, he thought, would
please them better. I fear Jeroboams Policy is one end, and the chief one of
their Separation, even to nurse the People up in Disloyalty against their
lawful Prince, and disobedience against the Holy Church: For should the People
go to the Church to Worship, to hear Divine Service, and receive the Holy
Sacrament; should they hear their lawful Ministers preach their Duty, and press
them to Fear God, and Honor the King, they might in time be convinced of their
Errors and Mistakes, and then all is lost.

CHAP. XIV. Of their Exaltation of Preaching, and the Reason why they do so. Of
the great Veneration people have for the Pulpit. The advantages they make of
it, to gain the love of People for being so painful Laborers; dispersing their
Doctrines, and procuring Benevolences. Hereby they bring the Prayers of the
Church to be nauseous, accustom People to variety and novelty, and have
opportunities of displaying their Gifts and Abilities, as well as in
Extempore-Prayer. The Abuse they put upon the Church, that it is against
Preaching. A vindication of the Church from this aspersion. Of the Primitive
and Modern Preaching: It is against preaching themselves, and their own
Interests and wicked Designs that the Church declares it self.
NOW to the end that they may have the better opportunity to disperse and
divulge their Doctrines, there is no place that can be so subservient as the
Pulpit: a Discourse from thence having gained the mighty Reputation of being
Authentic; and the generally received Opinion being, that from that place men
speak as the Oracles of God: and that every Word that comes from their mouths,
is as true as the Gospel; as in truth it ought to be.

There is therefore a Necessity, that they should exalt Preaching, as the
chiefly necessary, most excellent Christian Duty; and give it the pre-eminence
above all other Ordinances. And this is the third Doctrine which for the same
Design with the other, with so much vehemence and earnestness they press upon
the People.

And to satisfy you how strangely the present Age is enamoured of the Pulpit,
and how great an Opinion People have of what is spoken there. I will relate a
passage which happened to a Reverend Divine in the County of Essex. Every Lords
Day, as he thought it was his Duty, in the Afternoon he Expounded upon some
part of the Nine and thirty Articles to instruct his Parishioners what was the
Doctrine of the Church of England: judging it a good expedient to remove the
Scandal that lies upon our Religion; and to prevent their falling into Sects
and Factions, with which that County does abound: and this he did in the
Reading Desk, without the formality of a Prayer to usher it in, or make it look
like a Sermon; but never met with any thing but the discouragement of a thin
Audience; whereby ghessing at the true Reason, he gave them notice, that for
the future he would. Preach in the Afternoons; being determined to try if the
same Matter would take better from the Pulpit, than it had done from the
Reading Desk, he chose such Texts as were suitable to the Doctrines he intended
to Expound upon; and from them delivered the very same Words he was resolved to
use in his Exposition. Nor did the success at all deceive his expectation: The
Church is now thronged and crowded, whereas before it used to look as if the
Stones and Pillars must have said Amen, as it is said, they once did to the
Prayers of our Venerable Bede: The Discourses are extremely approved of; and
the People wonderfully pleased.

The plain truth on it is, the Commons of England, by the Disorders of the late
Times, and the many tickling Promises which were made them, That the Burden of
Tithes should be taken away, and a more Evangelical Way for the maintenance of
the Clergy should be found out, have lost the true sense of payment of Tithes;
and do not do it out of a Principle of Conscience, nor consider that they are a
just Right, which in all Alienations passes as a reserved Rent to the use of
Almighty God; and it may be are one of the best Tenures in Capite of their
Estates from the Great Landlord of the Universe: and from hence it is, that if
they had no such esteem for Preaching, yet they look upon it as a Debt their
Minister ows them for what they pay him; and though several of them care not
how little he has, yet they would be sure to have enough for their Money; which
makes them many times come to Church, to see that the Parson does his Duty,
rather than from him to learn their own, or perform what they know by joining
with him in humble and devout Prayers and Praises: But they think they have not
their Penniworths for their Penny, and that a man takes no pains for what he
does not speak in the Pulpit, or if he does not Preach twice in a day.

Besides, Curiosity and the desire and love of novelties, and mighty Natural:
and the Athenian humor does but too universally prevail; a certain pleasure in
hearing or telling some New thing. So that a Sermon, though never so good and
useful, which was preached in the Morning, would be Crambe bis costa, nauseous,
if repeated in the Afternoon; and with this humor of the World these men are
so well acquainted, that it is variety that makes the Feast, that usually they
have one Text for the Morning, and another for the Evening Sermon; and neither
the same Prayer exactly, before or after either: though it is but putting
Almighty before Eternal, or Eternal before Almighty, and it will please. And I
am persuaded, if any man would give himself the trouble in Shorthand to write
down one of their Prayers, for three or four Days together; he would find the
great Secret of Extempore-Praying, to consist in this neat and cunning
transposition, turning the inside outward, and the foreside backward; more than
in any thing of New Invention; at which, for all their pretended Gifts and
Parts, few of these Men have been observed to be very ready or excellent.

And this is one great Reason (and the Reason why they use it) why the People
do so much nauseate the Public Prayers of the Church, and prefer these
Enthusiastic Raptures before them. Just thus did the People of Israel despise
that Angelical Food, the Heavenly Manna; of which it is said, that it had
Omnimodum Saporem, a particular taste to please every palate: and yet those
murmuring Tribes were not contented with it; but their Souls were dried up,
Number. 11.6
because there was nothing for them besides this Manna, and they would linger
after the Eleshpots, and the Quails, though they came with a Tempest, and went
away with a Plague.

Many Persons, I doubt not, resort to the Church, to satisfy the itching of
their Ears, and to hear what the Minister can say; and if he be an Apollos, and
Eloquent Man, it happens to him as it did to the Prophet Ezekiel, and he is
unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can play
well on an Instrument, for they love to Hear his Words, but they Do them not.

With this gilded Fly it is, that these cunning Anglers bait the Hook with
which they first tickle, and afterward take so many Trouts. Having first set
abroad this Doctrine, they do with all vehement earnestness promote it amongst
the People, and in so doing, kill a great many Birds with one Stone; for they
do thereby extremely please the Vulgar (to whom nothing of Religious Duties is
so pleasing as Preaching) and at the same time mightily advance their own
Designs. Hereby also they add not a little to their own Veneration and Fame;
and something to that which has some Savor, The dear Benevolences. And they
are always careful to tell them, how willing they are to spend and be spent for
the good of their Souls; for their sakes and the Gospels: and thereby
ingratiate themselves into the Love, and insinuate their Opinions into the
liking of many, who are won upon by these Considerations, first to hear them,
after a while to approve of them, and become their followers and Disciples;
which when once they are, they cry up and Trumpet out the Praises of their
Teacher, for an able, painful, godly man, in all Companies and Places where
they come, and thus roll the Snow-ball as big as they can.

Now the advantages which they expect and receive by this, are not a few; for
first, as before was said, they infinitely oblige the People, and gain upon
their Love, pretending to do all this freely, and out of pure Love and
tenderness to their Souls: knowing well enough that Magnes amoris amor, the
great Loadstone of Love is Love; and therefore they demand nothing, but are
contented with what they will freely bestow upon them for their pains: which by
this Wheedle, comes many times to be more than otherwise they could ever have
expected, or than some of their Followers can honestly or conveniently spare:
of whom some, what with this Liberality to their Teachers, and what by their
frequent gadding abroad to hear Sermons, and in the mean time neglecting the
affairs and concerns of their Families at home, or which is as bad, trusting
them wholly to Servants, come to be in a condition fit to be relieved
themselves: and to my particular knowledge, some of them are not in a little
Danger of burthening the Parishes where they live, by wasting what should be
for a future Provision for their Families, in this Godly way of Gossiping. and
though by this great Zeal and travailing about, they may think themselves, or
be flattered by their Treachers into an Opinion, that they are excellent
Christians, yet St. Paul thinks and pronounces them worse than Heathens: for if
any man provide not for his own, especially those of his own Family, he has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, And if the Disciples be such,
what are the Doctors? Sure I am, if this be not the Effect, it very well may;
and if more People be not possessed with this rambling and vagrant Religion, it
is not for want of Exhortation, or encouragement to forsake all and follow
Christ and to go from City to City to hear the Word of the Lord, in this great
Famine and scarcity that there is of it, as with those abused places of
Scripture they persuade People there is, and spur them forward in this Wild and
travailing Religion. Should now a whole Family be all at once possessed with
this humor, and in the heat of Summer, in Hay-time and Harvest for Conscience
sake lock up the doors, or if the Servants were more careful of Heavenly than
of Earthly things, leave them open, and jaunt ten or twelve Miles to an
Exercise, and it may betwice or thrice in a Week besides Sunday; what must
become of them? they might like the Grasshopper sing in Summer, but like her,
they must either die and starve, or steal in the Winter, unless the
Neighborhood were more Charitable to them than they are to themselves: and
none of all this is either impossible or improbable. But what a brave time
should we have, if a whole Town or many Towns together should be bitten with
this Gad-Fly? The old People and Children who could not march over the
Threshold, would be bravely nurs't at home: I have known something like this,
and where a poor Child has been left at home by the tender Parents, for all
whole natural affection, if some of the Neighbors had not been more charitable
and compassionate Nurses, it might have perish't; and that it is not generally
thus, it is not the fault of these Godly Teachers, as they call them. And if it
does not by this way increase the Poor of the Nation, of which there is so
general a complaint in all Places, I am sure their absenting themselves from
their Parish Churches, and giving encouragement to those who have no Religion
to do the same, gives opportunity to many loose and idle People to creep into
Parishes, where they lurk till the time for removing them is expired, whereas
did all people resort to Church, a new Face would soon be taken notice of, and
care would be taken to remedy the inconvenience.

A second advantage is, that hereby they do gradually accustom the People by
following their pleasing Novelties, to dislike, neglect, and contemn the Church
and her Ministers, Prayers and Sacraments, which last, especially the Holy
Eucharist, I have known them willing to receive at the hands of a mere Layman
(though to say Truth, few of their Teachers are any other) rather than they
would repair to their Parish Church, to receive it of their lawful Priest:
because, there they must be obliged to hear the Antichristian. Prayers,
superstitiously or idolatrously kneel, and have Communion with the Wicked; all
which are an abomination unto them, and absolutely unlawful. And are not these
blessed fruits of these men's being Instant in season, and (most certainly) out
of season; with which place they do so frequently scratch this Itch of the
Ears. An Itch the more it is scratched the more it may, and the more it
pleases; especially the courser the Stuff is, the more delightfully it rubs,
and is still desired: until at last the blood and smart follows the busy
Fingers and poisoned Nails, and from their scratching us till we bleed again,
Libera nos Domine.

A third advantage they make of Preaching is, that hereby as well as in their
Prayer, they have many opportunities of displaying their own Excellencies, and
manifesting their great Abilities, Gifts, and Parts: of which, whatever men of
sober Judgments may have, They have no small Opinion: as is most evident, by
their obstinate persisting in their own Ways and Wills, not only against lawful
Authority, and the wise, safe and prudent Determinations of their Superiors,
but against Scripture and Reason, which must certainly speak them Wise in their
own Conceit, though thereby they render themselves more hopeless than Fools, if
we may take King Solomon's word. And they are so far from condescending to men
of Low degree, that they will not do it to those Persons who are of the
Highest; and whilst they thus preach Christ of strife and envy, if they would
impartially examine their Hearts, they would find a great measure of Pride,
Conceit and Selflove at the bottom of them; for as the abovementioned Royal
Writer tells us, Only by pride comes contention: and it is very evident, that
in all their Preaching they have a great respect to advance their own Fame,
Interest and Design, by the Authentic recommendation of their Doctrine and
Discipline from the adored Pulpit, which by successful Experience, they find,
do all thereby receive the most considerable Advantage. And how great an
Estimate they set upon themselves, is apparent, by their Intrusion into other
men's Parishes; by which procedure, they necessarily suppose themselves more fit
and qualified, than those who are by Law stated in those Places, to do the work
of an Evangelist. One of these Men being about to set up for himself in another
man's Parish, was pressed with several Arguments to desist; but more
particularly, with that golden Rule of Christ's, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri
ne feceris; to do as he would be done by: but either it was to him a leaden
Argument, or he had a leaden Head; for he would make no other Reply to it, But
that it was fit the People should be instructed. I will not trouble my self to
explain that that spoke his Sense of himself, and of the Minister of the place,
because it is easy to be read without the help of Spectacles.

It will now appear no Wonder that they do so highly magnify Preaching, and
look upon it as the only Means of Grace, so that in all their Discourses of it,
it passes amongst them, with the Prerogative Emphasis of The Means; and even
their own Extempore- Prayer, which they pretend to be the immediate product of
the Spirit (to which I never heard preaching did pretend yet) is but a handmaid
to wait upon it, and must lower the Top-sail to this All-powerful, this only
Soul-saving-Ordinance: Good! very Good! and if the Spirit must truckle to the
Flesh, and Humane Invention be preferred before Divine Inspiration, guess of
the rest of them by this. And in truth, to hear them exalt it, as they never
fail to do, upon the least hint that offers it self in their way; a man would
believe, that they think it more essentially necessary to Salvation, than
Faith, Hope, or Charity: of which last, and greatest of the three, you shall
rarely hear them Discourse; the true reason being, because all their Preaching
and Actings are directly contrary to it, and by St. Paul's rule, their golden
Language is no better than sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals, worth nothing
without Charity: but the pretended Reason is, to take men off from their
Settlement upon the Lees and Dregs of Popery, and the Opinion of the
Meritoriousness of Good Works; to which they say all men are but too naturally
prone and inclined: and I am very apt to believe it; and that by the high value
they set upon Preaching, a great many of their Followers think, that to go to
hear a Sermon is a thing wonderfully Meritorious; so that it is but changing
the Work and not the Opinion of Merit, which they bring men to by all their
Pains.

Now do I know, as well as if I were of the Secret Cabal, (and so I may be
under a disguise for any thing they know, purposely to discover their dangerous
Intrigues) that this one place will, if possible, keep this Book from ever
being read by any of their Disciples, and will heed no other Sentence for its
Condemnation: Oh it is a most abominable Book, it is against Preaching! Oh what
sad times should we have, if every body were of this Persuasion! It is against
The Means! Oh sad! and in regard they sow this aspersion amongst the other
Tares of Dissension, and endeavor by it to make the Bishops and Church of
England as odious as it is possible, by telling their Disciples the most
abominable falsehood, That the present Governors of the Church are all against
Preaching: I will endeavor to ward off the desperate blow with the Shield of
Truth: and wash off the Dirt which these Calumniators throw upon the face of
the most beautiful Church in the Christian World. I must therefore let them
know, that the Church of England has as great a Veneration and Esteem for that
Duty, as it can challenge. It is not the truly ancient and Apostolical Way of
Preaching, nor the new Way neither that the Church is against. It is the gross
abuse of Preaching, which these Men have put upon it, and the Ill Uses they
daily make of it to countenance, disperse and insinuate their wicked Designs to
disturb and ruin all Government; against which, with very good Reason the
Church declares it self.

St. Peter's Sermon with which he converted three thousand Souls, was not one
quarter of an hours Discourse; nor attended with the Prologue of a longwinded
Extempore-Prayer: nor indeed, is that preaching which is so strongly pressed and
commanded, any thing of affinity or kindred with this which they call
Preaching, as will appear to any who considers; That the great Commission of
our Savior to his Disciples, to go and teach all Nations; St. Matthew. 28. ult.
was, as the Word plainly imports, to go and make Disciples of them; That is,
to Baptize them into the Faith of Christ, by turning them from their former
Vanities of Idolatry, worshipping Stocks and Stones, Act. 14.15.
Gold, Silver, four-footed Beasts, and Creeping Things, to know and serve the
only true and Living God, and Jesus Christ whom he had sent. To certify unto
the Gentiles as well as the Jews, Heb. 1.3.
that Christ the only begotten Son of God, the express Image of his Person, and
brightness of his Glory, was sent into the World, out of the pure Love of God
to all Mankind, St. Joh. 3.16.
For God so loved the World that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life: and that
therefore he sent him to be a propitiation for our sins; 1. St. Jo. 2.2.
and not only for ours, but for the sins of the whole World. That is, in his
good Intention, he is unwilling that any should perish; but that all should
come to Repentance; and by this preaching of the Gospel to come to the
knowledge of these Truths, that so they might be saved. Let those men therefore
preach as Christ commanded, and as the Apostles Evangelized; and then if the
Church forbids them, they may say it is against Preaching. Let them obtain a
Lawful Deputation, and not run before they are sent, saying, The Lord says,
when the Lord has not sent them. Let them Teach and warn all men, every where
to Repent, because he that is baptized, Repents, Believes, and continues
steadfast in that Faith shall be saved; but he who does not, though he has
formerly escaped the Pollutions that are in the World, through the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, yet shall be damned, if he fall away from
Grace, and return with the Dog to his Vomit; which it is not impossible for him
to do, even after he has been enlightened, and tasted of the Powers of the Life
to come, so long as he has Within him a treacherous evil Heart of unbelief;
Without him, the powerful Temptations of the World and the Devil; and therefore
let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall; lest he perish from the
Right Way. Let them exhort, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, etc. be
made for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that so People may lead a
peaceable and quiet Life, in, all Godliness and Honesty; in Subjection and
Obedience to the Powers that are appointed and ordained of God to be over them;
because they that will not live so, (shall receive Damnation. Let them press
the People to Peace and Unity, and tell them, that they who live in Envyings,
Strife, Sedition and Divisions, live after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit;
and therefore shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: That they who speak Evil of
Dignities and despise Dominion, the things they understand not, shall bring
upon themselves swift Destruction; and then let them Preach in Gods Name, (and
certainly all Preaching that is not to this Effect and for these Designs, is
far from it;) till the Church or any Bishop in it finds fault with them, and
that will be never, as long as they live, nor after their death. All these are
Evangelical Commands, Doctrines and Truths. But if Satan be divided against
himself, how shall his Kingdom stand? and if ever you find them harping upon
any of these strings, I am much mistaken.

I know they have a Thunderclap ready; but God be thanked it is but a Brutum
fulmen, it may make a great Crack, but it will do no hurt: What say you to that
place of St. Paul, Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel? I say that place is nothing to their Purpose. Let us first see the same
Commissiom from them which St. Paul had; 1 Cor 1.1.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God: and then let them
undertake the same Work to Evangelize, as the Word is, to preach the Gospel to
those who never heard of it before. Let us see them so Zealous as to go and
convert the Savage Indians; and then we shall begin to believe, they are afraid
of the Woe, and preach the Gospel out of pure Conscience of the Necessity that
is laid upon them. But to go about to make all the World believe; that We are
Idolators and Heathens, such as know not Christ, that so they may have the
glory of our Conversion, and be thought Apostles, is just as if they should
first pick, our Pockets, and by giving us Brass again instead of our Gold,
persuade us to believe they are our best Friends and Benefactors, wonderful
kind and bountiful to us; which indeed would make Us look like Fools and
Children, but would certainly prove those who did it to be Cheats and Knaves.
If in one thing they will act like Saint Paul, let them in another; and not
boast as they do of their Great Labors in the Gospel, in other men's Lines, 2
Cor. 10.16.
of things made ready to their hand; of which Saint Paul would by no means be
guilty: But they are not so scrupulous in that particular as he was; and for
all the Necessity and the Woe, will rather act the Bishop in another man's
Diocese, than go to Mexico to preach the Gospel, and get one of their own.

And for that preaching which does not preach these things, but a Gospel of
their own, that is it which the Church by Authority of Scripture protests
against; and if they or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel in whole
or in part, than what the Holy Apostles preached, let him not only be silenced
but accursed. And so long as the Pulpit is made the Shop of Schism (not to say
Heresy) in the Church, and the Forge of Sedition and Rebellion in the State:
so long as Preaching is exalted above devout Prayers and Praises, which are the
only Tribute we can pay our Almighty Sovereign, and shall be one part of the
happy Employment in Heaven: so long as it shall stand in Competition with the
Sacraments those holy Seals, whereby we are sealed to the Day of Redemption:
Not only our Church says it, but all the true Saints and Servants of God have
said the same, and will say so to the end of the World, that not only twice in
one Day, but once in a Man's Life is too much for any man to preach, or any
Christian people to hear. And of all these miscarriages in Religious as well as
Civil concerns, this their Preaching is, and has been most notoriously guilty.

I would not have them take their Measures of us by their own Standard: for
though they know not how to distinguish betwixt the Use and the Abuses of
things, let them not say therefore that We do not neither. The time was when
they pretended there were great abuses crept into the Ecclesiastical
Government; therefore away with it, Root and Branch of Episcopacy, the Office
it self as well as the Offense (if any were besides their Loyalty, Honors and
Estates, Crimes great enough for Pride, Envy and Ambition) our Church is for no
such unreasonable Methods; nor because they have, and do greatly abuse
Preaching, therefore nothing less will serve than an utter Abolition of the
thing. I hope were there nothing else, yet common Prudence will allow any
Government that Liberty which is for its own Preservation, and to endeavor to
correct those abuses, which by experience are found so dangerous to the Souls,
Bodies, and Estates of Men, both in their Private and Public Capacities. It
is their idolizing of Preaching, making it the Golden Calf of Beth-el the House
of God, and exalting it above all other means of Grace; It is their justling
with it for precedence and not that only, but the All of Godliness, or at least
the sine qua non, without which, according to their Measure and Manner there
can be no true Religion, which the Church condemns in them, and with very good
Cause, for it is a most manifest falsehood; and the Bishops are so far from
being against Preaching, that many of them are very eminent and constant
Preachers themselves, to the Confusion of this notorious Slander,
notwithstanding that which, as Saint Paul says of himself, comes upon them
daily, the Care of all the Churches in the heavy as well as honorable Charge
of Government.

But the plain truth is, This is so necessary a Tool, that if it be taken away
they cannot go forward with their Babel; without this they could not be able to
Caress the People, or conveniently to disperse their Opinions, nor indeed make
any tolerable advance in their Grand Design; and therefore Silencing Godly
Ministers (of which Number, they only account themselves) is one of the most
horrid Cruelties that Perfection can invent: though unless their Tongues were
out, it is as easy to Silence a Thunderclap: and they are all like the
Aspen-leaves, of which the Story says, a Wicked Woman's Tongue was made; the
more the wind of Persecution blows upon them, the faster do they wagg.

To conclude, it is not for their preaching of Christ or the Gossel, but for
their prating with such malicious Words against Kings, Prelates, Magistrates,
Prayers, and all Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, for which the Laws as
well as out Church condemns them, and is against their Preaching.

CHAP. XV. A short View of some other of their Doctrines. Of their Judaizing
the Lords Day. Of their censuring all their Ancestors, and even their own
Children to Damnation. Their subtilty in denying all these Accusations, and
disowning the Actions of the late Rebels, when yet they tread in the very same
steps. That they have the same Design, manifested from their great Industry in
all late New Elections of Members of the present Parliament, to get Voices for
such as will be favorable to their interest. A probable Conjecture that they
have had a principal hand in the late unhappy Differences betwixt the Two
Houses; and of the great Desire they have of a New Parliament; and their hopes
when that shall happen.
THere are several other Doctrines of theirs which I shall only briefly touch
upon, in order to a Discovery of what is their Design in maintaining them,
though they may deserve a just reprehension from some other Pen. One of them is
their teaching the People to Judaize, by making a Sabbath of the Lords Day: not
that I believe, with all their turning over, they can find any thing in the New
Testament for countenancing their New Opinion, or for the Institution of it.
And though possibly the Disciples might have some intimation from our Lord
about it; Yet having not left any thing upon Holy Record that they had, the
more probable Opinion is, that in Commemoration of the Glorious Resurrection,
they keep it as a Festival; and that it is to the Ancient Usage and Command of
the Church that it ows its Institution, and that they never intended it for the
Sabbath in a strict and Jewish sense, we have the same Ancient Usage to
testify: and it was and still is the Ancient and present Quarrel of the Jews
against the Christians, that they break the Sabbath, not only as to the Day,
but as to the strict Observation of it even on the Lords Day, which they take
for the Christian Sabbath. And methinks that is strange, that these men should
cry out so against us for observing Days, and but using the name of ALTAR,
Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat who serve the
Tabernacle.
(for both which we have Scripture and Authority to justify us) should yet
think it is no Crime in them to seek for a refuge for their Error, by being
obliged to the Sanction of the Law for a Sabbath. And how they will make one
part of the Commandment mutable by changing the Day from Saturday to Sunday,
and the other part eternal and unalterable, without an express Warrant from him
who is Lord of the Sabbath, I confess it poses my Understanding; for, as I take
it, they can show no Deputation to be his Vicegerents; But if there were
nothing worse, though I think this an Error, I should not deny them my Vote to
be Jews, and enjoy their Sabbath, and think it as great a Sin to dress a good
Dinner on that Day, as to commit Murder or Adultery. Provided they would keep
it a Day of Rest from those ill Employments they have so often, and still do
abuse it to; as well as their Fasts, which were always observed to be the
Prologues to Mischief, or raising of Money. They who are for Liberty, let them
not condemn the Lawful Liberty of others, nor impose what they have neither
Warrant nor Command for, upon men's Consciences, as absolutely necessary to
Salvation. But the truth of the Business is, as they have no Doctrine without
an Use, so they have several very ill ones for this; for besides that it adds
not a little to that opinion of Sanctimony, which is so necessary for them to
cover their Black Designs; by the rigid Austerity they this Day impose upon
themselves and others: The great Use they make of it is to lessen the Esteeem
of the Holy Fasts and Festivals of the Church, which they say are mere
Superstitious inventions of Men, forbidden by Saint Paul, where he tells the
Galathians he had bestowed upon them Labor in vain, if they observed days and
years; but the Sabbath is of Gods own appointment, and to be Sanctified,
according to their Doctrine, So long therefore as they put it to these
Employments, as they do in their frequent Preaching upon it, to make a
Distinction of a PARTY; and to bring not only our Christian, but Politic
Liberty into Bondage, I think it is not without Danger, as well (though not so
much) as the rest.

As for that strange Doctrine which I have heard several of them maintain, That
all their Ancestors, and even their own Children, who dye in their Infancy are
damned, because they have not actual Faith, or had not the true Faith as they
have; it is a great Uncharitableness, but no injury to the Dead; who are never
the further off from Heaven for their saying so. But this is a necessary
Corollary to their former Doctrine or Predestination, and of their being the
only Elect; for not only all Heathens, but all others who are not of their
Faith and Persuasion are damned (and that till within this hundred Years none
could be) or otherwise their Doctrine is false, and Salvation may be had
without it; and in the Communion of another Church: which if they confess, all
goes to Ruin, and the Opus multorum annorum will be broken in pieces; and
would not that be a great Pity, that so curious a Frame should be ruined in a
Moment? as for their own Children, if they will damn them, who can help it? it
is a sign they are a kind, good natured, charitable Generation of Men. But if
the poor Infants must suffer for it, and go to Hell, I am sure they may thank
their Parents; whose want of Faith, or not procuring their Baptism, must if any
thing be the occasion of it: or else Saint Paul is much mistaken, when he tells
us, that the Faith of one of the Parents shall over balance the Infidelity of
the other in favor of the Child: for the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the
believing Husband, 1 Cor. 7.14.
and the unbelieving Husband by the believing Wife, else were your Children
unclean, but now they are holy. And if so, and they die so, I dare say they
shall be happy: and whosoever dare say the contrary, my Charity would oblige me
not to believe him; and I am sure my Religion obliges me to believe him who
best knows, and who bought and paid for them the price of his own dear Blood;
and he tells me, S. Mat. 10.14.
that of such consists the Kingdom of God.

But (which is at the bottom of all) hereby they still more and more ingratiate
themselves with the People, whom it is absolutely necessary to please; and
without a strong interest in whose love and esteem, they cannot hope to make a
Party strong enough to carry on the rest of their Designs; and how is it
possible, but that the very feet of these Messengers of glad Tidings must be
beautiful? their News and Person in the highest esteem? How is it possible
enough to admire and love these Men, who discover unto them this distinguishing
Grace of God so particularly by their preaching manifested to their Souls,
above all the rest of Mankind; undoubtedly, if they will not go so far as
Saint Paul witnesses of some of his Converts, as to be willing to pluck out
their Eyes for his sake, yet they will be ready to pluck out their Purses for a
present Maintenance, and if occasion be, both with those, and some of them with
their Persons assist the Cause, the Good Cause of Reformation; which is the
thing they by this Doctrine would bring them to, and assure themselves of.

As for their dislike of Christian Burial, and several other things, I have not
much to say to them about it; or can think they have any other Design, than
what they have in all the little occurrences of Life, Words, Looks, Gestures,
to keep up a distinction, etc. make a Party; and like the wicked King of
Israel, they will be buried with the burial of an Ass, much good may it do them.

And thus having taken a Survey of these Dissenters, their Original and
Education, their Positions and Doctrines, which are so useful and necessary to
them, in order to the promoting the Main Design of Reformation, by making ours
the Kingdom of Antichrist, that so they may have a color and pretense to pull
it down, we should now come to a particular, declaration of their Practices;
but having already upon the several Points of their Doctrine spoken fully of
them, I shall not use their Method, and endeavor to swell these pages into a
larger Book by vain Repetitions; for I design the Public and not the
Stationers advantage; and can assure them I am no Hackney Scribler; and
therefore for their Practice I refer the Reader backwards for about Forty
Years; and shall only Recapitulate; That all these great and fair pretenses,
with which the Heads of Faction indear themselves to the People, and the People
to them; all that Diligence they use both Night and Day (for they are not
without their to be suspected Night-Meetings; of which the Politic Historian
so well Remarques, That they are Long periculosiores, because they seem to
favor Deeds of Darkness) I say all this industry, is principally intended to
alienate the Affections of the Subjects of these Nations, from the present
Government and Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; and by creating Fears
and Jealousies, (the old Engines of Sedition) to unsettle the Minds of Men; by
pretending great abuses, and unlawfulness in Persons and Things; to bring the
People first to a dislike of them; and by degrees to wish an Alteration; and in
plain Terms, to fit and dispose them by these secret and subtle Artifices,
(which the unwary cannot, and the Designing Party will not discover) with the
first Opportunity for downright Rebellion.

It is a matter of the greatest Wonder, that there should be found any Men, who
pretend either to Honesty, Prudence or Policy, who should dislike a Government
which for Excellency has not its equal in the whole World: There is no Place or
People under the Sun, where the Laws do so exactly hold the Balance betwixt
the Prince and the People, as in the Realm of England: where every man's Right
is to be bounded, and Property secured, that the poorest Cottager enjoys such
Privileges and Protection, as the Gentry of other Nations would think
themselves happy in; and the better sort of People, the Freeholders, possess
many such Liberties and Franchises, as the Counts and Grandees amongst our
Neighbors can hardly boast of; and it is a, great pity that those People, who
pretend to be weary under so mild, and fresh a Constitution of Government, have
not seen or felt the hardship of the Lives of the Bores and Peasants on the
other side of the Sea; not only now, when they are Slaves to all Parties, in
the present War; but in the Times of the most profound Peace, and flourishing
Trade amongst them.

It has been esteemed a State Maxim, by the wisest Heads; Malum been positum,
non est temere Removendum. What must we then think of those Persons who are for
Innovations in that Government, which with the Wisdom, Caution, and Prudence of
several Hundreds of Years has been established? and by the constant succession
of all that experience, has been found so useful and advantageous to all the
ends of Society. Should a man go now about to persuade the Worthy Citizens of
London, to carry the ancient River of Thames out of its Channel over
Black Heath, (which would be difficult enough,) only because it did not please
him, or in hopes of finding Treasure at the Bottom of the Old River; would they
not provide a lodging think you for him, in the most stately Louvre that ere
was built for mad Inhabitants? but if he should not only frame such a Project,
but secretly endeavor to persuade the Populace to compel the more Rich and
Wealthy to undertake so unreasonable a Design, and which must certainly mine
the Glorious City beyond hopes of a second Resurrection; I am afraid he would
find a Lodging more inconvenient than Bedlam, and need not fear to be drowned
in his new River. The madness and malice of those persons who would alter the
Old Channel and Stream of Government is far greater, being of universal ill
Consequence, not only to that stately Metropolis, but to all Places, Persons,
Ranks and Degrees of men.

But the Miracle of Wonders is, that these men who dislike and despise the
present Government, who tread in the same steps, preach the same Doctrines, use
the same Arts and Methods, make the very same pretenses of Religion and
Reformation with those desperate Rebels who so lately did overturn the
Government, should yet be able so successfully to employ their Talent to put
the same cheat upon us a second Time; and so easily again deceive People into
the direct Road of those Miseries, Distractions, Confusions, Ruins,
Desolations, and almost Destruction, which are still so fresh in Remembrance.

After all this do I know they will look as demurly as if Butter would not melt
in their Mouths, and yet speak as if they had nothing else there: Ps. 55.21.
their Words will be softer than Butter, smoother than Oil in pretending all
imaginable Innocence; and to say truth, even the best of them, who it may be do
not penetrate into the Bottom of the Mischief, are yet like Solomon's Madman,
who cast about those Firebrands, Arrows and Death, with which the Engineers of
the Faction furnish them; who deceives his Neighbor, and says, Am I not in
sport? I mean no harm to any Body. I know not what others may do, But for my
part, I like no such Jesting: especially with such dangerous Edge-Tools as will
cut the Nerves of Government, and dislimb the Body Politic.

They are not yet come so high as to the removing Evil Counselors, and indeed
that Stratagem is too stale, and has been too often made use of. It were well
if they were not now busy upon the other Extreme, and endeavoring to put such
upon us. It is but too easy to observe, even by those who are not over
Curious, that something they do design, which it is not yet time for them to
make Public: And there is nothing more confirms the Suspicion, than the great
and indefatigable Industry, which of late they have employed, to promote their
Interest in the Present Parliament; in which there has rarely happened a
Vacancy and by consequence a new Election, but all their Forces are united, and
all their Friends are made, if possible to set up such a person as is a
Moderate Man (as they call them) if they can go no further; that is, such a one
as will be so favorably inclined to them and their affairs, as to let them
alone: and to confirm the probability of this, I heard it confidently affirmed,
that one of the great Leaders of the Presbyterians at an Election not long
since, induced all his Party to give their Voices for a Gentleman (who it may
be would have deceived their Hopes, if he had carried it) with this
all-powerful Argument, All you that hope for the Salvation of your Souls, give
your Voices for such a one. So that now it is clear that Elections of Knights
and Burgesses in Parliament is a necessary ingredient, and sign of their
Election as Saints. For I am satified that they do not promise themselves much
from this Parliament, which is composed of so many Worthy Gentlemen eminent for
their sufferings for Loyalty, as well as Prudence and Wisdom. All that ever
they hoped for, or it may be at present would desire; would be only a
Comprehension or Connivence; that so the Gospel might have free Course, that it
might run and be glorified; and that is, in the true Sense and meaning of it,
That thereby they might gain the advantage of Time and Opportunity, without
Controllment of Laws, to make their Party so strong as to have the greatest
Voice and Poll, in the Elections of future Parliaments, which dangerous design
of theirs, it is the general hopes of all those who wish well to the
Government, the Prudence of the Present will in their Wisdom in time endeavor
to obviate, by that much to be desired Bill of Regulating Elections. And there
appears no Reason that they who will not observe Laws, It is a saying of our
Law, Utlagatus habet Caput lupinum; Intimating that they who will not be
obedient to Laws, which is the reason of utlawry, are like Wolves and such
noxious Animals; and why the Wolves, though in Sheeps clothing, should either
choose, or be chosen a Guard for the Sheep, I know no reason, unless we have a
mind to be worried. And possibly in something of this Nature were provided to
disable all Recusants, it might prove a safe Expedient to secure the Government
at it is now established, and free us from the Fears both of Popery and
Persbytery.
and be obedient to Government, should have the Privileges of Laws, which they
endeavor to destroy. To have a Parliament of their Persuasion would be the
most glorious thing imaginable; and they know by experience, that the
Protection of that great Name of Parliament and color of Law, are the surest
Ways to overthrow all, even the Fundamental Constitutions of the Nation: and
as the late Usurper was wont to say, make even Magna Charta, Magna F -- if
contrary to the Establishment of their Dominion: and it is well for them if
they be innocent of the guilt of which they have not without reason been
suspected; That those great Heats and Animosities which have of late obstructed
all the public Affairs, and so much eclipsed the former Glories of this
Renowned Parliament, have in a great measure proceeded from this mutinous and
fermenting Spirit; which wherever it comes, like a strong Poison in the Blood
and Humors of the Natural Body, causes most violent Ebullitions, Spasmes, and
Convulsions in the Body Politic.

And I think it will appear but too plainly, if likewise it be considered, that
they have been the Party who have used all endeavors for the Dissolution of
the Present Parliament, and a New one to be called; which being sufficiently
taken notice of already has spared me the pains. One thing however deserves our
Observation, which confirms what has before been spoken; That the Confinement
of some who both by Print and Words did endeavor to prove this no Parliament,
as it has given a great dash to the Hopes and Confidence of the Party, so it is
resented by them with the greatest trouble, and the most sensible affliction
that could have befallen them; and that they may still do something, when they
cannot do what they would, (as a Noble Lord takes notice) the reason of their
misfortune is attributed to the prevalency of the Court-Party: by which
distinction they endeavor to make a Fraction in the House, and set the Country
against the Couit, so that they are for any Tooth Good Barber, if they may but
draw one out of the Head of the State, at which they have such an aching Tooth
in their own. But it is to be hoped that these Designs of their Enemies will be
an occasion of their closer Unity and firmer Union; no person breathing being
willing to believe the Counsels of his avowed Enemies, much less to take or
follow them: And whatever some men would persuade the World, the Interest of
the King is inseparable from that of the Country, and vice versa: and it is the
Kings Person and Presence that makes the Court; and whoever owns himself
against the Interest of the Court, does at the same time abandon the Interest
both of the Crown and Country.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Artifices which these men use to render all applications
ineffectual; by their tiring out the Inferior Magistracy with their Obstinacy.
The advantage they make of the suspension of Laws to fortify their followers,
and persuading them it is a particular effect of the care which God takes of
them and the Cause. That place in the Acts, of Gamaliel''s Counsel, If this
Work be of God it will stand, by which they frighten some, and endeavor to
discourage all people from meddling with them considered, and proved to be the
Word of Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law, but not the Word of God, because not
universally true.
HAving thus far traced them under ground, and brought to light their most
Secret Designs, by showing the ill and dangerous use they make of the Sword of
the Spirit, with which they pretend to be armed, though in truth it is the
Spirit of the Sword; Let us now come to see what Defensive Armor furnishes
their Panoply and Magazine; and there likewise we shall find them most
admirably stored; and that they are as they think, as invulnerable as the Poets
feign the Son of Thetis; and have not only Bombes and Fireballs to annoy their
Enemies, the great Ordinance of Preaching to batter down the strongest
Fortifications of Government, but a Shield to keep off every blow from doing
them harm.

There never was any Age that wanted mem of factious and turbulent Spirits, or
ambitious Heads; but sure never any produced more, or more dangerous than the
Present; such who will make no difficulty to sacrifice all the Public
Interest, to their Private Satisfaction, Opinions; and Designs. It has
therefore been the cautelous Prudence of all Governments to keep a watchful
eye, and a strict rein upon all such disorderly Tempers and dangerous Persons.
But above all others, as our late martyred Sovereign of most blessed memory,
from too dear Experience, does observe, the Devil of Rebellion, who comes
transformed in the shape of the Angel of Reformation is always most dangerous;
and where Piety and Conscience are drawn into the Conspiracy, though they are
but both personated, yet there will never want an unwary Multitude, to follow,
support, encourage and assist such bewitching pretenses.

How ineffectual all the endeavors have been which hitherto have been applied
to such growing Distempers, is but too apparent by the slender successes, and
slow advances they have made toward our pristine Health and perfect Recovery;
and that we are not yet out of a visible danger of relapsing into the same
desperate Maladies, which does not at all argue want of Skill in the
State-Physicians, but the incorrigible obstinacy, and radicated Malignity of
the Distemper, which will not submit to common, gentle, and familiar Methods;
and though they may expect the more rugged and forceable Process for a Cure, we
will endeavor to show how by their subtle Arts they render all Operations
upon them ineffectual.

They make it their great business to discourage and tire out the Subordinate
Magistrates, in the Administration of Justice; by rendering all their endeavors
of this Nature vain, fruitless and unsucceseful; encouraging their Followers to
hold out but a little longer, and persist in their obstinacy, and the Day will
be their own: and if, as it may probably happen, any one who formerly did use
vigorously to prosecute them, does but a little desist from his proceedings, or
abate of what they call his Heat; presently they tell their People, such a man
is now convinced of his Error, in persecuting the People of God; and in Time so
will all the rest: and they will give them Scripture for it; (for they are
rarely without a Scriptum est, though by their abusing it as he did to our
Savior, we may know of whom they learnt that Trade) The Rod of the wicked,
they tell them, shall not always lie upon the Lot of the Righteous. But if
this were all, they would many times prove themselves false Prophets: and these
their foolish Conjectures coming to the Ears of such worthy Gentlemen as are
thereby abused, prove an occasion to let them know their mistake.

But if any such Person, whom they call a Persecutor for doing his Duty, happen
to die (though in the common Method, and by the unavoidable Laws of Mortality)
presently they undertake to be Interpretes fulminis; and pronounce it a
Judgemeat from God, who lays such Persecutors in the Dust; and they will not
stick to threaten others with the fame Fate, to frighten them into a compliance
with, or connivence at them; and to manifest I do not abuse them in this or
whatever I write concerning them, this following Letter will make appear, and
give us a taste of their Temper, and pretenses of Innocence, which have been
mentioned. It was sent to me by a Clergyman, who (by the account he gave me
with it) did endeavor by all fair means, and several remonstrating Letters and
Discourses, to persuade one of these Dissenters, to quit his dangerous Ways
and Doctrines: but finding those ineffectual, he gave him to understand the
danger into which he had run himself by administering the Sacrament contrary to
the Act of Uniformity; besides several other offenses against many Statutes,
provided for suppressing and preventing Unlawful Conventicles; telling him,
that if he did not cease to make such Disturbances in his Parish, since the
such and gentle means would not, he was resolved to effect it by the Power and
Severity of the Laws: to which his Answer was as follows.

SIR,
YOurs I received yesternight, my Answer and Judgment is, that a persecuting
Spirit is very abominable and odious to God and all Good Men. I pity you for
your Saul-like breathings, notwithstanding (when with you) I challenged you by
your self, or any other justly to tax me with any wrong I have done you, or any
under you, or with meddling in the least, with State or Ecclesiastical Affairs.
Oh Innocence!
You in Yours to me assert and vaunt that it is in your power, to do that that
tends to the mine of my Estate. You know, Sir, whose language you imitate, to
whom our meek and Blessed Lord replied as in Joh. 19.11. I could instance in
many late Persecutors, whom God has laid in the It being the Government which
does prosecute them, they hope to see that laid also in the Dust.
Dust; I speak not this to irritate you or your Paritisan, but to lenifie: and
consider, Sir, if God should smite you, what may become of you Wife and
Children: but if you (causelessly) resolve to be a Snare and a Trap, a Scourge
in my Sides, and a Thorn in mine Eyes, I leave the whole matter to him who is
higher than the Highest, and judges righteously; and only telling you this,
that this is not the Quaere, what is?
Way to bring me and others in love with what you invite me to, I conclude with
my Prayers for the A kind supposition, that he to whom he writ was blind, and
unconverted, and a good way to persuade his Parishioners that such a blind
guide must lead them into the Ditch.
illumination of your mind, and conversion of your heart, and am,

SIR, Your to serve you for your Souls good.


But farther, The suspension of the Execution of the Laws, and the infliction
of those Penalties which men of good Tempers never make use of without a
Reluctance, they constantly abuse to fortify their followers in their
persuasions: for they always attribute that Impunity to an overruling hand of
Providence, or to the remorse of Considence; which is indeed the pure Effect of
Clemency, and proceeds from the tendemess of the subordinate Ministers of
Justice. But they cry it is the Lords doing, and a return of their Prayers; and
comes from that particular Care which God takes of them; who will not suffer
the Malice of the Wicked, (theirs and therefore his Enemies) to prevail against
them. I will not say but that it is an effect of the Excellency of the Divine
Nature, who by his goodness and long-suffering would lead them to Repentance;
but if they despise the Riches of his Grace, as much as they do all other
Clemency, they will find that those favors will not last always; and what
Mercy cannot, there will be an unavoidable necessity that Severity must punish
if it cannot reclaim.

There is one place in the Acts of the Holy Apostles, Acts 5.34. to 41.
which they make constant use of, to encourage their Party, and to discourage
Weak, and Timorous Minds from meddling with them, lest they should be found to
fight against God: as they persuade People all those do who do any ways oppose
them, who with so much confidence call themselves the Children and People of
God.

Now that this is upon the Holy Records as the word of Gamaliel, and not as the
Word of God, and an un-erring Rule for our Direction or Practice, is plain;
because it is neither universally true nor obliging, which, whatever is the
Word of God most undoubtedly is; for every Work and every Counsel which does
stand is not of God. It Is thought by some, there was a Time when all or the
Greatest part of the Church was Arrian; and Athanasius the only or principal
Person that did oppose it. I hope they will not agree, That that Heresy was of
God, or ought not to have been opposed, because it stood so long and
flourished: But they will say; You see it came to naught, because it was not of
God; and I say we are obliged, to Athanasius, whom it pleased God to inspire
with so much courage, (and a better understanding of this place than they would
have us have) as boldly to stemm the Flood and oppose his Buckler, in defense
of the truth against so many Legions, with which it is said the World was at
that time possessed.

But what a prodigious conquest, progress, growth and increase has the
superstitious Doctrine and most damnable Heresy of Mahomet made in the World?
all or the greatest part of Asia, a considerable part of Europe, and the most
of Africa, being become Proselytes to that Detestable Impostor: and I hope no
good Christian will allow this for a sound argument; That Mahometanism is
therefore a Work or Counsel of God, because it does stand, and has stood for
above this thousand Years: and that it ought not to be opposed, lest whilst
Christians fight against the Turks, they should be found to fight against God:
and could the Turks bring this to be an Article of our Creed, they would soon
fulfill their so much Believed Prophecy, That their Empire and Religion shall
be universally extended over the whole World.

Nay, should this be admitted as universally true, there is no Error in the
Church, of disorder in the State, which we may endeavor to suppress: and the
Country Constable seeing a company of armed Peasants about to commit a Riot;
instead of Charging them in the Kings Name to desist, and repair to their
several habitations and employments, or to keep the Peace, may for the neglect
of his Duty plead; if this Counsel or Work be of God (as it may happen to be
pretended, and that it is for Conscience Sake) it will stand, and all that I
can do will be to no purpose to overthrow it; and it may be whilst I go about
to suppress it, I shall be found to fight against God; but if it be of Men, it
will come to naught; and this will bring us perfectly to the Mohammedan
Principle, by which they always pass their Judgment of Persons or Actions
according to the Events.

And that all the whole Council, as it is there said, should agree to one
Doctors Opinion, and that built upon so slender a Reason, as two single
Instances, is so wholly Miraculous, that it cannot be looked upon as any thing
less than an Effect of that Power and Goodness of God, which did so wonderfully
manifest it self for the support and Propagation of that Truth which was his
own, that Counsel, and that Work which really was of God.

CHAP. XVII. A more particular Survey of their Policy in rendering all
Expedients useless which have been applied to reclaim them, from that place in
Ezra 7.16. Of Capital Punishments. Of Imprisonment, how they make of advantage
to them, to confirm their Cause and Followers, and to bring a general Odium
upon the Laws and Government: their evasions to escape Forfeitures. Of their
complaints of the injustice and oppression of the Penal Laws. Of Banishment: A
Coffee-house Dialogue about it, betwixt Mr. Kinglove of -- and a Grandchild of
Martin Mar-Prelates.
LET us pass on from Generals to Particulars, and there we shall find what
great Artists they are in eluding all the most prudent endeavors which have
been made use of to suppress their growth. We will therefore consider of the
several Remedies which have been applied to reclaim them to Obedience, as they
are propounded by the Prophet Ezra. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy
God and of the King, let Judgment be speedily executed upon him, whether it be
to Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment.
And though they may say this is only the Command of a Heathen Emperor; let them
consider that Ezra is so far, from thinking it unscriptural or unlawful, that
he blesses the Lord God of Israel who had put such a thing into the Kings
Heart, as was the only expedient to enable him to rebuild the House of the
Lord, and bring it to its former Beauty and Glory.

As for that fort of Punishment which is Capital and Sanguinary, as it does not
at all suit the temper of the Gospel, so they are satisfied that it is not the
Custom of our Lawgivers to write theirs, as it is said, the Athenian Draco did
his Statutes in Characters of Blood. Nor shall these Men need to fear resisting
unto Blood, unless they mean in unlawful Insurrections of their own railing; Or
for intentional or actual Violence, Treason, or Rebellion, to which they seem
to be in the ready and nearest way; and therefore since, if they will but take
care to avoid the Crimes, they are out of the reach of their punishments: we
will pursue this consideration no further.

A second sort of punishment, which has been made use of is Imprisonment; and
in this they pretend to Glory, and to make most considerable advantages; for
though you may confine their Bodies, yet their Tongues and Pens have always
been at Liberty; and this has been so far from hindering, that (contrary to
other Infections) they make this shutting them up contribute to the spreading
of the Contagion; and it has been no unusual thing for the Jaylors advantage to
have a Conventicle in the very Prison; (...) fer Persecution, Bonds and
Imprisonments for the Gospel: and also because God appears so particularly for
them in delivering them out of all these afflictions and tribulations.

Let us now see how they will deal with a third way of Punishment, which is
Confiscation of Goods, which has been the penalty that our Laws have most
generally inflicted upon Dissenters: and here it has been the general
observation, that the smaller Fines, as twelve pence a Sunday, have been most
effectual, the proceedings upon the greater and heavier Fines being more rarely
put in execution; that being generally a tenderness in all men, which makes
them unwilling to ruin others in their Estates, as they believe these heavy
Impositions would do. But they may spare themselves that Pity, for these People
know well enough not only how to avoid the punishment, but to make it become
serviceable to their Interest.

If the Penalty proceeds upon Information, as most generally it does, they
endeavor to render the name and Office of Informer odious, so that few people
of credit, will intermeddle in it; and then either it will not be done at all,
or it will be undertook by the meaner sort of people, who inform out of the
Hopes of their share of the Forfeiture; and if it happens (as too many of them
are) that the Information is given in by loose, idle, or scandalous poor
people, then they are safe enough, and proclaim to every body, You see what
kind of people these are, Drunkards, Swearers, poor pityful Fellows, that will
say or swear any thing for Money, that are hired against us, and are our
Accusers. And this adds not a little to the confidence with which their Leaders
inspire them, of having a good Opinion of themselves; or of that which hereby
others may come to have of them and their ways, seeing them prosecuted (which
they call Persecuted) by such a fort of people, as having no Religion
themselves, may therefore be thought to hate and persecute such as have: and
this also affords them an opportunity, which they are not backward to improve,
by insinuating, that the Authority which sets such Men at Work, encourages them
in it and rewards them for it, is like them persecuting and wicked too. Or if
the Information be given in by sober, honest, and credible Persons, they can
make a Bill of Sale of all their Visible Estate to a true and trusty Friend,
and then they will bid the Levy a Defiance, and never think this a fraudulent
Deed; nor shall the Officers be able, if they were so minded, by all their Art
or Industry, to discover and to prove that it is: Or however they will stand
upon their guard, and keep the Doors fast locked and bolted, in despite of
that Aphorism of the Law, which says, That no man's House shall he his Castle
against the King.

They will rarely pay the Forfeiture, which by virtue of the Warrant to Levy is
demanded of them, though it be but a Shilling; so that the Officers are obliged
to Distrain, and for their own security they will take enough: and when that is
done, there is such a general squeamishness upon People, that they do not care
to buy such Goods, unless they be overcome by the Temptation of an excessive
great Bargain; so that they are forced to sell Robin Hoods merry Pennyworths:
and when all the Charges are deducted, which necessarily attends this.
Procedure, there will be but a slender Surplusage to be returned to the Owners,
some of which, to mend an ill Market, are so stubborn, that they will not
receive it. Now though the fault was wholly in themselves, yet will they cry
out, That their Goods were sold for a quarter of their worth; and exclaim
against the injustice and oppression of such proceedings. And after all is
done, they will tell you, that you cannot take away their Spiritual Comforts;
you cannot take away their God from them. And they have so often, and so lowdly
in the Meeting House been fore-warned of this, that they are fore-arm'd against
it. What? can you endure to suffer Persecution with the People of God? Can you
be contented joyfully to take the spoiling of your Goods for the Gospels sake?
Can you be ready to suffer Bonds, and Imprisonments, and Death, rather than
forsake Christ? Can you endure to suffer affliction for a season with the
People of God like Moses? Ah my Friends! it is but for a Season, a short
Season, for those Days shall be shortened for the Elect sake. Can you bear the
Cross and despise the shame? Can you be contented to be the Song of the
Drunkards; such as are drunk with the Cup of the Fornications of the great
Whore of Babylon? Can you endure to be called Hypocrites and Deceivers? Oh!
then you Elect and previous; and a thousand such things. I say they have so
frequently been told of this, that they verily believe these afflictions are
sent of God, purposely for the trial of their Truth and Constancy; and by their
sufferings of this Nature their Teachers persuade and convince them beyond all
other Arguments, that they are the People of God, and no Hypocrites: for all
that will live Godly must suffer Persecution. Though that all is apparently to
be restrained to that Age or some following, for it is known, that many who
have lived Godly, have not suffered Persecution. Nor do they after all this
noise; for it is the Cause that makes Persecution and Martyrdom.

But having lost their outward Enjoyments, they fly to their inward
Refreshments, to the thoughts of their being the Elect, and to the
contemplation of those great and durable Riches and Treasures which they think
are laid up for them in Heaven; and these pleasant Phansies fill them with Joy,
and that Joy fills them with a contempt of earthly Things, that Contempt brings
them to some degrees of Contentment; and now they know how to suffer the want
and loss of all things: and at the last they come to the real belief, that they
are what they think themselves most tried and excellent Christians. Though all
this is but a mere Effect of Nature, and which a Heathen might have had above
the idle Dream of his Elysium: and they are no more the fruits of Grace in the
one than in the other: and the foundation of their joy being laid upon a false
bottom, as before was manifested, they have little Reason to rejoice in these
Sufferings which befall them as evil Doers, as disobedient to Authority, and
busybodies in other men's Matters, in meddling with the Affairs of State,
endeavoring Alterations and Innovations.

But for certain the Politic Ringleaders of Faction know, whoever loses by
these Punishments, they have gained their Design upon the People: whom by these
sufferings they assure to themselves and their Principles; finding it verified
which they have so often told them about suffering these afflictions; and that
God would recompense these their sufferings for Conscience sake, with spiritual
Joy and Comfort. And not only so, but they bring them to the bent of their Bow,
and easily induce them to hate all Government, which does by violence deprive
them of their Estates; and especially the guilt of this Persecution is sure to
be thrown upon the Ecclesiastical Government, to render that as odious and
Antichristian as they possibly can.

It is well that punishment is now a sign of Grace, and the suffering the
deserved Penalties of the Laws is come to be Persecution. It is not yet Thirty
Years since they, or so many of them as are alive, were then of another
Judgment; and made the most illegal and unjust sufferings of others, a certain
sign of Reprobation, and being forsaken of God. But these People have very ill
Memories, though it is the Opinion of some, that in regard of one excellent
Faculty they are Masters of, they had need to have good ones. However this
gives us some encouragement to hope, that before that time be run about again,
all People may be convinced, that this which they call Persecution may be
believed to be Just Punishment, since the Scene of words may be so easily
shifted in half an Age. And if once the Vizzard chance to fall off, the
Ethiopian come to be discovered, and what now looks like a Lamb, appears to be
a Leopard: when the World comes to understand them aright, they will pass a
true Judgment of them and their ruinous Principles and Practices, and say,

Qui Color Albus erat nunc est contrarius albo. And this is so far from
impossible that it is not improbable; and if no person will do it for them,
they will certainly do it for themselves.

Having shown what great Artists they are in eluding all other Penalties, we
should now come to a Consideration of the last Particular, which is Banishment;
but in regard that Method has never yet been tried upon them, nor so far as I
know, so much as been designed against them, I can say little to it, nor can I
conjecture what Startagems or Policies they would find out to evade and avoid
it.

But if I may be permitted the freedom, Ita vertere seria.

I will shift the Scene with a pleasant Dialogue, which it was once my Fortune
to hear at a Coffee-house, betwixt two Gentlemen, Strangers to me as I was to
them.

It was one Evening, before the House was full of Smoke and Company, though
never empty of what was then the talk of the Town about the Test; their
Discourse was occasioned (as I afterward understood by reading the paper when
they had left it) by a small Letter to a Friend which lay before them upon the
Table; in which it was in short treated of the Means to bring in Dissenters to
the Church: and particularly it was addressed to this point of Banishment, as a
most impolitick and unpracticable way of Punishment. The Gentlemen's names I
know not, nor if I did, would it be necessary to divulge them; but one of them
seemed to be the Grandchild to Martin Mar-Prelate, advanced by the gain of
Godliness to Master, for both his age and discourse were agreeable to the
conjecture. The other looked like one of the ancient Family of the Kingloves of
-- and therefore for distinction, so we will call them. They had warmed their
mouths with Coffee and Discourse before I came in, and what was the beginning
of the Discourse I cannot tell; but having seated my self in civility at a
convenient distance, called for a Dish of the Liquor of the House, got the
Gazette and Votes about me. The first that I heard Mr. Kinglove say, was, Sir
it is an Axiom both in Naturals and Politics, which will never fail while the
World stands, Sublata Causa tollitur effectus, do but take away these Causes of
Dissension and Disturbance and the Effects and Dangers will certainly cease.

Marp, Verily, now I find that the Tender Mercies of the wicked are cruelty:
What? would you have so many good People sent away, only because their
Conscience will not give them leave to bow to Baal? O! Sir, consider your own
safety is bound up in the Bundle of theirs; it is for the Elects sake that God
spares the World; it is for the five Righteous, that the Lord does not destroy
this Spiritual Sodom. Take heed how you offend these little Ones.


Kingl. Pray Sir, do not mistake me, though you are all subject to wilful
mistakes; I am not for dis-peopling a Nation, as the Gentleman in his Paper
here tells you Ferdinand the Catholic and Philip Kings of Spain did, in
banishing 234000 Families of Jews and Moors: nay, more, I must tell you; I am
of the Opinion, that it is no Politic Consideration, to permit whole Families
to go into Voluntary Exile amongst our Neighbors: and I have heard some people
(who have the reputatation of Prudence and Honesty) attribute a great part of
the sensible Decay of the Trade of the Nation to the want of such a Precaution:
for several of your discontented Mutinous Party have transported those Crafts
and Mysteries, which whilst they were such to our Neighbors, brought no small
advantage to the Nation, whereas now by these Men's baseness Foraigners are
become Masters of them, and by reason of their Industry, frugal way of Living
and Trading, they beat down our Markets and undersel us in our own Commodities.


Marpr. O, now I perceive your sad meaning; you would have our Candlestick
taken away, our Teachers removed out of our sight.


Kingl. I. have nothing to do with your Candlestick; but I would be glad to see
the Firebrand taken out of it, and a New and better Light set up in the room
of it: and I hope now I have pleased you.


Marpr. What? would you have the Godly Ministers sent away from us?


Kingl. By no means, not I: for I know none such among you, or that I may not
be uncharitable, but a very few; some mistaken well-meanining Men it is
possible there may be, whom the Politiques lead about by the Noses: but it is
the Ungodly, Seditious, Factious Teachers, who are no Ministers but of their
own or Hugh Peters's making, that not only I, but you if you understood your
self, or your own Interest ought to be against; who are like the notable
Pick-pocket with three hands, one of which was a Wooden one who used to do his
feat at the Church, and had two hands to hold up Devoutly at his Prayers, and a
third at the same time Diving into your Pocket.


Marp. Well, well, Sir, you may say what you will, but they are Godly Men; and
if God for our Sins should suffer them to betaken away from us, he would raise
us up more.


Kingl. Good Sir be not so bold with God Almighty, and however you make bold
with him at every turn; I doubt you would not be so bold, (though you are a Man
of Gifts your self) to set up for a Teacher, if you were assured, or but
thought, that you should be Exported amongst the rest of the Commodities with
which the Nation is clogged and overcharged, and for which we want a good
Market: and I believe it would cool the Courage of the hottest Zealot, and keep
him from setting up a Trade to which he never was bound Prentice, a Retayler of
Disobedience and Faction.


Marp. O Sad! what say you? would you have us sold for bondmen amongst the
Commodities of the Nation? I thought what a Conscience men of your Principle
have.


Kingl. Still more mistakes! I have you sold! why you are such inestimable
Jewels as are no bodies money unless it be the Grand Seigniors; It may be you
might become the Turbant, but I dare say, no Christian Prince will venture at
you for all your Luster, nor think you ornamental to his Diadem, which I fear
few of you have a kindness for, because it carries a Cross at top on it, and for
other Merchants, I know none that Trade in Noise and Bustle.


Marp. Good Sir, We love the King, and are as good Subjects as any he has.


Kingl. I am glad to hear it, but I should be far more glad to see it, that so
I might believe it, and it were well if your Words and Actions were at Peace
with themselves; but you are so great lovers of Dissension, that it is
impossible to find Unity in the same Person amongst you, but we will wave that
Discourse.


Marp. And I pray Sir, What would you do with those Multitudes, who will never
be brought to hear your Service Book? it may be you would have them
Excommunicated, to help the Commissaries and Officials to a little money for
their Absolution.


Kingl. I will not concern my self with what I would have done; but you had no
need to tell me what a slight Esteem you all have of that Dreadful Sentence. It
is because you do not understand it. However, We will leave it to the Wisdom of
those in whose Power it is, both when and where to make use of it. But what
Mulitudes are these you talk of? Sure you are great Arithmeticians, for you are
always at Multiplication, Division and Numbers, Fractions and Multitudes, I
would you knew the Golden Rule to.


Marp. You cannot but know that we are a considerable part of the Nation; and
if you would come to one of our meetings you would be convinced of it.


Kingl. I thank you for your invitation, but I will not trouble you, or add to
your supposed Numbers by my Company: and for all your skill in Figures, I
believe you have a great many Ciphers amongst you; and if all those who follow
you out of Affectation to be accounted somebody, or out of little Design and
interest, were taken off, which they would soon be, if they met with a
disappointment in those things which induced them to join with you, your
Numbers would dwindle into an inconsiderable Company.


Mar. And what must become of those? what must those poor Souls do? poor Sheep
without a Shepherd!


Kingl. It is not impossible but they may by the care of the Magistrates in
suppressing sin; by the exemplary Lives of the Clergy, and their care as the
Letter there tells you by Evangelical Instructions contained in the 39
Articles, be divorced from those Errors, which they have adopted into the
Family of their Faith. Or suppose if they continued refractory, they should be
Out-lawed while they Live, and incapacitated to make a Will at their Death; or
as the Countryman said, be their own Executioners, and dye detestable; What
think you of that?


Marp. I think the like was never heard of before in all the Persecutions that
ever were.


Kingl. Pray when you come at home, consult the Statute Book; for I know you
have it by you, if it be for nothing else but to find out creeping holes in
Acts of Parliament: You will find; 3 Jac. 5. something like this against
Papists.


Marp. And is there not a great deal of Reason for it? I hope you do not favor
Popery and the Jesuits.


Kingl. Not so much as you and your party do; for you are Recusants as well as
they; and till you can make it appear that you are less dangerous to the Peace
and Security of the Nation, by your own Judgment you should expect the same
Treatment from the Government. And since we are got into the Statutes, pray
look over 27 Eliz. 2. and you will in the Proem find your Character, and in the
Act the Punishment which by your confession (if your designs are the same with
the Jesuits) you deserve.


Marp. Well, I am sure we have nothing to do with Antichrist of Rome, and it is
you that come so near them which will never suffer us to join with you.


Kingl. Never's a long day; but should some of you persist to the last Gasp,
that tells us you are not immortal, and certainly we owe some care to our
Posterity: I my self have sown that wood which is like seris factura Nepotibus
umbram: and undoubtedly this would be a means to plant that Peace and Unity,
which though it may not advance so far as to give us the entire pleasure of
securely reposing our aged heads under their agreeable shades, yet may afford
us the satisfaction to see them grow; and give us hopes that succeeding
Generations may be freed from those Dangers which we labor under.


Marp. We are all at Peace and Quiet, and you would force us into Disorders and
Mutinies.


Kingl. Do you begin Mr. -- to show your self in your colors, I thought just
now you had loved the King so dearly, and been as good Subjects as any. Sure
you would not make Mutinies if it should be so. You are Men of Peace and
Religion: certainly you have no other Sword, but that of the Spirit.


Marp. A Worm if it be trodden upon it will turn again.


Kingl. Very good! but so will not a Sheep, when it is led to the Slaughter; I
understand you. But God be praised the Cursed Cow has short Horns. You yet want
a Parliament for your purpose, and I hope long will. The Militia is out of your
reach, and there are Guards enough (and no more than enough) about White Hall,
to hinder insolent Petitioners from affronting Majesty, and crying your old
stinking Fish, No Bishop. So that whatever your intentions may be, I persuade
my self you are too wary to betray your Good Cause by showing both your
Weakness and Wickedness at the same time.


Marp. Well! for all this I hope the Lord will not forsake his People, or
suffer us to lose so many good men.


Kingl. It is strange this should be a loss, when the outright loss of 10000
better men in a Battle to secure or obtain our Peace would not be thought a
loss, but an advantage to the Public: and hereby not only their Lives, but
many thousands may be saved hereafter, for any thing we know.


Marp. Sir, You create fears to your self which we are far from the thoughts of.


Kingl. You do well to lull us asleep with singing Peace, Peace, Hush, Lullaby
Baby. But if there be such fears of Mutinies now, what may there be some years
hence? when you are grown so strong and numerous as by compulsion to endeavor
to obtain those Demands which now you dare not petition for.


Marp. We for Compulsion! we are utterly against it, and for Liberty of
Conscience for all Men.


Kingl. You tell us so now, but what would you say, if hereafter your Contagion
should spread it self amongst those Persons, who ought to be the defense of the
Royal Person, our Laws, Property and Religion? amongst those who may come to be
Elected Members -- And here a great deal of Company coming in and the House
beginning to fill, they broke off their Discourse, and presently after, went
both one way out of the Door; though they seemed to be of far different Ways
in other things; and so I lost the diversion of their further converse, but not
the remembrance of what then passed, or at least the principal part and
substance of it. Clandite jam rivos pueri --


CHAP. XVIII. The Heads of Separation brought to trial by the Scripture, proved
to be false Prophets by their Fruits, by the Description of them, by the Time
of their appearance; the Signs given to know them by. Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing. Their pretense to be the Ministers of Righteousness. The way they
would evade these Signs; their Plea of not guilty, because not guilty of all,
manifested to be vain; and such as, if admitted, will clear all, even Mahomet,
from the guilt of being false Prophet.
THAT these Heads of Faction may see that I for my own particular Part have a
mind to be serious with them, and that I am in sober earnest, and so far past
the Lusoria arma, that I will close in with them, and come ad Triarios; and to
satisfy all those whose strength of Prejudice, or Interest, does not render
them utterly incapable of Satisfaction; I do cite them before their own Judges,
the Scriptures: let us therefore fore impartially examine the Character; and
then, in God's Name, Detur dignissimo, let it be awarded to those who deserve
it most.

THAT there shall arise false Apostles, false Prophets, and false Teachers in
the Church of God, we can make no doubt; having so much, and so plain,
Scripture for it; so many Caveats given us against them. S. Mat. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, says our great Lord and Savior, which come to you
in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Take heed that no
man deceive you, for many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many. S. Mat. 24.4, 5. S. Mark 13.5, 22, 23.
False Prophets, and false Christ's shall arise, ands show Signs and Wonders to
seduce, if it were possible the very Elect; but take ye heed, behold I have
foretold you all things. For I know, says S. Paul, that after my departing
shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst you: Acts 20.29, 30.
Also of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw
Disciples after them? Therefore watch. And S. Peter is in the same mind: But
there were false Prophets amongst the People, 2. S. Pet. 2.1, 2.
even as there shall be false Teachers amongst you, who primly shall bring in
(or as the Word (...) signifies) shall insinuate by the By, Damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, Denying, or scarcely owning, that he is
the Propitiation for the Sins of all the World. And many shall follow their
pernicious ways, (...) Their ways which come from Apollyon, and are
destructive to themselves, to the Peace, Unity, and Safety of the Church and
State; by reason of whom the Way of Truth shall be evil spoken of the Ancient
Catholic, or Universal Doctrine and Practice of the Church, ((...)) shall be
blasphemed, or accounted Blasphemy.

NOW as it is most certain that there shall be such Men, so it is no less
certain, that it shall be a very great Difficulty to discover and know them.

FOR, first they shall come in the Name of Christ; pretend a Commission from
Christ: and as confidently call themselves the Servants, and Ministers of
Christ, and of the Gospel, as they that really are so.

IN the second place, they shall be able to draw Disciples after them; and not
a few, but they shall deceive many. Nay, so far able, as if it were possible,
to deceive the very Elect. And to effect this, it is absolutely necessary, that
to deceive the Sheep they should come in Sheeps Clothing, look most innocently,
and appear most harmless, good and profitable. Nay, further, they must have the
appearance, and resemblance of the Ministers of Righteousness. And this St.
Paul tells us is no difficult thing; for such, says he, are false Apostles,
deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light: therefore it
is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
Righteousness.

IN the last place, they shall arise from among our selves; and their design
shall be to draw Disciples after them.

THAT we may not be mistaken, we must therefore make a Discovery of them, by
those Ways, Marks, Signs, and Directions which Christ and his Apostles have in
the Scripture given us to distinguish them and know them by. And therefore, for
the fulfilling of any prediction, we must first enquire for the time of its
Appearance; and that is all along said to be in the last times or Days. Now the
Spirit speaks expressly, 1. Tim. 4.1.
that in the latter Times some* shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. 2. Tim 3.1.
This know that in the last days perilous Times shall come. In the last days
shall come Scoffers, 2. S. Pet. 3.3.
walking after their own Lusts or Desires. And St. Jude tells us who they are,
S. Jude. 18.19.
They who separate themselves. So far the discovery is clear it shall be in the
last Days. The difficulty will be to know when these last Days are, these
dangerous Days. St. Paul intimates plainly when we are to look upon the Time as
the last Days. And having told us that in the latter time some should depart
from the Faith, he subjoynes, For the time will come when they will not endure
sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.3.
but after their own Lusts, shall heap up to themselves Teachers, having
itching Ears. And thus far the discovery is plain, that these are those last
and perilous Times, which he prophesied should come, and with the most
remarkable Asterisk points them out to us. Sure there was never any Age or Time
like this for the itching of Peoples Ears, nor for their heaping up to
themselves Teachers after their own Desires. And to satisfy himself of this, a
man need not take a far Journey or ride a Horse to Death; for if he cannot find
it true in his own Town or Parish or even at his own Door, he may walk on foot
to the next, where he will certainly find it. And so strangly do Peoples Ears
itch after Novelties, That let every Day in the Week a Teacher of a new
Doctrine come amongst them, a great Company shall run to hear him. Nay, should
a man come clothed with outward Profession of Sanctimony and Innocence, and
with confidence tell them a fine story out of the Jewish Talmud or Turkish
Alcoran, and pretend it is a new Revelation, I question not but he would have a
great many Hearers, and some Disciples. And for their heaping them up to
themselves, is it not as evident as the former? When People are not contented
with their Lawful Minister, (though never so Painful, Orthodox and Pious,) who
is set over them and appointed to watch for their Souls as he that must give an
account: but they must heap them up to themselves; have them of their own
choosing, according to their own Fancies and Desires, and not one, but many,
two, three, four, or more Itinerant and Resident, in some little Towns, and far
more in Places of good Capacity; for you must know, that as this sort of People
make advances in knowledge and Confidence which they call growing in Grace,
they are as they think all taught of God, and are to be Teachers of God. Though
that Prophecy, as he himself explains it, was meant of Christ, the eternal Son
of God, and fulfilled in him, and by him who was God, and therefore thought it
no Robbery to be equal with God; though it is a manifest and the highest piece
of Sacrilege in any Mortal Man to arrogate it to himself. S. Joh. 6.45. S.
Joh. 14.6.
And says he, They shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me, for no man can come unto
the Father, except I draw him. But this will not satisfy them; for to gain the
greater Authority and reputation they will apply it to themselves; so that in
some places where the infection has spread it self strongly, every third or
fourth House can afford you one or more if occasion be, either Man or Woman
Teacher, though S. Paul gives an express Command against these Female
Doctresses, 8. Tim. 2.12.
and tells us positively a Woman is not to be permitted to speak in the Church,
that is, to teach. For which Command I met with one of the most subtle
allegorical fine-spun Evasions, as far exceeding the Brains of Origin: The
Woman (says a Dissenter) must learn in silence, that is the Flesh; for all
Flesh must be silent before the Lord, Very well, repl'd I! and nicely
distinguished, to make us all Hermaphrodites; but how will the Woman part of
you by this sobriety come to be saved in Childbearing? which the Apostle adds
as a good encouragement to them to keep them in silence, v. 15
which you know is a hard matter, and that they may not usurp Authority over
the Man: and here the Man and Woman were both silent, wanting some of the old
Fig leaves to make an Apron of or Apron-strings for an Evasion, by which he
might have been convinced, that his Flesh was no Woman.

HAVING proceeded thus far; and found out the Time of their Appearance, it
follows that we examine these Teachers: and as St. John says, Let them pretend
never so much to the Spirit, Try the Spirits whether they are of God: because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World.

OUR most blessed Lord has given us a Criterion, an infallible Touchstone, to
distinguish Gold from Brass though double gilt; a certain way to know the Wolf
though in Sheeps Clothing, from the good Shepherd: Mat. 7.19.
By their Fruits ye shall know them. Not by their seeming good Fruits, their
appearance of Holiness, and profession of Godliness: for in these things they
transform themselves into the likeness of the Ministers of Righteousness, or
otherwise they could never be able to deceive. It is not by their zealous and
passionate v. 21.
Lord! Lord! for not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. It is not by their The word Prophecy is used for
Preaching, and by them so understood in many places; particularly that which
they abuse so often to countenance their way, Despise not Prophesying.
Prophesying in his Name, their often and painful Preaching of Christ, of
Strife and Envy. No, nor by their wonderful and miraculous Works done (as they
say) in his Name. Their converting so many poor Souls from Superstition,
Heathenism, and Idolatry, who were better Christians before. For, Christ tells
us, for all this, be will not know them for his. Many will say unto me in that
Day, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied (or Preached) in thy name, and tit thy
name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will
I profess unto them, I never knew you; Depart from me yon that work Iniquity.
By their ill Fruits therefore it is, by their working Iniquity that we must
distinguish them; and without a careful observation of this, it is impossible
to know them from the true Prophets, the Preachers and Ministers of
Righteousness.

NOW whether the Church of England and her Prophets, or these Prophets, are the
false, let their Fruits determine? Certainly they who both in Doctrine and
Discipline, not only Teach but practice, in their Lives, Actions and
Intentions, a true departing from all Iniquity; quity; from whatsoever is
contrary to the Commands of the Gospel: These are the true Prophets, the
Servants and Disciples of Christ, who by these good Fruits may be known by us
to be such as shall by him be known and owned for his at that Day. And they who
under pretenses of Piety and the Cloak of Maliciousness Preach themselves and
the Interest of their Party, who by their.Doctrine and Example teach others, to
live in Envyings, Hatred, Strife, Sedition, Disobedience, and (in the most
modest Expression of it) Principles of Rebellion; all which are directly
contrary to the Commands of Christ, and the Gospel, which are works of
Iniquity; I they who do such things are workers of Iniquity, and false
Prophets; who though they may come in Sheeps Clothing, yet inwardly they are
Ravening Wolves. And that the Doctrines and Designs, the Principles and the
Practice of these Dissenting Factious Heads of Parties, do all terminate in
these as in their Center and ultimate End, (however they may be wide enough
distant in the Circumference of several of their Doctrines one from the other)
has already in the foregoing Pages been shown; and by their former actions, it
has more at large, and beyond the Effrontery of Impudence it self most
demonstratively been manifested: and with the Pen of Iron, and Point of their
poisonous, though glittering, Diamond, been engraven in such deep and bloody
Characters, as whole Volumes would not contain: and I heartily wish they would
give us leave with the general and most gracious Amnesty to forgive and forget;
and not by their restless and repeated Machinations, give our Fear, those
alarming Passions of Men's Souls, a just occasion to call them to remembrance,
and by comparing past Events with present Circumstances, to suspect that they
are brewing a second draught in Circes Golden Cup, to intoxicate the People,
and transform them again into Wild and Savage Beasts of Prey, to worry the
Government; and by the most real Lycanthropy to feed upon humane Flesh.

If they shall, (as I do not question but for an Evasion they will) endeavor
to hide the Teeth and Paws of the Wolf, by the soft and woolly Words and
Protestations; that they are far from the thoughts and intentions, of those Men
of the late times: How can we be assured of it? Those very Men said the same,
and it may be at first had not those intentions themselves, which following
successes inspired them with, and as they thought, warranted them in, as may
appear by the Confident Motto of their Coin, (of which, for all that) abundance
was, like themselves, Counterfeit; only Brass plated over, which was, God with
us, The Commonwealth of England; and if a Man may, in so serious an affair be
permitted to be pleasant, it might be taken notice that God and they were not
both of a Side; however they made this ill Consequence upon their false
Supposition, If God be with us, who can be against us? Why do these Men write
so exactly after so foul a Copy? Why do they in all things come to so near a
Resemblance of those Men, (whose words though at first most specious, yet ended
in Actions odious, as well as unexampled to the World) so that an Egg is not
liker an Egg than the one is to the other? The same Way, if pursued, must lead
to the same End: and till by their Juggling they are able to cast such a Mist
hot only before my Eyes, but my Understanding and Memory, as to persuade me
that this is not Black and White which all the World calls so; I shall never be
brought to believe any other, but that they are the Children of those (or the
Men themselves) that killed the Prophets, by the great Zeal they have to build
them Monuments; that is, to bury the present Church and Government in the Grave
of oblivion. And by their so often telling us that the Liturgy is a dead
Letter, they plainly give us to understand that it is very offensive to their
Noses and Eyes, and more than time it were (in its own Linen, the Surplice)
buried out of their sight: and I dare say, they are as generous as that French
King, who being persuaded to* deface the Sepulcher of a great English Captain,
who lay interred most magnificently at Roan; he replied, I wish all my Enemies
were as honorably buried. And I hope all sober and considerative Persons will
be of the same Judgment with me: I an sure they must, if they love themselves,
their King, Church, of Country, against which these men are (some of them
actually, by solemn League and Covenant, and Engagement) sworn Enemies, though
they deny it never so often, and pretend never so much Innocence, Sincerity,
and godly Simplicity of the Gospel.

BUT since there is a necessity of a full and clear Conviction, we will bring
in more evidence against them; and no worse Men than the Holy Apostles: and if
such a Jury as Christ and his twelve Apostles find it Billa vera, and that they
are guilty of what they stand indicted for, let them acquit and absolve them
that can; I am sure they have no hope but by confession and amendment to crave
the Psalm of Mercy.

BUT before we come to these Attainders it will be requisite that we stop up
one avenue, at which otherwise they will undoubtedly all creep out, and escape
the Judgment of Men, though never the Righteous Judgment of God, who knows all
things, and does not judge according to outward appearance, but as things or
person are in themselves. If you bring them to any of the Places I shall
hereafter mention; because every thing in them does not exactly hit them, they
will persuade all the World and themselves too I am afraid, that they are not
at all concerned in those Descriptions of False Prophets, and false Teachers.
Thus though in their Principles they may be Traitors, and in their Practice
Heady, High-minded, etc. Yet if they do not forbid to Marry, or to abstain from
Meats; that Place is meant of the Papists who do so; or it may be they will say
of they Church of England, which commands abstinence in the time of Lent, and
upon other Fasts: though that is a Civil as well as a Religious Sanction, as
will appear by the Statutes which do enjoin it, 2o and 3o Ed. Sexti 19. where
the most satisfactory reasons are given for the Observation of Lent. Religious,
to increase Godliness and Piety, Virtue and Temperance, by fasting and
abstinence: Civil, to increase the breed of Cattle and to encourage Fishery,
which if improved might prove a more inexhaustible treasure to us than the
Indian Mines, as well as it is to our Neighbors, who from, Poor and distressed
stressed are by a particular industry herein become High and Mighty, Vide; 5
and 6 Ed. 6. and 5 Eliz. 5. Politic for the increase of Navigation, and
maintenance of the Navy, which no man that is a true Friend to the interest of
his Country can be against, 35 Eliz. 7. As for the Command of our Church, it is
wholly Religious; Nor does the Church think those Meats unlawful at other
Times; and only enjoins abstinence, that our Flesh being subdued tot the
Spirit, we may the better be enabled to obey the Godly Motions of Righteousness
and true Holiness; as the Collect for the first Sunday in Lent teaches us to
Pray: which therefore all they who quarrel at, or will not pray for, must
declare themselves Enemies to; and that they are against those Means, which the
Church of God has ever in and since the Primitive Times thought so conducive to
those great ends of Religion.

NOW to show the invalidity of this Plea, we must consider. That the intention
of the Apostles was to mark out all false Prophets of what Persuasion, Name or
Distinction soever. And If none are false Teachers or Prophets, but such to
whom every thing they mention does agree; then would the Character of
Discovery, and those Marks of Distinction which they give us to know them by,
be altogether in significant, impracticable and useless: for it is impossible
to find all those Devilish Qualifications, combined in one Person or Sect; no
not in Mahomet himself, who certainly was the greatest Impostor (and it may be
The False Prophet) that ever was, or will be in the World. And therefore these
signs are promiscuously laid down, hut are particularly to be applied, some of
them to one sort or Sect, and some to another, as they will suit and agree to
their Doctrines and Actions: and he is as certainly a False Teacher, (though
not so great a one) who is wilfully guilty of one or more of these signs by
which we must discover the false Prophets from the True, as he would be who
could really be charged with them all. And if these Men do not grant the Truth
of this Preliminary Assertion, it must be because they dare not join Issue with
us in the Trial: but being satisfied beforehand of their Guilt, are as the
Apostle says of Heretics, Tit. 3.11.
(...), convicted and condemned of theselves.

CHAP. XIX. A further pursuance of the discovery, and that these Men are False
Prophets from the Description of St. Paul and St. Peter St. Peter's (...), and
St. Judes (...), considered as particularly designed to show their Infectious
Contagious Doctrines. Of their despising Dominions, querulous, unsatisfied and
complaining Humor. A short vindication of the Church from their malicious
Aspersion of being Guilty of Idolatry.
LET us now come to a further and particular Examination of them by the
Description which St. Paul gives of them who are false Prophets, 2 Timothy 3.1.
and who were to come in the last and perilous Times. God forbid we should lay
all that is there said to their Charge; But I fear they will not escape
unconcerned in a great Measure of it: and if nothing else would take hold of
them, yet the Sin of Pride there mentioned, will I doubt pull them by the
Cloak, of which they are so fond. The wisest of Mortal Men tells us, Only by
Pride comes Contention; Pro. 13.10.
so that it seems there can be no Contention without it, nor would be any but
for it. There is a strange Temptation in being a Head, though but of a Faction:
Ambition is a Vice as natural as Self-love, and Men take a secret pleasure to
be taken notice of, which they think adds much to that esteem which all men
desire, and would persuade themselves they deserve from others. That a Man
cannot walk the Streets but he shall over-hear an (...), that is the famous Mr.
-- is the sweetest and softest Music to all Ambitious Ears, -- digito
monstrari, and dicier hic est: to have the Porter or Tankard-bearer, or honest
Tradesman as you pass by his Shop, point you out with his finger; There goes
the precious godly conscientious Mr. --

HAD they been truly good and obedient Sons of the Church, for any thing I know
of Parts of Excellencies ab^^^ other Men, they must have gone (...) the Common
Crowd; and it may be never have been taken notice of: or at best have been
contented with some small Vicaridge or Parsonage; as many Orthodox men eminent
for Parts, Piety, and Learning are; who many time, (the more is the pity) are
buried alive in some obscure Country Village; where partly by the narrowness of
their Fortune, partly by their religious, voluntary and unambitious contentment
and humility, they are confined to the knowledge of a few Rusticks, and the
next Market Town. For,

Haud raro emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res augusta Domi --
Whilst in the mean time, some of these empty Boasts fill a whole City and
Country with their noise, and by that and the liberality of their Disciples
(who barter ready money with them, for infected breath, swelling pompous Words
of Vanity, promises of Liberty, etc. with which feigned words they make a real
Merchandise of their Hearers) they arrive at such revenues as otherwise they
could never have hoped for. And how far even one of these Considerations may
transport Ambitious Spirits, let that eternal young Ephesian Villain testify,
Herostratus.
who merely for Fame burnt that stupendous Temple of Diana, justly accounted
one of the Worlds seven Wonders: and in a few hours laid those lofty Turrets in
Ashes, which all Asia had been They who write most modestly say it was 220
Years. Pliny affirms it to have been 400 Years in building by all Asia, and
several Kings of other Countries.
so long in rearing. It were well if the same madness, and a far greater
Impiety did not possess these Men, who throw the Flames of Dissension into the
Church and Temple of the Living God; of which his only Son laid the Foundation
with his most precious Blood, and of which he himself is the glorious Top and
Cornerstone.

BUT to go on: Are they not false Accusers? as it is in the Margin of the Bible,
Make-bates; in the Greek (...), Common Barretors in Religious affairs? do they
not falsely accuse us and our worship of Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, a
thousand other forgeries and calumnies as feigned as they are frequent? Are
they not Traitors to their Prince? whilst like Absalom with fine words and fair
Speeches they steal away the Hearts of his Subjects from him; 2 Samuel 15.1. to 7.
and render him only a King of their Bodies, but not of their affections, which
is his most glorious Prerogative, the fairest Jewel, and the surest Guard of
his Imperial Diadem: and without which, he is but a King of Brutes, and those
not over tame and manageable. It is the common Character of the King of Great
Britain amongst Foreign Nations, that he is Rex Diabolorum; a piece of Wit
which we may thank the Papists for first inventing, and this sort of People by
the horrid transactions of the late times for continuing, and in a great
measure justifying.

BUT further; Are they not heady as well as high-minded, wilfully wedded to
their own ways, and in effect lovers of Pleasures, of their own Pleasure more
than lovers of God, or of his Pleasure? He would have all Christians lovers of
Peace, Unity and Concord: to live in Peace, and as much as in them lies to
follow Peace; without which as well as Holiness, Heb. 12.14.
he positively tells us we shall never see his face: and which therefore he so
often recommends as a Duty most agreeable to the Gospel or Peace; the God of
Peace, and the everlasting Prince of Peace. Notwithstanding all which they care
not how they violate and banish it from the Church, destroy and break the Peace
of the State, rather than they will miss of their ends, and want their own
Will, and Pleasure.

IS not all this manifest from their Daily Practice? and which they justify,
telling us there is a necessity laid upon them from their Consciences so to do.
And which rather than they will not effect, and left it should not be as clear
as the Sun who they are that the Apostle points out unto us in this
Description: Are they not of this sort who creep into Houses, and lead Captive
silly Women laden with Sins, led away with diverse Lusts, variety of desires, or
desire of varieties and Novelties? I am fore this part of the Character hits
them like the left handed Benjamites, to a hairs breadth; and needs no Comment,
or Marginal Notes to explain the meaning.

LET them now with their usual Confidence deny these things if they have a mind
to prove themselves the most shameless Cretians, (...), that ever lived: and if
they cannot deny what is so notoriously known to all People; let us see how
they will avoid the just Charge of being of the Number of those false Teachers
who were to come and are now come, in these last and perilous Days.

NOR will they find much more favor at the Hands of St. Peter than of St.
Paul, in his 2 Ep. 2. cap. Where, after he had been speaking of the false
Prophets which had been, and should come, all which I will not accuse them of,
there being enough of what is obvious to all Men, Especially, or chiefly, says
he, Such are they who walk after the Flesh; that is, in opposition to the
Spirit; after the Works of the Flesh, and not after the Fruits of the Spirit,
as before has been often shown: Such as walk (...), in the unlawful desire, or
vehement defire of infecting others, with their own pernicious Ways and
Opinions. And that this is no putting the Place to torture, or wresting of it;
but the true and genuine construction, will appear to any Person, who has but a
competent acquaintance with the Greek Language, or any ordinary Lexicon; for
(...), properly signifies all, or any, desires of the inferior or animal part
of us; as is plain by the frequent use, both Aristotle and other Greek Authors
make of that Word to express the several Passions and Affections of the
sensitive Soul: and (...), signifies inquinamentum, contaminatio,
consceleratio, a defiling by Infection, or Contagion: and therefore amongst
Physicians it is the Word by which they most generally express that sly and
insinuating poisonous Disposition in the Air which spreads abroad a Contagion,
and carries about the Infection wherever it comes; and if the vulgar opinion be
true, that those who have the Plague themselves are infected also with a desire
of infecting others, it is not at all unsuitable either to the sense of the
Words, or the humors of the Men who labor of this Distemper of their Minds.
As for the Word Uncleanness in the English Translation, it seems neither
Natural nor Proper; and the rather, because I think in all the New Testament
the word Uncleanness in the Greek, (...), excepting only in this Place, and
that of S. Jude, which is almost verbatim the same with this, and given us for
the same Employment: Which makes the Conjecture not improbable, that S. Peter's
(...), and S. Jude's (...), must have a more particular signification, than is
expressed in the English word, Uncleanness; especially as it is commonly taken
for that secret Sin, which therefore is very unlikely openly to discover a
false Prophet or Teacher, for which design it is here given us. And another
signification than this more proper or Natural, I neither know, nor can
anywhere find. Whether it will bear it or not, let the Critics determine; sure
I am the Interpretation suits but too exactly with the Temper, Actions, and
Endeavors of these Men, who are but too truly the (...), Pestes Ecclesiae, the
Plagues of the Church, and it will be well if they be not found to be so in the
State.

BUT we will not wrangle with them about one Word, or stand upon what is not
evident and apparent; and therefore let them deny if they can, that they are
not presumptuous, self-willed, despisers of Government; or that they do not
speak evil of the things they understand not; of the Management of the Affairs
of State, at which they are perpetually discontented and quarrelling. I do not
believe they are of the Privy Council, and I hope they never will be; and
therefore one may presume they do not understand much of the Affairs of the
State. Do they not first unfix the Minds of Men, and loose them from the
Foundations of Peace, Unity and Obedience, and then beg^^^ those Souls, which
they have made unstable? Do they not speak great swelling Words of Vanity,
promising their followers if they will hold out, hopes of Liberty of Conscience
here, and Heaven hereafter, and allure Men through the fleshly Lusts or
Desires, and the much Wantonness (that pruritus audiendi Leachery and Itch of
hearing) those who before they came amongst them were clean, escaped from them
who live in error, who were baptized in the Name of Christ, instructed in the
true Christian Faith, and Evangelical Doctrine? I think what has before been
spoken upon this Subject is so full and clear, that though they plead not
Guilty, it will be no easy matter for them to free themselves.

NEITHER will St. Jude differ from his Brother Apostle. S. Jude. v. 8. v. 15.
Likewise these filthy Dreamers (...), defile the Flesh or animal part with
strange Imaginations, and strong Phansies and delusions, and despise Dominions,
speak evil of Dignities, the things they understand or know not. These are they
which speak such hard Words of God, that by his secret Will he never intended
that his Son should be a propitiation for the Sins of the whole world, or that
he would have all men to repent and be saved; which hard Speeches, these
Ungodly Sinners have spoken and taught others to speak against him. Are they
not Murmurers, Complainers, (...), never contended with their present
condition; but ever grumbling, desirous of innovation, given to change,
endeavoring an alteration in the Establilsh't Government? for such an humor
the word signifies; such Persons as are Sort sua minime contenti: a
description so exactly suiting with the querulous humor of these People, that
all the Art in the World cannot coin a fitter. And to conclude all
Emphatically, These are they, which separate themselves, Animal, having not the
Spirit, how highly soever they may pretend to it; nor having made a further
progress in Religion, than what is mere Sensitive or Animal, as the Word (...),
signifies, such natural seize, as without Grace men may, and many
Heathens have attained to, unless they may be said to exceed them in the
Confidence of proclaiming their own Worth and Merits.

Thus do they stand guilty by the Verdict of Christ and his Apostles, and if we
must Judge of them by their fruits, and by the forementioned signs whether
they are False Prophets, and Wolves in Sheeps clothing; then here is
Separation, Sedition, Contention, Disobedience, Despising of Dignities,
speaking evil of Dominions, Wrath, Strife, slanderous and false accusations of
their Sober, Pious and Lawful Superiors; and much more of the same Nature, of
which they stand daily convicted by their Preaching and Practice.

LET them now (if they can) show that the Church of England does either teach
or allow any of these things forbidden by Christ or the Gospel; or that any one
of these signs of False Prophets do agree to them: And let all the World judge
if the true Sons of the Church, are not the true Ministers of Righteousness.

AS for their Impeachment against us as guilty of Idolatry and Superstition,
all the Art they have used for near this hundred Years has not been able to go
further in the proof of it, than a bare saying so; and that (though pronounced
never so Magisterially,) will amount to no more than a seeble Woman's Argument:
They are so, because they are so. Ergo, they are guilty of Idolatry and
Superstition: Which may be good Logic amongst their silly Apron Disciples, but
will never pass muster any where else.

AND for their slander, That our Clergy, especially the Prelates, are so much
inclined to Popery; I know not whether it has more Malice or falshhood in it.
For they cannot be ignorant, how learnedly some former Bishops and some of the
present Clergy have defended the Protestant Cause against all the Champions of
Rome: and have shown the forgeries and feigned Miracles, upon which that Church
has built her Usurpations; how amply have they satisfied the World, that we
have not left Rome as anciently Christian, till Rome had first left the Ancient
Catholick-Apostolick Faith and Truth?

AND however the Men of this Party made the great and learned Archbishop Laud
so much a Papist, as for that suspicion or imputation to lose his Head; they
are obliged to that Head which we lost more than He: And the best Arms they can
employ against the Papists, they must be forced to borrow out of his Magazine:
and so long as that Incomparable Piece of his against Fisher continues in the
World; it will be an Eternal Monument of his Learning, Piety and firmness in
the Protestant Doctrine; and of their falsehood and Cruelty in depriving our
Church and the whole Protestant cause, of such an able Chief and expert
Commander; and for no other Crimes but his Loyalty to his Prince, his Constancy
to the Church, and his wearing the Sacred and Venerable Miter. Crimes great
enough if They were Judges, to take off the Heads of all the Bishops in the
World.

THEY cannot but know how many several times before a Man comes from a College
to a Cathedral he must take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegia^^e; and renounce
the Church of Rome: and therefore they must suppose, That all these Pious and
Reverend Fathers will make no scruple of Perjury, of which if ever they return
to the obedience of the Pope, they must be most horribly guilty: but the truth
is they care not how much they suppose them guilty, and never think they can
render them odious enough, though by the most improbable slanders which their
Malice can invent. God forgive them for it, for sure they know not what they do.

CHAP. XX. THE CONCLUSION.
AND now having found them thus guilty, I know they will say, I am a Man of a
persecuting Spirit, a Reprobate, a Machiavellian; a hard word they use to brand
their Enemies withal, and which most of their Party know not what it means,
whether a man or a Devil, or something worse if it could be. But it has been
the hard measure of those whose names I do so reverence, that it will be the
greatest honor they can do me to put me in the Rear of them. The Captain of
our Salvation was said to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devil; and the great
Apostle tells us he was by some accounted their Enemy because he told them the
Truth; and so long as the World indures it will be so: For,

Obsequium Amicos, Veritas odium parit. Flattery will for a while procure many
Friends, but great is the Truth, and will prevail though it raises a Man never
so many Enemies. And if it shall be said, All Truths are not fit for all times,
I must make that Necessity plead for me which can do violence to Nature; and
which made the Son of Crassus, who before was Dumb, break his Silence with
Regem nolite occidere. And it would make the dumb Ass speak the second time, if
she were alive, to reprove the madness of these Prophets who run on in the
Ways of Balaam, to curse a Church and People whom the Lord has Blessed; and
they shall be blessed, when these their Enemies shall inherit the Woe, and
perish in the Gainsaying of Corah. The very Geese will awaken the Gauls when
they hear the Barbarous Gauls secretly creeping up the Hill, to surprise the
Capitol. And the silly Curs will bark, when they hear the Evening Wolf coming
toward the Fold, to worry the Sheep. Danger opens every Eye, and Fear will
open any Mouth.

I do not question but to run through various Censures: and am ever since I was
at School, acquainted with the Fate of Books.

Pro captu Lectoris, habent sua fata Libelli. And though it is uncommon, yet
give me leave to close this Discourse, with what is usually the beginning of
others, something to the Reader; which I do not because I love innovations, but
because I hate long Prefaces, and will not be a Pimp to my own Pen, or Court
the coy to cast their Eyes upon the following Sheets, with Epistolary
Rhetoric: I had rather have People read, if they think good, and then judge,
than judge by the Elaborate Front, and after read what it may be they will not
like; and meet with Eger Wine after all the Promises of the Carved and Gilded
Bush. All I have to say for my self is, That if I have not done so well as I
should, I have done as well as I could: and am sure I shall deceive no
expectation, because nothing was ever expected from me.

IF the judicious shall tax me of two much Levity, there is to entertain the
greatest Sobriety, even under those little lightnesses serious truths; and it
was the humor of the Age, which has violenc'd my Inclinations; with which even
Truth is hardly palatable, without the Ragoust of Droll and Burlesque.

AS for the Aerie and pleasant, they will think it too serious; and so it is to
play withal: and if it may not, by diverting, advantage them; I shall not be
offended if they choose what they like better.

AS for my Friends, in which Number I reckon all those that love their Country,
Prince, Laws, Liberty, and Religion; they will certainly pardon the Defective
Effects of that Zeal and Passion I have for them, and their Interests; though
in some things to the severity of Critics, especially the prejudiced, I may
appear to have been so far transported as to seem blind.

AND for my Enemies; to show them I am a Church of England Man, I will forgive
them, and pray for them; though for speaking out too plain, they hate me,
persecute my Fame, or despightfully use my Reputation; and it may be I am too
intent upon Affairs of greater concern, than to turn again and pelt Stones at
the Dogs that bark at me; or to be angry, because I am dashed and bespattered in
dirty Ways; which whoever travels in the same Road of Truth, that I have, must
of necessity expect: and though a great Man tells us, Of Writing Books there is
no End; I will hope there will be such an End, as proceeds from there being no
necessity of such Books; because, no occasion for them.

-- Dabit Deus his quoque Finem.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the three Roses in
Ludgatestreet.
THE True Liberty and Dominion of Conscience, vindicated from the usurpations
and abuses of Opinion and Persuasion, in Octavo. Christian Ethics, or Divine
Morality, opening the way to Blessedness by the rules of Virtue and Reason, by
Tho. Traherne, B.D. Octavo. Roman Forgeries, or A true Account of False
Records, discovering the Impostures and counterfeit Antiquities of the Church
of Rome, by the same Author, Octavo. Daily Devotions, consisting of
Thanksgiving, Confessions, and Prayers in two parts, by an humble Penitent, in
120. The Causes and Remedies of the Distempers of the Times, in certain
Discourses of Obedience and Disobedience, Octavo.
(...)
