MORAL ESSAYS. Contained in several TREATISES ON Many Important DUTIES.

Written in French, by Messieurs du Port Royal. Faithfully Rendered into
English, by A Person of Quality.

Third Volume.

LONDON Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel Street in Covent Garden,
near the Piazza's, MDCLXXX.

An Advertisement.
WE have given to this Volume the Title of The Third Volume of Moral Essays,
because the design we had of joining to the fame Work, and under the same
Title, the Treatises which had appeared under that of the Education of a
Prince, and of Composing a second Volume of ESSAYS, being Published, this here,
which, without that, would have been but the Second, is now the Third.

It Is in Consideration of reducing under this same Title all the Treatises
which are of the same nature, that we have added to this a small Writing of
Plays, whereof we had a Right to Dispose, although some persons had already
inserted it in other Works. And we have been by so much more inclinable
thereunto, as these Works were less common. It has not quite lost the Grace of
Novelty, beside that we have taken an Occasion to Correct it in diverse places,
and to add thereunto likewise something.

There is yet another Treatise, which is that of Diverse ways wherein God is
Tempted, of which there might have been a Part seen under another Form, but it
is so changed and augmented that one would say it is absolutely new, or rather
that it appears here under its natural Shape and Form, whereas it was, as it
were, Disguised in the other.

It would be to no purpose to Note by what Accident these TREATISES have been
made, seeing that it is not this Occasion which can render them Useful, the
Public Judging thereof for the most part only according to the Relation they
have to its Disposition and Relish.

A TABLE Of the Treatises contained in this Volume.
First PART. OF the Knowledge of ones self, First Part. Of the Knowledge of
ones self, Second Part.
II Treatise. Of Charity and Self-Love. III Treatise. Of the diverse ways
wherein God is tempted. IV Treatise. Of Plays. V Treatise. Of Reports. VI
Treatise. Of the Remedy against Suspicion. VII Treatise, That we must not be
scandalized at Pious Men's faults. VIII Treatise. The means of profiting by bad
Sermons.
PLAYS Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes.
TArtus a Comedy by Mr. Medburn. Comedies by Mr. Howard. All Mistaken, or the
mad Couple. English Monsieur. Generous Enemies, a Comedy. The Plain-Dealer, a
Comedy.
Tragedies by Mr. Lee. Rival Queens. Sophonisba. Metridates. Nero. Gloriana.
Oedipus. Caesar Borge.
By John Dryden Esquire Kind Keeper. Oedipus. Mistaken Husband.
By Mr. Durfey. Fond Husband. Madam Fickle. Esquire Old-sap. Fool turned
Critic. Virtuous Wife.
By Mrs. Bean. Forced Marriage. Town Fop. Abdelazar.
By Mr. Crown. Andromiche Calisto, a Masque Misery of Civil War. Country Wit.
Destruction of Jerusalem.
Sertorius, by Mr. Bancroft. The Orphan, by Mr* Otway, in the Press.
Theodosius, or the Force of Love.
Moral Essays.
First Treatise.
Of the Knowledge of ones self.
First Part.
1. THE most common Precept of Pagan and Christian Philosophy is this, which
Orders us to know our selves; and there is nothing in which men agree more then
in the Precept of this Duty. It Is one of those sensible Truths, which has no
need of Proofs, and which finds in all men a heart which acknowledges them, and
a light which approves them. How agreeable soever we imagine the Illusion of a
man who is deceived in the Idea, which he has of him self, we find it always
unfortunate to be deceived, and we are on the contrary struck with the
Sentiment, which a Poet has expressed in these Verses

Illi Mors gravis Incubat,
Qui netus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
2. We must set a greater value on these Principles in which men find
themselves united by an unanimous Consent, because that seldom happens to them,
being always by their vain and malignant humors inclined to contradict one
another upon the least occasion; every one having a desire either to disparage
others, or to distinguish himself from them, in saying something that is new
and not following simply the common Tract: So Truth must be very clear, when
stifling this Inclination it forces them to reunite themselves in some Maxim.
It Is that which happens in respect of this. For there has not been a
Philosopher who has opposed it, and who has pretended that man ought to avoid
knowing himself. What if some one has passed even to this excess? he cannot do
it but by supposing that Man is so unfortunate, and that his Evils are so
without remedy, that he could not but increase his Misery by knowing himself.
And so one should always know ones self, even to conclude by this strange way
of Arguing, That it is good not to know ones self.

3. But that which is very strange is, that being so united to grant the
Importance of this Duty -- they are still far from practicing it. For, not
laboring seriously to obtain this knowledge, they are hardly employed all
their life, but with care how to shun it. Nothing is more odious to them than
this light, which discovers them to their proper eyes, and which obliges them
to see themselves such as they are. Thus they do all things to hide it from
themselves, and they establish their quiet in living ignorantly and in the
forgetfulness of their State and Condition.

4. A great Wit of this Age has shown, in an excellent Discourse, that this
desire to avoid the knowledge of ones self is the Fountain of all the
tumultuous occupations of men, and above all, of that which they call
Divertisement; That they seek in that only to rob themselves of themselves;
That it suffices to render a man Miserable to oblige him to consider himself,
and that there is no human Felicity in this World which is able to endure this
consideration. Thus Man without Grace is so great a punishment to himself, that
he inclines continually to fly from himself, that he looks upon himself in some
sort as his own great Enemy, and that he thinks his happiness consists in being
forgetful of himself, and running headlong into this forgetfulness.

5. This Inclination is not only the effect of an evil Custom, nor of a
particular disorder amongst some men; it is the general propensity of our
corrupt Nature. We are out of our selves from the very moment of our Birth, and
the Soul, which in her infancy does only busy herself with outward things and
the Pleasures of the Body, does hereby render these Objects and Pleasures so
familiar to her, and cleaves so strongly to them, that she cannot enter again
into herself, but by great trouble and violence And as she finds not there what
she desires, she freeth herself the soonest she can, and Melancholy inclines
her to return presently to those other Objects, to which she applies herself
with so much more eagerness, by how much more they assist her to forget her
interior Miseries, the sight whereof she cannot undergo. Projicit se for as
miserabiliter scalpi avide Contactu sensibilium.

6. But not to urge any farther that this not knowing ones self must not be
countenanced, and the better to dive to the bottom thereof, there must be
added, that this knowledge is joined in man to an inclination which appears
quite contrary, and which makes him to regard himself in every thing. Because
the greatest Pleasure of a proud man is to contemplate the Idea which he makes
of himself. This Idea is the Origin of all his vain satisfactions: He relates
all to it, and nothing pleases him but in proportion as it contributes to puff
it up, to adorn it, and to render it more lively.

7. These two inclinations, whereof the one makes us to fly, and the other to
seek the knowledge of our selves, are alike natural to a man; so spring they
from the same Fountain, though in appearance they are opposite.

Man, as being vain, will see himself. He avoids seeing himself, because being
vain he is not able to suffer the sight of his Faults and Miseries. To accord
these two contrary desires, he has recourse to a Subtility worthy his Vanity,
which gives him means to satisfy them both at the same time. This Craft or
Subtility is to cover all his Faults, to blot them, in some sort, out of the
Image which he has formed of himself, and only to include therein the
qualities which may raise him in his own thoughts. If he has them not
effectively, he has them imaginarily, and if he find them not in his proper
person, he endeavors to seek them in the opinion of men, or in outward things
which he joins to his Idea, as if they made some part thereof; by means of this
deceit he is always absent from himself, and present to himself: He looks upon
himself continually, and never sees himself truly, because he sees, instead of
himself, only the vain Phantomes he has formed thereof.

8. So when a Caribian represents himself to himself, he only sees a certain
figure resembling the image which he has seen of himself in the water; and
beholding it as exact in Shooting, as dexterous in Fishing, as Master of a
certain Cabin, as having slain such and such of his Enemies, as Husband to such
a Woman, he applies himself absolutely to these Objects and Ideas which renew
them, and thus he passes his whole life without reflecting on that part of his
being which thinks and reasons, not dreaming what it is, from whence it came,
what will become of it, what may cause its good or bad Fortune.

It is not to be imagined that the Pride of other men acts otherways then this
of these miserable people. They adorn only this Image, which is the object of
their love a little more. A Captain looking on himself sees a Phantome on Horse
back, who commands some Soldiers. A Prince sees a man richly clothed, who is
looked on with respect, and who is obeyed every where. A Magistrate sees a man
dressed up with the Ornaments belonging to his Dignity, who is respected by
others, because he is in a condition to oblige or disoblige them. A vain proud
Woman looks on herself as an Idol, Charming by her Beauty those who behold her.
An Usurer sees himself in the midst of his Treasures. An Ambitious man
represents himself surrounded with people who humble themselves at his
Greatness. And so every one in all these actions have no other end, whereof
self-love is the Original, but to join always to the Idea that they have of
themselves, new Ornaments and new Titles.

9. There is also a more spiritual Idea one has of himself, which is, when not
conceiving distinctly either good or bad qualities, one conceives only what is
expressed by the word Me; and this word conceived in this manner does likewise
hide from us all our faults, and does suffice to gain our love. The secret
apprehension we have thereof creeps in every where; we relate all thereto; this
is the principle of the most part of Pleasures that we enjoy. And though we
should come to unfold or unravel what this Me comprehends, we should find
therein nothing lovely, and may be nothing which would not give horror;
nevertheless we love it under this so confused Idea of Me, and we shun in it
the distinct and particular apprehension which makes us hate it.

10. From whence think you proceeds this trouble, which overwhelms those who
have been in great places when forced to live at quiet in their own houses? It
is not only because they see themselves too clearly, and that the apprehension
they have of their Miseries and Faults does trouble them. Perchance that is one
of the reasons of their Melancholy, but not the only one. It is also because
they do not see themselves thoroughly, and that there are few things which renew
the Idea of their Me. This Idea causes their pleasure during their fortune,
and its loss their displeasure during their disgrace: we love not to employ our
selves in solitude; the Images which we form there are infinitely more obscure
then those aided by outward Objects. Men in great Employments are advertised by
all those who address themselves to them, that they are Powerful, that they are
able to hurt or to assist. A thousand things does stir up lively the Idea of
their Me, and sets it before their eyes with some agreeable and pleasing
quality of Great, Powerful, and of Respect. Common Civility does the same thing
in respect of those who live in the world. For as it is Filled with
Testimonials of Esteem, with Respect, and with Applications, it gives occasion
of representing themselves to themselves, as being loved and esteemed, and by
consequence as being lovely and esteemable. And by a contrary reason these
deserts and solitudes do vex and trouble vain and ambitious men, because they
do not speak to them of themselves, and because they would have them speak of
nothing else.

11. There is a pleasure in hearing Self-love speak when it is not disguised at
all, and that it discovers lively, what pleases it in difficult occupations,
wherewith it charge men. There is scarcely, for example, any more laborious
than those who speak in public, as Traitors and Advocates: they are obliged to
charge their memories with a thousand unpleasing affairs, and apply themselves
to find out devices and expressions to fill up their discourses, to drain the
forces of their bodies, and their Spirits, upon matters which they shall be
glad to forget, as soon as they shall be discharged of their Offices.
Nevertheless, because there are many things in their professions, which renews
the Idea of themselves; those who exercise them with Honor, think themselves
the happiest of men. Let us but hear what one of these ancient Orators upon
this subject said, to judge of what the rest maintain. What is there more
sweet, Quintil. dia. Orat.
said he, to an honest man, born for honest pleasures, than to see his House
always full of people, and to know that they render him these respects, not
because of his Riches, nor out of hopes of being his Heirs; nor because of some
Office he enjoyes, but in respect of himself; that even those to whom we give
respect, in hopes to be their Heirs, those who are the richest, and the most in
credit do come to see him, although oftentimes he be young and poor, to the
end, that they may recommend to him their own, or their friends concerns? Is
there any thing in Riches, and Grandeur, which can give pleasure equal to that
which he feels; when he sees persons considerable for their age, and whose
credit is spead through all the world, to confess in the abundance of Riches
which they enjoy, that they have not the first and greatest of all worldly
advantages, which is that which an Orator professes? What I say of that throng
of people, who present themselves to accompany him, or who go before him? What
shall I say of the splendour with which he appears in public, of the respect
given him in men's opinions; of the joy which he conceives, when being raised to
speak singly in the midst of a throng of people, who listen to him attentively,
he sees the eyes of all the Auditors turned toward him: That the people crowd
to hear him, and that he stamps in all their minds the same Impressions, which
he desires to make appear in himself.

Behold what made this Roman undergt the troubles and disgusts of his
profession. And if all those who are in other dangerous and painful employments
speak as simply as he; they would tell us also, that all that pleased them
therein, is reduced to this Idea of their Me honored and respected by others.

12. We see clearly enough by these examples, in what fashion Self-love makes
use of outward objects, to satisfy these two inclinations natural to men of
knowing, and not knowing himself, not suffering on the one part, that he see
himself otherwise, than by a confused Idea, which represents to him no one
fault; and adding thereto on the other part, all that he can of exterior
things, which give him means to fix there unto a fantastic Image of
Greatness. But this nevertheless does not suffice man to procure him the rest;
and the pleasure which he seeks, nor to avoid the knowledge of those faults,
whereof he has so much horror. He has need of quite other inventions to shun
the sight of himself. In vain would he publish himself abroad, he would not
fail to find himself there, and a thousand things would be able to set his
faults before his eyes. He would see the Images thereof in all the faults, and
in all the miseries of others, which he could not avoid seeing, and which
oftentimes he looks on, even with pleasure. So that he would not find his
account better out of himself, than in himself. There is great likelihood, that
if the fear of seeing himself, had made him go out, the Image of himself, which
should have been represented to him by all these outward Objects would have
made him to enter again how unwilling foe-he might have been.

13. To comprehend better in what manner man may be forced to see himself by
objects, which are out of him, and what he does to warrant himself from them it
is necessary to consider, that he does not look upon himself less according to
a certain being which he has in the imagination of others, than according to
what he really is; and that he does not only draw his portraiture by what he
himself knows of himself; but also by the sight which he discovers in the minds
of others. Because we are all in respect of one another, as that man who served
as a model of the Practitioners in the Academies of Painters. Each of those,
who environ us, do form to themselves a portraiture of us, and the different
ways wherewith our actions are observed do give leave to make them differently.

The great and the little, those who have a good repute, and those who have
none; are hardly distinguished, but because there are more people who draw the
Pictures of the one then of the others. How many draw the Portraiture of a
Prince? All his Kingdom, all Foreign Countries are for him an Accademy of
Painters, whereof he is the Model. Those who are more remote represent him by
more gross draughts. Those who are nearer do draw his Picture more lively, and
more resembling. A mean man, on the contrary, who lives in his Family, is only
Painted by the small number of those who know him, and the Portraitures which
they make of him scarcely go out of the Limit of the Town.

But what is more considerable in this is, that men do not only draw the
portraitures of others, but that they see also those which are made of them,
and if they would look on them indeed, nothing would be so capable to remedy
their pride, nor more able to help to undeceive them then, even the sight of
these portraitures.

Let us choose the greatest and most glorious man in the World, and allow him
so great a Wit as to contemplate at once all this variety of Judgments which
are made of him, and to enjoy fully the sight of the thoughts and of the
motions which he excites in others, there is no vanity can undergo this sight.
For a small number of advantageous opinions he would see an infinite which
would displease him. He would see that the faults which he dissembles, or which
he does not know, are in the eyes of the most part of people; that they
entertain themselves often about no other thing, and that men observe them only
in this manner; he would see that the World is very little touched with all
these fine qualities with which he flatters himself that some see them not at
all, others behold them with a coldness, others only observe that in which they
are defective, some hide and disfigure them, joining thereunto some faults
which they know in him, and that from all this he draws his own picture which
is only proper to extinguish his Pride.

There needs only to learn to humble our selves, that we open our eyes to all
these several opinions men form of us, and Reason, if we desire sincerely to
know them, will discover them. But because vanity is an evil whereof we will
not be cured, and that we place our happiness not to be cured of it, we make
use of an Invention, which how gross soever it is does nevertheless work its
effect. It is, that although Reason in general be convinced that men form of us
many Judgments not very favorable, and that the Examples of those we hear ever
and anon made of others, and those which we make of them our selves might
instruct us, do nevertheless in some sort cause us not to see those which are
disadvantagious to us, and to apply our selves cheiflly to those which are
advantageous to us. So in Banishing from our minds all these Objects which may
be able to displease us, in fixing our selves only to those which are pleasing
to us, in deceiving our selves willingly, and in avoiding being deceived, our
vanity remains half satisfied, and procures this fond Pleasure in which vain
men place their false felicity.

14. It is yet more easy that the great ones, and generally all those whom it
is our intent to please, do entertain themselves in this Illusion, because
instead of making for our selves only one Portraiture of other men, we may in
some sort make two, the one interior which is true, the other exterior
wherein we paint nothing but what we judge may please them; and great care is
taken afterward to set before their eyes only this false Picture, and to
endeavor to make them take that for the true one. Without doubt they would
easily hinder themselves from being deceived therein, and might convince
themselves if they would, that there is nothing so false and so vain as all
these Testimonies of Esteem and Aflection which men show them. They know often
what they think thimselves of those to whom they return the like, and they have
no reason to judge others more sincere then themselves. But they are easily
held back in this point, and do not dive so deep into these things. They
content themselves therefore with this deceitful Surface, they leave there
these interior portraitures which they fear to discover, and they make a stop
only at these flattering Pictures, which are made purposely to draw from them
what we pretend thereby.

15. We make use of the same preparation to hinder that the faults and miseries
of others, and the Judgment which we see made of them, and which we our selves
make of them, do not call us to our selves nor discover to us our own juglings.
Wit assisted by self-love does cut off all the reflections it can make, or
applies it self so little thereunto that they make scarcely any Impression at
all. We hear every hour people who deceive themselves, spoken of with scorn. We
see that they are the common objects of men's disdain, because there is nothing
more ridiculous then a man deceived, and deceived by his own vanity.
Nevertheless we do not think that we are those ridiculous and deceived men; let
men say of us in our absence what is faid of others before us, let us give
therein as much Subject as they, and let there be no appearance that they have
more respect for us then for all the rest.

How frequent and how certain soever these objects may be, they have not more
force to oblige the mind to enter into it self, and there to see the same
faults and the same miseries then it sees in others. Think we more on death for
hearing or for seeing the death of those with whom we have lived? We fly his
Spectacle if we can; if we cannot fly it, yet we endeavor to fly the
reflections it ought to produce. If we cannot stifle them absolutely, we turn
away from them with what expedition possible. What I have said of Death may be
said of all the other Miseries and of all Human Frailties, which may be able to
represent ours to us. These Images strike us at every moment, but we endeavor
as often to resist, and not to be daunted. We deceive our selves if we can, and
if we cannot do it absolutely, at least we strive to turn our thoughts another
way.

16. What should we say of a man who seeing his Picture every day in a Looking
glass, and seeing it therein continually should not know it, and would never
say Behold I am here? should we not accuse him of stupidity little different
from folly? This nevertheless is what all men do; and it is likewise the only
secret they have found to make themselves happy. They see every moment the
Image of their own selves, I mean of their own proper faults* in those of
others, and yet they will not acknowledge them. To be full of Miseries and not
to see them, to be ignorant of our faults when no body else is, to be the
Subject of most peoples laughter and not willing to know any thing of it; to
feed our selves with vain Imaginations being unwilling to know that they are
vain, is a condition which does not seem very desirable; and yet it is this
which is the delight of worldly men, and chiefly of the great ones.

17. It Is by these means we are interrupted from seeing the Truth, when we
should use some care and application to find it. But there are some rencounters
wherein Truth shows it self to us, and in which we should be forced to see it,
if we did not use Cunning to avoid it. For some times we find men Charitable
enough to try to free us from the delusions wherein we live in respect of our
selves self-love therefore endeavors to banish this inconvenience, wants not
yet the way to prosper therein. For it expresses so much Melancholy and evil
humor to those who would do us this good Office; it finds so many pretenses
not to believe what is discovered to us of our faults; it is so ingenious to
find out some greater in those who observe ours, and to make the judgments
which are made to our disadvantage pass for wicked, that there is hardly any
body will hazard to tell them us.

The general Principle that self-love inspires us with is, That we condemn
nothing in us by a motive of Equity and Justice. So when any one shows that he
does not approve of us in every thing, we attribute to him the Idea of
prevention, of jealousy, or some other less favorable. And as no body loves
to be looked so upon, there is formed amongst men a kind of Conspiration to
dissemble the opinions which they have one of another, and there is no
agreement which is better preserved then that, because it is grounded upon the
sentiment of self-love, from which few or none are exempt.

18. We must not think that men do not take care to hide the Truth only in
respect of those whom they fear, or from whom they hope something. They do the
same almost in respect of all the World.

Men apply themselves more to deceive great men, but they do not apply
themselves to undeceive those of meaner quality. This is all the difference
that is made between the one and the other. They love not to be hated by any
body, so they do not love to tell truth to any one. They know on the contrary
that to make it be received there should be many niceties, moderations, and
many studied inventions. Now men will not take this pains for people they do
not value. So we do not tell the Truth to Persons of Quality, because it is not
our interest to do it. Nor to those of meaner degree because we have not
Interest enough to tell it them.

19. This reserve that men keep amongst themselves in avoiding the
Communicating the thoughts they have to the disadvantage of one another, is not
nevertheless without Limits. And there is reason sometimes which persuades them
to dispense therewith. There needs also often but a little provocation to noise
abroad on a sudden what we had kept secret for a long time. And moreover we
have not been reserved in this manner, but in speaking to the persons
themselves, whose faults were known to us. But that which we dissembled in
their presence, we speak ordinarily more freely in their absence, as we have
had then more trouble to refrain. It is true we govern our selves a little more
reservedly in respect of those who can hurt us, and we use more precaution to
discover what men think of them. But as it is an unsufferable Constraint to
hide always these our sentiments, the desire which we have to free our selves
from them makes us easily put on Confidence enough to trust those to whom we
speak, and that there wants little or no reasons to incline us to declare our
selves with freedom.

Now although these wicked Prodigalities which happen so often in the
discourses men make, are in themselves a very great evil, seeing that whereas
Charity does oblige to tell Persons themselves of their faults, to give them
thereby means to Correct them, and to hide them from others, to favor them we
do ordinarily quite contrary, and speak of these faults to all the world,
except to those to whom it should be necessary to speak of them. There might
happen nevertheless from thence some good, if we had a care to profit thereby.
Because, these particular discourses spreading themselves by little and little,
and forming a public Clamor, there returns often thereby something to the
ears of them it concerns, because there are many found, who, having not Charity
or Force enough to tell themselves what they think, are glad to be discharged
thereof by attributing it to others. It would be then a means for those to whom
it is discovered to draw them out of that Delusion wherein they live. But we
have such deceitful hearts, and so full of aversion from any thing of Truth,
that we abuse very often this means, and render it useless to our selves. For
instead of judging of these discourses and these opinions by which we are
detracted as we ought they are spread abroad amongst an infinite number of
persons, and so we have not right to complain thereof to any particular body,
the inclination we have to deceive ourselves causes us to turn all our malice
against him who is charged therewith; We persuade our selves that he is single
in his opinion; that he has not entered thereupon, but through hate or
interest, and that there is no man of sense and reason who does not condemn it.
We attribute to him likewise some Imprudence, or some excess for pretending
more right to reject those advices, and by the means of this voluntary
delusions we stifle the impression which these discourses might imprint in us,
we conserve our selves in the esteem we have of our selves, and we avoid in
some sort seeing what the world disapproved, because it is an object or
spectacle which vanity is not able to suffer.

20. I have said that we shunt it in some sort, because we do not shun it
absolutely. Truth always makes it self a little light through all those Clouds
wherewith men strive to obscure it: there pass always some rays which
incommode Pride, and which trouble this false quiet which it endeavors to
procure it self. These opinions, which are grounded only upon a voluntary
error, are never firm and sure. They are always mixed with Mistrust, and
consequently with melancholy, trouble, and molestation. So instead of this pure
Joy, and this full and entire satisfaction which self-love aims at, all it
can do with all its wiles is to suspend for some time the sentiments of
sadness, which are nourished at the bottom of the heart, and which are always
ready to seize thereon.

21. These are the natural sentiments of Self-love, and the addresses it makes
use of to conceal our faults, and to hinder people from telling us of them. And
it is remarkable that as it is in it self a very great fault not to see the
truth, so Self-love does not allow it no more than others. Self-love does not
use less artifice to disguise it to others then to our selves. And therefore we
see few or none who do not esteem it an honor to love truth, and who do grant
sincerely that they are not at quiet until it be discovered to them. We are
offended with this reproach as much as with any other, and in a word, we would
have the glory to love Truth, and the satisfaction never to hear it.

But as these two Passions in some sort do not hold together, we endeavor to
accord them in giving something to the one and to the other. It is true, that
as it is Self-love which causes this difference, so it makes it very unequal.
For it brings it about that we are never told of those essential faults, to
which we are inclined by a quick and active Passion; that we dissemble to those
which get us ill will from men, and which would give occasion to despise our
selves, and to believe that it is with reason that others do slight us. All the
liberty therefore that we give to others upon this subject, is to mind us of
some small faults, which do not disfigure the Image we have of our selves, and
which suffers the whole beauty thereof to remain. Velut si egregio Impressos
reprehendas Corpore naevos.

So we suffer men to declare their opinions of a Discourse, or of a Writing,
which we have made to find fault therein with some expressions not very Just,
some bad Cadence, some place neglected; conditionally nevertheless that they
esteem the design of it; the Judgment, the Economy, and the other more
essential parts. We pardon likewise those who advertise us of some want of
respect, of management and other trifles of this nature, provided they do not
touch upon our principal Passions, and that all they observe in us may subsist
with the esteem and approbation of the generality. It Is on these Conditions,
and at this rate we resolve with our selves sometimes to purchase glory, love
truth, and give it some entrance; yet it must be Self-love which opens it to
it, and that it be accompanied with testimonies of esteem and affection not to
be slighted.

22. In the second Part we shall speak more particularly of the ways men use to
hinder that truth trouble them not, in the esteem and love of themselves. But
what we have already said may suffice to show that we extend too much those
common Maxims, that men naturally love truth, that they have a natural aversion
for what is false, and that there being an Infinite of persons who would
deceive others, there are none at all who would be deceived; seeing that it
appears on the contrary, that the world is almost composed of nothing but
wilful blind people, who hate and fly the light, and who labor for nothing
more than to deceive themselves, and to entertain themselves in delusion. Where
is then this love of Truth, wherewith we flatter our selves, and what hatred
for falsity may be found in men who according to Scripture seek nothing else?

23. Nevertheless, we may say that these Maxims have place in things
Indifferent, in which men taking no Interests at all, do not in effect love to
be deceived, and prefer truth before falsity. The which shows some natural love
for Truth. But it is seldom seen that this natural Inclination is free to act,
and that the mind is not prepossessed with some Passion which makes it incline
more to one side than to another. There needs scarcely any thing to make
Self-love to deliberate. It makes private and secret Interests even things
wherein it seems to have none at all. The least advance, the least engagements,
the least inclination to please or to displease suffice to take away the
balance, and to incline the minds, to seek out reasons only on one side: How
many are there, for example, who have no reason to continue in an opinion, but
because there would be some trouble to examine the Contrary reasons. They fly
the pains of instructing themselves, because it is laborious: They will judge,
and decide, because they will appear Learned, and to satisfy at once these two
inclinations they suppose without other examination that what they have
formerly learned is true. Taedio novae Curae semel placita pro aeternis servant.

24. The chief and principal use we make of this love of truth, is, to persuade
us that what we love is true. For if we would do our selves Justice, we should
acknowledge that we love not things because they are true, but that we believe
them true, because we love them. Our minds are fixed to objects Independent of
their truth, and by the sole relation of these Inclinations. But because they
cannot enjoy them, if they look upon them as false, they endeavor in some sort
to add thereto the Idea of truth, that they may be fixed thereunto more firmly.
Quicunque aliud amant, Aug. Con. l. 10.13.
hoc quod amant volunt esse veritalem.

25. We love truth in general as the common and general good. For as we can
love nothing which we do not think good, likewise we can love nothing which we
believe not to be true. But Self-love knows very well how to conjoin these
general Inclinations with particular Passions; And as it makes us believe that
what we love is good, it makes us likewise believe that what we love is true;
that is to say; we cannot love what is false under its proper and natural form,
and loving in effect many false and deceitful objects, it finds means to
represent them under the image of truth.

26. This aversion so uniform and constant* which is found amongst men, for the
truth which discovers them to themselves, and this inclination so general of
shunning the sight of their faults, as their greatest misfortune gives way to
believe that this common Maxim which calls them back to themselves, and makes
them to know themselves, Nosce teipsum, proceeds not from a common light
persuading them that this knowledge is for their good, and which makes them
desire it, but that it may well have its source in the knowledge of every man's
heart, who feeling himself incommodated with the vanity, and the Injustice
which he observes in others, persuades him to seek and desire for them, this
knowledge which he neither seeks nor desires for himself.

27. This thought is so much more likely* as nothing shocks us more in the
faults we observe in others, then the blindness wherein we see they are in
regard of themselves. What is there more troublesome than a vain man who is
taken up with nothing but himself, and who would have men only to apply
themselves to him, who admires himself continually, and who imagines that
others do the same, or that they are to blame if they do not? And who is he who
has not a great inclination to tell persons of this opinion, that they would
do well to labor to know themselves to draw themselves out of those delusions
wherein they are? Nosoe teipsum.

28. The World is full of people, who observe other men's faults with an
admirable Judgment, who pardon them nothing, and who being subject to the same,
or to greater faults themselves, do not make the least reflection thereon. The
vainest persons most frequently laugh at other men's vanity. Those who are
Cheated, most laugh at those whom they believe deceived. The most unjust
reproach others of their Injustice: The sharpest men give sweet lessons; The
most prejudiced persons speak earnestly against prejudice: The most opiniated
are the first in accusing others of obstinacy. It is very hard, not to have a
desire to advise these sort of people that they speak to themselves in speaking
against others, and not to tell them at least in their heart: Nosce teipsum.

29. When we see these ambitious men who heap enterprises upon enterprises, who
form designs to which many lives would not satisfy, who trouble by their
caprichios both their own and other men's quiet, who never dream of death which
threatens them every moment, who imagine that others live, only for them, who
devour with an insatiable Covetousness, other men's Goods. Who is it that does
not find himself inclined to recall them to the knowledge of their mortal
Conditions, and to make them mindful that they are but men?

We feel the same motions in an infinite other* rencounters, as when we see
people, who for want of knowing themselves, undertake things infinitely above
them, and in which they cannot prosper: who will do all because they judge and
think themselves capable of all, and who spoil all by their want of parts; who
glory in taking Counsels of no body; who complain to others of their bad
success that they have had by their imprudence. In fine, as the ignorance of
ones self is found almost in all vices, and is most what shocks us therein, we
should every moment endeavor to draw people out of their delusion in teaching
them to know themselves, if this motive were not witheld by others more
powerful.

30. We have right methinks to conclude from what I said but now, that this
Precept, Know thou thy self: in the mouth of those who have acted only by
self-love was rather the effect of impatience, and vexation, stirred up by the
faults that they see in others, then by a clear sight of the necessity of this
knowledge for every man in particular, and for his proper good. We would have
others to know themselves, to the end they might act in a less shocking manner
in regard of us: And yet we will not know our selves because we will not see in
our selves what thwarts us therein, nor think our selves obliged to labor to
correct some faults, in which we are very glad to continue. We find means to
foster our selves in our proper delusion, in fixing our thoughts only on
certain objects, and hiding others from our selves. But we find the delusion of
others very ridiculous, because we see in them what they will not see therein,
and clearly perceive the Judgments that are made of them, of which they see but
a part. We do not forbear nevertheless to envy something the condition of those
persons so deceived, and to covet their place: But it is by fancying that if we
were there we could avoid the faults we see in them, and that we could procure
to our selves all that they wanted. And I know not if we would have it on
condition to live in the same delusion wherein we believe they do. For men have
light enough not to believe others happy by the possession of false wealth, and
they are not capable to place their happiness therein, but by banishing away
the thought that it is false, and taking it for real.

31. It is true, our understanding is not so blind but that having recalled
others by vexation to the knowledge of themselves, it must conclude from thence
in general, that it would be useful that every one should know himself, and
apply to himself this Precept in giving it to others. We are also very glad to
honor our selves in making a show to be comprehended in the Precepts which we
give to others. But these cold and speculative applications are very far from
forming an effective desire to labor to acquire this knowledge, and lastly
human reasons, which might carry or incline us thereunto, are hardly able to
make us surmount the natural disaffection we have thereunto. Whosoever looks
upon himself only in relation to this present life, is always unfortunate, be
it that he do know or not know himself. He is more really so in not knowing
himself, but he is more sensibly so in knowing himself; and the sensible
carries him ordinarily to the real, because it makes Impression upon the
senses, whereas the insensible realities act only upon the reason. Now reason
when it withstands the inclinations of Self-love is not of very great use in
the Conduct of life; and after all, Death which puts an end to all Imprudence,
and all the wisdom of men renders the advantage of the one above the other so
inconsiderable, that it takes away the desire of seeking eagerly: Which made
Solomon say to express this human opinion, That he has said in himself* If I
must die, what will it profit me to have applied my self to wisdom? Every
advantage which regards only this present life is hardly worth the pains we
undergo to obtain it, because this life is only an instant which deserves not
to be deliberated on.

32. We shall not find then in our own nature any inclination which does move
it to apply its self to the knowledge of its self, nor sufficient motives which
can make it desire: But if we add thereto the lights of faith, the necessity of
this duty will appear so pressing, that we shall have much ado to comprehend
that there are any Christians, who would live well in the ignorance of
themselves, and their estate. For this faith teaches us, that it is in vain
that we fly and avoid knowing our selves, that this sight is unavoidable;
seeing that God will open the eyes of all men that they may see themselves such
as they are, but with this horrible difference, That those who have been
unwilling to know themselves in this World, shall see whether they will or no
themselves everlastingly with a sight which shall fill them with rage and
despair; Whereas those who have not avoided seeing themselves in this life, and
who have labored by this means to destroy in themselves what is displeasing to
God, shall hereafter see nothing which may not be joyful to them, or rather
they shall forget themselves happily for eternity, because they will see
nothing but God in themselves and in all other Creatures. We have therefore
only to choose either to endeavor to know our selves in this World, or to be for
ever our own proper torment. By making trial of this terrible Threat God
pronounces against the wicked. Arguam te and statuam contra faciem tuam, I will
reprehend thee, and will place thee before thy own face.

33. What despair will that be of a miserable Soul, who having avoided all her
life seeing and knowing her self, shall be at once fixed and glued to this
object for all Eternity, without hope of ever being able to divert her self for
one single moment, who shall have continually before her eyes all her Crimes,
not being able to destroy them, nor to avoid seeing them. This is the
Inevitable punishment of this voluntary forgetfulness of ones self. We must
labor sincerely either to know our selves during this life, or to know our
selves eternally in the other in this horrible manner. There is no Mean,
neither Reason nor Faith have doubtless any trouble to deliberate. But as we
are carried to this forgetfulness by a very violent weight, and which does
overpoise almost all the World, it is necessary to fortify our Faith, and to
maintain our Reason by all the considerations* which may discover to us the
advantages of this Knowledge, as are these which shall be mentioned hereafter.

34. We may say that as the not knowing of ones self is the source or fountain
of all vices, the knowledge thereof is the ground or foundation of virtues. And
we need only consider the nature of each Virtue to be persuaded thereof. What
means, for example, to be truly humble without knowing ones self? or rather,
what is humility but a knowledge of ones sins, of ones miseries, and of ones
unworthiness, which makes one abject in his own thoughts, and judge himself
worthy of all sorts of Abasements? This is the definition which St. Barnard
gives thereof. Humilitas virtus est, qua homo verissima sui Cognitione sibi
Ipse vilescit. The sight of our faults is therefore the foundation of humility,
and it is at the same time that which preserves it. It Is presently lost if we
only observe our virtues whether they be true or false. Strange condition of
man's Soul to whom sickness it self is necessary, that she may not die! She is
almost void of all good, and cannot see the little that remains without danger
of loosing it.

35. The knowledge of our selves does not humble us simply in respect of God.
It hinders us also that we do not raise our selves above our neighbor, there
being nothing but the forgetfulness of our selves which is able to make us
contemn and despise him. One sick person never insults over another, but in
forgetting his own sickness, and as one is always full of sweetness toward
ones self, he never uses others hardly but in distinguishing himself from
them. And this is it which the knowledge of our selves does not permit us to
do, seeing that it always discovers to us either the same faults in us, or the
roots thereof, and makes us feel the weight which we should undergo if Gods
grace did not permit it. Therefore the Apostle in recommending us to reprove
with sweetness those who sin in spiritu lenitatis, recals us to the knowledge
of our weakness, and the danger wherein we are of falling every moment: Ne and
tu tenteris. Behold the source of meekness, and of humility toward ones
neighbor.

36. Man is so weak and so vain, that he is equally carried to pride by the
sight of Virtue, which he thinks he has, and by that of faults which he
observes in others. By the one he raises himself in his own opinion above
them. By the other he humbles them and brings them under him. But the
knowledge of ones self preserves both the one and the other; and in placing
ones proper faults before ones eyes, it stifles on one part the complacency
that it may have in his virtue, and it renders the other more Indulgent to
another faults. So it keeps him at least at a level with other men: It
teaches him to bear them as he would be born with by them, and it makes also
in some manner a good use of Self-love.

37. The forgetfulness of ones self produces obdurateness, and by a contrary
effect the knowledge of ones self produces Piety. For there is in the
sentiments of Compassion for others some secret reflections upon our selves, by
which we look upon our selves either as having suffered the same evils, or as
being liable to suffer them.

Non Ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. And it is this which makes men who
believe they are above others, and who imagine the evils wherewith others are
afflicted, cannot happen to them, are for the most part hard hearted, because
they make not upon themselves these kind of reflections, which soften the heart
in consideration of another evil.

It is the same with the most part of Injustices we do to others. They come
ordinarily from a blindness, which makes us never blame our selves, but think
that we are exempt from all faults and misdemeanors, we lay the blame all upon
others. So that nothing contributes so much to make us just and equitable
toward others as the knowledge of our selves. It Is that makes us discover in
the bottom of our hearts the impression of the Law of nature which forbids us
to do to others, what we would not they should do to us. It Is that which
disperses all the Clouds wherewith Self-love does observe this rule in the
rencounters wherein it is concerned. It Is this which hinders us likewise from
complaining with eagerness of the disadvantageous. Judgments men form of us,
and of the injustices men may do us, in convincing us that oftentimes we deal
so with others without taking care thereof. In fine, it is this which
suppresseth men's insolence, and haughtiness, and placing a very lively Image of
their miseries before their eyes, destroys the most ordinary cause of
injustices which they do to others.

38. The sight of our faults in suppressing our pride, suppresseth also the
consequences of it, and all the Passions wherewith it mingles it self, and as
there are few whereof it is not the source, there also few whereof this sight
is not the remedy. A man who knows himself well, is scarcely emulous, because
he is convinced that he deserves nothing, and therefore he does not believe
that the honor which is given to others is due to him.

He is neither sharp nor vindicative, because the small esteem that he has of
himself, does not make him take or reckon the offenses men do to him as things
of moment.

He cannot hate any man, because he cannot hate himself, and sees nevertheless
nothing in others that he does not acknowledge in himself in some degree.

He is not very ambitious, and he cannot form designs to raise himself in the
World, because these designs spring from a belief we have that we deserve the
rank whereto we aspire, and do think that we have more cunning and industry
than others to arrive thereunto. Now a man who knows himself well, does not
flatter himself with these thoughts.

He does not conceive moreover this elevation as a great good. He perceives
that these passions may render him very miserable in some condition. That his
Covetousness would exceed its limits more, if it had more means to satisfy is
self, and in the uncertainty wherein he is, whether it would be good or bad for
him, he easily concludes to keep himself in the places wherein he finds himself.

39. That Poverty which Jesus Christ has made the first of the Beatitudes, and
which is praised in so many places in Scripture, is nothing else but an humble
knowledge of ones self. For to be poor in this manner, one must know that he is
so, and able to say with the Prophet, Ego vir videns paupertatem tuam. That is
to say, that we ought to know in us either the lack of goods which we have not,
or the lack of all right to the goods which we hold from Gods liberality, which
includes an entire knowledge of our selves.

40. It is easy to comprehend how this knowledge does make us more patient in
respect of the evils which are purely opinion; as unfavourable judgments which
are made of us, calumnies, and falsities. For it is clear, that knowledge ought
to lessen the sense thereof by the sight it gives us of our effective misery,
which yet is much more great then all that man can say of it. But we do not see
at first how this knowledge of our miseries and faults may serve us to be more
patient in outward evils, in losses, in disgraces, in sickness, in griefs. We
might also believe that it would be a new Charge which would only be proper to
overwhelm the Soul by sadness and despair. Yet it is not so, for if this sight
of our faults be a burden, it is a burden which comforts one in all other
afflictions; because it discovers to us that they are Just, that they are
proportioned to our Inward evils, and that they may serve as a remedy
thereunto; that it convinces us that prosperity would not have been less
dangerous then adversity, and that giving us leave to reflect upon all that is
arrived to us in our life of good and evil, it makes us see that we have yet
more abused our selves with good then evil, and that we are charged more
strictly therewith in the sight of God.

41. It is yet easier to comprehend how much the knowledge of ones self does
contribute to Prudence. For the most part of enterprises ill managed, and
designs rashly undertaken spring from the presumption of those who form them;
and this presumption comes from a blindness wherein they are in respect of
themselves. There is nothing more frequent then these indiscretions in
particular actions, and they all spring for the most part from the principal
action of life which is the choice of the State and Employment wherein every
one ought to pass his time. For it is this wherein the ignorance of our selves
makes us to commit the greatest faults.

There is no man so disgraced by Nature who cannot find in the order of the
world a place proportioned to the strength of his mind and body, but the small
knowledge which he has of himself is the cause that most people make a bad
choice. Let us make reflection on those who take upon them the Charges and
Employments of this World, and the places that they enjoy, and we shall
scarcely find any one well placed. How many are there who having Arms and no
Head do choose Employments which have need of a head and not of Arms? How many
are there who being born to obey and not to govern do possess Places where
there is need of Commanding and not of obeying? How many that engage themselves
in Offices which are above their Sphere, their Power, and above their Virtue?
and how few withdraw themselves from them by the knowledge of their
Incapacities? Every one thinks he is able, and only limits his pretentions by
the debility wherein he finds himself of being raised to a higher pitch. This
is the most common Source of worldly disorders, and of the Evils that befall
both Church and State, and likewise of each particular. For it is not possible
that a person ill placed, and who wants necessary qualities to acquit himself
of the Employment wherein he is engaged, should not commit a world of faults,
and these faults which are the sequels of his temerity and presumption do
render him ridiculous in this World, and everlastingly miserable in the other.

42. The sole knowledge of ones self may supply the defect of Talents, and the
sole defect of this knowledge on the contrary renders all these Talents
useless, dangerous, and pernicious to him who has them. It Is no great harm to
have neither Memory, Understanding, Conduct, Science, Industry, nor Ability,
provided that one know it; Let him borrow of some other what he has not, and
undertake nothing which requires those qualities which God has not pleased to
bestow upon him. A man with all these Imperfections, in applying himself only
to that which is proportioned to his ability, is Praise worthy, seeing that he
may become a Saint, and that he is often more acceptable to God then those who
have all the qualities which he wants? He is only deprived of them for a
Moment, that is, for this present life, and he has as much right as any man to
hope he may be partaker of them in the other. But let us suppose all these
Talents in one man, and as much light and understanding as we will, if with
these he does not know himself in his imperfections, and in his weaknesses, all
these qualities with prove only his fall and ruin, and often also in this
world. If he cannot measure his enterprises by his forces, he will enter into
rash engagements and presumption which has no boundaries, not being checked by
the Rains of the knowledge of ones self, will carry him away to dangerous
excesses.

43. One may add to these particular reasons this general one which ought to
make more Impression upon our minds and add thereto more horror of this
blindness, That as the common punishment of the Condemned in the other life
will be to see themselves, Arguam te, and statuam contra faciem tuam, the
general Character of the Condemned in this here is not to see themselves; so
that it is equally true that we enter not into heaven unless we know our
selves, and into hell because we do not know our selves.

The death of sin which is the cause of eternal death is accompanied always
with a kind of misfortunate drousiness which deprives us of the knowledge of
our condition, and therefore the Prophet earnestly beseeched God, That he would
enlighten his eyes to the end that he might not sleep in Death, because he knew
very well that this death was inseparable from that drowsiness, and that
provided he did not sleep he should not dye. Illumina occulos meos, ne unquam
obdormiam in morte. The State that sin reduces man to is so horrible that he
would not suffer it, if he saw it but, and so men whom Pleasure draws thereunto
find means to hide it from themselves by a thousand Inventions which they are
miserably ingenious to find out.

44. One of the most criminal ones and yet the commonest is to stifle in ones
self the sight which condemus these disorders, in justifying them to their
face^ by false Rules which authoriseth them. It Is the Origin of so many Errors
in Morality, and of so many bad Maxims which men have always endeavored to
introduce into the Church, and principally in these latter times. For men not
being willing to render their actions conform to the Law of God, have
endeavored to render the Laws of God conform to their actions. In stead of
redressing their corrupt Inclinations according to the exactness of this Divine
rule, they have endeavored to strain this rule, even to adjust it to their
inclinations. They will not only follow their own Interests and Passions, but
they will also be approved in their Interests and Passions, nor will they
permit that their Consciences reproach them of being unjust. So that things not
Answering their expectation in the Maxims which God has given us for our
guide, if they did leave them in their Purity, they have endeavored to alter
them, to find therein this approbation which they seek, and to appease by this
means the trouble of their Conscience. It Is thus that by the favor of these
false lights, which they willingly take for true ones, they settle themselves
in thi^ unfortunate Peace and Quiet, which is properly the sleepiness which the
Prophet beseeched God to be preserved from by the Rays of the true light.

45. What if they cannot succeed to hide entirely this light which condemns
them, they have recourses to other means to weaken the effect of it, and to
hinder the Impression which it would be able to make upon them. Sometimes in
letting the Law subsist, they are contented not to think of it, never comparing
their actions therewith, nor ever looking on them unless with contrary faces,
which do not represent to them what they have defective. If they cannot stop
the sight of this opposition entirely which they have to the Laws of God, they
weaken and diminish the Idea of it in joining themselves to an infinite of
people which they condemn as well as themselves, as if this crowd of Criminals
was capable to defend them against God: Lastly, if they do not disguise the
Laws of God, they disguise, themselves to themselves. They attribute to
themselves motives and intentions which the have not, and will not see those
they have. Thus in having a false judgment of their actions, they justify
themselves during their whole life by the means of this voluntary delusion.
Behold the sleepiness we must desire to be preserved from, and what every
honest well-meaning man ought to resist all his life by endeavoring to know
himself, and by embracing all means which may help him therein, and which we
are going to show in this second Part.

Of the Knowledge of Ones self.
Second Part. Containing Means to Acquire it.
WE have endeavored in the first Part of this Treatise, only to make the
knowledge of ones self desired. We suppose in this here that desire quite
formed and joined to a sincere resolution of laboring to acquire this
knowledge. There is nothing more to be done but to put those who are so well
disposed, into the way that leads to it, and to open to them the most proper
means to attain thereunto; And we may first tell them that this desire is one
of the Principallest of them, and that it would suffice to produce this effect
if it were full and entire. For there is this difference betwixt this knowledge
and that of objects which are out of us, we may be ignorant of other things,
how desirous soever we may be to know them, but we continue not in the
ignorance of our selves, but only because we do not desire absolutely to
forsake it, and we nourish in the bottom of our hearts a secret disowning of
truth. It is this which in us opposes the light of God, and hinders it from
penetrating our understandings. Without that it would make us see clearly into
all the foulds of our hearts; it would advertise us of all our dangers, and we
should have need of no other thing to make us know our selves perfectly, but to
expose our selves to these Divine beans.

2. We have shown in the first Part that this miserable Inclination was become
natural to man since sin, and we must add here, that grace never destroys it
absolutely, and that whatsoever desire it inspires us with not to blind our
selves, there rests always as we may say in the bottom of the old man an
inclination toward this voluntary blindness which is observed by these words
of Jesus Christ, That every man who does ill, Omnis qui male agit odit lucem
non venit ad lucem ut non manifestentur opera ejus.
hates the light, and comes not to the light, that his works may not be known.
For as there is no man who does not incline to evil, consequently there is none
who has not some aversion for the light which discovers it to him.

But also as that inclination to evil, which sin has imprinted in out Souls,
does not hinder God from Imprinting therein, by his grace, a contrary
Inclination, which inclines us to Good and to Justice, This natural disowning
which we have of Truth hinders not God from breathing into us a contrary
Inclination, which makes us love and search Truth. We are only obliged to
acknowledge that our heart is divided, That we love not absolutely truth, that
there are two opposite weights and inclinations in us, so that if we have
reason to give thanks to God because he has given us some love for Truth, we
have also reason to humble our selves in beholding our selves, according to
this other inclination, as Enemies to this same Truth.

3. There is nothing that makes us better to comprehend the greatness of man's
disorder then the sight* of this miserable Propensity we feel in our selves.
For God being the Truth, the Light, the Justice; to hate the Light, the Truth,
the Justice, is to hate God himself. Nevertheless man hates them. He would
gladly that this Truth were not, that this light were extinguished, and that
this Justice were abolisht; that is to say he would that there were no God. He
wishes that there were an annihilation of it, and not being able to destroy it
in his proper being, he destroys it as much as he can for himself by shutting
his eyes against the sight of Truth.

Behold that condition in which we are not only born, but wherein yet we are
partly engaged, and from whence we ought to endeavor to free our selves by
lessening as much as we shall be able this natural aversness we have for Truth,
and by laboring to increase in us what God has given us of love for it. It is
good to exercise our selves more about this work to convince our selves of the
weakness of this love. We may easily do it in considering how much a perfect
and sincere love, of which the heart is possessed, as is that of an Usurer for
his money, is different from the love we have, or that we flatter our selves to
have for the Truth.

4. An Usurer inclines continually toward gain; the means that are given him
thereof enter always without resistance, they are always received with a sincere
Joy, and without opposition. There needs no studied management nor moderation
to make them agreeable. Every man is welcome to propose them Friends, Enemies,
Acquaintances, Strangers, Inferiors, Equals, Superiors; and he is far from
conceiving any bitterness against those who make him any Overture to increase
his Wealth, it would be a certain means to sweeten him if he were angry at
them. He does not amuse himself in finding out reasons to reject these advices,
nor ever takes occasion to examine the defects of those who give them. He is not
scrupulous in manners, in the behavior, in the intentions. He only seeks to
assure himself of the truth of what has been told him, and examining it
sincerely, he fears nothing but being deceived therein.

Behold in what manner we ought to love Truth, and the Model the Wise Man
proposes to us, in ordering us to seek it as Money; and we may see there that
we love it so little and seek it so imperfectly, that the contrary to what we
have said of this Usurer may be said of us.

For our hearts are hardly ever open on that side Truth presents it self. It
finds there always resistance, and never enters but by violence and force; and
if sometimes it be in appearance gratefully received, it is always with some
inward remorse of some superficial joy, with which we distinguish it. No man is
proper to make us know it, and self-love is almost never wanting to furnish us
with Reproaches against those who undertake it. Rhetoric has neither Cunning
nor delicateness enough to insinuate it without hurting us. We allways find
excess in the things, defects in the Grace, in the manner, and in the time; and
in stead of applying our mind sincerely to the examination of what is proposed
to us, we apply it only in an unprofitable search of their defects who have
given these Counsels. This is the protraiture of the Spirit, and the Conduct of
the most part of men. The lineaments are more observed in some then in others,
but there are very few in whom some footsteps of them do not appear.

5. At least let us not flatter our selves with a Virtue which we have not, and
let us beware of saying, as many do, That we desire nothing so much as to know
our selves, and that they can do us no greater pleasure then to help us
therein. Let us on the contrary acknowledge that it would be to give to our
selves a Praise which surpasses man, and which could be nothing but the effect
of our Vanity and our Blindness: So that the first step we shall make to get
out of it is to acknowledge sincerely the opposition we feel in our selves
against this self knowledge, and to weep for it before God as being one of our
greatest misfortunes.

6. The second step which is no less essential is to acknowledge the
impossibility we have of prospering in this search, without the assistance of
Gods light. Because there is only this light which is able to dissipate the
Cloud which cover our hearts, and it is only by means of it that we are
capacitated to Judge truly of what we discover therein, our motions being good
or bad as they are for or against Truth, which is the rule of them. Lastly,
there is none but God who can give us a knowledge of our selves, which is
moderate to the just proportion our Infirmity requires, that which we are able
to procure purely by human force, being sometimes as dangerous as the ignorance
it self of our State and Condition, because it is able to discourage the Soul,
and bring her to a kind of Despair, whereas that which God gives her, upholds
her at the same time that the other dejects her, and never shrinks back at the
sight of of her miseries, but is raised again by hope in the mercy of God.

7. But this persuasion, That we ought not to expect this knowledge so
necessary except from the pure Grace of God, does in no manner exclude the
reflections we must make to obtain it. For Grace is often hid under these
reflections, and makes use thereof to make these lights enter into our minds.
Therefore we must act in respect of this important Point of Christian life as
in all others. That is to say, we must demand it of God as dependant on him
only, and labor to get it as if it did depend only on our care: And it is in
this consideration that we shall give here some Overtures which may be useful
in this Enquiry.

8. There are two sorts of knowledge of man, the one general, the other
particular. The first discovers what happens to all men in the state of sin
wherein they are born; the other teaches us what we have added to this common
Corruption. Because though it may be the same in all at the Root, it takes
nevertheless infinite several Shapes, accordingly as the Soul forsakes them
more or less, and that Concupiscence being limited and excited by occasions and
objects, diffuseth it self more on the one side then the other, so that by this
different mixture of particular disorders, it forms it self as many several
Diseases and Conditions, as there are different Souls.

It is, without doubt, to this particular knowledge of our condition that we
ought to incline. For it would help little or nothing to contemplate the
general Portraiture of the corruption of Nature, if we make not use of it to
trace out our own, seeing that it may be a means to cure us particularly, and
not men generally. But the knowledge of the common condition of men is
nevertheless very useful; and comprehends likewise the greatest part of this
particular knowledge which we seek. For these defects and these Vices do not
cease, for being common, to be the Vices and the Defects of each of us; they
subsist not in the Air, nor in some being separated from us. They are in us,
and render each of us as miserable as if none other had them.

9. We cannot propose a more proper Image to present the State of man corrupted
by Sin then that which the Scripture uses to express that of Jerusalem by, in
saying, That from the head to the foot there was not in it one sound part; a
planta pedis usque ad Verticem, non est in ea Sanitas. Let us then imagine an
universal Wound, or rather, a heap of Sores, Plagues, and Ulcers, wherewith
man's Body is covered over in a horrid and frightful manner; Let there be
amongst these Sores some that s^em to be more venomous and enflamed; others
that look as it were dead and without heat, but that have nevertheless this
which is common, that they may all become Mortal, these same which seem almost
Cured being able to inflame themselves afresh by diverse inward and outward
causes sufficient to produce this effect, this man having no means or force to
hinder it. Behold the Image of the State wherein we are born, and what we are
by Nature. The love of our selves which is the Center and Fountain of all our
Maladies gives us a violent inclination for Pleasures, for Promotion, for all
that does nourish our Curiosity, to fill up thereby the terrible vacuity which
the loss of our true happiness has caused in our hearts. And this Inclination
disposes us to procure these three objects of our desires by all sorts of
means, how unjust and how criminal soever they may be.

But as these objects are changed a thousand ways, acting more or less upon our
imaginations and our senses, the motives by which the Soul is swayed thereto
are also very different: And it is that which makes the variety of our
passions. Therefore the diverse assemblings and the several degrees make the
difference of the particular humors and dispositions of men. Some are more
Criminal others more Innocent according to their objects; some more lively,
others more languishing, according as they behave themselves. There are some
likewise which appear absolutely extinguished, because the heart is Lorded over
by a contrary Passion. And these are the wounds without inflammation; and
almost cured, whereof we were speaking even now. But we must not rely thereon
absolutely; For they never are so well closed up but that they may be venomed
again. How far soever we may be from certain Vices, there remains always
nevertheless in us inclination enough to make us fall therein, if God did
permit that the thoughts which might dissuade us should be taken away from our
mind, that the objects which might incline us thereunto should act lively upon
us, and lastly that there should be a heap of outward Circumstances able to
provoke our Concupiscence, and to turn it on that side, which has occasioned
St. Augustine to establish this fine Rule, That of all the sins that men
commit, there is not one that another man would not commit, if he were not
assisted by Him who made Man. Nullum Peecatum facit homo, quod non facit alius
homo, si non adjuvet Rector a quo factus est homo,

10. Let us therefore never flatter our selves with a clear exemption from any
vices, and acknowledge in us this unfortunate aptness to all the Crimes and
disorders of men. Let this consideration never permit us to raise our selves
above any one whomsoever. Let it humble us by all the disorders and by all the
defects which we shall observe in others, being that they are ours in some sort
by an inclination we have thereunto, and by an impossibility we are in of
securing our selves from them unless God preserve us. Thus the History of man
which comprehends almost nothing but that of their Passions, their weakness,
and their disorders, will in some sort become our own History; and whereas it
is for the most part of people only a vain and idle recreation, it will be for
us, if we will consider it in this sense, a very solid Instruction, which will
continually set our faults before our eyes, and make us acknowledge either that
which we are really, or what we may come to if God leave us to our selves.

11. It is by these reflections which we ought to make without intermission
upon all we see, and learn by men's disorders, that we must endeavor to
conceive more distinctly the corruption of our nature. For it does not Justify
to have only a confused and a general Idea of it, like those we have already
drawn. We must consider particularly the several parts and the effects that
depend thereon, and strive to know thoroughly the injustice, the vanity, and the
weakness of the nature of man, the progress and the effects of his Passions, in
applying our selves always to these common knowledges, and not contenting our
selves to acknowledge simply that we have the Root and the Source of these
defects, endeavor moreover to discover what these Roots have produced in us,
and even to what degree they are living.

12. But as the disorder and Injustice of man are only deprivations of the
order wherein he ought to be, and of the Justice in which he ought to remain
firm, it is clear that it cannot be known as it ought to be, whilst we are
ignorant of this Order and this Justice, that is to say, of the Divine and
Eternal Laws which rule and govern men's Duties, and from whence they cannot be
separated without falling into disorder and injustice. But it is not here in
this place that we intend to treat of it thoroughly, it is rather the substance
absolutely of Morality then of a small Writing like this here; and we will
content our selves to propose in general some advices to avoid in the study we
must make all our lives, the voluntary digressions, and the crafty and subtle
fetches wherein the aversion for Truth does engage us unknown to our selves, or
rather without acknowledging that we were aware of them.

13. Amongst the Rules which prescribe men's Duties, and concerning which they
shall be judged, there are some generally known, as for Example, that Murder,
Theft, Adultery, Fornication, False witnesses, are actions very Criminal; and
others on the contrary concerning which there is some difference betwixt those
who engage themselves in the deciding these kind of questions.

I do not by this difference pretend to take away the certainty and evidence of
these contested Rules. For I know that there are some which are no less clear
and certain then Principles the most generally received by all men, and of
which Rules there is no doubt but by mistake of application or by blindness of
Passion and Malice. I will only mark the fact, and distinguish the truths of
Morality in these two Classes, by relation not to their real evidence, but to
the effective disposition of men, who have embraced the one unanimously, and
who are divided in regard of the other.

I place likewise in the same rank with these contested Rules those, which
although little oppugn'd by writings and discourse, are nevertheless by
practice, and which many who would pass and be thought to lead a Christian-like
life, do not forbear to violate by their carriages; not ceasing, for all that,
to find out Confessors who do tolerate them, or who do approve them, and
without loosing the esteem of Persons who are very regular. There are, for
example, very few Confessors who would authorize, by a formal decision, Balls,
Comedies, Romances, the immodest manner Women dress themselves in now a days,
the use that is made commonly of the Goods belonging to the Church, the seeking
after Ecclesiastical Dignities. Nevertheless seeing that so many, who have some
Conscience, make no scruple of all these things, there must needs be Confessors
who find nothing to say against them, and who believe them not obliged to
forsake them.

14. Whosoever desires to know himself ought to be Instructed and well Versed
in these two kind of Truths, seeing that it is thereby that he ought to judge
of himself and his condition. And it is very easy to do it in the respect of
the first; because there is no need but that we seriously wish it. These truths
are exposed to all those who desire to be informed of them; they are to be
found every where. But if it is easy to learn them after a speculative manner,
it is not so easy to make use of them as a light to discover the very bottom
of the heart, and to judge of our actions. Because self-love, which cannot
hinder them always from entering into the memory, acts so that they continue
fruitless therein, that is to say, that they never serve for Rules to us, that
we never compare our action with them, that we never draw the most natural and
certain consequences from them, that they never come into our mind but when we
are compelled to discourse of them; and lastly that we look upon them not
different from those opinions of the ancient Philosophers, which we are glad to
keep as a Pledge in our memory as points of knowledge and erudition, but by
which we do not think to rule our lives.

This disposition of our hearts must be considered as one of our greatest
mischeifs, making Truth, which should be the remedy, to serve only to augment
them by the bad usage we make of its light. For not being given us but as our
Guide, we become unjust Possessors of it, when we do not use it for this end.
We ought therefore to attempt all means to remedy this evil; and so how remote
soever we may imagine our selves from truth, it is necessary that we force our
selves to draw nearer to it, and make use of it as a Torch to search in the
most hidden corners of our soul all that may be contrary thereto.

15. But if self-love have subtilty enough to stop in the most part of the
world the effect of the most constant Truths, and whereof we are the most
convinced, it does yet shift off more easily those which are disputed, either
by contrary opinions formally maintained, or by an opposite practice. For it is
the cause either that people, remaining in a doubt, do nevertheless act as if
they were very certain of what they must believe in that disagreement of
opinions, or that they do define for that party which favors their
inclinations by so frivilous reasons that they are ashamed to tell them when
they are obliged, or that they blindly follow the example of others, without so
much as ever examining whether this example be satisfactory or not, or whether
they may be freed from it before God in alleging to him that they have
followed the common tract; and at last they know so well how to stop in this
point their curiosity, that they apprehend nothing more then to see it too
clearly.

It is not my design to decide here any of these points which I have called
Contested, because there may be found persons in the Church who oppose them,
either as their opinions, or a practicing them. I say only that the quiet
wherein those live who follow some base opinions without ever having examined
them seriously, is visibly unreasonable, and cannot come except from the
corruption of the heart, from a hatred for Truth, and from a desire which they
have to satisfy their Passions, not being troubled for it by remorse of
Conscience; and lastly from a fear of being obliged to Condemn themselves in
respect of the time past, and to change their manner of living for the time to
come. It Is that which stifles their fear, and hinders them from having, in
regard of their Salvation, the same Sentiments which they approved in regard of
all other things. If some able Phisicians did tell them that such certain meats
were poisoned, they would willingly abstain from eating of them, before they
were assured that these Phisicians were mistaken. If they had notice given
them, That there was a Design of taking away their lives, that the houses were
on Fire, they would give little or no belief to those who should tell them the
contrary, without bringing them very good proof; they would not be wanting to
dive into the bottom of these advices, nor could they be at quiet with
themselves until they should be absolutely cleared of the truth thereof. From
whence happens it then that when they hear that rational and understanding
persons are convinced, That some things they practice are not permitted, that
they are capable to destroy them, that they are Condemned by the Law of God, as
being Crimes, they are nevertheless so little moved thereat, that all seems to
assure them? From whence comes it that they take so little pains to examine to
the bottom the occasion of this Judgment or Opinion which is against them, or
to discourse any of those who are persuaded of it, but that they stop at
certain superficial reasons, and that provided they see themselves Authorized
by a Rabble, whom other times they esteem very little either for Judgment or
Piety, they think they have nothing to fear? Who sees not that it is their
Passion that suspends their Reason, and hides from them the most common rules
of Sense, which they cannot hinder themselves from seeing, if they were not as
it were tied by their heart, which fears to be disturbed in its Inclinations?

That which we ought to do to avoid this disorder so visible and so proper to
cast us into, and keep us in blindness, is to establish, for an inviolable
Principle of our Conduct, never to follow in the practical any of those
opinions favorable to the inclination of Nature, and which are condemned by
able men, unless we be fully assured that these men be deceived, and in an
excess of security. Otherwise we shall not be able to free our selves from
rashness, and the unadvised Acts which we commit by following a Rule so
preposterous ought to be a warning for us that we deceive not our selves even
in the bottom, and that it is the aversion we have for Truth that hinders us
from acknowledging it.

17. It would not be sufficient to advance in the knowledge of ones self to be
only instructed in the Principles of Truth, by which we ought to judge of our
Actions, and of our State and Condition. Because, provided that we had never so
little Sincerity to make the application of it, 'twould not be possible at
least that our gross faults should remain absolutely unknown to us. But to form
to our selves the Idea which ought to be had thereof, there must be added to
the knowledge of Gods Laws that of his Grandeur, of his Bounty the infinite
obligations we have to him, the Right which he has over men in quality of
Creator and Redeemer. There must be added the necessary Consequences of Sin,
and we must look upon our selves as Sinners reduced to the last degree of
unworthiness and annihilation. Vide Domine, and considera, quoniam sum vilis;
As deserving that all Creatures rise up against us, as being unworthy of all
the Consolations and Comforts, of all the Assistance which we receive of him,
and lastly as having no right to complain of any bad usage, because there is
none which we do not deserve. ^ut if we compare afterward those opinions which
our Condition requires of us with those we really have, with this violent
inclination for greatness, will this niceness and sensibility even in small and
trivial things, with this Tiranical propensity, to be obnoxious to all men, and
to relate all to our selves, it is impossible that we should not be amazed at
so strange a Deposition, and so opposite to Reason and Justice.

18. Although these Considerations may be useful to all the World, they are
nevertheless proper particularly to those who return to God after great
Strayings. But there is another study of ones self much more tedious and
difficult, and which makes the exercise of the Just even during their whole
life. It consists in knowing those Passions, Humors, weaknesses, defects,
deceits, which self-love makes use of to hide them both from our selves, and
others, and the secret Injustices wherein this Self-love engages us. It Is to
what each one is obliged to apply himself unto with Care, as to the chief means
to advance himself therein. for all the faults of the Just, as well the small
ones as the important ones, do happen ordinarily, only because they do not know
themselves enough, that they do not themselves justice enough, and that they
dissemble, and keep close a great part of their faults from themselves.

19. The persuasion wherein one ought to be as to the importance of this Duty,
and the application to practice it, which ought to spring from it, will make
one presently discover a great number of faults. For it is certain, that that
which ordinarily causes that the most part of our faults are unknown to us, is
because as soon as we perceive any of them, we look another way, taking them
for objects which incommode us, and so they make little or no impression upon
our Minds. Likewise we look upon them only separately, as if we had only the
fault which we are forced to see at that very moment. All those we have
observed in passing by, remain as it were annihilated in regard of us. The
inclinations and customs which remain, we reckon as nothing, and stopping also
only at simple actions, and yet as slightly as possibly we can, we never have
time to form an Idea of our selves, which is very humble.

We can make no progress in the study of our selves, but in correcting this
fault, and taking a quite contrary way, which is to force the Mind to consider
its faults and imperfections, with a serious application to annex one to
another, according as they are discovered to endeavor to search to the bottom
of it, to examine the cause of the passions, not to think they can be easily
destroyed, being sometime without action, and to make use of this Image to
humble our selves before God and Man.

In a word, we must act in this Study almost, as if we had undertaken to labor
all our life time to draw our Portractures, that is to say, we must add every
day some strokes with the Pencil, but not put out what is already drawn
therein; so we shall observe sometimes one passion, sometimes another. To day
we shall discover one delusion of Self-love, tomorrow another. And by that
means we shall form by little and little a Portraiture so like, that we shall
see every moment even what we are, so that we shall have reason to say
continually to our selves, behold what I am. See here what I have loved so
much, and could wish that the whole World might be the object of its esteem and
affection.

20. We must not forget, amongst the multitude of our faults, those which being
only outward and involuntary, render us not properly guilty before God. For
those are they, which oftentimes humble us the most in our own thoughts,
because we are so vain, that we ordinarily judge of our selves, rather
according to the report of men than truth. Moreover, these Faults rendering us
incapable of certain actions and employments, ought to have place in the
deliberations, which we make of entering or not entering into diverse engagements
which might be proposed to us.

Lastly, as they make commonly many Impressions upon the minds of others, we
are obliged to be very circumspect therein, because we ought partly to regulate
our behavior concerning this Impression, which opens to us, or shuts the
entrance to their Hearts, and disposes them to stumble, or not to stumble at
our Actions.

21. Faults and Virtues ought equally to be the object of this Examen; because
we must endeavor to know the extent, and the greatness of these Faults; and
the limits and imperfections of these Virtues. The one and the other is
necessary to form a true Idea of our selves, and we are equally deceived in the
one and in the other, by the inclination Self-love gives us to hide, or lessen
what we have that is naught, and to expose to view, or to increase what we have
that is good.

22. We ought not to judge simply of the greatness, and the extent of these
faults in relation to the consequences, and the effects they have had, but in
relation to the consequences and the effects they may have, if God hinder them
not; because there is no passion but may be the cause of our utter ruin.
Inconstancy, a little motion of choler, a word of vanity, an inordinate desire,
a want of circumspection may oftentimes be followed with consequences which may
change the whole state of our life. We shall know it clearly in the next world,
and God will let us see there, that he has made us escape a world of dangers,
into which, the weight of our Concupiscence would have drawn us headlong, if he
had not stopped the course of it. And we may likewise know some part thereof in
this life, if we reflect upon what might happen to us from all the faults which
we have committed, and on the excesses whereunto our passions might have
carried us, if they had been violently excited by the objects, and favored by
occasions, and not hindered by the obstacles, which God placed there to keep
them within certain boundaries, which make us acknowledge, that it is not
through our moderation and wisdom, that we have escaped these great
inconveniences, but merely by Gods mercy.

23. We must take away in the Examen of Virtues which we believe we have, what
there is purely natural, and wherein Grace has no share at all. For God, who
ought to be the rule of all our judgments, makes no account of what comes from
Nature. The effects of custom and habit, which is nothing but another Nature
must be taken away. There must be an absolute depriving our selves from the
desire we have to please Men; and from other secret considerations from
interests and passions, because all that is very bad. We must separate from it
what we have destroyed by our ingratitude, and our sins, because, that not
subsisting in the eyes of God, ought not to subsist in ours. We must consider
how many of these Virtues, such as they are, have little extent, force and
solidity: with how small zeal we carry our selves therein, and after all these
separations, we must ask our selves what we have yet remaining.

24. Not only good Qualities, and Virtues are nothing in the sight of God;
being destroyed by Crimes, but without having committed any, they become often
useless, and even render us culpable by the little use we make of them. Because
the gifts of God include always some new obligation. He expects more from
those, to whom he has given most. We owe him for the interest of his Favors
and Graces; and if we fail to give it him, he would rather we had not received
them. If he has given us a favorable natural Condition; if he has preserved
us from temptations which carry away most part of others; if we have had little
to contest within our selves; if he has given us some good qualities of mind,
some propensity, and inclination to virtue; Lastly if he has bestowed on us
virtue it self, we ought to look upon all that as Talents from God, yet only
conditional to increase them, so that if we know we have not performed it,
there is nothing ought to give us more confusion and fear.

25. We ought above all to consider the ill use we have made of all the Truths
God has been pleased to discover to us, be it in the elevating us thereby
inwardly or outwardly, be it in profaning them by indiscreet entertainments,
or that we make use of them not to contemn or despise our selves, but others.
For that is the use, or rather the most common abuse, that men make thereof.
It Is impossible that those who know the Truths of the Gospel, should not see at
the same time, how little they are observed by a great many, who at other times
make profession of Piety. We may see that they want light in many points, and
that they commit diverse considerable faults. And malice placing it self on that
side, takes delight in busying it self about these defects. It exaggerates
them, it stuffs it self with them, and thereby disswades the Mind from whatever
might be able to edify it in those, in whom we observe them. Every thing
wounds and shocks these so clear-sighted, but little charitable Men; If a
Monastery do not follow the rules prescribed by the Canons of the Church, they
do no more good in it, they busy themselves only in that, and make no account
of what it has otherwise of God. They have reason in what they condemn, but
they have not to condemn it with so little meekness, humility and charity: so
that they blame things oftentimes after a manner more blamable than the evil it
self, by which they are hurt.

26. We may say that it is nothing but the want of will, which is able to
prevent that we arrive not at this degree of Self-knowledge, being we imagine
that Men do not apply themselves to this Examen, except in visible faults. What
remains is more difficult, because it is active in giving means to discover
those which we cannot find in our selves, either for want of judgment, or else
through the devices of Self-love. We hardly see any one, in whom we do not
think to find some faults which are unknown to him; and as we ought to judge
thereby, that this Illusion is very common, the lest we can conclude of it is,
that it is much to be feared, we are not more exempt from it than others.

We have likewise no reason to assure our selves, that these secret and hidden
faults are not very considerable, and never capable to hinder Salvation. This
is by no means true; the blindness wherein we are, is able to hide very
important ones from us. How many for example, do we see, who not knowing their
want of Understanding, do undertake Employments, and therein commit very great
faults. Men choose their Occupations and Employments ill, they slight those
which are proper for them, and apply themselves to others in which they cannot
prosper. Men engage themselves in contests which have evil consequences, they
think they are in the right when they are in the wrong, and upon this score
they deal hardly with others; they excite murmurings, against themselves; they
destroy the whole Edification, they were able to give by their other actions.
There are some, who for want of knowing what they have that is troublesome in
their humors and conducts, raise a coldness, and a disgust in the hearts of
others, who disunite by this means whole Societies, who divert Persons from
their way, and stifle in them the seeds which God has sown therein. There are
some who serve as obstacles (not dreaming of it) to many useful and necessary
things, because they do not know how to behave themselves in treating with them.

There are some, who by small ties, or wilful preventions which they know not
of, are hindered from satisfying these important Duties, the omitting of which
becomes a scandal to those who see them act; and causes great inconveniences.
Lastly, it seldom happens, that these visible errors have not their beginning
from those faults which men will not see.

27. This ought to suffice to make us join to the Examen, which we ought to
make of our selves, what strength we can draw from others to know our selves
better. There are several ways that it may be procured, but I shall only take
notice of the two principal ones which comprehend many others. The one is in
some sort to go before Truth it self, seeking it in the e^^mple and the
instructions of other People; the other to suffer that it approach us, in
giving it a free access, and taking away all obstacles which may hinder this
approach.

28. We seek truth in other Men's examples, by the reflections we make on their
Actions, which extend to their Virtues, and to their faults: Their Virtues
instruct us in those we want, they convince us of our weakness and of our
baseness, and they humble us by this comparison. It is enough also, oftentimes
that there be some difference of light and conduct betwixt others and us, to
give us thereby means to undeceive our selves. Because although Self-love
persuades us at first; that we have reason on our side; yet if we observe that
other Men's conduct has ordinarily good success, and that ours on the contrary
has always bad, we should be wilful to believe that we are not in the wrong.

29. It Is almost the only means to acknowledge in ones self what Men call false
judgment, which is a defect that makes Men undertake cross businesses, engages
them in false parties, in various opinions, and in evil arguments. For although
this same lack^^ judgment, which produces these false Opinions, may be a
hinderance to the direct acknowledging them, yet if it happen, that a man had
the fortune to observe, that generally he was single in his sentiment, and that
his thought were almost always contrary to every Bodies else, he must be
extremely opinionated, to conclude from thence that he is in the right. And
thus the least he can do is to be mistrustfull of his Judgment, and of the
quality of his Understanding, and to consult sincerely upon the Points, in
which he shall have some particular advices, the most able, and most
disinterested Persons he knows, by endeavoring in good earnest to embrace
their Reasons.

30. It is by so much more important to endeavor to be edified by other men's
Virtues, and good qualities, by how much more we ought to acknowledge in us an
inclination which separates us from them. Our wickedness hides part of them
from us, and makes us apply our selves to those which it cannot hide from us;
we absolutely either forget them, or we scarcely take notice of those who have
them, in these circumstances; on the contrary, their faults make very deep
impressions in our minds. We conserve of them very lively images, which present
themselves on their own accord without the trouble of seeking them, and we
renew continually these images and impressions by new Reflections, to hinder
them from loosing any thing of their force and strength. However we ought to do
the contrary, seeing that whereas there are very few, who are charged to remedy
other Men's faults, there is none on the contrary, God does not oblige to profit
by their Virtues. For he proposes them to all those who see them as a living
and animated instruction, for which he will demand an account one day, as of
all the other favors he has done them.

But it is not forbid to observe in others certain visible faults, and it is
likewise impossible not to see what strikes upon our senses, we must try to
make use of them, thereby to know our selves better, and to the end we may draw
this advantage from thence, we must first perceive some of those faults, we
must ask our selves; Number quid ego unquam Imprudens facio simile huic? Did not I
fall my self into these Faults, which I observe in this Man? The occasion of
making these kind of reflections, are but too common; because Self-love, which
has a thousand tricks to conceal from us our proper faults, has no less to
discover those of others. And whereas its delicateness does scarcely permit us
to look steadfastly upon our own, it renders us on the contrary clear-sighted in
respect of those of others. We see them such as they are; we consider them as
much as we will, we hardly trouble our selves to lessen them by favorable
excuses; this effect comes doubtless from some bad causes. But keeping them
within their boundaries some profit may be drawn from thence, and use made
thereof to deceive in some sort Self-love. For by considering thus the faults
of others without this multiplicity of considerations, and artificial excuses,
which deceive us in ours, we may easily discover what is the false light which
dazles them, how they have engaged themselves in this Illusion, what they ought
to do to be delivered from it. And afterward, in turning all these
Considerations toward our selves, we may easily apply them to our selves, if
we have never so little sincerity, and desire to know our selves.

32. Unless we make use of this cunning to profit by the fault of another,
which we cannot hinder our selves from seeing, they only blind us more instead
of helping us to know our selves. For either we take occasion to slight those
who fall therein by raising our selves above them, as if we were exempt, or if
we acknowledge our selves guilty as well as they, we comfort our selves, that
we alone are not subject to these Weaknesses. We are glad that they have not
this advantage over us. We diminish the Idea we have of our own faults, as
looking upon them common to many, and as being rather the consequences and
infirmities of Nature than of our disorder. And thus we free our selves in some
sort secretly from the reproaches of our Consciences, by hiding our selves in
the throng of the Culpable.

33. But besides the Instructions which may be drawn out of other men's faults
which we perceive by our selves, very important ones may likewise be drawn from
the Judgments which we hear made of them by those who entertain themselves with
them. For we may learn that it is in vain to dissemble our own, and be angry at
those who speak of them; we thereby only apply people more to do it. Because
whereas they are ordinarily very indulging to the Imperfections of those who
seriously acknowledge them, they do not suffer on the contrary patiently those
which we would hide or canonize, and of which they do not permit us to speak
with freedom. Although they be something reserved in speaking with those, of
whom they have some reason to be distrustful, they may find always some one to
whom they may speak freely; so by this means things are dispersed in secret
from one to another, almost as if they did speak them publicly. So that we
must show that the only way to hinder men from speaking of our faults is to
Correct them our felves, or to Testify that we desire it seriously, and that
we are well pleased to be put in mind of them.

34. We may learn by these Judgments that hardly any one knows what is thought
of him, nor what Impression his Actions make upon the minds of others; from
whence it happens, that in forming to our selves false opinions of their
disposition, we take in conclusion false measures. We do not the Good we ought,
nor prevent the Evil which we might; we disturb others a thousand several ways
without knowing it, and we break thus by little and little all the ties which
knit the union we have with them.

We perceive it well at the end of some of these bad effects, but that only
increases the illusion we are in. For the lack of knowing the causes which are
given them, we substitute false ones. We cast all the Blame on others, we
attribute to them the Motives, Intentions, and Designs on which they never
thought, and upon that we form of them very disadvantageous Ideas, which
appearing without by some exterior marks do yet increase the remoteness they
have from us.

35. It Is true we must not absolutely rule our Conduct by the opinions and
Impressions of others. But these Opinions and Impressions being uniform they
give us often means to acknowledge, That this Conduct is not regulated
according to Gods Laws; others being ordinarily more subtle then we to discover
what happens in us of Passion and Self-love. Even often times when these
Impressions are unjust, they do not forbear to have some cause in us, the which
we may ^^medy. In fine how unreasonable they are, as they may be either
sharpened or sweetened by our Conduct, they may serve for obstacles to certain
enterprises, and facilitate others, and we may sometimes take other courses to
avoid them. It Is always good to know them, provided we are able to undergo them.

36. We might obtain this advantage, and we might shun one part of the
inconveniences if we did practice sincerely what is observed in St. Thomas of
Canterbury's Life, which was that one of his Friends should advertise him of
all that he found fit to tell him again in his Carriage. And it is what they
had in Prospect who have ordered that in certain Religious Houses, That there
should be one Person Charged to receive the complaints that each should make of
the Superiors Behavior, to give him an account thereof, without naming the
Authors. But as all the World cannot enjoy this Good we ought to endeavor to
supply it by procuring a faithful and understanding Friend to whom an entire
liberty should be given to advertise us of what should be said of us in the
World, and after what manner our actions might be taken therein.

37. It seems at first that the most part of the World do follow these advices,
and that at least it is practiced by all persons who profess Piety. For there
are none who have not a Confessor, and this Confessor ought to be that faithful
friend who should advertise us of our faults, of the scandal which we cause,
seeing that we give him that right in addressing our selves to him. He may know
them so much better, as he joins to the knowledge we give him of our selves,
that which he sometimes may get elsewhere, and that thus he sees the limits of
our light, that is to say, what we know of our selves, and what we know not.
And as the practice of this Office of Charity makes one of the chief parts of
his Ministry. There is hardly any one who does not flatter himself, That it is
that he seeks in submitting himself to the Conduct of a Director, and who does
not believe that he gives him in this point all the liberty which he can desire.

38. Whosoever will unfold these secret windings of his own heart, will find
that although he think not to address himself to a Confessor except to draw
from thence some help the better to know himself, he has at the bottom of his
heart a quite contrary end, and a secret design to make use thereof to Justify
himself in his faults, which is properly not knowing himself. This it is we do
not take heed of to confess in our selves, seeing that on the contrary we know
it not, and that we have also on the outward appearance of the mind a quite
different thought. But Self-love which resides in the bottom of the Soul knows
how to prosper there without our making any express reflections. See here the
Artifice self-love makes use of. We have two sorts of faults, the first which
are the object of our Affection, and which we will not acknowledge for faults
for fear of being obliged to disanul them; the others that we really condemn
are those which we have no inclination to, and from which we would very
willingly be delivered. Self-love makes us therefore first choose a Ghostly
Father, who ought to Judge of us almost as we would desire; Afterward it makes
as it were a kind of Covenant and Bargain with him. Self-love tells him the
faults it loves not: it is content that he find fault with them, as it would it
self. But the Object of its principal Passions it scarcely puts under the
Censure of the Confessor, and only chooses him, thinking that he will not
concern himself with them.

Therefore first we justify our Passions to our selves, and at last we seek a
Ghostly Father to justify them. In a word we would have one who might not
outgo us in direction, and who would conform in every thing, that is, we would
he should approve and condemn what we our selves approve and condemn.

39. It Is that which is the cause that there being even amongst those who
profess Piety so many strange and irregular Conducts, there is hardly any one
nevertheless who wants a Director, if he will have one; and this Director is of
no use to those that would choose him in this manner, but to stifle their
remorses, and to make them live more quietly in the condition, out of which
they have no desire to depart.

Thus we may define a Director in respect of the most part of the World, a
charitable Censurer of small faults, and light defects, and an Approver of
passions, which we will not remove. We would not have a Director who would not
find fault at all, and we would not have one neither who touches upon our
beloved passions. These two Conditions are both equally essential; because, as
it would be troublesome, if he did pretend to contradict us in what we resolve
absolutely to do, he would serve our Self-love but ill, if he did not
contradict us in some thing, our intention being to make use of his zeal
against certain faults, to authorize us in those we would not acknowledge for
such.

40. Therefore it is not sufficient to have a Director, nor even to have one
learned. We must moreover abandon our selves to him without dissimulation and
artifice, and resolve to conform our selves to the judgment he makes of us, and
not to incline him to follow ours. Lastly, we must be ready to learn from him
to know our selves better, and be glad of his aid and assistance therein,
without prescribing him limits. It Is the disposition all the World ought to be
in; but it is not necessary that it be perfect, or rather it is impossible that
it should be so. Because there is no man upon Earth, who has humility enough,
and force to support, without being discouraged and afraid of the sight of the
least sin in its natural greatness; and it is true to say of all our known sins
in their greatest extent, what the Scripture said of God. Non videbit me homo,
and vivet. Thus to take a proportionable Conduct, both of the necessity we all
have of Truth, and to the weakness which renders us incapable of undergoing it
in all its force, we must wish ardently to know it. We must embrace with
docility what is discovered of it to us; we must believe that we are mightily
spared, and labor nevertheless to become more strong, to the end we may be
less obliged to spare our selves.

41. We would doubtless advance hugely in this self-knowledge, if we really had
this disposition in the heart, by treating with the Confessor we have chosen.
But we must however not grant only to this Confessor the right of discovering
to us our faults, and the evil consequences of our actions. On the contrary, It
would be just to stretch this right as far as we can possible; and to give it
also in some sort to all the World, seeing there is not any to whom we are not
answerable, and whom we are not able to hurt and scandalize. How circumspect
soever a Confessor may be, he sees not always our actions; he hears not all we
say, he knows not always the impressions our words and our actions make upon
others; and it is scarcely, except from those who perceive them that they can
be learnt. One should therefore learn the custom of being less delicate in this
point, and give all the world an honest liberty. Possibly we should receive
oftentimes advertisements less censurable. But if we will receive only those
which shall appear altogether reasonable, we shall receive none at all. For men
will never charge themselves with so severe an exactness, and they will much
sooner loose the Party by saying nothing at all to us, than expose themselves
to hurt us, if what they should say did not appear to us absolutely just.

We must on the other side suppose, that every one being prepossessed on the
one part, that he loves not to be admonished of his faults, and on the other
unwilling to show any aversion upon him, is disposed by this means to free
himself from rendering us this charitable office, and to tell us nothing what he
thinks of us, nor what he knows others think of us. Thus except we remove this
obstacle, and go as it were before Truth, in exciting others to tell it us, in
testifying to them in an unsuspected manner, that we think our selves in some
sort obliged that they should do it, and thus dispersing the fear they have of
rendering themselves odious, they will always observe with us this deceitful
reservedness, which entertains and keeps us in ignorance of many things which
would be very necessary to be known.

42. We must not imagine, that it is sufficient to receive without being moved,
the advices which are given us, and to thank those who run the hazard of
giving us them. For it is well enough known to all the World, that, as it is a
shame to show that one is offended at them, so we endeavor to do our selves
honor in being civil upon these occasions. But we must persuade People that
these civilities are sincere; and it is that which cannot be without shunning
many things, which the World take for marks of a secret discontent and spite,
which we are afraid to discover.

43. We must not pretend for example, that they ever take the liberty to advise
us of any thing, if they see that we have no union and tie, but with those who
enter absolutely into all our Sentiments; and that we testify to all others
nothing but dryness and coldness.

If they see, that after this confidence which they shall have shown us, we
enter into a reservedness of mind, that we find our selves entangled every time
we are with them, and that we act no more after a free and natural manner. If
they see that to have more right to reject the Advice which is given us, we
give an evil censure of it, that we seek every where for People, who condemn
them by proposing them after an odious fashion; if we seek in the persons of
those, who give them wherewith to decry their Judgments; if in occasions which
present themselves, we speak of them with more sharpness then ordinarily.
Lastly if they be aware, that that has made a wound in our heart, let us be
mindful of it, and let us mingle on purpose in our Discourses certain affected
Apologies relating to the things we have been advertised of. If we do not
avoid, say I, all those things which show us to be inwardly grieved, we must
not hope that they will stop at words of Civility, which are destroyed by so
many marks of secret discontent, and those real.

44. It Is the sentiment of a wise Pagan, that he who is advertised of any
fault, ought not to do the same presently, in respect of him from whom he does
receive this advertisement, and that he ought to expect an other time to render
him this office. But this advice must be stretched much farther; for we must
not only not reprehend upon the place those who reprehend us, but we must also
avoid reprehending them when there is reason to suspect, that any secret spite
should have opened our eyes to see their faults, and made us attentive to
observe them. We ought to suppose they are in pain to know the effect of the
Advices they have given, and that they will perceive the least sign which we
shall give of disapproving: That they will refer to this cause all they shall
remark in us of coldness, and aversion to them, which might render these
advices unprofitable to them, and give them leave to make a rash judgment of
us. And this is it which obliges us to stand upon our guards on that side, and
to testify to them even more freedom and confidence, than we would have done
at another time.

45. It is so much more important to preserve this conduct toward those, who
run the hazard of giving us this Advice; because in acting otherwise we do not
shut the mouth only of one or two Persons, but almost generally to all the
World. Because there needs but two or three rencounters of this nature, to get
ones self the reputation of being very nice, and to pass in the minds of those
who know us for People, who love not that we should speak freely to them. Now
after this impression is formed, it is a very strong bar against Truth. Eeach
man seeks pretenses to free himself from the speaking to those Curious men. We
fear always to disturb and vex them. Thus in doubt we ordinarily take the way
of being silent, and to say nothing to them that may be disagreeable.

46. The Great ones and Princes complain, and Reason shows that they are
miserable in this, that their greatness is the cause that Truth dare not
approach them, and that they pass thus all their life in Illusion. But
certainly we have not less cause to complain in this point of the most part of
those, who are in any esteem in the World. For they are not Princes by Birth,
they are Princes by Humor, in dispersing amongst all those who come near them,
certain terrors which hinder their most intimate Friends from speaking freely
to them. From whenc it happens, that oftentimes they are not informed what is
made use of for entertainment to all the World; for they think to be approved
in what is almost universally condemned, and lastly take almost in all things
false measures.

47. It is much more important to avoid the appearing of this humor, because
when this self Impression is given, even our Friends believe they are obliged
by Charity to dissemble their Opinions, and to leave us to our own. wills. Aug.
Epist. 250.
St- Austin complains as of one of the chief difficulties which is met with in
the Commerce of this life, that when Men approve not something in the words or
writings of some one, and that they discover to them this opinion in the belief
that Christian liberty does oblige us to make use of it thus, it happens often,
that these Advices pass for effects of jealousy, rather than of amity. He
represents these evil suspicions as a conconsiderable fault, and at the same
time very frequent, and he says that oftentimes they cause divisions and
enmities amongst Persons very well united. Nevertheless, he cannot tell himself
any other remedy for this evil, but by suppressing these Sentiments, when we
have business with Friends of this humor. If I can, said he to St. Jerome,
expose freely to you what appears defective in your Writings, and that you
cannot do the same in respect of mine, without rendering our selves suspected of
distrust for one another, and of want of Friendship, let us rather leave all
that, and not put our lives and Salvations in danger. Let something of science
rather be wanting, which does swell, provided that we hurt not Charity which
does edify. And in another of his Letters, Methinks, says he, we ought to
treat together not only with Charity, but also with Liberty and Friendship, and
that thus we ought not to dissemble, what may be displeasing in our Writings,
provided that we do it with a Spirit which God approves in Brotherly Charity.
But if you think that we cannot use this conduct one toward the other, without
the danger of hurting Charity, we shall do better to abstain from it. For although
this sort of Charity, which I desired we might practice together, be very
excellent; nevertheless, it is better to entertain our selves in this other to
which you have reduced me, than to have none all. Illa enim Charitas quam tecum
habere vellem major est profecto, sed melior haec minor quam nulla est. If a
Saint found himself obliged to do thus toward another Saint, we see easily
that we may well be reduced to do it toward others, and thus even Charity
demands sometimes, that we live in this reserve with our Friends, when they
give no more overture to discover to them their Sentimen^s.

48. Besides the reputation of delicateness, there is yet another which
strangely hinders even our Friends from speaking freely with us, it is that of
being tied to our own Sense, and strongly opiniated of our thoughts. Because
having given this Idea of our selves, hardly any body ventures to gainsay us,
especially if we have some considerat^on which persuades Men to deal wari y
with us. Thus every one is reserved, and leaves us to believe what we have a
mind, mocking often at us inwardly. But they will say; Is it only that we may
not pass for Opinators in the minds of those, who would be believed in all they
propose; that we shall be forced to grant, that we approve Opinions which in
effect we do not, and yield to all the Advices the first comer shall think good
to give us? It Is by this means that People justify in themselves and flatter
themselves, that their stubborness, and their inflexibility in their
Sentiments, proceed only from the love they have for Truth. But it is easy to
convince them, that one may avoid the reputation of being tied to ones own
sense, without approving all the thoughts of others, which would be a very
great fault. To do this, it is but to distinguish reasonable Certainty which is
a Virtue, from Self-opinion which is a vice.

49. We cannot justly force whomsoever he be, to yield to our Judgments, not
being convinced, nor yet accuse him of being obstinate. Because if it is
through knowledge that he is not persuaded of it, he is praiseworthy for not
yielding to what is false; If it is lack of understanding, and of light he may
accused of these faults, but not of that of being obstinate. Also the world
does not commit this injustice, when we give it elsewhere what it has a right
to exact from us. See here in what it consists. Tho men in this life be not
absolutely incapable of knowing any truth certainly; yet there are so many
things which they see but obscurely, and they are so often deceived in taking
that for a certainty, which indeed is not so, in considering objects
confusedly, and in not seeing therein all that is necessary to judge by, that
the least they ought to do, is to have a general distrust of their sentiments
and thoughts, when they are not expressly confirmed by Faith, and the Authority
of the Church. This distrust causes not them to be indetermined, and that they
do not take some part, but it hinders them from proposing their thoughts with a
determinative Air, and to be troubled when they are contradicted. This distrust
makes them give ear, and examine seriously the reasons alleged against their
Opinions. Lastly, it makes them slight the Opinions they approve not of, with
so much Modesty, that we remain persuaded that they should have disposed to
embrace them, if they had had light enough to penetrate into the Reasons. This
is the disposition the World does force from us, and with Reason, because we
ought to have it in effect. And the contrary to this disposition, that is to
say, that assurance which excludes even general distrust, that determinative
Air, that manner of rejecting other men's Opinions without taking almost the
pains to examine them, as if they were incapable of finding out the Truth, or of
being deceived, is that properly, which men call being Opiniator.

It Is that which repulses the World, and hinders it from speaking freely to us,
because it is always imagined that it would be in vain, for when we have
espoused a cause, we never forsake it; but after having contested soundly, we
always think that we have Reason, and that others have not. Thus every one had
rather leave all in that Condition, and abandon us to our own light without
proposing theirs to us.

50. We produce almost the same bad Effects, if without contesting and showing
wilfulness, we remain nevertheless in a certain coldness, without appearing
either to approve or disapprove the liberty which our Friends take in telling
us their opinions. For as they are naturally inclined to believe, that this
liberty is not pleasing to us, and that they are in distrust upon this point;
Whosoever destroys not this Impression by his Air, and by his way of answering,
gives leave to believe, that he would willingly that it may subsist or remain,
and his silence being taken with probability for a token of discontent, the
World thinks it self freed from making for the future the like attempts.

51. If we be careful to avoid these, and such like faults, we may engage our
true Friends to tell us sometimes what they think of our Actions, and to let us
know after what manner the World takes them. But to judge well of what they
tell us we must observe this rule, that as Natural Complacency, fear of
troubling, and civility it self, obliges those who speak to us of our faults to
moderate themselves much in their expressions; If we will know their Judgment
exactly, we must add of our selves what is wanting in their words, and not
imagine that these thoughts come into their mind with all these restrictions,
and these mollifications which they use in proposing them to us. Let us
endeavor therefore, that they tell us only some small part of what is judged
of us, and that we must multiply in some sort all that is said of us to find
out the Truth. If they tell us, that they have some little to contradict in
some thing we have done, that signifies that there is therein much to be
gainsaid. If they say they make some difficulty in some Argument, that means
that they believe it false and ridiculous. If they tell us that they cannot
without difficulty enter into any of our thoughts, that is, they disapprove and
condemn them. If they give us notice that there are some People who harm
themselves by certain Actions, that is to say, there are a great number who are
scandalized at them. Lastly, it must be supposed that the language of
Advertisements is a particular Language; that we do express our selves therein
but by halves; that they are nothing but perpetual silences, and that unless we
supply and understand it at half Sentences, we are deceived by those even who
strive to undeceive us.

52. If man had as much subtilty and craft for what relates to his Happiness as
generally he has for his Interests, he would not only discover the Truth from
under some little Clouds, the goodness and Prudence whereof might serve to
sweeten and temper it, but he would even distinguish it in the most profound
obscurity of Fiction and dissimulation. We alter it by the fiction of
flatteries; we dissemble it by silence; But very often it relies only on us to
distinguish it in the one and the other. Because there is always something of
Truth in flattery it self, and Silence has also its Language; which has
caused St. Jerome to call the silence of St. Aselle, Her. Ep. 3.
Silentium loquens.

53. To Comprehend what there may be of Truth in flattery we need only to
distinguish the precise sense of expressions from the thoughts which they give
us leave to read in the mind of those who make use of them. There is no Truth
at all in the precise sense of the expressions of Flatterers, seeing that we
take here the term of Flattery for a false Praise. But they give leave to know
many of their thoughts, and to instruct us by these thoughts of many Truths
which concern us.

The first is, when they give these Praises, they believe the quite contrary
what they say, and contemn as much in their hearts those to whom they give them
as they do testify outwardly esteem for them.

The second is drawn from the nature of some Praises which they choose. For
they take ordinarily the substance of things truly Praiseworthy, which they
falsely attribute to those they desire to flatter. Thus those to whom whom we
give Praises ought not to conclude from thence neither, That they have these
qualities effectively which are attributed to them, nor that there are people
who believe it, but only these qualities are Praisable in themselves, and that
it were to be wished that they had them, that is to say, that they might learn
by that not what they are, but what they ought to be. It Is a reflection St.
Augustine made upon the Praise Cicero gave to Caesar, To forget nothing but
Injuries, Nihil oblivisci nisi Injurias. Dicebat hoc, said he, tam magnus
Laudator, aut tam magnus Adulator, sed si Laudator talem Caesarem noverat, si
autem Adulator, talem esse debere ostendebat principem Civitatis, qualem illum
fallaciter praedicabat. What Cicero said to Caesar, said this Father, was
either a greas praise, or a great Flattery: If it was a Praise he ought to
believe that Caesar was really such an one: If it was a flattery he showed
always thereby, that he who Commands an Estate ought to have these qualities
which he attributed falsely to Caesar.

The third thing that Flattery teaches us is of the same kind as the first.
It Is, that the Flatterer believes not only what he says, but he imagins
moreover that he whom he flatters is Fool enough to let himself be deceived by
his flatteries, and to take them for sincere Praises. And as we cannot approve
false Praises but by flattering our selves, every Flatterer condemns, in
himself, of illusion and vanity, that man to whom he addresses his flatteries.
This is the Judgment of it. Lastly, as it is by Interest and not by inclination
that we are inclined to flattery, and that we make use thereof only as a means
to obtain of the great ones what we pretend, flatterers must judge, That those
to whom they give these false Praises are mightily in love with themselves to
be gained by such gross deceits. So that if all that is in the mind of a
Flatterer were laid open and explicated, it might he reduced to this strange
Complement. Sir, I belive nothing of these Praises I give you, I have for you
all the just disdain you deserve; but knowing that you are vain enough to
believe that men have in their heart the Sentiments of Esteem which I show you,
and that the excess of love you have for your self* will be able to dispose
you to do me the favors. I desire, I thought that to obtain them, I ought to
attempt a way which ought to bring the contrary. Behold what the Great may see
in the minds of most people who Praise them, if they can add to the expression
of these Flatterers what they are able to gather from their thoughts. But as
that would incommode them, they had rather penetrate less, and stick at the
appearances of words. And it is by the knowledge men have of this disposition
that they run the hazard to use this wicked means.

54. The language of silence, is what silence it self makes known in the minds
of those who are silent for certain Considerations. For Example, when we avoid
speaking of a certain fault before Great men, that signifies we believe them
subject to it, and that we are afraid, lest they should take to themselves what
might be said of it. In like manner, when in their presence we omit to praise
certain Persons, it is interpreted, that we imagine they love them not, and that
they have a prejudice against them. Thus they need but to observe the
Discourses that are forborne before them, to know what prejudices, and what
faults are laid to their charge. And as nothing is spoken of so much in men's
absence, as things which we dare not speak in their presence, they may also
judge by these Discourses which we never make before them, what are those which
are often discoursed of when we are far removed from them.

55. The practice of these means is not only useful to make us know many
defects which we are ignorant of, but it is very proper to obtain of God the
assistance of his Lights in this study of our selves to which we apply our
selves. Nevertheless what progress we may make therein, we must not pretend
ever to arrive at that pitch of knowing our selves perfectly. Man has always
in his heart so long as he is in this life; some abuses impenetrable to all
these diligent searches. And it is likewise one part of the Knowledge we may
have of our selves, to comprehend that we do not know our selves with
assurance, in what even appears most Essential, and most important. For we
never know certainly what is called the bottom of the Heart, or that first
propensity of the Soul, which makes her either belong to God or the Creature. I
would say, that we know not certainly that we belong to God, although we may know
assuredly that we are not so.

We know not with an entire assurance the Habitation of God in the Soul, as in
his Temple, because it is an attendant of the first Propensity of the Heart.

We know not absolutely in the particular actions, whether the Love of God is
the Principle of them, or whether Nature and Custom did not borrow the Form of
the Love of God.

None knows absolutely if his sins be forgiven, he knows not the precise degree
of his weakness or force, he knows not what God imputes, or not imputes to us
of the continual productions of our Concupiscences.

Lastly, We know not evidently either the nearness or the remoteness of God.
For often we think we have Grace, when the Mind is taken up only with thoughts,
and quite natural motimotions, and often even we take for motives of Nature the
Operations of Grace.

We ought therefore suppose, that with all our Study, and all our diligent
Scrutinies, we shall always remain unknown to our selves in this Life. But as
this necessary Ignorance is in the Order of God, we bear it humbly, and believe
likewise that it is necessary for us to continue therein. There is nothing but
voluntary Ignorance that we ought to shun, because it is contrary to this Order.

56. In a word, we ought not to desire to know our selves more than God
pleases. And God will not that we know our selves more than is necessary to
make us humble, and to govern our selves. Thus every Application to dive to the
bottom of the Heart, which is not enclosed within its limits, is not agreeable
to God, nor useful to us.

We must not therefore busy our selves in such a manner about our faults, lest
that under pretense of avoiding Presumption, we fall into despair and trouble.
Therefore whatever may be said of this Portraiture, which we must attempt to
make of our selves, if it happen nevertheless that we were so frighted at these
Objects, that the Soul might thereby be overwhelmed, it would be better a great
deal to turn it another way, and to busy it only about Gods Mercies.

57. Care yet ought to be had in the whole Examination of our actions and
interior motions, to do our selves the same justice that we think we are
obliged to do to others, that is to say, not to condemn our selves without
Evidence.

It is true, that we are ignorant whether our better Actions are good and
agreeable to God, but yet we know much less whether they are disagreeable.

There are intermixed therewith many human and corrputed Considerations, but we
cannot tell whether they be voluntary, and what part thereof we have, whether
they are not pure motives of Concupiscence, which God does not impute to us, or
temptations of the Enemy which render us yet less guilty.

We acknowledge in us a great stock of Corruption, but this stock whatever it
be, does not render us guilty when there is another stock of the Love of God
and Justice, which possesses our hearts.

We have committed, and we commit hourly an Infinity of faults, but God pardons
also hourly this infinity of faults, when we return to him with a true and
sincere humility. And thus we cannot tell whether these faults do subsist
before his eyes.

What therefore must be done in this Ignorance? We must humble our selves under
the Hand of God, but not condemn our selves; because that would be to attribute
to our selves a Knowledge which we have not.

58. Lastly, The principal Precaution that ought to be had in the study of ones
Self, is, not to apply ones self so absolutely to it, but join it always with
the infinite Mercies of God, which surpass so much all our miseries, that they
are only as a drop of water in the Ocean. It Is therefore in this immense Sea
that we must drown them, with an entire confidence. Considered in themselves
they are great, but compared to the infinite Greatness of Gods Love for us, and
the price he has given to deliver us, they are nothing. They ought to humble
us without casting us down, as the Mercy of God to comfort us without elevating
us. God was willing to give us these two great objects of our misery and his
Mercy to keep our Soul in Aequilibrio, or even balance. There is always danger
in considering the one without the other, but the uinon of these two
Considerations establish the Soul in the true state, wherein she ought to be
during this Life, which is that of the wholesome fear grounded upon the
consideration of our miseries, and an humble confidence maintained by Gods
Mercy.

The Second Treatise.
Of Charity and Self-love.
1. Although there is nothing so opposite to Charity which relates all to God, as
Self-love which relates all to it self, yet there is nothing so resembling the
effects of Charity, as those of Self-love. For it marches so by the same ways,
that one can hardly point out those better whereunto Charity ought to carry us,
than in proposing those which Self-love takes, which knows its true Interests,
and inclines by reason to the end it proposes it self.

2. This conformity of Effects in Principles so different, will not appear
strange to those who shall have well considered the nature of Self-love. But to
know it he must first consider Self-love in it self, and in its first bent,
that he may see afterward what carries him to disguise and hide it from the
sight of the World.

3. The name of Self-love is not sufficient to make us know its nature, being
we may love our selves diverse ways. We must add thereunto other qualities to
form to our selves a true Idea of it. These qualities are, that Man does not
only love himself, but he loves himself without limits, and without measure;
loves only himself, and refers all to himself. He covets all sort of Riches,
Humors, Pleasures, and desires none but for, or in relation to himself. He
makes himself the Center of all; he would Lord it over all, and could wish that
all Creatures were only employed to content him, to praise him, and to admire
him. This tyrannical disposition being stamped in the bottom of all men's
Hearts, renders them violent, unjust, cruel, ambitious, flatterers, envious,
insolent and quarrellous. In a word, it includes the seeds of all the crimes,
and of all the misdemeanors of men, from the smallest, even to the most
detestable ones. See here what a monster we harbor in our bosoms. This monster
lives, and reigns in us absolutely, except God destroy its empire by putting
another love into our hearts. It is the Principal of all our actions, which
have no other then corrupted Nature: And so far is it from terrifying us that
we love, and hate all things which are out of us, only as they are conform or
contrary to our Inclinations.

4. But if we love it in our selves, we are far from using it so when we
perceive it in others. It appears then to us, on the contrary under its natural
form, and we hate it by so much more as we love our selves, because Self-love
of other men opposes all the desires of ours. We would that all others should
love us, admire us, buckle under us, and that they should be busied with the
care of satisfying us. And they have not only no desire thereto, but they look
upon us as ridiculous in pretending to it, and they are ready to do all, not
only to hinder us from succeeding in our desires, but to make us obnoxious to
theirs, and to require the same things of us. Behold then by this means all men
at difference one with another; And if he who has said, that Men are born in a
state and condition of War, and that each man is naturally an enemy to all
other men, had a mind only to represent by these words the disposition of the
Hearts of men, one toward another, without pretense of passing it for
legitimate and just; he would have said a thing as conform to Truth and
Experience, as that which is maintained is contrary to Reason and Justice.

5. It cannot possibly be imagined how there can be formed Societies,
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms out of this multitude of People full of passions,
so contrary to Union, and who only endeavor the ruin of one another. But
Self-love which is the cause of this war, will easily tell the way how to make
them live in peace. It loves Domination, it loves to enslave all the World to
it, but it loves yet more life and convenientness, and an easy life more than
Domination; and sees clearly that others are no ways disposed to suffer
themselves to be domineered over, and are sooner ready to take away from it the
Goods it loves best. Each man sees himself in an impossibility of succeeding by
force in the designs which his Ambition suggests to him, and apprehends
likewise the loosing by that violence of others the essential Goods he
possesses. It Is that which obliges at first to submit ones self to the care of
his own Preservation, and there is no other way found for that, but to unite
ones self with others, to beat back by force those who undertake to deprive us
both of our lives and fortunes. And to strengthen this Union, laws are made,
and punishments ordered for those who violate them. Thus by the means of
tortures, and gibbets set up in public, the thoughts and tyrannical designs of
every particular man's Self-love are withheld.

6. Fear of death is then the first tie of Civil society, and the first check
of Self-love. It Is that which forces Men, what aversion soever they may have
to obey the Laws, and which makes them in such a manner forget these vast
thoughts of Domination, that they hardly are raised any more in the thoughts of
the most part of them, so impossible they see it is for them to prosper therein.

Thus seeing themselves excluded from the open violence, they are constrained
to seek other ways, and to substitute craft for force, and they find therein no
other means than to endeavor to content the Self-love of those whom they have
need of, instead of tyrannizing over them.

Some endeavor to make it fit for their Interests, others employ flattery to
gain it. Gifts are bestowed to obtain it. This is the source and foundation of
all Commerce practiced amongst men, and which is varied a thousand ways. For
they do not truck merchandises for merchandises or for money, but they mutually
traffic, I mean they make a trade also of labors and toyls, of services done,
of diligence and assiduity, of civility; and Men exchange all that either for
things of the same nature, or for real goods, as when by vain complacencies we
obtain Effective commodities.

It Is thus that by the means and help of this Commerce, all necessaries for
this life are in some fort supplied without intermixing Charity with it. So
that in Estates, where Charity has no admittance, because true Religion is
banished from thence, men do not cease to live with as much peace, safety and
commodiousness, as if they were in a Republic of Saints.

7. It Is not that this tyrannical Inclination which makes us have a desire to
rule and govern by force over others, is not always lively in the hearts of
Men. But as they see themselves unable to prosper therein, they are forced to
dissemble it, until they are strengthened by gaining others by sweet ways, to
have afterward the means to bring others to their bent by force. Every one
therefote is mindful at first to occupy the first. Rank of the Society he is
of, and when he sees himself excluded, he thinks of those which follow. In a
word, he extolls himself the most he can, and he humbles himself only by
constraint. In every state, and in every condition he endeavors always to
acquire to himself some Pre-eminence, Authority, Intendency, Consideration,
Jurisdiction, and to dilate his power as much as he can. Princes wage war with
their Neighbors, that they may enlarge the limits of their Estates. The
Officers of several Companies in one and the same Country, undertake and
intrude upon one another: They strive to supplant them, and to humble each
other in all their Employs, and in all their Offices. And if the wars which are
made there are not so bloody as those which Princes make; It Is not because the
passions are not as quick and sharp, but it is for the most part because they
dread the punishment, which the Laws threaten to those who have recourse to
violent ways.

8. I see nothing more proper to represent this Spiritual world formed by
Concupiscence, then the Idea which some Philosophers give us of the material
World made by Nature, that is to say, of that Assembly of Bodies which compose
the Universe. Because we see there, that every part of Matter tends naturally
to move and to dilate it self, and to issue out of its place, but being pressed
by other Bodies it is confined too kind of prison, from whence it escapes so
soon as it finds that it has more power and force than the matter wherewith it
is environed. Behold already the Picture of Constraint, whereto the Self-love
of each particular is reduced by that of others, which does not permit it to
set it self out at large so much as it would. We are going to see all the
motions in the sequel of this Comparison. For these little confi'nd Bodies
coming to muster up their forces, and their motions do form great heaps of
matter which Philosophers call Whirlwinds, which are as States and Kingdoms:
And these Whirlwinds are themselves pressed and imprisoned by other Whirlwinds,
as it were by neighboring Kingdoms. They likewise will, that in each Whirlwind
there are formed other small ones. which following the general motions of the
great Bodies which draw them, have nevertheless a particular motion, which does
force yet other small Bodies to turn round about them; which represents the
Grandees of State, who follow them in such a manner, that they have their
particular Interests, and are as the Center of a quantity of People who fix
themselves to their Fortune. Lastly, as these little Bodies drawn by the
Whirlwinds, do yet turn as much as they can upon their own Center, so likewise
the little ones which follow the fortune of the Grandees and that of the State,
do not forbear with all their endeavors and all their services, which they
render them, to look upon themselves, and to have always their own proper
Interest in prospect.

9. That which self-love covets particularly in Sovereignty, is, that we be
regarded and looked upon by others as great and powerful, and that we stir up
in their hearts motions of respect and submission, conform to these Ideas. But
however it may be the Impressions which are most agreeable to it are not yet
the only ones wherewith self-love does nourish it self. It generally loves all
those things which are favorable to it, as admiration, respect, constancy, and
chiefly love. There are many who scarcely do what they ought, to make them
beloved, but there are none who do not desire to be loved, and who do not
behold with great pleasure this Propensity in others turned toward them, which
is that which is called love. What if it appear that we labor not much to
obtain this love? It Is because we had rather give sentiments of fear and
submission under Greatness, or because, desiring too passionately to please
certain persons, we trouble our selves very little to please others.

10. Yet this does not hinder but that even when we are canryed away by more
strong Passions, we behave our selves after a fashion very improper to make us
be beloved, yet would be beloved, and do not perceive our selves incommoded,
when we see in the minds of others motions of hatred and aversion. There are
likewise many people, in whom this inclination of making themselves be beloved
is stronger then that of Domineering and Lording over men, and who fear more
men's hatred and aversion, and the judgments which produces it, then they love
to be rich and powerful. Lastly whereas there are few great ones, and few
likewise who are able to aspire to greatness, on the contrary there are none
who cannot pretend to make himself be beloved.

11. If the desire of being loved is not then the strongest Passion which
springs from self-love, at least it is the most general. The considerations of
Interest, of Ambition, of Pleasure, stop many times the effects of it, but they
do it not effectively. It is always active at the bottom of the Heart, and so
soon as it is at liberty, it forbears not being active, and to make us desire
all that is able to procure us the love of Men, as it makes us avoid all
whatsoever we think may draw upon us their hatred. It is true, we are sometimes
deceived in the distinction which we make of these things, which draw love or
hatred, and that there are some who judge thereof much better, and more nicely
than others. But be it that we are deceived therein, or that we be not, it is
always the same Passion which acts, and which flies or seeks the same Objects.
There is also a common distinction for all Men, even to a certain degree, that
is to say, they know every one, even to some point, that certain actions excite
hatred, and others cause love.

12. It is not needful to dive further into the description of the retreats of
Self-love, to comprehend how it imitates very much Charity. It is sufficient to
say that Self-love hindering us through fear of chastisement to violate the
Laws, does remove us by this means outwardly from all the Crimes, and so
renders us like to those who avoid them through Charity. That as Charity
comforts the necessities of others in the sight of God, who will that we
acknowledge his Favors in helping our Neighbor. Likewise Self-love comforts
them in the sight of their proper Interest. And that lastly, there is hardly
any action whereto we are carried by Charity that would please God, whereunto
Self-love cannot engage us to please Men.

13. But tho Self-love tend by these three motions to counterfeit Charity, we
must for all that allow that the last comes nearer to it, and that it is much
more extended than the two others. For there are many occasions, where neither
fear nor interest have any place. And we distinguish often easily enough what
we do, either through Human fear or through absolute Interest, from what we do
by a motive of Charity. But it is not the same of Love, and esteem for Men.
This inclination is so nice, and subtle, and at the same time of such a
latitude, that there is nothing it cannot enter into; and it knows so well how
to trim it self up with the appearances of Charity, that it is almost
impossible to know exquisitly what distinguishes it from Charity. Because
marching in the same steps, and producing the same effects, it defaces with a
mavelous subtilty all the signs, and characters of Self-love from whence it
springs, because it sees very well that it could obtain nothing of what it
pretends, if they were taken notice of. The reason of it is, because nothing
does draw upon us so much the thing called Aversion, as Self-love, and because
it cannot show it self without exciting it. We experience this our selves in
regard of the Self-love of others. We are not able to suffer it so soon as we
discover it, and it is easy for us to judge by that, that they are not more
favorable to ours when they discover it.

It Is this which inclines those who are sensible of the hatred of men, and who
love not to expose themselves thereunto to endeavor to withdraw as much as in
them lies, their Self-love from the sight of others, to disguise and
counterfeit it, never to show it under its natural shape, to imitate the
behavior of those who would be entirely exempt from it, that is to say,
persons animated with the spirit of Charity, and who would not act but through
Charity.

14. This suppression of Self-love, is properly that which makes human
Civility, and shows in what it consists. And it is this which has caused a
learned Man of this Age, to say that Christian virtue destroys and anihilates
Self-love, and that human Civility hides and suppresses it.

Thus this Civility which has been the Idol of the learned Pagans, is nothing
at the bottom, but a Self-love more intelligent, and exact than that of the
generality of the World, which knows how to shun what hurts its designs, and
which tends to its mark, which is the esteem and love of Men by a more straight
and reasonable way, in showing how Self-love does imitate the principal actions
of Charity.

15. It Is no hard matter to comprehend in what manner Charity renders us
humble. For making us love Justice, which is God himself, it makes us hate
injustice, which is contrary to him. Now it is an injustice very visible, that
being as we are full of faults, and guilty of so many sins, we would be
honored of Men, and that we should pretend to deserve their Praises either by
Human qualities, and so consequently vain and frivolous, or bygifts, which we
have received of God, and which do not belong unto us. It is not just that a
sinner be honored, but it is just that he be humbled and brought low. It Is the
eternal Law which ordains it, and Charity consents to this law. Charity loves
it, and by the love which it bears to it, embraces with joy all humiliations
and humblings. Charity makes us hate all that smells of pride and vanity; and
as it condemns these motions when they start up in our hearts, it hinders them
also from appearing without by words and actions, which it reduces thus to an
exact modesty.

16. Yet there is nothing in this, but what Self-love imitates perfectly; For
seeing the Heart of each man turned absolutely toward it self, and naturally
an enemy to the preferring any other: It dares not expose it self to their
thought and malignity.

Whoever praises himself, and sets to sale what he thinks he has that's good,
pretends thereby to bring others to him, and it is almost the same thing, as if
he begged of them to give him praises, and to look upon him with esteem and
love. Now there is hardly any prayer which appears more uncivil, and more
incommodious to Self-love, which men bear themselves, than this. It is angry
and vexed at it, and answers only by scoffing and disdain. Thus those who are
cunning enough to know these tricks and devices, avoid making these kind of
demands, that is to say, they keep themselves generally to a distance from all
that seems vanity, from all that tends to make them be taken notice of, and to
show these advantages; and they endeavor on the contrary to appear not to heed
them, nor to know them in themselves. And that is the modesty Civility is able
to procure.

17. Civility does not only fly these means and base vain glories, and the
declared Commendations which Man gives himself; but knowing that Self-love of
others is extremely subtle in discovering the by-ways which may be taken to
make manifest in us what we desire to show thereby: Civility renounces these
small Crafts, and studies to avoid them. It would force us rather to speak of
our selves directly and publicly, then to make use of these wicked Trucks,
because Civility always fears being surprised therein, and knows that when men
perceive them, they take a great delight to turn and make them ridiculous. Thus
you see there is nothing more simple and humble then these Discourses. Civility
does not Publish nor show it self by any way, and in a word, it has for a
general rule, never to speak of it self, or if it do, it is with more coldness
and indifferency then of others.

18. Those who have heard speak of the War maintained by the two chief Captains
of this Age, have always been ravished with the Civility and Modesty of their
Discourse. No man has ever observed, that the least word on this Subject that
could be suspected of vanity has been spoken by them. They have always been
seen to do Justice to all others, but never to themselves, and one would have
believed, to have heard them make a relation of some Battles wherein they have
had the greatest share, both by their Conduct and Valor that even they were
not there, or if they were, that it was without acting any thing. Let men read
that News which came to Paris after the Battle of Senof, they will find therein
that great Action half deminished. It seems that the Prince of Conde was but as
Spectator therein. He was every where, and it appears he was hardly in any
part; and never was any thing more lessened then what he contributed to the
success of this great Combat. I think that if St. Lewis sent formerly
relations of what he acted in Egypt, they were described like this. So much
resemblance have Holiness and Civility in their outward deeds and tend equally
to hinder that nothing that is vain may appear therein, there being only this
one difference between the one and the other, that holiness is struck with the
injustice of Vanity in relation to God, and Civility is concerned for its
meanness in relation to men.

19. Moreover the fear which Civility has of exciting against it self the
natural aversion all men have for the vanity of another may yet have in this
Conduct a more cunning and delicate sentiment of this Pride, which is born with
man, and which never abandons him. These people which we see so busied with
some affairs wherein they have signalized themselves that they have astonished
all the World, as Cicero did by his Consul-ship make appear thereby that Virtue
is not at all natural to them, and that they had need of great strength to
hoist up their Souls to the condition wherein they are so glad to show
themselves. But there is more Grandeur not to make reflection upon their great
Actions, so that they seem to escape us, and that they Spring so naturally from
the Disposition of the Soul that she is not aware of them. This degree of
Virtue is doubtless much more Heroic, and it is of this which human Civility,
when it is at its height, endeavors, without thinking of it expressly, to give
the Idea; or which it imitates by Cunning and Policy, when it is not perfect,
and proceeds rather from Reason then from Nature.

20. Who could choose but love that well-bred man, of whom a great Wit of this
Age has made this description. Man does not pass in the World, said he, for
being known in Verse, unless he hang but the Sign of a Poet, nor for an Able
man in Mathematics, without that of a Mathematician. But the true Well-bred
men will have no Signs, and hardly put any difference betwixt the Profession of
a Poet and that of an Ambassador. They are called neither Poets nor
Geomitricians, but they Judge of all those. Man does not conjecture it; they
will speak of things which men spoke of when they entered; there is not
perceived in them one quality more then another, barring a necessity of putting
it in use, but then they are mindful of it. Because it equally belongs to this
Caracter, that we say not of them that they speak well when there is no
question of the Language, and that we say of them, That they speak well when
there is a question of it. It Is therefore a false commendation, when one says
of a man when he comes in, That he is skilful in Poetry, and it is an ill Sign
when men have recourse to him, only because he is able to judge of some Verses.
Man is full of business; he loves only those who are able to employ him in it.
He is a good Mathematician, one will say, but I have nothing to do with
Mathematics. He is a man who understands War well, but I will not wage War
with any one. We must therefore have a man who can adapt himself to all our
Affairs.

It is impossible not to love a man thus qualified. But why do we love him?
It Is because he seems to be made for others, and not for himself. He troubles
not our Self-love by an importunate affectation, he pretends not to force us to
praise him in making appear in him what we would not see. If he shows us what
is good in him, it is for us that he shows it. Civility rendering us therefore
sensible of these favorable Judgments and Opinions which it discovers in the
minds of others, by this proceeding forces it self to deserve them in following
it.

21. We may discover by this, wherefore the same actions may be civil in some
Men, and not so in others. This happens for that they are less affected in
some, and because Self-love shows it self less, and testifies less desire to
apply men to it. Let a man, such an one as Mr. Vaugelas, whose profession is to
study Languages, make a Book wherein he observes, both the good, and bad
fashions of speaking those which are in use at Court, and those which smell of
the Country, no man can find fault therewith: It Is a man who makes it his
Trade, and he may have had in that a laudable Consideration to render this
Service to the public. But if it should fall out, for example, that a Priest,
or a Religious Man being angry at fine wit, would make Collections of some
words which were said in the streets, and in places which he ought not to know,
that he would appear full of esteem for Gallantry, and for the Conversation of
Ladies, it could by no means be suffered All the world would become Spiritual
at his cost, and whether through malice, or through an opinion of Religion,
would make a thousand reflections upon the disproportion of some thoughts,
wherein he might busy himself, from the Holiness of his Office and his
Profession. Insomuch that when men take delight in his Book, either because
there would be something that is good therein, or because there would be some
body who might will dealt withal, which is always agreeable, they esteem the
person of the Author less, and find themselves disposed to choose him either
for Friend or Counselor.

22. It is needless to prove that Charity is yet more removed from affectation,
than mere Civility. For loving others but not it self, it has nothing to do
but to follow its natural motions, to act with a perfect Civility. It does it
so much better, by how much it does it more sincerely, and that there is
nothing of counterfeit in it. Whereas this civility of Self-love is for the
most part not so uniform. If civility repress it in one part, Self-love shows
it self sometimes in another, and so leaves some little disgust of it self, to
those who observe it narrowly. But as that happens but against its intention,
it is ashamed being aware of it, or rather perceiving that others did observe
it.

Thus it is always true to say, that when Self-love follows reason exactly in
the search of esteem, and affection of Men, it imitates perfectly Charity, so
that in consulting it upon exterior actions it makes us the same answer that
Charity does, and engages us in the same ways.

23. If for example, one ask Charity, in what disposition we ought to be
concerning the subject of our Faults, she will tell us that we ought extremely
to contemn our selves as to our own understanding, in regard of those we think
we have not; and that the persuasion wherein we ought to be in general of our
blindness in this Point, ought to dispose us more to believe others in this
than our selves; But in respect of faults which we shall be convinced of, there
would be nothing more unjust than to counterfeit, and destroy in some sort the
Light of God it self, by pretending to justify what it condemns; and thus the
least we can do to escape this pride so criminal, is to acknowledge them
sincerely, and to humble our selves before God and Man.

24. Let us now propose the same question to Self-love, and we shall see if it
speak not the same language at the bottom of the Heart, it gives yet the same
counsel. Tho it be hard, it will say, to acknowledge our faults, and desire to
deface them, and blot them out of the memory of Man, as well as out of our own,
it is evident nevertheless that that is impossible. The more we shall strive to
disguise them from others, the more ingenuous they will be to discover them,
and wicked to make them taken notice of. This same desire of Concealing them
will pass in their minds for the greatest of faults, and we shall do nothing in
striving either to dissemble them or to maintain them, but draw hatred and
disdain upon our selves. We must therefore necessarily steer another course. If
we cannot have the glory of being without faults, we must have that of knowing
them, and not being cheats to our selves. Bellum est sua vitia nosse, Let us
take away then from others the pleasure of taking notice of them, in observing
them our selves first, and thereby disarming their wickedness.

It Is upon the like considerations that Civility forms its conduct, and it is
that which carries it to make an open profession of acknowledging sincerely all
its Faults, and not to take it ill that others observe them, and by this means
it gains the reputation of an amiable equity, which makes it judge of it self
clearly, and without passion, which knows how to justify it self, and with
which one may be at quiet, without being obliged outwardly to testify that one
approves, what indeed one approves not.

25. It is easy to be discerned by what has been said, that Charity and
Self-love should be very conform as to the receiving reprehensions and
advertisements, and that some very different consideration, and motives ought
to unite them in the same outward conduct. We know well enough that to which
Charity sways us; For looking upon these Advertisements, as a very great good,
and a favorable means to deliver us from our Faults, Charity receives them not
only with joy, but with greediness and avidity. The bitterness it self which
accompanies them is agreeable to it, as procuring us the satisfaction of
huminity, and weakening Self-love, which Charity esteems as its worst enemy.
Thus it is so far from showing any disgust or sharpness of speech to those who
procure us this good, that it forgets nothing that may testify its
gratefulness; to comfort them in the fear they have of hurting us, to incline
them, to do us sometimes the same favor, and to free them from all doubts
which may make them reserved, and keep them in torment and constraint.

26. In truth Self-love is always inwarly very far removed from this
disposition. It loves not that others take notice of our Faults, and much less
that they admonish us of them. But yet it acts outwardly as Charity does. For
learning by these admonitions which are given us, the bad impression Men have
of us, reason makes Self-love conclude presently, that it must be lessened, or
at least not augmented; and consulting afterward other men's minds to learn how
we ought to guide ours, Self-love easily acknowledges that nothing is a
greater stumbling block than the haughtiness of those, who are not able to
endure to be admonished of any of their Faults, who rebel against Truth and
who could wish that all the World were blind in respect of them, or would
suppress their thoughts, so soon as they are not for their advantage; and on
the contrary nothing is more agreeable to People than to be freed from this
resistance, and to see that they put a stop to their judgments, and to their
light, and thus in some sort they submit themselves to their empire. Self-love
therefore without hesitating takes this last part, and thereby makes us
insinuate our selves so agreeably into the hearts of those who reprove us, that
they love those who humble themselves in that manner much better, what faults
soever they have, than those who having none, have not opportunity to give them
this satisfaction. Because we must observe that our faults are not of
themselves contrary to the Self-love of others, and likewise that the bravest
qualities of themselves, are not pleasing to it. It Is the relation these
faults, and these brave qualities have with them. So that if these faults make
us more humble in respect of them, or if these brave qualities render us more
haughty, they will love us with these faults, and hate us with all those brave
qualities.

27. It is manifest that this conduct aims directly at least at Self-love,
which is to obtain the esteem of the friendship of men. And therefore Human
civility never fails to follow it, and often even does it more exactly than
true Piety, when it is not perfect. Because as Charity is less active than
Self-love, it happens often also that Pious people appear more sensible, and
more delicate than civil wordly Men, when advertised of their faults, which are
observed in their Conduct, or in their labors, because in these occurrences,
not having a very lively Charity, they lack also this Self-love which is a
supplement in regard of outward actions.

28. The conduct which Charity observes toward civil Men, when we are
prepossessed with unjust suspicions, and unreasonable Impressions of them, is
not to reprove them, and show discontent and malice, but to justify them in
testifying that they are not astonished that being Men, they are suspected of
human frailties, and in a word not to complain of these suspicions, but to
labor to cure them; because we ought to look upon them as very dangerous for
those who have them, and that the way to free them from them, is not to reprove
them when they are not persuaded that they are in the wrong, but to show them
gently the falsity of their suspicions to oblige them, by this means to condemn
them their own selves.

29. In truth if we follow on these occasions, the first motives of Self-love,
we shall be very far from this moderation. They will be on the contrary only
passions full of resentments and bitterness. But if we consult Reason, with a
resolution to follow it to arrive at last at last at what we ought, which is to
blot out these suspicions, which are so injurious, and to stablish our
reputation in the minds of those who have received them, it is necessary that
we take the same way. Because all that seems passion and trouble of the mind,
is only capable to increase the bad Impressions men have harbored of us. And
whereas oftentimes there is only the mind which is prepossessed therewith, we
by bitterness carry it into the will it self, and make it endeavor to maintain
the Impressions of the mind. Thus Self-love foreseeing this evil effect, is
reduced, how unwilling soever it may be, to imitate this sweet and moderate
conduct which Charity prescribes.

30. Who would ever believe that Self-love, even when it should have intention
to cry down its enemies, to render them odious, and to make them condemned by
all the world of baseness, and injustice, could not do better to prosper
therein, then to follow the steps of Charity? Yet this happens very often. For
there is nothing for the most part, which makes base and uncivil proceedings
which are used toward us, appear better, than to withstand those by a process
full of civility and moderation. This opposition, which shows the difference of
these two contrary conducts, makes the one and the other more apparent.
Civility appears more lovely on the one side, and baseness more shameful on
the other. And in this manner Self-love has all it pretends, which is, that we
raise our selves, and humble those who have offended us.

31. I remember upon this Subject, that when a certain Book was published, in
which the Author pretended to have gathered together diverse and sundry faults
against the Language, which he thought he had found in some works of Piety,
which passed for well written, it was examined in a Society by a way of
discourse, what those who were concerned therein ought to do on this score;
Each man agreed presently that the remarks of this Author being inconsiderable,
ought not to be proposed against the same Writings, because there was no other
end in it, but that of acquiring the reputation of Writing well; those whom it
attacked, ought not to have the least thought of forming a contest upon so
frivolous an occasion, how much to blame soever this Author might be in some of
his Remarks. But when we came to speak of what they ought to do, we were not of
the same mind. There were some who would maintain, that they ought not to
affirm that they had seen this Book. But the Generality believed that they
ought to take other measures, and that for full answer, they need only correct
honestly and faithfully in the other Editions of those Books, all that this
Author had disallowed therein with any gloss of Justice. The reason which they
allege for it besides the general motive of honoring Truth in every thing,
is, that there was no better way, whereby the Public can do this Author, and
those whom it should have attacked, Justice, than by using them so moderately.
I confess that I was of this opinion, and that I thought there was none more
conform, neither to Charity, which always tends to humble us, nor to Self-love,
which is glad to place in sight the faults of those who have a desire to abase
us. I will also praise it very willingly, if I have occasion to do it, without
any pretense whatsoever of obliging any one to believe that it is an act of
humility, being I acknowledge that it may very easily have another principle.

32. It Is thus that Charity and Civility accord together to make appear
outwardly the same Sentiment, in what regards our good and bad qualities; and
it is not hard to judge thereby that they do the same in what regards others.
We see easily whereto Charity inclines, in respect of the good it observes in
others. As Charity rejoices at it inwardly, it testifies also its joy outwardly
all manner of ways possible, and far from endeavoring to observe it, Charity
uses its power to heighten it and make it esteemed. Other men's good is its
proper good, through the love it bears them, and it stops there more
cheerfully, than at is own, because it fears not therein complacency and vanity.

33. It would seem at first that there could be no reason to hope the like
conduct from Self-love. For it is so far from having this goodness and kindness
for others, that on the contrary it is naturally wicked, jealous, envious, full
of gall and venom. All that puffs up others Incommodes, and vexes it, and one
hardly sees it really favorable to the praises given them, except some profit
may be drawn from thence, and that they make use of it as a step to raise
themselves.

But although one perceive in himself all these motives, nevertheless when one
considers the effect they would make upon the minds of others, if one should
show them publicly, one would immediately conclude to keep them secret. We see
clearly that that would be the way to make ones self looked upon as a common and
public Enemy, and would thereby become the Object of hatred, and the
abomination of all the World. We should not only be odious to those against
whom we would exercise our wickedness, but even to those we would spare, no
body being able to assure himself to receive Justice from people in whom this
evil Platform is found, and every one fearing, with reason, to become the
object of their Jealousy. Civility makes us therefore take justly the contrary
way. It makes us affect to show outwardly an extreme equity to praise
voluntarily what is Praiseworthy, to set a value as great as we can on other
men's good qualities, and not to refuse even to our Enemies our Testimonies of
esteem which they deserve; and by this means we prosper in the Design of making
our selves beloved, we acquire friends, we pacify our Enemies, and we keep a
good Correspondence with all the World.

34. It Is by these considerations that Civility does manifest an extreme
Indulgence for other men's faults, and far from exagerating or divulging them,
does hide and excuse them as much as it can; never contemns any man, explicates
all to the best, is easily satisfied, and affects not to be curious and subtle
in discovering peoples faults who are generally esteemed, avoids rash and
illgrounded suspicions, and had rather, in some sort, be deceived, then give
way to suspicions which are hurtful to its Neighbor. All this tends directly,
at least to self-love. For as we cannot be ignorant but that we have faults, we
hate much more those whom we judge will Scorn us when they shall perceive them,
and we cannot on the contrary but love those from whom we hope for some
support, condescendence and favor.

35. If Charity be patient in Injuries, because it endeavors to assuage the
sharpness of those who hurt us, it does it that we may suffer all sorts of bad
usage joyfully, to satisfy Gods Justice, and persuades us that we deserve yet
worse. Self-love has also a Patience of Interest and Vanity which outwardly
produces the same effects. It hinders us for passing for proud and
presumptuous. It teaches us, That it is good not to vex or provoke people too
much, and thereupon makes us dissemble the Injuries which we receive.

If Charity be kind through a sincere desire of serving others, Self-love will
also that we be so, to rule thereby in their minds, and to enjoy the
inclinations which these good Turns excite therein.

If Charity endeavor to conceal it self when it does good to others, that it
may not attribute any thing to it self, Self-love does as much to enjoy it more
fully, because we hold our selves so much more obliged, by how much more he who
does a good turn does it privately.

If Charity extend its good turns to those from whom nothing is expected, and
even to Enemies, as regarding nothing but their good, and not its own interest:
Self-love does the same, as knowing by how much more good turns do appear
disinteressed and free from all self-seeking; by so much more they obtain a
general affection by a hope they give to all the world of receiving the like.

If Charity be thankful toward the world, because its Gratitude toward God
diffuseth it self over all the instruments which it makes use of to procure us
happiness: Self-love makes us earnestly desire to be so, for fear of disturbing
the happiness of others who expect it, and is troubled when it fails therein.

Lastly, if Charity makes us faithful toward all the World through a sincere
love of Justice, Self-love makes us practice the same Fidelity to obtain men's
assurance.

36. Charity, as the Apostle says, is not ambitious, because those who are so,
have but little esteem for human Honors and temporal Greatness which Ambition
seeks; because they fear them more then they desire them, and find themselves
always happy in the condition wherein God has placed them. We cannot say so
much of human Civility, and if we will judge of it by its Basis or Groundwork,
this Civility is not only subject to Ambition, but is indeed nothing else but a
curious and delicate Ambition, and yet endeavors outwardly to imitate Charity.
For it knows so well how to conceal its ambitious desires, for fear of meeting
with opposition in the self-love of others, which is always on its Guard on
that side, that one would say, it had not any pretense, that it had only a care
for others, and that it had absolutely forgot it self. If it think of raising
it self, it is without trouble and meanness, and it does it so well as if
Fortune seemed always to come and find it it self, without being able to make
any retreat or any advance to obtain it.

37. There are some likewise which self-love pushes further, and to whom it
gives an effective separation from great Fortunes and great Employs, tho
possibly they might arrive thereunto. The satisfaction of a sweet and quiet
life, in which we entertain a great quantity of brave Friendships, and render
service to many persons of quality and worth without Interest or Dependence in
contenting our selves to have got in the world the reputation of a Civil,
Obliging, Disinteressed Man, and a good Friend. This life, I say, has Charms
which are able to make it preferred before all the greatness in the World,
through a wise and discreet Self-love, and which knows how to compare the
advantages and disadvantages of diverse States. This is the Idea which Pomponius
Atticus proposed to himself, and which he followed so happily that being found
amongst many dissenting Parties, who in his time tore in pieces the Republic
of Rome, he was always friend to all, and served them without displeasing any.
We see yet that there are of Atticus's followers or imitators, and it may be
said to their advantage, that if it were permitted or possible to be happy in
this life, they would have found out the secret of it, and that their choice is
infinitely wiser then that of others, who being always desirous to raise
themselves by a boundless ambition, do thereby deprive themselves of two
principal goods of life, which are Security and Repose.

38. Likewise it is easy to see, that as Charity seperates us from the
pleasures of the senses, because it keeps the Soul in order, and permits it to
cleave to God only; Civility ought to do the same, because the subjection to
Corporal pleasures has always something of mean and contemptible, which
debases and disfigures the Idea of us, which self-love desires to imprint in
the minds of others. We have also reason to be distrustful of those who are
governed by their Passions and Pleasures, and to fear from them all sort of
basenesses and injuries. For what assurance can one have that their Passion
will not oversway them when it shall be contrary to their duty toward men,
being we see it sways them so often in what is their Duty to God.

Thus Civility, which will above all conserve the reputation of an inviolable
Fidelity, and of an inflexible firmness in duties, affects to appear free from
this Passion for Pleasures, which gives so just an occasion of distrust.

39. Lastly, not to urge this conformity of Charity and Self-love to a
troublesome rehearsal, I shall content my self to add what I have said of it,
that it is very true that Self-love may imitate all the Actions of Charity, and
insinuate it self often into those wherein it seems it may have the least
share, and which are designed to mortify and to destroy it.

It can sometimes make religious persons Fast, or at least assuage one part of
the trouble of their Fast. The hair Clothes and Discipline are sometimes for
their use, and there is hardly any humiliation which Self-love is not capable
to practice; and although it find not its account in solitude, in silence, and
in secret Austerities, there are perchance certain hidden passages and certain
subterraneous ways, through which it might (may be) find some entrance. In fine
self-love is also capable to make us suffer even death with joy; and to the end
that there may be no certain way to distinguish it from Charity by Martyrdoms,
the Saints do teach us after St. Paul, that there are Martyrs of Vanity as well
as of Charity. Therefore St. Austin having said, That Vanity does imitate so
exactly the works of Charity, that there is almost no difference at all betwixt
their effects, that Charity does nourish the Poor, and that Vanity does so
likewise; that Charity Fasteth, that Vanity can Fast also; that these works do
strike us, but that we cannot distinguish which come from a good and which from
an ill Principle. He adds at last that Charity dies, and brings us at the end
to Martyrdom, and that Vanity dies also and suffers Martyrdom. Videte qualia
opera faciat Superbia, quam similia faciat and prope paria Charitati. Pascit
Esurientem Charitas, Pascit and Superbia, Charitas ut Deus laudetur, Superbia
ut ipsa laudetur. Jejunat Charitas, jejunat and Superbia. Opera videmus, in
operibus non discernimus. Moritur Charitas, Moritur Superbia.

40. But there is this difference betwixt the hard, troublesome and humbling
actions of Virtue, and those which have nothing but what is beautiful without
being troublesome, that when Self-love persuades Men to humility, patience, and
to suffering, it is by a kind of unusualness or disorder. For it is evident, for
example, that the way to attain to our end, which we propose, is not to shut
our selves up in solitude to have no converse with Men, or to have nothing
spoken of but our sins and faults. And thus it is almost impossible that there
be any who embrace this kind of life so contrary to the inclinations of Nature,
and who persevere therein by other motives, than those of Salvation. But it is
not the same with the most part of the actions of Virtue, which may be done in
the world. Self-love obtains its ends better by practicing them. It cannot omit
them without loosing what it aims at: And it must be carried away by some
unreasonable passion against its true Interests, to follow any other road but
this.

41. Thus one may say truly, that absolutely to reform the World, that is to say
to banish all the Vices, and all the gross disorders therein, and to make
Mankind happy even in this life, there needs only instead of Charity, to give
every one a harmless Self-love, which may be able to discen its true Interests,
and to incline thereto by the ways which true Reason shall discover to it. How
corrupt soever this whole Society may be within, and in the sight of God, there
would be nothing without better ordered, more civilly, more just, more
peaceable, more honest, more generous; and what would be more admirable, it is
that not being animated and stirred but by Self-love, Self-love would not appear
at all there, and being absolutely void of Charity, we should see every where
nothing but the form and characters of Charity.

42. Perhaps it would not be amiss, that those who are charged with the
Education of great Persons, should have this engraven in their minds, to the
end that if they should not be able to inspire them with these sentiments of
Charity, which they would gladly do, they should endeavor at least to form
their Self-love, and teach them how the most part of the ways which they take
to content this Self-love are false, ill understood, and contrary to their true
Interests, and how it would be facile for them to take some others, which would
conduct them without trouble to honor and glory, and would get them the
affection, the esteem, and the admiration of all the World. If they should not
prosper by this means to render them useful to themselves, they would at least
make them useful for others, and would put them in a way which would always be
less remote from the way to Heaven, than that which they take, seeing that it
would be only to change the end, and the intention, to render themselves as
agreeable to God by a truly Christian virtue; as they would be to Man by the
splendour of this human Civility to which we would form them.

43. But it would be of little or no moment that these two Principles so
different, the one whereof bears the fruits of Life, the other of Death, should
be confounded in the outward Actions, at least if it were easy for every one
to know distinctly that which makes him do it, to the end that he may be able
to judge thereby of his actions and condition. What is more strange, is, that
many times this mixture and this confusion begins in the heart it self, so that
we cannot distinguish whether it is through Charity or Self-love that we act,
whether it is God or our selves we seek for, whether it is for Heaven or Hell we
labor. This obscurity proceeds from diverse causes; and I will take notice here
of the three principal ones.

44. The first is that these considerations of the judgments of men, and the
motions of their hearts in regard of us which are the rule, the source, and the
object of human Civility, are not always accompanied with formal and express
reflections, and that the motions which they produce are yet more imperceptible
to us. These are often in respect of the mind, only as certain looks, and
certain transitory thoughts by which it is carried, as by stealth toward these
Judgments, which are made of us, and in respect of the heart only as certain
hidden Propensities, which stop it gently on this side; so that we do not make
any express reflection neither on this propensity, nor on the thoughts which
produces it, although that may be the thing which gives the motion to our
outward Actions, and which is the Principle thereof.

45. The second is that it may often happen, that even when we are not removed
in effect but through fear of displeasing men, or through a desire to please
them. We have not absolutely any knowledge, nor any distinct thoughts, neither
of the one nor the other; and that because we act often without a distinct
knowledge, and by a simple custom, which is not guided, unless by confused
thoughts, being forced to look upon certain actions, as able to bring upon us
public infamy, and the hatred of honest men, it forms it self in the mind a
confused Idea thereof, which represents them to us as hateful and odious,
without troubling the mind why. And this Idea suffices to stir up in the heart
a motion of horror, aversion and separation. Now the confused Idea's, and these
motions which follow them, come so near to the true considerations of Charity,
which make it hate the evil actions which they include, that there is hardly
any but God who can discern the difference betwixt them.

46. The third is, that even when we have Charity in the heart, and that it
carries us to objects which are proper for it, nevertheless because cupidity
marches many times the same ways, and tends to the same objects, tho by
different motives, it makes a Hotchpotch in the Mind, and in the heart of these
two considerations and motions, without our knowing certainly which it is that
carries it, and which is the true principle of our Actions. We seek God and the
World at once; the heart is very glad to please the one and the other, and
knows, not whether it is God he relates to the World, or the World to God. This
difference cannot be discovered, but by penetrating a certain Groundplot which
is in the heart, and which is not evidently known but by God alone.

47. Behold what is the ordinary condition of Men in this life, even when they
love God. Self-love acts more grossly in some than others, but it lives and acts
in all to such a degree, and it is seldom that they are able to assure
themselves of any one action in particular, that it is exempt from all
self-inquiring. But tho this state and condition may be for them a great cause
of grief and fear, they may be able nevertheless to find therein some
Consolation, if they dive into the reasons for which God permits them to remain
there, and raises not them to a higher degree of Virtue.

48. It is visible in the first place that the design which God has to conceal
the Kingdom of Heaven, which he came to establish upon Earth, requires that men
of Honesty and uprightness be intermixed outwardly with wicked men, and that
they be not distinguished from them by clear and visible marks. For if the
faithful, whom he animates by his Spirit, and in whom he resides as in his
Temple, were a certain kind of men, separated from others, and as a Nation
apart which the World might distinguish by actions which could not be met with
in others, they would all be public, continual and subsisting miracles, which
would destroy the state of Faith, by which God will save the World. The wicked
who would see themselves in an impossibility of imitating them, would thereby
clearly know, that Nature cannot attain to the state of virtuous Men. Therefore
there must be some actions purely Human, which do so much resemble supernatural
and divine Actions, that the distinction cannot be perceived. And as these
well-meaning men do not commit any crimes, and thus cannot be thereby
intermixed together with the wicked; It must necessarily follow, that the
wicked can imitate their virtuous Actions, and do some which may be so like
outwardly; that they cannot be discovered from the others.

49. But it is not only an effect of Gods Justice to withdraw from the sight of
wicked men the treasures of Grace, which he gives to the Just. This is one of
his Mercies also toward the Just themselves. It is good for them not to know
themselves, nor to see their own proper Justice. The sight would be capable to
overwhelm them. Man is so weak and feeble even in his force, that he is not
able to undergo the weight of it. And by a strange disorder which has its
source in the corruption of the Heart, although its happiness consists in the
possession of Virtue, and its misfortune in being full of faults, it is
therefore more dangerous for him to know his virtues than his faults. The
knowledge of humility renders him proud, and that of his pride humble. He is
strong and powerful when he knows himself weak, and weak when he thinks he is
strong. Thus this obscurity which impedes and hinders him from distinguishing
clearly whether he acts by Charity, or by Self-love, is so far from hurting,
that it is comfortable to him. This obscurity does not take away Virtues from
him, but hinders him from loosing them, by keeping him always in humility and
fear, and making him mistrust all his Works, and to rely only on Gods Mercy.

50. This is the great profit of this outward resemblance of the actions of
Self-love, with those of Charity. But we may yet take notice of some others
which are very material. It happens oftentimes that Charity is weak in certain
Souls, and in this condition of weakness Charity would be easily extirpated by
these violent tentations, if God did not permit that these tentations were not
enervated, and as it were counterpoised by certain human motives, which stop
the violence of it, and give means to the Soul to follow the instinct of Grace.
The fear of men's judgments is one of these motives, and there is hardly any of
them which make more impression upon the Mind. Fear alone is not sufficient for
Charity to surmount temptations in a Christian way, seeing that this fear
springs only from vanity, but it suspends their force, and if it be found that
the Soul has some spark of true Charity, it puts her in a condition of
following it; and therefore we see that the Holy Legislators of Religious
Orders have not been negligent in these human means, and that they have fixed
to certain faults, penances, which were dreadful before men, to the end that
the fear of this Human confusion may render the Religious more diligent in
avoiding them. It Is not that they would pretend to make them do them by this
sole motive, but their intention has been, that they should make use thereof
to fortify themselves against negligence, and that this Human fear might serve
as arms to Charity, the better by this means to resist the inclination of
Nature.

51. It is not then unprofitable for Men in the state of weakness, wherein they
are to be far removed from vices, not only by Charity, but also by this kind of
Self-love which is called Civility, to the end that in the feebleness of
charity Civility may be able to uphold the Mind, and hinder it from falling
into dangerous excesses. And it is this which makes us see often strange
Revolutions in those, who being little sensible of men's judgments, and not
thinking of pleasing or displeasing them are sometimes touched with some small
motions of Piety. Because when it happens that they want these motions, not
having then curb enough to stop them, they let themselves be hurried away to
all sorts of Extravagancies. Thus when one relies upon Men, it is good to
consider if besides Conscience which keeps them from evil, they have yet a
certain Civility, which makes them apprehend doing things which may be
condemned by wise and prudent Persons, there being hardly any spirits more
dangerous, than those who are capable of maintaining an unreasonable and
extravagant conduct against the Public Judgment, and of placing themselves
without reason above the reproach of those who know them.

52. Is it not a great and considerable advantage to Civil men to be able to
conceal themselves from men by the means of this obscurity which hinders one
from discerning true Piety, from Self-love, and which makes actions of Charity
pass in the mind of the World for the effects of pure Civility? For how
dangerous would it be for them, if all their good actions were taken notice of,
and that they were recompensed for them out of hand by praises which they would
bring them? It would be the means to oblige them to separate themselves
entirely from the society of Men; whereas by the favor of this confusion they
have some more liberty to treat with the World, to follow on all occasions the
motions of their Charity, in hopes that they will be taken only as simple and
mere Civilities. In a word one may say, that as Civility is very glad to pass
for Charity, and that it does all it can to borrow its form and shape, and its
characters; Charity on the contrary is glad that it may be taken for Civility,
and although it does not contribute directly to establish this Impression, yet it
does nothing to destroy it, as well because it knows not absolutely that it is
not something of it, as because that it is advantageous to Self-love that we
believe it.

53. Lastly, is not this a motive powerful enough to stir us up to the practice
of Virtues, to say to ones self, I should be very unfortunate to wander and
stray out of the way whereto Charity and Self-interest equally inclines me, and
to render my self, in forsaking them, equally odious to God and man. Is not
this a means to praise God, that he has been pleased to forbid us the most
part of Disorders, as contrary to the good of men even in this life, and ought
to be avoided for the same motive of human interest? In fine is not this a
means to understand better the strange corruption of nature and the violence of
our passions, to see that they make us forget not only what we owe to God, but
also what we owe to our selves, and render us unfortunate Both in this World
and in the other? Because if there be less glory and merit in serving God, when
it is for our Interest, there is, without doubt, more disorder and confusion
not to serve him, when we deprive our selves at the same time of what Interest
it self causes us to desire, and diligently to seek for, as being our own
proper advantage.

The Third Treatise.
Of the several means by which God is Tempted.
1.THere are certain Duties which all Christians know to a certain degree, and
which are very much unknown to them beyond this degree, which happens
ordinarily, that not penetrating into the true Principles of them, they are not
able to comprehend their extent. The prohibition that God has made us of
Tempting him is properly of this kind. Few persons are ignorant that God
thereby orders us not to be idle when we have in our power human means which we
can employ. But as we know not why God forbids us to neglect these human means,
we rest there, and we heed by so much the less to instruct our selves in this
Precept, by how much it seems that there is nothing more rare than to tempt God
in this manner; human understanding being infinitely more inclined to fix it
self too much to human means, through a want of Confidence in God, then to
neglect them through an Excess of Trust. It Is this which gives a belief that it
would not be unprofitable to explicate at large what it is to tempt God, and to
declare the Grounds and Principles of the Prohibition which God makes us
thereof.

2. God is not only Soveraignly powerful, he is also Soveraignly Wise in his
Conduct. As being powerful he is the chief Original of all things, whether in
the corporal and visible World, or in the invisible or Spiritual World. As
being wise he operates all things by certain means, and in a certain order,
which is not less essential to his Providence than the Power it self by which
he operates them.

3. The pride and disorder of Men tend equally to withdraw them from the Power
and Wisdom of God; as solid Piety tends to humble them more and more to the one
and the other. To withdraw themselves from this Power, some have denied
absolutely the Providence, and the Operation of God, even in natural things,
like the Epicureans. Others have denied it in Spiritual things, and in the
actions of our Souls, which lead us to Eternal Happiness or misery, like the
Pelagians. And others not daring to go to this excess of Impiety, have not
stuck to deny it him in the distinction of good Men and bad, in the Elect and
Reprobate, like the Semipelagians.

4. But the manner how Men withdraw themselves from the Wisdom of God, being no
less criminal, is much more unknown. And it is this which they call tempting of
God which is a sin few people comprehend.

It depends in the withdrawing themselves from the order of God, and pretending
to make it act according to our fantasy, in neglecting the consequence of the
means, to which he fixes ordinarily the effects of his Divine Power. And to
conceive in what manner we fall thereinto, as to what regards the life of the
Soul, it is but to consider how we may fall thereinto, as to what regards the
life of the body.

5. It is manifest, that it is God who maintains our being and our Life; and
that he is not less properly the cause thereof, than if he made it subsist by a
visible Miracle, independent of all exterior means. We maintain it by food! But
who is it that produces this food? It was not, says St. Augustine, neither my
Mother, nor my Nurses, who replenished their breasts for me with milk which
they gave me, but it was thee, O Lord: It was only thee, who gave me by their
help the nourishment I had need of according to the natural Order which thou
have established, and according to the riches of thy Bounty and Providence, who
diffusest thy Cares even into the most secret Principles, and the most hidden
causes of the subsistence of thy Creatures. Thou art the Author of all Good, O
my God, and I owe thee all the Conservation of my life.

6. Whether he make us live after this manner, or after an extraordinary and
miraculous manner, it is always he who acts and maintains us. And thus we are
obliged to acknowledge his All-powerfull Hand and Operation, whether he conceal
or disclose it. But yet there is this difference betwixt these two ways,
whereby he acts upon the Souls and bodies. That the first is the common way by
which he guides his Creatures, and the other an extraordinary way whereof he
seldom makes use, and which has no certain rules. It Is in the first that the
order of Providence, which he permits men to know, consists; and the second
includes only certain effects and causes which of our selves we can never
foresee, because the counsels according to which God produces them at one
time, and does not produce them at another, are too sublime for the wit of man.

7. His Wisdom being therefore debased to hide ordinarily his divine Operation
by human means, it is just that men should humble themselves by these means,
and it is a great pride in them to neglect them, and to pretend to constrain
God to act in an extraordinary manner, of which he has not made us capable of
penetrating to the bottom. It Is this which is properly called tempting God, as
Jesus Christ teaches us in the Gospel. For the Devil urging him to cast
himself from the top of the Temple to the bottom, in alleging to him that it is
written; that God has commanded his Angels to uphold the Just, and to hinder
them from hurting themselves against the stones, Jesus Christ resisted him,
telling him, that it is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
supposing that it would be tempting God, to pretend that he ought to cause his
Angels to uphold a Just Man, who should expose himself rashly to this danger in
leaving the common way which consists in avoiding it.

8. St. Austin grounded this Maxim of Christian Morality upon the Example of
Jesus Christ and St. Paul; Aug. l. 22. contr. Faust. c. 36
Holy Doctrine teaches us, says he, that when we are able to employ these
human means, it is to tempt God to neglect them; the Redeemer wanted not power
to secure his Disciples by miracles, and yet he ordered them that if they were
persecuted in one City, to fly to another, and he has been willing also to
show them the example of this Conduct in his own Person. For although he was
Master absolutely of his life, and that no man could take it away without his
consent, he has not omitted in his Infancy to fly death by flight, in causing
his Parents to carry him into Egypt. The Gospel also observes that once he
would not go publicly to the Feast of Easter, although at other times he had
spoken to the Jews without hiding himself, even when they were the most in
wrath against him, and heard what he said to them with more hatred, because
they were not able to lay hands upon him, his time not being come. It Is not
that that time could force him to die, but it is because he had chosen it
willingly to suffer the Jews to take away his life. Thus he has shown the
power of a God, when instructing and reproving his enemies publicly, he did
not permit their rage to have any power over him; but in flying and hiding
himself he has instructed the weakness of Man not to tempt God in neglecting
to do what he was able to guard himself from the mischiefs which he ought to
avoid. The Apostle St. Paul did not despair of Gods Help, nor had not lost
Faith, when he caused himself to be let down in a Basket from the top of the
walls of Damascus, to free himself from falling into the hands of his enemies,
and his flight did not denote that his Faith was void, but only that he would
not tempt God, as he should have done, in omitting this means of saving himself.

9. It Is yet by the same Principles, and by the same examples that this Holy
Doctor does confute, in the Book he writ of the Labor of Religions, the vain
imaginations of certain Affrican Monks who would not labor, because it is said
in the Gospel, that God does nourish the fowls of the air, although they neither
sow nor reap, in establishing against them this admirable Rule which forbids
men to tempt God; and at the same time teaches them not to be less unmindfull
of him, when he nourishes them by their labor, then if he procured them their
food without contributing to it at all on their part. If there happen, says
he, to us infirmities and troubles, which hinder us from laboring, we ought to
hope that God will feed us as he does the fowls in the air, and clothe us as he
clothes the Lillies, neither the fowls nor lillies contributing any any thing
thereunto. But being in a condition to labor, we ought not to tempt God by
neglecting to do it; being the power of doing it is a gift of God, so that in
procuring by this means what is necessary to keep us alive; it is alwas from God
we receive it, because it is from him we receive the power of laboring for our
living.

10. Thus it would be to tempt God to refuse what is necessary to keep us
alive, under pretense that God can keep us alive without the help of food. A
Governor would tempt God if he should not make preparation to defend the place
he has Command of, against the enemy; under pretense that it is written; If
God defend not the City, the Guard watches in vain. For although he can conserve
it in effect, as he did Jerusalem again the Army of Sennacherib; yet the
ordinary way whereby he saved the Cities, was to inspire the Captains with
vigilance, and the Soldiers with courage. And generally it may be said, that
all dull and lazy People in some sort tempt God; because they neglect the means
by which Gods Grace and Assistance is obtained.

11. Nor is there any but God who knows all the reasons why he conceals his
operations under certain causes, which appear all Natural. We know only some of
them. By this means he withdraws men from idleness, he obliges them to
vigilance and labor, he employs and exercises them, he punishes them by these
painful and laborious employments, he makes them set a great value on those
things which cost them most pains. But it may be said that one of his principal
designs, is, to hide himself, and to make his conduct unknown to those who are
unworthy to know it.

12. If he did always act after a miraculous manner, we should be as it were
forced to acknowledge him in every thing, and this evidence would not be
conform neither to his Justice nor Mercy: He is by his Justice to suffer the
wicked to continue in the dark, which inclines and makes them doubt of his
Providence, and of his Being, and he is by his Mercy to keep his Chosen
privately from vanity by this wholesome obscurity.

The life of Faith which is the life of the Just in this world, consisting then
in serving God without seeing him in a sensible manner, it is evident that
continual miracles would destroy this state absolutely.

Thus it is necessary that God act on one part, and on the other that we do not
know his action sensibly, he must hide himself under a certain means, which
would appear as it were natural; and which being always exposed to view, should
not stir up their admiration, that it might only be discovered by those whose
eyes he should open by a Light which he gives to whom he shall think fit.

13. But if it were necessary that God should conceal himself in this manner in
the Order of Nature, and in the outward effects he produces on the body, it
were not less necessary that he should conceal himself in his inward Operations
upon the Soul; because the evidence of the Divine Operation in these kind of
actions, withdraws not the Soul less from the state of Faith, by which he
desires that she should work out her Salvation in this life. And therefore he
gives not ordinarily his greatest Graces, but by a consequent of means which
appear quite Human and ordinary, and which seem humanly proportioned to the end
for which they are ordained.

He wills us to desire Virtues, to labor to acquire them, to seek out means to
practice them, to separate our selves from things which may carry us to sin.
It Is he who breathes these desires into us, who operates in us these labors
and pains, and who makes us lop off these impediments. It would be facile for
him to give us Virtue without this consequent means, but in giving them us in
this order, and by these means he hides himself from us, and conserves us in
humility.

14. In the same manner he might advertise us every moment what we have to do;
but if he did in this manner it would be a Conduct visibly miraculous. He wills
us then that we foresee our actions and our words, that we consider them before
him, that we may govern them according to his Laws; and that we may employ all
the care we possibly can to acknowledge what he wills us, and requires of us in
each rencounter. He himself is the Author of these preparations, of this
Enquiry, of this Care; and he makes use of them, as an ordinary means to
communicate to us the Wisdom which we have need of for our Conduct.

15. It Is true that Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, that they ought not to
be troubled for what they shall say to Kings and Princes when they shall force
them to appear before them, because it shall be given to them even at the hour
it self what they ought to answer them. But Jesus Christ's design in this
admonition was only to exclude the foreseeings and the reflections of despair
and Self-love: And he would rather dispose them not to be astonished, when they
are obliged to speak to Kings, being unprepared, then to forbid them to prepare
themselves for it. Likewise when Jesus Christ forbad his Disciples to be
troubled at the want of food and clothes, he did not forbid them according to
the Fathers, reasonable care and precautions, nor obliged them to expect that
God should procure them the one and the other by extraordinary ways; he only
commanded them to banish inquietudes and distrusts from their hearts, which are
hurtful to his Providence, and to his Bounty and Goodness, which hinder them
from seeking the Kingdom of God before all other things.

16. Thus there be often apparent contrarieties in Christian Truths, when we
only look upon them with a superficial sight which disappears and vanishes,
when penetrated to the bottom.

We may believe, for example, to follow only the first Light which springs from
an imperfect knowledge of Truth, that Christian Life being a Supernatural Life,
and which is above all human strength, we ought not rather to choose one kind
of life more than another, nor to trouble our selves to avoid the occasions of
sinning. We can do all with God, one will say, but we can do nothing without
his help. Thus with the aid and help of God I can continue immovable in the
most dangerous occasions, and without this aid I cannot uphold my self in the
most sure retreats.

But those who speak in this manner, comprehend not the secret of the Conduct
of Grace. It Is true, God is able to boy us up in the greatest perils; and he
does it sometimes when it is he himself who ingages us therein; but it is but
seldom that he gives his Grace in so conspicuous a manner. Thus to make us
resist temptations, he inspires into us the care and means to avoid them. This
is the ordinary way, and whoever neglects it has no right to pretend that God
upholds him after another manner.

17. If one were ordinarily as recollected in business, as in quiet and repose;
If one sunk down oftentimes no more in temptations living in the occasions of
sin, than in the way of avoiding them; If one contracted no more spots in
trading with the World, than by living a retired life; If great Employments
swayed us not more to vanity, that mean and base employments; it would
undoubtedly be a kind of visible miracle, God acts in this sort when he
pleases, for some chosen Souls. But as he will not that his Conduct over us,
appear so visibly miraculous, he does it not very often, and he obliges us
thereby to reduce our selves to the ordinary way, and to prefer as much as we
can repose before action, a retired life before great Employs; And lastly, the
flying all occasions, before a confidence which leads us to expose our selves
thereto. Not that it not as facile for God to save as well in one manner as
another, but he has taught us that ordinarily he saves us in the second
manner, because he is there more private and less known; and by that means he
obliges us to reduce our selves thereunto.

18. It Is upon this method of Grace, and this consequence of means under which
God hides his Supernatural Operations, that all the Rules, and all the
Spiritual Counsels are grounded, which the Saints inspired by God, have given
to those whom they have conducted in these means.

These great Saints are not ignorant that it is from him all Virtues must be
expected, and that he is the cause of all the good actions Christians perform.
They were persuaded that he is the Master of men's Hearts, and that he operates
in them what he will by an Invincible and an All-powerfull force. Nevertheless
they prescribe Rules and practices, as Philosophers might do, who would pretend
to obtain Virtue by their own proper force. They will have us to keep our minds
always busied about holy thoughts; that we apply our selves without
intermission to the reading, and to the studying the Word of God; that we live
as it were separate from the World; that we reduce our bodies into bondage by
labor and mortification; that we avoid all that may weaken us, or be an
occasion of our fall; that we make a continual trial upon our selves to resist
our passions; that we lead a life uniform, orderly, and not idle, passing by an
infinite number of actions prescribed us, as more conform to our condition and
to our duty. It Is not that they did not know perfectly, that God is able to
bestow on us his greatest Graces without making us pass through these
exercises, but they knew at the same time that the common order of his
Providence is, not to grant us them, but persuant to these exercises, and by
these exercises themselves; and thus he grants in the first place to Souls the
Grace to practice them, to make them afterward to arrive to the Virtues
whereunto he desires to raise them, being the Author as well of the actions
which he makes them perform to acquire these Virtues, as of Virtues which they
acquire by these actions.

19. Nor is there any thing more easy to God then to make us know from time to
time our faults, by the infusion of a Light which will place them at once
before our eyes. He might likewise correct us for them in giving us contrary
Virtues, without our being obliged to be troubled continually at the sight of
our Miseries. But the Saints who know the ways which God makes use of generally
to cleanse Souls, forget not to recommend to us this diligent examination and
care of our Souls, as one of the chief Duties of Piety, which ought not to end
but with our life. Brethren, says St. Augustine, in expecting the coming of
this happy day, Hom. 15.
wherein we shall be joined with the Angels of Heaven, to Praise God for all
Eternity; In expecting till we be arrived at this ineffable joy which we hope
for, let us apply our selves as much as we can to the Practice of good Works;
let us daily examine our Consciences, and carefully look that there be nothing
broken and torn in the Spiritual Robes of our Souls, that we have not received
some spots through Intemperance, that we have not burnt them through Choler,
nor divided them through Envy, that we have not tarnished their Luster through
Avarice. Let us make have to Cure these Wounds of our Souls, whilst we have
yet the Power with the and of Grace.

20. The great St. Gregory, whom God has given particularly to his Church, to
instruct her with Rules of a spiritual life, recommends nothing so much in his
Morals as this Vigilance and Care of our selves, and this diligent examination
of good and bad actions. We must, says he, purify the Actions even of Virtue,
Greg. Mor. l. 1. c. 17 and 18.
by an exact discussion, for fear of taking bad for good, and what is imperfect
and defective for very perfect. It Is that which is hinted to us by the
Sacrifice which Job Offered for each of his Children. For it is Offering a
Sacrifice to God for each of his Children to Offer him prayers for each Act of
Virtue; for fear that Wisdom should puff him up, that Intelligence should make
him stray, that Prudence should puzle and confound him, that Force should make
him presumptuous. And because Holocaust is a Sacrifice which is absolutely
consumed, it is necessary that our Soul be burnt by the fire of Compunction, and
that she consume in this fire all that she has of impure in her thoughts. But
no man is able to do it, if he be not careful to examine all his inward motions,
before be proceed to Actions. This Saint says yet, Ibid. c. 19.
We must bruise Perfumes, that is to say consider apart all that passes in the
Soul, and reduce it as it were into dust by this examination. We must take off
the skin of the Victim, and cut it into bits, that is to say we must take from
our Actions this outward Surface, which makes them appear to us virtuous, that
we may see even to the bottom of them.

This instruction is often repeated in St. Gregory's Works, that one may say
that it is the principal Foundation of his spiritual Conduct, and far from
exempting the Just more advanced in this Practice, he on the contrary places
their advancement in the increasing this Care and Vigilance, and in this
attention upon themselves.

21. Saint Barnard has writ four Books to bring Souls to this exercise of
examining their Actions and Conduct before God; and he makes it the chief Duty
of a Christian life; but to show in a word the Idea he had of true Piety, he
says, That it is to apply ones self to consider what one is. Quid est Pietas?
Vacare Considerationi; and that this Consideration consists in foreseeing ones
actions to regulate them before God, to correct ones faults, and to think what
is ones Duty. And it is remarkable that this Saint gives not these instructions
to a Novice, but to a great Pope, whom he ought to imagine in a state of
Perfection, having been raised to this first dignity of the Church for his
eminent Virtues.

22. When the Philosophers, who supposed that Virtue has no other Source but
Nature, prescribed Rules to attain it, they prescribed no other then these
above. They recommended to us, like these Saints, this examination, and this
continual care and vigilance over our actions, as may be seen in the Verses
attributed to Pythagoras, and in several places of Seneca. Did not St.
Augustine, St. Gregory, and St. Barnard know that Virtue is a pure effect of
the mercy of God, and not of our endeavors and reflections? Doubtless they
knew it, seeing that they taught it in so many places of their Books; but
likewise they knew that God did not give it ordinarily to men, but by the
practice of certain means and exercises, to which he applies them by his Grace.
And thus the principal care of those who have the Charge of Souls is to put
them in the way of practicing these means, by which they may obtain God's
Grace, and that it is tempting him to act otherways, and to desire that he may
grant us them by some other way then that which his Wisdom has chosen, and
which he has given us to understand by the example of all the Saints.

23. Wherefore do men believe that the Fathers have testified so much doubt of
those who do not think of being converted, except at the hour of death? Is it
because it is not as easy for God to touch sinners by his Grace at the last
moment as at another time; or that that of death is excluded from the general
Promise, which God has made to Men to receive them into his Grace if they be
Converted sincerely? Without doubt it is nothing of that, God is always equally
powerful, and the bosom of his Mercy is always equally open to converted
Sinners. But it is because the Fathers have thought that these Conversions were
not generally speaking sincere, and that they were rather an effect of the
state wherein they found themselves, than an alteration of the heart. And the
reason of it is, that in the common way the Heart does not change thus all at
once the object and the end. Outward Actions may be changed easily in an
instant; but Love which holds the principal place of the Heart scarcely changes
in an instant. It must, ordinarily speaking, be discouraged by little and
little, and that there be another to take its place by diverse progresses. It Is
thus that Human passions are changed, and God who wills that the Operations of
his Grace be not sensibly distinguished from those of Nature, follows commonly
the same method. He begins to shake the Heart through fear, before he touch it
with his Love, and he often touches it a long time by beginnings of Love,
before he makes himself master of it by a ruling Love, which turns the heart
toward him as toward its last end, and which frees and delivers it from the
bondage of the love of Creatures. Thus as the Conversion of dying sinners
cannot pass through these degrees, it must be miraculous to be true. The Church
despairs not of this Miracle, which is the reason why she grants the Sacraments
to dying People: But she fears mightily that these Sentiments which appear in
sinners in this state, are only those light beginnings either of the Fear or of
the Love of God, which are not sufficient for a true and hearty Conversion. And
it is this which obliges sinners not only to labor, but also to make have to
labor seriously for their Salvation; that their love may have time to
increase, and to arrive unto a condition that one may be able to say they are
truly Converted. To act otherways is to tempt God, nay, and to tempt him after
a most dangerous manner, in willing him to do a Miracle in the Order of his
Grace, to save us. And in this fashion all those who expect to be Converted to
God at their death, besides their other sins, do yet commit that of tempting
God, which often causes the very utmost of it.

24. Spiritual Riches are all gratis as from God, and yet it is written; That
the hands of those who labor strongly heap up Riches. Manus fortium divities
parat. And the Scripture attributes on the contrary Spiritual poverty to the
want of this Labor. Egestatem operata est manus remissa, that is to say, that
negligence and sloth cause the poverty, and the misery of Souls; so great a
care has God to hide the works of his Grace under the resemblance of those of
Nature.

25. Prayer is doubtless that of all Christian actions wherein the need of
Grace appears most. Therefore the Spirit of God is called by a particular
Title, the Spirit of Prayers, Spiritus Precum. And it is said of him, that he
prays by unspeakable sighs. It would seem then that this so Divine exercise
should need neither preparation nor rules, and that it had nothing to do, but
to expect the Inspiration of Grace. And yet the Wise man advises us expressly,
that we must prepare the Soul before Prayer, for fear of being like those who
tempt God; Ante Orationem praepara Animam tuam, and noli esse quasi homo, qui
tentat Deum: Showing thus, that all those who pray being unprepared, fall into
the sin of tempting God, and that one of the principal causes of the
Lukewarmness in our Prayers, is the little care we have to prepare our selves
thereunto, by the means prescribed to us by Scripture, which consists in
withdrawing our hearts, and minds from wandering and vain amusements, that we
may find them again when they must be presented to God in Prayer, being
impossible that the heart does not run after its Treasure, and busy it self
with the objects it possesses.

26. It Is thus that truth unites what appears contrary to those who know it but
imperfectly. All depends on God, therefore we must labor, say certain
Heretics, we must not labor. Therefore Virtue depends not on Grace, say the
Pelagians. But the Catholic Doctrine consists in uniting these Truths, and
casting away the false conclusions. We must labor says this Doctrine, and yet
all depends on God. Labor is an effect of Grace, and the ordinary means to
obtain Grace, to think that labor and virtues are not the Gifts of God, is a
Pelagian presumption. To slight the means God makes use of generally to
communicate his Grace to Men, is to tempt God in subverting the order of his
Wisdom. Thus Piety consists in practicing these means, and acknowledging that
it is God who makes us practice them.

27. I know well that human Understanding, which is dazzled by the splendidness
of Divine Truths, and which is puzzled with its vain reasonings, may yet find
difficulty in this alliance of Labor and Grace, and in supposing with St.
Austin and St. Thomas, that what power one may have to do acts of Piety by
other Graces, they are never done effectually, unless God determine the will by
efficacious Grace. He is easily inclined to conclude that we need only continue
in repose, until we perceive these efficacious motions, which make us practice
them; that when we shall perceive them we shall not fail to labor, being that
Grace will apply us thereto by a Virtue all powerful, and not having them, it
is certain that we shall practice them only in an unprofitable manner.

It Is an objection which comes easily into the minds of those who follow their
own reasoning in these matters, which regard the Conduct of God upon Souls. The
Fathers who were not ignorant thereof have answered thereto in diverse solid
ways, by showing after what manner it may be truly said, that it is always in
man's Power to satisfy the duties of Christian Piety, and that it is their fault
if they do not accomplish them.

28. But as it is not convenient to answer thereunto in a Theological way, it
is enough to show that it has nothing of Solidity, even according to human
reason, and that the necessity we have of efficacious Grace to Practice
Christian Virtues, may well serve to humble men, and to keep them in a state of
fear and trembling; but that it can never justly carry them neither to
Idleness, to Trouble, nor despair, because we have always by nature it self a
means which suffices to keep our minds in quiet, and to banish away trouble
and inquietude. The reason is, that although to labor according to God, to resist
our faults like Christians, to Pray, and to practice good Works by the spirit
of true Charity, we have need of efficacious and supernatural Grace. It is
nevertheless certain that each of these actions in particular may be done
sometimes without Grace, by a motive of Self-love and human Respect, and by a
fear purely servile. Now though there be an infinite difference betwixt
Self-love and the love of God, nevertheless the motives and the actions which
spring from these two principles so different are sometimes so like, and we
have so little light to penetrate to the bottom of our hearts, that we do not
distinguish with certainty by what Principle we act, and whether through
Covetousness or through Charity. We may well say with St. Paul, That we do not
think our selves guilty of any thing, but we ought to join with him, that for
all that we are not Justified, and that we cannot Judge our selves, because we
do not know our selves perfectly.

We have therefore always a principle in us to accomplish what there is of
outward show in these exercises of a Christian life. And as we are not able to
know certainly when we have efficacious Grace, except it be by a human
Principle that we act, likewise we cannot always know when we act by a
Principle of human Interest, Grace not being the principle of our Action. We
may take Charity for Self-love, and Self-love for Charity, and in this
obscurity Reason obliges us to take a resolution to do always what is
Commanded, leaving to God the determination of the Principle which makes us act.

It Is not that our endeavor to purify our selves is not requisite, as much as
is possible from all self-love, and from all Interest; but this desire does not
assure us that we are exempt. For one may desire through Self-love to be freed
from Self-love; as one may wish for Humility through Pride. It makes it self an
infinite Circle of reflections upon reflections on those actions of the Soul,
and there is always in us a certain bottom and Root which remains unknown to us
our whole life time.

It Is the State wherein God wills that men live in this World. We are condemned
to these obsourities by his Justice, and his Mercy renders them advantageous to
us, when it causes us to make use of it to become more humble. And thus it is
manifest that these Obscurities being unavoidable on the one part, and on the
other useful, what we have to do, is to rest in quiet, and to adone in Peace
the Goodness of God who ordains them for our good, and to act nevertheless the
most sincerely, and the most disinteressedly that possibly we can, which is
prescribed us by his Laws, in expecting the Judgment he will lay upon us in the
other life in making us know the bottom of our hearts, which we shall never
know clearly in this.

The which suffices at least to procure us a human peace, which is not easily
distinguished from the Peace of God, and which is always worth more then
trouble which overwhelms the Soul, and reduces her to Idlenese and Despair.

29. This reason ought to make us: prefer the practice of all the exercises of
a Christian life, before a soft, negligent, and slothful life, because it is
certain, that those who do not practice them are in a wrong way, and that few
of those who pass their lives in disorder will be saved, seeing that it cannot
be, unless God Convert them by an extraordinary Mercy, which is very rare in
the order of Grace it self.

On the contrary those who practice these holy exercises, are all in some sort
in the way of Peace, they are in the company of those who go to Heaven, and
have also this comfort, That there are very few of those who shall practice
them a long time, who arrive not at happiness; perseverance in an orderly life
being the most certain mark of Charity, because Cupidity is Wavering of it
self, and continues not long in the persuance of one and the same design.

30. Thus the knowledge of the need and want of efficacious Grace, to act like
a Christian, does indeed never puzle those who hearken to and follow Reason;
because they always see their way. They know they must pray to God without
intermission, mortify continually their Passions, always keep a Guard upon
themselves, strive even to Death for Victory, never to be tired with practicing
good Works, and to be ruled in all things. They know that the incertainty
wherein they are, whether it be Grace or Self-love which moves them to act,
ought never to hinder them from acting. Perform, perform these thing, says St.
Augustine, through fear of Punishment, Aug. Ser. 13. de Verb. Ap.
if ye cannot do them for the love of Justice; that is to say for, Charity.
They ought then to practice them always: It Is what is certain and indubitable,
and in practicing them they ought not to judge that they act only by
covetuousness and interest, seeing that their hearts are unknown to them, and
that they ought not to judge rashly of themselves, no more then of others.

31. In a word we must Pray, Labor. and live in quiet even to Death, in
abandoning our selves to God, and saying to him with the Prophet, In manibus
tuis Sorts meae. My Lot is in thy hands, both for this life and the life to
come, for the present, and for Eternity. Marching in this sort in the ways of
God with a persevering Fidelity, if we never have absolutely a certainty that
the holy Ghost dwells in us, and that it is he who causes us to act, we shall
not forbear nevertheless to have thereof a just confidence, and this confidence
increasing more and more according a we shall advance in Virtue, will on^^
leave us so much fear as is necessary to resist the Tentation of Presumption
and Pride.

32. There are yet many other ways of tempting God besides those we have set
down. For as this sin consists it withdrawing our selves from the wisdom of
God, and in obliging us to accontrary to the ordinary rules of his Prudence,
whether in the order of Nature, or in that of Grace, we may tempt God in as
many fashions as we can dispense with these rules, in hopes that God will act
toward us in an extraordinary manner.

For Example, it is tempting God to engage our selves in Charges of the Church
without meet and convenient Vocation, slattering our selves with the hopes that
God will rectify our entrance, and will not forbear to grant us the necessary
Graces to acquit our selves of the Charge which we have rashly undertaken.
Because the ordinary way to obtain necessary Graces for this employ, is to
enter thereupon by the door of holy Vocation; and if God repair this fault in
some in making them enter again as it were anew into the Charge which they have
usurped, it is an extraordinary favor which no man can promise himself without
rashness and tempting God.

33. It is the very same with all other engagements in the several conditions
of this life. We tempt God when we enter into them without a reasonable
assurance, That we have necessary dispositions to acquit our selves of te
obligations which are belonging to them. A man who enters into Office tempts
God, if he do not perceive in himself a force able to resist Injustice,
according as the Scripture says, Noli quaerer^ fleri Judex, nisi valeas
perrumpere Iniquitates. Those who engage themselves in Marriage tempt God,
unless they be disposed to satisfy the Obligations of that State, and have
strength enough to suffer all that must be born withal therein, and to bear up
against the temptations which are either from this state in general, or from
the particular choice which they make of the party they marry. They who embrace
a religious life tempt God, if they have not fit qualities to persevere in that
holy Vocation, and to undergo pains and labor. And therefore those who exclude
such as have not these qualities, far from doing them an injury, do them on the
contrary the greatest Charity which could be done them; being they hinder them
from contracting an engagement, the confequences whereof could not be
prosperous to them. Lastly, what enterprise men form to themselves, what design
of life men undertake, what State and Conidtion men embrace, they must always,
according to the Gospel, compute the Charges, that is to say, exanin what
strength God has given them, and what willingness, to Judge thereby if they be
not too fool hardy in engaging themselves therein.

34. If we do but reflect on men's Conduct in the choice of the employment and
state wherein they pass their lives, we shall find that there is not only
nothing more common then this manner of tempting God, but that it is the most
ordinary Source of Confusion which Reigns in all States and Conditions. For it
is clear that we do not choose them through the consideration of the relation,
and the proportion they have with the dispositions which God has put in in us,
but through certain Laws of Opinion which men's Vanity has established in the
World; according to which we believe, that being of such and such a Birth, and
that having a certain quantity of Goods, we cannot but embrace such kind of
lives, and that all others are against our interest. In this manner there are
some who think that there is no other way to be taken for them then that of the
Sword, or an Ecclesiastical Profession: Others are of opinion that they cannot
live in the World, except they be Magistrates. This Daughter must be Religious,
because in the condition she is she cannot be Married. Thus we reduce our
selves to a straight by these Chimerical Laws; and as God follows them not in
the distribution of of his Talents and Graces, it happens from thence that we
strictly forbid, through fancy all employments which God permits us, and are
very remiss in performing those he commands us. We engage our selves therein
therefore rashly, and likewise continue therein; we tempt God continually by
the exercise of these ill chosen employments, and instead of getting his favor
and assistance, we get, without intermission, the effects of his wrath, and the
loss of his Friendship. One may easily imagine what must be the consequences of
this Conduct.

35. We must observe yet upon this subject, that although men in this life be
always in a continual want of Grace, they are not nevertheless in an equal
degree of weakness and strength, and that the different measure wherewith God
distributes his Grace to them, makes according to the language of the Fathers
and holy Scripture, that we may say there are works and employments
proportionable to the Grace of certain Souls, but which are not so to others.
There are some who would lose themselves in striving to imitate certain actions
of Saints, because they want the power and force to undergo them like these
Saints. It is requisite then that each know what he has received from God, and
if he is not able to judge thereof by himself, let him judge thereof at least
by the light of understanding persons. Otherwise in advancing himself beyond
the gifts God has given him, he tempts him, and is in danger of committing
many great faults by those rash advances.

36. God having been willing to conjoyn men together by these reciprocal
endeavors or Duties of Charity, to render them dependant one of another, as
well in respect of a spiritual as a temporal life, and communicating to them
for that purpose more ordinarily the light they have need of for their Guide,
by the means of Pastors and Spiritual persons, which they may consult as well
as by himself, from thence it follows that it is also to tempt God in some sort
not to submit to the order, in refusing any ones Counsel, and following only in
the conduct of their life, their own proper thoughts and reasons; because this
is to oblige God to communicate his light to us in an extraordinary manner.

37. It may be said also, that every mortal sin which we commit in hopes to be
absolved thereof by Penance, is one way of Tempting God. For the Ordinary way
of Salvation, whether for those who as yet have not lost the innocence of
Baptism, or for those who have repaired it by Penance, is to conserve the Grace
they have received, and to labor to augment and increase it every day by the
exercise of Christian Virtues. To pretend then that God will make us reenter
into the way of Salvation, although we lost it by grievous crimes, is to
withdraw our selves from his ordinary Conduct, and to force him to do, in the
order of his Grace, Miracles in our behalf.

38. Lastly, even just men, and persons living orderly tempt God in many ways,
and often when they are not aware of it. For the Gospel tells us that the means
to obtain grace requisite for us, whether to acquit our selves of our
Obligations, or to enter safely into the least engagements, and form the least
design is to consult God upon all occasions, and to pray to him continually;
every time they neglect to practice this means, and engage themselves in small
and trivial enterprises, in visits, in conversations, in works of Piety,
without applying themselves to God, without looking toward him, without
advising with him, without praying to him, in some sort it may be said, that
they Tempt God. And as all the faults which we commit in our life time happens
through a neglect of practicing the means to avoid them, it is evident that men
sin not, but because they Tempt God, and thus this sin which they think on so
rarely, and which they dream so little of, is the cause of all Just men's
fallings, and the loss of all those who perish.

The Fourth Treatise.
Of Plays.
1. IT has scarcely been known but in this Age, that men have undertaken to
justify Plays, and to make them pass as Recreations which might be joined with
Devotion. Former Ages were more simple and sincere in good and bad. Those who
made profession of Piety, did witness by their actions and words, the horror
they had for those Profane Sights. Those who were possessed with passion for a
Theater, acknowledged at least, that they did not follow in that the Rules of
Christian Religion. But in this Age there are found those who have pretended in
this point to be able to conjoyn Piety, and the Spirit of the World together.
They are not content to follow vice, they will have it honored, and that it be
not withered and decayed by the shameful name of Vice, which always troubles a
little the pleasure which they take therein, by the horror which accompanies
it. They have therefore endeavored to act in some sort, that Conscience might
be accommodated with passion, and not to come and trouble it by its importunate
Remorses. And this is it they have taken so much pains about, upon the Subject
of Plays. For as there is hardly any Recreation more agreeable to worldly
People than that, so it was very important for them to assure themselves
thereby of a sweet and quiet enjoying of it, to the end that nothing should be
wanting to complear their satisfaction. The means which those undertook who
were the cunningest, was to form to themselves a certain Metaphysical Idea of
Comedies, and to purify this Idea from all kind of sin. Plays, say they, are a
representation of Actions and Words, as it were present. What harm therein I
pray? And after having justified in this sort the general Idea of Plays; they
think that they have proved that there is no sin in them, and in conclusion
they go to them without any scruple. But the way to free themselves of this
Illusion, is to consider on the contrary, Plays not in a Chimerical
Speculation, but in the common and ordinary practice, whereof we are witnesses.
We must take notice what is the life of Actors and Players, what is the
substance and end of Plays, what effects they generally produce in the minds of
those who represent them, or who see them acted or represented; what
impressions they leave in them, and afterward to examine if all that have any
relation to the Life, Sentiments, and the Duties of a true Christian. This is
it that is designed to be done in this Treatise. But as the generality of
Reasons men make use of, tend naturally to the reading of Romances, they may be
easily comprehended therein, and those who read this are entreated to
comprehend them therein, when they are not expressly mentioned in this.

2. It Is impossible to consider the Trade of Players and Actors, and to compare
them with Christian Profession, but we must acknowledge that there is nothing
more unworthy a Child of God, and Member of Jesus Christ than this sort of
Employment. We do not speak only of the gross abuses, and the dissolute manner
Women appear upon the stage, because the upholders of Plays, separate always
these sort of disorders by imagination, although never effectively. We speak only
of what is entirely and absolutely inseparable. It Is a recreation which tends
to the divertisement of others, where Men and Women represent passions of
hatred and choler, ambition, revenge, and chiefly of Love. They must express
them the most naturally and the liveliest, that possibly they can, and they
cannot do it unless they stir up in some sort these passions in themselves, and
that they be imprinted in their Souls, that they may express them outwardly by
actions and words. Those then who express a passion of Love, must be touched in
some manner with that passion whilst they act it, and they cannot think that
this Impression which they have excited so willingly, can be forgotten
suddenly, and that it should not leave in them a great inclination for this
same Passion, which they were willing to resent. Thus Plays are by their nature
the Schools and exercises of vice, being that they excite in us necessarily
vicious Passions. What if we consider that the whole life of Players is
employed in this exercise; that they pass it absolutely to learn in particular,
or to repeat amongst themselves, or to act before the Spectators the image of
some vice; that they have nothing almost in their minds but these follies: It
will be easy to see that it is impossible to accord this Trade or Calling with
the Purity of our Religion. And thus it must be allowed to be an Employ
profane, and unbecoming a Christian; that those who follow it are obliged to
leave it, as all the Councels do command: and that consequently it is not
permitted to others to contribute to entertain them in a profession contrary to
Christianity, nor to authorize it by their Presence.

3. As the passion of Love is the strongest impression which sin has made upon
our Souls, which appers clearly enough by the horrible disorders it produces
in the World, so there is nothing more dangerous than to excite it to nourish
it, and to destroy what restrains and stops its course. Now that which helps
most thereto is a certain horror, which custom and good Education imprints
therein; and nothing lessens this horror more than Plays, because this passion
appears there with honor, and in a manner, which instead of rendering it
horrible, is capable on the contrary to cause it to beloved. It appears there
without shame or infamy. There they boast of being touched with it. Thus the
Mind is ensnared by little and little. They learn how to suffer it, and how to
speak of it; and the Soul afterward is easily caught with it in following the
propensity of Nature.

4. It Is needless to say in justification of Plays and Romances, that therein
is only represented lawful Passions, and which have marriage as the end they
aim at. For tho Marriage may make good use of Concupiscence, it is nevertheless
in it self always ill, and it is not lawful to excite it, neither in our
selves nor in others. We ought always to look upon it as the shameful effect
of sin, as a source of poison able to infect us every moment, if God stop not
the bad causes of it. Thus from some apparent honesty, wherewith Plays and
Romances endeavor to cloth it, we cannot deny but even in that, they are
contrary to good manners, being that they imprint an agreeable Idea of a
vicious Passion, and that they make of it an Heroic quality, there being none
which appears with more splendour, then that in these Heroes of the Plays.

5. Marriage checks Concupiscence, but makes it not orderly. It restrains
always something of disorder which is proper to it, and it is not but by force
that it keeps it self within the limits which Reason prescribes it. Now
exciting this passion by Plays, we do not imprint at the same time the love of
that which governs it. The Beholders receive only the impression of the
passion, and little or none of the moderation of it. The Author stops where he
pleases this Passion represented by a Stroke of his Pen; but he does not stop
it so in those in whom he excites it. The representation of a legitimate Love,
and of that which is not so, causes almost the same effect, and excites only
the same motion which acts afterward differently, according to the different
dispositions which it meets with; and often also the Representation of a
private passion, with this vail of honor is most dangerous, because the Mind
looks upon it with less precaution, as it is received there with less horror,
and because the Heart is carried thereunto with less resistance.

6. That which renders Plays more dangerous, is because they disperse all the
remedies, which are able to hinder the bad impression they make. The Heart is
soften*d by the pleasure of them. The Mind thereby is altogether busied with
outward objects, and absolutely besotted with the follies which are there
represented, and consequently not in a condition of Christian vigilance,
necessary to resist temptations, and like a Reed bent by all sorts of winds.
There is great likelihood that no body has ever thought of preparing
themselves against them by Prayer, seeing that the Spirit of God would much
rather incline to avoid this dangerous sort of Divertisement, than to beseech
his Grace to be preserved from the corruption, which there it met withal. If
then Persons who live in solitude, and in retirement from the World, do yet
find great difficulty in a Christian Life, even in Monasteries. If they receive
trials of wordly Commerce at the same time, when it is Charity and necessity
that engages them therein, and that they keep themselves upon their gards as
much as they can, that they may resist: What may be the wounds, and downfall of
those who leading a life absolutely sensual, expose themselves to temptations,
which the strongest are not able to undergo? Ought it not to be said of them,
comparing them with holy persons, what Job said of man, comparing him with the
Angels. Ecce qui serviunt ei non sunt stabiles, and in Angelis suis reperit
pravitatem; quanto magis qui habitant domos luteas consumentur a Tinea? If
these Spirits which serve God as Ministers are not stable, and if he find fault
in the Angels themselves, by how much more reason will Souls enclosed in
Bodies, as in houses of clay, be subject to corruption and sin? Or what Esaias
said, Super humum populi mei Spinae and vepres ascenderunt; quanto magis super
omnem Domum gandii Civitatis exultantis? If the ground of my people, says our
Lord, is covered with Briars and Thorns, that is, if the Souls which sigh after
their Celestial Country, are sometimes peirced by the Stings of Sin, what
disorders will not those run into who live in Pleasures, and whose hearts are
filled with all the foolish joys of this World? Quanto magis super omnem domum
gaudii Civitatis exultantis?

7. We ought to consider that Plays are tentations taught with gayety, which
seperates and takes away Gods grace from us, and inclines him more to forsake
and abandon us to our own proper corruption, then those whereinto we fall
unawares. It is rashness, Pride, and Impiety to think that we are capable to
resist, without Grace, the tentations we meet with in plays; and it is a
presumption and a folly to believe that God will always deliver us from danger
by his Grace, when we expose our selves voluntarily, and without necessity.

8. We deceive our selves mightily in thinking that Plays make no ill
Impressions upon us, because we perceive not that they excite in us any ill
desires. There are many steps before we come to an entire corruption of mind
and heart; and it is always much harm to the Soul to destroy the Rampires which
save it from tentations. It Is to wrong her much to accustom her to behold
these sorts of Objects without dread, and with a kind of Complacency, and to
possess her that it is a pleasure to love and to be loved. The aversion which
she had for them served her as Fortresses which stopped the passage to the Devil,
and when they are ruined by Plays, he enters afterward easily. There is often
a long time that we begin to fall before we chance to be aware of it. The
misfortunes of the Soul are long and tedious; they have preparations and
Progresses, and it happens often that we lie under these temptations, only
because we have weakened our selves in occasions of small importance.

9. Let those then (who perceive not that Plays and Romances excite in their
minds these Passions which are ordinarily apprehended) not think themselves,
for all that, safe, and let them Imagine that these Lectures and these Sights
have done them no harm. The Word of God which is the Seed of life, and the word
of the Devil which is the Seed of death have this common, That they remain
often a long time hidden in the heart without producing any sensible effect.
God oftentimes joins the Salvation of certain persons to words of Truth which
he has sown in their Soul twenty years before, and which he awakens when he
pleases, to make them produce the fruits of life. And the devil contents
himself likewise sometimes to replenish the memory with these Images, without
going further, or forming yet any sensible temptation. But at length, after a
long time he enlivens them, even without our so much as remembering how they are
crept in, to the end that they may produce the fruits of Death, ut fructificent
Morti, which is the only mark he proposes in all that he has done in respect
of men. We may say then to those, who boast that Plays and Romances provoke not
in them the least evil thought, that they expect a little, that the Devil will
know when to take his time, and will be sure to find a favorable occasion.
Possibly engaging them to him by other ties* he neglects none to make use of
those which are most visible; but if he has need of them to destroy them, he
will not be wanting to employ them.

10. If it should be true, that Plays could produce no bad effects upon the
minds of certain persons, they should not therefore take them for innocent
recreations, nor believe that they are not guilty in assisting at them. A Play
is not acted for one single person. It Is a show which is exposed to all sorts
of humors, the most part whereof are weak and feeble, and to whom consequently
it is very dangerous. It Is their fault, will you say, to be present in this
condition; It is true, but it is your fault likewise, seeing that you make them
contribute to the making them look upon Plays as an indifferent thing. The more
you are orderly in your other actions, the more they are bold to imitate you in
that. Why, say they, Shall we scruple going to Plays, seeing that virtuous
people go thereunto? You participate then of their Sin; and if Plays hurt you
not of themselves, you are prejudiced by those damages which others receive by
your example; and thus you are the most blameable of all. Worldly persons of
whom we take no example, are scarcely faulty but by their proper sins. But
those who will pass for virtuous, and who practice indeed some good Works, are
faulty by their proper sins, and by those of others; and loose not only the
merit of their good works, but they poison them in some sort, in making them
serve to engage others in sin.

11. God asks of men, properly speaking, only their love; but he demands it
absolutely. He will have no division of it. And as he is their Sovereign Good,
he Wills that they fix themselves no where else, nor that they set their minds
upon any creature, because no Creature is their end. The fullness of Charity
which we ow to God, says St. Austine, permits not that we let any Current run
out. Nullum rivum duei extra patitur. Therefore what goodness soever can be
imagined in the love of a mortal Creature, this Love is always vicious and
illegitimate, when springing from any other than the love of God; and it cannot
spring from thence, when it is a love of passion, and self-interest, which makes
us find our joy and pleasure in this Creature. A Christian who knows what he
ows to God, ought not to suffer any alteration in his heart, nor any fixedness
of this sort without condemning it; without being sorry for it; and without
beseeching God to be delivered from it, and he ought to have an extreme horror
that he himself should be the object of this passion, and this inclination in
any others, and thus in some sort their Idol; seeing that Love is a worship
which is only due to God, as God can be only honored by Love. Nec colitur nisi
amando. It Is this which shows that there is a great number of Women, who
believing themselves innocent, as having indeed some horror of gross vices, are
yet nevertheless criminal before God, because they are very glad to hold in
men's hearts a place which belongs only to God. These Women take pleasure in
being the object of their passion: They are glad that people fix themselves to
them, that they look upon them with sentiments, not only of esteem, but of
kindness, and they suffer without trouble, that they witness it to them by this
profane Language, which is called cajolling. Therefore what care soever we may
take to separate Plays and Romances from these images of shameful disorders,
we shall never take away the danger, because we see always therein a lively
representation of this passionate tie of Men toward Women, which cannot be
innocent, and which will never be hindered so long as Women are delighted with
the pleasure of being loved and adored by Men, which is no less dangerous, nor
less contagious for them, than the Images of disorder, which are both visible
ard criminal.

12. Plays and Romances do not only stir up the passions, but they teach also
the language of Passions; that is to say, the art of expressing it, and making
it appear agreeable and ingenious, which is no small evil. There are many who
stuff them with bad designs, because they want address to explicate themselves.
And it often happens, that some persons without being touched with passion, and
desiring simply to show their wit, find themselves afterward insensibly engaged
in passions, which they only counterfeited at the beginning,

13. The pleasure of Plays is a hurtful Pleasure, because ordinarily it comes
from a corrupt bottom, which is stirred up in us, by things we see therein. And
to be convinced thereof, we need but consider, that when we have a great horror
for an action we take no pleasure in seeing it represented, and it is that which
obliges Poets to hide from the sight of the beholders, all that may cause this
horror in them. When we feel not the same aversion for foolish Loves, and other
disorders represented in Plays, and that we take delight in beholding them.
It Is a Token that we hate them not, and that they excite in us, I know not what
inclinations to vice, which spring from the corruption of the heart: If we had
the Idea of Vice in its natural deformity, we should not be able to suffer the
Image of it; therefore one of the greatest Poets of this age observes, that one
of his best pieces has not pleased upon the Stage; because it struck the minds
of the spectator with the horrible Idea of a prostitution, whereunto a Holy
Woman had been condemned. But what he drew from thence to justify his Play,
viz. That the Theater is now so thast, that men cannot suffer dishonest
objects, is what manifestly condemned it. for we may learn by this example,
that men approve in some manner all that is suffered, and all that men see with
pleasure upon the Theater, seeing that they cannot suffer what men have a
horror for. And consequently, there being so many corruptions, and vicious
passions in Plays, the most innocent, it is observable, that men hate not these
disorders when they take delight to see them acted.

14. It Is yet a great abuse, and which deceives very many, to consider no other
bad effects in these representations, but that of giving contrary thoughts to
purity, and believing thus, that they hurt us not when they do it not in this
manner; as if there were no other vices but that one; and that we were not
susceptible of them. Nevertheless, if we consider Plays made by those who have
been the most affected to this honesty, we shall find they have only forborne to
represent some objects which are entirely dishonest, to paint others as
criminal, and which are not less infective. All their Works are nothing but
lively representatives of passions of Pride, Ambition, of Jealousy, and
Vengeance, and chiefly of this Romantic virtue, which is indeed, nothing but a
furious love or ones self. The more it colors these vices with the Image of
greatness and generosity, the more it renders them dangerous and capable of
re-entring the best Souls, and the imitation of these passions does not please
us; but because the bottom of our corruption does excite at the same time, a
motion altogether like, which transforms us in some manner, and makes us
embrace the passion which is represented to us.

15. It is so true, that Plays are almost always a representation of vicious
passions, that the most part of Christian virtues are incapable of appearing
upon the Stage. Silence, Patience, Moderation, Wisdom, Poverty, Repentance are
no Virtues, the representation of which can divert the Spectators; and above
all, we never hear Humility spoken of, nor the bearing of Injuries. It woul be
strange to see a modest and silent Religious person represented. There must be
something of great and renowned according to men, or at least something of
lively and animated, which is not met withal in Christian Gravity and Wisdom,
and therefore those who have been desirous to introduce Holy Men and Women upon
the Stage, have been forced to make them appear proud, and to make them utter
discourses more proper for the ancient Roman Heroes, than for Saints and
Martyrs. Their Devotion upon the Stage, ought also to be always a little
extraordinary.

16. Common Affections are not proper to give the pleasure which is sought for
in Plays; and there would be nothing more cold than Christian Marriage freed
from passion on every side. There must always be some transport, that jealousy
may enter; that the consent of Parents may be found contrary, and that
Intrigues may be made use of, to make their designs Proper. Thus the way is
laid open to those who shall be possessed with the same passion, that they may
make use of the same means, to arrive at the same end.

17. The drift of Plays engage Poets to represent nothing but vicious passions.
Because the end they propose to themselves is to please the Spectators, which
they cannot do, but by putting into the mouths of the Actors, words and
sentiments conform to those whom they make to speak, or to whom they speak. Now
they hardly represent any but wicked persons, and they speak only before
worldly people, whose hearts and minds are vitiated by disordered Passions, and
wicked Maxims.

18. Worldly people the ordinary spectators of Plays have three principle
inclinations They are full of Concupiscence, full of Pride, and full of esteem
for human Generosity, which is nothing but a disguised Pride. Thus Poets, to
please them by adapting themselves to these inclinations, are obliged to act in
such sort, that their works may roll always upon these three passions, and fill
them also with love, sentiments of Pride, and Maxims of human Honor. It Is this
which causes that nothing is more pernicious then poetic and Romantic
Morality; because it is nothing but a Collection of false opinions, which spring
from these three ^^untains, and which are only agreeable, as flattering the
depraved inclinations of the Readers and Spectators.

It Is by the same corruptness of mind that men, without trouble, hear horrible
opinions of a person who would fight a Duel with his friend, because the world
believed he was the Author of a business, whereof he thought he was innocent.

Men listen with delight to the words of a Father to his Son, to whom he gave
charge to revenge him.

And yet, considering these sentiments according to reason, there is nothing
more detestable. But men think that it is permitted to Poets to propose the most
damnable Maxims, provided they be conformable to the Character of their
Personages.

19. It Is not imaginable that these wicked Maxims which plays are stuffed with
should do no hurt, because men go not to them to instruct their judgments, but
to divert themselves: For they do not cease to engraft their Impressions
without men's being aware of them, and a Gentleman will perceive an affront more
lively, and will be more easily inclined (...) revenge himself by the Criminal
way, which is very frequent in most parts, when he shall have heard and seen
how a light affront is resented in a Play upon the Principle of a false Idea of
Honor.

The reason whereof is, that Passions excite him, not only by objects, but also
by false opinions wherewith the mind is prepossessed. The opinion that
Chimerical Honor is so great a Good that it must be maintained with the loss
of life it self, is that which has produced, for so long time, the brutish
rage of the Gentry of many parts. If we never spoke of those who fight Duels,
but as mad and ridiculous people, as indeed they are, if we never represented
this Fantome of Honor, which they make their Idol, but as a Chimera and Folly;
if we had a care never to form Images of Revenge, but as base actions, and full
of Cowardice, the motives which the Person offended would feel, would be
infinitely more dull. But that which renders them more lively, is the false
Impression that there is of Cowardice to suffer an Injury. Now it cannot be
denied but Plays which are stuffed with these bad Maxims, contribute much to
fortify this Impression, because the mind being transported with them, and as
it were besides it self, instead of checking these sentiments, gives way
thereunto without resisting, and places its pleasure in feeling the motions
they inspire, which disposes it to produce the same or the like upon occasion.

20. Yet that which renders the Image of the passions, which Plays propose to
us, more dangerous, is that the Poets, to make them agreeable, are obliged, not
only to represent them in a very lively manner, but also to divest them of what
looks more horrible, and to paint them out in such a sort by the nimbleness of
their wit, that instead of gaining the hatred and the aversion of Beholders,
they may on the contrary get their affection. So that a Passion which only
causes horrors, if it were presented in its natural dress, becomes lovely by
the ingenious manner by which it is expressed.

If we divest the Image of the Passion of Anger of all the Paint the Poet
bestows on it, and that we consider it by reason, we can imagine nothing more
detestable then the fury of an incensed person, whom a foolish Passion causes
to violate all the Laws of Nature. Nevertheless this same disposition of mind
so criminal in it self has nothing that is horrible, being dressed up in these
Ornaments, and the Spectators are more inclined to love this Fury then to hate
it. We have made use of these instances on purpose, because they are less
dangerous to be reported. But it is true that the Poets practice this Artifice
of disguising Vices into subjects much more hurtful then that. And if we
consider almost all Plays and all Romances, we shall hardly find therein any
thing but vicious Passions beautified and set forth with a certain Paint which
makes them agreeable to worldly people. Now if it be not permitted to love
Vices, may one take delight in things which tend to render them amiable?

21. A Christian having renounced the World, his Pleasures, and his Pomps,
cannot seek after pleasure as pleasure, nor divertisement for divertisement
sake. He must, that he may be able to use them without sinning, act in some
manner, that one may say truly of him, that he uses them with the moderation
of one who does use them, and not with the passion of one who loves them,
Vtentis modestia, non amantis affectu. Now as the sole use of recreation is to
renew the force of the mind and body, when tired with labors; so it is
evident, that it is not permitted to divert ones self over much, but as it is in
eating.

It Is easy to conclude from thence, that it is not a Christian life, but a
Pagan and brutal life, to employ the greatest part of our time in recreation,
seeing that it is not permitted for ones self, but only to render the soul more
capable of labor. For if no body doubt but that it is a dangerous life for a
man that should do nothing but eat, and sit at Table from morning till night,
which the Prophet condemns in these words, Vae vae qui Cousurgitis mane ad
ebrietatem sectandam, and potandum usque ad vesperam. It Is not hard to see that
it is not less abusing the life which God has given us to serve him, to spend
it totally in that which is called Divertisement; seeing that the word it self
tells us, that we ought to seek it but to divert our selves, and withdraw us
from thoughts, and laborious occupations, which cause in the Soul a kind of
weariness, which we have need to repair.

This is sufficient to condemn the most part of those who go to Plays; For it
is clear, that they go not thither to ease the mind of serious occupations,
being that these people, and particularly worldly Women, hardly ever employ or
busy themselves seriously. Their Life is nothing but a vicissitude of
divertisements, which they pass away in Visits, in Game, in going to Balls and
Masks; in Walking, in Feasting and in Plays. What if they be vexed, as they
often are, it is because they have too much divertisement, and too little
serious employments? Their vexation is a dislike of plenty and satiety, like to
that of those who have eaten too much, and it ought to be cured by abstinence,
and not by the alteration and change of pleasures. They ought to divert
themselves in being busied, for that laziness and idleness, are the chief cause
of their vexation.

22. From hence it follows, that all those who have no need of divertisement,
that is to say, the most part of those who go to Plays, cannot do it without
sinning; tho there should be no other reason to believe them forbidden. But it
follows not, that those who have truly need to recreate the mind, can go
thither without sin, because Plays cannot pass for a Divertisement, not being
able to work the effect, which is allowed to be sought therein. For a Christian
can only seek a simple refreshment of mind, which may render him more
capacitated to act Christian-like, and according to Christian policy. Now Plays
are so far from being assistant thereto, that there is nothing makes the Soul
worse disposed, not only to the principal Christian occupations, as Prayer, but
to Actions themselves the most common, when one would do them with a Christian
mind; that is to say, recollected, and attentive to God, which one ought to
endeavor, as much as he can to conserve in the outward actions, Thus as the
need we have to eat; allows, not that it is permitted us to eat meats serving
only to weaken the body; likewise the need of diverting our selves cannot
excuse those who search after such Divertisements, as only render their mind
less proper to act Christian-like.

23. Plays and Romances render not only the mind ill inclined to all actions
of Religion, and Piety, but make it have a dislike in some manner of all
serious and common actions. As there is nothing represented in them but
Courtships, and extraordinary passages, and the discourses of those who speak
on the Stages, are far enough removed from those which are used in common; so
men take therein insensibly an inclination altogether Romantic; they are
stuffed with Princes and Princesses; and chiefly the Women taking pleasure in
the respects which is given to those of their Sex; the Image and practice of
which, they see in the several Divertisements, wherein the young Gallants pay
to them what they have learnt in Romances, and treat them like Nymphs and
Goddesses, imprints in such a manner this sort of life in the fancy, that the
little affairs of their Huswifery becomes unsupportable to them, and when they
return into their Houses, with this evaporated Spirit, and quite filled with
these follies, they find all therein disagreeable; and above all, their
Husbands, who being busied about their affairs, are not always in the humor to
render them those ridiculous complacencies, which are given to Women in Plays
and Romances.

24. The necessity which we have to repair the decay of our bodies by
nourishment cannot serve as an excuse for eating voluntary meats, which might
imprint a venomous quality, which might cause therein intemperance, because this
kind of nutriment would be contrary to the end, or intent of eating, which is
to conserve the life of the body. Thus the need we have sometimes of refreshing
our selves, cannot excuse them who esteem Plays a divertisement; seeing that
they imprint, as has already been said, bad qualitys in the mind, that they
excite passions, and disorder the Soul.

25. The necessity men have to divert themselves, is much less than they think,
and consists more in imagination, or in custom, than in real necessity. Those
who are busied in outward labors, need only a simple cessation from their
labor. Those who are employed in affairs troublesome to the mind, and not
laborious for the body, have need to withdraw themselves from the dissipation
which springs naturally from these sorts of employs, and not to disperse
themselves yet more by divertisements which bind the mind strongly. It Is an
absurdity to think, that there is need to spend three hours at a Play, to stuff
the mind with foo^eries. Men in these days have not their minds made otherwise,
than those in the time of St. Lewis, who employed his time well when he
banished Plays out of his Kingdom. Those who feel in them this need, ought to
consider it, not as natural inability, but as a vice gotten by custom, which
must be cured by employing themselves seriously. A man who has labored sore,
is satisfied when he leaves working, and diverts himself in all that does not
busy him, Plays are only necessary for those who divert themselves always, and
who endeavor to remedy the dislike, which naturally accompanies the
continuation of pleasures. And as this necessity comes only from their evil
disposition, which they are obliged to correct, it may be said, that it is
needful for no man, but that it is dangerous to all the world.

26. But there is nothing that shows the danger of Plays better, and how much
they are forbid to Christians, than the opposition they have with the principal
dispositions in which Christians ought to establish themselves, and to which
they ought to tend, although as yet they may be separated through weakness from
their virtue. The First, is continual Prayer, whereof the Apostle gives an
express Command in these words; Sine Intermissione orate. Pray without
Intermission; and Jesus Christ by these, Vigilate and orate ne Intretis in
tentationem. Watch and pray lest you enter into temptation. Because temptation
being in some sort continual Prayer, the remedy ought to be so likewise. It Is
true, that this continuation and perseverance in Prayer, cannot consist in a
perpetual attention of the mind to God, and that it is sufficient that it remain
always in a simple desire that God know it: but it is certain, that this desire
is easily extinguished, if care be not had to nourish it by actual Prayers, and
by meditating upon Divine things.

Therefore Christians not being able to lead their whole lives in the act of
Prayer, are at least, obliged to renew it from time to time before God: and as
it is by these actual Prayers that they entertain that which ought to be always
at the bottom of their heart; they ought with great care avoid all that may
render these Prayers unworthy of being presented before the Divine Majesty,
which not only obliges them to fly distractions which happen to them in Prayer,
but much more the sources of distractions, which filling the Soul with foolish
thoughts, renders it incapable of applying it self to God.

This is sufficient to oblige those who are careful of their Salvation, to fly
Plays and Romances, because there is nothing in the world which destroys the
Soul more, which renders it more incapable of applying it self to God, or which
fills it more with vain fancies. They are strange Prayers which are made coming
from these Sights, or from these lectures, having the head filled with all the
fooleries which they saw there. Man is not able to procure to himself the
Spirit of Prayer, nor this Holy zeal which excites him when God pleases, by
meditation: Et in meditatione mea exardescit ignis; but the least that can be
done, is to put no obstacle by doing voluntarily, what is directly opposite to
this Spirit.

27. God easily pardons the distractions which spring from the frailty of
nature; but he does not so with those which are voluntary in their sources,
such are those which Plays produce; therefore there is reason to fear, that all
the Prayers of them who go to Plays, being full of these kind of distractions,
are more capable to irritate God, than to appease him, and that they are of the
number of those which the Prophet speaks of. Et oration ejus fiat in peccatum:
Let his Prayer be imputed to sin. Now if their Prayers which ought to invite
the Spirit of God over all the body of their Works, are themselves defiled,
what ought men to judge of the rest of their actions? Si lumen quod in te est,
tenebrae sunt, ipsae tenebrae quantae erunt?

28. One of these principal parts of Piety, and one of the chief means to
conserve it, is to love the word of God, and to place our Consolation therein.
It Is by the sentiment of sweetness which the Prophet had tasted in this
spiritual nutriment, that he said to God, Inventi sunt sermone^ tui and Comedi
eos, and factum est verbum tuum in gaudium and in laetitiam Cordis mei. I have
found thy words, and I have fed my self with them, and they have filled my
heart with joy and delight. It Is this Consolation so Divine which entertains
our hopes according to St. Paul, and which maintains us in the crosses of this
life. Now experience may make known to all the world, that nothing does destroy
this spiritual Joy, that men resent in the reading the word of God, more than
worldly and sensual joys, and principally those of Plays. These two joys are
absolutely incompatible; Those who please themselves with Plays, are not so
with Truth; and those who take pleasure in Truth, have nothing of satisfaction
in those sorts of pleasures. Therefore the same Prophet to whom God has given
this spiritual taste, for his Word witnesses presently after, that he could not
suffer assemblies of Games, and Divertisements; and that he put all his Glory
and Joy, to consider the wonderfulness of Gods handiwork: Nonsedi cum concilio
ludentium, and gloriolus sum a facie manus tuae. And the Holy King David, who
had also tasted the sweetness of the Divine Law, does witness likewise the
contempt it made him conceive of all vain discourses of worldly men;
Narraverunt mihi Iniqui fabulationes, sed non lex tua. It Is the sentiment which
the Holy Ghost inspires into all those to whom he gives a love for his Holy
word. All those Divertisements which are so agreeable to those who love the
world, are to them an unsavory meat, which they cannot eat, because they see
nothing therein but emptiness, naughtiness, vanity, and foolishness, and find
therein a want of the salt of Truth and Wisdom; which causes them to say with
Job, that they cannot taste it. An poterit Comedi Insulsum, quod non est sale
Conditum? Whither he could eat of this meat, which was not seasoned with Salt?

But on the contrary, if the Soul addict it self to these false pleasures, she
presently looses the pleasure of Spiritual ones, and finds only the word of God
unsavory. These are those sower Grapes, whereof the Prophet speaks, which set
the Childrens Teeth on edge. Omnis homo qui Comedit uvam acerbam, obstupescent
dentes ejus: That is to say, according to the explication of St. Gregory, That
when men feed of the vain joys of the World, the spiritual senses become
incapable of tasting and understanding Heavenly things. Qui praesentis mundi
delectatione pascitur, Interni ejus sensus ligantur, ut jam spiritualia mandere
and intelligere non valiant. Now amongst the Delights which extinguish the love
of Gods word, It may be said that Plays and Romances are of the first
magnitude; because there is nothing more opposite to Truth, and the Spirit of
God, as St. Bernard says, being a Spirit of Truth cannot take part with the
vanity of this World. Sed nec erit ei unquam pars cum mundi vanitate, cum
veritatis sit spiritus.

29. God imputes not to us the coldness which comes from the substraction of
his Lights, or simply from the heaviness of the body; but doubtless, he imputes
to us those which by our neglect we have contributed unto. He wills that we
esteem nothing so much, as the precious gift he has made us of his Love; and
that we be careful to embrace it in giving it nourishment. It Is the Command
which he has given to all Christians, in the persons of the Priests of the
ancient Law, to whom he orders to maintain always the fire upon the Altar, and
to be careful to add every day in the morning wood to it. Ignis in Altari
semper ardebit, quem nutriet sacerdos, subjiciens mane ligna per singulos dies.
This Altar is the heart of Man, and every Christian is the Priest, who ought to
have a care to nourish upon the Altar of his heart, the fire of Charity, by
putting thereto every day some wood, that is to say, in entertaining it, by
meditating of Holy things, and by exercises of Piety. Now if those who go to
Plays, have yet any sense of Piety, they must necessarily grant, that they
absolutely extinguish and slay Devotion. And thus they ought not to question,
but God will judge them culpable; for having made so little account of his
Love, that instead of nourishing, and of endeavoring to augment it, they have
not feared to extinguish it by their vain and foolish divertisements; and that
he will impute to them as a great sin this coldness, or the loss of their
Charity. For if the dissipation of worldly Goods, and of terrestrial Gold by
Play, and by Excess, be not a small sin; what ought men to think of the
dissipation of the Goods of Grace, and of this inflamed Gold the Scripture
speaks of, which we ought to buy at the loss of all the Goods, and all the
pleasures of this life?

30. The Fathers blame as a dangerous rashness, the conduct of those who being
not as yet grounded in the love of God, employ themselves with too much
eagerness in outward good Works, under pretense of Charity; because it is
difficult that the mind be not much dissipated in these exercises: In terrenis
quippe actibus, says St. Gregory, valde frigescit animus, si necdum fuerit per
Intima dona solidatus. If the Soul be not fortefied in the inward life by
Grace, she becomes very cold, in terrestrial, and worldly employments. What
judgment would he have made then of those, who being yet weaker, do
nevertheless make no difficulty of going to Plays, which dissipate the mind
more than the greatest employments, and can be excused neither by Charity nor
by Zeal, being that men seek therein only pleasure.

31. No man doubtless would approve that a Carthusian should go to Plays,
because all the world sees the great disproportion of this divertisement with
the Holy Life he professes. But we are not struck, that many Christians make
little or no difficulty of going thither, because we know not the Holiness to
which they are obliged by the vow of their Baptism. We consider not, as S.
Paulinus says, that by the grace of this Sacrament they have been buried with
Jesus Christ, that they have promised to embrace his Cross, to live no more for
themselves nor the World; but that Jesus Christ may live in them. We consider
that a Christian life ought not only to be an imitation, but a continuation of
the life of Jesus Christ; since that it is his Spirit which ought to act in
them, and by them, by imprinting in their hearts the same sentiments which it
has in that of Jesus Christ. If we did observe a Christian life by this means,
we should soon know how much Plays are opposite thereunto, and there would need
no reasons to convince those who would be persuaded of the Capital Truths of
our Religion, as there needs none to convince a Carthusian, instructed in his
Order, that these diversions so profane are forbidden him.

32. All our actions are due to Jesus Christ, not only as to our God, but as to
him who has redeemed us at the price of his dearest Blood, to oblige us to
glorify him in all our works, as St. Paul says. All our actions must relate to
his Glory, and must witness, that we will imitate Jesus Christ crucified; that
we love what he has loved, and hate what he has hated. And as he is the
beginning of all good Works, and that the Grace by which we do them, is the
fruit of the Cross; we ought to thank him for all those, which his Spirit has
made us do. Lastly, we ought to say truly, that we do them for him, and by his
Love. Now would it not be to scoff at God and Man, to say that we go to Plays
for the love of Jesus Christ? should we dare to offer him this action, and tell
him, Lord, it is in obedience to thee that I will go to Plays; it will be thy
Spirit which will guide me thither; it will be thee who shall be the principal
of this action; it is by the Cross that thou have made me deserve it? Is there
any one so blind or stubborn, who can suffer without horror, the impiety of
this Language? and even those who labor the most to justify Plays, have they
ever dared to offer this action to God? Have they ever thought to give thanks
to God for having assisted thereunto? Is not this an evident proof that their
Consciences belie their false Lights; and that they themselves are convinced
from the bottom of their hearts, of the harm there is in Plays, although they
endeavor to dissemble it by the weak reasons, which their wits furnish them
with? For every action which we should not dare to offer to God, every action,
whereof Jesus Christ is not the principal; every action which we cannot do to
obey him; every action which cannot be the fruit and effect of his Cross; In
Fine, every action which we dare not not thank him for, may not be good, nor
permitted a Christian.

33. If a Christian consider himself as a sinner, he ought to acknowledge that
there is nothing more contrary to that state which obliges him to Penance,
Tears, and to avoid unprofitable pleasures, than the hunting after such vain
and foolish recreations, and so dangerous as Plays. If he consider himself as a
Child of God, as a member of Jesus Christ, illuminated by his Truth, enriched
by his Graces, nourished with his Body, Heir of his Kingdom; he ought to judge
that there is nothing more unworthy so high a quality, as the taking delight in
these foolish pleasures of the Children of the World.

34. The Soul cannot conserve a true Piety, without the assistance of a
wholesome fear, which she conceives at the sight of dangers, wherewith she is
environed. She cannot be ignorant of the power and malice of her enemies, who
go round seeking how to devour her, as the Scripture speaks. She knows, as St.
Paulinus says, that all corporal creatures, which draw our Hearts by the means
of our Eyes, are so many Nets, which the Devil makes use of to catch us in; so
many Swords wherewith he endeavors to run us to the Heart. She knows that she
marches in the midst of her enemies, and of a thousand snares; and that she
walks there without Light, or Strength; because she sees only darkness in her
understanding, only weakness in her Will, and rebellion in her Senses. The
experience of so many Souls which loose themselves by their sight, and the
general disorder which reigns every where, makes her know that there is nothing
so rare as Christian virtue; nothing so easy as to loose ones self; nothing so
difficult as to be saved. How then can she join with so just a fear of terrible
evils, which threaten her, the vain rejoicing of the world, and feed her mind
with Chimeras, which Plays stuff it with all? Is it not visible that as the
natural effects of Plays are to stifle this so wholesome fear? also the effect of
this fear, ought to be to stifle the desire of unprofitable, and profane
recreations, and to make her conclude, that she has many other things to think
of in this world, than going to Plays: that the time God bestows on her, is too
precious to be lost unfortunately in these vain amusements; so that when she
gives her self over thereunto, it must needs be, that she is blind, that she
has lost the remembrance of her dangers, and that she has stifled in this
manner, that disposition, by which the Holy Spirit enters into the heart, and
is entertained there whilst it remains therein.

35. One of the first effects of the light of Grace, is to discover to the
Soul, the emptiness, the meanness, and the instability of all worldly things,
which slide and vanish away like fantomes, and to make it see at the same time,
the grandeur and solidity of Eternal Goods. And this disposition produces of
it self a peculiar aversion for Plays, because it perceives therein an
emptiness and meanness altogether peculiar. For if all temporal things be
nothing but Figures and Shadows, in what rank ought Plays to be put, which are
only the Shadows of Shadows, seeing that they are nothing but the vain Images
of temporal things, and oftentimes false things also?

36. Sin has opened the eyes, to make men see with pleasure the vanities of
this world: and Grace in opening the Eyes of the Soul for the things of God,
shuts them to worldly things, through a blindness, much more fortunate than
that miserable sight which sin has procured us. It Is this wholesome blindness,
says St. Paulinus which the Prophet begged of God; when he said, Hinder my
eyes from seeing vanity. And which our Lord prefers before the clear seeing
eyes of the Jews, when he told them, Si caeci essetis non haberetis peccatum.
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin.

If then we are obliged in quality of Christians, to beg of God, that he will
take away our Eyes from all worldly follies, of which, Plays are as it were a
Compendium, and imprint in us a hatred, and an aversion for them in the Heart;
How can we think that we shall be able to satisfy our eyes with these vain
sights, and to place our Satisfaction and Content, in what ought to be the
object of our aversion and horror.

The Fifth Treatise.
Of Reports.
1. WE scarcely see any one who does not complain of the Reports which are made
of him, and who pretends not that others violate, in regard of him the Rules of
Honesty and Justice. And as these sorts of complaints have not only a place in
the world, but amongst persons of Piety and in Societies, the most orderly. It
seems, that we have right to conclude from thence, that the Rules by which we
ought to judge of the equity and necessity of Reports, are not known well
enought. In the mean time we may say, that there is hardly any thing more
important, than to clear them, seeing that indiscreet reports are the most
common cause of troubles and divisions, which happen not only in particular
Friendships, but also in Societies, and even in whole Kingdoms, and that it is
difficult that we do not commit many Faults if we be not well instructed what
ought to be done to avoid them.

2. What is strange, is that every man complaining of others upon this point,
no man thinks he gives cause to others to complain of him. He saw enough
thereof, who said of others, That they are people who Conster all things wrong,
who report them so, who wast and poison the most innocent and the most harmless
Discourses, who have neither Fidelity nor Secrecy: But we see not therein who
attribute these faults to themselves, and who believe they want neither
Sincerity nor Honesty. Finally each would observe this Law willingly, that it
might be permitted him to tell all that he would of other men's Discourses, and
that it might not be allowed any one to report any thing of his.

But as all the World pretending to this Privilege, no man obtains it indeed,
it must make account that all things will go always almost alike, and that the
World will always follow its fancies and passions, that there will always be
found people who will suffer themselves to report what they shall thing fit,
and thus they need only to be mindful to rule themselves, that they may observe
in this point, in respect of others, what Honesty, Charity, and Justice demands
of us.

3. It Is almost the sole real Interest which we may have therein. For provided
that we our selves commit not Faults, the indiscretion and wickedness of others
can hardly hurt us. They are evil for them, and sometimes for those who give
ear to them and believe them, but not for those whom these reports are made of,
if they bear them as they ought. God oftentimes makes use of them to procure
them considerable Benefits, and thereby to make them prosper by the designs of
his Mercy upon them. Thus we have nothing to do but to stand upon our Guard
against our seles, and we shall be sheltered from all the rest.

4. We are so much more obliged thereunto, because unless we be very attentive
to our selves, it is very hard to avoid committing these kind of faults,
because direction has no certain and precise Rules, and because we cannot
establish, upon this point, general Maxims. It is not true, that we cannot at
some time report what we have heard. It is not true, that it is never permitted
to tell what may be displeasing to those who have spoken it. It is not true,
that it may be allowed to relate all that may be gainsaid without displeasing
them. And finally, excepting the Maxim which commands that we relate nothing
but Truth, all the rest are not universal Truths, and they must be restrained
by diverse Conditions to make them Just.

5. But it is not unprofitable nevertheless to know these Rules, and to have
them present, because it behooves us to stick to them, unless we clearly see
that we are in the case of exception. Particular reasons to observe the general
Laws of secrecy are needless, but there must be very clear and very pressing
ones to dispense with them. So that when the least doubt is started we must
adhere to the Rule, and not to the Exception. This is the first Maxim which
ought to be printed in the mind upon this Subject; and will suffice also to
mark out to us our Duty in the most part of occurrences. For we are hardly
wanting to secresy, but through a fickleness which makes us pass by all doubts
and reasonable scruples, which we perceive formed of our understandings.

6. The general Foundation of the tie which we commonly have to secrecy in
regard of what men say to us in the way of discourse is, that God having had in
consideration in all his Laws the linking men together, and making them live in
a well grounded Society, all that destroys this Society ought to be esteemed as
wicked and pernicious. Now it is manifest that 'twould be impossible that this
Society should subsist, if men were in a continual defiance of one another, if
they looked upon one another as Enemies, and if they thought they might not
communicate their intentions to whomsoever it were, with security. It Is a
Torment the Common people cannot endure, as being always upon the reserve to
say nothing that may be ill taken. This inconveniency cannot absolutely be
avoided; because minds being different, what one man thinks good, another
oftentimes takes it in the contrary sense. There are elsewhere a thousand
things which have nothing of bad, being said in particular, and which we cannot
nevertheless tell again without imprudence and danger; so that if those to whom
we speak, think that they have reason to relate all that men tell them, there
is almost no entertainment from whence we ought not to fear bad effects.

7. Also let us not presume to speak to people with confidence, but in
supposing them in another disposition, and imagining that they have some
fidelity and secrecy, and as every one may judge what they expect and what they
reckon upon that, It may be said that we engage our selves therein by giving
ear to what others say to us that they were promised Secrecy, and thus we are
obliged to be upon our guard, not only through consideration of common profit,
but by virtue of this Covenant and this secret Promise. If we had not a design
to oblige them thereby, that should be declared, and we ought to act in such
sort that they may have no reason to expect it; because it is reasonable that
those who will not observe the common Laws which are received amongst men, do
at least give notice to others of their resolution, that we may not take them
for that which indeed they are not.

8. It Is for this reason that we cannot blame the Rule and Government observed
in Monasteries, which is to relate all to the Superior they hear said ill of
those who live there. For persons chosen and tried may well renounce all the
entertainments of Confidence, and the rule which obliges to these relations
being known by all, each one is sufficiently advertised to say nothing but what
he desires may be told again: After which those who run the hazard of it ought
to complain of themselves, not of those who do nothing but what ought to be
judged they should do. But as the same Law is not established in the world, and
that it would be also a fault to establish it therein, those who are wanting in
what may lawfully be expected from them, do undoubtedly wrong Honesty and
Justice, and it is enough to judge them guilty of infidelity, that they have not
spoken to them with freedom, but upon consideration that they would not have
abused it at all, but would have kept secret what could not be told again
without injuring the Party who said it.

9. There are some who never miss, when they will that a thing be not told
again, to require absolutely the secret. And this is not a bad Custom, because
that applies more the imagination of those to whom we speak, and frees them
from the trouble of distinguishing whether they could or could not relate what
was told them, seeing that after the express promise there is no more to
deliberate upon. But moreover as this prevention would be very troublesome in a
long discourse, and that there are some who would be astonished that they
should have so little trust in their discretion, it is likewise hard to
practice it always, and there should be for that an application which many
people are not capable of. It is requisite then that the natural secret supply
the defect of an express engagement, there being no other difference betwixt
natural obligation to a secret, and that which comes from an express promise;
only in the last we leave it not to him we engage in the freedom of
distinguishing whether he can or cannot relate what was told to him; whereas in
the other we remit it to the discretion of him whom we speak to, and imagine
that he has so much interest as not to tell what he shall conclude prejudicial
to him from whom he learnt what he knows. But the obligation is alike in the
one and in the other; and in one sense it may be said that a truly honest man
ought to think himself so much more obliged to secrecy, by how less cautious he
has been with him, and has more relied upon his discretion, and his fidelity.

10. It Is but considering the bottom of the heart to grant the justness of this
Law. For who is he who would not that others should practice it to him? Who is
it that would not be glad to find in them this Fidelity, and complain of those
who want it? It follows then by the general rule of natural equity, That each
man is obliged to practice this fidelity toward others. There needs not for
this express Promises and Compacts; The fear of this natural Law is greater
then that of all promises and Compacts; and it may be said even that this
promise is found there, and that it is that is observed by all those ordinary
Civilities which are rendered to people in the World. For if these Civilities be
sincere as they ought to be, they signify at least that we are not Enemies to
those to whom we pay them, that we have no design of harming them, and that we
are disposed to practice, in respect of them, the Obligations of Honesty and
common Civility. Now the least respect we can pay them is not to abuse, to
their prejudice, what they shall have told us.

11. The right of a Pawn has always been sacred amongst men, and they have
always esteemed it an Injustice to violate it without an excess Baseness and
Perfidousness. Nevertheless it is not needful that he who trusts a business of
concern to another, take assurance for his faithfulness. He is engaged
sufficiently to it in receiving it. Now what is it that man does, in a
particular discourse, but render him whom he speaks to, depositor of his
thoughts, which he trusts him withal? Let it be then, that he require expressly
the secret, or that he do not, it is always the Pawn, which we ought to believe
cannot be disposed, but according to the intentions of him who has trusted it.

12. There are men enough who think themselves obliged to this Fidelity toward
their Friends, but there are very few who extend this obligation to persons
either indifferent, or Enemies. Thus men think they are out of reproach, as to
Reports, when they may say they have no Obligation to those whom they concern,
nor any engagement to advise them. But these excuses come only from a base Idea
we have of Charity. A true Christian is not only no man's Enemy because he loves
all men, but he loves them all equally, according to St. Augustine, in wishing
them all equally happiness. What though they show more kindness to some then to
others, it is because the outward effects of Friendship being limited, they owe
them particularly to those to whom the Providence of God has associated with
him. It Is not then affection that he wants when he shows it not outwardly; it is
this association. Now from the time that men enter into talk with some one by
particular discourse, the Providence applies us to him in giving us the means
to practice Charity in its proper place, and by consequence we are obliged to
use him like a Friend, which at least includes the Obligation not to abuse his
Confidence.

13. But must we extend the secret to those also who have violated it first by
indiscreet Reports, and who shall have abused, through Malice and Imprudence,
the confidence which we have testified to them? Do not they take away the right
of requiring from others by this means, what they themselves have not observed?
It seems at first, the first sentiment conducts us thither; but if examined
more strictly, we shall find that it is rather a motive of indignation, than of
Justice: because, what would friendship be, if each one thought himself in the
right of making a Magazine of all that should slip from his friends to injure
them, in case they happen to fail in their Duties? Also St. Austin observes
equally amongst the qualities of aman of worth, never to discover what has
been put in trust to him, and never to do any thing that he fears may be
discovered. Aliena peccata sibi Commissa Aug. non produnt, quae prodi timeant,
ipsi Ep. 15. nulla Committant. We ought not therefore to suffer our Duty to
depend upon another, nor commit Infidelities, because another does so. If a
slight and unfaithful friend deserve not that we manage him by his present
state and condition, he deserves it by his past state. Secrecy is a debt of
that time; and as the engagement was not at all conditional, it subsists even
when friendship cease: so that we should not forbear to continue Debtor to a
fickle and inconstant friend, if after having borrowed Money of us, he chance
to break with us.

14. Now what has been said of friendship, may be said of the transitory
Confidence, which we take in some, in disclosing to them things which we would
not have known. For this Confidence or Trust is a sort of friendship, which tho
not so strong, nor lasting, ought to be regulated yet by the same principles.
We ought to love all men, as we have said already, and this general love
becomes friendship, being joined with familiarity. Thus a familiarity of many
years, is a friendship of many years; and a familiarity of one day, is a
friendship of one day. So that as every friendship does oblige Secrecy,
touching what is said in the time of friendship, friends of one day, or one
hour, are obliged to preserve the secret of all things committed to their
Trust, during that day or hour, and the perfidiousness of the one, can no way
excuse that of the other.

15. Hitherto I have not pretended to establish any thing, but the general
rule, which consists in judging of what we ought to keep secret, and what we
may discover by the consent and approbation of those from whom we had learnt
them, as far as this consent, and approbation is known to us. It is true
nevertheless, that this rule admits of diverse exceptions, but being seldom met
withal in practice, do no way destroy the usefulness of the rule. It Is for
example, an indubitable exception to this Law of Secrecy; when any body
communicates to us a criminal design, which we may hinder by discovering it.
For we are so far from hurting civil Society, in not keeping it secret, that we
should destroy it by keeping it. Crimes are not matter of Trust, and the
commerce of discourse is not ordained to communicate evil designs one to
another. Thus it is he who makes these detestable overtures, that abuses this
chief tie of Society; and those who tell again these wicked discourses, that
they may hinder the bad effects of them, make good use of the indiscretion of
those from whom they slip.

16. We ought to say the same of certain Vices, pernicious to human Society,
and dangerous for certain persons. For if it happen that men out of confidence
discover them to us in discourse, and that afterward they would engage
themselves in employments, whereof these vices render them incapable, those to
whom they have discovered themselves are not wanting to secrecy, if they avoid
these unfortunate engagements by discovering what they know of those persons. I
know by the declaration of a man, that he has bad thoughts of Religion, and
nevertheless I see him ready to enter into an Ecclesiastical State. It Is so far
from being a fault to give notice to those who can hinder him, that it would be
a greater not to do it.

17. Finally one may yet except perchance from the Law of Secrecy, certain
occasions wherein men discover in discourse; designs and pretenses, which tho
not expressly wicked, are yet contrary to other pretenses, and other designs,
which we think bona fide more legitimate, and which we are more obliged to
favor; provided that this obligation be so clear, that he who has discovered
himself rashly, may be convinced himself of it. For this disposition whereby he
may know what we are, ought to suffice to advise him not to lay himself open to
us; and his inconstancy having persuaded him to do it, it appears not
absolutely injust, that we profit by his imprudence, to sustain what we take
for a greater good. But it is easy to see, that this case is very rare, and
that it does not make thus a considerable exception from the Law of Secrecy.

18. Those who have some Conscience, or make profession to have any, do not
forbear to color with some pretense of usefulness, the reports they make of
others, and think thereby to be exempt from all reproach of infidelity, when
they have no engagement at all to silence. But to keep themselves from this
Illusion, they must consider that all profit is not sufficient to justify these
Reports. It must be great, certain, that we cannot procure it by any other way.
For it is a real inconvenience only to be wanting in the confidence they have
had of us. It Is a source of disunion, and it is to deprive ones self of the
means to serve those who enjoin it. It Is to banish the overture of the Commerce
of Discourse. Lastly, it is to injure human Society, by filling it with distrust
and suspicions. Thus the wrong ought at the least to be recompensed by some
certain and considerable profit.

19. Whosoever therefore feels himself thrust forward to report what he knows
not, but by particular discourse, ought to examine all the following
conditions; whether the thing which he is about to do, be very certain, and
whether he has not been mistaken in the Idea he has conceived thereof;
whether it is so constantly bad, that he has no reason to doubt of it; whether
it is important that it be known to avoid some great inconveniency; whether
this inconveniency may not be avoided by some other means. Whether he have
practiced toward him who is interressed all the means prescribed by the Gospel
to correct him. And if all these conditions happening, he be inclined to
discover it afterward, it ought to be precisely only to those who can give
order therein, and not to those to whom these reports would only serve to
satisfy their curiosity, or irritate their malignity.

20. We shall be easily convinced of the extreme circumspection that ought to
be had in these Reports; if we make reflection on the consequences, and terrible
indiscretions which may be committed. For as soon as any report is rashly
escaped from us, we are no more the master of it. It multiplies and increases,
and dilates it self mightily; It serves as an instrument to the passion of
some, and as a nourishment to others, it produces oftentimes disagreements, and
durable, and permanent animosities, which have long and troublesome
consequences. It engages an infinity of people in considerable faults: and all
this multiplication of sins shall be imputed to those who shall have given way
thereunto by their indiscretion.

21. I have hitherto only considered the obligations to any secret thing which
springs from the common interest of civil Society and Fidelity, which is a
continuation of that transitory friendship, which is contracted with all those
who out of confidence speak to us: And thus I have taken their Will for the
rule of Reports, which may honestly be made from what shall have been told us.
But as from hence it would follow, that one might tell again all that they
should be glad we should tell; it may be added, that we are often obliged to
Secrecy, by the general rule of Charity, which forbids the reporting many
things; although those who have said them, should not think themselves obliged to
it: for we ought not only to have respect to their Will, but also to their
good, and to the good of others. It ought to satisfy us, that we know that some
report may really hurt some one to publish it. In a word, we must regulate our
Reports, not by what people desire in their passions, but by what they ought to
desire, therein having a reason to suppose, that when their passion shall
cease, they will be glad that they had managed them so: and when this passion
shall not cease, we ought not to make our selves the ministers to do hurt to
others, or to our selves.

22. Thus a man of worth will never fall into this fault, which St. Austin
calls A horrible Plague, to report to those who are angry against others, the
words of animosity which these persons might have said against them; and he
will follow without trouble this maxim of that Holy Doctor, That it is not
enough for a man truly Charitable not to excite or augment, by his reports, the
enmities of men, but that he ought also to labor with his whole strength to
extinguish and stifle them. Animo humano parum esse debet Inimicitias hominum
nec excitare nec augere male loquendo, nisi eas etiam extinguere been loquendo
studuerit.

23. A man, by following these Rules, avoids one part of the faults which he
commits in relating indiscreetly what he only knows by some particular
Discourses. But that is not the only fault which he is obliged to be careful of
upon this Subject; That of believing lightly the faults which others tell us,
is of no less importance, and it may be said that it is yet more dangerous,
because we are less watchful on that side, and we suffer our selves so much
more easily to fall thereinto, by how much it appears that we have no concern
for it. We think that it belongs to him who relates something, to give an
Answer, and that we may rely upon him for the truth of the deed which he
relates. In the mean time it is quite otherwise: For the Soul of that Man who
hearkeneth, remains not without action; she thinks, judges, follows her
Passions, acts also often times in following her Passions, and if she have not
had cause to yield to these reports, those Judgments are false, those Passions
injust, and those actions disorderly.

24. To comprehend, as to this point, the injustice and the aversness of most
men's minds, we need only consider that when they are Clothed with certain
Ornaments, which the Order of this World has assigned to Judges being
assembled in a certain place, and things are proposed and treated of in certain
Forms or Methods, they act ordinarily after a discreet, wise, and equitable
manner. The discourses of the one Party make no Impressions upon their Souls,
unless they know what the other side has to Answer to it. They examine
scrupulously the Proofs; they reject those which are false and uncertain; they
give leave to weaken the depositions of Witnesses; they stop only at those
which are not destroyed by reasonable disproofs, and they never declare a man
guilty of a Crime which is imputed to him, unless he be absolutely convicted of
it. The sole defect of Proofs suffices them to absolve the accused, and to
condemn the Accuser; and when they want any of these forms, they condemn
themselves of Temerity and Injustice. But when moved to judge of some one in
particular without Power or Authority, they act clear another way. All Proofs
suffice them, every Authority serves their turn, every Witness is kindly
received; and upon the bare report of Persons either prejudiced, or ill
informed, or wavering and without judgment, they will declare, without any
scruple, people guilty of all that others shall have been willing to lay to
their Charge.

25. Perhaps men will say that it is impossible to use in particular judgments
all the formalities of solemn judgments. But if men observe not the Garb and
the Pomp, they ought at least to observe therein what is necessary to assure
themselves of the truth. Now it is no less necessary to form the Judgment and
understanding in particular, to know what each Party says, then to pass
juridical Sentences of it. That which a passionate, inconsiderate, and
unconstant Witness reports in a Discourse, deserves no more belief then what he
deposes before a Judge, and he deserves even less, because the Oaths which the
Judges draw from them do much more apply people, who have any Conscience or
Honor, to say nothing that is false. A false and uncertain Proof is absolutely
false and uncertain. Nevertheless those who would make a Conscience of Judging
upon the Bench, on Proofs and Witnesses of this nature, make none at all
oftentimes of Condemning people in particular upon very weak Proofs, and
Witnesses yet less received.

26. Doubtless there is nothing more unreasonable then this unequal dealing;
but it has a very effective cause in the Corruption of men's hearts. If they
show some equity in public Judgments, it is not because they really love
Justice, they would love it every where, if they loved it truly; but on the one
part it is because the Forms to which they are bound hinders them from going
aside, and that on the other, the faults which they commit in public would not
remain absolutely unpunished, and would at least be revenged by the outcry they
would bring upon them, if they were not Chastised by the superior Judges. There
is nothing of that in the Judgments which we make in secret, upon the reports
men make us. There is neither Form to be observed, nor Infamy to be feared.
Thus as we have an entire liberty to follow the propensity of nature, we follow
it; and this propensity carrys us to receive without examination, all that men
have related to the disadvantage of our neighbor; because we naturally love to
jeer at others, to scorn them, and to see them humbled; And on the contrary, we
fear the suspension, the reservedness, and the attention which has always
something of tormenting, and laborious, which makes us rather judge at
hap-hazard, than take so much pains to judge well.

27. It is enough to have some Idea, and some love for equity to condemn this
conduct. But lest, that taking the same resolution of judging advisedly of
Reports which are made to us, and not believing any which be not clad with
circumstances, which may make it entire^y certain, we permit our selves
nevertheless, to be deceived thereby, by taking that for certain, which indeed
is not so; it is good to reflect upon the quantity of Reports, which we daily
observe, which appearing certain and undoubtful, are not yet at least found
very false. Who, for example, would not believe the testimony of a sincere man,
who says that he has learnt such and such a thing, from such an ones proper
mouth? Nevertheless, there happens daily differences amongst sincere persons,
wherein one maintains, that he has not said what the other affirms he has
heard; without any reason of suspecting either the one or the other, of
falsehood or knavery. This may happen a thousand ways, which might easily be
discovered if we would but give attention thereunto. We correct at every turn,
the equivocations which slip from our pens, in what we write, for fear they
should carry or bear false sense in other men's minds, about what is proposed to
them, and the false consequences they may bring with them: and by the help
thereof, we avoid always that what we write be not ill taken and misconstrued;
and that we be not obliged to long Illustrations. What mistakes may then follow
in transitory discourses, made without any care, application, or precaution,
wherein we only express most things imperfectly; oftentimes referring them to
the Intelligence of those we speak unto? And who can wonder if they be
sometimes taken in a wrong sense, so that the one thinks he understands what
the other never pretended to have spoken.

28. The sense and meaning of our expressions, is not absolutely included in
^he terms which we make use of to express our selves; it depends sometimes ^f
the preceding discourses. A Tone, ^n Inflection, a Behavior, an Air alters the
signification, and often it depends ^f thoughts which we imagine in those ^o
whom speak: so that if the want of ^ttention, make them take less care of ^his
Consequence, this Tone, and this ^ir, or if we be deceived in attributing ^o
them certain thoughts which they had ^ot, and which yet made part of the ^^se,
they deceive themselves almost necessarily in the understanding of what ^as
said to them, and conceive quite another sense, than that which we would ^ave
them to conceive.

29. There springs from thence yet another mistake more surprising. It Is that
as the Soul is not accustomed to conceive these things by the help of words,
every time that men take what ^s told them in a contrary sense, this false
impression is painted in their false imagination, with some certain terms,
whereby they borrow some part from those who speak, and they themselves furnish
the other part thereof. But in the end, the remembrance of what they have
added, slipping out of their minds, and not distinguishing what they have heard
from what came from them, they attribute in good earnest to him, who has
entertained them with all the words which denote the false impression they have
conceived, because they find it in their mind, clad with those words.

30. There are some likewise who reciting the discourses they have had with any
one, and not remembering exactly some things, make them speak according to the
remembrance which they have left them. But if one asked them then, if they be
certain of what they relate, they would say no, and that they would not be
vouchers. But in the conclusion, they come to quit their doubt, and to be
assured that they have none in a very pleasant manner. For in making these
rehearsals, they imprint them strongly in their memories; and on the contrary,
they forget this disposition of distrust, and uncertainty, with which they had
made them at first; so that they think in conclusion, that this remembrance is
an effect of the things themselves, whereas they came from the frequent
repetition they have made of them.

31. It is therefore just, when we accuse any one for having said something
which may fall upon him or some other, to inform our selves before hand, that
is, before we give credit to this report, whether those it concerns be agreed
of if, and when we know that they disallow it, Judgment must be suspended, and
enquiry made into the circumstances of the Report, how to determine on one side
or another. For it is sometimes more probable, that he to whom we attribute the
thing has said it, and sometimes that he has not. When for example, one
busieth himself about a discourse, which notes something of an opinion, if he
who disavows it, declares that not only he never held such a discourse, but
that he is not, nor never has been of this sentiment; his testimony is
infinitely more credible, than the report of those who should pretend to have
heard this discourse from him. For a sentiment is a thing which remains, in
regard of which we can scarcely be deceived, whereas it is very wrong easy to
take other men's words in a wrong sense, and to be persuaded in this manner, to
have heard what he has never said.

32. We should never have done, if we should report by piece-meals, all the
ways whereby we may be deceived in the intelligence of what is told us. It Is
sufficient that we be persuaded in general, that there are many, and that thus,
not only in the differences wherein the one affirms he has not said what
another lays to his charge; but also in all reports which are made us, which
are not absolutely certain, we must hinder the mind from resolving out of hand,
and stop the motives, which are the consequences and marks of belief. By this
means we shall not participate at all of other men's faults. We shall not enter
into their passions. If we apprehend some suspicion of the conduct of those,
whom we understand have drawn a Picture very disadvantagious, we shall not form
an express judgment thereof, wherein the greatest ill that these discourses can
do us, consists. Lastly, we shall always be so much more disposed to clear
them, by how much we shall not have resolved concerning them.

33. There remains only one passage, by which Reports can hurt us. It Is when we
our selves are the cause of it; and that people whom we shall have entertained
confidently, attribute to us afterward, discourses, either ridiculous or
imprudent, which of it self is able to exasperate us against them, who make or
believe these Reports. It is much more necessary to be prepared to behave our
selves like Christians in these rencounters, than it is to pretend that we can
^eave them absolutely. For how circumspect soever we may be of those we ^alk
with, we are often deceived in the quality of their minds, and yet more in the
disposition of their hearts. It Is likewise an effect of goodness to be deceived
therein, and not easily to conceive suspicions of men's fidelity. It is moreover
impossible to foresee all the ways, whereby false Spirits may abuse our words,
and all the false Idea's which they may form by this strange mixture of their
imaginations with our thoughts. We should then renounce entirely men's company,
if we would not expose our selves to these inconveniences, and as that is
neither possible nor profitable to all the world, we must be content to avoid
them as much as we can, and resolve to bear them with patience, when we are not
so happy as to avoid them.

34. If it happens then, that we fall thereinto, however it be, the first care
and application we ought to have, is to hinder, that other men's faults be not
to us an occasion of doing it on our side; and to beware also, that in
complaining, that they have done us some injustice, it be not our selves who
have offered it to them. For we know not what is imputed to them, for having
said of us, because others have reported it. Now as they may have altered our
words in relating them unto others, we may also have altered theirs, in
relating them to our selves. We must then at least be well assured of the fact
before we complain thereof, and it is wherein we ordinarily miss, because we
rather follow the impressions of passion, which is stirred by the mere Image of
the offense, whether true or false; then the light of reason which is regulated
by evidence and conviction.

35. We owe them the same justice, and the same reservedness when they
endeavor to judge of the motives, which they might have had in making these
Reports. Some are worse then others, and it is not just to attribute without
reason, the worst to them. It may be, what our spite makes us take for an
effect of hatred, disdain, and jealousy, is nothing but the effect of
Inconstancy, Indiscretion, Prevention, and of a mistaken Conscience, and of a
desire of diverting our selves. Let us have a care therefore, that our passions
go no further, than our sight; and let us not imagine without reason, that we
cannot be deceived in earnest to our disadvantage.

36. Likewise we must not be unmindful upon these occasions, to demand justice
of our selves against our selves, of all discourses, of all rash, inconstant,
indiscreet, and of all wicked Judgments, which we have made of others; or
pardon the mind for all evil effects, that they may have produced in their
heart, whereof we may judge better at that time, by our own proper judgment;
and as we know not, what God imputes to us yet, nor what remains thereof to pay
to his Justice; we ought to be ravished that he has given us means to obtain
pardon for them by suffering some small injustice, upon the account of others.

37. Afterward we must consider closely these reports and these noises which
incommode us, being careful not to give them more substance and reality then
they have. For oftentimes giving them a Being which they have not, and making
them subsist by our imagination, when they are annihilated in that of others,
we must not believe that men who busy themselves so little with the most
important Objects, yea and the most solid, are of an humor to amuse themselves
any long time at reports noised abroad without ground. All these relations have
only a transitory course, and having served for discourse, for some days, to
idle and lazy persons, they are dissipated and vanish away when they are weary
of speaking and talking of them. We have nothing to do then but let them pass,
and to slight them as vain whimseys, whereof nothing remains. Although they
should subsist for a long time, and that they should make a very durable
impression, pity must be had of those who should conserve it, seeing that it is
to them rather then to us that it is hurtful.

38. But we must not only endeavor to preserve our selves from the evil that
these reports may do us, in swaying us to impatience: We must attempt to make
them effectively useful; and they would be so doubtless, if we knew how to
profit by the instructions which we might draw from thence, For what is there,
for example, that can teach us better the vanity of that which men call
reputation, then the inconstancy which the Commonalty of the World show upon
these occasions? What Proofs soever a man has given of a good judgment, we
shall not for that be less ready to hearken with pleasure to a ridiculous
story, and without ground, which it shall please any one to make of him,
provided there be found any cross mind which gives him liberty.

The World is naturally so wicked that it always seconds those who will destroy
another reputation, and if it has sometimes an esteem for certain people,
it is in some sort against its will and in spite of it; so that the World is
always glad to be assisted to get rid of this esteem, as of a thing that
incommodes it. What is there then more ridiculous then to feed this vain Smoke,
and to make it the end of our actions and labors?

39. As it is necessary that Worldly Goods be intermixed with bitterness, least
men should cleave too fast to them, we ought to be glad also that Conversation
which is none of the least of these Goods have its disgust; because there is
almost nothing to which it is more dangerous to adhere unto. Men receive from
it an Infinity of sensible and insensible Wounds; Virtue is often quite lost by
it, and we gather together all the corruption which is spread into several
minds. All that witholds us then to oblidge us to a greater solitude, and to
have Communication with few people, is very advantageous to us. Now there is
nothing more capable to make us loath the Commerce of this World then to find
little Honesty and Faith in most people that we meet therein, and to learn by
experience how much it is necessary to be upon our Guard when we are to Treat
with those whom we scarcely know. It may be said also that it is a happiness to
be freed from an ill affected Spirit, and which is capable to abuse what is
told it; that we ought to esteem our selves happy when we have notice by some
indiscreet report which is raised of us, that we had no more Commerce with it
without great necessity.

40. Nevertheless we ought not to ^^etch that Commerce so far as frequently to
break with our Friends, when we ^ave cause to impute some indiscretion ^o them;
for we must suffer in them this ^ault as others. But it ought to be a warning
to us continually to behave our selves better in respect of them, not to injure
our selves, and to be more upon (...) Guard; and by this means persons who are
neither Trusty nor Faithful will ^ecome oftentimes the most useful, by ^bliging
us to apply our selves to be more cautions of our words, and to a^oid all that
may give them occasion to abuse them.

The Sixth Treatise.
Of the Remedies against Suspicions.
1. CHarity carries us not toward God and our Neighbor, but in some manner
toward it self. I do this, says St. Austin, By the love of your love; Amore
tui amoris facio istud: And it is in the same sense that the Kingly Prophet said
in one of his, Psalms, My Soul has earnestly coveted to desire your
justifications. Concupivit anima mea desiderare justificationes tuas. He did
not only desire to accomplish the Law of God, which he understands by the word
Justifications, but he also desired the desire of it. One desire produced
another, because it is impossible that we love any one, but we must love also
the Love which we bear him, desire to increase it, and fear the diminution and
decay of it.

It Is then a necessary effect of a true and sincere Love for our neighbor to
make us fear all that may slacken this Love. All the Clouds which obscure never
so little the luster of Charity, are hurtful to it. All that hinders it from
publishing it self freely, afflicts it; and it tends always to have a free
course to its motions, and to dissipate all the obstacles which may hinder,
stop, or trouble them.

Now there is nothing occasions this bad effect, more than the disadvantagious
impressions we conceive of our neighbors, either upon Reports from others, or
from the Idea's we form of them our selves. And consequently there is nothing
Charity ought to be more vigilant of.

2. These Impressions are capable of weakening Charity many ways. What care
soever we take not to judge at all; these Impressions nevertheless, give us an
inclination thereto; for they are the effects of suspicions, and suspicions
dispose to Judgments: and if these Judgments be rash, they may not only hurt,
but even blot out Charity, because rash Judgment s may be, according to St.
Thomas. mortal sins. Thus, although these Impressions be not yet formed
Diseases, we ought nevertheless to take them for forerunners, and presages of
a menacing sickness. They are like the first Fits of a dangerous Fever which is
like to follow, except it be prevented by remedies, which Christian prudence
may furnish us with.

3. These Impressions make us suspect the good it self which we see in others,
and hinder also from partaking of it, both by the joy we ought to be sensible
of, and by the thanks which it is just we should render to God, which is a very
great evil. For God distributing his Graces to diverse members, which compose
the Body of his Son, which is the Church, and not giving it all to all, he will
nevertheless that they become all common to them by Joy and by Thanks, which
renders them all partakers of them. No man can say, that his proper Graces and
Favors are sufficient without those of others, which made David say, Particeps
ego sum omnium timentium te, and custodientium mandata tua.

4. These Impressions dispose men insensibly to take ill some words or actions
of themselves innocent, and wherewith we should not have been troubled, if the
mind had not been already prepossessed with some suspicion. One Impression
becomes the source of another, and what is worse, we are almost never aware of
it; because we never ascend to the first foundation, which is a rashness of the
first impression.

5. As they stop the course of our Charity toward those of whom we harbor
these disadvantagious opinions, they often produce the same effect in their
hearts, because we oftentimes suppress them not so clearly, as that they
perceive them not. Our backwardness therein produces the like in them, which
God imputes to us, in respect of the occasion we have given thereof. Thus we
are insensibly separated from one another, and if there remain yet some
Charity, it is so disguised, and hid by the Clouds of suspicions, that it
remains without action.

6. We must therefore shun these Impressions as much as we can. This is the
conclusion whereto Reason leads us. But we cannot always; For there are some
Impressions grounded upon such evidence, that it is not possible to defend our
selves from them. Likewise, we cannot establish for a Rule, not to give ear to
Reports, disadvantagious to our neighbor. For if they be true, and if they be
necessary, or useful, we ought to hearken to them. Now there are some of this
nature, when Jesus Christ wills that we take two witnesses of the faults which
we desire to correct in our Brethren, he obliges these witnesses to see them,
and when he orders to tell them to the Church, he wills the Church to hearken
to them. Seeing that he inclines us to lament for the mischiefs of the Church,
he pretends not that we should shut up our eyes, that we may not see them;
seeing that he wills us to judge of false Prophets by their Works, he supposes
that we know them. Finally, seeing that he obliges us to treat with Men, and to
vary our Conduct according to their different dispositions, he would gladly,
without doubt, that we be not dim sighted, as to what appears to us thereof,
without which, it would be impossible, but that we should fall into these
snares men lay for us, which he commands us to avoid in these following words,
Cavete autem ab hominibus.

7. There is properly then none but false and rash Impressions, which we are
obliged to cast away and destroy. It is enough in regard of the true ones, when
contrary or against our neighbors, that we receive them with trouble, and that
God see in our hearts, that we should be very glad they might be false; that
they serve not as a sustenance to our malignity, but as an object of grief to
our Charity, and in a word, if we look upon them in the same manner as our own,
the continuation and increase whereof, we do not at all desire.

8. But if this disposition be sincere, it is absolutely necessary that it make
us glad when we have means to expunge this Impression, and that we know that we
are deceived. It Is by this means that we may judge of the bottom of the heart.
Because if men, on the contrary, pluck not these opinions from us but with
pains; if we feel a secret spite against those who disabuse us; if we have
eyes only to see what favors our suspicions, and that we have none for all
that discover the uncertainty and falsity of them; it is a sign that we have some
connection or tie thereunto, and that far from thinking them a burden, which is
troublesome to us, and whereof we would willingly be delivered, we take a
particular pleasure therein, which springs from the depravedness of the heart.

9. Charity demands yet more than this. It makes us not only receive willingly,
all that is able to deface or diminish our suspicions, when men offer to
undeceive us, but oftentimes obliges us to go even to Truth, and I seek of our
selves the explanations which we are able to find: For it makes us regard these
explanations as a Good, which deserves to be sought after, as the deliverance
from evil, and from tentation; And lastly, as a debt of Justice which we ought
to practice; Seeing that we all desire that others should practice toward us,
this equity of clearing as much as they should be able, the Truth, instead of
continuing in the Impressions, and those very disadvantageous, which men shall
have given of us.

10. There is nothing more evident than the Justice and the Importance of this
Duty. But for all that it is frequently very ill practiced. For most part of
the world are equally easy to receive Impressions, and neglect to clear
themselves of them. Being more apt to suppose them true, than to examine
whether they are so or no, Self-Love ordinarily makes this side be taken; and
for that there needs nothing but to suffer the two main springs of men's Rule
and Conduct, Idleness and Vanity to act: Idleness hinders us from the care of
informing our selves exactly of things, because it is always accompanied with
some sort of labor. Vanity fixing us to our opinions, makes us apprehend,
being obliged to go from our word, and to acknowledge that we have been
inconstant and credulous. It Is by this means that the most false impressions
become perpetual, and that there are so few that shake them off. When we cannot
conserve them absolutely, we conserve always something of them, because we
desire to give always self-love that consolation of not having been deceived
without some reason. Even those, who through a motive of Conscience, forbear
judging absolutely, are more easy to continue in suspense, than to free
themselves wholly from it, by an entire explication. For Self-love is not
mistaken in this condition: If we condemn not people, we think therefore we are
dispensed from justifying them, defending, maintaining, and approving their
Interest. We weaken by this doubt, the praises men give them; we obscure the
glory of their Virtue, and we keep them in a low condition, in looking upon
them as suspected persons.

11. As Charity inspires us with sentiments, quite opposite to those of
Self-love, so Charity makes us take a quite different Conduct. And to express
in few words, the degrees through which Charity leads us. 1. It causes us, not
to receive these disadvantagious impressions of our neighbor, but by necessity
and constraint, 2. It carries us to keep them in their just boundaries, and to
avoid taking for certain what is not so. 3. Charity makes us always desire
sincerely, that these Impressions be taken from us, and favorably to hear
those who undertake to do it. 4. Charity enclines us to embrace with joy, all
the ways to make Truth evident, and to free it self clearly of those
impressions which hold its motives by a kind of constraint, by keeping
nevertheless certain measures prescribed by prudence, not referring them to
those who shall have reported these things, and not rendering them odious, by
discovering them to be the Authors of those Reports.

12. There are some people who dare not clear themselves of their suspicion,
for fear of startling those of whom they conceived them, in opening themselves
to them. But there is a great deal of appearance that Self-love has a greater
share than Charity in this reserve. Charity is not so fearful, because it
imagines not so easily, that those to whom we declare these suspicions are able
to hurt it. Charity would think it an injury to attribute to them a
delicateness so unjust as this. Charity knows how to make these explications in
a simple and humble manner, that it is not possible almost to hurt it. For she
is so far from showing any inclination for those suspicions, that she shows on
the contrary, that she desires nothing more than to forsake them in changing
her opinion. We scarcely offend against those who desire to be enlightened with
this Spirit. But that which makes one troubled at these explications, is, that
those who do them, witness oftentimes more eagerness to maintain their
opinions, than to instruct themselves whether they be true or not.

13. If we followed these Rules and this Conduct, we should see the greatest
part of the differences which weaken Charity amongst persons professing Piety,
vanish away. For there are very few of them which are not produced, or which
are not maintained by these Impressions, which we do not explain at all. But
the worst is, that every one would that others do them this Justice, and yet
there are not many that practice it themselves in respect of others.
Nevertheless this common Injustice must not withold and hinder us from doing to
others what Charity prescribes us, seeing that this Injustice is evil for them
who fall into it, and that Charity is always a Good, and a Spring of Goodness
for all those who follow her Motives and Rules.

14. Behold what we owe to our Neighbor when we have conceived these
Impressions to his disadvantage. But what ought we to do when others on the
contrary are prejudiced against us by injurious and unjust suspicions? Is it
sufficient to bear them with patience, and to make no passionate nor angry
complaints of them? It would be something to Preserve and keep our selves in
this moderation toward them. But if we Consult nevertheless the rule of
Charity, we shall find that oftentimes we must proceed farther to be satisfied
exactly therein. Because some times we have reason to think and consider these
Impressions as dangerous Diseases for our Neighbor, and to judge at the same
time, that there are none but we who can remedy it, or at least that we can do
it better then any one. Now in these two Circumstances can we doubt that
Charity obliges us not to do all that we can to destroy in them these
preventions, be it in clearing them as to the Truth, be it in employing other
means proper to give them other thoughts of us, or lastly be it in avoiding all
that may fortify their preoccupations.

15. St. Austin teaches these Maxims, and has practiced them himself after an
admirable manner. He looks upon these suspicions against the Honor of his
Neighbor of so great a concern, that he calls them a Poison able to make Souls
to perish. It is to be wished, says he, that those who have these thoughts,
Aug. Ep. 223.
Witness publicly what they have in the heart, that all sorts of Remedies may
be employed, rather then suffer them to be lost, without knowing it, by the
Poison of these pernicious doubts and suspicions: Quam ut taciti pereant
perniciasis suspicionibus venenati. He teaches that we ought not to be
contented with the testimony of our conscience, and that Charity which seeks
not after her own interests, obliging to do good, not only before God, but also
before men, we ought rather to endeavor to persuade them of the falsness of
their suspicions, then to rebuke them, because they make them appear. Magis
satagendum est quomodo persuadeatur hominibus falsum esse quod suspicantur,
quam quomodo arguendi sunt qui suspiciones suas vocibus verbisque declarant.

The principle of this Doctrine is contained in this other Maxim of this holy
Doctor, That, although he who disdains the Practices of men disdains also their
rash suspicions, De Civitate Dei. l. 14. c. 19.
yet if he be truly an honest man, he does not disdain their Salvation, because
he has so much love for Justice, that he loves even his Enemies, and desires
to correct them, to the end he may have them for Companions of his happiness.

Finally as it is clear that those we suspect unjustly are not more undeserving
our Charity then those that injure us, we might apply to them what St. Austin
said of the obligation those, who have suffered some Injury, have to cure the
Soul of what has caused it. This man, says he, has injured you, Aug. Sermon.
16. de verb. Dom. in Evan Mat.
and in injuring you he has hurt himself mightily, and you slight this hurt of
your Brothers. You see him perish, and you care not if he perish; your silence
in this regard is more Criminal than the Injury which he has done you. Pejor
es tacendo quam ille conviciando. Injuries therefore done you must be
forgotten, but forget not your Brothers hurt.

16. These are the Rules established by this holy Doctor, and he has himself
practiced them on an important occasion. For having been suspected by Albina,
an illustrious Roman Lady, to have contributed through Interest to the Oath
Pinian made to the People of Hyppo, never to go out of their City, and to
receive Ordination no where else. Instead of complaining of a suspicion so ill
grounded, he thought himself obliged to purge himself thereof by Oath, which he
did with an edifying humility, without reproaching Albina, and without other
Prospect then to cure her of the Wounds she had received by this suspicion.
Sananda ista in vobis, non accusanda sunt, and nostra purganda vobis est Fama,
si est Domino purgata Conscientia.

17. This same Saint having rebuked something too severely, although without
naming the person, the error of a Bishop who believed that God was Corporeal,
and that he might be seen with human eyes, and this Bishop being so troubled at
it that he refused to see him, though he offered to beg his Pardon for the
offense, suspecting perchance that it was through Artifice that he showed so
much desire to appease him. Saint Austin, instead of being struck with this
suspicion, endeavored only to molifie this Bishop, and to free him from this
Impression, and there is nothing more humble then the manner of his doing it.
First he condemned the harshness of his words. I have been, said he, imprudent
and lavish in this reproach, and have not considered what I owe to my Brother
and College in the Episcopacy; I am so far from vindicating my self in this
Point, that I Condemn my self: I am so far from excusing it, that I accuse my
self of it. I beg I may be pardoned, and that this Offense may be concealed by
the remembrance of our ancient Friendship. And to destroy the suspicion which
this Bishop had of being slighted by him, and that it was by deceit that he
sought it, he desired another Bishop whom he took for a Mediator, to free him
from these thoughts, Assure him, said he, of my sincerity, and let him know
with what sentiments of grief I have spoken to you of his discontent, how far I
am from detracting and contemning him, how much I fear God in his Person, and
how much I look upon him our Head, in whose Body we are all Brothers. Noverit
quam eum non contemnam, and quantum in illo Deum timeam, et cogitem Caput
nostrum in ejus Corpore Fratres sumus.

18. Behold what St. Austin believed was requisite to be practiced on occasions
where there is hopes of Curing other men's suspicions in giving them an account
of their Conduct informing them of their true intentions. What if men judge
with cause that these kind of explications would be unuseful, as it happens
often enough; Charity should then apply us to seek out other means to destroy
these preventions, not because they are hurtful, but because they may hurt
those who have them. Thus instead of complaints and reproaches, which serve
only to exasperate men's minds, we should try to show them who are prejudiced
against us, a quite contrary disposition to that they lay to our Charge. If
they think we have no esteem nor affection for them, we should endeavor to
convince them by effective Proofs, that we love them, and that we esteem them
truly. If they imagine that we mistrust them, we ought to seek dilligently some
means to give them marks of Trust: If they suspect us for some fault which we
are not guilty of, we should labor to take away by little and little this
Impression from them, by avoiding what may either entertain and augment it, and
by dealing with them in such a manner as is capable to destroy it; and by this
means we shall be so far from being hurt by these suspicions, that they give us
means to correct our selves of diverse faults, and to enrich our selves by the
practice of many Virtues.

19. There would be often times likewise no need to dissipate these suspicions
by an application so express. It would be sufficient to dissemble them, and to
continue acting as accustomed with those who are addicted to them, without
telling them we perceive them. The uniformity of our Conduct and Behavior
would consume them by little and little; and their minds would find they were
changed, even without being aware thereof. But our impatiency spoils all; we
cannot expect the slow remedies; We would carry the minds away by force, that
is to say, we would make them act against their nature.

20. Although a man have hurt himself by his own fault, though he have by the
disorderliness of his living, made himself sick, no man pretends to cure him of
his wounds and diseases by reproaching him; we must have recourse to the
remedies proper for his distemper; and not wonder that they act only with time.
Now we ought not to distinguish in this case the diseases of the Mind from
those of the Body. How voluntary soever they may be, they are not for all that,
less durable, nor less obstinate. He knows the nature of man's mind but badly,
who thinks, that when it is once prepossessed, that Self-love has an interest
in an opinion, that there is formed an inclination in the heart to judge in a
certain manner, we are able to blot out in short time, all these impressions.
It is necessary to change this sentiment, that the mind get new Lights, that it
be familiar therein, that it loose a certain distrust, which the opinions
wherewith it is prepossessed, give it of all that is contrary thereunto; that
Self-love accustom it self by little and little, to suffer the reproach of
being deceived, and that it forget in some sort, that it had taken another
part. All this has need of time, and it is ridiculous to pretend, that because
some suspicions relate to us, that we ought out of hand to rid our selves of
them, and that men's minds ought to act in our consideration in an extraordinary
manner.

21. Perhaps there may be more evil in this niceness, which makes us suffer
with so much impatience, the unjust suspicions men conceive of us, than there
are in these suspicions, whereof we complain. We judge of others, according to
our understanding, and those who have but little, judge sometmes ill enough,
their hearts for all that, not consenting much thereunto. Oftentimes they have
Charity for those they condemn unjustly, and would be very willing ^o serve
them. Whereas this impatience which we experience in the evil judgments men
make of us, is a fault which certainly comes from the depravity of the heart,
and from the pride whereof it is full.

What do we know but God will permit sometime, that men judge of us little
favorably, and that they suspect us wrongfully, to make us more sensible of
this wound, and to give us means to heal it? What do we know also, but that he
has annexed our Salvation to the use of this means? Thus in complaining of it,
we complain in reality of a favorable remedy God offers us. We oppose the
designs of his mercy toward us; we contemn his favors, and we refuse to enter
into the way of salvation.

The Seventh Treatise.
That we ought not to be scandalized at good Men's faults.
^eatus qui non fuerit scandalizatus me. WHen Jesus Christ said, Blessed is he
who shall not be scandalized in me, he gave us to understand by this
expression, that it is a happiness very rare to be free from this scandal, and
by consequence that it is a misery very frequent to fall into it. Now if it be
true, that the number of these happy men be small, and the number of these
miserable Creatures great, we have all a great interest to instruct our selves,
what it is to be scandalized in Jesus Christ; and of the extent of this Word,
seeing that we would all be of that small number of these blessed, and not of
the great number of the miserable.

2. Jesus Christ is properly a subject of scandal to those who know him not,
and he is unknown to men only, because he is hidden from them. We stumble not
against a stone, but only because we see it not; We hurt not our selves against
Jesus Christ, but because we know not what he is. Thus to be scandalized at
Jesus Christ, is not to know him, and to contemn him through blindness and
ignorance. That which hides Jesus Christ from us is therefore that which makes
Jesus Christ an occasion of scandal to us. Now there are many things that hid
him from men.

His Meanness, his Poverty, his Sufferings, and all the marks of his Infirmity
have hid him from the Jews. They could not believe that this Messiah, whom they
imagined to themselves, ought to be environed round about with Pomp and Glory,
could be that miserable man they saw amongst them, and who was not
distinguished from other men by any exterior Luster. They could not imagine
that man whom they had crucified, was the Author himself of Life, and therefore
St. Paul calls the Cross, The Jews Scandal. Judae is Scandalum.

4. But they are not only the Jews who are scandalized at the weakness of Jesus
Christ. This scandal comprehends generally all those who love the World. All
those, faith St. Austin, who love what Jesus Christ disdained, and who hate
what he loved, despise Jesus Christ. For is it not to disdain his Wisdom to
judge of things quite otherwise than he does, and to choose quite contrary to
him, to think that a Good, which he believed an Evil, and an Evil what he
thought a Good? Now to disdain the wisdom of Jesus Christ, is to disdain Jesus
Christ, and to be scandalized at him.

5. O how great is this scandal, and how common! For how few are there who are
exempt? How few who esteem not men less when clad with the Liveries of Jesus
Christ, that is to say, with his poverty, and who inwardly honor them not more,
because they were those of his enemies, which are the pomps of the world, which
St. Austin, with reason, calls the Devils rags, paunos Diaboli. What are
Princes Courts, or rather what is the World, but a place where it is a shameful
thing to imitate Jesus Christ?

6. But yet we may not fall into this scandal, which is only proper to those
who are possessed with wordly Love. We may nevertheless say, that there are few
amongst the just themselves, who participate perfectly of this happiness, of
not being scandalized at Jesus Christ, not only because they have not always
some inclination for things which Jesus Christ has disdained; but also because
they are scandalized at him many other ways, which are necessary to be
considered.

7. Not to be scandalized at Jesus Christ, we ought to know him, and to know
him, we ought to understand him entirely. Now Jesus Christ entirely is not only
the Head, but also the Members. He lives in them, he is hidden in them. Thus we
take another for him when we despise him in his members wherein he is hid.

8. It is much easier to contemn Jesus Christ in his Members then in himself,
because there he is more hidden. He was not private in the world, but by
meanness of nature, but he is often private in the faithful by many faults,
which Jesus has not had, and also by many faults, which rob us sometimes of
the splendour and the odor of their virtue, and make us suspect that they had
nothing in them but human. And as this scandal is very dangerous we must
embrace all ways imaginable to shun it.

9. One of the principal ways is to comprehend well with what conditions Jesus
Christ is hid in the faithful. We must know for that, that this Divine Kingdom,
which he came to establish in this world, is an interior Kingdom, Regnum Dei
intra vos est. He is hid in the bottom of the Soul; where God resides with the
Riches of his Grace without showing often any splendour outwardly. A Soul by the
possession of this Kingdom, becomes the object of Gods pleasure; she becomes
his Throne and Temple. The Angels who know him, discover therein all these
grandeurs. But men discover them only by certain obscure lights, which make
them appear in their actions, and in the conduct of their lives, all the rest
is darkened by the infirmity of the flesh.

10. This obscurity wherewith God covers in the World the Treasures of Grace,
which he puts into Souls, produces great Good, and great Harm, according to
the good or bad use is made thereof. It Is one of the great means by which God
exercises in the world his Mercy and Justice. It hinders on the one part, that
the Just exalt not themselves, nor loose themselves by the sight and knowledge
of their proper excellence, and it delivers them on the other part from the
tentation which might be caused in them, by the esteem and admiration of men
who should know them. It conserves them in the way of Faith, in depriving them
of the sight of onething which would draw them from it by motives too human.
For if St. Austin say, Aug. de Civir. l. 15. c. 4.
that God has not been willing that the renewing which Grace produces in our
Souls should extend it self, even to the Body, by conferring immortality to it,
lest the hope we ought to have in him, should be too interressed; If this same
Saint ascertain, that it is by the same reason that he permits the just to be
afflicted in this world, as well as the wicked, for fear we should aim in the
services which we render to God, to exempt our selves from temporal evils, We
may likewise say, That he permits us not to see the excellence of a just Souls
beauty, and the horrible deformity of a Soul in sin, lest it should be through
these interessed motives, that we should desire justice, and have an horror for
sin.

11. But if this obscurity produce some good in respect of some, it may be
said, that it produces very great evils in respect of others, and that it is the
principal cause of wicked men's blindess. For it is that makes worldly people
believe, that there is nothing in men worthy of esteem, but what flatters their
senses, and contemn most part of honest and good men, not seeing in them what
they love. What is told them of the good of the soul, they look upon it as a
mere imagination, because they neither perceive nor see it. Thus they
distinguish men only by the outward qualities, and by the relation they have to
their passions, and as virtuous men participate always of the Spirit of the
World, they participate also a little of this Illusion. The too great ties they
have of outward qualities, take from them the sentiment of the spiritual misery
of many Souls; and often also they have not the esteem they ought to have of
the real Goods others possess, because they are covered with outward faults,
of which they are too sensible. This is one of the most ordinary means, whereby
Jesus Chist is scandalized in his members. For as the Jews would that their
Messiah should be environed with rays of Glory, we would also that honest men
should have no defect, neither inwardly nor outwardly, and unless they have
this agreeableness which strikes our senses, we have a propensity to condemn
them, as seeing their faults and their miseries, but not their Riches and their
Goods.

12. This scandal increases infinitely, when these faults which we observe in
them, are not simple natural faults, but faults of manners, and true and
absolute faults. For if we only need to beg of God to preserve us from the
tentation which springs from thence; there is danger that these faults which we
see in those, who pass for pious men, do humble and debase them so in our
sight, that we deprive our selves of the edification, which we might draw from
all the other virtues which we observe in them. Oftentimes these virtues are
suspected by us; we begin to apprehend that we have been deceived. We know not
what to stick to, and we enter into a certain despair of finding in the world
solid virtues.

13. This tentation is at the same time very dangerous, and very ordinary. For
it is a hard thing to live long with pious people, but we shall find in them
many faults, not only imaginary, but true and real ones. Human Wit never hides
it self absolutely. They suffer themselves to be cheated and beguiled. They are
carried away by unjust prejudices: they are sometimes precipitate in their
judgments. We see some who are resolved in their thoughts, others who are
curious and delicate in what concerns them nearly: Others who are tender and
nice in small inconveniences. There are some that their zeal carries to
excesses. Lastly, There are almost none in whom nature shows not her self by
many ways. But if men thereupon are inclined to condemn them, they come to
condemn all the world, and to pass from aversion for faults, to aversion for
men, according to this saying of an ancient person. Qui vitia odit, homines
odit.

14. It Is good therefore to fortify our selves against this tentation by
considerations, which may be found in Faith. Now Faith furnishes us with what
may be able to dissipate this tentation, if we apply our selves seriously to
it. For Faith shows us that the faults of the just are profitable to them in
diverse manners, as has already been said, and likewise, that oftentimes God
permits them more for others than for themselves. He darkens their splendour,
that those who deserve not to enjoy it, may be deprived of it. He takes from
before our eyes, their good examples, to punish us for not having profited by
them; he holds back the odor of their Piety, because the world has not
received it as it ought.

15. We are scandalized then often at certain faults in just men, which are not
so much for them as for us. They hurt them not, but they hurt us; they are
Thorns which are good for them, because they warrant their Piety from the
danger it would be in of being withered by men's praises; but these Thorns
wounding us, hinder us from approaching, and from perceiving the good smell of
them. And thus there are none but we who loose thereby.

16. Just men's faults enter into the order of Providence, and often God makes
use of them to execute his greatest designs against the wicked. Possibly St.
Chrysistome might have dealt better with Aroadia and Eudoxia; and that if he
had done so, they had not abandoned him to the fury of Theophilus: But because
Theophilus, and the wicked Bishops of that time deserved to be abandoned to
their passions, and blinded by a success, conform to their designs; God did
permit this Saint to follow the heat of his zeal.

17. There are virtuous men, who examining the Life of St. Thomas of
Canterbury, were persuaded to believe that he might, without violating the Laws
of the Church, have yielded to many things, which King Henry the Second desired
of him; yet the heart of this Holy Bishop being right, and the heart of King
Henry corrupted, the proceedings of this Saint being Humble and Just, the Kings
proceedings violent and unjust, God rather judged of this difference by the
purity of the Saints Heart, and the wickedness of his adversary, than by the
bottom of the cause, and did not omit to justify him by many miracles, when the
whole Church was divided upon his score.

18. The Cardinal of Arles was Author of an enterprise which caused great
troubles, which was the deposing of Eugenius IV. This action was not followed
in the Church. It is no where observed that he repented the act; and yet he
has done miracles after his death, God having not laid to his charge what he
did through zeal of Justice, though in some circumstances which rendered his
action imprudent. St. Peter of Luxemburg, St. Vincent Ferrier, St. Catheriue of
Siena, were in diverse and different times of Schism, and by consequence some
of them for the Antipope; yet nevertheless this blemish has not hindered their
Sanctity.

19. They who write the Lives of Saints think that it is their Duty to set forth
all their virtues, and to hide all their faults. But I do not know if they
should not do as well to take notice of all their faults, as of their virtues,
to hinder thereby, that men be not scandalized at such as appear in some pious
men which we know. Whosoevor for example, shall make reflections on the manner
how Three Saints, to wit, St. Epiphanius, St. Jerome, and St. Cyril of
Alexandria, acted upon account of St. John Chrysostom, will wonder no more
that virtuous men be sometimes prevented, and fall sometimes into excess, and
they will conceive, that there is very great limitation in this passage.
Charitas operit multitudinem peceatorum.

20. We see often in Saints some faults which God sees no more there; whereas
we see not in our selves, those which are truly there. If they commit faults
through ignorance, the heat of their charity purifies them, even without their
acknowledging them, and thus they subsist no more. If they commit some through
weakness, or through some passion, they humble themselves, and they rise again
more strong than they were before their fall, and by this means again they
subsist no more. But the faults of Souls grown cold, although more inconsiderable
in appearance, subsist always in the eyes of God, because they want this fire
of Charity to consume them, and because they are not restored again absolutely.

27. We must distinguish faults of passion from faults of darkness, and faults
of light; the faults of understanding, from faults of the heart: Nor is there
properly any but God who can judge of faults which spring from ignorance,
wherein Cupidity appears not to have any share at all: Nor is it permitted for
men to determine of the degree.

22. All Saints have in their hearts a sincere disposition to love, and follow
every known Truth. But they know not equally all Truths, nether are they
equally appropriated to all those they know. God enlightens and touches them
differently, according to the several designs he has upon them, and by giving
them an ardent Love for certain Truths, by which he will sanctify them; he
suffers sometimes that in respect of others they remain in some kind of
obscurity, or in a want of judgment; which comes not from the corruption of
their hearts, but from this, that God applys them to other things. It Is this
that makes these who love these Truths, to be oftentimes troubled to see them
so little concerned for them, because they consider not that they themselves
are in this deprivation of Light and Judgment, in regard of many others, and
that the heart of man being limited, and narrow in the condition it is in, as
to this life, God does not exact, that it should love Truth, Truth in all its
extent, but only that it be the love of Truth, and not Cupidity, which should
be the principal of its actions.

23. When God leaves the Saints thus in Ignorance, as to many Truths, or
diverts and stops the occasions, which might engage them to commit some faults
through ignorance, or hides by the purity of their hearts, and by the ardency of
their Charity, those which they commit, it happens nevertheless from hence,
that we may easily make ill use of their examples, whether it be in imagining
that we ought to follow blindly all they have done, or in behaving our selves,
so as to condemn these Saints, because of these wants of Light. But both the
one and the other of these scandals must be remedied by the consideration of
this various dispensation which God makes of the knowledge of this Truth. For
we see by this on the one side, that there may remain darkness in the Saints,
in respect of certain points, in which by consequence they ought not to be
taken for guides, and we have reason to conclude on the other, that it follows
not, that those in whom we perceive the wants of Light, in respect of certain
Truths, cannot be Saints by the application they have to others.

24. We may add to this, that perchance those who hurt in appearance certain
Truths through ignorance, and lack of Light; have before God, more love and zeal
for them, than these who show a great heat for those same Truths. For God has
particularly regard to the bottom of the heart, and when he sees there a
sincere love for Truth and Justice, a disposition to follow them at the cost of
all things, he has less regard to the darkness, which hinders this Love to
spread it over certain particular points. Whereas it happens sometimes, that
this Zeal, so apparent for certain Truths, is nothing but the effect of
Self-love, and a tie to its proper sense. We maintain Truth, as we should
maintain what is false, if we had the same engagements to do it; and oftentimes
God fees nothing that is sincere at the bottom of the heart, which leads
directly to Truth.

25. Those who by a more exact study of antiquity, should have acquired
knowledge and some light, which very Holy persons should not have had, should
yet have occasion to humble themselves by this thought; that those Truths, tho
great and important, are not ordinarily those, the practice whereof is most
frequent, and which are the principal of the common actions which compose our
lives. Thus as the occasion of practicing them are not very ordinary, they
become often barren in these who know them, and we may easily believe, that men
love them without any real or effective love for them. It is altogether
contrary with common Truths, as with those which teach to converse with our
neighbor, in an edifying manner, to have God present in all our actions, and
to do nothing but by his Motive, and his Spirit, to mortify all the inordinate
excesses of Self-love, to lop off all things useless to this life, to correct
the senses in all that we can, to moderate our passions, to govern all the
motions of Mind and Body, not to complain of little evils, to receive
favorably those who mind us of some defect, not to be tied to our own Sense
and Light; to be reserved in our judgments. Those Truths which prescribe these
actions, are not less Truths than the others, whereof we have spoken, but they
have this advantage, that the practice is ordinary, and that we scarcely
flatter our selves with loving them, without we love them truly. These are
those which all the Saints have known, and it is in practicing them, and loving
them, that they are become Saints. Whereas it happens, that those who are more
knowing in these Truths less frequent, and which serve only as Rules to great
Actions, apply themselves much less to these common Truths, whose continual
practice is the true source of the sanctification of Souls, and of the
edification we give to those who are witnesses of our actions.

26. Neverthsless, it happens some times that persons who appear very exact,
and very edifying in their common actions, are sunk down in great businesses,
for having neglected to search the Lights which were necessary for them to
march therein, or through other secret reasons, which God knows, and that
others on the contrary, whose Lives indeed were less exact, and stuffed more with
small faults, show great courage and force in those in those occasions of
importance, and show also, that they had at the bottom of the heart, a solid
and true love for God. And that is it which ought to humble in their turn, those
who are more outwardly and orderly and more composed, because they know not for
all, that what their force is, and that perchance they are with all this
outward regularity, weaker and more imperfect before God, than those whose
imperfections strike more upon the eyes of the world. So great a care has God
to keep in this life, all things in obscurity, and uncertainty, to take from us
all right of magnifying our selves in our selves, and contemning others.

The Eighth Treatise.
The means of profiting by bad Sermons.
1. WE cannot avoid sometimes hearing bad Sermons. For besides that, we know
not all the bad Preachers, and that it is not just to avoid them until we know
them. The Preachers themselves are not alike in Preaching, either always good,
or always bad; and that thus in seeking out a good Sermon, we oftentimes find a
very bad one. Methinks a pious person cannot dispense with himself, from
hearing Preachers, what ever they be. Because Sermons in general being
necessary for the Church, and God having chosen this way for the instruction of
his people, it is requisite, that they whose Piety serves for a Rule to others,
contribute to cause this ministry to subsist, in giving the example to render
themselves assiduous in public instructions. Otherwise if through a judgment
which they might make of the Preachers; they did persuade the people to
dispense with the hearing them, this Ministry would by little and little be
laid aside, and the simple poor people would find themselves thereby deprived
of the principal means which God has given them to be instructed with the
necessary Truths for their Salvation.

2. But that they may not ordain only this action to the edification of others,
and that they may profit also thereby themselves, their Piety ought to apply
them to find some means whereby they may profit by all sorts of Sermons: and
seeing that it is not in their power to cause, that all those who engage
themselves to preach, acquit themselves of this ministry as they ought, they
ought to labor to acquit themselves as they should of that duty of hearing
Sermons, which is another function, having likewise its obligations, and by
consequence its rules.

3. We see at first, that the seeking out of these means, and of these rules,
ought to consist in finding out Holy inventions, whereby to edify our selves by
bad Sermons. For there needs no method to gain by good ones. Every one knows,
that he ought to open his heart to solid Truths, which are declared to him
therein; that he ought to beg Grace of God, that they increase as Divine Seed;
that he ought to conserve them in his memory as a precious Treasure; that he
must act in such sort, that weighing them often in his mind, they may take
root, and spread themselves there, and that lastly he must seek occasions to
reduce them into practice.

4. We know yet, that we ought not to place in the number of bad Sermons,
those, wherein Truths, otherwise solid and edifying, should be proposed after a
gross and unpleasing manner; wherein the Preacher should have but a little
Talent, little of outward address, little facility to express himself. For
provided, that the Subject be good, it is requisite that a judicious Auditor
fix himself thereto, and that he make use of it to cover the outward defects.

5. It ought to be the same, when that which stumbles us in a Preacher, is
nothing but the little relation of his thoughts to the matter. For provided,
that the Truths be good and profitable in themselves, what imports it, that the
relation of it be so just? But I would gladly, says one, that they had been
proposed to us in another application. Well, separate them from this
application which stumbles you, and consider them in themselves, or make you
another application of them. It Is always to oblige you, to have given you means
to be attentive to these Truths. They deserve very well to be attentively
considered for themselves.

6. But there are Sermons which are defective, even at the botom, and which are
only made up of words, which have more of sound than of sense in them. There
are some wherein are distributed only shallow speculations, and unsolid
thoughts: which leave the Soul in want and hunger, whereto we can add nothing
for the correction of her manners, and wherein the people comprehend as little,
as if they were made or preached in an unknown language. There are some
likewise, wherein the Preachers dissemble or weaken the Truth by a criminal
cowardice or baseness, or alter it through Ignorance or Interest.

As it is impossible that those who have a little light, should not acknowledge
these faults, we ought not to force them that they should dissemble them to
themselves, but only that they extol not and magnify them. On the contrary, it
is good that they endeavor to comprize the greatness of the excesses which are
committed in this point, and that they lament before God for so unworthy a
manner, wherein Truth is handled by men. For this Holy lamentation conducing to
Piety, all that excites it is profitable to them, and contributes to their
edification.

7. In considering with this Spirit, the outrages done to Jesus Christ, in the
dispensation of his word, they will find that they are not less, than those he
received in the distributing of his Body; and that it may be said likewise,
that they are greater, and that thus they ought to be to us a greater cause of
grief, humiliation, and terror. For although there may be many criminal and
vicious Priests, who insinuate themselves to the administration of the
Sacraments and the distribution of the Body of Jesus Christ; there is nothing
more rare then to find of them impious enough to give to the faithful
unconsecrated Hosts instead of the Body it self of Jesus Christ, or to mingle
Poison with Consecrated Hosts, that thereby they may kill the Bodies of those
who receive them.

Thus although the wicked Priests commit a Sacrilege through the boldness they
have of insinuating themselves into so Divine Functions, those nevertheless who
participate of the Body of Jesus Christ by their Ministry, receive no prejudice
thereby. It Is not the same with the Word of God. For there are not only some
Priests who dishonor it by presuming to Preach it, when they ought to think of
nothing more then doing Penance for their Crimes, and who draw upon themselves
thereby the Reproach which God makes them in these words of the Kingly Prophet.
Peccatori autem d^xit Deus, quare tu enarras Justitias mea^, and assumis
Testamentum meum per Os tuum? But there are those who poison it by their bad
Maxims, or by their Passions, and they who do this, instead of giving life to
Souls, bring often death. And lastly there are some, who, instead of the true
word of God, distribute only their imaginations, which is not hurtful only to
the ignorant in depriving them of the nourishment they have need of, but
deceives them wickedly by suffering them to receive, as the Word of God,
thoughts altogether human and profane.

8. We need not only apply these considerations to the present State of the
Church to acknowledge that there are a great number of Christians that suffer
what the Scripture calls Famam Verbi, The desire of God's Word, because those
who are charged with this instruction, instead of solid Truths drawn from this
word, wherewith they ought to nourish them, feed them only with their own
proper thoughts and vain speculations; and that thence it is that the Church
experiences in many places this terrible Wound wherewith God has at other times
threatened to strike the Jews, which the same Scripture calls Vbera Arentia, The
Breasts giving no Milk, that is to say, Pastors without light, and incapapable
of nourishing their people with the Doctrine of Truth; which at the same time
ought to stir up in us sentiments of Compassion for the spiritual misery of so
many Souls, motives of acknowledgment, that God has treated us more fovourably
than them, in giving us the knowledge of his Truth, which he suffers them to be
deprived of, and a wholesome fright through the consideration of the little use
we have made of all these helps.

9. If these Sermons which please us so little of themselves, did make us enter
into these Sentiments, they would also become as profitable to us as those
which fill our memories the most with edifying Truths. There are hardly any of
more importance than those which may be learnt by the chastisement which God
exercises upon the Church. For he shows that the knowledge of Truth is not due
to us, that we deserve to be deprived of it; that this deprivation is the just
punishment of our disorders; that we ought to impute to our selves this want of
Evangelical Preachers; that thus the faults they commit in the exercise of
their ministry, are in some sort ours, seeing that it is to punish us, that God
permits them.

10. We must not imagine that we have no reason to fear, as to our selves, the
effects of Gods wrath, under pretense that we are better instructed, and that
we have diverse ways to supply the defects of Preachers. For God has also other
sorts of blindnesses to spread over us, which we ought not to apprehend less.
If he punish us not by depriving us of the knowledge of some particular Duty in
some important occasions, and this deprivation is enough to make us enter into
some unlucky engagements, and to render all our other knowledges unuseful. We
have not therefore less need of his light, nor less obligation to seek it. And
as this Light is communicated in the ordinary way by the Ministry of men; no
man can say, he has not need of a Preacher, that is, of a man who makes him
understand what God requires from him.

11. But there is no need that this consideration of the disorders, which are
committed in the dispensation of Gods word, as well as in the distributing the
Body of Jesus Christ, apply us only to the consideration of his Justice toward
the wicked; it ought to fill us yet more with the admiration of his bounty
toward the Elect. For it is for them that he suffers all those prophanations,
with an incomprehensible patience. It Is for them he commands, that his Body
reside even to the end of the world upon our Altars, and that it enter into the
mouths of all those who would receive him without having regard to the
Sacriledges that so many impious people commit in receiving it, to the end,
that his chosen may not be deprived of this Divine nourishment, which is the
ordinary means of their Salvation. Hence it happens sometimes, that the Body of
Jesus Christ remains whole years in the Churches, in the hands of wicked
Priests, who dishonor it every day by new Impieties, and receives thereby
abundance of outrages on the score of disorderly Christians, to the end, that
some poor Woman may have the means to partake thereof, or to come and adore it.
It Is also sometimes not there for those who compass this particular Church,
because they may be all impious and wicked. It is there for those who shall
spring from them long after. It is also in consideration of his Elect, that he
suffers that some wicked men corrupt and profane his word in declaring it, and
that he permits that men preach it to people who draw no profit from it, and
who become only more criminal thereby, to the end, that some simple Souls, who
shall be there present, may be instructed, and edified with it; or at least,
that the Ministry being conserved, some of the chosen, who perhaps shall be
many years after, may find in these places, instructions they may have need of.

As Piety then ought to make us adore the infinite Charity of Jesus Christ,
residing upon our Altars, and suffering for the good of his Elect, all the
outrages which he received there, it ought not to incline us less to adore this
same Charity, which makes him endure the most scornful manner, wherewith his
Truth is Treated, whether in pronouncing or in hearing it. And it is very just
to conclude, that it would be the height of ingratitude, not to expose our
selves for the interest of Truth to receive some evil usage on the score of
men, seeing that God suffers every day, that this Truth be exposed to so many
disdains, and to so many irreverences for our good.

12. Nevertheless, great care must be taken to keep this consideration of
faults committed by those who pronounce the word of God within its just limits,
lest it should carry us too far; and that as there appears little Light, little
Unction, and often little Judgment in certain Sermons, it make us not conclude
that the Preacher is absolutely unprovided of all those qualities. For this
Judgment may be ill-grounded. There are some persons who preach very ill, and
who nevertheless have Piety, and also Light and Judgment in other things; and
the reason thereof is, that they preach ill, because they have a false Idea,
and that they have at first proposed evil models. They apprehend, I know not
how, that Sermons ought to have something that is excellent, sublime, and
extraordinary; and that common and popular thoughts are to be avoided therein.
Thus when they are to preach, they neither consult the Heart, nor the
disposition of their Auditors; they skip into a certain region of their mind,
where most commonly they inhabit not, and where they have a magazine of false
thoughts, and shallow speculations, which this false Idea wherewith they are
pre-occupied makes them approve. But as their Judgment is only spoiled in this
place, they forbear not to be judicious in other things, when they leave the
Pulpit, where they are in some sort in a violent state and condition, and are
returned to their ordinary manner of speaking and thinking.

13. After we shall have practiced this equity toward the Preacher, and
resolved to manage him as well as we shall be ble in what shall be said before
others, for fear of hindering the fruit he might make upon those who should have
other Considerations, than we. We shall be forced to consider all that he says,
and endeavor to find therein something which may be able to edify us, and
whereunto we may fix our minds; and it is very hard if we prosper not therein,
if we do it faithfully; or that we have not at least reason to be convinced,
that it is our lack of Light and Virtue, which hinders us from profiting thereby.

14. We desire always that all Sermons should contain some brave principle of
Morality well expressed, and well explicated, that they may make us observe
some considerable defect in the lives of Christians, that they may make us
prone to practice some important obligation, And indeed it were to be wished
that they were such; and it is a defect when that is not; because Preachers
ought to imagine that the vulgar people are scarcely edified without these kind
of Sermons, which made St. Francis of Sales say, That he did not find that a
Sermon was good, if the Preacher had not for his Mark the Building some Corner
of the Walls of Jerusalem. Nevertheless we ought to acknowledge that it is also
a fault to have so strict a Piety. Christian Virtue has a larger extent. It is
not always busied with the correction of our manners, nor with the care of
instructing or teaching Christian Principles. It is forgetful sometimes of it
self, that it may be raised absolutely to God, to admire him, to Praise him, to
consider his Mysteries in themselves without any reflection upon it self, to
Contemplate the works of his Mercy and Justice, to rejoice at the Graces he
has bestowed on the Saints. Now there are no Sermons which are not able to
stir up in us some of these Motives, if we were disposed thereto, and if our
minds were not so limited as not to search occasions of edification but of a
certain kind, which makes that oftentimes we find as few to edify themselves
by certain Sermons of the Fathers, as by those we hear now a days.

15. We flatter our selves ordinarily with being of the number of those, whom
St. Austin calls non Verborum sed Rerum avidos, greedy of Things, but not of
Words; and we imagine that it is this which displeases us in Sermons where there
are more words then things. Nevertheless we may say that this disgust comes
rather from a contrary defect, that is to say, for that we are more fixed to
the manners and ways then to the things themselves, and that we love the
rarity, the excellency, and the aptness of thoughts, better then their Solidity
and Truth. For lastly there are no Sermons so bad where there is not something
of Truth; but they touch us not at all, because they are either common or out
of their place, or ill expressed, or that they are mingled with false thoughts,
or they miss the Subject. So seeing all these faults joined to Truth take the
relish of it absolutely away, we must needs have but little love for it. A
Diamond cast into the dirt, looses not its luster nor its price in regard of
us; we take great care to dig it out when we discover it, and often apply our
selves thereto so much the more as we find it in a place that seems to
dishonor it. We should make as much of this Pittance of Christian Truths,
which is found in certain Sermons, it would be just that we apply our selves
thereunto with so much more attention that our Spirits might not be distracted
by a great number of things which might deserve application. Now there is no
Christian Truth considered as it ought, that is not capable to comfort us, and
likewise there is not any which will not appear to have a very large extent if
we have light enough to penetrate what it includes.

16. We ought to consider well that these common truths which we hear with
disgust are infinitely above all that can be found in the Books of Paganism,
which men read with so much esteem, and so much pleasure; That It Is a
particular Grace that God has done us to have been pleased to discover them to
us, having kept them hid four thousand years from all men; that the Prophets
themselves and the Saints of the Old Testament have sighed to know them in this
excellency with which they are revealed to us; that they make up part of those
Judgments which David spoke of with so much sense of acknowledgment. Non fecit
taliter omni Nationi, and Judicia sua non manifestavit eis. And this may
suffice to give us Confusion that some human defects with which they are
enveroined, may make us loose entirely the gust and love for them.

17. As St. Augustine says, That men discern Beauty and Justice better when they
observe them in objects, which have nothing but what gives horror to the
Senses, such as the members of Martyrs were, when covered over with Wounds; may
we not say also that they cannot acknowledge better that they love Truth for it
self, then when presented to us in discourses wherein we can love nothing but
it, and where we find also an infinite of displeasing things. Thus these sorts
of Sermons may be made good use of to honor Truth for it self, without
dividing the homage which we give to it. And the least Truth honored in this
sort would be able to edify us more then the most touching instructions which
please the mind better.

18. There are almost no Sermons so bad, whereby a man may not be edified, if
what be said therein be new, and that we know nothing what it contains by means
of any other way. There is not, for Example, any Discourse so cold either of
Paradise or Hell, but makes great Impressions upon us, if we have never heard
speak thereof elsewhere. That which takes away the thought of these things is
then that they are already known to us, and that we are accustomed thereunto.
But if we cannot avoid this cause of human Infirmity, we may very well at least
humble our selves thereby, and make use of it to acknowledge that human Wit is
of so little or no account, seeing that the same objects which have justly
touched it at one time, do not at another, through this vain circumstance,
that it is accustomed thereunto; as though this custom did change the nature of
those objects, and took any thing from them of what they have either of
terrible or great.

19. It Is one of the reffections which the Sermons called bad gives leave to
make, and many more may be added to it of this nature, in making use of what
shocks us therein to know our proper faults. And in considering them in this
prospect, The more a Sermon is filled with human defects, the more it would be
proper for us to serve as a draught of what we are, and the manner how we act.
For the lives of Christians ought to be a continual Preaching, which should
carry into the mind of others a lively Image of all Virtues. St. Peter the
Apostle recommends to us the insinuating of Humility in all things. Humilitatem
in omnibus insinuantes, that is to say, that he wills Christians to preach
Humility in all their actions. The same may be said of all other Virtues, and
we ought to do nothing which may not help to engrave them in the heart of
others, as a Preacher ought to say nothing which is not edifying to his
Auditors. Nevertheless how far are our actions from making this Impression upon
the minds of those that see them? On the contrary what do we most commonly
bring thither, but the Image of our Passions, of our disorderly Motions, of our
secret Interests? We preach almost by our actions as they preach by their
words, and we acquit our selves of the general Ministry of Christians, as they
acquit themselves of the particular Ministry of Preachers: Let us not look upon
their faults alone, but upon our own in theirs, and let us turn one part of
that disgust we have for them against our selves.

20. If we look narrowly thereunto, we shall find that the particular faults
into which they fall, do much resemble ours, and have almost the same causes.

These people follow generally their thoughts and phancies without reflecting
whether they will be proportioned to the mind of those who hearken to them. We
follow also our Humors and Passions without any regard to proportion our
Actions and Words to the minds of those with whom we live, which is the reason
that we startle them a thousand ways, and that we do nothing that edifies them.

21. There are some Preachers who startle understanding and judicious Hearers
in crying out without reason upon small things, in chaffing themselves about
things which deserve it not, and by making appear I know not how many false
Motives, which incommode strangely those who have the Idea of Justice as well
for the Motives as the things.

But this defect, is it not infinitely, greater, and more frequent in our Lives
than in Sermons? For how many motives slide into our actions and words, which
are false, not according to Rhetoric, but according to Faith? Do we not often
show the inclination and esteem we have for some actions, which ought to cause
nothing but sentiments of horror? Do we not receive oftentimes with scorn, and
disdain things which ought to excite only Piety? How much do we extol things
which ought to appear mean, and disdainful to us? How much do we cry down some
things, which indeed are noble and worthy to be admired? How cold do we speak
of those we ought to have the greatest concern for? They are so many false
motives by so much more dangerous, as they spring from the bad disposition of
the heart; whereas those of Preachers denote often only in them a simple, and
mere want of wit.

22. The more one has the Idea of justness, be it for things or for motives,
the more one deserves defects in Preachers. And hence one may say, that the
reputation of many of them who make a great show in this employment, is only
grounded upon the little light of their Auditors. If we had also understanding
spectators, and who had the Idea of the true motives that the objects ought to
excite in us, the manner whereby we act and speak, would become almost
insupportable to them. They would only see in us depraved Inclinations, unjust
Impressions, lack of sense and love for things which deserve most, and they
would find in respect of us, something of that Holy Commotion, which Jesus
Christ showed in regard of the Jews by these words. O generatio incredula
quousque vos patiar! the meekness with which men bear with us, is not then any
thing but the effect of blindness of men. We only surpass by the favor of
their want of light, and it is very just that we should suffer patiently in
others, what they suffer continually from us.

23. What diverts Preachers from the right way, and casts them upon false
eloquence, upon vain thoughts, and of no edification, is often because they
have other prospects, than they ought to have in acquitting themselves of their
ministry. They would appear Wise, Eloquent, and Able, they would appear wits;
in a word they speak for themselves, and not for their Auditors; and in
speaking in this manner, they speak often neither for their Auditors nor
themselves. These are likewise those false Prospects, which are mingled with
our actions, which destroy the edification of them; if we had no other than to
satisfy our obligation, and to serve our neighbor, they would spread an odor
of Piety, which would gain hearts insensibly, but the passions and secret
desires which are intermingled, hinder this effect, and produce ordinarily
quite different impressions from those we pretend. The desire we make appear of
exalting our selves, makes us dis-esteemed in the eyes of other men. We please
so much less, by how much it appears that we have had a design to please: and
by a natural contradiction in men, they conceive justly passions, quite
opposite to those which they observe in us.

24. These Preachers whereof we speak are particularly proper to make known the
wretchedness and the blindness of men's vanity. They tire themselves in their
Closets to bring forth brave thoughts; they overcharge their memory with
labor, they distribute them with boldness, and afterward they rise from their
Chair well satisfied with themselves, imaging to have left a great Idea of
themselves in their Auditors. For men do not seek these pretended high thoughts
for any thing else but to please, and it is difficult that in thinking to
please others, men please not themselves. Nevertheless there is very often
nothing at all that persons of Piety have a commiseration for these sorts of
Sermons. Those who are not very charitable laugh at them, and almost all never
think a quarter of an hour after them. It Is almost as men deal with us, when
instead of searching the true good, they aim only at obtaining the good repute
of men. We thereby become the object of their disdain and malignity, and those
who are the most favorable to us, scarce trouble themselves with us, the space
of one quarter of an hour.

25. The subtilty of these Preachers may yet serve to make us observe how
little help we get from others to correct our selves of our faults. For although
there be none more exposed than those of Preachers, nevertheless, there is
nothing more ordinary than to see some who remain all their life, without
finding one single person, who advertises them of it. Men think that it is a
civility due to testify to them, that they are satisfied with their Sermons;
and those Civilitys being received through Self-Love, pass for sincere
testimonies and authentic approbations. Thus a Preacher deceiceived by others,
and by himself, continues oftentimes to abuse his Ministry all his life; he
destroys instead of building, and he drains unprofitably, not only the Forces
of his Body, but also those of his Soul, which yet is impaired more than the
Body by this employ, when he acquits himself not as he ought.

26. It is less strange, that the Preachers, who are subject to none, correct
themselves in their faults but very little. They are generally called to this
Ministry, they preach when they will, and as they will, and no man is
particularly concerned how they do it. But who will not be astonished, that
Preachers chosen by regular Societies, where men admit them not to this
Ministry, but with Discretion, Caution, and mature* Deliberation, should
oftentimes make show of so little Spirituality and Light in their Sermons, and
that they should not stuff them less than others, with mean and unprofitable
Scholastic terms.

That which ought to increase our admiration upon this point, is that in the
same Orders wherein men suffer; Thus persons to preach as they please, and with
faults visibly contrary to the intent of their Ministry; they should not suffer
them to make a false step in their Ceremonies, a mistake in bowing, or that
they should want the least of their regular Practices. There are in these sorts
of Societies, punishments ordained for all faults, against regularity; but
there are none at all for those who abuse the word of God, whether in
distributing it to the people in vain, and abstract thoughts, instead of giving
them a solid nourishment, and proportioned to their occasions; or in destroying
the fruit of the Truths they declared by an ostentation of Knowledge and
Eloquence. They leave absolutely to the Preachers, the manner whereby they
acquit themselves of their Ministry. They let them follow their Ideas, and if
they give them some Rules to govern themselves by, they are so extravagant, and
so little exact, that they think to follow them, by doing quite the contrary to
what they ought.

27. We cannot doubtless, allege any other reason for this Conduct, unless
that they know very well in these Societies, in what consists the manner of
practicing the Ceremonies; but have a very small Idea, what it is to pronounce
Gods Word in a way worthy of him, and know scarcely the importance of some
faults which are committed in abusing of this Ministry, and in relating it to
our Selves, and not to the benefit of our Auditors.

This is the conclusion which methinks should be drawn from thence, but it
extends it self much further than this example; and if we will do our selves
justice, we shall find that it Concerns us diverse and sundry ways. Because we
are exact in the practice of certain exterior Duties, even to the being fixed
thereunto, in a supersticious and judicial manner; but we have only very
confused Ideas of the greatest part of Spiritual Duties, and Interior Virtues;
which is the reason that we scarcely know the faults we commit against these
Duties and Virtues. We know not what true Humility, inward mortification, the
love of Justice, the dependence upon God, and the desire of suffering is: And
as they are these inward Virtues, which are the source of the Unction, and
Edification, which spread themselves into our Actions and Words; it is not
strange, that not knowing them, and likewise not having a true Idea of them,
there is nothing that is edifying either in our Conversation, or in our Lives.

FINIS.

