NEVVs from St. John Street, Being a Strange and True Relation of a Monstrous
Creature Which was brought Forth by A SOW, The like was never seen before.

The Skin of this Monstrous Creature is smooth, like the Skin of a Child, and
has a Round Scull, and the Face of it is like the Face of a Monky, with the
Feet like a Goat, with several other Monstrosities throughout all the rest of
the Members.

(...)is to be seen at the Sign of the White-Hart the upper end of St. John's
Street.

London, Printed for D. W. in the Year 1676.

Strange and Wonderful News FROM St. John's Street.
THe Judicious Reader has been so often imposed upon in this pamphletting Age,
that it is no wonder he should suspect the truth of a Reality, after he has been
fooled by so many fictions. But in this ensuing Relation, I have taken so much
pains to exhibit nothing but Verity, that I laid by as suspicious the reports
of my dearest Friends, till I had purchased my own satisfaction, with going to
be an eye witness of what without a blush from the Testimony of my own sense, I
dare as a certain truth to all the world boldly Relate.

The General Report of a Monstrous Creature which was lately produced in St.
John's Street, Beckoned my curiosity thither, where from one Mrs. Denman, at
the White Heart, a Victualling House in that same street, I had this ensuing
Relation.

That about a week since (it being part of her livelihood to keep Hoggs,) it
happened that she had a Sow brought forth seven live well shaped Piggs, which
at that time she thought were all that the Sow then went withal; but about
half an hour after their production, to her great Amazement, she beheld her
delivered (in a bagg by it self) of a wonderful Monstrous Creature, which upon
entreaty, she openly exposed to my view.

The Skin of it instead of being shaded (as is usual) with Infant bristles, was
like an Infants, soft and smooth, and not so much as Covered with a hairy Down.
Its Body somewhat resembles that of a common Swine, but its hoofs were so
Monstrous that liberal nature in all her variety will not admit them a
similitude: They some what resembled a Goats, but turn up at the ends not much
alike that Horses, which as a wonder, was frequently shown at Moor Gate. About
the Virilities it is so ambigously compacted that it would have puzzled the
curious inspection of the most inquisitive Anatomist to deside its Sex, but the
Deformities of its Body were beauties compared with the Monstrosity of its
head: The Ears more resembling those of Dogs, than Swines, hung backwards and
pointed toward the Nape of the Neck; but the forehead being broad toward the
Crown, Lessened downwards, and looked as if Nature in her formation had been at
a Nonplus, and was forced to patch up a shape equally resembling both Man and
Monkey.

The deformity of its face is able to put an Atheist in mind of the primitive
Chaos when all things lay blended in confusion, and providence had not yet
lick't them into form, instead of eyes you might have seen the plain blank of a
whole Skin, which looked as if Oblivious Nature had forgot to Chalk out the
Eye-holes, which in lieu of those glittering luminaries (which recommend to our
approbation the displeasing irrigularities of most animals) were supplied by a
pair of sinewy Bunches stuffed up with a grisly substance, and strutting out like
a threatening Promontory, seemed to overlook the horrid deformities of its
imperfect Nose, which upwards near the forehead, was plained even with the
face, and at the Root where that member Joins to the forehead, was separated by
a certain Vacuum, through which one might almost discover its brains. The
cheeks bear no ill comparison with those of Humane Creatures, being like
theirs, plentifully adorned or streakt with a pleasant mixture of Red and
white, which would make the wondering spectator grieve to see so many
perfections coupled to a Swinish snout, which notwithstanding is not exactly
shapt like those of that species, but seems rather to resemble the Trunk of an
Elephant, turning round at the end till it almost makes a Ring at the end of
the face. It has but one Nostril which by its excessive wideth promises to be
as officious to Nature as others too.

The surprising horror of its Clubbing deformities at first sight posesses the
wondering spectators with a Certain dread not much unlike the ungrateful
salutation of a naked Corpse; and indeed methinks it would be worthy the most
curious Inspection of the most accomplished Naturalist, who with no small
wonder, would there behold humanity and sensuallity so artificially blended,
that he would be put to no small pain upon, the consideration of their mutual
concurrence to give the Creature a name. He who looks upon its Body without the
judgment of an Adam, might readily call it a beast; but should he go further,
and deliberately behold the woundrous composition of its startling Phiznomy, I
question whether he would not repent the Temerity of his verdict and recall the
sentence. To behold wrapped up in the careless swadling-cloath of a clean Napkin,
a Creature about the bigness of a Child

the fore part of the head representing in Epitomy those Reverend Skulls which
Age has robbed of hair, and cruel time closed up their useless Ey-lids. I
assure thee Reader, if thou have not a dauntless courage indeed, it will
surpize thee with unusual dread, when thou shall look in its face, and behold
perfect Eye brows mourning they have no Eyes to defend, struting) Cheeks
shaking hands over the depressed bridgs of an Apish nose, a forehead which by
the least contraction of its dilicate skin, exactly immitates a humane frown.
In short, when thou have glutted thy Curiosity in beholding Monstrosity in
t(...)my, thou will not repent thy Pilgrimage to St. John's Street, but return
home thronged with admiration at the promiscuous productions of Nature.

FINIS.

