A DIALOGUE OF POLYGAMY, Written Originally in Italian: Rendered into English by
a Person of Quality; and Dedicated to the Aut^or of that well-known Treatise
called, Advice to a Son.

LONDON, Printed for John Garfeild, at the Rolling-Press for Pictures, near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, over against Pope's Head Alley, 1657.



To that ingenious, judicious, free-spirited Gentleman, the Author of that
well-known Book, lately published under the Title of, Advice to a Son.
Worthy Sir,
HAving rendered this short Discourse of Polygamy into English, I could not
devise to whom, I might more fitly Dedicate the same, than to your ingenious
and free-spirited Self; and in and by You, to all other Gentlemen of like Noble
and manly temper, so much (and that deservedly) magnified by In his Book of
Wisdom.
Charron, as a principal accomplishment of that Wiseman, whom he so
excellently describes. For indeed, this Treatise requires such Readers. As for
Paedantic and vulgar Spirits, I warn them to stand a loof, lest they break
their shins upon it, make sour faces, and hail upon the Author a thousand
Censures and Reproaches, part of whose burden, I am like to bear, for teaching
him to speak English. Yet the Discourse it self, asserts nothing, positively
determines nothing; only, the chief and most considerable, if not all, the
Texts of holy Scripture, and Arguments from Reason, and the Laws and Customs
of Nations, that have been, or can be brought for, or against Polygamy, are
urged and Answered interchangeably, by the two Persons of the Dialogue; and the
Author being one, is a stiff Pleader for Monogamy, and fighter against
Polygamy. The Point it self is left free and undetermined, to the understanding
and conscience of the serious and judicious Reader: And therefore, I know not
why any discreet person, (what ever he thinks of the Point) should find himself
offended at this Discourse: But that, as it was publicly printed, and vended
at Basil, a renowned Protestant City, in Switzerland, in the year 1563. so it
may in our famous London, without offense to a judicious Reader: And the
blessing of God, Almighty and only Wise, go along with it, Amen.

Daphnis and C^^oe; A most sweet and pleasant Pastoral Romance for young
Ladies. By George Thornley G^nt. Sold by John Garfeild at the Printing press
for Pictures in Cornh^l, near the Royal Exchange, over against Popes-head-alley.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Desire thee to take notice, that by Polygamy or Plurality of wives, handled
in this Treatise, is not meant that base practice of certain impudent, sharking
rogues, whose manner is, to marry a Wife in one City or town, and devour her
Substance, and abuse her Body, and then run away to some far distant place, and
marry another, leaving the first, with popoverty, shame, and, it may be, a
great Belly to boot; to be sure, sorrow enough, at Weeping Cross: and when they
have served a second, with the like ^oursauce, They remove their Quarters and
make bold with a third, till the Gallows catch them. For such hard-hearted and
injurious Rogues and vagabonds, are by the Laws of this Nation to be punished
with death, and that (I conceive) more justly then common thievs and robbers.
But the Subject Question of this Treatise is, Whether he that (if the Law of
the Land gave way) should with the Consent of his first Wife, upon just grounds
and reasons marry a second, being able to provide sufficiently for them and
their children, and living with them as becomes a Man and an Husband: The
Question I say of this Treatise, is, Whether this Man in so doing, should
offend against any Law of God in the holy Scriptures recorded, or against the
Law of Nature and right Reason, implanted by God in the Hearts of mankind. Read
the Treatise soberly and impartially, as in the fear of God, and pray that he
will give thee understanding in all things, Farewell.

Thine to serve thee, John Garfield.

An Advertisement to the Reader, touching the Author of these following
Dialogues, concerning Polygamy and Divorce.
Friendly Reader,
THe Author of these following Dialogues Bernardinus Ochinus by name, was born
at Siena, a City of Tuscanie, a Province in Italy. He was bred a Friar as
Luther was, and having a good industrious wit, proved an excellent Scholar; and
in process of time, God so opened his eyes, that he discovered the Impostures
and Idolatries of Popery, and thereupon left his Covent and the Romish Church
together, and fled to, and sojourned for his safety and further edification
among the reformed Churches of Switzerland, and Geneva. He wrote diverse
ingenious and acute Treatises, by way of Dialogue, in the Italian tongue, for
the greater profit of Countrymen, whose edification he rather aimed at than to
make ostentation of his own learning, and parts by delivering himself in Latin.
His Dialogues touching Predestination, were long ago rendered into English, and
published in print, which I remember I have seen in the old English Character,
printed I guess about the beginning of the Reign of of Q. Elizabeth, if not in
the days of K. Edward, for I have not the Book by me. After his forsaking the
Papacy, he entered into the state of marriage, as Luther likewise did.

If these Dialogues here presented, shall be gently accepted, possibly thou
may receive hereafter some other Pieces of his; if any shall be thought
serviceable for thee. Mean while, Farwell and enjoy what thou have, soberly, and
thankefully.

A DIALOGUE OF Polygamy.
Between Telypoligamus and Ochinus. I Desire your advice; which because I
conceive you are both able and willing to afford me: therefore it is I address
my self unto you.

Och. I am indeed willing, provided it be within the reach of my understanding
and ability.


Tell. In the first place, I beg of you, That you will faithfully promise to
keep my Counsel.


Och. I am content, if I may do it, without dishonouring God.


Tell. I have a Wife not suitable to my mind, so that I cannot love her, and as
far as I can perceive, she is both barren, and unhealthful; and I find my self
so disposed, that I cannot want the Company of a Woman: also I desire to have
Children, both for Posterities sake, and that I may instruct them in the fear
of God. I could indeed keep a Concubine or two, but my Conscience will not
suffer me: also I could falsely charge my Wife with Adultery, and so put her
away; but in so doing, I should both offend God, and blemish mine own, and my
Wives reputation, which I will not do. I could also poison her, which is a
thing I abhor. But a thought is come into my mind, to take another Wife, so
as to keep her that I have already, notwithstanding; and I conceive God has put
this into my mind, and that I am thereunto called by him: my desire therefore
is, that you will tell me whether, according to the word of God, I may lawfully
do it.


Och. In doubtful cases it is fit to take advice, but the case is clear, that a
man ought not to have more Wives then one, because the condition of Marriage is
such, that it cannot be between more then two.


Tell. How can you make that appear?


Och. God at the beginning made out of Adam, Genesis 2.
only one Woman, and gave her to him; signifying, that he ought to have but one
and that Matrimony ought to be only of two persons. If he would have had a Man
to have more Wives, he would doubtless have made him more, especially at the
beginning of the World, when propagation was more necessary, then ever
afterward.


Tell. I conceive, this Argument is of small validity. God gave to our first
Father Adam one Wife, therefore it is unlawful for any man to have more.


Och. If it had been the will of God that he should have more, he would have
given him more, especially in that state of perfection, wherein he was pleased
to put him.


Tell. A bare act of God, without any precept added thereunto, does not obliege
us to imitate the same; for if so, then we are bound to wear Coats of Skin,
because God so clothed our first Parents, and it were unlawful to wear Cloth
or Silk. For your Argument would always be of force. God clothed them with
Skins, Genesis 3.
and he could have clothed them with Cloth or Silk, if it had been his
pleasure, that men should be so clothed. If an Act of God alone do bind us as
much as a precept, so that Gods giving Adam one Wife only, were as much in
effect, as if he had said to him, I will and command, that every man have one
only Wife; it would follow, that not only it should be unlawful for a man to
have more Wives then one, but that every man that did not take a Wife, it being
in his power so to do, should sin, which is contrary to the Doctrine of St.
Paul.


Och. You must understand, that Paul is not contrary to God. For in that, God
gave only one Wife to Adam, it was all one, as if he had said, I would not have
a man to have more Wives then one, and it is my pleasure, that he have one,
unless I shall call him to a single life, 1 Cor. 7.
and give him the gift of Chastity, and that is the intent of Paul.


Tell. And I for my part must say, that when God gave Adam one Wife, it was as
if he had said, It is my pleasure, that a man shall have one Wife; if either he
want the gift of continency, or I shall call him to a married condition. It is
also my pleasure, that he shall have no more; unless he stand in need of more,
or I shall call him to more: which is at this time my condition, who stand in
need of, and am called to marry another.


Och. That a single life is pleasing to God, the word of God shows; but we are
not thereby taught, that he is pleased, Men should have more then one Wife.


Och. Nay verily, both Gods word, and the Saints example, do reach the same, as
we shall show by and by. But go to; suppose, it had been Gods pleasure, that
every man should have so many Wives, as it was possible for him rightly to
govern, and instruct together with their Children: how many Wives must he have
given Adam, thereby to signify his pleasure in this point?


Och. You suppose that which cannot be, seeing the having more Wives than one,
is repugnant to true Matrimony.


Tell. You have not yet made it clear to me, that to have more Wives then one is
repugnant to Marriage, otherwise then by saying, that God gave one to Adam, Let
us now suppose he had given him more; doubtless, from that first Institution
you could not prove, that a man ought not to have more; nay, it would follow of
necessity, that a man might have more. How many Wives therefore in such a case,
had it been necessary for God to give Adam, to signify his pleasure in this
point?


Och. Two would have been enough.


Tell. Now then, if that Action of his had bin a praecept, as you say, it would
have bin unlawful for men to have had more or less then two Wives: which
nevertheless, would not have been answerable to his will, seeing his intent
was, that they should have as many as they could govern. We must therefore
confess, that by a bare act of God: no command being added, we are not obliged
to the imitation thereof. Otherwise it would be sin for a Minister to celebrate
the Lords Supper, unless the Communicants were just so many in number, as the
Apostles of Christ were, when he instituted the same.


Och. Although it does not necessarily follow, that because God gave one Wife
to Adam, therefore it is unlawful for a man to have more; yet is it doubtless,
a very probable Argument, to persuade, and urges strongly, though it be not
altogether compulsive.


Tell. Nay verily, it urges not at all: since it may be said, that God gave one
Wife to Adam, not to show that his will was, that every man should have but one
Wife; but that the rest of mankind being born as well of one Mother, as one
Father, might love one another so much the more: also that Eve being made of
the Rib of Adam, might be a figure of the holy Church, the only Spouse of
Christ.


Och. Go to, let us come unto the words of the Text. Do you not think that Adam
was moved by divine instinct, when he said; For this cause shall a man leave
his Father, and Mother, and cleave to his Wife?


Tell. Without doubt.


Och. Do you not see how, in saying, he shall cleave to his Wife, (not, Wives)
he teaches us, that a man is to have but one?


Tell. Very good, when God commands a man to love his Neighbor, does he oblige
him to love one or more?


Och. All that are his Neighbors.


Tell. That Is false; for he says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, not thy
Neighbors; and therefore whoever loves one of his Neighbors, has fulfilled
that Command.


Och. Christ, when he said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, spoke it in this
sense, as if he should have said, Thou shall love every one that is thy
Neighbor.


Tell. So likewise Adam, when he said: he shall cleave unto his Wife, did
intimate, that he should cleave unto every one that shall be his Wife; And
therefore (...) not be proved by those wor^s, that it is unlawful for a man to
have more Wives then one.


Och. But what will you say to those following words of his: and of them twain
shall be made one flesh? Genesis 2.
for he does not say, of three or four. From these words it is doubtless
manifest, that God would not have Marriage to be made between more then two.


Tell. Adam says not, that of them two shall be made one flesh; but, they shall
be made one Flesh.


Och. But that was his meaning, as plainly appears from the words of Christ,
who citing the said speech, says, that God by Adam declared, Mat. 19.
And they two shall be one Flesh, adding moreover, this following clause: They
are no longer two, but one Flesh.


Tell. It is as if he had said, The Husband shall love every one of his Wives,
as if she were the same flesh, and the same body with him; and so likewise,
shall every Wife love her Husband.


Och. But God said, they two shall be one: therefore there cannot be three or
four.


Tell. You were in the right, if he had said, They two (only) shall be one. And
therefore, as this Argument is of no force; Christ said, Mat. 18.
If two of you on Earth shall agree about a thing, they shall obtain what they
ask: therefore if three or four shall agree they shall not obtain the same:
so is this no good inference; God said, They two shall be one Flesh: therefore
if there be three, it is no true Marriage.


Och. It is impossible for more then two, to become one flesh.


Tell. In the primitive Church, there were not only two believers, but they were
in great numbers, having nevertheless one soul, and one mind; and you believe,
if a man had diverse Wives, he could not become one flesh with them. If a man,
while he cleaves unto an Harlot, becomes as Paul says, one body with her,
although he have a Wife, should he not much more become one flesh with her, if
he should make her his Wife?


Och. Say what you will; To have more then one Wife, is a thing filthy,
dishonest, and quite contrary, and destructive to the holy State of Matrimony.


Tell. And yet you know, that Abraham had more Wives then one; as also David,
and many other men under the old Testament; who, in case it had been unlawful
for them, to have more then one Wife, they should have sinned in marrying
diverse Women; and the Children which they had by all their Wives, excepting the
first; should have been Bastards, because not begotten in lawful Matrimony.


Och. I will sooner grant all that you have said, then I will allow, or grant
it lawful for one man to have more then one Wife. Those Ancients were holy men;
yet did they sometimes sin. They were sinners, as being born of Adam, as
appears in the example of David; and they should have deceived themselves, if
they had denied themselves to be sinners.


Tell. That they sometimes sinned, I shall easily grant; but I will never yield,
that they continued in their sins, till their day of death: which nevertheless
they did, in case it was unlawful for them to have diverse Wives. Whence it
would follow, that they were all damned, as those who die while they keep a
Concubine. As for us, we cannot hold them for Saints, seeing we know not for
certain, that they ever repented. When David had committed those same Acts of
Adultery and Murder, because he was one of Gods Elect, God sent his Prophet to
him, to reprove him: as also when he numbered the People, contrary to the
Command of God. Credible therefore it is, that if to have diverse Wives, had
been contrary to the Law of God, God would have used the like proceedings
toward him, that he might not be damned. But though you read the whole Bible
over, you shall never find, that God has forbad the having of diverse Wives.
And yet, if it had bin a thing unlawful, Moses would never have dissembled the
matter. Moreover, the Scriptures tell us, that David was a man after Gods own
heart, and that he was obedient to all the Lords Commandments, all his life
long, save in the matter of Vriah. So that had it been a sin to have diverse
Wives, seeing that also had been sufficiently known, the Author would have
^^cepted it, or he must doubtless, make himself a liar; by saying, that David
committed only that sin of Homicide, under which his Adultery is comprehended.
Again, how could that be true, which God said to David, when blaming him for
his unthankfulness he told him, that he had given him many Wives? which
questionless, must have bin all Whores, except the first, and so it had not bin
God, but the Devil that gave them unto him. Moreover, you shall find, that God
made a Law, that if any man had two Wives, the one beloved, the other hated;
and had by them diverse Children, the eldest of which, was the son of the hated
Wife, it should not be allowed the Father, to make the Son of his beloved
Wife his Heir. Now it might fall out, that the beloved Wife might be his first
Wife, and so it should come to pass, that though the Husband had Children by
the latter, sooner then by the first, yet they should be Bastards, if your
opinion be true, and born of an Whore, and therefore ought not to be Heirs. It
is therefore clear by the word of God, that all the Children are legitimate,
though sprung from diverse wives by one and the same Husband; and that therefore
not only the first, but the following marriages are lawful, seeing God did both
approve and bless them, in those holy men the first Fathers of the world.


Och. The first thing, which you say follows from my opinion, that all which
died having many wives should be damned. I answer: If they are dead not having
divorced all save their first wife; or without repenting of their sin, they are
all damned. But as many of them as are saved did repent and put away all but
their first and lawful wife.


Tell. But, it is not apparent, that ever any did that; and yet if your opinion
were true, mention ought to have been made thereof in the holy Scriptures, that
we might know and understand, That to keep diverse wives, is an abominable thing.


Och. It was already known, that men ought not to have more wives then one,
because God had commanded that the Husband and the wife, should of two become
one-flesh.


Tell. It is not likely that it was unlawful to have diverse wives, and that the
unlawfulness thereof was known, and Abraham, and Jacob, and David, and other
worthy persons like them, should nevertheless marry more wives then one.


Och. That Is a good one! As if many holy men in ancient times did not sin,
though they knew what they did, was unlawful.


Tell. But they did not continue to their lives end in those sins, as those that
married more wives then one, did.


Och. I told you before that if they were of the number of Gods Elect, they did
at last repent.


Tell. But we ought no longer to reckon the Patriarchs for examples sake to be
Saints, seeing we are assured that they sinned in having many wives; but we are
not assured of their repentance.


Och. True, unless the word of God assures us that they were Saints: as we
know (for example sake) Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to be Saints, because Christ
said, that many should come from the East, and from the West, and sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Now, I conceive, that as
Moses because of the hardness of their hearts, suffered the Jews to put away
their wives without just cause, so for the same cause he suffered them to have
sundry wives, that is to say, he did not forbid or hinder it, nor punish the
same by any Law enacted in his Commonwealth. But it follows not therefore, that
they did not sin in Gods sight, and that they did not deserve punishment
unless they repented.


Tell. That thing is permitted, which is neither punished, nor hindered, nor
forbidden. Truly, I will not say Moses sinned, if to avoid a greater evil, and
to comport with the hardness of the Jews hearts, he permitted them to have
diverse wives; that is to say, he did not punish or hinder them. But if he
permitted them so as not to forbid them, I cannot but say, he sinned. For Moses
ought to have expressly forbidden, that any man should have more then one wife:
which because he has not done, we must needs confess that it is not a thing
unlawful.


Och. The having of many wives, was then (as it is now) so apparently filthy,
dishonest, and vicious, that it was needless for Moses to forbid the same.


Tell. And was it not apparent, that Adultery was a thing filthy, dishonest,
vicious? yea, much more then the having of many wives, and yet he expressly
forbad adultery. But in case it had been unlawful to have many wives, he ought
to have forbidden that, so much the more expressly, by how much the
unlawlawfulnesse thereof, was less manifest then the unlawfulness of Adultery
was. Is it not a clear case, that Homicide is unlawful, and yet he forbids
that. In a word, What are the ten Commandments, but an Expression of the Law
of Nature?


Och. It may be said, that God might remit the transgressions against the
second Table, because he is above, not only all Creatures, but his own Law: and
peradventure he might remit the same to all mankind born before the death of
Christ; and consequently be willing, that they might have more wives then one,
without sin. And so it comes to pass, that those under the Old Testament that
had many wives, did not sin; and under that consideration, God might give many
wives to David. Though it may also be said, that he gave them to him, that is,
permitted him to have them, in as much as he neither hindered, nor punished him.


Tell. That it is unlawful to keep more wives then one, if your opinion be true,
is clear from the word of God, who said, that two should be made one flesh; but
that God did so far remit of his Laws, that men should not sin in having more,
does not appear in the word of God; that opinion therefore of yours, has no
foundation.


Och. If you consider well, you shall find that Lamech a very wicked man, was
the first that had two Wives. Other holy men that preceeded him, knowing the
will of God, had only one a piece.


Tell. As if that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were not more holy then those very
men you speak of. But, in the first place, I cannot tell how you came to know
that Lamech was the first man that had two wives, although he be the first man
whom the Scripture mentions to have had two. But as this is a vain Argument,
The Scripture no where mentions, that Cain had more then one Son; therefore,
doubtless he had no more: so, as vain is this which follows: It is no where in
Scripture recorded, that those men that lived before Lamech, had more wives
then one: therefore none of them had above one wife. Moreover, where it is
said, that Lamech had two wives, it is not charged upon him as a sin, but seems
rather to be set down as a thing pleasing to God, that a man should have more
wives then one, seeing by them he gave Lamech such ingenious Sons, as proved
the inventors of Arts, both delightful and profitable. Neither can I see how
you came informed, that Lamech was so wicked a man, as you talk of.


Och. God plagued him, by suffering him to fall into the sins of murder and
desperation, only because he had married two wives.


Tell. But I cannot see, either that he was a murderer or fell into despair;
neither does the Scripture teach any such thing, if it be rightly interpreted:
Or if the Scripture had intimated any such thing, (which I do not grant) yet
does it not thereby appear, that God suffered him so to slip, because he had
married two wives.


Och. But we may conjecture, that his having two wives displeased God, seeing
his murder is presently after mentioned.


Tell. In the first place, I have already told you, that by the words of that
Text, if they be rightly understood, there is no signification made, that
either he was a manslayer, or in desperation; and if such a thing were
intimated, it does not therefore follow, that his plurality of wives was the
cause thereof, or that God was offended with him therefore; inasmuch as
presently upon the mention of his two wives, he commends their Sons, as if he
would give us to understand, that he approves of plurality of wives. Add
hereunto, that nothing ought to be affirmed or avouched in the Church of God,
as necessary to salvation, if it cannot otherwise be known, save by conjectures
only.


Och. Seeing I cannot convince you out of the old Testament, I will try what I
can do from the New.


Tell. You are in an error if you think the Old Testament is not sufficient to
teach us all things necessary to salvation. If therefore that be the cause you
betake your self to the New, you are deceived, seeing as Paul writes, All
Scripture of Divine insp^ration is profitable for reprehension, correction and
instruction, in righteousness, that the man of, God may be made perfect,
furnished for every good work. Now clear it is, that Paul in that place speaks
of those Scriptures, in which Timothy was exercised from a child. And because
the new Testament was not then written, you must be forced to confess, that
Paul in that place speaks of the Old. The old Testament therefore is
profitable, not only to assert the truth of such things as are necessary to
salvation, but also to confute falsities: and consequently to render a man
perfect. For which cause, Christ ^peaking thereof said, Search the Scriptures
for in them is fou^^d (...) life.


Och. Perhaps somethings are forbidden to us in the New Testament, which were
not forbidden to them in the Old.


Tell. In moral matters, verily what ever is unlawful and to us forbidden, was
in like manner evermore forbidden to them; and whatever was allowed and
commanded to them, the same is in like manner allowed and commanded to us. God
was equally Author of the old Testament as well as of the New; nor was he ever
contrary, or unlike himself.


Och. That was allowed to those under the old Testament, because of their
imperfection, which is not allowed to us, in whom carnal desires ought to be
much more mortified.


Tell. You take that for granted which you have not proved, viz. That it is
unlawful to have more wives then one. Moreover, you are deceived, if you think,
that it is a bad thing to have one wife, but worse to have two; For as the Act
matrimonial, in him that has one wife, is a thing not in it self evil, nor
repugnant to those actions, that are necessary to salvation: no more is it to
have two wives, provided a man have a call from God to mary them, and be moved,
not by the impulse of the flesh, but of the Spirit, that he may have children,
and bring them up in the fear of God; his wife likewise doing the same. Whence
it follows, that he may be as perfect that has two wives, as he that has but
one or none. Nor had Abraham, because he had diverse wives less Faith, Hope, or
Charity, then Priests, Monks, or Friars that have none. Conjugal Chastity, is
as well the gift of God, 1 Cor. 7.
as that of a single State, For this cause Paul said, Every one is endued with
his own gift from God, some one way, some another.


Och. In that place, the Apostle exhorted the Corinthians to a single Life, and
that for no other cause, but that a married estate has many encumbrances
attending the same: in as much as married people, being entangled with worldly
affairs, are not so free to pray, and preach up and down, and do good to
others, as single people are. Now, if so be the having of one wife, do bring so
many impediments, any one may soon conjecture, what the having of diverse wives
will do. And therefore to have more wives then one is unlawful.


Tell. You are in an error if you think, that the mind of Paul in those words
was, that marriage was a stop to men's journey to Heaven, so that married people
could not be saved; For then that which God said, would not be true, viz. That
it was not good for a man to be alone; Gen, 2.
but it would rather be an excellent thing to be alone; and to marry a wife,
the worst thing in the world, because in so doing a man should sin. Moreover, I
and, that not only a married man may be saved, as well as a Bachelour, but be
as perfect as he, inasmuch as he may attain as great perfection in Faith, Hope,
and Charity as the other. And i^ he cannot personally perform some external
works which the single man can, as hindered by his married estate, yet he may in
mind perform the same, and that is it which God regards.


Och. Though Matrimony do not hinder a man from going to God; yet the having of
more wives then one, does.


Tell. How prove you that?


Och. From Paul, who speaking of Bishops, says, he would have them to be the
husbands of one wife, meaning that they should have no more. It is therefore
unlawful to have more wives the^ one.


Tell. Nay rather when he tell^s them, by name, that they should have one, lest
having more, they should be too much distracted with worldly business, it is
easy to see that he allows other men to have more.


Och. Some do thus interpret the mind of Paul, A Bishop is to have but one
wife, that is (say they) one Church for his spiritual Spouse.


Tell. Many reasons show that to be a false opinion. First, because Christ only
is the Spouse of Souls and Bridegroom of his Church. And if we that are
ministers be his friends, we ought with John Baptist, as the friends of Christ,
the only true Spouse of Souls, to send them to him their Bridegroom: and not to
draw them to our selves. The Churches therefore of Christ are not the Bishops
Spouses. And if they were, as the Husband is superior to his Wife, so should
they be to their respective Churches, against which Paul writes to the
Corinthians, where he says, We are not Lords over your faith, or over you, by
reason of your Faith. The Church therefore is not Paul's Wife. I confess indeed,
that one Church is enough for one Pastor, and he does no small matter, if he
can govern that well. In the ancient times of Christianity, one Church
sometimes had diverse Pastors, as appears from the Epistle to the Philippians,
in which Paul salutes the Bishops, which were at Philippi: whereas now a days
one Bishop has many Churches. Moreover, when Paul says. A Bishop ought to have
one Wife, he speaks of the manners of him that was fit to be a Bishop. But if
he be yet to be chosen, he is no Bishop; and therefore has no Church as yet,
that might be called his wife. Hereby also it is manifest, that by Wife, he did
not mean Church, because presently almost after those words, he makes mention
of his Children, commanding that he govern his Family well, and have his
Children subject to him, with all Reverence. For if a man cannot govern his own
Family, how can he oversee the Church of God? In that place therefor he speaks
of a Wife, and not of a Church.


Och. Some say, that Paul in that place, forbids such men to be cho^en Bishops,
who have had diverse Wives, though not at one and the same time.


Tell. But I do not conceive, that Paul counted it sin after the death of a man's
first wife, to take a second; for as much as he himself says, that after the
death of the Husband, the wife is free, and may without blame marry another. So
far is it from being unlawful for a man, after the death of his wife, to marry
another.


Och. They say, it is a shameful thing, when a man's first wife is dead, to marry
another.


Tell. If you weigh the matter rightly, and follow not the Opinion of the blind
vulgar people, you shall find that the matrimonial Act, is as free from
turpitude, as the actions of eating and drinking; nor would God have commanded
Matrimony, if it had bi^ evil, which nevertheless he did, when he said,
Increase and propagate.


Och. I condemn not matrimony; but the Iteration* or Repetition thereof.


Tell. The second Matrimony, is as true and valid as the first; and therefore
you cannot condemn the Iteration of Matrimony, but you must withal, condemn
Matrimony it self. Take an Example. A young man marries a Wife, she dies a few
days after, he is somewhat incontinent, or is again called to a married
condition: who knows not, that he according to the Precept of Paul, seeing he
cannot contain, ought to take another Wife.


Och. Unless second Marriages were filthy, and unlawful, Paul would never,
speaking afterward of Widows, have commanded such to be chosen, as had only
one Husband.


Tell. Think you that Paul was superstitious?


Och. I do not think he was.


Tell. If a young Widow, somewhat incontinent, had asked Paul's advice, what
think you Paul's answer would have bin? 1* Tim. 5.



Och. That she should marry again, according to his own Doctrine.


Tell. It is not therefore unlawful to marry again. Why then should Paul reject
such Widows, as had had more Husbands then one? for it was possible that some
Widow having had diverse Husbands, might be more holy and honest, then they
which had had but one. Also it might fall out, that she which had had diverse
Husbands, might live but one year with them: whereas the rest that had never
had more then one, might have lived with him, thirty or forty years. In such a
case truly, I cannot see why they should be more worthy to be chosen then she.
I do therefore believe, that the mind of Paul in that place was this, that such
Widows were not to be chosen that had had many Husbands, that is to say, who
being divorced, had married again: their former Husbands who divorced them
being yet alive. For either they were divorced upon a just ground, and then it
was not fit they should be chosen; or upon an unjust ground, and so the
Matrimony remained good, having never bin violated and then the divorced woman
had sinned, if she married to another. By which means it came to pass, that
all women divorced were infamous, not only such as married to other men; but
such likewise as abstained from Marriage, especially amongst the Gentiles, who
were not wont to divorce them; save for some fault or vicious quality. Paul
therefore did never condemn those Women, who their former Husband being dead
married another, nor did he forbid them to be Bishops, who their former Wi^e
being dead, married another, which notwithstanding, the s^perstitious Papists
observe, because they understood not the meaning of Paul. Though a man have
kept diverse Wh^res, they make him a Bishop; but if his first Wife being dead,
he marry another, they will not: whence it comes to pass, that Matrimony
amongst them is of worse report, then Fornication, Adultery, Incest,
Sacrilege, Sodomie, and all imaginable abominations. This is therefore the
mind of Paul (and this will make the third opinion) as has bin said of Widows,
that he who has had diverse Wives, because he divorced one^ ought not to be made
a Bishop. For if he divorc't her unjustly, he ought not to be a Bishop in that
regard; if justly, yet the Infamy of his wife, redounding upon himself; for
that cause Paul would not have him be a Bishop. Howbeit, I like not this
Opinion; for he does not say, he must have bin, but that he must be the Husband
of one wife: for he says, he must be unblamed, viz. as the Husband of one
Wife: as he expressed it a little afterward, touching Deacons, and writing to
Titus about Bishops.


Och. Because a Bishop, in regard of the public Office he bears; as also the
Deacons, have to do with all persons, not only with Men, but also with Women;
to avoid suspicion, Paul would that they should be married; and this perhaps
might be the meaning of those words. Also, it may be, that Paul foreseeing the
Superstition of the Papists, who would forbid the Mari^ge of Bishops, that they
might be without excuse, he said, they ought to be blameless, and to have a
wise* but that they should have no more then one, he did not say. Or he shows,
that a Bishop ought to have a wife, that is, he ought to be content with her,
and not to have any thing to do with other Women, which is, as if he had said,
that he ought to be honest.


Tell. The mind of Paul is this, that it is lawful for the generality of
Christians, to have many Wi^es; but for Bishops to have only every man one, not
because it had bin a sin for them to have more; but because the duty of Bishops
being to labor for the salvation of others, he feared lest multiplicity of
Wives should be a pul-back, and hinder them from performing their Office, as
they ought to do. For this cause he would have them to have but one: nor is it
therefore unlawful for other men to have more. Yea verily, while he forbids
Bishops and Deacons to have more then one, he closely allows it to other men.
Nor is it likely Paul would have forbidd^n Bishops to have more Wives then one,
had it not bin the Custom of those times for them to have more. It was
therefore in the new Testament forbidden to Bishops to have many Wives, as it
was in the old Testament forbidden to Kings; not because it was in it self
unlawful, Deuteronomy. 17.
but lest Kings, whose Office was of greatest consequence, being distracted by
their Wives, should be corrupted, as it happened to Solomon; for if Adam, when
he had but one, was notwithstanding perverted by her, it is easy to conjecture
what might happen to Kings, if they should have many. Yet do I believe
nevertheless, that as in the same place he forbad Kings to have many Horses,
that is too great a multitude, least he should put his trust in them, rather
then in God; for otherwise they were allowed to have many Horses; even so, they
were (...) forbid to have many Wives, seeing David a most holy man, had many;
but that they should not have an immoderate multitude, especially such as were
Heathens, and Worshippers of false Gods. To return therefore to our business,
it is not credible, that Paul feared, lest Timothy should choose for Bishops,
such as were Gentile's or Jews, not baptized. There were therefore in the
Church of Christ, and among the Christians, such as had more wives then one.
And because from among them a Bishop was to be chosen: he would not have him
choose one that had diverse wives. But if to keep more wives then one, had bin
contrary to the Law of God, as you say it is, and the first Wife only were
right and true, the rest Harlots: it is not credible, that the Christians would
have baptized any one that had plurality of wives, unless he had put away all
saving his first. And if that had bin the practice, it had bin in vain for Paul
to command, that he that was to be chosen Bishop, should be the Husband of one
Wife, seeing Christians out of the number of whom the Bishop was chosen, had
but each of them one a piece. But this I much marvail at, that many who have
sometimes written and do believe, that to have more Wives then one, is
repugnant to the divine Law, both moral and natural, and yet in expounding
Paul, they say, that he writing to Timothy, warns him to take heed, that he
choose not a Bishop that had plurality of wives; whence it follows, that seeing
Election was not to be made of any out of the Church of God, that there were in
Gods Church such as had more wives then one; and consequently, counted it not
unlawfu^lt have more. Otherwise, if they had counted it unlawful, as they did
not Baptize, or admit unto the Lords Supper any man that kept a Concubine,
unless he would forsake her: in like manner they would not have Baptized, nor
admitted to the Supper, nor suffered amongst them such as had many wives,
unless they would divorce all save the first.


Och. But what do you say to Paul who wills and commands, That every man should
have his own wife? for in saying his own wife he excludes wives.


Tell. Some say, his meaning is, Let every man have his own wife; that is, his
own, not another man's: and nor, only one. As if some Father making show of his
Daughter, should say, This is my own Daughter; not denying that he has more
Daughters, that are likewise his own.


Och. In the same place the same Paul commands, That the Wife have her own
proper Husband, that is to say, such a Wife as is proper to him alone, and not
in common with other wives. Whence it follows, That as a woman ought to be
proper to her husband, and not to belong to other husbands: so the man ought to
be appropriated to his first wife, and not common to others: provided, you will
(as you ought) expound the words of Paul, so as he may not contradict himself.


Tell. Paul does not there dispute, whether an husband may have plurulity of
wives, or no; but his intent is to show, that such men as have not the gift of
continence, should take them wives; and that women in the like case should
marry.


Och. Is it possible that you should not see, that plurality of wives, is
repugnant to the matrimonial contract, in which the man grants his wife, and
the woman her husband, an honest use of their respective Bodies for ever? For
which cause also Paul says, That neither the man nor the woman have power over
their own Bodies, but each of one another. And in case a man have given the
honest use of his Body to his wife, he can no longer give it to another,
because he has already given it to the first.


Tell. Yes, by the permission of the first he may, as Abraham did, when by the
permission of Sarah, he married Hagar, and consequently by permission of the
first and second, he may marry a third, which is true of other men as ^ell as
Abraham: especially the wives being instructed that it is ^o sin for their
husbands, with their consent to marry other wives.


Och. Do you believe, that David when he married Bathsheba, did it with consent
of his other wives, and that others who married diverse wives, did so likewise.


Tell. Suppose they did not, yet were not their marriages the less true and
lawful. For it was then ^ thing commonly known, and confirmed by example, That
it was lawful for a man to have many wives. Therefore when a man by marriage,
gave the use of his Body to his wife, he did not so ^otally give the same, as
to bereave himself of all power to give it to other wives also: which the wives
knew well enough by the public custom then in force; and thereunto the wives
did silently give consent, seeing their husbands married them with this
condition being understood. Their marriages therefore were good and lawful.


Och. An husband cannot marry a second wife without detriment of his first. It
is not therefore credible, that wives did in their hearts consent, that their
husbands should marry others.


Tell. It is possible my wife may prove barren; in which case, it is her duty to
consent that I should take another; yea and of her own consent to exhort me
thereunto, as Sarah did of old. And if she would not approve thereof, this will
of hers were unjust, and so it were lawful for her husband to marry another,
contrary to her unjust mind. Also when a woman is with Child, and sometime
after she is brought to bed, seeing she is then unfit for procreation, as also
when she is old and sick, her husband may without injury to her, have to do
with another wife; yea, though a man's wife were sound, and fit for generation,
yet she ought to take it in good part, if enjoying the company of her husband
at some certain times, as it is with other living Creatures, she leave it free
for him to enjoy the carnal acquaitance of his other wives.


Och. Do you think it lawful for one wise to have many husbands?


Tell. No.


Och. And yet there are sick Men, as well as sick women. Also a woman is able
to have to do with more men, then a man can with women. Whence it seems more
just, for one woman to have diverse husbands, or at least less injust, then for
a man to have many wives.


Tell. Nay rather, since Matrimony is chiefly ordained for procreation sake, and
a man having many wives, may in a short time have many more children, then a
woman which has plurality of husbands: it is more equitable, that a man have
many wives, then that a woman have many husbands. But the chief causes why
women may not have many husbands, and yet men may have many wives, are these.
First of all, because, if women should have many husbands, there would follow
great disturbance and confusion in the world. For seeing no husband could
certainly know that his children are his own, he might always suspect, that
they were some other husbands rather then his; and consequently he would not
bring them up, nor instruct them, nor take such care for them, as ^ow he does,
knowing they are his own, though born of diverse wives. Perhaps also being
unassured that they are his own, he would not make them his Heirs. Another
cause, why it is lawful for men to have many wives, but not for women to have
many husbands, is this; The husband is his wives Head, and has authority and
command over her, as being her Superior; for which cause he may have diverse
wi^es, provided he can well rule and instruct them all. Nor is it a monstrous,
but a comely thing for to have many members in one Body, though there he but
one Head; but if the Body should have many Heads, it would be a monster: So for
one husband to have many wives, is not monstrous; but for one wife to have many
husbands, is monstrous. And therefore, as there would be dissension and
discord, ^f in one Body there were many Heads, and they should be of contrary
minds, as might well happen: so would there be discords, perturba^ions, and
great inconveniences, if should have plurality of husbands, seeing it might
happen, that they should will things contrary, and command their wives to do
them.


Och. If we regard discords and inconveniences, we shall find they have been
some^imes exceeding great, because one man has had two wives: as we see in the
example of Sarah and Hagar, Leah and Rachel, Hannah and Peninnah, and others,
amongst whom were continual dissensions: which I conceive, God did therefore
suffer, to show that he was not pleased, that one man should have more then one
wife.


Tell. Although among the firstborn, and other brethren, many times grievious
discords have arose, as appears in Cain and Abel; Esau, and Jacob; and many
others: it is not therefore displeasing to God, that Fathers should have many
Sons* As also between Mothers in Law, and Daughters in Law, though there is
many times little quiet, yet is not Matrimony therefore displeasing to God. In
like manner, although among diverse wives of the same Husband, there has seldom
bin good agreement, yet cannot either Marriage in general, or marriage of
sundry wives be condemned; but only those wives, who were not so well disposed
as they ought to have bin.


Och. Christians ought in this life to be contemners of pleasures, and to have
more of the Spirit, then those men had, which lived under the old Testament.
And therefore, though They had many wives, one a piece ought verily to content
Us.


Tell. I have already declared, and told you, to cohabit with plurality of
Wives, is no unlawful thing, and that it may consist with the greatest degree
of faith and perfection. And therefore I cannot tell how you can be assured,
that some Christians are not called by God, to cohabit with diverse wives, as
well as some Jews of old were called by Him thereunto.


Och. Say what you will, to have more wives then one, is a thing filthy and
dishonest.


Tell. There are two things which bring you into that error. The first is
custom; for if it were the Custom for men to have more then one, it would not
seem to you blameworthy. Another is a feigned kind of holiness, which makes the
having more wives then one, seem to you unlawful, though it be no whit
repugnant to the holy Scriptures. Yea, and those that have more wives then one,
are wont to be more grievously punished, then they should be, if they kept a
thousand Concubines.


Och. It Is hard for one man to content one woman, and you would have it lawful
for him to have more.


Tell. An Husband is not obliged to satisfy all the carnal desires of his wife,
but such only as are moderated with reason.


Och. Under the old Testament when there were few men in the world, it was
peradventure, expedient for men to have more wives; but now the world is full
of people, it is not expedient.


Tell. In the first place you know not, whether men if they had more wives,
would have many more Children then they have: or if they should beget more
Children (as is very likely) how know you that the fruits of the Earth will not
suffice to afford them all that shall be necessary for their livelihood, and
all other occasions. For the same God that gave increase of men, Our Author
seems not to have heard* or not to have thought, when he wrote thus, of the
Newfound World, nor of many large Tracts of ground in Hungaria, and other parts
of Europe unpeopled.
would likewise supply plenty of (...) to nourish and maintain them. But
suppose you were assured they should perish with famine, yet the souls of men
are of so great price, that we should no ways hinder their existence,
especially if we be called thereto by God, as those holy men of old were, who
had plurality of wives.


Och* In these days a Christian ought not to have plurality of wives, if for
no other cause, at least to avoid the offense which might thence arise, seeing
all Christians do account the having of more wives then one, to be a most
filthy and Diabolical thing.


Tell. Even as, although men should account Matrimony an unlawful thing, yet
ought you not to be moved with their offense taken thereat, but to marry, if
need were: so ought you to marry more then one, if need be, or you be called
thereunto by divine impulse.


Och. A single man might indeed in such a case marry, to avoid fornication,
although men should be therewith offended; especially, being called by God
thereunto. But he that has one already needs not marry another, nor will God
thereunto call him.


Tell. Nay verily; if his wife be sick, or other impediments shall happen, so
that he cannot enjoy her, and be incontinent, he must of necessity, to avoid
fornication, marry another. Add hereunto, that God does not call men to marry,
only for the avoidance of fornication; but chiefly for propagation, as of old
he called Abraham, and other holy men.


Och. Shall I make it clear and manifest to you, that the having more wives
then one, is a thing forbidden? Christ says, if any man put away his wife,
save for adultery, and shall marry another, he commits adultery. But if a man
might have more wives then one* he should not commit adultery, as Christ says,
whether he put away his former wife, or no.


Tell. No man can expound those words of Christ, better then Christ himself, who
in another place explaining the said words, says, Whosoever shall put away his
wife, save for adultery, causes her to commit adultery, that is to say, he
gives occasion to his wife, so unjustly put away, to commit Adultery. For the
wife being by that means deprived of her true Husband, cannot marry any other,
her former Husband living; but she shall commit adultery. Christ does not
therefore say, If any man put away his wife, not for adultery, and marries
another, he commits adultery; but that he gives occasion to his repudiated wife
to commit adultery.


Och. Both Matthew, Mark, and Luke record, that Christ said* If any man put
away his wife, and marry another, he commits adultery, that is to say, by
marrying that other. But if his intent was to show, that by unjustly putting
her away, he gave her occasion to commit adultery; it had been sufficient to
have said, If any one put away his wife; not adding, and marry another. Christ
therefore by those words of his in the fifth of Matthew, did not intend to
explain that passage, which is recorded in the 19. Chapter of the said
Evangelist: only he said, If any put away his wife, not for adultery, he makes
her to commit adultery. But in the 19. of Mat^hew, he says another thing, viz.
that if he marry another in the same kind, he commits Adu^tery, because the
first was his wife, and he ought not to have more then one. Add hereunto, that
the words of Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount, were uttered before those
were, by which he answered the Pharisees, when they asked him, Whether a man for
every cause might put away his wife. Those former words therefore cannot be an
Exposition of those were spoke afterward.


Tell. Whether the latter words were an Exposition of the former or no; it
satisfies me; that his meaning is one and the same in both places, viz. that if
any man put away his wife without just cause, he occasions her to commit
Adultery. And as for those words, which in the 19. Chapter, are added over and
above: Christ added them to show, that a wife unjustly divorced, if she marry
another man, commits adultery, though at the same time her former Husband marry
another wife, seeing the first Matrimony is not void; but remains in full
force. His meaning therefore is this; If he put her away unjustly, though he
marry another, yet he gives her that is put away, occasion to commit adultery.


Och. This interpretation of yours, is so forced and strained, that it is in
danger of breaking. Moreover, we may see in Creatures irrational, that the
Males have their Females, with whom alone they couple, as we see in Birds; and
much fitter it is for men, especially Christians, to have the like.


Tell. That is true only in such like Creatures, whose propagation is not very
needful, to the maint^nance of the life of man. But if you observe, you shall
find, that one Cock has many Hens, one Bull many Covves; and so in other
Creatures which are profitable to mankind. If therefore God has ordained for
the Commodity of Mankind, that one Cock should have many Hens, much more has
he ordained, that one man should have many wives, for the propagation of men,
whom he so highly prizes, and so dearly lo^es.


Och. If none of those live-Creatures you speak of were guelt, and they should
all converse together, you should find every male with his proper female; and
men ought to do the same much more. But now, many of the males being guelt and
separated, if one male couple, with diverse females; it follows not therefore,
that it should be lawful for one man to have many Wives. God put into the Ark
of Noah, just so many males as females, to show that every male ought to have
only his own single female.


Tell. If there were in the world as many Men as Women, I confess it were
expedient, that every man should have his own single Wife. But seeing the
number of Women is greater, I conceive it fit, that one man have many Wives;
for it is not in vain, that God makes more Women. If there were in the World,
for example sake, only three hundred Women, and as many men, and every man
should have one Woman, they could not so soon propagate their kind: as if of
six hundred, four hundred were Women, and two hundred men, every one of which
should have diverse Women. For this cause therefore, God ordained, that the
number of Women, should be greater then the number of Men. The life of one Man
equals that of two Women.


Och. In the first place, I do not believe that you know there are more Women
in the World then men. Perhaps it seems so to you, because commonly we rejoice
at the birth of Boys, and grieve at the birth of Girls. But though there be
more Women born into the World, yet they live not long for the most part, by
reason of the more tender constitution of their bodies. Add hereunto, that many
more men perish then women, by Wars, Shipwreck, and the Sword of justice:
that reason therefore does not prove Polygamy or plurality of Wives. Moreover,
the love of carnal society, is a most violent passion: and if dishonest love
cannot endure a Rival, much less can that which is honest?


Tell. Holy love rather extends to all, even our enemies.


Och. Jacob was an holy man, and he loved barren Rachel, more then fruitful
Leah. So also Helkanah loved Hannah that was barren, more then Peninnah that
was fruitful. Solomon also said, that his beloved was one. It is therefore an
hard thing, to share out a man's love, amongst many Wives, which
notwithstanding, must be done in Polygamy. When a man has but one Wife, mutual
love is better preserved, then if he had more; and if any falling out happen,
reconciliation is more easily made. Where there are many Wives, there are
diverse understandings, diverse Constitutions, Distractions and Discords.


Tell. If there were a call from God, there would be his blessing. Polygamy is
no enemy to charity. And therefore if any man should have plurality of Wives,
and love were wanting between them, that were not the fault of Polygamy, but of
the said Wives.


Och. If the filthy love of an Harlot, is oftentimes the cause, that a man is
content with her alone, much more ought the holy love of Wedlock, work the same
effect.


Tell. We see that filthy love is more effectual in some persons, then holy love
is in others: as also in like manner, superstition produces more good works in
some, then true Religion in others: all which comes to pass, by the instinct
of Satan.


Och. That plurality of Wives, is a thing contrary to natural Reason, hereby
appears, in that all Nations have always abstained therefrom, as from a thing
unlawful.


Tell. You know that the light of nature, that is to say, the Law which is
imprinted in the hearts of men, is the gift of God, and that it is just, and
that the Law of Moses is not contrary thereunto, but an explanation thereof For
if the Law of Moses were contrary thereunto, God would be contrary to himself,
seeing both proceed from God, or rather, both are one and the same Law. And
therefore if plurality of Wives, had bin contrary to the judgment of right
Reason: neither would Moses verily have dissembled the same; neither would
those most holy Patriarchs have used the same* nor would God have born with it.
God by Moses commanding the Jews, that when they came into the borders of the
Gentiles, they should not imitate their vices, would have named Polygamy, among
other vices, if it had bin unlawful; and he would have forbidden the same by
Moses, which nevertheless, he did not do. We no where read, that ever God
punished any man for having plurality of Wives, nor that he ever did by his
Prophets, threaten such as had many Wives. If you would have the manners of the
Gentiles, to be your rule and law, you shall find amongst them much
wickedness. And whereas you said, that all Nations abhorred Polygamy, that is
false, as appears by the Jews. Also Chremes had two Wives, if we will believe
Terence: also Bocc^^, as Salust relates; in a word, Socrates himself, who
notwithstanding, was the wisest of men, and had much of the light of nature.


Och. Even wise men sometimes do amiss.


Tell. Never any man condemned, or reprehended Socrates, for having two Wives,
although for other things he has been condemned. What needs many words?
Polygamy was used as a good thing, and very profitable to Mankind, by
furthering propagation; not only among the Jews, but also among the Persians,
and the Turks likewise. Only in Europe it has been hateful; in which Europe,
vice has abounded, if not more, yet not a whit less, then in all other parts
of the world. Nay, and in the days of old, Polygamy was commended, even in
Europe. Only they would not have in one house many Mistresses to rule the
Family, which was a thing convenient to avoid confusion.


Och. I will never confess, that it is a good thiug, to have many wives.


Tell. That is, because you conceive it is an unlawful conjunction, and you are
overpowered with an old custom among the vulgar; which in tract of time, has
wone the favor of the common people, and the Magistrates: by which it comes to
pass, that the common opinion prevails more with you then the truth it self.


Och. But what do you say to the Imperial Laws, which are against you?


Tell. In what place?


Och. First of all, the Emperors D^ocletianus and Maximinus, do fordid
Polygamy, in these words: That no man within the jurisd^ction of the Roman
Empire can have two wives: seeing also in the Edict of the Praetor, such men
are branded with infamy: which thing a just Judge, will not suffer to go
unpunished. Also, in the same Code: That man doubtless that has two wives at
once, is accompanied with infamy.


Tell. The Authors of the first Law, as you say, were Diocletianus and
Maximinus; the other is taken out of a certain Rescript of Valerianus and
Galienus.


Och. It is sufficient, that being Emperors, they had power to make Laws.

It is to be observed, that in their days, the condition of Matrimony, in the
Heathenish Empire was such, that any man might put away his wife for light and
frivolous causes, and keep Concubines without any shame. Howbeit, they had
neither the name, nor authority of wives. The Emperors therefore thus decreed,
not because they thought Polygamy was unlawful, seeing they allowed many lawful
Concubines; but they judged it fit, that only the first should have the title
and authority of a wife, especially seeing they might Divorce her, if she
pleased them not.


Och. But we see that Concubines were forbidden by the Emperor Constantine.


Tell. If you well weigh his words, you will find that his intent was, that it
should be unlawful for him that had a wife to have Concubines; not that it was
wholly unlawful, but he might not have them with him, that is, in his own
House, where his wife dwelt, viz, to avoid brawlings, discords and
countentions. But out of his house, he might have as many as he would,
Moreover, the Roman-Emperor Valentianus, having the same Authority and power,
did not only permit such as had wives to keep Concubines, but many wives also
at the same time, in the same house, all dignifyed by the same name and of
equal authority: and Valentianus himself, at the same time had diverse wives;
and therefore by the Law of Valentianus, which was afterward made, the former
Law of Constantine was abrogated.


Och. But Justinian in his Code, makes no mention of that Law of Valentianus.


Tell. Yet that Law of his was, doubtless, published, as appears by the
Histories. Add hereunto, that besides Valentianus, it is apparent, that
Constantius also the Son of Constantine the great, had many wives. Clotarius
also King of France, and Heribertus and Hypericus his Sons, had plurality of
wives. I add Pip^n and Charles, the Great, of whom Urspergensis witnesses,
that they had more wives then one; Yea, and Lotarius, and the son of Lotarius:
as also Arnolphus the seventh Emperor of Germany, and Frederick Barbarossa, and
Philippus Deodatus King of France, and many more. Nor will I deny, that it is a
wicked thing to do as some do, who having wives, leave them, travel into
strange Countries, and marry others. But I speak of such as take care of both
their wives, and are thereunto called by God.


Och. You suppose that which never was in the world, viz. That any man should
be called by God to have two wives.


Tell. Even as Abraham, Jacob, and many others were called by God thereunto, so
may we. Nor do I see, why they had more need of this Remedy then we, nor why it
was rather their duty to beget and bring up a numerous progeny, then ours.


Och. Constantine will not have men to keep plurality of wives, nor will the
Emperor that now reigns.


Tell. Tell me what is just and fit, and not what men will. The Law of nature is
unchangeable. And if in the days of Abraham, it was agreeable to reason, to
have plurality of wives, as a thing honest and just; otherwise, we may assure
our selves Abraham would not have married above one; and therefore we must
confess, That it is at this day a thing fit and just, and so it was in the
days of Constantine, For though he were an Emperor, yet could he not make
that to be unjust which was just in it self; Doubtless that ancient Church of
Christ, had the knowledge of divine matters; and yet neither that Church, nor
the Emperors of those times, did condemn or punish Polygamy. But men had rat^er
seem to be good, then be so indeed, since they are so great haters of plurality
of Wives, but not of Adultery. Finally, to condemn Polygamy, is for a man to
prefer himself before God, who never condemned the same, and to strive to be
more perfect then he. I spare to say, that I may not allow of the Laws of the
Emperors, in cases of Matrimony; seeing they refer the business to the
Ecclesiastic Laws.


Och. If you will be tried by them, I am Victor.


Tell. Bring one Canon that makes for you.


Och. In the times of the Fathers, Polygamy was accounted so filthy, and so
notoriously and manifestly abominable, that they did not think fit to condemn
it by words.


Tell. But I, for my part, am verily persuaded, that those Fathers of the
ancient Church, were contented with the Canon of Paul, who would have the
Ministers of the Church, to be contented with one Wife; not because, it was in
it self unlawful to have more, but that they might the better execute their
Office: but he allowed others to live, according as they found themselves
inwardly moved by God.


Och. And yet plurality of wives was forbidden in the third and seventh
Neo^aesariensian Council.


Tell. I say, it was never forbidden, neither in them, nor in any other.


Och. Sure I am, they ordained a penalty for Polygamists, which they would
never have done, unless they had counted it unlawful to have more Wives then
one. Moreover, they forbad all Priests to be present at the marriage of him,
that would have more wives then one.


Tell. True, but they did not forbid Polygamy it self.


Och. They forbid it sufficiently, when they ordained punishments for it.


Tell. Though you read all the Councels over, you shall never find Polygamy
forbidden. Nor can that be said to be the reason, because they conceived, it
was forbidden in the holy Scriptures. For, neither is it forbidden, as we have
shown already: and in the 17. Canon of the Apostles, it is decreed, that a man
having two Wives, should be removed from the Episcopal and Priestly Function,
and from all other Ecclesiastical Offices. But if the Authors of those
Canons, had seen that Polygamy was repugnant to the Scriptures, to charity, and
the common good of mankind; they would have excommunicated such as had two
Wives* nor would they only have kept them from the Communion; but they would
have also punished them grievously. But those Apostolical persons, as Paul had
done before them, did only forbid the Ministers of the Church to have more
Wives then one, not as if it were a thing repugnant to common honesty; but
because it would draw them away, and divert them from spiritual exercises. But
because afterward, men began by little and little, to turn aside from the right
way, so that many now fell to account Marriage unlawful; they were not ashamed
to write, That a man's first Wife being dead, it was Adultery and not Marriage,
to take another: touching which matter, you may see what Gratian writes. So
also Hierome, and Tertullian interpret that saying of Paul and the Apostles, as
if his intent had been, that he which had two Wives, though one after another,
might not be a Minister in the Church of God: as also he that married a Widow,
or a divorced Wife, which is observed at this day, by those most holy men (Sir
Reverence) the Papists, who notwithstanding, create men of extraordinary and
noted filthiness for their Bishops. But mark what I shall say: the life of a
Courtier and a Soldier, is not sinful in it self, but many may be called by
God to embrace the same; and yet in the twelfth Canon of the Nicene Council it
was decreed, that those men should be severely punished, who having left the
Wars, should become Soldiers again; notwithstanding in those times, War
was seldom made, saying against Idolaters and Infidels. In like manner, though
they decreed penalties for such as had 2. Wives; yet is not Bigamy therefore
sinful, nor does it follow, but that many may by divine instinct, be called
thereunto. There are many such Canons; especially, concerning Matrimony, which
want amendment; nor are we tied by any Canons, but such as have their
foundation in the word of God. The Fathers have many times erred, as being men,
and sometimes swarving from the rule of Gods word. Moreover, we ought to
believe, that Paul taught the Ephesians (for examples sake) and the rest of the
Churches, all things necessary to salvation, as himself testifies; and yet he
taught them not, that any were to be tied to one Wife, excepting Ministers of
the Church.


Och. He might therefore perad^enture do that, to the intent, that others by
their example, might by little and little, be brought to practice the same.


Tell. In the first place, that which you say, is not founded upon any word of
God; without which, it seems to me an impious thing to bind men's Consciences.
Moreover, every thing that is convenient for Bishops, ought not to be
propounded, as an example for all to follow.


Och. Yet is it much, to say that the Church has erred, for the space now of a
thousand two hundred years, in punishing Bigamy.


Tell. That error is not to be attributed to the Church of God, but to men, who
in the Church, have as much erred in forbidding Priests to marry; yea, and I
would have you to take notice, that the Neocaesariensian Council decreed not,
that the second Wife should be divorced, nor that the second was no true
Marriage.


Och. The Council declared that sufficiently, by decreeing penalties for such
as had two Wives.


Tell. Austin judges that man to sin, who, having made a vow of chastity,
marries a wife; and yet he accounts it true marriage, and that it ought not to
be made void. This Arg^ment therefore, is of no force; the Council enacted
penalties for such as had two wives; and therefore the second was no true
Marriage. Moreover, though above a thousand years are passed, since penalties
were enacted against such as had two wives: yet is it not above four hundred
years, since that decree was first received by the Italians, Spaniards, and
Germans. For it is but an humane constitution; and the Bishops would have
exclaimed against Valentianus, for his plurality of wives; but that he had the
holy Scriptures on his side. And notwithstanding, they reprehended such as had
more then one wife, as Austin and Boniface did, as persons that seemed over
indulgent to the flesh; they did not therefore excommunicate them, or reckon
them for such as could not be saved. Ambrose was a very sharp Reprover of sin;
yet do we not any where read, that he reproved Valentinianus, for having two
wives. Yea, and the said Ambrose, reprehending Iustina his second wife; for
being an Arrian, must have reproved her also for being no true wife, but a
Concubine, which notwithstanding he did not do. It is likewise recorded that
Leo the fifth, when he heard that a certain Bishop in Africa had two wives, he
only decreed, that by reason of the words of Paul, he should be degraded from
that honor; but not that he should put away his second wife, or be otherwise
punished for having two. Gregory likewise, Bishop of Rome, writing to Boniface,
who was sent into Germany, to ^e^ch Christianity, an hundred and twenty years
after the Nativity of Christ, beseeches him to take care, that such as had many
wives, and all were dead save one, might content themselves with her alone, and
marry no more. So that he exhorts men to shun plurality of Wives, just as he
should exhort them to embrace a single life; which can be understood of none,
but such as are called by God, to such a kind of life. The true Ecclesiastical
Canons, which oblige us to their observance, are such as have their foundation
in Gods word. But go to; read that Epistle which Gregory the third of that
name, Bishop of Rome, wrote to the foresaid Bonifacius, there you shall find
him write, to this effect.

If any Man have a Wife, which by reason of some bodily infirmity, cannot
afford her Husband due benevolence, he shall do well to abstain from her. But
if he cannot contain (for that is a gift of God not given to all) it is better,
that he should marry another Wife, then burn; provided, he allow his first Wife
all necessary maintenance. Than which, what could be expressed more clearly?


Och. All that you can say, though you talk till Doomsday, will never make me
think it fit, and lawful for a Man to have more then one Wife.


Tell. Suppose there are more Women then Men, what shall the poor Women do in
this case?


Och. They must do, just as the men should do, in case there were many more Men
then Women, viz. pray to God to give them the gift of continence.


Tell. In case a man is by God called to a married condition, and has not the
gift of continence, to live a single life, it would be in vain for him to pray
to God, that he might have the gift to live without a Wife; for in my Opinion,
he would never obtain his request, seeing God calls him to marry.


Och. The whole World has believed, that plurality of Wives is unlawful, nor
can any man have more then one Wife, without giving the greatest offense
imaginable, which all men ought to shun. Moreover, it is the will of God, that
we obey our Magistrates; and they are so far from consenting to Polygamy, that
they will put him to death, that shall have more then one wife.


Tell. But not, if he have many Concubines, or Whores. If any man being moved by
divine instinct, to marry diverse Wives, and it should be no sin so to do; if he
married them, it were a scandal taken (as the Schools speak) and not given.
Also he might, to avoid scandal, marry his second Wife privately.


Och. But such things are hardly practicable; and if he should be often seen in
Company of his second Wife, men would take offense, as supposing her to be his
Concubine. I shall therefore continually exhort all men to avoid Polygamy; and
truly I exhort you to do the same. The Papists themselves do vow to live
single, and shall we that are regenerate, spiritual, and Evangelical men, marry
more wives then one?


Tell. Just; And how honest, that single life of theirs is, all the World takes
notice. The Law it self condemns barren Matrimony; so far is it from not
condemning voluntary and barren single life. Now I speak expressly, of such as
have not the gift of continency, nor are called to a single life. The Romans
did punish such as lived single, and rewarded those, who by abundance of
Children, did augment the Commonwealth; and Lycurgus also, and Ulpianus decreed
the same. Now what more blessed a thing can there be, then the preservation of
humane kind? which would wholly perish, were it not for Marriage. A man cannot
transmit to posterity, a more honorable memorial of his name, then by leaving
behind him Children, virtuously educated. And what greater folly can be
imagined, then under a show of holiness, to shun holy Matrimony, as a thing
profane* which notwithstanding, has bin ordained by God, is dictated by nature,
persuaded by reason, confirmed by Christ, praised by Authors, sacred and
profane, commended by the Laws, approved by the consent of all Nations; and
whereunto we are invited by the Examples of good, and holy men? What more
barbarous and inhumane, then to loath Matrimony, the desire whereof is
implanted in us by nature? What more unthankful to the common nature of the
World and Mankind, then not to beget Children, as our Ancestors and Parents
have begotten us? For my part I make account, that such men are murderers of
as many as they might have begotten, in case they had embraced Matrimony;
unless peradventure, they are carried by a Divine Impulse to live single.

Questionless, it is a kind of Manslaughter, not only by Medicaments, to cause
abortion and barrenness; but also, without very just cause, to shun Marriage.


Och. I do not condemn Matrimony, namely, the having of one Wife; but the
having of two, or more.


Tell. But what advice will you give me?


Och. That you marry no more Wives, but pray to God for the gift of continence.


Tell. What if he will not give it me?


Och. He will, if you pray in Faith.


Tell. What if he neither give me the gift, nor faith to ask it?


Och. If you shall then do that, to which God shall incline you, so that you be
sure you are led by divine Instigation, you shall not sin. For it can be no
Error, to obey God. Other advice I cannot give you. And therefore I bid you
farwell, and promise you, that I will seek God in your behalf.


Tell. And that is it which I beseech you to do, that I may not offend God; but
that I may give him all honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


A DIALOGUE OF Divorce,
Between OCHINUS and MESCHINUS. Ochinus. I See my most dear friend Meschinus
coming toward me; and he seems to me by his carriage to be exceeding sad. I
have a great mind to go meet him, and see whether or no I am mistaken in my
conjecture. I wish you an happy day, Sir.


Mesch. Hitherto, truly, I have found it very unhappy.


Och. Why so?


Mesch. I am brim-full of grief, nor was I ever in my life so possessed with
trouble and sadness, as now I am. And this evil is added to all the rest, that
I cannot lay open my grief; for if I could open my heart unto you, and discover
that which perplexes me, I should seem in some measure to be disburthened and
refreshed. But my calamity is so foul, that it is not fit to be related to any
man, but ought rather to be buried in silence.


Och. Are you ignorant that you and I are all one? and that all affairs, both
prosperous and adverse, ought to be common among friends? And therefore if you
communicate your secrets to me, you do not acquaint another therewith, but your
own self.


Mesch. But there is no remedy in the world for my calamity.


Och. Perhaps there is. Do but open your mind to me: for you shall find me
your secret and faithul friend.


Mesch. I took my wife in the act of Adultery with another man, which torments
me the more, because I always loved her, and should have believed any thing,
rather then that she would have dealt so by me.


Och. Oh strange! Truly I am exceedingly sorrowful, but there is a Remedy.


Mesch. What is that?


Och. Divorce.


Mesch. If I might do it religiously.


Och. Why so?


Mesch. Because sacred Matrimony cannot be dissolved.


Och. True, if there be no adultery committed.


Mesch. Dare you then say, that Marriage, a thing so holy and divine, may be
dissolved by Adultery? so that men being thereby freed, may marry other women?


Och. I for my part have said it, and will say it again, and stand to it: and
that you may perceive the truth of what I say, I will show you the reason of
it. A woman in the matrimonial contract, gives up the honest use of her Body
to her husband, promising that no man while he lives shall have the use thereof
besides himself: and the man does the like by his wife. For this cause Paul
says, that the wife has not power over her own body, but the husband: and
likewise, that the husband has not power over his own body, but the wife. If
therefore the wife break her promise, and faith made to her husband, as yours
has done, having given the use of her Body to another, contrary to her Covenant
made with you; in this case the husband is free and disingaged, so that he may
grant the honest use of his Body to another woman, joined to him in Marriage.


Mesch. When men in covenanting, do give or promise any thing upon condition,
there is no question, but the condition being unperformed, the promise or
donation becomes invalid: But if the Promise or Donation be made without any
condition, it is always valid, though one of the parties break their faith.
And because in Matrimony, an honest use of the Body is promised, both by the
wife and husband, without any manner of condition, it follows, That though the
one falsifies his or her faith, yet is not the other party freed from the
Engagement.


Och. Do you then think, that the husband promises the use of his Body to his
wife perpetually, without any condition, viz. Though she shall behave her self
perfidiously toward her husband?


Mesch. Yes.


Och. But in the matrimonial contract, doubtless, neither says to the other:
I do for ever give you the use of my Body, notwithstanding that you prove
unfaithful to me.


Mesch. Nor is it thus said, I give you the use of my Body, for ever, upon this
condition, That you prove faithful to me. But this, doubtless, ought to be the
mind of each of them, viz. to give the other the use of his or her Body for
ever, whether he or she shall prove faithful, or no?


Och. And how know you that, I pray you? If it were necessary that Marriage
should be contracted in such a sense, it ought to be so expressed in the
Contract, which notwithstanding is not done. And if it were so, that these
words should be used: I give thee the use of my Body for ever, though thou
should prove unfaithful to me, th^r^ would be very few, that could be
content so to be bound.


Mesch. Therefore it is, that no such expression is used, lest one should give
the other occasion of breach of faith, and to think: Although I shall break my
troth plighted, yet cannot he or she deny me the use of his or her Body, seeing
it has been given me without any condition. But they ought doubtless, both of
them to be of that mind.


Och. But I believe there are few, that contract Matrimony in such a sense, as
that they will never deny the use of their Body to the party with whom they
contract, though that party should prove unfaithful. But, go to; think you not,
that it is lawful for you, after you have taken her in Adultery, to separate
your self from her for a time, and not to meddle with her, but to deny her the
use of your Body; yet ^o as to remain bound, as before, in the bonds of
Matrimony, not being in a capacity to marry another woman?


Mesch. That, I conceive, I may lawfully do; provided* that the Matrimony be
not dissolved.


Och. Yet, according to your own words, you married her upon such terms, and
with such a mind, as that you gave her the use of your Body without any
condition, so that you could not deny the same, though she should prove
unfaithful unto you.


Mesch. In the matrimonial Contract, I gave my wife the use of my Body, both
without condition, and upon condition, as she also did to me Without condition*
in as much as I promised, that I would never, she living, engage the use of my
Body, no^ once grant the same, to another; although my wife should carry her
self unfaithfully toward me. Again, I gave the same upon condition, in as much
as I gave it with this Proviso, that she should be faithful to me: otherwise,
that it should be in my power to deprive her thereof for a time; and the self
same, my wife promised to me. And this ought to be enough to preserve such as
marry from Adultery, besides other cause^ both Divine and humane, wherewith
they ought to be moved, to abstain from so great a wickedness.


Och. But this imagination of yours is built and founded in the Air, and
contrary both to the holy Scriptures and right Reason. And that it is, in the
first place, contrary to the word of God, is clearly seen from the words of
Christ, Matthew. 5,
who thus speaks, You have heard how it is said, He that will put away his
wife, let him give her a B^ll of Divorce. But I say unto you, he that shall put
away his wife (save in the case of Adultery) causes her to commit Adultery: and
he that marries her that is put away, commits Adultery. From these words of
Christ, it follows, that if the wife be an adultress, the marriage is
dissol^ed; and the Man may without sin marry another woman, which he could
not do, if he should put her away for other causes besides Adultery.


Mesch. But there is no mention of this matter, in the Gospel of John.


Och. And what then I pray you? Will you therefore deny that those words were
spoken by Christ, and accuse the other Evangelists for liars? Christ wrought
many miracles, which are not written in the Gospel of John; and did not Christ
therefore work the said miracles, because John has made no mention of them?
John in his Gospel, did not write all the miracles and works that Christ did,
nor all the words which he said; yet ought we not a whit the less to believe,
that he did those miracles and works, and spoke those words, of which the
other Evangelists have made mention, than if they were likewise written in the
Gospel of John.


Misch. But what will you answer to this, that it is by Mark and Luke reported,
that Christ should say, If any man shall put away his wife and marry another,
he is an Adulterer, without adding any exception of Adultery, or any other
thing.


Och. And what of all that? Will you therefore say, that Matthew added that
exception touching the wives adultery, from his own head.


Mesch. Nay rather, Will you say, that those other two Evangelists, have so
delivered in writing the sentence of Christ, in a matter of such moment, as to
leave his speech maimed, and detract from his words?


Och. Matthew relates, that Christ said touching John Baptist, that among all
born of women, none was greater then he: And Luke, that no Prophet had been
greater then he. Now if Christ had uttered those words twice, it might be
alleged, That at one time he said a greater, and at another time a greater
Prophet. But like it is, that he spoke those words but once. And therefore we
must think, that eith^r Luke added that word Prophet of his own head: or, that
Matthew omitted the same. And because it is more credible, that Matthew omitted
somewhat, then that Luke should add any thing, we are to believe that Christ
said, there had been no greater Prophet. Likewise, in this case we ought rather
to think, that those two Evangelists omitted that exception touching Adultery,
then that Matthew did add the same. So that we must confess, that it was
uttered by Christ. But, let us suppose that Christ said it not, and that
Matthew added it; in such a case, we must certainly confess, either that
Matthew wrote by the Instinct of Christ, as his Instrument and Member; and that
it is therefore of as much authority, as if Christ himself had said it: or that
Matthew added it of his own head; and so all the authority of the Evangelists
falls to the ground which were a great wickedness to say. And therefore, we
must confess, that those words are true, as they are recorded by Matthew.


Mesch. That we may rightly understand the holy Scriptures, the circumstances
are diligently to be considered. Matthew wrote his Gospel to the Jews, who
because they were accustomed to Divorce their wives at pleasure; he gave
allowance to them, as men unperfect, to put away their wi^es for Adultery. But
Mark and Luke, because they wrote to the Greeks and Gentiles, who were not wont
upon such slight terms, to put away their wives as the Jews were, they did not
permit them to put them away. And because we are sprung from the Gentiles, it
is unlawful for us to put them away.


Och. In the first place, How you come to know that Matthew wrote his Gospel in
Hebrew, I know not. But suppose it be so, as some give out, it does not
therefore follow, that he wrote only to the Jews. If Matthew when he wrote his
Gospel, had wrote an Epistle to the Jews, and that touching matters concerning
them alone, there were somewhat in that you say. But he in his Gospel relates
the Nativity, Life, Death, and Resurrection of Christ, what he said, and did,
and suffered, for the profit and good, not of the Jews only, but of all
Mankind. And therefore, as Christ forbad it to all men, though principally to
the Jews: even so also Matthew wrote his Gospel to all. Otherwise, we must
confess, that the other Evangelists also, wrote only to the Gentiles, and not
to the Jews likewise. Yea verily, and the Epistle which Paul wrote unto the
Romans* seeing it was not written concerning matters belonging to them alone,
both was and will be useful to the whole world: Even so, the Doctrine of each
of the Evangelists, is profitable for all men. Add hereunto, that if what you
have said be true, it should be lawful for Jews being turned Christians to put
away their wives for Adultery; but not for the Gentiles: Ephesians. 2.
and so Christ should not have taken away the partition wall through his flesh,
nor abolished the enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances,
for to make in himself o^twain one new man, so making peace; and that he might
reconcile both unto God in one Body. Also, that should be false which Paul
writes, where he says, Gal. 3.
that in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Gentile.


Mesch. Are you ignorant, that Christ wills and commands, that whom God has
joined together, in Marriage, no man should separate? And will you say, That it
is lawful for me to put away my wife?


Och. Is not the Pope a man?


Mesch. Without all question


Och. How comes it then to pass, that he separates whom God has joined
together in Marriage?


Mesch. After what manner?


Och. Suppose an honest and creditable Virgin, have with her Parents consent
married a young man suitable to her condition; If after the marriage has bin
solemnized with all the rites and Ceremonies thereto belonging, a ^oy shall
take that young man in the Head, to become a Friar; after that he is received
into the religious fraternity, and has made profession thereof, the Pope will
dissolve the said Marriage, so that it shall be lawful for the said Virgin to
marry another man, provided there have been no carnal conjunction between them.


Mesch. But in this case which you suppose, it is not the Pope, but Christ that
frustrates the Marriage.


Och. How I pray you?


Mesch. Know ye not that Christ being at the wedding, did make void the
Marriage of the Evangelist John, who was the Bridegroom? because he took up a
resolution to follow Christ. So also, the same Christ undoes the matrimony of
such as have resolved to follow him, and to become Monks and Friars.


Och. I for my part never knew, that John the Evangelist was the Bridegroom at
that marriage where Christ was a guest: nor can I devise how you came to the
knowledge of such a secret. Nay verily, I cannot tell how you should know so
much, as that the foresaid Marriage was dissolved, and that by Christ. I have
thought that Christ was present at that marriage, not to dissolve, but approve
of holy Matrimony. Nor do I be^ieve, that to ^ollow Christ, it is necessary to
become a Monk or Friar: rather, I know for certain, a man may be both an
Husband and an Apostle, as Peter was, and that Marriage is not repugnant to
perfect Faith, Hope, and Charity.


Mesch. Marriage is such a band as couples and binds men and women together so
long as they live: and therefore the one party being dead, the band is loosed,
so that the party surviving, is free and unrestrained from marrying again with
any other, Romans 7.
as Paul writes. If therefore natural death dissolve Matrimony, we are
doubt^esse to think, that it is much more dissolved by spiritual death. And
because he that becomes a Monk or Friar, is spiritually dead unto the World, we
must needs confess, that the marriage of such an one is dissolved, and that the
woman is free; neither is the marriage dissolved by man, but by death.


Och. They likewise that are baptized, are dead to the World, yea, and buried
with Christ, and yet their Marriage is not dissolved: because two persons may
be married together, the one of which is dead to the World, and alive to God,
and yet their Marriage held good and firm: yea, and supposing both the parties
be dead unto the World, yet is not their Marriage frustrate. If Matrimony were
a thing naught and vicious, I should then confe^s, it could not be practiced by
good Christians, who are dead unto the World. But Marriage is a thing so holy*
that it is not repugnant to Christian perfe^tion, and the same man may be both
in the highest degree spiritual; and a married man nevertheless. Nor do I truly
believe, that men are made dead to the World, and alive to Christ, by Monkery,
more then by Christianity. But to return to the point in hand, where as you
have alleged that saying of Christ, which forbids men to separate whom God has
joined together, viz. by Marriage. I answer, If the Woman be an Adulteress, and
therefore put away by her Husband, in such a case* the Marriage is not
dissolved by man, but by God; whose pleasure it is, that for Adultery, it
should be dissolved. And therefore, as in every lawful Marriage, God is he that
joins us together; so, wherever Marriage is lawfully dissolved, God is he
that dissolves the same.

And again, When Marriages are unlawful, the Devil is the maker, and joyner of
them; and he it is that dissolves them, when they are dissolved without just
cause. Add hereunto, that seeing by marriage, of two one flesh is made; if
either of them commits Adultery, that party breaking his or her plighted faith,
by joining him or her self unto another, and disjoyning him or her self, from
his or her respective Wife or Husband, dissolves the Marriage. And therefore,
if the Wife have committed Adultery, and for that cause her Husband marries
another: in such case the marriage is not dissolved by the man, though he marry
another; but by the woman, who by her Adultery, has disannulled the marriage.
Therefore Christ, when he forbids Man to separate, whom God has joined
together: he does not only declare, that a man ought not without just cause, to
put away his wife; but also, that neither of the parties should commit
Adultery, because he or she that commits adultery does for his, or her part,
dissolve the marriage.


Mes. But you do not understand the mind of Christ, when he denies that a man
ought to put away his wife, save for adultery. For his intent is not, that a
man by his wives adultery, becomes so free, that he may marry another woman:
his meaning being only this, that a man in regard of his wives adultery, may be
so separated from her, as to deny her conjugal benevolence; the holy band of
matrimony, remaining nevertheless entire betwixt them.


Och. When the Jews divorced their wives, the matrimony was dissolved, so that
not only they which divorced them, might marry other women; but the divorced
wives might likewise be married to other Husbands. Otherwise it had bin
needless for God by Moses, Lev. 21.
to forbid Priests to marry women that had bin divorced, in case such women had
not bin allowed to marry; and yet God by Moses, forbad the Priests to marry
women that had bin divorced from their Husbands. Mat. 5. 19.
Christ therefore speaks after this manner. It has bin said, viz. by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 24.
whosoever will put away his wife* let him give her a Bill of Divorce: namely,
to the intent, the Husband may not marry her again; and that she may be free,
and in a capacity to marry to another man; and that marriage of hers may become
firm and stable. But I, says Christ, speaking after another manner, do tell
you, whosoever does put away his wife (that is to say, as the Jews were wont
to put away theirs, who having given them a Bill of divorce, were freed and
enabled to marry others) he is an adu^terer. Therefore, it is lawful for a man
to put away his wife, and marry another, only in case his wife be an
Adulteress. Marriage may therefore, according to the Doctrine of Christ, be
dissolved for Adultery, in such manner as the Jews were wont, for every cause
to dissolve their Marriages, not only so, as that they should not have to do
one with another, in a conjugal way; but also that each party should be so
free, as they might marry with any other. Neither indeed, is it a true divorce,
unless the Matrimony be dissolved: neither were the Jews acquainted with any
other kind of divorcing, or putting away of wives, saving that which did
abrogate and nullify the marriage, and of such a putting away, or divorcing it
was which Christ spoke, which is apparent from these words by him subjoyned:
Mat. 19.
If the Husband (save in the case of his wives commiting Adultery) does put her
away, and marry another, he commits adultery. Therefore if he put aaway his
wife for adultery, and marry another, he does not, in so doing, commit
adultery. We must therefore from the words of Christ, be forced to confess,
that the marriage is made void, by the wives adultery; seeing it is in this
case lawful for a man to marry another. And that you may clearly see, that
Christ there speaks, only of such a divorce, as disannuls the marriage, do but
consider, how the Pharisees tempting him, and asking him, if for every cause a
man may put away, or divorce his wife, viz. in such wi^e as the Jews did, by
dissolving the matrimonial Contract; he answers them, that it is not lawful,
save for adultery. Marriage is therefore dissolved by adultery, otherwise the
answer of Christ were impertinent. Nor shall I stand to say, that if Christ by
the term of divorcing, or putting away, had intended only an abstinence from
conjugal embracements, so as that the marriage was nevertheless to continue
firm, that Exception had contained in it matter of untruths: for it is all one,
as if he had said, a man may divorce his wife only for adultery. Now, that it
should be unlawful for a man, so to put away his wife, as to stain from her
bed, save in case of adultery, is false: for it is clear, a man may lawfully do
that for many causes.


Mes. Let us suppose, and take for granted, that Christ by the terms of
putting away and divorce, did intend the abrogation and dissolution of
marriage, yet shall you never be able to make it appear, that a man by reason
of his wives adultery, may marry another: the cause whereof is this. The speech
of Christ has two members, each of which is true, and the first member is this:
whosoever puts away his wife save for adultery* he makes her commit adultery,
that is, gives her occasion of so doing, because he puts her away, not being an
Adulterss. For if he should put her away, being an Adulteress, he should not
give her occasion of adulterating, because she was adulterated before. The
other member is likewise true, being rightly understood, that is to say,
without any exception, viz. after this manner whosoever marries her that is put
away (v^z. unjustly) commits Adultery. You see how the truth of Christ his
Speech stands firm; nor can we conclude from his words thus understood, That
Marriage is abrogated and nullified by Adultery.


Och. According to your opinion therefore, Christ intimates, That if any man
puts away his wife, not being an Adult^esse, he gives her occasion to commit
Adultery, unless she were adulterated before. For, in such a case, seeing she
is already adulterated, she cannot be made an Adultress. Now, if this be the
mind of Christ, What great matter has he taught us? For who knows not, That he
which puts away his wife, being already an Adultresse, does not give her
occasion to commit her first Adultery, because the same has bin already by her
committed? It seems you have so low an opinion of Christ, as to believe that he
should utter so frivolous a speech. Though an Husband, divorcing his adulterous
wife, does not give her occasion to commit her first Adultery; yet,
questionless, if it be unlawful for him to put her away for Adultery* and if
the marriage be not thereby dissolved, he that puts her away, gives her
occasion to commit new adulteries; from which to terrify us, Christ would
doubtless have said, That she ought not to be put away for any cause, no, not
though she should have committed Adultery: for as much as, even thereby, the
Marriage could not be dissolved. It is therefore clear, that, as to the first
member of the speech, this is the mind of Christ; If an husband put away his
wife, only because she is an Adultresse, he gives her no occasion to commit
Adultery, because that she marrying upon these terms, the former marriage
being dissolved, does not commit Adultery, but becomes the lawful wife of her
latter husband; the marriage which she had made with her former husband, being
by her adultery dissolved. Certain likewise it is, that those words of
exception used by Christ, are likewise to be accommod^ted to the second member
of the speech, so that the sense of Christ in that member may be this; that if
any man marry her that is put away, he commits Adultery, unless she were put
away for Adultery. And that this is the intent of Christ, is apparent, not only
from the tenor of his words, but also much more from what he faies in another
place, explaining the said words. Whosoever, quoth he, puts away his wife,
Matt. 19
save for Adultery, and marries another, commits Adultery. And so does he that
marries her that is put away. Here it is manifestly apparent, that the
exception is to be accommodated to each member of the speech, and that the
meaning thereof is this, That he sins not, who having divorced his wife for
Adultery marries another: and that he likewise does not sin, who marries her
that has been divorced, or put away for Adultery.


Mesch. Will you make Christ to contradict Paul, 1 Cor. 7.
who thus speaks; Unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not
the wife depart from her husband; but if she depart, let her remain unmarried,
or be reconciled to her husband; And then without any manner of exception, he
adds this following speech, And let not the husband put away his wife. And
therefore it is unlawful for a man to Divorce his wife for Adultery:


Och. Do you believe, that it is Paul's meaning, that it is not lawful for a man
upon any occasion whatsoever, to put away his wife and marry another, no not
for Adultery?


Mesch. I believe it.


Och. But I have shown already, That the sentence and judgment of Christ is,
That a man may lawfully put away his wife for Adultery and marry another. How
can it therefore be, that Paul should faithfully declare the Commands of
Christ, as he says of himself that he did, if his mind was, to speak contrary
to what had been said by Christ, viz. That a man ought not to Divorce his wife,
no not for Adultery? For, if this be his sense, certainly Paul was no faithful
Messenger of Christ. And therefore, if we will grant, That Paul faithfully
delivered the mind of Christ, we must confess, that by him Adultery was
excepted as well as by Christ, although Paul did not in words express so much.
For this cause, Ambrose conceived, that in the words of Paul the exception of
adultery must be understood, left Paul should be contrary to Christ. Add
hereunto, That seeing Paul in this place, exhorts to reconciliation; it is
clear, that he speaks not of Adultery, but of other smaller injuries, for which
the Greeks were wont to make Divorce, and which might easily be reconciled; for
which kind of injuries, Paul would not by any means have married people to
Divorce. It may likewise be said, That although the mind of Christ, is, That he
who puts away his wife that has committed adultery, and marries another, is not
an Adulterer, because in such a case, the second Matrimony is good and valid,
as the first was; yet he did not think it was always rightly done, and that
Husbands of Adulterous wives, ought always to Divorce them and marry others.
But rather that it may sometimes so happen, that the wife being an Adulteress,
her husband may nevertheless sin, if he put her away and take another. For in
case a Wife have committed adultery, and the Husband be so minded, as to judge
that it makes more for the Glory of God, not to put her away and to take
another, than the contrary; supposing it probable, That if he take the
Adulteress again, she will be reclaimed; but if he put her quite away, she will
grow worse: he ought not to Divorce her; and if he marry another, he sins: not
because the second is no true marriage, but because in refusing and divoreing
her, and marrying another, he has sinned against Charity and his own
Conscience. And because it is likely, that many times it is the best way, not to
Divorce them, Paul gave order in the name of Christ, That they should not be
divorced, although they did commit adultery, in case the husbands believe, that
it will make more for the Glory of God not to Divorce them. But if the husband
judge, That in case he be reconciled to her, both she and other wives, by her
example, will become more insolent and depraved, to the great dishonor of God;
he ought to put her away by Divorce.


Mesch. Paul in another place says, That the wife is bound to her husband by
the Law so long as he lives, so that if she marry another man, she becomes an
Adultresse: which holds not, he being dead; for then, being freed by the death
of her husband, she is by the Law allowed to marry another. And therefore a
Wife cannot so long as her Husband lives, any ways be freed from the band of
Matrimony, and marry another.


Och. They which hold it lawful for a man, because of his wives adultery* to
marry another, do not therefore think it lawful for a woman by reason of her
husbands adultery to marry another man. I may therefore grant you that which
Paul writes, viz. That it is in no wise lawful for the wife during her husbands
life, to marry another, though her husband be an Adulterer. But it does not
therefore follow, that the husband cannot Divorce his adulterous wife, and
marry another. And therefore, though the husband has power to put away his
wife, having played the Adulteress, yet has not the woman the same power, to
Divorce her husband, in case he prove an Adulterer, and marry another man.


Mesch. But what arguments do those men bring, to maintain this their opinion?


Och. The very words of Christ, who says expressly, That it is lawful for a man
to put away his wife for adultery: but that it should be lawful for a woman to
put away or refuse her husband for adultery, he has not said. Neither did ever
Moses speak so much as one word of the divorcing of men. They add also this
Argument, because the husband is Head of his wife, and has authority over her,
he may upon the occasion aforesaid, put her away: which the wife cannot do to
the husband, as having no such authority.


Mesch. If Marriage be dissolved by adultery, so that of two, there is no
longer one flesh made, as there was by Matrimony; seeing the husbands adultery
is as much adultery, as the wives, I admire that Marriage is abrogated and
dissolved by the woman's adultery, and not by the man's likewise.


Och. Marriage is not so dissolved by adultery, that as soon as the adultery is
committed, the band of Matrimony is loosed and broken a sunder; so that,
neither the woman is any longer his true wife, nor the man her true husband.
For, supposing the case to be so, it were necessary that they should be married
again, to the end they might enjoy one another in a conjugal way, without sin.
And therefore the Marriage is not dissolved by the Act of Adultery; but by the
woman's Adultery it comes to pass, that the Man has power to Divorce her, and
she being divorced, the Matrimony is dissolved, which does not so come to pass
by the man's Adultery: for as much as the wife does not, thereby acquire any
power to put away her husband, or Divorce her self from him.


Mesch. Nay, but a wife may also put away her husband if he be an Adulterer;
although neither Christ nor Moses have expressed so much, nor the Jews ever
practiced the same.


Och. I will give you another answer to the words of Paul, and say, That it is
not necessary that Similitudes and Comparisons should in all points agree; but
it is enough if they agree in that particular for which they are brought, As
when Christ says to his Apostles, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches, his
meaning is by that similitude to declare, That as the Vine-branches cannot bear
fruit without the Vine, neither can they without Christ; and if in that point
the similitude hold* it is enough. But he does not likewise intimate this, That
as the branches of the Vine bear fruit only once a year: so they should bring
forth the fruits of righteousness only once a year. So Paul in the place
before alleged wou^d declare to the Jews converted to Christ, That they were
not now under the Law, seeing by Christ the carnal m^n was killed in them, who
stood in need of the Law; and brings the Example of a woman, who may lawfully
marry again, her husband being dead. It is therefore sufficient, if in this
particular the comparison hold (as it does) That as by the death of her
husband, a wife is freed from the Law of Marriage, so that she may be married
to another man; even so we, by the death of the carnal man are made free from
the Law of Moses; seeing that we now operate, not by command of the Law, but by
impulse of the Spirit, and are no longer under the Law, but under Grace. Yet is
it not unlawful therefore for a wife to marry again, her former husband being
yet alive, in case she be by him divorced.


M^sch. And yet Paul says, Romans 7.
While he lives she cannot marry another, without being thereby an Adulteress.


Och. I answer, In that place, the saying of Paul runs thus; I speak to such as
know, the Law, viz. the Jews that are already baptized, who know the Law
allows a man to put away his wife, by giving her a Bill of Divorce: by which
means she being freed may marry another man. This therefore was the mind of
Paul, that she might not marry another during her husbands life, unless she be
first divorced from him; and therefore during her husbands life, it is not in
her power to marry, though she be an adultresse, because the power of divorcing
is not in her, but in her husband. And I am of the same opinion, touching what
the same Paul writes in another (...). 1 Cor. 7.
The wi^e (quoth he) is bound by the Law as long as her husband lives, that is
to say, she cannot marry to another, unless her husband put her away for
Adultery. But if her husband dye, she is freed from that Law.


Mesch. As God allowed the Jews by reason of their imperfection, and to give a
little way to the hardness of their hearts, to Divorce their wives when they
pleased* so we must needs confess, that he has denied this liberty to
Christians, because they are perfect.


Och. This indeed is manifest; Unless sin had been in the world, there would
never have been any Divorce: and unto Christians, who ought to be perfect,
Divorce may be in such a sense said to be forbidden, in as much as Adultery is
forbidden. But if a woman be an Adulteress, her husband is allowed to put her
away, and to marry another. Even as, if there had never been any sin, Parents
would never have cast off, or renounced and disinherited their children; and
Christians, as those that should be perfect, are so far forbidden to renounce
their children, for as much as those causes are forbidden, for which they may
justly renounce them: But if children be such, that their Pa-Parents may justly
renounce them, it is allowed to Parents, both to renounce them, and to adopt
others in their stead.


Mesch. As the Jews offended, in divorcing their wives: so do also the
Christians, and indeed much more.


Och. If at any time the Jews did Divorce them upon a just ground, they sinned
not; no more do the Christians.


Mesch. There can be no just cause of Divorce, by reason of those mighty
inconveniences which follow the same.


Och. Christ, it seems, was not aware of those so great inconveniences, which
Divorce, as you say, brings along with it: or you are more careful to preserve
sanctity then Christ was. If Divorce drew so many inconveniences after it as
you say, we ought to confess, that Christ did ill who allowed a man to
practice it, by reason of his wives adultery.


Mesch. If Christ did permit it, he permitted it only as an evil thing.


Och. That he permitted it to a man, in case of his wives adultery is apparent
out of his words, which we have formerly heard. But whether he did well or ill
in permitting the same, that is a thing, truly, which I would learn of you. Nor
do I take you to be so shameless as to say, that he did not well in permitting
the same.


Mesch. He did well to permit it.


Och. If he did well to permit it for adultery, it follows, That they do not
well, and are contrary to Christ, who deny the same, though a man's wife be an
Adultress.


Mesch. They do it to a good intent, that those inconveniences may be avoided,
which are wont to spring from Divorces.


Och. If greater inconveniences arise from the allowance, then from the
forbidding of Divorce, Christ did ill to permit the same: and they have done
well that have forbidden it. But because it were wickedness to say, That Christ
did ill to permit it, we must confess, that they have erred, that forbad it,
and that greater inconveniences arise from denying, then from permitting the
same. Therefore it is rightly permitted by Christ; seeing of two evils, if one
must be chosen, we ought to choose the least. But, let us take this course; do
you reckon up the inconveniences, which arise from divorcing wives for
Adultery; and I will recount such as spring from forbidding to Divorce^ them:
which evils, being afterward put into the balance, one against another, we
shall see which are the greater.


Mesch. I am content. And in the first place: If it were lawful for men to put
away their wives for Adultery, seeing the number of unchaste women is great,
there would be a world of divorces, from whence infinite inconveniences would
arise.


Och. In the first place, I believe there are many chaste women; and if some
prove unchaste, I am sure there will be the fewer, if they shall know they may
be divorced for adultery, and shall suffer the just penalties thereof. Add
hereunto, That I do not say, that a man may put away his Wife for every
suspicion: no, not if he shall see her play the Adulteress, with his own eyes:
but only, if he shall convict her of adultery, before Judges appointed to hear
such cases. Nor is the Husband in such case bound to put her away: nay, but it
is lawful for him not only not to put her away in such a case, but to be
reconciled to her. Yea, and he is bound to do it, if for some cause (which may
sometimes happen) he shall foresee, that it will be more for the Glory of God,
to be reconciled. I add this also, Although the woman be convicted of adultery,
yet is it not lawful for the man to Divorce her, and to marry another, without
the Magistrates consent, who may sometimes determine, that he shall not Divorce
her: as if, for example sake, he fears lest if he should Divorce her, the
woman's Parents should raise great tumults, and there should be danger of much
bloodshed. And therefore, there would not be in this case so many Divorces, as
you have intimated.


Mesch. If the Magistrate in such a Case as you have propounded, wou^d not
suffer her to be divorced by her Husband, he should then, according to your
judgment, go contrary to Christ: and therefore the Husband ought not to obey
him.


Och. Nay, but he ought: for he should not go contrary to Christ. For Christ
does not command, that a man should put away his wife for adultery: he only
grants that he may do it. And the man ought doubtless to Divorce her, if that
shall tend more to the Glory of God. But if to Divorce be more dishonorable to
God, then not to Divorce, as it is in that Case by me propounded, he ought not
to Divorce her. The Magistrate therefore, is no^ therein contrary to Christ,
but agrees with him; and the Husband ought to obey him, and not to Divorce her:
because Christ would have offenses, and the dishonor of God, avoided.


Mesch. Put the case, that it is no dishonor to God to Divorce her, and the
husband believe as much: but the Magistrate refuses, for some humane
consideration, having no regard to God: What shall the poor Husband do in this
case?


Och. Not Divorce her.


Mesch. But what if he shall, contrary to the mind of the Magistrate, Divorce
her and marry another?


Och. He shall sin that marries another, and deserves to be punished.


Mesch. Suppose he cannot contain, What shall he then do?


Och. Pray to God to give him the gift of continency.


Mesch. What if God shall not grant his request?


Och. There are diverse Remedies. In the first place, let him be reconciled to
his wife.


Mesch. What if she be afraid to have ^o do with him again?


Och. Let him relate the whole business to the Magistrate, and make it appear,
that he wants the gift of Continence.


Mesch. What if the Magistrate will allow him no remedy?


Och. Let him marry another with all possible secrecy; and, if it happen to
come to light, yet can he not justly be punished. But, it were better for him,
to go into some other jurisdiction, where he might be allowed to marry another
openly.


Mesch. If Husbands ought to obey the Magistrate, in not putting away their
Wives, though he unjustly forbid them, Why ought they not to obey the Pope, who
would have them put away for no cause, no not for adultery; notwithstanding
that Precept of his be unjust?


Och. In such a case as I propounded, the Magistrate ought to be obeyed and not
the Pope; and that for this Reason. The authority which Magistrates have, is
not contrary to Christ, but agreeable to the will of God: and therefore they
ought not by refractorinesse to be contemned, but to be honored by Obedience.
But the authority of the Pope, is point blank contrary to the Authority of
Christ; and ought therefore to be contemned and opposed. And, that this is so,
I thus demonstrate. The godly and Christian Magistrate, has a power of taking
cognizance, whether women accused of adultery, are indeed and in truth
Adulteresses, or not. And, in case they shall be lawfully convict of adultery,
they have the power of judging, by sundry circumstances, whether it is best
they should be divorced, or not. And, in case they may sometimes err in their
Judgment, their authority is not therefore contrary to Christ, as the Popes
is; for their business is not to hinder all Divorces, but providently to
consider, when they may be allowed* or not allowed; being well assured, that it
may often so fall out, that they may be lawful and fitting. But the Popes work
is, to prohibit all Divorces, as if to Divorce were never lawful, contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, who taught* That a Wife may lawfully be divorced for
adultery; It is therefore fit in this cas^, to contemn the authority of the
Pope, as pernicious and contrary to Christ: and on the otherside, to honor the
authority of Magistrates, and obey the same, as being useful in it self, and
agreeable to the mind of Christ, though they may sometimes abuse the same. But
to return to our matter in hand, Do you go on to declare the inconveniences
which altered Divorce.


Mesch. When women are not pleased with their Husbands, they will commit
adulteries that their Husbands may Divorce them, to the End, that being at
their own dispose they may at pleasure marry to other Men.


Och. But this would very seldom happen: In the first place, because they would
understand, that possibly they might not be divorced, though they should prove
Adulteresses: Again, because although they were divorced, being made infamous,
hardly any men would marry them. Add hereunto, That if just Laws were in
force, they should be put to death, or be at least so punished, as it would be
impossible for them to marry.


Mesch. If a Man might put away his Wife for adultery, and marry another, his
marrying another wife would show, that he divorced the former, not so much
because offended with her adultery, as because he was allured by love of the
second.


Ochinus. Holy men can do nothing so uprightly, but that wicked persons may at
least calumniate their intentions; yet ought they nevertheless, to persist in
that which is right. If Divorce should be exercised for adultery, according to
Gods word, when ever it were done, by order of the Magistrate, it would give
occasion of offense to no Man. And, if so be nevertheless, some wicked person
should by such Divorce, take offense where none was given; it were not
therefore just to compel the innocent Husband, to hold society with so wicked a
Woman, to his great disgrace and infamy, as in such a case would happen: or to
live single all his life after, whether he were endued with the gift of
Continence or not. But, go to; consider with your self, how many inconveniences
have hitherto arisen upon this ground, viz, because it has been wholly
forbidden to Divorce for Adultery. In the first place, Many men have killed
their Wives whom they have taken in Adultery, that they might free themselves
from so shameless a companion, and have by that means liberty to marry
another: which they would not have done, if they might have been allowed to
Divorce them. Moreover; many Husbands, offended by their Wives Adultery, and
loathing to hold society with them, have given them Poison privately, or have
run away from them: and many times the Wives themselves for fear of death, have
abstained from the society of their Husbands in such cases: and wanting
peradventure the virtue of Continency, have committed innumerable crimes: which
they had not done, if being made each of them free by Divorce, they might have
joined themselves to some other in Marriage. And these were the fruits of (Sir
reverence) those holy Interdictions of the Pope, forbidding Divorce for
Adultery, and License to the divorced to marry again.


Meschinus. As Christ sticks close to his Church, and cannot be separated from
her being his Spouse: So, a man ought to cleave unto his Wife, without any
possibility of separation.


Ochinus. Nay rather, As Christ divorced the Jewish Commonwealth, because she
brake her Covenant with him, and had played the Harlot with many Lovers: So a
Man may Divorce his Adulteress Wife, and marry another.


Meschinus. No man marries a Wife to Divorce her.


Ochinus. Nor does any man marry a Wife, for her to play the Adulteress.


Mesch. But all men know, when they marry Wives, that they cannot Divorce them,
although they should prove Adulteresses: and they marry them with such a mind
as not to Divorce them: Whence it follows, That it is not lawful for them to
Divorce them.


Ochinus. Seeing it is false, That they may not be divorced for Adultery, and
that which is false cannot be known, it follows, That Men when they marry, do
not know that their Wives may in no case be divorced. They had indeed such a
false persuasion: but their Error being removed, they may lawfully and honestly
Divorce them, though, through erroneous persuasion, they promised the contrary.


Meschinus. You can never reckon up all the causes, for which Divorce ought to
be made: and therefore it is better wholly to forbid it.


Ochinus. Truly you reason most excellently! just as if you should say; You
shall never be able to reckon up all the Causes for which men ought to be
punished: and therefore it is the best way to forbid all punishment of wicked
men. But I, for my part, in the first place, do assuredly know from the words
of Christ, That a Wife may be divorced for Adultery. I know likewise, that
Magistrates may, and ought to put in execution these Divorces for Adultery, so
often as they see, it may make to the Glory of God. I know also, that Divorce may
be made for infidelity, because Paul has so said.


Meschinus* You shall never make me believe that, while I live.


Ochinus. Peradventure I may persuade you nevertheless. But because dinner
time is already past, and I find my stomach crave refreshment, you shall dine
with me. After dinner, we shall have time enough to consider, Whether or no, a
Man may Divorce his Wife for Infidelity.


Mesch. Content.


The End.

