NEVVES From Hull, Ireland, and France, AS FIRST THE MANNER OF Sr. John
Hothams PROTECTION OF HVLL Discovering a horrible Plot conspired by one Becket
a Papist in Yorkshire and one Fulckes to admit some Lords into Hull May 24.
1642. 2 of June With Fulkes his loyalty shown to the Perliament in not
concealing the plot, but revealing it to Sr. John Hotham. Secondly a Letter
sent to Captain White in London From Thomas Prideaux in Ireland dated from
Dublin the twentieth of May, 1642. Concerning a Proclamation laely Proclaimed
in Ireland. AS ALSO 3. Remarkable passages at the Seige of Airs, a City upon
the border of Spain where for these hundred years, The King of Spain has
held it by force from the King of Fraunc but now recovered 1642.

with an Order from the high Court of Parliament. Io. Brow. Cler. Per.

London Printed for Thomas Baker. 1642.

SR. John Hothams Protection OF HVLL In discovering a horrible Plot conspired
by one Becket a Papist in Yorkshire, and one Folks to admit his Majesty into
Hull.
THe 28 of May. The House of Commons received letters unexpectedly, from Sr.
John Hotham in full discovery of the conspiracy at Hull, May 24. The effect of
which letters were, that the said Becket had conspired with one Folks his son
in law and soldier of Sr. John's to betray the town to him and his friends, by
opening a gate at one end of the town on his watch night and to cause a false
alarm to be beat at the other end whilst they entered the town, for which he
was to have 500 pound presently paid him. And 250 pound per annum, if he
performed it.

But the said Faulkes made discovery of the Plot to Sr. John Hotham, who
concealing the same caused the said Faulks to write a letter to the said
Becket, to inform him that he had contrived the plot according to his desire,
who returned Answer that he would not fail of his promise. Whereupon the said
Becket with a great company of caveleers gentlemen and some Lords in the company
came to Hull at the time appointed. And at their coming the said Sr. John
Hotham appeared on the walls with his men, completely armed, And told them
their treachery was discovered but offered not the least violence to them, And
then they fled.

Upon this letter there was a great debate and the Lawers delivered their
oppinions concerning it, the effect whereof that for any to betray any of the
Kings sorts is treason by Law, whereupon it was ordered Becket should be
forthwith sent for to the Perliament. They also received letters from Beverly,
that his Majesty has sent to Sheifeild, for 4 pieces of ordinance upon which
they ordered to send messengers to make stop thereof.

A LETTER SENT TO CAPTAIN WHITE in London from Mr. Thomas Prideaux in Ireland
dated from Dublin the 16 of May 1642. and received in London the 24. of May.
WOrthy Sir I have sent you here enclosed the Relation of the King of France,
the Duke of Bulloign Don Lomboyle general for Spain Mounsieur Shattello chief
general for France, and Count Swasham governor of Sedan worthy of
observation which I desire you to let my Cosen and friend Captain Hill have a
sight thereof, It has bin much rejoiced at in those parts of Ireland, and the
rather in regard it has bin a weakening to the King of France for he has bin
long looked for amongst the Rebels in those parts for a fresh supply of
Ammunition and Arms but now it is supposed he has need of them neererer at
home, I know you desire to hear of the state of this Kingdom. I will neither
add nor diminish but in truth the Kingdom is overspread with the Rebels, their
is hardly any one part of this Kingdom secure, save only in the North toward
Londonderry And if we have not a new supply of men and Arms, this Kingdom
will be without all hopes of recovery or reducing the same to due obedience ct
subjection to the Crown of England.

We have long expected a supply from Scotland which is not yet come over as
also from England God grant them a sudden and happy landing.

I make no doubt but you have heared of the death of Sr. Charles Coote who was
shot in the belly by one of his own soldiers unawares, his death was much
lamented at in regard of his valor and, good service he has done in this
King: dome of Ireland, I cannot for the present write you any strangs news
more then you have allredy hear of (only this) we hear that since the
proclamation proclaimed in this Kingdom that every one that could bring in
such a Traitor dead or alive should have such aportion of land or a sufficint
reward in money, diverse of the greater sort of the Reblles have sent vnro the
counsel of Ireland with a petition to be sent to his Magiesty and Parliment in
England that if that his Magiesty and Parliment will grant them a genrall
pardon with a tolleration of their religion as in Queen Elizabeth's days they
woule submit and bring in many thousand more with them.

Thus far I have presumed upon your patienca in exposing these fewelynes to
your view but hope they will not be so thought of by your self as being but
in discharg of that Engagement which I have long time owed you but opportunity
before not permiting me I thought it necessary to pay the same thought not in
that manner I desired.

From Dublin the 20 of May 1642 Yours with respect Tho. Prideaux.


As Also Remarcable passages at the Seige of Airs a City upon the border of
Spain where for this 100 years, the King of Spain has held it by force from
the King of Fraunc but now recovered
MOnnsiear Shattello chief general for the King of France having near upon 4
months besieged the City of Airs Don Lomboyle governor of the said City, and
chief general for the King of Spaynes Army which he had to go for France
perceiving that he could not keep it, which drew all his forces and marched
toward Dunsleigh a Protestant town in France by which means the French Army
had quiet possession after which Mounsieur Shattello understanding that
Lomboyle was marched toward Dunsleigh Shattello followed him verry closely,
and in his March he came to Sedan a town of the Duke of Bulloignes, where he
sent and demanded of the Duke contribution for his Mr. the King of France. The
Duke denying it, Shattello caused his Ordinance to be planted against the
town and battered the walls of the Town, and slew therein almost 500* brave
Cavillers, notwithstanding the Duke resisted his entrance and slew a greater
number of Shattello his Army, and forced him to raise his siege, the rather
because the Duke joined with Lomboyle his Army chief general for Spain and
entertained all his Army to pass through his Country for his nearest cut to
Airs, where both Armies meeting being about 50000 soldiers they went hand in
hand to the City of Airs, and coming almost within shot of the town,
Lomboyle sent to Mounsieur Shattello to yield with quietness the City of Airs
being his Mr. the King of Spaines right and inheritance and in case he shall
leave the town quietly, Then to have a convoy for his Carriages and no
interruption of any person during their marching into France.

Upon which words Shattello was moved to wrath and sent a challing, to Lomboyle
and the Duke of Bulloigne appointed a place of meeting where he would fight
with both their Armies.

After which Lomboyle by the assistance of the Duke of Bulloigne marched toward
Shattello his Army and appointed a set battaill to be fought where for the
space of two days there was great slaughter on both sides and the Duke of
Bulloigne and Lomboyle slew above 2000 of Shattello his forces and took about
4000. prisoners and imprisonned them in Sedan a town also of the duke of
Bulloignes, and the duke made also Proclamation that all those soldiers and
prisonners that would serve either the Duke of Bulloigne or Lomboyle should be
entertained (if not) they should every man pay for their ransom three Months
means and so to be sent by Convoy to their quarters and Randevow.

Count Swasham a valiant Commander and governor of Sedan, came also with 10000
soldiers more to assist the Duke of Bulloigne and Lomboyle and in his passage
toward Airs he met with Shattello his Army, and both Armies meeting almost
within pikes length one of the other, Count Swasham his army was broken and
separated and put to flight and diverse slain whereof the Count himself was
slain, the rest of his Army was in a trance and ran to their garrison towns of
Sedan.

The King of Fraunc hearing of the ill success Mounsieur Shattello chief
governor of his forces had with the Duke of Bulloigne, and Lomboyle raised a
great Army the number of 50000 soldiers and threatened to be revenged of
Bulloigne and Lomboyle where indeed he was for he burnt and spoiled many
villages and hamlet towns. of the Duke, being most part thereof Protestants
never theless, the Duke at length obtained the Conquest and forced the King to
remove his seige and obtained his own conditions that is to have the sum of
2500000. pounds of the spoil he had done him and his Country and an
everlasting place between them without paying any Contribution to the King of
France hearafter which the King yielded thereunto.

Diverse Princes Dukes Marqusses and Counties some Protestants some Papists are
at this present in Rebellion against there King the King of France.

Dii Martis 29 Maii 1642.
It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Perliament assembled, That
the Magazines of the several Counties in England and Wales, shall be forthwith
put into the power of the Lords Livetennants of the said Counties, respectively
(being such as the Parliament does conside in for the service and safety of
his Majesty and the Kingdom.

Ordered in Perliament, That this Order shall be printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Clar. Perl.

FINIS

