News from Purgatory. OR, The Jesuits Legacy To all their Loving Friends In all
Cities and all Countries.
WE had long since (most Noble Friends) left you this our last Legacy, as a
Testimony of our thanks due to your great Trust and singular Contrivance in
carrying on the Design, but that we stayed for Mr. L -- our Fellow Laborer,
and deserved indeed at the same time to have been a fellow-sufferer, though the
subtilty of his Evasions obtained a small Respit from the Execution of Justice,
for which he has now suffered the same Fate. For as he is a spirit of profound
knowledge in the deepest Mysteries of the Law, so is he of greatest use for his
singular Trust in the management of the same; for tho these Regions be very
well stockt with Gown-men, especially Priests and Lawyers, yet could we not in
all this numerous crowd, find out one Devil, tho some thousand years
experienced in all the Villainies of Man, whom we might entrust in this Concern
like him: who as he was best acquainted with our Estates and Writings, Privy to
all our Councils and Debates, can in the most profound and Legal Method convey
them to your Lordship.

We need not tell you with what obstinacy of Resolution; and unparalleled
Impudence, we perished to the last gasp, even to the defiance of Truth, and
abjuration of Heaven, for the Holy Catholic Cause, and must exhort you by our
Example to continue Obstinate to the End, that Heretics get no Advantage
against us, that your lives may be thought Innocent, and the Credulous
multitude pity your Sufferings, you may daily gain Proselytes into the Bosom of
the Mother Church.

But we hope such Cognizances are not necessary for you (My Thrice Noble
Friends, the great Atlasses of our Papal Heaven) whose larger Souls are a
greater Testimony of your Integrity then our Example can express, for which you
deserve the Eternal Praise and Prayers of the Church, and which we to the most
excellent worth of your most noble persons, with an ampler right and greater
Merit than our selves have now applied, who have hitherto labored in so
glorious a work, not for the sake of profane Empire only, but for the
Principality, Universality and Infallibility of the most Holy Roman Catholic
Church. For it was you (My Noble Friends) who at the Command of his Holiness
the present Alexander the 14, and some years since brought forth of your Armory
instead of Allegiance and Loyalty, Darts of a clear different frame: to wit,
the Shield of Assistance and the Sword of Glory for propagating the Holy
Catholic Cause, and subverting of Heretics, which they miscall Rebellion and
Treason, for which we have already suffered Martyrdom, and you your selves lie
under the State of Condemnation.

Nor is it only for your generous Conspiracy and secret Conduct we owe you this
acknowledgment: but that likewise, since you made a Distribution of these your
Arms, gnawn a little with rust, but new cleansed and polish't to the
confederate Accomplices with several Grants, Orders, Warrants, Commissions,
Patents, Decrees, to proceed in the great Design, whilst we, who had the Care
of Souls, were abundantly stockt with Spiritual Engines, as Dispensations,
Reservations, Equivocations, Absolutions, Pardons, Indulgences, Confessions and
secret Insinuations to excite Proselytes, and carry on the same through the
three Nations, where, tho we were discovered and prevented by the Apostasy of a
Dissenting Brother, you may yet proceed, since for your Success there are daily
Prayers said in the Conclave, and there are enough who yet survive to take
Advantage of Opportunity.

Thus having in general intimated our Acknowledgments we think it our Duty to
your present conditions in particular, with a small portion of Goods and
Chattels as escaped Confiscation, this place not admitting of much Money, yet
such as we have in distinct parcels according to the present following
Inventory.

The last Legacy of Thomas Whitebread, to all Catholics.
IN the Name of the most Holy of Holiest upon Earth, Vicar and Vicegerent in
the Pontifical Chair, etc. I Thomas Whitebread (very weak and infirm in Body
since the last Execution) but of sound and perfect Memory of all the Good or
Evil I have done in the Flesh; whether by Deceit, Bribe, Treachery, Hypocrisy,
Treason, Conspiracy, Policy, Cheating, Lying, Swearing and Forswearing, all
Meritorious Acts to carry on the Cause, and for which I am Justly Sentenced
unto this World of Purgatory, do bequeath unto you (my Honorable Friends) all
my Right, Title, Claim and Interest of and in the Provincial Seat of the
Jesuits in England, since from you it did descend, and to you it appertains
to dispose of it, to none but so great a Villain as my self, who had rather
hazard Damnation at the Gallows with a Lie in my mouth, and a Rope about by
neck, then by a feeble Confession suffer your Honorable Heads to be brought to
the Block, and to my Successor this Advice, by my Example, if he fall under the
same Praemunire to justify his Innocence to the last.

The last Legacy of William Harcourt.
I William Harcourt, etc. do bequeath unto you (my good Friends) all and every
the vast Sum and Sums of Money committed unto my Trust, under pretense of
supplying Indigent Papists, but indeed for carrying on the Cause, to be
returned into the Exchequer at Tarthall. Likewise to my good Lord -- I do
resign and make over all my Right and Title of Rectorship of the Jesuits in
London, and Somerset Cloisters for a new Convent, since the Invisible Monastery
was unhappily discovered at Tart-Hall, and his Ladies Cobbler with the Leather
Apron for a Tippet to succeed me in the Rectory. Lastly, I do absolve all Roman
Catholics from their Prayers which I begged at the Gallows (because I find here
they are like to do but little service) to be employed in your Lordships behalf
to enable you by a Legion of Oaths, Vows and Protestations, from which I
Absolve you to justify your Integrity to the the end.

Mr. Anthony Turner's last Legacy.
ANd to you my Honorable Patrons, as the chief undertakers and principle
promoters of this Fatal Plot; I do bequeath all the Art of Secresy and Mystery
of Jesuitism, with all its practicable Tenants of King-killing and
Heretick-destroying; with the allowance of Equivocation, Lying, Swearing and
For-swearing, as the cause shall require, to be delivered out with your
Commissions. And to my Lord -- the present Council of Trent for a Model of his
new Government, and Tixal for the Council Chamger. I leave you my Prayers which
I had on my Finger-ends at the place of Execution, my Beads, Rosaries and
Avies, as a pledge of my Martyrdom, to be Registered amongst the Relics in
Trinity College in Cambridge, and my Manual of Ignorance to be inlisted in the
Library at Oxford, when they shall be established Roman Catholic Universities;
which though you cannot so easily effect at present by reason of your
restraint, yet at least you must be active to endeavor by such Instruments as
are proper to effect the same, with this Motto, Si non simul, and semel, at
paulatim and sensim sit mutatio fact a.

Mr. Gawen's Legacy.
I must confess that I rather choose to die, rather then confess Truth at the
Gallows; (my most Noble Friends) I have not much to bequeath you of any Worldly
Talents, only what Talent I claim by virtue of my Function as a Jesuit, that
is, a certain Authority more then Travelers challenge for Lying, which I
improved to the last minute, and leave unto you both Interest and Principle to
manage to the best advantage, as necessary to your present Estate as well as
mine; since according to our Principles it is both lawful and necessary to Lie
and Outface the Truth, even by Oath and Imprecations; nay outbrave Death and
Judgment, and like brave Roman Heroes sacrifice Soul and Body for the Holy
Catholic Interest, rather then by a Cowardly Confession to betray the Cause
you undertook, and give and allow you all liberty to exercise the same. As also
a full power to Kill, Rob and Spoil Heretics, as fully as it is granted you by
the Lateran Council. I do likewise bequeath unto you all my share, part and
portion of all the Goods, Chatels, Movables and Estates of any Heretic
Prince, Prelate or People, which are already confiscated by the same Council,
and which might or ought by Writ of Partition fall unto my Lot, when it comes
into your hands: In recompense whereof, I do enjoin you to erect ten thousand
Chapels in ten thousand several places, where ten thousand Priests may say ten
thousand Masses every day, for ten thousand years to make Atonement for the
last abominable Lie I told, for I find less time will hardly redeem me from
this Purgatory.

Father John Fenwick's last Legacy.
TO strengthen your Resolutions (my noble Friends) in the holy Cause you have
undertaken, I John Fenwick leave you my Impudence to outface Justice and the
Truth, and my Innocence to palliate your Guilt when you are convicted: And that
you may not stammer at a Lie at the last gasp, I leave you my Tongue to be your
Advocate, and two drams of my Brains for a Council's Fee; my Privities, which
were the first Martyrs before my self, I do bequeath to the Mother Church,
which the Heretics call the Scarlet Whore, and Whore of Babylon, to get many
such Phaenixes out of the Ashes: My nether Jaw I leave to my Lord -- for a
Brandy-Cup; my Skull for a Snuff Box; and my Bowels to your L --, to be spun
into a Clew of Innocence, to lead you out of your present Labyrinth. Lastly, I
leave you my Advice still to assert your Innocence; lay the Plot, and -- and
others, Fee-deep for Prorogations and Dissolutions; bribe O -- and B --; if you
cannot do that, at least lessen their Evidence, by reviling their Persons, and
deny all with Oaths and Imprecations, even upon the Scaffold.

We do also as Proto-Martyrs in the same Cause, for and in the name, and by and
with the consent of them, and every of them, present unto your Lordships
Staley's Jewels, after his Debts are paid, that durst rail at Monarchy, and
proclaim his noble Resentments in public Assemblies, and had the honor to be
the first Martyr, whilst you sneak into blind Corners, whisper your Treasons
like Confessions into each others Ears, and suffer others basely to go before
you, whilst the quality of your Worth and Dignity of your persons, ought to
prefer you before the rest. We do also bequeath unto you three Locks of his
Hair to make a Golden Tower for the Queen of Babylon, that his early and
forward zeal may be writ in Rubricks in her forehead, and his Effigies as it is
now sold at Westminster Hall like Mahomet hanging Geometrically in the Air,
with a numerous retinue of Staves and Halberts by way of Trophyes inserted in
the very Porch and Frontispiece of the Mother Church. We had a design to
present her also with three Locks of Mr. Coleman's Wig, if all our small
Patrimony could purchase it, but that his Relict has converted them to a
better use, having sold them for a Guiney a Hair to make Rings for the
surviving Brethren to walk invisibly. However as more material and better
proofs of his good service, we recommend unto you his Original Letters to be
inrol'd amongst the Epistles of the Apostles writ by their own hands, to be
preserved as Relics in the Vatican: As likewise his Gloves and Sword, which
you must purchase from Mr. -- in Hay-Market for 100 Guineys, having refused
fifty Pounds half a year since; together with Grove's Dagger, and Pickering's
Pistol, to be kept as Eternal Monuments amongst the Trophies in the Capitol
with this Inscription, -- Mors mihi, non Regi.

And for fear you should want Stock to carry on the Design in this interlude of
Action; my Noble Friends, we do present unto you the three thousand Pound per
annum, raised upon the Catholic Estates for carrying on the Design, with
threescore of Mr. L. -- the double Martyr, his Penetential Scourges in Newgate,
to any that shall by any encouragement of Life, Fortune or Estate, make or
incline to make hereafter any Confession. Father Irelands Talents measured out
by the Shackles of the Sanctuary at Rome, lapt up in Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Napkin, till time and liberty give you opportunity to improve and convert it to
its proper use; together with Green-Berry-Hill to be set a part and consecrated
for the Erecting a Monastry when the Government shall come into your hands,
where daily Prayers may be said for the Saints departed.

FINIS.

