OBSERVATIONS Upon a Paper entitled, Reasons humbly offered to this Honorable
House why a Bill pretended to give further Powers to the Corporation for
setting the Poor of the City of London and Liberties thereof to work, should
not pass into a Law.
TO the first Paragraph. It Is presumed no further Powers are desired by the
President, Governors and Assistants of the City of London, than what are
granted in several late Acts to other Corporations, in order to the clearing of
the Streets from Beggars.

To the 2d. By the Bill no single person of the Corporation has power to
determine any Allowance between any Complainant and the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor, but such only as live within the respective Ward where
such poor person is legally settled; which Governor may reasonably be supposed
as well to understand the condition of the Complainant as of any the said
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, and more likely to do Justice between
them.

To the 3d. There are few or no Churchwardens either in City or Country, are
desirous to have their Accounts publicly examined, while their own Vestrys
choose the Auditors of the said Accounts, without ever consulting the Justices
therein. But the Bill proposes no less than 7 of the Corporation to examine
their Accounts: And if the said Accounts are just, they need not fear who
inspects them; nor will any honest man be discouraged thereby from being
Churchwarden, and others are not fit to be entrusted. Besides all which, any
Determinations of the said Corporation are subject to an Appeal to the Justices
at the next open Sessions.

To the 4th. The Collections desired were proposed to be made as well at all
other places appointed for Religious Worship as at Church-doors, and only
intended to ease the several Parishes in raising Money to the Corporation by
appointment of the Common Council, pursuant to 13 and 14 Car. 2.

To the 5th. That tho the Corporation have power, according to the foresaid Act
of Parliament, to apply to the Common Council to raise a Year's Tax 'as often
as they have occasion, yet have they endeavored to raise only one half Year's
Tax in two years last past; and hope they may not have any further occasion in
some considerable time. And the said Corporation have not power to maintain the
Impotent, but only to set those to work that are able. And what Money the
Corporation have raised and disburs'd, they have given an account of to the
Justices of the Peace at the open Sessions, and are obliged yearly so to do by
the foresaid Act. And one 3 d part of those Persons the said Paper styles [
these men] are the Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and besides, diverse others of the
Gentlemen of the Corporation have served or fined for the Office of Sheriffs of
the said City, and none are chose but by the Common Council. And whereas the
Corporation are charged with requiring twelve pence per week, they proposed it
only for Children, and not for other persons; which Children are fed, clothed,
lodged, and taught to get their own livings; and when able to maintain
themselves, the Churchwardens are at liberty to take them away, and the
Corporation will be willing to take more, and teach them in like manner. And
the Corporation having now about 200 Children in their Workhouse, so maintained
as aforesaid, the several Parishes of the City of London which send them, do by
that particular only save 800 l. per ann. And the said Children are taught to
read, and do go to Great St. Hellens Church twice every Sunday, and are there
catechized. And the Corporation do employ a great part of their time in serving
the Public, without one penny benefit to themselves; but on the contrary, they
spend their own Money, and did advance a considerable Sum for carrying on that
Work before any Money could be raised by the Common Council for that end.
Whereas in one or two of the Parishes in Farringdon without, it has been
customary to spend twenty pounds at a Scavenger's, and three or four and twenty
pounds at a Perambulation dinner; which Money is generally raised by overrating
the Inhabitants.

As to the Honorary Governors, the Writer of the said Paper arraigns the Wisdom
of the Parliament, who have given the like Powers to other Corporations for the
encouraging their Charity, without having any respect to their Persuasions.

To the Conclusion. Tho the said Writer Will not allow the Reasonableness of
the Bill now desired by the Corporation, yet he desires to have a like Bill for
Farringdon without, who yet have an equal number of their Ward that are of the
said Corporation already.


