NEWS from DVNKIRK-HOVSE: Or, CLARENDON'S Farewell to England.
In his seditious Address to the Right Honorable the House of Peers, December.
3. 1667. Which was afterward, according to the Sentence and Judgment of both
Houses of Parliament, burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman, in the presence
of the two Sheriffs, with a great and signal Applause of the People, December
12. 1667.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament
Assembled: The Humble Petition and Address of Edward Earl of Clarendon. May it
please your Lordships:
I Cannot express the insupportable trouble and grief of mind I sustain under
the apprehension of being misrepresented to your Lordships. And when I hear
how much of your Lordships time has been spent upon the mention of Me, as it
is attended with more publ^ck consequence, and of the difference in opinion,
which has already, or may probably arise, betwixt your Lordships and the
honorable House of Commons, whereby the great and weighty affairs of the
K^ngdom may be obstructed, in a time of so general dissatisfaction. I am very
unfortunate to find my self to suffer so much under two very disadvantagious
Reflections, which are in no degree applicable to Me.

The first, From the greatness of my Estate and Fortune, collected and made in
so few years; which if it be pr^portionable to what is reported, may give
reasonable cause for my Integrity to be suspected. The second, That I have been
the sole Manager and chief Ministex of all the Transactions of State since the
Kings Return into England, to August last; and therefore that all Miscarriages
and Misfortunes ought to be imputed to me and to my Counsels.
Concerning my Estate, your Lordships will not believe that after Malice and
Envy have been so inquisitive, so sharp-sighted, I will offer any thing to your
Lordships, but what is exactly true: And I do assure your Lordships in the
first place, That (excepting the Kings Bounty) I have never received or taken
one penny, but what was generally understood to be the just and lawful
perquisits of my Office, by the constant practice of the best of Times, which I
do (in my own Judgment) conceive to be that of my Lord Coventry, and my Lord
Ethesmere, the Practice of which I constantly observed; although the Office in
both their times was lawfully worth double to what it was to me, and I do
believe now i^.

That all the Courtesies and Favors which I have been able to obtain from the
King, or other Persons, in Church, State, or Westminster Hall, have never been
worth me five pounds; so that your Lordships may be confident I am as innocent
from Corruption, as from any disloyal thoughts, which after near thirty years
service of the Crown, in some difficulties and distress, I did never suspect
would have been objected to me in mine Age. And I do assure your Lordships, and
will make it very manifest, that the several sums of Money, and some parcels of
Land, which His Majesty has bountifully bestowed upon me since His Return into
England, are worth more then all I have amounts unto; so far I am from
advancing my Estate by any indirect means. And though this Bounty of His
Majesty has very far exceeded my Merits, or my Expectations; yet some others
have been as fortunate, at least in the same Bounty, who had as small pretenses
to it, and have no great reason to envy my Condition.

Concerning the other imputation of the Credit and Power of being chief
Minister, and so causing all to be done that I had a mind to do, I have no more
to say than, That I had the good fortune to serve a Master of very great
Judgment and Understanding, and to be always joined with persons of great
Ability and Experience; without whose Advise and Concurrence, never any thing
has been done.

Before his Majesty's coming into England, he was constantly attended by the
Marquess of Ormond, the late Lord Culpepper, and Mr. Secretary Nicholas, who
were equally trusted with my self, and without whose joint Advice and
Concurrence, when they were all present, (as some of them always were) I never
gave any Counsel.

As Soon as it pleased God to bring his Majesty into England, he established
his Privy-Councel, and shortly out of them a number of Honorable Persons of
great Reputation (who for the most part are alive still) as a Committee for
foreign Affairs, and consideration of such things, as the nature of them
require much secrecy: And with these persons he vouchsafed to join me, and I am
confident the Committee never transacted any thing of moment (his Majesty being
always present) without presenting the same to the Councel-Board: And I must
appeal to them concerning my carriage, and whether we were not all of one mind
in all matters of Importance: For more than two years I never knew any
difference in the Council, or that there were any complaints in the Kingdom:
which I wholly impute to his Majesty's great Wisdom; and the entire concurrance
of his Council; without the vanity of assuming any thing to my self: And
therefore, I hope I shall not be singly charged with any thing that has since
fallen out Amiss.

But from the time that Mr. Secretary Nicholas was removed from his place,
there were great alterations; and whosoever knew any thing of the Court or
Council, knew well how much my credit since that time has been diminished,
(though his Majesty graciously vouchsafed still to have my Advice in most of
his Affairs) Nor has there been from that time to this, above one or two
persons brought into the Council, or preferred to any considerable Office in
the Court; who have been of my intimate acquaintance, or suspected to have any
kindness for me; but most of them known to have been very long my enemies, and
of different Judgment and Principles from me, both in Church and State and who
have taken all opportunities to have lessened my credit to the King; and with
all other Persons by mis-representing, and mis-reporting all that I said or
did: and persuading men that I had done them some prejudice with his Majesty,
or crossed them in some of their pretenses, though his Majesty's Goodness and
Justice was such, that it made little Impression upon him.

In my humble opinion, the great misfortunes of the Kingdom have proceeded from
the War, to which it was notoriously known, that I was always most averse; and
may without vanity say, I did not only foresee, but I did declare the mischiefs
we should run into, by entering into War before any Alliance with the Neighbor
Princes: And that it may not be imputed to his Majesty's want of care, or the
negligence of his Counselors, that no such Alliances were entered into; I must
take the boldness to say, that his Majesty left nothing unattempted in order
thereunto: And knowing very well that France resolved to begin War upon Spain
as soon as his Catholic Majesty should depart this World; which being much
sooner expected by them, they had in the two Winters before been at great (...)
Spaniards with that apprehension, offering his friendship to that degree, as
might be for the security and benefit of both Crowns: But Spain flattering it
self that France would not break with them; at least that they would not give
them any cause, by administering matter of Jealousy to them: never made any
real approach toward Friendship with his Majesty, but both by their
Ambassadors here, and to his Majesty's Ambassadors at Madrid, always insisted
as Preliminaries, upon the giving up of Dunkirk, Tangier, and Iamaica.

But France had an Ambassador here, to whom a Projecto for a Treaty was
offered, and the Lord Hollis his Majesty's Ambassador at Paris used all
endeavors to promote and prosecute the said Treaty, yet it was quickly
discerned that the principal design of France, was to draw his Majesty into
such a nearer Alliance, as might advance the design, without which, they had no
mind to enter into the Treaty proposed.

And this was the state of Affairs, when the War was entered into with the
Dutch; from which time, neither concerned themselves with the making of
Alliance with England.

As I did from my Soul abhor the entering into this War, so I never presumed to
give any Advice or Counsel for the way of mannaging it, but by opposing any
Propositions which seemed to the late Lord Treasurer, and my self, to be
unreasonable; as the payment of the Seamen with Tickets; and many other
particulars which added to the expense.

My enemies took all occasions to inveigh against me, and making Friendship
with others out of the Council of more Licentious Principles, as who knew well
enough how much I disliked and complained of the Liberty they took to
themselves of reviling all Counsel, and Counselors, and turning all things
serious and secret into Ridicule: They took all ways imaginable to render me
ungrateful to all sorts of men (whom I shall be compelled to name in my own
defense) persuading those that miscarried in any of their designs, that it was
the Chancellors doing; whereof I never knew any thing.

However they could not withdraw the Kings Favor from me; who was sti^l
pleased to use my service with others; nor was there ever any thing done but
upon the joint advice of at least the major part of those that were concerned.
And as his Majesty commanded my service in the late Treaties, so I never gave
the least advice in private, nor wrote one Letter to any person in any of those
Negotiations, but upon the advice of the Council; and after it was read in
Council, or at least by the King himself, and some other. And if I prepared any
Instructions or Memorials, it was by the Kings command, and the request of the
Secretaries, who desired my assistance: Nor was it any wish of mine own, that
any Ambassador should give me account of the Transactions; but to the
Secretaries, with whom I was always ready to advise: Nor am I conscious to my
self of ever having given advice that has proved Mischievous or Inconvenient
to his Majesty: and I have been so far from being the sole Manager of Affairs,
that I have not in the whole last year, been above twice with his Majesty in
any Room alone; and very seldom in the two or three years preceding.

And since the Parliament at Oxford, it has been very visible that my credit
has been very little, and that very few things have been hearkened unto; which
have been proposed by me, but contradicted, eo nomine, because proposed by me.

I most humbly beseech your Lordships to remember the Office and Trust I had
for seven years; in which, in discharge of my Duty, I was obliged to stop and
obstruct many men's pretenses, and to refuse to set the Seal to many men's
Pardons, and other Grants, which would have been profitable to them which
procured them; and many whereof, upon my representation to His Majesty, were
for ever stopped: Which naturally have raised many Enemies to me.

And my frequent concurring with the late Lord Treasurer, with whom I had the
honor to have a long and a fast friendship to his death, in presenting several
Excesses and Exorbitances, (the yearly issue so far exceeding the Revenue)
provoked many persons concerned, of great power and credit, to do me all the
ill-Offices they could. And yet I may faithfully say, That I never meddled with
any part of the Revenue, or the Administrations of it, but when I was desired
by the late Lord Treasurer to give him my assistance and advice (having had the
honor to serve the Crown as Chancellor of the Exchequer) which was for the
most part in His Majesty's presence.

Nor have I ever been in the least degree concerned in point of profit, in the
letting any part of his Majesty's Revenue; nor have ever treated or debated it,
but in his Majesty's presence; in which my opinion only concurred always with
the major part of the Counselors who were present.

All which, upon Examination will be made manifest to your Lordships, how much
soever my Integrity is blasted by the malice of those, who I am confident, do
not believe themselves. Nor have I in my Life, upon all the Treaties, or
otherwise, received to the value of one shilling from all the Kings and Princes
in the World, (except the Books of the Louvre Print, sent me by the Chancellor
of France, by that Kings direction) but from my own Master; to whose entire
service, and to the good and welfare of my Country, no man's heart was ever more
devoted.

This being my present Condition, I do most humbly beseech your Lordships to
retain a favorable Opinion of me, and to believe me to be innocent from those
foul Aspersions, until the contrary shall be proved; which I am sure can never
be, by any Men worthy to be believed. And since the distemper of the Time, and
the difference between the Two Houses in the present Debate, with the Power and
Malice of my Enemies, who give out, That they shall prevail with his Majesty to
Prorogue or Dissolve this Parliament in Displeasure, and threaten to expose me
to the Rage and Fury of the People; may make me looked upon as the Cause which
obstructs the Kings Service, and the Unity and Peace of the Kingdom: I must
humbly beseech your Lordships, that I may not forfeit your Lordships Favor and
Protection, by withdrawing my self from so powerful a Prosecution; in hopes I
may be able by such withdrawing, hereafter to appear, and make my Defense: When
his May(...)


