OBSERVATIONS ON A LATE Scandalous Paper Reflecting on the Admiralty, etc.

Said to be written By an ENGLISH Sailer.

Humbly Offered by one who is not a Sailer, though of long Service in the NAVY.

Published by John Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

OBSERVATIONS ON A Scandalous Paper, Containing (among other Things) Several
Reflections on the Admiralty.
THOUGH I have not hitherto thrown away much Time, in Perusing the many
ill-natured Pamphlets that have lurked about the Town; yet have I, with more
than ordinary Observation, read over a Book just crept out among the Crowd, on
which is bestowed the Title of, The State of the Navy, etc.

As to its Author's Reflections, on those Gentlemen who are entrusted with the
Management of the Offices of the Navy and Victualling, I shall leave it to such
of them (if any) who have for a long time sucked in the Sweerness of those
Employments, to perform that bitter Task, of making the Brightness of their
Integrity shine, through the many Clouds this Gentleman has drawn over them;
and shall only confine my short Discourse to what he lays to the Charge of the
Admiralty; in which Office, tho I have not been particularly concerned, yet
have I not been wanting, in some measure, to inform my self of the Nature
thereof, and am not wholly a Stranger, to the ill Treatment those Gentlemen
daily receive, notwithstanding the Services they have done their Country during
the Fatigue of the late War.

This ingenuous Author, at his first attacking them, does peremptorily affirm,
That the Mismanagements of the Offices of the Navy and Victualling, proceed
from the ill Conduct of this single One, the Admiralty, which he terms their
Fountain; without considering, that the Purest Waters, when they once entangle
themselves with other Channels, that they must unavoidably fall into, seldom
fail, by such Conjunction, of losing great part of their Original Virtue; tho
what remains in the Fountain, keeps its Purity.

From what Fountain this Gentleman has derived his Knowledge, I cannot judge;
but it is somewhat apparent, that if once it had good Qualities in it, it has
now had the ill Fortune to mingle with a Pool of Troubled Waters.

I can hardly be Master of so much ill Nature, as to put him in Mind of one
Observation of his on Solomon and Hiram's Navies, lest being thereby led to
reflect on it, he should at last discover himself to be a greater Ape, than any
he says were contained in those Noble Machines; for what Notion this Canting
Gentleman can have of the Economy then in Practice, for the Preserving and
Well-employing the Invincible Armada's of those Princes; or what sort of
Shipmen they were, whose Experience in Sea-Affairs, Entitled them to the
Conduct of them, I am altogether a Stranger to; though I am apt to believe, his
Ignorance in that, and the present Discipline of our Navy, run Parallel one
with the other; otherwise, he would have found out more proper Persons for the
carrying on so great and intricate a Business, than a Number of Old Females,
Inhabiting a Place, from whence, it is more than probable, he gathered the
scattered Fragments which he has maliciously taken the trouble of jumbling
together.

I find this Gentleman's Stomach too Squeemish, to admit of any one's being
Qualified to sit at the Admiralty-Board, but a Seaman; for to that intent he
Quotes the Sea-Commanders of Solomon; a Prince, whose Country, I am apt to
believe, afforded but little choice of that kind. But if my Author had taken
the trouble, to have informed himself a Little (for Much I doubt he will never
know with greatest Application) of the Constitution and Business of the Office
of High-Admiral of England, he would have agreed with me, That Persons knowing
in other Matters, as well as Seamanship, are absolutely Necessary to carry on
so intricate an Affair: But since his want of Enquiry, renders him altogether a
Stranger to this, I cannot judge him in the least capable to discover, wherein
the Gentlemen who now Compose that Board, are wanting, either in Qualifications
or Inclination, to serve their Country; but do rather suspect, that he has
industriously gathered his Scandalous Reproaches from Persons who have thought
themselves Disobliged, or whose uneasy Tempers, like his own, induce them to
fly in the Faces of others, chiefly for the sake of Mischief, and not with the
least intent of Benefit to their Country: And if I guess right, this is not the
first time the Pen of my Antagonist has been dipped in Gall.

In another Place he takes Pains to insinuate his own mighty Apprehensions,
That the trusting the Affairs of the Royal Navy any longer in the present
Hands, may be of Fatal Consequence, in regard they may embarrass the Naval
Affairs, and retard the Enterprises thereof, by ordering Squadrons and Cruizers
in such Stations where they cannot be Serviceable; but sure I am, he cannot
believe, (unless he is an Original of downright Folly) that these Gentlemen
will so little regard even their own Safety, as wilfully to do what may
prejudice their Country; whereas others, (whoever they be that succeed) for
want of the Experience which a Nine Years War, and an Industrious Application,
must give, (tho otherwise Persons of greatest Probity) may unadvisedly fall
into such Errors as my Author mentions. Besides, Are not the future Actions of
these Gentlemen, as liable as any others, to pass the strictest Scrutiny of
that Great and Wise Assembly which our Country has made choice of? These Things
weighed together, wherein does appear the Advantage a Change will introduce;
unless the worthy Gentleman, with whom I am now in Contest, be silenced with
the Offer of the Chair? His Qualifications, for which I did vainly hope to find
in the Body of his Book, since on the outside he borrows the Name of a Sayler.

However, I find he would have them out, Right or Wrong, because they have been
so long In; as if the length of a Man's Service to his Country and Prince,
Renders him Guilty of an unpardonable Crime: But then I hope he will be-friend
his Country, by Nominating a Set of those un-erring Gentlemen he has in his
Eye, to Fill their Places. For my own part, I cannot think a Thousand Pounds a
Year, is so very Tempting, (especially, where a Man has a Competency of his own
to afford him Bread) as to Induce many Men to Expose themselves to the the
constant Clamor and Reproach, which I doubt will always attend the Actions of
those that Fill this unlucky Office; nor can he, in Common Justice, think it
Reasonable, that others should have the Benefit of that in Peace, which these
Gentlemen have Toiled for in War; wherein, though their many Services are now
forgotten, and Crimes daily laid to their Charge, yet I cannot find any Facts
proved, able to Stagger me in my Opinion, that in Consideration of the length
of their Service, and Experience in the Business, they are the most proper
Persons to carry on the Affair with which they are at present Entrusted,

I cannot omit taking notice, that in several Pages of the First part of this
Gentleman's Book, he Insinuates the Hardships done to the Seamen, during the
late War, and particularly, in the turning them over, after having made one
Foreign Voyage, into Ships bound on another, without suffering them to come on
Shore to tell their Grievances; to which I dare boldly say, that had there been
more Instances of this kind, than he can be furnished with, from those Persons
whose Materials stuff up his Book, yet the frequent want of Men, and the many
Services which the greatness of the Action required them for, might
sufficiently excuse it. For my own part, I wish all Imaginable Happiness and
Satisfaction to these poor People, who Wade thorough so many Difficulties and
Hazards for the Bread they Eat; and I would not have them Despair of finding
Advantages and Ease in Peace, which they could not Enjoy in War: But I should
be much to blame, did I not tell this their pretended Champion, that he shows
himself rather an Enemy than a Friend to the Government, by publishing a
Doctrine like this, in regard it may tend more to Its Prejudice than he is
capable of Judging, though perhaps not to that Degree as he does wish.

Lastly, As to what he Insinuates relating to the Victualing the Fleet in the
Streights, under Command of the Earl of Orford, and particularly that part
wherein he says, It was called the Vinegar Fleet, by reason of the sour Wine
the Sailors drank; I refer my self to any of these Men, he says were so sourly
Treated in that Expedition, whether the Wine which was daily delivered to them,
was not as good, as what the Admiral himself, or the Captains drank at their
own Tables. Which being matter of Fact, I do not think it worth my while to
expose any other parts of his Ignorance or Malice on that Subject.

FINIS.

