NEW ENGLAND Pleaded with, And pressed to consider the things which concern her
PEACE at least in this her Day: OR, A Seasonable and Serious Word of faithful
Advice to the Churches and People of God (primarily those) in the Massachusetts
Colony* musingly to Ponder, and bethink themselves, what is the Tendency, and
will certainly be the sad Issue, of sundry unchristian and crooked ways, which
too too many have been turning aside unto, if persisted and gone on in.

Delivered in a Sermon Preached at Boston in New England* May. 7. 1673. being
the Day of Election there.

By Vrian Oaks Pastor of the Church of Christ in Cambridge.

Mic. 6.3, 4. O my People what have I done unto thee, and wherein (...) I
wearied thee? testify against me. For I brought thee up out of the (...) of
Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants, and I sent before th^^
Moses, Aaron and Miriam.

Deuteronomy. 28.58 59. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law that
are written in this Book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name
the Lord thy God. Then the Lord will make thy Plagues wonderful, and the
Plagues of thy seed; even great Plagues, and of long continuance, and sore
sicknesses, etc.

Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn from all your transgressions, so iniquit^ shall
not be your ruin.

Cambridge, Printed by Samuel Green. 1673.

Christian Reader,
OF all Humane Societies on Earth, That which in Scripture is called Heaven,
Rev. 4.1, 2. Cap. 12*1, 3, 7. viz. the Church of God, and above all, that part
of it which is most such, upon the account of highest Reformation; has
greatest cause to serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling: to Fear
the Lord and his goodne^s, to Dread his jealousy and Justice, and to walk
humbly with her God. Height of dignity, Nearness of relation, and Choiceness of
precious Privileges, if not improved as effectual Obligations and Incitements
to duty, will prove sorest aggravations of sin, and provocations of wrath:
Solomon's Apostacy to Idolatry, 1 King. 11.9. was more then a single sin,
because against that God who had twice appeared to him. Amos 3.2. You only have
I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities. No provokings are comparable with those of Sons and Daughters,
Deuteronomy. 32.19. nor is there any fall like that of Jerusalem: in the day of the
Lords fierce anger, she came down wonderfully, because she had sinned
grievously, Lam. 1.8, 9. The Immutable God, (with whom there is not found so
much as a shadow of change) is the same: he ever was infinitely Holy to hate,
Just and Powerful, to punish all proud and impenitent Apostates: Who ever
hardened himself against him and prospered? Job 9.4.

Are not the many severe threatenings recorded in Scripture (firstly breathed
out against this and the other Church) and the dreadful accomplishment of
them, unto the ruin and perdition of so many (sometimes) famous Societies;
intended to hold forth instruction to succeeding generations to the worlds end?
the truth of the affirmative see unquestionably proved from Rev. 2.7, 17. Cap.
3.22. 1 Cor. 10.6 -- 12. Romans 11.20, 21. WE, upon whom the ends of the world
are come, have more places then Shiloh ( Jer. 7.12.) to go to: where is
Jerusalem, what is become of Ephesus,, and other the (sometimes) so renowned
golden Candlesticks? I^ not Bethel become Bethaven, and the valley of Vision,
turned into a valley of the shadow of Death? Shall we think our selves
altogether unconcerned in what befell them: and conclude there are no treasures
of wise pre caution, and prudent prevention, to be raked up out of the ashes of
their ruins? ought not all people to hear and fear when malefactors are hung
up in chains, Deuteronomy. 17.12, 13. see Pro. 24.30 -- 33. How cheap is understanding
offered to those, who are advantaged to purchase and procure it wholly at the
cost of others? Let not the man^ pillars of Salt, which stand so thick in the
way of the defections of a back sliding people, be heedlesly passed by, without
once observing and considering, what they have from God to acquaint us with:
When the dead are not dumb, let not the living be deaf, but hear and lay it to
their hearts: O that we were wise that we understood this, that we would
consider our latter end. To direct herein, and press hereto, was the Pious
design of the Reverend Author of this Treatise, in the day whereon he was
called to preach it, as a message from God, to a great and honorable Assembly
of his people. The only impression then in his heart to desire and pray for,
was That, upon the spirits of all humble hearers of, and tremblers at the word
of God present: but by the concurrent and importunate entreaties of very many
his Brethren in the Ministry, pressing^ it as a hopeful Mean of glorifying
God, and furthering the best good of his ^lear people in this Country; he has
been at last prevailed with* to permit it to pass through the press, into the
hands of such as desire to peruse and make a pious improvement of it.

Amongst the many things, which (as to the decaying and almost dying state of
this poor Country) are of a very solemn signification, and awful import; there
are some that in a valley of Consternation, seem to hold open a Door of hope;
we shall take the liberty to mention two of them.

First. The number, and that (we hope) considerable, of mourning, faithful,
believing, praying Souls, these how ever over-looked, and looked down upon with
scorn enough, (and possibly accounted the troublers of our (...)) by the (...)
( as they are called 2 Timothy 3.2.) men in their own conceits, of a higher
Elevation and streine of profession then others; are yet upon a true account
the I^^hin and Boaz, Pillars and Strength of our Temple-buildings, the Salt of
our Land, and the Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel. Unto the seven thousand
who ( in the days of Elijah) had not bowed to Baal, and lay (like the
foundation of some structure) hidden and unseen, did that Apostate people owe
their not being utterly destroyed; they were the Braces, which held together
the shaking parts, of that (almost) rotten building, when beside their own
sins, they had against them the prayers of so great a Prophet, who upon his
knees had wrought wonders.

O pray that the number and graces of such supporting Pillars may be more and
more increased, unto a lengthning out of our Tranquillity.

The Second is, That a Spirit of Zeal for, and Faithfullness to the glory of
the blessed God, and the best good of his dear people, has not hitherto
(through grace) failed from those whom our glorious Lord and Savior has been
pleased to send forth and make use of as his mouth and messengers to his poor
saints and servants wildering in these American deserts; Have they not been
heard crying aloud, and lifting up their voice like a trumpet, showing Gods
people their transgression and the house of Jacob their sins? have they not (in
the fear of the Lord) conscientiously declined and abhorred, to palliate,
dawbe and flatter, and upon the account of a carnal interest, to couple in and
comply with men of corrupt principles and designs? May they not with some
measure of holy boldness and good conscience say, as that great Apostle, Acts
20.26, 27. that (brow beatings, censures, reproaches, calumnies and contempts
notwithstanding) they have not shunned to declare all the counsel of God? if
denied, the Pulpits and seats of our houses of public worship will attest it;
and New England (what ever the issue be of the contest between her and Christ's
Ambassadors to her) shall know that there have been Prophets among them.

The Eminent faithfulness of the judicious Author, (which is his praise in our
gates) in his through and home-plain dealing in this Sermon or Treatise; as we
believe it acceptable to God, so we are persuaded, it will procure it a
friendly reception and entertainment in all humble hearts: For such as are
otherwise affected, let them have thy pity and prayers.

Now the good Lord ^ouchsafe so to Assist and Bless his poor Builders and
Watchmen, that they may not build and watch in vain; and so spare and save his
people, that they may be kept from falling, and be presented faultless before
the presence of his Glory with exceeding joy: Which is the hearts desire and
prayer of us, Who are,

Thine in him who is both Lord and Christ. John Sherman. Thomas Shepard.

DEUTERONOMIE 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end.
BLessed Moses that Renowned Servant of the Lord, and King in Ieshurun (having
served his own Generation by the Will of God, and performed his high and
honorable Undertaking in Leading and conducting that untractable and
rebellious People of Israel to the borders of Canaan, and after many
Temptations and Exercises in the Wast and Howling Desert, brought them to a
fair view, and near prospect of that long promised and much desired Land) was
just now ready to deliver up his trust, and resign the weighty charge of that
great Congregation unto Joshua, his servant and successor, on whom it was
devolved by the immediate order and disposal of the Lord. You have in this
Chapter his (...) His Swan like Song, or his Farewell Sermon (as I may not
ineptly call it) dictated to him by the Spirit of God, and delivered by him to
that people at his departure from them into another World: And it is a very
precious and a stately portion of Scripture. The Hebrews say of this Song of
Moses, that it is a Summary of the whole Law, wherein mention is made of Gods
Magnificence, the Creation of the World, the One true God that is to be
Worshipped, t^^ Generation of the Flood, the Division of Languages and Lands,
the E^^^ction and Separation of the Children of Israel for the peculiar
Treasure (...) Inheritance of the Lord, the benefits conferred upon them in the
Wild^^ness, the future Resurrection of the dead, with many other things of
gr^^^ importance and concernment. You may well call it a Song of Degre^^ (as
David does some of his Psalm) in respect of the superlative excellency of it:
It is certainly a Prophetical Song, wherein we have a prediction, or
Prophetical Declaration of what the Lord, the God of their Fathers, would do
for that people of Israel in that good Land of Canaan; and of the manner of
their demeanor and deportment of themselves there. Moses by the spirit of
Prophecy gives us in this Chapter, as in a true Glas^ the feature of that
People, as it looked in aftertimes. He begins the (...) with a Rhetorical and
pathetical Apostrophe, wherein there is a most (...) and weighty contestation
or appeal to Heaven and Earth, importing the deafness and stupidity of his
hearers (that he had as good apply his speech to senseless and inanimate
Creatures as to them) and the great concernment of what he had to speak, as fit
and worthy that Heaven and Earth and all the World should hearken to it. After
his Exordium, Proem or Preface, wherein he labors to procure Benevolence,
Attention and Docility: You have, 1. A Narrative, wherein he commemorates the
great benefits which had been, and were to be conferred on that people, from
ver. 4. to 15. The Lord took special care in the first division of the
habitable parts of the World, that there might be an Inheritance laid out for
the Children of Israel, and assigned the Land of Canaan to them, ver. 8. He
singled them out for his peculiar people, ver. 9. he conducted them graciously
in the Wilderness, ver. 10. and afforded them not only safe conduct in the way,
but also wholesome Instructions in his Laws and Commandments, ibid. He granted
them protection from the many dangers they were exposed unto, and was as tender
and careful of them as a man is of the Apple of his Eye, or the Eagle of her
young ones, ver. 10, 11. He made comfortable provision for them in their
Journey, introduced them into that Land flowing with Milk and Honey, confirmed
and settled them in Possession and Fruition of the good things of it, ver. 13,
14. Moses mentions and records in this Song (which was appointed of the Lord to
be written and taught the Children of Israel, that it might be a Song of
Witness for the Lord against them, Deuteronomy. 31.19.) these and other loving
kindnesses of the Lord. 2. A Prediction of the Apostasy; Idolatry and horrible
Ingratitude of ^^rael, from v. r. 15. to 19. They would be so far from rendering
again unto the Lord according to the benefits done unto them in that good Land,
that (...) would requite him evil for good, and load him with their sins, [
Amos (...)] as he loaded them with his benefits. All those Cords of a Man (...)
Bands of Love with which the Lord drew them to himself, would not hold them or
bind them fast unto him: but they quickly snapt all a^^nder, and broke loose
from all engagements, and rushed on prodigiously and desperately in ways of
Provocation and Rebellion. 3. A severe Commination of deserved Chastisements
and Punishments, from ver. 19, to 36. 4. A Word of Consolation Administered unto
them: from ver. 36, to ^^. When they should have sinned themselves into a
deplorable condition, so that all Humane helps and hopes failed, and their case
in appearance and to the eye of reason was desperate: God would then awake and
arise and plead their cause against insolent and injurious Adversaries, and
glorify himself in their deliverance. He would certainly preserve alive an
Holy Seed, a Remnant in the worst times, and show himself faithful and
bountiful, even to an undeserving people* 5. The Conclusion of the song,
wherein he predicts the multiplication of the Church, and enlargment of the
Kingdom of Christ, and exhorts the remnant of Israel to praise God for their
deliverance from their Babylonian Captivity; and the pious converted Gentiles
for the vengeance executed upon the Mystical Babylon, that had detained them in
spiritual bondage; and especially for the expiation of their sins by Jesus
Christ which is by many Expositors, wise, and judicious, apprehended to be the
sense and importance of the 43. verse.


Now in that part of the song which is Comminatory, and includes my Text, the
Lord acquaints them by the hand of Mos^s with those dreadful and almost
unparalleled judgments and calamities (Temporal as well as Spiritual* that
should be inflicted and executed on the account of their intolerable
Provocations: yet not to (...) and universal destruction and desol^^ion. Though
their sins were ^^ch as deserved utter extirpation and ruin, and their
provocations so grievous and unsufferable that the Lord was ready to resolve to
dissipate and blow them away, and make the remembrance of them to cease from
among men, ver. 26. yet the clemency and goodness and moderation of the Lord's
anger in the execution of his threatenings should appear in the preservation of
a remnant the impulsive cause whereof is intimated to be the consideration of
the Wrath and Insolence of the Adve^sary, and the Dishon^^^ that woul^d
redou^^* to the Name of God thereby, ver. 27. which is ^mplified by the
Antithesis of the Impulsive cause that might have moved him to destroy t^em
utterly, ver. 28. God renders the reason of his severe proceedings against
them, why he heaped so many mischiefs and spent so many Arrows upon them, ver.
23. and was almost ready to blot out the Name and Memory of that People; namely
this, Because their folly was Incureable. For he does not only signify in
those words, that they did inconsiderately rush forward in ways of sin, and
precipitate themselves into misery, because they wanted the actual exerc^se of
judgment and sound reason: but that they acted at such a rate, as if there
were not the least Drop or Dram of spiritual Wisdom in their hearts, nor a
possibility in the course of ordinary means of ^educing them ad sanam mentem,
as judicious Calvin observes upon the place. Thereupon we have in the Words
read, a Pathetical Exclamation wherein the Lord (after the manner of men)
passionately expresses his desire that they would he spiritually wise to
consider what would become of them, if they held on their course of sinning
against the Lord: what would be the sad end and issue of their Rebellions
against the God of their mercies. I know indeed that some understand these
words, ver. 28, 29. as spoken of the Enemies of Israel. As if the Lord had
said: If they were wise in deed, they would not say our hand is high and the
Lord has not done all this as ver. 27. nor attribute and ascribe their
prosperous and victorious proceedings, and the destructions they bad brought
upon Israel to their Own prowess and policy, but would easily understand that
God had delivered up his People to misery and destruction for their sins. Yea,
and they would consider also their own latter end, that is, what end remains
for themselves also, even the like d^struction for their great Abominations
impenitently persisted in. But we have no reason to recede from the received
common Interpretation of the Words, or question their immediate Application to
the People of Israel. The Words are plainly spoken of Israel, the peculiar
People of God, in a condition of great degeneracy* wherein the Lord intimates
and expresses.

1. The g^ound and occasion of that Misery and Ruin that was comeing upon
them, namely, their want of Counsel and Understanding, ver. 28. The misery that
befell them at several seasons in these and those Generations was not either
undeserved or accidental: but as the hand of God inflicted it in a way of just
severity, so their incurable Folly and Unreasonableness was the meritorious
cause that brought it upon them. 2. The Cure, the Help, the only Remedy, or
rather, that which would have saved them and secured their Nation, with all the
concernments of it from those Ruins, and prev^^^ed such a sad issue and
calamitous event, namely, Wisdom, ver. 29. which is in the words of the Text,
amplified from the Act and Object thereof.
First, The Act of this Wisdom: and that is double,

1. To Understand. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this. The Word
so translated signifies also to prosper, and to make prosperous: because though
men of Understanding are not always, yet they are ordinarily prosperous, their
counsels and actions are usually attended and wai^ed on with success. The Word
therefore may import a prosperous, ^^ccessful, right und^rstanding of things.
Yet it signifies an acute and ^ubtle and accurate understanding, with an
intense and industrious exerci^e of the m^nd, and is contrary to a word [
Chasal or Sachal] that signifies incognitancy, or idle levity in the managing
of things as Pagwine observes. And considering the Conjugation wherein it is
used, it signifies, to make (that is, to make themselves) to understand. Gods
donation of this wisdom and understanding excludes not, but supposes our
endeavors to acquire it.

2. To Consider: The Original word has Affinity with Banah (is Avenarius
notes) which signifies to build. A man of consideration must be like a wise
Architect that disposes in his mind, contrives, concer^^s, models, frames and
casts the several parts of his Fabric or building. To consider is to cast, and
conceive, and get the model or idea, the Platform (as it were) of this or that
Object in our minds. And it notes a judicious, fixed or abiding dijudication of
things.

Secondly, The Object of this Wisdom, Understanding and Consideration: and
that is, their latter End. End in this place notes not the final cause (as
when we say, the last end of man is to glorify God) but the exitus, the term,
the issue, the upshot, the event and the conclusion of those sinful ways they
were engaged in. As when it is said the end of some way that seems right unto
a man (are the ways of death: and the end of some mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14.12, 13. the wisdom of that people should have expressed it self in
understanding and considering the latter end of their ways. Not so much finis
operantis, the end intended by themselves; as sinis operis, the end of their
ways and doings, the scope, and tendency, and issue of their evil and unworthy
deportment^ should have been considered by them.

I shall only add, that the form of this expression in the Text is optative; O
that they were wise, etc. we meet with the like form of speech, and mode of
expression attributed to God in other places of Scripture. As Psalm. 81.13. O
that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, and
Isai. 48.18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, etc. the like
occurs in other places. There is indeed some difficulty in it; For you will say,

Obj. How can the Lord be said to wish this? He could have made them wise, and
understanding, and considering men and women, if it had been his good will and
pleasure. How can wishing and woulding be attributed to God in respect of those
things which are never accomplished? How can such a ^elleity be ascribed to God
without the impeachment of his wisdom, and power, and constancy, and
blessedness.

Ans. This and the like expressions are spoken of God (...) after the manner of
men, and must be understood (...) in a manner becoming the glorious Nature and
Being of God. It is manifestly an expression borrowed from the manner of men,
lamenting the rashness, the folly, the inconsiderateness of their Children, and
their want of understanding, their ways and the issue of them. And yet we must
understand, and take it up in a manner becoming and comporting with the perfect
nature of the blessed God. The Lord does not really and properly carry himself,
as a Father that stands wringing his hands over a prodigal Son, and says, O
that thou would be wise, that thou would understand thy self, that thou
would consider what these prodigal courses will come to at last, what will be
the end of thy Drunkenness, thy Laciviousness, thy Company keeping, thy great
Idleness, and vain expense of precious Time, Estate and Strength in this
manner! O that thou would bethink thy self and consider what will be the
issue of these lewd ways and courses! the poor afflicted Father may wish and
desire it, but has not power to give such an heart: but God alone can do it.
If the Lord had willed properly with the will of purpose, or decreed that
Israel should be wise to understand and consider their latter end, be both
could and would have conferred upon them that wisdom, and prudent
consideration of it, and that without any impeachment of or de^^iment to the
liberty of their wills. It is at first sight a strange expression which we meet
with, Deuteronomy. ^.29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear
me, etc. In the Original it is (word for word) Who will give that their heart
may (...) such in them. as Mr. Ains^orth reads it. Why does God need to ask the
question: who will give them such an heart? He knows that none but himself can
give such an heart, and that he can effectually give it: and he knows whether
he has determined to give it or not. And therefore the expression must be
understood after the manner of men. It is evident to any under standing man,
that these things cannot be spoken of God properly and rigorously (as the
Arminians absurdly strain them) salva Ma^^^tate Divina. But we must say, cum
toto Th^ologorum Choro (as judicious Am^s speaks) that God in such forms of
speech, that he may commodiously treat with man, does induere se homine, put on
Man (as it were) or vest himself in the condition and properties of man, and
propose his counsels to us in such a way wherein we may best apprehend them,
and they may be most familiarized to us. The Lord in his Scripture treaties
with the Sons of men, very frequently applies himself to them in such a form or
mode of expression as is best suited and accommodated to their understandings,
because most familiar to them, and that which they are well accustomed unto.
The great God in this querimonious form of speaking resembles himself to a
Father ( the Father of Spirits imitates and likens himself unto one of the
Fathers of our Flesh, as the Apostle phraseth it, Heb. 12.9.) mournfully
complaining of the folly of his Prodigal Son running out to excess of riot, and
not considering what the end of such vicious and ri^^ous courses will be. And
yet it does not argue, nor may we imagine, that God was willing, but unable to
give his people of Israel this grace and wisdom without impeachment of the
Creatures native liberty, or any violation of order settled and prefixed by
himself. God does not do and undo, and thereby contradict and deny himself: He
does not Decree not to confer this wisdom, and then wish there had been no
such Decree to hinder the communication of that wisdom; He does not give the
Rational Creature such an absolute and uncontrolable liberty of will, that he
cannot bend and incline their wills to what he will, and then repent, and wish
that he had otherwise constituted the frame of their Rational Faculties: But if
you d^vest the expression of that Anthropopathy that is in it, there are these
and such like things imported therein.

1. A Graphical and Emphatical Expression of their want of wisdom and counsel,
understanding and consideration. They were not spiritually wise, nor was it in
their power to understand aright, or consider duly their latter end. Gods
lamentation of their folly and inconsiderateness argues their lamentable
condition in that respect.

2. That it was their duty to be so wise, as to understand and consider their
latter end. Gods wishing this does not necessarily import and argue the
Creatures power, but their duty: not that they can of themselves, but that they
ought to be thus wise. Their duty is hereby indigitated; that they ought to
wish, and desire, and aspire after those things, which God (speaking after the
manner of men) wishes for them; and that it is their great fault if they
neglect their duty herein.

3 That it is their interest and the wisest course they can fix upon wisely to
mind and consider their latter end. It would be really good for themselves, and
the best way to prevent misery and ruin. It would have been a very beneficial
course, and turned to their great advantage.

4. It imports God* approbation of, and complacency in this wisdom and wise
consideration. That it would have been a very pleasing thing to him, as things
wished for by men are wont to be unto them: As it wou^d have proved their
advantage and consolation; so, when God speaks so pathetically, he seems (as
Mr. Caryl observes from a like Scripture) to include his own consolation in it,
as well as theirs. Oh that the^^ were wise, etc: as if he should say, as it
would be good for them, so it would be highly contentful to me, and for my
great satisfaction. It is acceptable to God and pleasing to him to see this
wise consideration in a people so circumstanced as Israel was. It does not
argue that God was pleased to give them wisdom to understand and consider
their latter end (for then what should have obstructed the communication of
it?) but that it would have pleased God, if he had observed it in them: he
would have liked and approved it as agreeable to his Will. The Lord would have
greatly delighted in such a frame and practice of his Vovenant People, and
abundantly rewarded it.

5. That the want of this was the great cause of their rushing on prodigiously
in a course of sin into misery. The Lord sufficiently intimates thereby, that
all the mischief among them was occasioned through the want of a wise and
understanding consideration of the event of things: This would have prevented
it.

6. That this is the first and good step toward the repentance and reformation
of a degenerous, backsliding and rebellious People, to consider what they are
doing, whither they are going, and what the end of their ways will be at last.

7 The nature of the Word of God and the dispensation thereof is signified
hereby, viz. that it does instantly persuade men to get this wisdom and
understanding and considering spirit, or wise consideration of the Event and
Issue of their ways and doings. And that God will in the way of these moral
means, (these pathetical (...) suited and accommodated to the manner of men)
effectually (...) wisdom and serious consideration of their latter end in some
(...) hearts, and that he does eminently and virtuali quadam ratione (as the
learned Ames expresses it) will it as to other men, ^atenus, or so far forth
as he commands and calls for it.

But I shall not detain you longer in the general Explication of the Text, or
Solution of these or those Difficulties. The sum and result of all is; Israel
was a People of many mercies and singular enjoyments (none like unto them) but
withal of great provocations by their Apostasy, Idolatry, and other grievous
miscarriages: and the Lord represents it here as their wisdom to consider
rationally and judiciously what would be the sad and doleful issue thereof.

The Observation is plainly this: Doct. That it is the great wisdom of a
People that have heen conducted by the Mighty Hand of God to a place of Rest
and Liberty, and settled in the possession of singular Privileges and
enjoyments, to understand and consider, or understandingly to consider what
will be the latter end of their sinful ways, their unsuitable and unworthy
deportments before the Lord.

The People of Israel were in Covenant with God, peculiarly favored and
accepted of him: And in pursuance of his Covenant engagements he had delivered
them out of hard bondage, and carried them in his Arms to Canaan, a Land of
rest, and liberty, and glorious enjoyments, where they quickly trespassed and
rebelled grievously against him (according to the prediction of Moses in this
Prophetical Song) and the Lord in the words of the Text plainly intimates it to
be the wisdom of that People (and by parity of reason, of any other People
that may be paralleld with them) at such a juncture, and in such a condition,
to understand and consider (or to Consider with Consideration, as the Original
has it significantly, Ier. 23.20.) what will be the latter end of their sinful
and rebellious ways. The Lord tells, that People in the place but now
mentioned, when he was about to bring a dreadful storm of wrath upon them, that
in the latter days they should consider it perfectly. Surely then it would
have been their great wisdom to consider it, in the former days, before the
storm came, and the wrath of God arose against them, so that there was no
remedy. Hence the Lord expostulates with the Jews, and calls them to a serious
consideration of the end and issue of the general corruptions, and great evils
found among them, Ier. 5.31. The Prophets proph^sie falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their means, and my People love to have it so: And what will ye do
in the end thereof? when Prophets, Priests (or Princes) and People were so
extremely bad, so wo^ully corrupt and faulty, it was time for them to look
about them, and consider what would become of them at last. It is the guise and
character of a Fool, Prove. 17.24. to have his eyes in the ends of the Earth,
gazing and wandering about, looking hither and thither, far enough from his own
concernments: But it is an act of wisdom in any People, especially such a
People as Israel; and the property of wise persons to have their eyes fixed
upon the end of their ways and walkings. The only Enquiry here will be,

Quest. What is it for a Person or People understandingly to consider the
latter end of their ways?

Ans. It implies evidently these Particulars:

1. To pass a right judgment upon it: to find out and fix in their thoughts
upon the true end and issue of their ways according to the nature and tendency
of them. To pitch upon it, and determine aright concerning it. For many men
deceive themselves shamefully in this matter, many bold and presumptuous
sinners (though they hear the words of the curse of the Law) do bless
themselves in their hearts, saying they shall have peace, though they walk in
the imagination of their hearts, to add Drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 9.19
Though they walk not in Gods ways (which are ways of pleasantness and peace)
but in the crooked and destructive ways of their own besotted foolish hearts,
yet they promise themselves a good issue, and vainly imagine that they shall do
well enough at last. Though they walk in the ways of their hearts, and in the
sight of their eyes, yet they think to hold up their Heads, and look the Lord
Jesus with confidence in the Face, when God shall bring them into Judgment. As
a Bird hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is for his life, Prove.
7.23. So many a rash, inconside^ate, deluded Sinner rusheth on headily in a
course of Rebellion against God, and knows not that the end of it will be
destruction. Such is sometimes the Blindness and Security, not only of
particular persons, but of the Body of a People, that they cry peace and
safety, and promise themselves Prosperity and a good Iss^e of those ways that
end in sudden and unavoidable Calamity. Understanding consideration in the
case before us, imports thus much, that a person or people syllogize well,
and conclude aright concerning the end of their ways and actions: that they do
not (...) (as the Apostle speaks, Iam 1.22.) reason themselves into a mistake
and ^rrour or false conclusion about the end of their deportments toward the
Lord, and put a fallacy upon their own Souls in this respect.

2. To revolve this in their minds, and to be frequently thinking of their
latter end. To ponder it thoroughly, and to have their Souls, Judgments and
Consciences much exercised with, interested and engaged in it. Consideration
intends more then a transient thought, or sudden ^^itting apprehension. It
imports a fixing, and dwelling upon this or that in our thoughts. Though
sometimes the Object of consideration may be so plain and legible, that he that
runs may read it; yet consideration is not a cursory work, or a running
cogitation. It becomes a people (especialy such as are so circumstanced as
Israel) to be much conversant in this work and duty. There must be a Fixing and
staying of their minds upon this Subject: as it were a steeping and soaking of
their thoughts in the daily meditation of their latter End Not only rolling or
glancing* but fixing the eyes of the Understanding, and looking steadily upon
it, is implied in this consideration. That a People do not trifle in it, but
make a business of it. As David says of his sin, that it was ever before him,
Psalm. 51.3. So may a truly considering man say of his latter end, that it is
ever before him. Consideration keeps it within view and prospect, and will not
suffer it to go out of sight and thoughts. There must be a disco^sus mentis,
assuming to and fro (as the expression is, Dan. 12.4.) traversing of this, and
rolling it over and over in the minds of men, if there be eff^ct^^l
consideration.

3. It connotes suitable Affection of the heart. Though Consideration (if we
speak accurately) is an act of the Understanding, yet it imports (in the
Scripture dialect and use) suitable affection. It is not in the Text a bare
speculation, or mere contemplation of the Latter end of their ways that is
intended by the Lord, but that which enwraps in it suitable actings of the Will
and Affections, and has a benig^ or beneficial influence upon the Heart, or
Will and Affections, to frame, and shape, and mould, and fashion them
accordingly. And in this case, the End being miserable; to consider it, is to
be sutably affected with it, so as to mourn for, hate and loath those ways
that will be bitterness in the end; to have a real aver^^tion of them, to
repent and turn from them, to relinquish and abandon them as destructive and
pernicious; so to think, as that the mind may affect the heart, and
consequently both mind and heart influence and regulate and reform the
conversation: as David says, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies, Psalm. 119 59. Serious consideration of the latter end of a
man's sinful ways, will have a converting influence upon his affections and
conversation. This Consideration, if it be right, has a kind of imperious and
commanding influence upon the hearts and lives of men.

Reas. 1. Because it is the great act of Wisdom to deduce, and regularly to
infer one thing from another. And so one of the Jewish Doctors says, that
(...) is when things are rationally collected from things, and one thing
deduced from another. Sapience or Wisdom properly belongs to Syllogistical
Judgment, and is a virtue of the Understanding, whereby a man discerns the
dependence of things, and how one follows upon another. To consider
understandingly what will be the End of these or those ways, imports in it a
laying of things together in a Syllogistical way. Hence when men reason amiss,
and conclude that which is not virtually contained in the Premises, or make
wrong inferences, they are said to Paralogize themselves. Be ye doers of the
word (says the Apostle, Iam. 1 22.) and not hearers only, (...). We are
constant hearers of the Word, and waiters upon the Ordinances of God; therefore
we are certainly in a good condition. The Apostle calls this a Paralogism,
Sophistical Reasoning, and unsound Argumentation, wherewith many Professors are
wont to cheat themselves. So, We are Abraham's children, a people in Covenant
with God, and we have his Temple and Worship, and Ordinances among us:
therefore though we indulge to sin, and do these and those abominations, yet
God will dwell among us, and we shall do well enough. These are lying words,
false inconsequential Inferences, and foolish Reasonings. But to syllogize
aright concerning the End of these and those ways, is an act of Wisdom
indeed. This is the work of Conscience, when it relates to the Moral actions of
a man, and the issue of them; and it belongs to Syllogistical Judgment. This
will follow upon that, this will be the certain Consequent of such an
Antecedent; this will be the Conclusion resulting from those Premises. Wisdom
lies in the Rational Application of general Rules of Scripture to our selves
and our own conditions, and in the induction of particulars, and due Reasoning
from it: This has been the End of such and such ways, to these and those
persons (witness Scripture and Experience) therefore will be so of mine also.
The End is virtually in the way, as the Conclusion in the Premises. To consider
and find out this, and reason aright in this matter, is an act of great
wisdom and judgment.

Reas. 2. Because it is the unquestionable duty of any people, especially such
a people, to consider their latter End. What the Lord wishes they might do,
and would do, was their undoubted duty to do: and it is certainly the great
wisdom of any person or people, to do their duty. There can be no greater
wisdom then to conform to, and comply with every part of the revealed will of
God. The Lord calls aloud upon that people of Israel again and again to
consider their ways, Haggai 1.5, 7. that is, the sad fruit and issue of them.
Their building their own houses, and pursuing their private Interests and
Advantages, with the shameful neglect of public Temple-work, was attended and
followed with a visible Blasting Curse of God upon their Labors and
Enjoyments, and he commands them to consider it. It is the duty of a person or
people, because God has commanded it; and it is their wisdom to attend it,
because what God commands is for their good; as Moses intimates to them, Deuteronomy.
19.1^. We cannot please God, but in a way of obedience and duty: now to please
God is our wisdom and happiness. Men cannot walk before God in all good
conscience, that want this understanding consideration of the End of their
ways. Conscience is the Judgment of man concerning his state and actions,
with reference, and as he is subject to the Law of God. It is the office of
Conscience to review, and to make a recognition of a man's actions, to compare
them with the Law of God, and to conclude upon the state of a man, and the
event of his ways and actions accordingly. This is the work, and office, and
exercise of Conscience. To keep Conscience awake and at work in this manner is
the duty, and the wisdom (because the duty) of God's Israel.

Reas. 3. Because it is their great Interest, a very beneficial and
advantageous course, and makes very much for their well-being, understandingly
to consider their ways, and the latter End of them. This is the way for a
people to do well for themselves, as it is the way for every particular person
to do well for himself, as David speaks in another case, Psalm. 49.18. They that
are wise in this respect, are wise for themselves, as Solomon expresses it,
Prove. 9.12. The great enquiry of any wise man, when he is about to lift up his
hand to any Enterprise, and ready to engage in this or that business, will be,
Cui bono? To what purpose? what benefit will redound and accrue thereby?
Interest and Advantage is wont to lead men captive, and to influence them
marvellously: and there is ordinarily no surer way to prevail with them, then
by arguing ab Vtili, and demonstrating the advantagiousness and expediency of
any course or duty. Hence the Lord, when he would reason his people into a Care
and Conscience of universal obedience to his Commandments in general, argues
from this Topic or Head of Argument, Vt tibi been sit, That it may go well
with thee, Deuteronomy. 4.40. -- 5.29. -- 6.3, 18. -- 12.28. So may I reason in this
case from the profit and advantage of such a course of consideration. A person
or people do consult their own good, and singular advantage in it. Hereby they
may come to understand the signs of the Times, the want of which skill our
Savior taxes severely, Matthew. 16.2, 3. Men are usually wise to discern the
signs of the Weather, and can probably conjecture when it will be fair, and
when it will be foul Weather: but this is Wisdom indeed, to understand and
discern the dispensations of God, in a way of Mercy or Judgment, beforehand,
and to know what God is doing, or about to do with them. As men can by the
Aspect of the Sky prognosticate what Weather it will be: so they may be able to
make a Judgment of their condition, and what is like to become of them, by the
Aspect of their own ways and deportments toward the Lord. Hereby they may
know what to expect from the Lord, whether Mercy or Judgment, according to the
ordinary Rule and Tenor of Gods dispensations. Hereby they may be (...) to
Repentance, and the casting away or turning from those iniquities and
transgressions that are otherwise sure to be their Ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. Mark
those steps. ver. 28. Because he considers, and turns away from all his
transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.
Consideration makes way for Repentance and Conversion, and this for life and
happiness. Serious consideration of the nature and End of our ways, leads the
way to Repentance and Reformation. Hereby they may be quickened and helped to
meet God, when he is coming forth in the way of his Judgments, in a way of
Humiliation and Supplication, Amos 4.12. and to wait for him in the way of his
Judgments, Isa. 26.8. And if there be any way to avert the Judgments of God,
this is it. Hereby they may know how to order their Prayers, and get into the
gap, and prevent the Judgments of God that are in their way toward them, and
obviate them. And it is of singular use to Magistrates, Ministers, Governors
of these and those Societies, that have Power and Interest, and are in a
capacity to lead on in a way of Reformation, and to command those that are
under them to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. Hereby they will come to
see the Justice of God in his severest Corrections, and learn to justify him
in all his proceedings, and accept the punishment of their iniquities, and bear
the indignation of the Lord, because they have sinned against him. When they
consider aright the scope and ten^ency, the inequality and demerit of their own
ways, they will readily apprehend the Justice and Equitableness of God's hand,
in bringing a miserable End upon them. So that it is the great Interest, and
therefore Wisdom of a people (in these and other respects) to consider their
latter end. I shall only add for a close h^^e, That the Reasons given, as
they demonstrate it to be the wisdom of any people in general to consider
their latter End; so they may be argued a Fortiori, as to a people
circumstanced as Israel was: Because they are peculiarly advantaged for the
Indagation or Discovery of the End and Issue of their ways, and are in the
best capacity to find out, and pass a right Judgment upon the tendency and
conclusion of them; As also, because the end of their sinful ways impenitently
persisted in, must needs be worse then of any other people. They cannot sin at
so cheap a rate, or expect so few stripes for their disobedience, or look for
such moderation from God in the inflicting of his Judgments, and execution of
his Threatenings, or rationally hope for so tolerable a condition at last, as
other people that are not like them, but far inferior in their Privileges and
Enjoyments. So that it is their great Concern in a peculiar manner to consider
what will be the latter End of their un^^table and unbecoming deportments
before the Lord. Ierusalem's not remembering her latter end, brought her down
wonderfully, Lam. 1.9. Want of this consideration will ruin any people, but it
will make way for wonderful and unparalleled destruction of such as are
circumstanced as Israel was, as the serious and timous remembrance of the End
of their ways (...) in the way for their wonderful Exaltation.

Use. Of Exhortation.

First, To All that stand here before the Lord in this great Assembly. Oh be
persuaded to consider your latter End. If it be the great wisdom of a people
in general, the Body of them, thus and so circumstanced, then also it is the
concernment of particular persons understandingly to consider what will be the
End and Issue of their sinful deportments before the Lord. Consider what is the
true tendency of your ways and courses, whither you are going, whether to
Happiness or Misery, to Heaven or Hell; what is like to be your journeys end,
whither you are bound, and where it is probable you shall arrive and take up
your abode for Eternity. All is well that ends well. Therefore

1. Make a right Judgment of the End of your Actions. Solomon lays a Rub in
the way of the Young man in his full Career after the Enjoyment of his Lusts,
when he says, Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment, Eccles. 11.9. that is, Remember that all thy ways of sin will
end in Judgment, or a dreadful sentence of wrath, and everlasting separation
from God. Thou art now pleasing thy self in the ways of thy own heart,
accounting practical and serious Piety mere Folly, applauding thy Wit, and
Parts, and Policy, but in thy latter end thou will be a Fool. Now the Gospel is
foolishness, Religion is foolishness, Praying in secret, walking humbly and
mournfully with God, is foolishness in thy deluded apprehension: And the people
of God that deny themselves, and crucify the flesh, with the affections and
lusts, and will not run with you to the same excess of riot, are a company of
weak and foolish men in thy valuation: but who do think will be the fool at
last? Oh think over and over what will be the end of (...) penitency and
perseverance in a course of sinning against God. (...) away your transgressions
(says the Lord, Ezekiel 18.30, 31.) repent, and turn from them, so iniquity shall
not be your ruin: importing, that ruin will be the end of sin not repented
of. Consider what will be the end of thy Unbelief, thy contempt of Jesus
Christ, thy comparative hatred of him, and preferring thy base lusts before
him. The end of Faith is the salvation of the soul, 1 Pet. 1.9. therefore the
end of Unbelief will be the perdition of the soul. The end of neglecting great
salvation, will be unavoidable misery, Heb 2.3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? Yea the end of thy positive U^belief, in rejecting
the Lord Jesus Christ revealed and off red in the Gospel, shall be a more
intolerable condition then that of Tire and Sidon, Sodom and G^morrah, (the
Cities which God overthrew and repented not) Turks and Indians, Heathens and
Infidil^* Mat. 11.21, 22, 23, 24. Oh play the men, act the part of rational
Creatures, set your rational Faculties, your Understandings and Consciences
awork; consider and know whither you are going, and what the issue of your
ways is like to be. As Solomon says of the house of the strange woman, that
it enclineth unto death, and her paths to the dead, Prove. 2.18. so may I say of
the sinful courses and practices of men. What are the sons of men generally
doing, but laying wait for their own blood? Prove. 1.18. plotting, as it were,
and projecting, contriving and accomplishing their own destruction, and know it
not. Wicked men are inconsiderate men, and their way is as darkness, they know
not at what they stumble, Prove. 4.19. The end of their way is bitter as
wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword; their feet go down to death, and their
steps take hold of hell, as Solomon speaks to another sense, Prove 5.4, 5. Can a
man take fire in his bosom? or go upon hot coals and not be burnt? Prove. 6.27,
28. You would account him a poor distracted creature that should so do, and
think to escape without harm and inconvenience. Sinners are as irrational, and
as much bereaved of sense and understanding, that dally with sin, and play with
the Serpent that has a speckled skin, and consider not that it will sting them
to death at last. Thou go after thy Lusts, as the Ox to the slaughter, or as
the Bird hastes to the snare, and know not that it is for thy life, Prove.
7.22, 23. Remember and judge aright, that the end of your natural lives will be
death, and the end of your sinful lives will be Hell. Take heed, lest thou
mourn at last (as Solomon speaks, Prove. 5.11.) though thou rejoice at present.
Make a right Judgment in this respect.

2. Fix and dwell upon the consideration of the latter End of your ways.
Settle it upon your hearts by frequent and thorough Meditation, that it may
stick by you, and abide with you; hold your hearts to it, and let not your
thoughts easily divert and slip aside from the serious consideration of it. Do
not rest in a slight and sudden apprehension of it, but roll it in your minds,
and ponder it thoroughly, that you may la^ the whole weight of this
consideration upon your Souls. Do not men know very well that the end of
Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Uncleanness, and Disobedience to Parents, and
Profanation of the Sabbath, and Vnfruitfulness under Ordinances, and of
deriding and maligning the ways of godliness, and those that walk in them,
will be death and destruction from the Lord? Yes verily: but they do not
consider it, and revolve it in their minds, so as to affect their hearts with
it. Oh ponder the path of thy feet, and consider much and often whither it will
lead thee in the conclusion.

3. So consider the end of thy way of sinning, as to put an end to thy way of
sinning: So as to break off thy course of sinning by sound Repentance, serious
Application to the blood of Christ for forgiveness, effectual Conversion to
God, and thorough Reformation of thy Life and Conversation. Consideration is
not mere speculative Contemplation, but practical Reformation must be the end
of it, as it was of David's consideration, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. The Jews report it for a saying of
Adam, that No man would sin, if he saw from the beginning to the end of things.
But I shall not stay longer on this Branch of the Exhortation.

Secondly, As the words of my Text respect the Body of a Nation, even Israel,
that were sometimes the peculiar people of God: So give me leave to direct my
Exhortation to the People of New England, or the Representative Body of the
People of this Colony, and to persuade the New-England-Israel to get and
improve this Spiritual wisdom, Understandingly and judiciously to consider
what will be the latter End of your sinful ways, and unworthy deportments
before the Lord. As you are a people of many Mercies and Privileges, so I may
well parallel you with Israel, a people graciously conducted and carried by the
mighty hand of God to a place of Rest, and Peace, and Safety, and Liberty; and
settled in the possession of singular Mercies and Advantages: and I wish with
all my heart that we could not see a cast of their countenan^e in our own
faces; that as in water face answers to face (Prove. 27.19.) so our spirits
and ways did not answer theirs, and that our misdemeanors and unsuitable
deportments, were not commensurate and correspondent with theirs, as our
mercies are. I make out the Parallel thus.

1. You have been conducted to a place of Rest and Liberty, and settled in the
possession of very choice and singular Privileges and Enjoyments. The Lord
has brought you over the great Ocean from your Native Land, the Land of your
Progenitors, to a place of Rest, where you have enjoyed singular mercies. As
when there was a Division made of the habitable parts of the Earth to the sons
of Adam there was an Assignation of that good Land of Canaan in the purpose of
God to the Children of Israel (which seems to be the sense and importance of
that difficult place, Deuteronomy. 32.8. which has put Expositors, as the body of
Asahel in the way did the people, 2 Samuel 2.23. to a stand) so was there an
Allotment, in the Counsel of God, of these Ends of the Earth unto this part of
our Nation for the Bounds of their Habitation. This Wilderness was the place
which God decreed to make a Canaan to you: and what he thought in his heart, he
has fulfilled with his hand, in bringing you to this good Land, and providing
wonderfully for your well-being here. Many and wond^rful are the Favors and
Privileges which the Lord your God ha^ c^nferred upon you.

1. As to your Civil G^v^rnment. You have had Moses, Men, I mean, of the same
spirit, to lead and go before you. The Lord has not given Children to be your
Leaders, and Babes to rule over y^^, which is the eatned as a great Judgment,
portending and making way for the ruin of Jerusalem, and fall of Judah, Isa.
3.4, 8.) but Pious, Faithful, Prudent Magistrates, men in Wisdom and
Understanding. He has not set Taskmasters and Oppressors over us, or caused
those that hate us to rule over us, as he threatens, Lev. 26.17. As a roaring
Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people, Prove.
28.15. God has delivered you from the Paw of the Lion and and of the Bear, so
that you have not known by woeful experience to this day, what a wicked
oppressing Ruler means, nor seen one of these cruel and imperious Beasts among
you. God has not given us Rulers that would fleece us, that would pull the
bread out of our mouths, that would grind our faces and break our bones, that
would undermine and rob us of our Liberties, Civil and Religious, to the
enslaving of this people and their children after them: but he has given us
men of Nehemiah's spirit, that have not sought themselves, but sincerely
designed the good, and consulted the welfare and prosperity of these
Plantations, to go in and out before us: Men that have not rigorously exacted
the bread of the Governor, ( Neh. 5.18.) but have cheerfully receded from
their own Right, sympathizing with, and compassionately considering the low
estate and condition of this people. Nor has the Lord in displeasure left us
to be Levellers and Libertines, to do every man what seems good in his own
eyes. Thus far he has delivered us from Anarchy and Confusion, as well as from
Tyranny; and set over us pious and faithful Rulers, that have been indeed
(according to the obligation and intendment of their Office, Romans 13.3, 4.) a
terror to evil, and not to good works, and Ministers of God to us for good:
which is an admirable and invaluable mercy. I know indeed that profane and
licentious persons would have Magistrates that would connive at, and
countenance their Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Filthiness, and
Sabbath-breaking, and the like gross enormities, that there might be no Master
of Restraint, or Coercive Power exercised in the land, that they might sin
without control, and go to hell without interruption or molestation: and that
wanton Gospellers, giddy Professors, men of corrupt minds, would have
Magistrates that will allow them in publishing and spreading their damnable
Heresies, disturbing the Peace and Order of the Churches of Christ, and
spurning at, or setting their foot upon all that is precious and sacred amongst
us. But behold the goodness and patience of God! notwithstanding all our
contempt of them, murmurings against them, unsuitable behavior toward them,
insensibleness of the greatness of our mercy in the enjoyment of them,
uneasiness of too many diaffected persons under their Government, or attempts
of men to bereave us of them, yet we have still our rulers as at the f^^st, and
our counsell^rs as at the beginning. And though many of our worthy Patriots
have acted their parts graciously, wisely, faithfully, and gone off the stage
with honor, yet there is a succenturiation or succession of men in their places
of the like Spirit, Principles and Abilities. This is because the Lord our God
has loved our Israel, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. God has walled us about with a godly
Magistracy, given us Rulers out of our selves (which was the privilege of
Israel, that they might take wise men, and understanding, and known among their
Tribes to be Rulers over them, Deuteronomy. 1.13.) and has caused justice and
judgment to run down among us as a mighty stream. One of the great miseries of
the World is the Tyranny and Oppression of Rulers. God has thus far secured
you from it, and given you to taste the sweet and pleasant fruits of a good
Magistracy. Good Magistrates, good Laws, and the vigorous Execution of them
has been the privilege and glory of New England, wherein you have been
advanced above most of the Nations of the Earth. This is a mercy of no small
elevation.

2. As to your Sanctuary mercies. God has sequestered you from the rest of the
World, allured you into this Wilderness, and brought you into these parts of
the Earth (out of the streets of Rome, as some conceive, whether rightly or no,
I cannot determine) that you might set up his way and worship in the purity and
Gospel-glory of it. This was the refreshing mercy of God to his People when he
first brought them over, and that which sweetened to them many a bitter Cup, and
supported them under the burdensome inconveniences of a Wilderness condition.
Here you have seen the goings of God in the Sanctuary; the fingers before and
the players on Instruments after, Psalm. 68.24, 25 the orderly Administration of
the Worship and Ordinances of God. Churh-officers duly qualified, and set
apart to their work and ruling authoritatively in the Lord, according to the
order of the Gospel, using their power to ^^^^^cation, and not to destruction:
And Church members allowed, and us^^g their liberty and privilege, obeying and
consenting in a due exercise of their Judgment of Discretion. The Doctrine of
Faith duly dispensed the worship of God solemnly celebrated without the
mixture of human; Inventions and Discipline administered (for the substance
thereof) according to the appointment of Jesus Christ. And in case of
difficulties emerging through want of light or peace, Councils orderly
assembling and acting in the fear of God, Ministerially declaring the mind of
God, and commending their advice to the Churches concerned, without ^^y
irregular imposing upon their liberty. And this course also attended generally
with the Blessing of God for the final issue of controversies, and ending of
differences. These are such mercies as are almost appropriately yours, if all
circumstances be considered: so that hardly any People under heaven equal you
in this respect. God has instructed us, as he did Israel in the Wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 32.10. you have been provided of all helps and advantages for the
edification of your souls and a rich Blessing upon them. This is the Milk and
Honey with which this Canaan (though a Wilderness flows. Here you have seen the
Rivers, the Floods, the Brooks of Honey and Butter, Job 20.17. And for the
continuance of these mercies, the Lord has given you Schools of Learning, and
prospered that work of the education of your Children in the hands of those
that have undertaken it, both in infe^ our private Schools, and in the College
(that Nursery of Piety and good Li^terature) even to admiration. So that God
has made this Wilderness to be glad for his People, and this Desert to rejoice
and blossom as a Rose, Isai. 35.1.

3 As to those great blessings of Peace and Plenty, at least a competency and
sufficiency of outward comforts. You have here in these Chambers of Secrecy
and Safety which God has brought you into, in this place of Retirement and
Hiding, enjoyed peace and rest, when other parts of the World have been
embroiled, and that dear Nation of which you are a part, has been involved in
Blood and Distractions, emptied from Vessel to Vessel, undergoing strange
alterations. The Lord has been a Wall of fire about us, and his salva^ion
appointed for Walls and Bulwarks to us. Here the glorious Lord has been unto
us a place of broad Rivers and Streams to defend us from all annoyances: And
our eyes have seen our Sion, the City of our Solemnities and our Jerusalem a
quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle not taken down, neither the stakes removed, nor
Cords broken, Isai. 33.20, 21. The mercy of the Lord has compassed about his
People that have trusted in him. Deliverances have been commanded seasonably,
and no weapon formed against us has prospered. God has found us in this
Desert Land, and compassed us about, and kept us as the Apple of his Eye, Deuteronomy.
32.10. And all that have attempted to devour you have offended, and evil has
com^ upon them: just as it was with the Adversaries of Israel, Jer. 2.3. God
has scattered his favors, and dealt out his blessings with a liberal hand to
you: Having blessed you in basket and store, and raised you up ^o some
considerableness in the World from low beginnings. Gods People followed him
into this Wilderness for Himself, and for his Kingdom and Righteousness, and
he has added and cast in over and above other things also: when they came,
they asked Communion with Himself, in his Worship and Ordinances; this was the
one thing they desired, as David speaks, Psalm. 27.4. And he has in a way of
surplusage and advantage, over and above given them other mercies. Yea, and as
he says to David, 2 Samuel 12.8. If what he has done had not been enough, (...)
wou^d moreover have given you such and such things. He has given you more in a
sense then he promised you, much more then the first* Adventurers and
Undertakers could rationally expect or promise themselves in a Wilderness.

And indeed, if we cast up the Account, and Sum up all our mercies, and lay
all things together, this our Commonwealth seems to exhibit to us a specimen,
or a little model of the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, not in the wild sense
of those that are called Fift-monarchy men, but in the sober sense of many of
our Divines, wherein it is generally acknowledged and expected. This work of
God set on foot and advanced to a good Degree here, being spread over the face
of the Earth, and perfected as to greater Degrees of Light and Grace and Gospel
glory will be (as I conceive) the Kingdom of Jesus Christ so much spoken of.
When this is accomplished, you may then say He has taken to himself his great
Power and Reign^, and that the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms
of our Lord and of h^^ Christ, Rev. 1.15, 17 You have been as a City upon an
hill (though in a remote and obscure Wilderness) as a Candle in the Candlestick
that gives li^ht to the whole House. You have, to a considerable Degree,
enlightened the whole House (world I mean) as to the pattern of God^ House, the
Form and Fashion and Outgoings and Incomings thereof* convinced and helped
many, and le^t others; that sh^t their eyes against the Light of you^
Profession and Practice, without excuse. God ha^^ be^^ doing (in my
Apprehension) the same thing for the substance o^ it here* that shall be done
more universally and gloriously, when Israel shall bl^^som and h^d and (...)
fare of the world with fruit: Isa. 27.6 you have (...) though an handful of
people separated from the greatest part of the Christian World (as it is
prophesied of Jacobs remnant that it should be in the midst of many people.
Mic, 5.7.) as a Dew from the Lord, and as the showers upon the grass. God has
privileged and honored you greatly in this respect.

2 All this has been accomplished for you by the mighty Hand of God. Though
not in a way of miracle (as it was with Israel of old) yet in a way of wonders
of mercy and Grace, and glorious appearances. All this is not come to pass,
either by the mere counsel of man, or by chance and Accident. They were wise
and sober, and industrious and good men that laid our Foundations, and did what
men could do, (in their several capacities) toward the settling us upon lasting
Foundations of Righteousness and Holiness: but there has all along appeared
more of God then of man is it. It must be acknowledged with all Humility and
Thankfulness, that it is God himself that has brought us hitherto, as David
speaks 2 Samuel 7.18. you got not this Land with your own Sword or Bow, your
power and policy; Cease ye from man in this respect: But it was a Land which
the Lord espied out for you. Eze. 20.6. I may appeal confidently to the
consciences of those that hear me, that have any pleasure in the great works of
God, and have considered the operation of his hands. Was it not the mighty hand
of God upon those Worthies that first came over, that touched and bowed their
hearts, that made them willing to leave a pleasant Land (Dulce solum natale)
the Land of their Fathers Sepulchers, and of their own Nativities, to
relinquish their settlements and fair accomodations (as to many of them) and
their dear Friends and Relations, that they loved as their own souls, with whom
it was in their hearts to have lived and dyed: and to cast, not their bread,
but, themselves and their Fami^ies upon the great waters, to venture all upon
the mere mercy of God (who called them to his foot as he did the righteous man
whom he raised from the East. Isa. 41.2.) And to follow him into a wilderness,
a land that was not sown, a place of great hardships and difficulties? And was
it not God who then sweetened their wilderness condition to them, conducted them
as with the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, protected them from the many dangers that
threatened them, and directed them (being a Sun as well as a shield unto them.
Psalm. 84.11.) in the happy settlement of Church and State, effecting great
things by small and despicable means? was it not the same mighty hand of God,
that routed and put to flight the spirit of Error and Heresy that was growing
and getting ^ead among you in your beginning times, plainly threatening the
subversion of your State, and the destruction of your Civil and Sacred
Concernments and Enjoyments? was it not the same Almighty Arm that vanquished
the Pequots, and put the dread and terror of you into the hearts of the
Natives, that you have awelt safely in this wilderness, and slept securely in
these woods? Ezekiel 34.25. Has not the Lord given a miscarrying womb unto all
such as have conceived and been big with mischievous designs against you?
Insomuch that all their counsels and endeavors have been abortive and
fruitl^ss? Has not the same Hand of the most High broken the head of many a
Leviathan in pieces, and given him to be meat to (the Faith of) his people
inhabiting this wilderness? Psalm. 74.14. Has not that glorious hand of God
been stretched out from year to year for your Defense and Deliverance, though
you are maligned and envyed, and there have been* Attempts and hazardous ones
too, made upon you? you have had sensible experience of the lighting down of
the omnipotent Arm of God on your behalf. Happy art thou Oh New England Israel!
who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and
who is the Sword of thy Excellenc^! and thine enemies have been found liars
unto thee^ as Moses speaks upon consideration of the Condition of that Israel,
Deuteronomy. 33.29. So that as he says, Bless ye the Lord from the Fountain of
Israel. Psalm. 68.26. That is, either you that derive your Original from the
Fountain of Jacob and Israel, that descend from him as his natural offspring
and Posterity, (as the words are generally expounded) or (if I may be allowed
so to gloss and improve them) Bless him for all the mercies that have been
conferred upon you from the Fountain, or first Original of Israel to this Day.
So, let the Suc^essors and seed of those that laid our Foundations bless the
Lord, yea, let their souls and al^ within them bless his holy name, for all
that he has done for us from the Fountain and Foundation of this plantation.
We may say with wonderment (almost in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.32. Ask now
of many of the Ages that are past, and ask from one side of Heaven unto the
other, whether there has been any such Thing as this great Thing is, or has
been heard like it, for many generations? Has God essayed to go and take him a
part of a Nation from the midst of a Nation, by temptations, by sig^s, by
wonders, by a mighty hand and by an out-strethed arm, according to all that the
Lord your God has done for you before your eyes? God has shown us almost
unexampled unparalled mercy. And it were very well if there were a memorial of
these things faithfully drawn up, and transmitted to Posterity, as the Reverend
Servant of God, that spoke to you the last year, moved and advised. Mr.
Shepard's Election Sermon, page 15.16. However* it is our great-duty to be the
Lords Remembrancer^ or Recorders, Isa. 62.6. that the mercies of the Lord (that
has allured us into this wilderness, spoken comfortably to us and dealt
bountifully with us therein) may be faithfully registered in our hearts, and
remembered by us. It is a desirable thing, that all the loving kindnesses of
G^d, and his singular favors to this poor and despised out cast might be
Chronicled and communicated (in the History of them) to succeeding Ages; that
the memory of them may not die and be extinct, with the present Generation: And
it is the unquestionable duty of every one of us to keep in mind and consider
the signal works of the Lord, and the operation of his hands for and in the
behalf of his dear people in this wilderness.

Now then, this being your Condition that you are in a manner parallel with
Israel in their mercies: and that in the apprehension of all considering men we
are too like them in their sinful deportments also: (all sides are agreed that
things are in a declining posture, that there is a great degeneracy, that
things look with another Face, that there is a defection and declension: though
all are not resolved wherein it does consist, some charging it one way, some
another, as their judgment or Affection, or party and Interest leads them; yet
they all center in this, that there is a back sliding and declension among us)
Give me leave therefore, (who am much a stranger) to take it for granted, not
only from my own observation, but especially from the the Confession of all
parties (and what better evidence can be expected?) that this Noble vine
planted by the Lords own right hand is become degenerous, that your ways are
unanswerable to the ways of God, that your deportments are unsuitable to your
engagements and the Lords expectations: and therefore to pursue the Exhort^tion
in beseeching and persuading you to understand and Consider what is li^^ to be
your latter end. It will be your Interest to Consider, first, whence you are
fallen, Rev. 2.5. And then, whither you are going, or falling by your iniquity.
Hos. 14.1. And what the end and Issue of your sinful ways will be. This is that
which my Text leads me to prosecute. And truly me thinks I hear the Lord
speaking these very wo^d^ of New England at this Day: On (...) they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. As Christ
sometimes stood weeping over Jerusalem, and said, O that (...) had known even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things which (...) peace! Luke 19.41, 42.
So me thinks the Lord Jesus is this day (...) above, beholding us from the
height of his glory, and saying, Oh (...) my dear people in New England (whom I
have peculiarly loved, and pitied, and protected, and blessed, were wise, and
(...) understandingly and rationally what the end of their sinful deportments
before me will be at last. I hope he does not add, But now this (...) from it
hid from their eyes.

I confess I was under some temptation to have singled out such a Subject in
the Discussion or Hau^ling whereof some general Christian Duties might have
been commended to this great Assembly (so considerable as to the quality and
public capacity, as well as numerousness of the Auditors,) to have declined
all such Discourses as might seem to grate, or reflect blame, and bear too hard
upon these or those. I would not have the Ministers of Christ needlessly to
tamper or intermeddle with State affairs, or direct and dictate to Rulers, and
intrude themselves into such things as are out of their sphere, and foreign to
their calling, and profession, unless upon insuperable occasions. I have seen
much evil and inconvenience in it elsewhere: I would not pass the bounds, or go
beyond the line of my calling and commission from Jesus Christ. Tractent
Fabrilia Fabri.

Moreover, I have considered (as a Discouragement from attempting any thing in
this kind) that I am much a stranger to the Spirits, and Principles, and
Practices of men in this Country, and greatly unacquainted with the state of
affairs among you, and that it is no easy matter to gain thorough and certain
information. And that good caution also came to mind, as a seasonable memento,
(...) a Stranger must be no needless medler. I considered also, that where men
are in a divided posture, and their hearts are hot within them, there is small
hope of doing any good. To what purpose is it to charm deaf Adders? such are
men usually that are addicted to sides and parties: they are deaf on one side,
and cannot hear of that ear. If a man had the meekness and gravity, and
Fatherly spirit and affection that Moses discovers in the Book of Deuteronomie,
the Wisdom and Reason of Solomon or Paul, the Tongue and Eloquence of Isaiah,
the best accomplishments of any Son of Adam: yet it would in reason signify
little, where he has to do with the ignorance, the pride, the perverseness,
the conceitedness, the prejudices, the opinionativeness of engaged men. Many
good men, though in no good frame, are too like him in the Comedy, that said
(...) Aristoph. Plut. Thou shall not persuade me, no, though thou do persuade
me. I considered also that things are run much to ruin among us, and gone
beyond man, (the counsel and help of man) and that it must be (...) God alone
in some more then ordinary way of working that can retrive the Interest of
Christ among us, and reduce us again. Probable it is, that it must be some
sharp affliction, some smarting red, or sore trial that must come upon these
Churches to reduce them generally to their old trembling frame of spirit at the
Word of God, and humble submission to the dispensation of it: And there is
great reason to conceive that many Professors may be grown Sermon-proof, that
we had as good preach to the Heavens and Earth, and direct our discourse to the
Walls and Seats and Pillars of the meeting house, and say, Hear, O ye Walls,
give ear O ye Seats and Pillars, as to many men in these Churches, that are
deaf to all that is cried in their ears by the Lords Messengers, and are ind^ed
like Rocks in the Sea, not to be stirred and moved by the beating and dashing
of these waters of the Sanctuary, or by the strongest gust of rational and
affectionate discourse that can blow upon them. I considered also that there
may be too many, even in the Bosom of New-English Churches that have lived
long in that great sin of confronting the faithful Ministers of Christ, and
gloried in their Rebellion against the Authority of Christ in his Churches, and
plausibly, but falsely called it, an asserting of their Liberties, and Defense
of the Privilege of the Brethren, and that do even religiously despise and
deride those that oppose their darling Notions: and he that rebukes a scorner,
gets himself a Blot. It may be justly feared, that it is all the Religion
some men have, to vilify, and traduce, and lower the reputation and Authority
of the Ministers of Christ. Time was, when the Messengers of Christ, the
Masters of Assemblies, were precious and welcome, (even when they came with a
Rod, as Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 4 21.) and their Feet beautiful and their words
very acceptable, yea, were as Goads and Nayls that made great Impression, and
took fast ho^d in the hearts of hearers, and were greatly heeded on subh an
occasion as this. But now they are become the Enemies of some men, because they
tell them the Truth. Too many professors are like Ezekiels hearers, that were
still talking against him by the walls and in the doors of their houses, even
then when they would come and sit before him, and hear his words as coming
forth from the Lord, and it was as a lovely Song, and a pleasant fit of music
to them, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. I considered also that it is a matter of some
difficulty, a dangerous undertaking, to search the wounds of this poor Country,
lest instead of Help and Healing, they should be but the more enflamed,
irritated and exasperated thereby.

However having this opportunity, unsought and undesired by me, nay thrust upon
me, I shall adventure (as God shall assist) to speak something to the present
case and condition of the Country: If weakly and unadvisedly in any respect, I
beg pardon of God and of his People; And if the Lord help to any words of
wisdom; I know wisdom will be justified of its Children, whoever condemn it,
and I shall deliver my own soul, and express my compassion to the souls of
others, and my faithfulness to the Interest of Christ in New England, and those
that will not hear shall be inexcusable. The condition of Affairs at this
juncture calls for something. -- In magnis voluisse sat est. I beseech you lend
me a patient and unprejudiced ear. I design not the grieving or gratifying o^
any party, but the faithful discharge of my duty, according to the known
practice, and laudable example of the worthy Servants of the Lord before me
(some of whom are yet with us, and others fallen asleep in Jesus) on the like
occasion.

That which I have to commend to you, and entreat of you (even in the bowels of
Jesus Christ) is, the understanding, serious consideration of the lat^^ end of
your unsuitable and unbecoming deportments before the Lord* in this good Land
which he has graciously given you. And because general Discourses affect and
edify (...), I crave leave here to instance in some particulars, that I may
the better accommodate and direct you in the management of this Important Duty
of considering your latter end. Therefore,

1. Consider what will be the latter end of that great decay of the power and
practice of Godliness that is but too visible among us. Are not even many old
Disciples, Professors of a long standing, that for a long time have been
accustomed to the yoke of Religion, grown weary and drowsy, and next unto
formal and customary in their performances? Though they do not, possibly, make
any notorious and scandalous Digression and Diversion from the good ways of
God, but are drudging and plodding on in a visible regular course of Obedience
and Profession: yet behold, what a weariness is it? They are not diligent and
active to stir up themselves to take hold of God, and work out their own
salvation, and forgetting the things that are behind, to press toward the
mark, and to pursue and prosecute and reach forth unto these and those
Christian excellencies which are before them. How few watch and keep their
garments, and gird up the loins of their minds, that walk and are not faint,
ru^, and are not weary in the ways of God? Not but that there are yet (through
the great mercy of God) many, very many living, thriving, waking, powerful
Christians among us, that have another spirit, and follow God fully (as C^^eh
did, Numb. 14.24.) whose souls follow hard after God (as he speaks, Psa. 63.8)
and that walk with him with much exactness, according to the tenor of the
Covenant, with whom the Lord is well pleased, and for whose sakes it fares the
better with us at this day. But what shall we say of the Body of Professors
among us? Are they not grown customary, formal, superficiary, luke warm,
neither hot nor cold? and what can be expected but that the Lord Jesus should
grow sick of us, and spue us out of his mouth, as he threatened the Church of
Laodicea, Rev. 3.16, He that remembers the good old Spirit of Those that
followed God into this wildernes^; the Faith, the Fervency, the Zeal for God,
the good Affection to his Ordinances, the dear love to his Messengers* the
Heavenly-mindedness, the Diligence in working out their own Salvation, and
watching over their Hearts and Tongues and Conversations, that practical Piety,
and power of Godliness, when the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and
Religion was the great buisiness, and All in a manner, of such as had given up
their Names to God, and subscribed with their hands unto the Lord: cannot but
easily discern a sad alteration of the state of things among Professors, that
much of our silver is become dross, and our wine mixed with water, and that the
Daughter of Sion has contracted filth that had need be purged away. Oh where
is that Sense of the evil of sin? that Dread of the Majesty and Terror of the
Lord? that Fear of the wrath to come? that care and vigorous endeavor to
secure an happy condition in the next World? where are those fervent Prayers,
unutterable groans, invincible wrestlings with God? that serious and frequent
meditation, that trembling at the Word, making have and not delaying to keep
the Commandments of God? are not the wise (as well as foolish) Virgins
slumbring and sleeping? As the Spouse says, I sleep but my heart wak^th, Cant
5.2. They are in a great measure oppressed and overborn with security: And others
fast asleep; their eyes closed, and hearts asleep too. Hence so many Dreaming
Professors among us. Do not men too generally turn Religion into a Formality
and keep up a gaudy pageant of Religion in a course of Profession, that has no
life nor soul in it? Professors do not walk (...) with that accurateness and
circumspection that they were wont to do^ but are grown careless and sleepy
because the Bridegroom tarrieth, and wax weary of well-doing, and suffer their
love to grow cold, and stumble at such stones as are commonly laid in the way
of a long profession? do not some of them begin to eat with the gluttonious,
and drink with the drunken, and smite their fellow servants, because their Lord
delays his coming? verily the hearts of men generally are not lift up in the
ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. nor engaged thoroughly to seek after him, but
they walk at all adventures with him, Levit. 26.21. And there are a Generation
of heedless Professors among us, that take no heed to walk in the Law of the
Lord with all their heart^^ which was the Character and Brand of Iehu, for all
his high profession of Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, 2 King. 10 31. what settling
and thickning upon the lees of security and sensuality, sloth and ease, does
the Lord Jesus observe among us, that searches Jerusalem with Candles? Zeph.
1.12. what a deal of Dross cleaving to men does He take notice of, whose fire
is in Sion, and furnace in Jerusalem? Here is much precious Wheat but what a
deal of Chafe will be found, when Christ comes to sift, and win now, and purge
his floor thoroughly? When the Apostle gives us the Character of those last and
perilous times that should overtake the Church of God, he reckons up sundry
evils that too many Professors in those days should be addicted to: And I wish
his prediction were not verified among us in all the particulars of it. Men
(says he) shall be lovers of themselves (pursuing their own interest with th^^
neglect of the good of others) Covetous, or Lovers of Money, Po^sters (insolent
and vain glorious) Proud (supercilious, vaunting or flaunting Profession)
Blasphemers (scu^^ilous and abusive revisers of others) Disobedient to Parents
(that is, Despisers of the lawful Authority not only of natural Parents, but
of Civil and Ecclesiastical Rulers, and of superiors in all Societies,
Families, Churches, Commonwealth) Unthankful (that are not to be won by any
kindnesses, but are ungrateful to men of worth and usefulness, that have
obliged them by all manner of Civilities and Services) Unholy, or Profane
spirited men, without natural Affection, Truce Breakers or Perfidious (that
mak^ no Conscience of words and covenants, but violate their promises and
engagements) False Accusers (Devils, the Original word is or Make bates and
Calumniators) Incontinent or intemperate (that are buri^d in flesh and drowned
in sensuality) Fierce (men of savage and brutish dispositions that will admit
o^ no moderation) Despisers of those that are good, (such as cannot love good
men but despise them, be they Magistrates or Ministers, men of Piety and great
Worth) Traitors (perfidious to the cause and interest of Christ, to their best
friends that repose confidence in them) Heady (violent men that are not to be
checked and restrained by Reason or Conscience within any bounds of sobriety,
but are precipitately carried on, as their blind affections and passions hurry
them) High-minded (they are Lords and Reign as Kings, and have an high Opinion
of themselves, an overweening conceit of their own excellencies) Lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God (preferring their own carnal pleasures before
the holy will of God) And the Close of all is, Having a Form (a show,
appearance or vizor) of Godliness but denying the power thereof. I need say
nothing more by way of Application: only mind that the Apostles Exhortation is,
from such turn away, 1 Timothy 3.1.6. And therefore we may well conclude, that
Jesus Christ will turn away from them, and have no pleasure in them. This, this
is the sad Apostasy that many in New England are guilty of. A visible decay of,
and declension from the practice of piety and power of Godliness seizing upon a
very considerable part of the professing party of these Plantations, as to
personal holiness and zeal for the precious interest of Jesus Christ among us.
An Hour of Temptation is come upon us, the desperate effects and issues whereof
are plainly seen in the Decay of Love, the subversion of the Faith, and partial
or total Apostasy of many persons. Our vain janglings, and contentions, and
strifes, and debates (those Sucker^ that draw away all the nourishment from the
substantial parts of godliness) are an evidence that we are grown carnal, that
once were a spiritual people, 1 Cor. 3.3. We have many fearful instances,
tremendous Examples of backsliding: so that the goodly profession of many
persons expires in sad revolt from the Truth to vile Opini^ns, or from the
power of godliness to loose and licentious courses. I have against thee, much
against thee, may Christ say to New England, as he said to Ephesus, Rev. 2.4
because thou have left thy first love. And what will be the Latter end of this,
but the removing of our Candlesticks, the loss of the presence and ^avour of
Christ, the departure of the Glory of the Lord from us, the casting away of the
Salt that has lost its savor?

2. Consider what ^ill be the latter end of the great contempt of and
unfruitfulness under the Dispe^sation of the Word and Ordinances among us.* Do
not your own Consciences tell you, that the Market and Price of Ordinances is
very low at this day? Houses and Lands, Lots and Farms, and outward
accomodations are of more value with many people, then the Gospel and Gospel
ordinances. When the Ark of God was taken, it was the sad lamentation of that
good Woman, the Glory is departed from Israel: and she named her Son l^habod,
that is, ^here is the glory? 1 Samuel 4.2^.22. As if she had said, you tell me of
the Birth of a Son; but where is the Glory of Israel? you show me a Son indeed,
but can you show me the Glory? no alas! the Glory is departed from Israel, for
the Ark of God is taken. The Ark of God was the glory in her eyes. But how many
among us are there to whom F^o^ks, and Herds, and Earthly Enjoyments are Glory
(as they were to Labans Sons, Genesis 31.1.) rather then the Ark of God's presence
and his Holy Ordinances? where is that love to the Word, that affection to
Sacraments, that longing for Sabbaths and Lecture days, that holy care to
prepare for a meeting with God at such times, and to improve them, that was
wont to be among us? Oh that old love, and zeal, and affection to the
Ordinances and Messengers of Christ, though it abides (blessed be God) with
some still, is much abated and lo^t, as to the generality of Professors in this
Country. How Beautiful have the Feet of those that brought the Glad tidings of
the Gospel been? but now how burdensome? that Ministers are reckoned Bills of
Charges, and were it not for shame, I doubt some people could be well enough
without them, or would entertain and set up any piece of ignorance and
confidence (that would be cheap enough) to dispense the Oracles of God, and the
Holy Mysteries of Religion unto them, rather then to be at the charge to
procure and provide for men of Worth and Ability. This very thing would make
one fear that New England has seen its best days: no^ is it to be wondered at,
if this undervaluation of the Ordinances of God be attend^d with great
unfruitfulness. Oh what barren Fig^re^s stand in this vineyard of the Lord? How
much of the Earth here drinks in the rain of Heaven that comes often upon it, and
brings forth nothing but briars and thorns? what will the end of this be, but
the c^tting down of such cumbersoms-Professors, and the burning them up* Luke
13.7.8. Heb. 6.8. If men like the deaf Adder, shall stop their Ears and will
not hearken to the voice of the wisest Charmers, Psalm. 58.5. Doubtless God will
send Serpents and Cock^trices among them which will not be charmed and they
shall bite them and make those feel that would not hear. Jer 8 17. It was the
Critical Sin of the Jews, that they refused to hearken to the Word of God,
pulled away the shoulder, stopped their Ears, made their hearts as an Adamant,
lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord sent in his Spirit
by the Prophets: And what was the latter end of it? why, therefore came a great
wrath from the Lord of Hosts; And as he cried and they would not hear; so they
cried, and he would not hear, but scattered them with a whirlwind among the
Nations: and thus they laid their pleasant land desolate. Zech. 7.11, 12, 13,
14. God, that, out of gracious respect to your Fathers and Prede^^ssors that
were a willing and obedient people; turned this wilderness into a pleasant
fruitful land, can in severe wrath for your contempt of his Word and
messengers, turn this land into a wilderness again. It is one (...) the
praiseworthy performances of God to make such Metamorphos^ (...) alterations.
Psalm. 107.33, 34, etc. If he call and you refuse to hearken, if he stretch out
his Hand. and you regard not, he knows how to laugh at you calamity, and mock^
when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind. Prove.
1.24, 25, etc. yea, and to be deaf to all your calls and cries in the Day of
your distress and anguish. Would it be strange if those that will not hear the
voice of the Lords Prophets should be constrained to hear the voice of
Oppressors, or of Prophets that should speak Lies in the Lords Name, and are
Prophets of the deceits of their own hearts? God may justly give you Pastors
not after his own heart, but after your own hearts, which is a dreadful
judgment: what can you expect but to have such Pastors as are described Ier.
23. beginn. Ezekiel. 34. beginn. He will make a Famine of his Word, or smite you
with penal judgments, that you shall see and not see or see your selves into
Blindness, and hear away your hearing Ear, be a people past Counsel and
Instruction, and contract that woeful deafness, which is sometimes gotten by
hearing of Sermons, and is most incurable and deplorable. Verily God will
revenge (in some way that will make the hearts of men eke) the quarrel of his
despised Word and Ordinances, if this sin and sinful frame be not timely
repented of. There are few (I am afraid) in compa^ison tha^ tremble a^ the Word
of God. Men are too proud, and high and f^ll and knowing and good in their own
Apprehensions, to stand trembling in the presence of God, and humbly to receive
their Doom and Sentence from the Lord. They come now as ^uges of the Word, and
not to have the secrets of their hearts opened, their Cases scanned, and the
state of their souls judged by it: yea, as Critics, to ca^p and quarrel, and
find fault with it. God will look (with a look of favor and gracious aspect)
to them that tremble at his Word. Isa. 66.2. But with such a look as he cast
upon the Egyptians through the black and dark side of the cloud on all the
proud men among us, as those are called that disobeyed the voice of the Lord by
Jeremiah. Jer. 43.2. At this door came in the great calamity that befell the
Jews in their seventy years captivity. The Lord God o^ their Fathers sent to
them by his Messengers, rising up betimes and s^nding, because he had
compassion on his people and on his dwelling place: but they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no R^medy, 2 Chronicles
36.15, 16. Verily God will not ^a^e to vindicate the Honor of his despised and
abused Messengers and Ordinances.

3. Consider what will be the latter End of that Worldliness that is among us.
Would not that great Apostle Paul, if he were here tell you, even weeping, that
many of you mind ^^rth^y things? Phi. 3.19. Is not this an Epidemical disease
of New England? the Str^in, the G^nius, the Spirit of many Professors among
us? Hence general calling neglected, the work of Religion goes on heavily, the
strength and spirits of men are exhausted, or laid out on other things, and
they have no heart to cl^s^t work, to family duties, which are neglected, or
slubbered and posted over shamefully. Hence great Contentions about little
things, three-penny-m^tters) and a little spark kindles a great fire. Hence
grievous oppression, a Sin that was notorious in Israel and Judah, and
contributed remark^bly to their Calamity. And are there not sad complaints of
this in New England? and are they altogether without cause? may not any man
that observes what Griping, and Squeesing, and Grinding the Faces of the poor,
and Greediness there is among us, fear it? Hence a private Selfish spirit; that
works of Charity and Beneficence, and of Public concernment are neglected to
the damage of the public and disgrace of Religion. Hence no progress in a
Course of Piety, no getting onward in the Journey to Heaven; You have men now,
where they were twenty years ago: For they are sunk and stuck fast in the mire
and clay of this present world, and cannot stir: There is much thorny ground in
this Country, and the Seed of the Word is choked, and the springing of any
good in their Souls is checked and hindered by the cares of the World,
deceitfulness of Riches and lusts of other things. There is so much rooting in
the Earth, that there is little growing upward, Heavenward, I mean: men are
coupling both Worlds together (as one speaks) that they may drive them both
before them. Certain it is that such men's hands will never be lifted up to any
singular enterprises and Achievements for God, and the good of the Societies
where they live. This is such a monstrous deportment of a Covenant people
toward God, as might even transport Heaven and Earth into an Ecstasy of
Admiration and astonishment. Ier. 2.12, 13. Nothing being so portentous and
prodigious in Nature, and beside the course of it, as that a people of so many
mercies and such singular Engagements to the Lord, and of such wonderful
experiences of the fruit of dependence upon God, should forsake God, the
Fountain of all their comfort, and run for supply to empty, muddy pits, the
perishing vanities of this World. And what will the end be? Those that get
Riches and not by right (either in a way of Injustice, or Inordinacy) shall be
like the partridge, never hatch the Eggs they sit on, or enjoy the good of
their labors: but shall leave them in the midst of their days and be Fools to
purpose at their end. Jer 17.11. They may heap up si^ver as the dust, but the
Innocent shall divide it, and prepare Raiment as the clay, but the just shall
put it on, Job 27.16, 17. Nay I am apt to think that the Unjust and Cruel and
wicked one may plunder it away and possess it. yea, God will Tear away such
Estates sooner or later, Job. 20.15. It is seldom seen, that Estates gotten
either injuriously, or over-greedily prosper^ with posterity -- Vix gaudet
tertius Haeres. The third Heir has scarce any joy of them. And truly the
general end of this worldly spirit among us, is like to be this: that Church
and Commonwealth will be neglected, all sink, and the Tree be chopped down, or
fall, whilst men are busily building and feathering their several Nests in the
Branches of it, unless the Lord show mercy. Sad it is, that many good men have
so far forgotten their great Errand into this Wilderness. Sure they were other
and better Things the People of God came hither for, then the best Spot of
Ground, the Richest Soil in the World, much more this Wilderness can afford.
You would think, if the Land were full of Idols, and men were generally
addicted to Idolatrous practices, that the Land were greatly defiled, and that
God would lay all desolate. Truly Covetousness is Idolatry in Gods account,
Ephesians. 5.5. And New England, notwithstanding the pure Administration of Gods
Worship and Ordinances, is yet a Land fall of Idolaters. This is for a
Lamentation! What will the end of this be?

4. Consider what will be the latter end of that great Pride that is among us.
Who doubts but that Pride is a prevailing, spreading sin in New England? Now
pride expresses it self variously. There is pride appearing in the Garb, in
garish attire, in affected trimmings and adornings of the outward man, that
Body of Clay that is going to the dust and worms. How are men and women
garnishing those dishes, Bodies I mean, that must shortly be set upon the worms
Table, for them to feed sweetly upon? Though this may seem a small matter: yet
the Holy Ghost takes notice of the pride of gate and Garb. Isa. 3.16.17. etc.
And of strange Apparel, for which the Lord threatens to punish the Princes and
Kings Children (that one would have thought might have worn any Apparel, and
swaggered at any Rate cum Pr^vilegio) Zeph. 1.8. This kind of pride is very
much unbecoming a people circumstanced as we are: a poor people in a wilderness
condition. Has God brought us into a wilderness, and caused us to dwell alone,
and separated us for a peculiar People to himself, that we should imitate the
Nations in these vanities? I know very well that there is a lawful ^ure of Rich
and Costly Apparel, of Beautiful Garments, of these and those Ornaments. To be
clothed in Scarlet, and put on Ornaments of Gold was not unbecoming some of
the Daughters of Israel, 2 Samuel 1.24. Nor am I so Severe, or Morose, as to
exclaim against this or that Fashion, provided it carry nothing of Immodesty in
it, or Contrariety to the Rules of Moral Honesty. The civil Custom of the
place where we live i^ that which must regulate in this case. But when persons
spend more time in trimming their Bodies then their Souls, that you may say of
them (as a Worthy Divine wittily speaks) that they are like the Cinnamon Tree,
nothing good but the Bark: When they go beyond what their State and Condition
will allow, that they are necessitated to run into Debt, and neglect works of
mercy and charity, or exact upon others in their dealings, that they may
maintain their Port and Garb; or when they exceed their Rank and Degree
(whereas one end of Apparel is to distinguish and put a difference between
persons according to their Places and Conditions) and when the Sons and
Daughters of Sion are proud and haughty in their Carriage and Attire in an
humbling time, when the Church is brought low, Jerusalem and Judah is in a
Ruinous Condition, and the Lord calls to deep Humiliation: This is very
displeasing to God, and both Scripture and Reason condemn it. These are the
most gross, and fantastical, and foolish buddings of Pride. But that which I
principally intend* is more spiritual and less observed: A Fond and Foolish
Admiration of Self, Pride of Parts, Gifts, Graces, Privileges, Haughtiness
because of Gods Holy Mountain, any Overweening conceit of a man's self, because
of any thing that God has conferred upon him. This is a close and secret evil,
bred in the bone, in some cases not easily discerned or discovered, (...), and
occasions a great deal of trouble in Churches and other Societies. Hence men
the up against the order that is established according to God, and ^^bel
against the Authority that is set up in Church and Commonwealth. Men have
great Apprehensions of their own Wisdom, and Grace, and Abilities, and Fitness
to Rule and Order every thing (though it is their place to be ruled) and
nothing is well done if they be not at one end of it. Factious men are Proud
men, Self admiring men: they look on themselves through their own magnifying
Glass, and admire that every body does not admire them, and wonder that all the
World does not wonder after them (as it is said, They did after the Beast when
his Deadly VVound was healed Rev. ^3^3.) and that all the Sheaves in the F^^^d
about them do not fall down and make ob^ysance to their Sheaves. Such men are
in their own apprehension, good enough to rule, and too good to obey: and can
pick holes and find as many faults with our Rulers in the management of Civil
and Ecclesiastical affairs, as the mutinous Israelites with Moses and Aaron, or
proud Absalom with his Father David in his Government. Hence men are rebellious
against the Word of God, and the voice of his Messengers. The proud men would
not hea^ken to the Prophet, Ier. 43.2. Hence also Men are stiff in their
Opinions, and confident in their persuasions even about things of doubtful
Disputation, to such a degree that they cannot bear with any that do not
comport with them in their Apprehensions: And if they have imbibed this or that
Heterodox Opinion, that is never so much against the sense of the generality of
Gods People, Wise and Judicious; yet they hold in (...) will not let it go: but
will rather separate from Churches* part with the communion of Saints, lose
their interest in Ordinances, yea, (...) all Order, and hu^l^^ into a
disturbance and confusion, then lay down the Darling notions they have taken
up. Hence men carry it as though they were infallible, they cannot be in an
errou^^ and impeccable too, They cannot be in a fault. Hence men's hearts rise
and swell against faithful Admonitors, and they must not be reproved or
contradicted. Hence men contend eagerly for disputable things, so as to impose
their belief on other men, and make their Apprehensions the Measure and
standard of theirs, and conformity to them therein, the condition of their
Communion with them; whereas Humility would teach Placid^ ferro contra
sentient^^, (...) Moderation and Forbearance in such cases, without which there
will be justling and endless contention. Only by pri^e comes contention, Pro.
13.1^. There are many occasions of Contentions: But Prias, if there were
nothing else, would occasion and produce Variance and Contentions. And what
will the latter end be? Why, Pride goes before destruction, and dishaughty
Spirit before a fall, Prove. 16.18. If this be the general sin of this Country,
we may well fear that destruction is coming, and that we are in a tottering,
ruinous, falling Condition, Pride has budded, the Rod has Blossomed, Ezekiel.
7.10. Unless this Pride be nipped in the Bud, it will certainly thrustforth the
Blossom of a Rod. God has smart Rods for the back of a proud People.

5. Consider what will be the latter End of those bitter Contentions, and
unchristian Distances and Divisions among us. All sober and considerate wise
men have great thoughts of Heart about them. Sad it is, if there should be
Contentions and Divisions, sides and parties and factions in Courts and
Churches, and almost all Societies amongst us. This is very much unbecoming a
people in our circumstances: Embarked in, and ex^^es for, the same cause and
interest in this wilderness. And that which renders it more sad is, that the
Contentions which are among us are not merely sudden exacerbations or
ebullitions of anger and passion occasioned by these or those emergencies; but
that there seems to be a Froward and perverse spirit mingled among us: which
was the judgment of God upon the Egyptians before their destruction, Isa.
19.14. May not the Lord charge us as he did the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 20.
that we have too much of the spirit of that crooked and perverse Generation,
even in this respect? Hence good Counsels are defeated, and all manner of Good
almost obstructed in the^e and those Societies. And these contentions are not
only as a paroxism, and fit of a Fever, that spends it self and goes off in a
little time: but like a Chronical distemper, they are perpetuated, and drawn
out from year to year, and there is no end of them. Either they refuse healing,
and are the more Exasperated by the best means that can be administered by the
ablest hands* or admit only of a palliative cure that does not eradicate the
disease, but give some check to it, and yield present relief, and leave the
patient in continual danger of R^cla^vation, or relapsing (with lost hope of
recovery into the same Distemper again. We abhor and punish (and that justly)
Adultery, Witchcraft, Murders, and such like abominations: but do we not make
too little conscience of Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strif^, Emulutions,
Seditions, or Siding^ which are ^l works of the flesh also, and to be abandoned
Gal. ^.19, 20. It is a lamentable thing that w^^ should be thus (...) our
selves, when Herod and P^late can make themselves friends in order to the
crucifying of Christ in his Interest and Members, and the enemies of the Church
of God, though of very different Interests and Apprehensions in many things can
cement and unite and combine to subvert the visible Kingdom of Christ upon
Earth. When Ge^^^ and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistines with the Inhabitants of
Tire can consult together with one consent, and are confederate against the
Church of God; when the League and Combination of the Anti Christian party in
the World against the Interest of Christ is so evident, their Advantages so
great, their Successes so notorious, their Rage such as reaches up unto
Heaven: Then for a professing people to be contending and quarrelling, biting
and devouring one another is most unseasonable, most unreasonable. Your
differences will make way for those that will make no difference between
Synodists and Antisynodists, Old or New-Church men, Tros, Tyriusve illis nullo
diserimine agetur.


The Hatred of your Adversaries is not derived upon you as you are thus and
thus distinguished and diversified among your selves: but upon one common
account. The Enmity of the seed of the Serpent is against One and All of the
seed of the Woman, of what Complexion soever they are; and their Hatred is
(...) against the whole Race and Generation of Religions and Reforming
professors among us. These Divisions will open a wide door to your Adversaries.
Those that let out these waters of strife and fill their streams with
bitterness; that kindle these flames and increase them, or hinder the quenching
of them, do thereby gratify them, exceedingly that wish ill to our Sion.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno merceniur Atrida.
And indeed it would be very strange, if the Industrious and indefatigable
^esuites (that compass Sea and Land to do mischief) and other sly, and subtle
and malignant Enemies should not Improve and Graffe upon the Stock of our
Divisions.

Our Conten^ious render us weak and despicable, and obnoxious to great Danger;
they make us hang loose one from another, and from the general interest of
Religion and civil Liberty, and render us like^ Fig trees with the first ripe
Figs, which if they be shaken will even fall into the mouth of the eater, Nah.
3.12. Yea, they do as it were, Arm our Adversaries against us; and in a manner
tempt them to set upon us. A Mutinous Army and a Divided People are easily made
a prey to their Enemies. Scripture, Reason and Experience attest unto the truth
of what I say. Again, well it is, if whilst we are contending about the
preservation of the purity of Churches, and Church-Administrations, we are not
laying a foundation for the corruption of them: and that our Contentions and
Divisions (which naturally lead men in policy to endeavor the enlarging of
their respective interests) do not make more Church Members, then the
conviction or evidence of their fitness for such a privilege. May not that be
the issue of these differences, that Adherence to a party, or to be a Darling
of the Faction, will become as p^ssant a Qualification with this or that party
or Faction for admission into the Church of God, as visible Saint-ship has
been among us? And that, Who are you for, will be in reality the only Test and
Tou^h stone of the sufficiency of persons for Communion with us in Church
ordinances? Nay further, as I remember it has been said of Lawyers, and too
much verified in the men of that profession, that Contention maintains them,
and they maintain Contention: so may it not be truly said of many men in
Churches (that have few commendable Qualities in them, whether you consider
them as men or Christians) that Contention maintains them in Credit and
Reputation with their party: and they maintain Contention in heart and vigor
among us? This is the way whereby some men (that are men of no remark for the
practice of Piety, or real Worth and Abilities in any respect) do signalize
themselves with their Brethren in Con^ention: even by floating upon the top of
these waters of strife, and appearing with the foremost in the Defense of the
Divided, narrow Interest of this or that party amongst us. Moreover it is a
very great provocation to the God of peace, that you should strive and contend,
judge and despise one another, and fall out so unreasonably about lesser
matters, and such things as are foreign to the Bond of Christian-Communion.
When you should be blessing God that you agree so far, you are wrangling
because that you disagree a little: when you should thank God that you agree so
much, you quarrel because you agree no more. Certainly God is displeased,
Christ dishonored, Religion (as to the Course and Race, Reputation or Glory of
it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1,) Disadvantaged, Malicious Enemies Encouraged, the World
Offended, the Rising Generation, and your own Souls unspeakably prejudiced by
these Divisions. And what will the End be? It is commonly observed by those
that are conversant in Ecclesiastical Histories, that in the Primitive times,
when the Churches had Peace and Rest, and Respiration from the heat of
Persecution, they soon grew Quarrelsome and Contentious: And the^ God in a
little time raised up some Persecutor or other to chastise them for their
faults in that kind, and whip them together again: and then, SEE (could their
Enemies say) how these Christians love one another! the contentions of Gods
people in times of liberty make way for Persecution or some dismal Catastrophe.
The Divisions among us (some whereof seem to admit no Help or Healing, but are
rather heightened and exasperated by the best Applications) are in my eye like
any Comet, or Blazing-star, or Prodigious Apparicion, direfully portending
woeful Calamities. What the Latter End will be, our Savior has told us, Mat.
12.25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation: and
every City or House divided against it self shall not stand. Divisions are sad
presages of misery, and lead the way to dreadful Desolations.

6 Consider what will be the latter end of your unreasonable Iealousies,
abusive calu^^nie^, or other ill Usage of persons of great worth, use and
Interest* among you. Consider (I beseech you) in the fear of God, what will be
the end of the ill entertainment of the best men among you. Who sees not (that
is not woefully blind) that no men are more suspected and taken up in the lips
of talkers. Ezekiel. 36.3. calumniated and-abused, then pious and faithful
Magistrates and Min^sters? Moses and Aaron of old, as Meek and Humble and
Faithful and Innocent as they were, yet were suspected and traduced by many
Malcontents in Israel: You take too much upon you. Numb. 16 3 Good Moses must
still bear the murmurings of that discontented, unruly people. If the Lord
cross them in denying them any thing they wanted or lusted after, Moses
presently must pay for it. If they wanted flesh or water, then presently they
fly out against Moses; We may thank you, Moses, for this: would God we had
stayed by the Fleshpots in Egypt and dyed there; have you brought us into this
wilderness to starve us to death, and kill us wi^h hunger? Exodus 16 3. And if
the Lord vindicate the cause of Moses and Aaron against any Rebels among them,
and destroy them in such a miraculous and extraordinary manner, that one would
have thought it should have for ever silenced all their murmurings, and taught
the survivers submission to the Authority of God vested in Moses and Aaron, yet
soon after, the very next morning, in cold blood, as it were, they are making
head against them again, and charging them with the murthe^ of their Brethren:
Ye have killed the people of the Lord. Numb. 16.41. It is the hard condition of
Magistrates and Ministers that they must bear all the murmurings of
discontented people, and belo^d^d with all the obloquies and injurious
reproaches that can be. They had need be men of great meekne^s and patience,
able to bear much, that are Pillars in the Church and Commonwealth. But great
is the sin and unworthiness of those that put them to such an exercise of
meekness and patience, And are not many among us guilty in this respect? It is
a sad time when a lying Spirit is gone forth into the mouths of many
Professors; when lies are invented to the disparagement of Rulers, and
Ministers, and calumnies and base Reproaches are vended and put off and
dispersed through the Country with much subtlety and industry, as if there
were some Lying Office set up in New England. It has been my observation since
I came among you, that almost all the (...) in this poor Country is made and
carried on by Lying. Talebearer or Slanderer in the Hebrew [ RACHIL] has its
Origination from [ ROCHEL] a word which signifies a Merchant, quasi fame as
honoris p^oximi nu^^^ator ( Buxt^^) one that sets to ^a^e the name and honor
of other men. We have many such Merchants, or Pedlars rather, that go up and
down the Country with this kind of Commodity; and it is a lamentable thing
that they should have so good a Trade of it, and meet with so many Chapmen that
are ready to take their ware off their Hands. -- Hinc illa Lachrima! There are
many that walk with Lies and Slanders. Ier. 9.4. I wish it were not too
manifest that many men among us have the art of telling a Ly with a great deal
of gravity and seriousness, and have gone to School to Machiavel, that
instructs his Scholars ^alum^^ari fortiter, to calumniate stoutly, and tells
them for their encouragement, Aliquid haerebst, something will stick. Many
pregnant Instances of this evil Spirit might be produced to confirm what I say:
but herein I shall spare the guilty. Only, who knows not ( that is no stranger
in our Israel) that the Ministers of Christ among you indefinitely have been
deliberately and solemnly charged with a Declension from Primitive Foundation
work, I^novation in Doctrine and Worship, Opinion and Practice, Invasion of the
Rights, Liberties and Privileges of Churches, Usurpation of a Lordly
Prelatical Power over Gods Heritage, and with the like things which are the
Leven, the corrupting Gangrene, the Infecting, spreading Plague, the provoking
Images of ^ealousie set up before the Lord, the accursed thing which has
provoked Divine wrath and further threatens Destruction? I need give you no
other instance of this evil spirit of Jealousy and Calumny then this. Here is
good measure pressed down, shaken together, and running over. Enough and enough
to demonstrate the disaffected and embittered Spirit of some men; and what
unkind usage from some hands, those your poor Ministers find among you. Such
men (whom I wish either that they were better informed and affected, or less
considerable in the Commonwealth) impute all the Blastings and Droughts and
Iu^gments of God upon the Country to the Defection and Apostasy of their
Ministers. As if the confident Accusers themselves were men of such
unquestionable innocence, as not to contribute any thing to the Sins and
Sorrows of the Country; or as if there were no other sinners among us that are
kindling the wrath of God against the Land, and pulling down his Judgments,
but a few despised Ministers: Or as if there were no other sins against the
Lord our God found among us, to provoke the wrath of a jealous God, but the
supposed Deviations of pious, conscientious, learned men, truly studious of
Truth and Reformation, and a due progress therein. Such Accusers of our Civil
and Ecclesiastical Rulers, do in effect and by consequence (according to the
just interpretation and construction of their words, without wringing blood
from them) say thus much, That it were happy for the People of New England if
they were rid of such Leaders in Church and Common wealth. -- Tantane Animis
celestibus Irae? Strange! that any good men should be so far transported with
passion or prejudice, as to cast fire brands, Arrows and Death in this manner;
and not to say, are we not in sport? but are we not in sober sadness, in
Religious good earnest? There is a spirit of persecution in such men: they
discover Sanguinary thoughts toward the Servants of Christ* For when they have
Achanized the Body of the Ministers, and found the accursed thing in their
Tent, what should they do but stone them? when they have calumniated them to
such a degree, and put them into such Bear skins: what should they do but b^^t
and worry them? when they have represented them as abominable Apos^^^tes, and
the prime incendiaries of Divine wrath: what should they do, but deal with
them, as (...). ^^acular and devoted persons that must be cut off by the hand
of justice for the purging of the Land, and putting away evil from Israel? The
Pagans of old attributed all their Deaths, and Plagues and Droughts, and
unseasonable weather to the Christians that cohabited with them. Hence, if any
evil befell them, they thought the Gods were angry with them, because of the
tolleration of the Christians among them: and therefore their out cry was,
Christianos ad L^ones, Away with the Christians to be devoured of the Lions.
And truly such a notion as some have of the Ministers of Christ carries this in
it; that it were expedient that they should be made a Sacrifice, and thrown to
the Lions: but that some of you have in some places a severer way to punish
some of them for their supposed Apostasy, viz. To keep them short in their
maintenance, to distress them and their Families, or drive them to such shifts
for a livelihood, as men of Liberal Education can hardly buckle to, or else to
tire and weary them out with vexatious contentions. And better it were for a
man of logenuity to come under the Paw of a devouring Lion, that will destroy
him mercifully because suddenly; then to be stretched upon the Rack and
tortured to death with ill usage, or to live under the continual droppings of a
contentious froward people, that will waste and wear him out by Degrees, ut
sentiat se mori, as the Bloody Tyrant said, It is not very long since, upon
occasion of the Defamation (as it is said) of one Minister among us, that (...)
Prove. 19 5. A false witness shall no^^ce unpunished, and (...) Lies shall not
escape, was uncour^ed and improved. But (...) we say then of the persons that
are guilty of the De^amation of the Ministers of the Country in general, that
are no less (...) then He was? What Atonement can be made for those men, and
their Demerit? I will not ^ay that it is revealed in mine Ear^ by the Lord of
Hosts, surely this iniguity shall not be purged from them, till they die: But
this I will say, because I judge it (...) enough, that it is a grievous
provocation, and calls for deep and solemn Repentance, and other manner of
satisfaction then yet has been given.. But what wrong, on New England, have
thy Magistrate, and Ministers done thee? For which of their good works art thou
St^ning of them? Have they Prayed for thee? Have their Souls wept for thy Pride
and Unbelief and Hardness of Heart, and Vnruliness? Have they Watched over
thee, in their several Capacities? Have they given thee Faithful Warning of
approaching Calamities? Have they served thee with all their might, with very
little advantage accruing to themselves in outward respects? Have they loved
thee more then thou ha^ loved them? Brethren and Friends, forgive them. I
beseech you) this wrong. I confess I have used some sharpness in this
Discourse: And I believe I have sufficient warrant for it. There are some that
are to be rebuked sharply; and they are the (...)* The Cretians are always
Liars. This Witness is true, wherefore rebuke them sharply, or cuttingly, as
the Original Word imports, Tit. 1.12, 13. And the truth is, I look upon this
practice of Reproa^hing and Fraunting your Leaders in both Orders, as greatly
prejudicial to the prosperity of the Country, tending to the some^ting and
perpetuating of our Dissentions, and rending all our Hopes and Endeavors of
Peace and Reconciliation ^rustrate and fruitless. As he said, What peace, so
long as the Whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many. 2
Kin 9 21. So may I say, what peace can be expected so long as this trade of
Lying and calumnating men of piety worth and Authority is continued and driven
on among us? And ind^ed though it may be thought by some that these wretched
practices are but the small Devices of some petty Politicians and little
creeping Statesmen among us that have no very considerable influence into our
public affairs: yet I must needs say, that I look upon this course of
calumniating your best men, as the very Gun-powder-Plot that threatens the
destruction of Church and State. Nothing (as experience shows) is more
advantageous to the designs of Innovators, then the right knack of kindling and
fomenting jealousies and fears in the minds of men concerning Magistrates and
Ministers. Such men are wont to make and improve false Alarms of danger, that
people may believe that Religion and liberties are at the Stake, and in danger
to be lost! Designers are wont to impose upon the credulity and easiness of
well meaning people this way. And that men are generaly disposed to receive
such impressions, and suspect evil of their Superiors and Leaders, is but too
manifest. Moreover these Calumnies are Immoralities, and scandalous evils, and
it is the duty of Gods servants to lift up their voice as a Trumpet, to cry
aloud and not spare them that are guilty whatever the issue be: yea, to cry to
God and man for redress. And I would humbly commend it to our Honorable
Rulers, upon whom the lot of this days Election shall fall, that they would
take it into serious consideration and fix upon some expedient, to put these
lying lips to silence, and to find out the principal Authors and Fomentors of
these mischievous calumnies. They are certainly moral evils, and God is angry
with us for them, (for he is very tender of the name and reputation of pious
Rulers and Ministers) and many good people are deceived and drawn in the
simplicity of their hearts, into a disaffection to their Leaders; yea, and the
people of God abroad are abused and misinformed, and these Calumnies (to my
knowledge) are handed and transmitted over Sea; insomuch that many good people
take it for granted that most of the Leaders in this Country are meditating a
Revolt from the good old principles and practices of their worthy predecessors:
And how prejudicial this is to this poor Country to lose their reputation and
their Room and Interest in the hearts and prayers of the people of God abroad,
I need not say: me thinks those things should be looked into. A Committee of
enquiry or discovery might do well: for it is a matter of very threa^ning
consequence. Ob Consider what the end of these things will be. It is sad when
people are jealous of the best men they have, and those that are truest to
their Interest, and when h^s are disseminated, and base calumnies spread
abroad, and must be believed against men of known piety and worth, and zeal,
and Faithfulness. What will the end be, but that the Magistratical Office will
go a begging, men of worth will be loath to appear on the Stage of Government,
and wise men will say, make us not Rulers over this people, and that those that
despise the waters of Shiloah that go softly, shall have the waters of the
great River, strong and many, come up upon them. When a Spirit of Jealousy
concerning Rulers is growing and spreading in any place, That there is a
diffidence of the people in their Magistrates; It is an ill Omen, a sad sign,
portending some great Alteration in Church and State. When people are afraid
of, and disaffected to their best Friend, that pity them, that pray for them*
that mourn in secret for them, that watch for their good, and consult for their
comfort, as to Soul, Body, Estate, and all their Concernments: It is a great
evil, and greatly provoking to God. If men will be despising, and censuring,
and reproaching, and abusing the Gods among them (as Magistrates are called)
and the Angels of Churches (as Ministers are called* God can send Devils or
Evil Angels among them to torment and terrify them, I mean, unreasonable men
to rule over them in a Tyrannical way: and then they will in vain wish that
they had those again, whom they have thrust away from them. The end of these
things will be, that you will weary Magistrates and Ministers, and break their
hearts, and send them to their Graves, and God will take you into his own hands
and walk contrary to you in fury, and cause those that hate you to rule over
you. If you are jealous of those that are men of Worth and Integrity, that mean
you good and no harm: It is just with God to give you Rulers and Ministers that
shall be as bad to you indeed, as you injuriously fancy those you have to be;
that shall really wrest away your liberties, oppress your Consciences, and
bring in not Presbyterianism, but worse, and spread their hand^ upon all your
pleasant enjoyments. Be Instructed O New England, be instructed; and know that
this will be the latter end of thy unreasonable ^ealousies, Calumnies, and ill
usage of thy Best men, if timely, nay speedy Repentance prevent it not.

7. Consider what will be Latter end of Receding, or making a Defection from
the way of Church Government established among us. I profess I look upon the
Discovery and Settlement of the Congregational Way as the Boon, the Gratuity,
the Largess of Divine bounty, which the Lord graciously bestowed upon his
People, that followed him into this Wilderness: And a great part of the
Blessing on the head of Joseph, and of them that were separate from their
Brethren. Those good People that came over showed more Love and Zeal and
affectionate Desire of Communion with God in pure Worship and Ordinances, and
did more in order to it, then others: and the Lord did more for them, then for
any other people in the World, in showing them the pattern of hi^ House, and
the true Scriptural way of Church Government and Administrations. I have often
adored the wisdom* and goodness and Faithfulness of the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ in this respect. God was certainly in a more then ordinary
way of favor present with his Servants in the laying of our Foundations, and
in settling the way of Church order according to the will and appointment of
Christ. If Things were to begin now, how many mind, and what discord would
there be? But God showed them the Form and Fashion of his House, as to all the
substantials of it (for I do not think that they were at a Ne plus ultra, and
that nothing was left to the discovery of aftertimes; but beginning-work was
substantially done by them: They were set in the right way, wherein we are to
proceed and make a progress) And he made them unanimous about it, and bl^ssed
what they d^d marvelously: It will be our Wisdom, Interest, and Duty to follow
them, as they followed the Guidance of the Spirit of Christ. Oh consider what
will be the sad issue of Reovlting from the Way fixed upon, to one extreme, or
to another, whether it be to Presbyterianism or ^rownism. As for the
Presbyterians, it must be acknowledged, that there are among them as Pious,
Sober, Learned, Orthodox men, as the World affords; and that there is as much
of the Power of Godliness among that party, and of the spirit of the good old
Puritan, as among any People in the World. And for their Way of
Church Government it must be confessed that, in the day of it, it was a very
considerable step to Reformation. The Church of God has been recovered by
degrees out of the Antichristian Apostasy. When our Lord Jesus wrought the Cure
on that Blind Man, Mark 8.23, 24, 25. He first saw men as tree^ walking, and
then saw every man clearly. Great Blindness had happened to the World for many
Ages, and the cure was performed by the Hand of Christ gradually, and to see
men walking as Trees, to have any Glimmerings of Truth, was a good degree of
Recovery, and a far greater mercy then to be sta^k b^iud, and should be so
acknowledged. The Reformation in King Edward's days was then a blessed work:
And the Reformation of Geneva and Scotland wa^ a la^ger step, and in many
respects purer then the other. And for my part I fully believe (the Reasons of
which Belief cannot be rendered here*) that the Congregational way far exceeds
both, and is the highest step that has been taken toward Reformation, and for
the substance of it is the very way that was est^blished and practiced in the
Primitive times according to the Institution of Jesus Christ. And indeed it
has been and is my persuasion from what I have read and observed, that those
that will forsake the Congregational and pass over to the Presbyterian-way,
because of some diffe^ences of notion among our Congregational Divines, or
difficulties in the practice and way of the Congregational Churches, shall find
that they make but a bad exchange, and that there are as many or more
Differences, Difficulties and Entanglements in the Presbyterian Principles and
Practice. And I must needs say, that I should look upon it as a sad degeneracy,
if we should leave the good old way so far as to turn Councils and Synods into
Classes and Provincial Assemblies, and there should be such a laxeness in
Admission of Members to Communion as is pleaded for and practiced by many
Presbyterian^, and Elders should manage all themselves in an Au^ocratorical,
absolute way to the utter Subversion or Overthrow of the liberty and privilege
of the Brethren. Our Worthies that are gone off the Stage allowed the
Privilege of the Brethren without any infringement of the Rule and Authority
of the Presbytery, and knew how to reconcile them together. Whatever influence
the concurrence of the Brethren has into Church Acts, clear it is that it is
necessarily required to the exercise of Church Authority, that all Ordinances
may be admininistred in a way of Edification. The Expressions of the deservedly
Famous Dr. Owen are very considerable. The Reason ( says he) why the consent
of the Church is required unto the Authoritative Acting of the Elde^s therein,
is not because from thence any Authority does acerue unto them a new, which
vertually and radically they had not before: but because by the Rule of the
Gos^el this is required ^o the orderly acting of their power, without which it
would be contrary to Rule, and therefore ineffectual: as also it must needs be
from the nature of the thing it self; for no act can take place in the Church
without or against its own consent, whilst its Obedience is voluntary an^ of
choice. And in case the Church refuse to consent to such Acts a^ are according
to Rule, the Elders must instruct them in their Duty, declare to them the
danger of Dissent, wait patiently for the concurrence of the Grace of God with
their Ministry in giving Light and Obedience to the Church: and in case of the
Churches continuance in any Failure of Duty, to seek for advice and counsel
from the Elders and Brethren of other Churches. Thus that Man of Renown in his
excellent Treatise of Worship and Discipline, Page 130, 131. If this be
attended, the Congregational way is so far secured. I know there are many that
are bold to Affirm, that the Ministers among us are generally revolted, or
revolting to Presbyterianism. If I were persuaded that any such thing were done
or designed, I should account it my duty with all due respect to give in my
Testimony against it at this time. This indeed would be a real Degeneracy and
Defection from a better way, that God has by an High Hand of Providence set up
among us, and signally ow^ed and blessed. But I am fully persuaded, that such
Representations of you^ Elders^ as to far the greatest part of them) are
injurious, groundless Calumnies, which some men m^st answer for. It was
heartily and truly said by that Reverend Servant of Christ (sufficiently known
to be no Presbyterian) that Preached on this solemn occasion two years ago,
that ^^ting some Eccentricks, we are all generally agreed in the Principles of
Purity* and Power of the Churches, Mr. Oxenbridge his Election Sermon, Page 45.
that is, we are all generally Congregational men. And none will say otherwise
but those that have profit by the Fable. If the Doctrine of Discipline drawn
out of the Scriptures, and delivered to us in the Platform as well as in the
writings of famous and blessed, Cotton, Hook^r, Mather, Shepard, and the rest
of ou^ Worthies be Congregational: I doubt not but you have, for the substance
of it, the hearty Consent of the most, if not all your Elders to it. I cannot
find upon my utmost enquiry, that there is any real Foundation for such
Invidious Reports, or any thing that answers the great Cry which some make.
Differences indeed there are among godly learned men about some Apices or less
considerable particulars, and ever were among your Famous Leaders, and yet they
walked sweetly together, and never branded one another with the name of
Presbyterians. There is doubtless a Latitude in the Congregational Way, wherein
good men may walk a Breadth: and Degrees do not vary the Species. And I am
persuaded that if many of the Clamorous or loud Accusers of the Ministers of
Christ would examine themselves Impartially, the verdict of their ow^
Consciences would be, that the Reason why they charge their Elders with
Presbyterianism is, because they themselves are revolted to the other Extreme,
or never came up to the true Congregational way, as it is delineated by our
Worthies out of the Scriptures. Else what do those mean that speak of the Rule
and Government of the Church ves^ed in the Brethren, of the Governing Vote of
the Brethren, of a Moderator to be set up by the Brethren, when the Elders
(that are Recti in For^) are unsatisfied to put this or that to Vote, of
allowing the Officer his single Vote, and no more? what means that disgust that
some men have against the very Name of Rule and Authority (truly so called) in
the Eldership; against Councils and Synods, and the decisive power thereof, as
it has been stated by the Leaders of the Congregational-way, both in Old and
New England? I will be bold to say, (and indeed there is no great haza^d in the
Assertion) that these notions are as opposite to the Principles of our
Congregational Worthies, as darkness is to Light: Yea, they are the Reproach of
the way of these Churches, which our Divines have industriously rolled off it.
Those that laid our Foundations were directed of God, to sta^^ a middle course
between Rigid P^esbyterianism and Levelling Brownism There is a sweet
Temperament in the Congregational way; that the Liberties of the people may not
be overlaid and oppressed, as in the Classical way; nor the Rule and Authority
of the Elders rendered an insignificant thing, and trampled under Foot, as in
the way of the Brownists; but that there may be a Reconciliation or due
Concurrence, and a Ballancing of the one justly with the other. And herein the
wisdom of our Lord Jesus in the Frame of Church Government (for it is not any
politic and prudential Contr^vance of man, but modelled by the great
Lawgiver, the Lord Jesus) is greatly to be admired by us: and those that have
not seen and acknowledged this, never yet beheld the beauty and glory of the
Congregational way (...) P^esbyterianism in the Rigor of it, should obtain
among us, there will be an Oppression of the liberties of the people: If
Brownisme be introduced, there will be a rising up and rebellion of the people
against the Authority of Christ conferred on Church Officers. Whether the
Oppression of Church Guides, or Rebellion of Church Members, be the greater
Evil, I shall not concern my self to enquire. I beg that we may keep the Kings
High way, the way that Christ himself has cast up for us, and that ou^ worthy
Predecessors have traveled in before us: the way that has been Stated, not in
the private modells of some fancyfull and conceited men, but in the Platform of
Church Discipline (O that it were more generally recived and attended!) and in
the writings of our Ablest and most judicious Divines. The truest understanding
of these things is from the Platform (deduced out of the word of God) and the
Polemical writings of our Blessed worthies. For men generally speak warily and
accurately, when they have to do with Adversaries, and know they are like to
answer and account with them for every expression that falls from them: whereas
those very men in practice are apt to take more Liberty, and are sometimes
driven by ^cessity, and for peace sake to comply fu^ther then they would. As
there are necessities of State that Politicians are forced to comply with for
avoiding of public inconveniencie^: So there are also Church necessities,
which Officers must concede unto for peace sake. I would much rather judge what
is the true Congregational way in the judgment of our Divines from their
writings, then by what was practiced by them in this or that Congregation,
where they might be necessitated to give way and comply (and that in Christian
prudence with respect to peace and edification) to such Things as did not in
every respect satisfy them. There were Sons of Zerviah that were too hard for
wise and just and holy David (2 Samuel 3.39.) And if he let them take their
course sometimes, and things went not so well in the Government on that
account, It argues David's desire of peace and David's necessity, not his
judgment or Principles. In like manner it comes to pass through the H^adiness
and Wilfulness of some people, that cannot be contradicted in practice without
hazard of peace; or the weakness of others who cannot bear what is every way
right) that must be tendered and da^dl^d and dealt gently with, that Church
Officers cannot in the course of their practice always come up to their
Principles. The unpreparedness of this or that people for a full Scriptural
Reformation many times is a great Clog and R^mora to pious Rulers and Ministers
that are vigorously pursuing it, 2 Chronicles. ^.33. Labor therefore to inform your
selves aright in this matter: and Consider what will be the sad end that will
attend and follow a Revolt from the established way of Church Government among
us.

8. Consider what will be the Latter-End of Contempt of, weariness under, or
Disaffection to the Civil Government established among us, whether as to the
Constitution or Administration thereof. When God has so graciously settled us
upon to good Foundation^: now to kick and spurn at our Corner Stones, to be
given to Change, and ready for Innovations and Alterations is great Ingratitude
to God, and a very irreligious thing. For here (according to the Design of our
Founders, and the Frame of things laid by them) the Interest of Righteousness
in the Common wealth, and Holiness in the Churches are inseparable. The
prosperity of Church and Common wealth are twisted together. Break one Cord,
you weaken and break the other also. They are like Hippocrates his Gemelli,
that do ridere simul, and flere simul. They that are weary of, and disaffected
to this Government that God has established among us, and shall betray and
give up the Civil Interest of New England will have more to answer for then
they are aware of. He is a mad man that will hope for the Continuance of our
Spiritual Liberties, If the Wall of our Civil Government be once broken down.
Those Beasts that break down the Hedge of our Civil Government, do not d^sign,
or do it merely because they are angry with the Hedge, but because they would
break in and devour all that is precious and dear to us. The change of our
Government will inevitably introduce a sad change in our Churches To divide
what God has conjoined, viz Civil and Ecclesiastical Liberties, to deliver up
Civil, and yet hope to keep Spiritual Liberties, is folly in its Exaltation. I
look upon this as a little model of the Glorious Kingdom of Christ on Earth.
Christ Reigns among us in the Common wealth as well as in the Church, and has
his glorious Interest involved and wrapped up in the good of both Societies
respectively. He that shall be Tre^cherous and False to the Civil Government,
as he is injurious highly to the present and succeeding Generations; So he is
guilty of High Treason against the Lord Jesus, and will be proceeded against as
a rebel and Traitor to the King of Kings, when he shall hold his great Assizes
at the End of the world And if there be any such Iudas^s among us as have
received their Sop, and are going forth to betray Jesus Christ (I mean the
Interest of Christ here among us) with a kiss (^^b^^lous pretenses of love and
good affection) or to force him (if need be) with swords and staves? Le^ them
know that they are hastening their own Ruin, and it had been better for them
that they had never been born. Certain^ly they that long for a Change, or that
would not do all that may be done, with a good Conscience, to prevent it, may
have time enough to repent their F^lly. I am no States man, nor Politician; It
is neither my Profession, nor Ambition: nor do I love to Discourse of things
that I do not competently Grasp and Comprehend. Therefore I shall only say
further: it has been very sag^ Counsel that has been often given you; Keep to
your PATENT. Your Patent was a Royal Grant indeed, befitting a Great Prince to
make, and that which our Worthies that are gone to rest have many a time
blessed God for: and it is instrumentally your defense and security. Recede
from that one way or other, and you will expose your selves (for ought I know)
to the Wrath of God, and Rage of Man. Fix upon the Patent, and stand for the
Liberties and Immunities conferred upon you therein, and you have God and the
King with you, both a good Cause and a good Interest, and may with good
Conscience set your Foot against any Foot of Pride and Violence that shall come
against you. I shall only add, that my Hearts Desire and Prayer is, that the
E^ctors this Day may use their Privilege well in choosing men fearing God, and
duly Accomplished for Government, acquainted with the Worth and Glory of the
Interest of Christ among us in Church and Common wealth; And that the Elected
may have (...), suitable and seasonable Help and Grace to manage all affairs
they are entrusted with to the Glory of God and good (...) this Plantation: And
that the People under them may be so far from weariness of and Disaffection to
the G^v^rnment, that they may thankfully enjoy the sweet fruits of a good
Mag^stracy, and that there may be a Covering or Defense upon all our Glory.

9. Consider what will be the Latter End of an inordinate Affectation of
Liberty. I am far from speaking against due care to maintain our Liberties.
It is the property of English me^, much more of Religious Englishmen, and
should be most of all of Religious New Englishmen to be tenacious and tender
of their Liberties. Religion does so ennoble and heighten the spirits of men,
that a Christian, though he can be cont^nt to bear the Yoke and be in bondage,
when God will have it so: yet he cannot willingly prostitute his Liberty, and
basely enslave himself. You are bought with a price, Be not servants of men. 1
Cor. 7.23. Religious people will bear as long with Tyranny and Oppression as
any people: but when God and Reason calls for it, they are wont to be as stout
Assertors of their Liberties as any men. I am far from condemning or
persuading to Jealousies concerning men of piety and principles, that are sober
and modest and conscientious Assertors of their Liberties. But I would dissuade
from an extreme and undue affectation of Liberty. Here is a great Cry in the
Country as this day about our Civil Liberties: these and those (in the
frightful Imaginations of some men) are about to rob us of our Liberties. I
doubt not but the Jealousy and complaint (at least as to many of them that are
thus censured) is utterly groundless. And therefore take heed what you do.
Outcries for Liberty are popular and plausible, and make a pleasant sound in
the Ears of Injudicious and unexperienced persons: but to those that have been
abroad in the World and observed; or acquainted themselves with the Histories
of States and Kingdoms, nothing is more suspected. Commonly they that raise the
loudest Outcry against Governors for Robbing the people of their Liberties,
either design, or eventually prove to be the greatest Oppressors of them, When
they come to be Masters. The World has been long imposed upon, and accustomed
to these Impostures and yet is not old, or wise enough (as to the generality of
the Inhabitants of it) to be cautious in this matter and to repose confidence
in those that they have experienced for Faithful Conductors before the
pretended Assertors and Conservators of their Liberties. See says Absalom, thy
matters are right, thou have a very good cause, that would admit a quick and
easy dispatch: but my Father David is a careless man, and minds not the good
of his Subjects, Thou may wait long enough for justice to thy great charge
and Trouble; for he has deputed none to hear thee. Oh that I were judge in the
Land! I would do every man justice without delay. He kissed and courted the
people to get into the throne. 2 Samuel 15.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. But what do you think
would that dissolute young man have been in the throne for all his Courtships
and flatteries? good David with all his partialities, Injustices and
infirmities, was far better (and the deluded people would have found it so)
then aspiring Absalom with all his Complements and fair promises. Nothing is
more ordinary with Ambitious men in a Popular State then Affectation of
Popularity, seeming* Sympathizing with the people, and complaining of the
Defection, Apostasy, and evil Intentions of their Governors. Take heed of such
Impostors, though Religious in pretense and appearance, Acting all with a
Theatrical Gravity. When you have pious Rulers, of whose Faithfulness you have
had experience, Do nor easily suspect them. Verily none are more like to wrest
away your Liberties, then those that make the greatest Outcry for them; when
there is no Reason no greater Engine to embondage and enslave a people, then
such causless Outcries for Liberty. I would know them very well that I would
trust in that Case. In Popular States the great danger is of a Licentious,
Pa^sions, Vngovernable Spirit, that kicks and spurns at Authority; and this
makes way for Anarchy and Confusion, and that for Tyranny. For though it may
seem a Paradox to some, yet it is an experienced Truth, that nothing makes way
more for Tyranny and Oppression, then an undue Affectation of Liberty. This
certainly genders unto Bondage! Our Liberties are so sweet and precious, that
its pity we should lose them by needless Jealousies and Murmurings,
Unthankfulness to God and Men who have been the Custodes and Keepers of them,
or by catching at a shadow instead of the substance.

There are the same Outcries in Churches also for their Liberties. And God
forbid but that our Brethren should enjoy the Privilege and liberty which
Christ has conferred upon them. But take heed Brethren, of complaining without
cause. It grieves my heart sometimes to think how shamefully many good people
are cheated and befooled in this matter. Many of those Brethren that give out
themselves to be the great Assertors of the liberties of the Church, that make
such tragical complaints of the Presbyterian Usurpations and Encroachments of
their painful, faithful Officers, that oppose them in their Government; and
bind their hands that they cannot act according to their Commission from Jesus
Christ, under pretense and color of securing the Churches power, and
privilege, and liberty: It is but that they may grasp all the power in their
own Hands and in effect Lord it over Gods Heritage, and that the Church may in
truth and reality be governed by three or four F^ling (you may call them, if
you please, Presbyterian) Brethren, rather then by the Officers that the Holy
Ghost has made Overseers and Rulers. This is the goddly way whereby our
Brethren are wont to provide for their own Liberties. Do but open your eyes and
look about you, and mark it in any Church where the Authority of the Elders is
disowned and opposed, and tell me whether it be not so indeed: that a few
Pragmatical and Loquacious Men ( Concionales Hommes, as Livy calls some of the
Turbulent Tribunes that opposed the Consular Authority with that specious
pretense of the Peoples liberty) do boldly usurp and inva^^ the Church power
and Authority, and Rule their Brethren and their Rulers also. They must w^nk
hard that do not see this. And just it is that those that will not obey them in
the Lord that have the rule over them, should be thus enslaved to the imperious
and uncertain Humors of these and those usurping Brethren. And it is to be
feared, that many of our Brethren (such is their weakness, and the power of
prejudice) will never come humbly and kindly to submit themselves in the Lord
to the Government ^f Jesus Christ in his Church, till they have been soundly
scratched with this Bramble Government of some aspiring and domi^eering
Brethren. But I beseech you, Observe the mischief of this practice. It is a
staple Principle of our ablest Congregational-men, that as there is a liberty
and privilege appertaining to the Brethren; so the Rule and Government
(properly so called) is appropriated to the Elders by the appointment of Jesus
Christ. Now the Promise and Blessing goes with the Institution. So that where
the Elders are in effect set by, and three or four heady Brethren lead the
Church and rule all: They are in such Administrations under the wing and shadow
of no promise or blessing; which to a gracious heart is a dreadful
consideration. Again the loud Outcry of some is for Liberty of Conscience:
that they may hold and practice what they will in Religion. This is the Diana
of some men, and great is the Diana of^ the Libertines of this age. I remember
Julian the Apostate, that malicious and implacable Enemy to Christianity have
observed that the Christian Religion prospered the more for the severe
persecution in Dioclesian's Time, and that the Christians grew up thicker and
faster for being Mowed down with the Sithe of Bloody Enemies; He did for a
while abstain from severities against the Christians, and suffered all men to
use what Religion they would: And Austin says of it, Libertatem perditionis
permisit, He gave men liberty to destroy themselves. Such is that liberty of
Conscience, even a liberty of Perdition, that some men are so unconscionably
Clamorous for. But remember, that as long as you have liberty to walk in the
Faith and Order of the Gospel, and may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
Godliness and Honesty, you have as much liberty of Conscience as Paul desired
under any Government, 1 Timothy 2.1, ^. He that is allowed without molestation to
walk with God, and serve him with all good Conscience, has liberty enough.
Never complain, when that is your condition, that you may be as good as you
will. Oh take heed in all Societies, and in all Respects of an inordinate and
undue Affectation of Liberty. The latter end of it will be Bondage and Slavery.

10. Consider what will be the latter end of a Licentious Toleration of all
Opinions and Religions among us. I profess I am heartily for all due
moderation. I have a real compassion toward the Infirmities of the minds of
men, the Ignorance, and weakness, and Errors of their understandings, as well
as the passions and other distempers of their Wills and Affections. I know many
men are very weak and injudicious, and want Natural Logic; and have Cor bonum,
an honest Heart (are (...) (...) the Apopostle speaks, Romans 16.18. simple and
no ill meaning men) that want Caput Regul^t^^m, a judicious and well regulated
Head. Many a man has a good Heart and Affections under the bad conduct and ill
steeridge of a very weak Head. Yea many ingenious and witty men are yet very
injudicious. I am far from the Barbarous Spirit and Humor of that Giant and
Robber Procrus^es, that was wont cruelly to cut shorter such as were too long,
and stretch out those that were too short for his Bed. A tender consid^ration
of the weakness of men, and due moderation in this case is the Duty of those
that cannot but be conscious to themselves of their own infirmities.
Nevertheless I must add (as I have great reason) that I look upon an unbounded
Toleration as the first born of all Abominations. If this should be once born
and brought forth among us, you may call it God, and give the same Reason that
she did of the Name of her Son, Genesis 30.11. Behold a Troop comes, even a Troop
of all man^er of Abominations. This would be not only to open the Wicket, but
to ^ling open the great Gate for the ready Admission and Reception of all
Abominable Heresies. It is excellently determined by that Judicious and Blessed
Man, Mr. Norton; That Unity in judgment is to be endeavored, because Truth is
one and indivisible; yet some Difference touching the Truth must be endured,
because of the weakness of men. To tolerate every Thing, and to tolerate
nothing, are both intolerable. A toleration is not an approbation. Those
Distinctions between mixtures in Religion, and Errors in those that profess
the same Religion, between Fundamentals and Non-Fundamentals, between Errors
held sorth by an Erroneous Conscience and a contumacious Will, between persons
peaceable in Israel, and Disturbers of the State, between points that are
clear, or orderly decided with due time for conviction, and such as are
disputable and of depending disquisition, being prudently applied, may be of
special use. Thus that excellent Man in his excellent Preface to his Treatise
of the sufferings of Christ.

I doubt not but it is the duty of the Civil Magistrate to tolerate what is
tolerable, and that some Errors are tolerable as to the practice of them. For
the Conscient^ous pers^^si^n about them is not immediately under the
Magistrates Cognizance. -- He (...) neither be said to tolerate or prosecute
men for the Errors of Conscience that are no way manifested: And yet no Error
is tolerable mee^^y (...) Cons^ience sake, or because it is conscientiously
maintained by the Erroneous person, and he can truly say that he believes ^t in
his Conscience. For then a Conscientious Papist or Socinian, or Quaker (the
most notorious Haretic^ in the World) must be connived at and suffered; yea,
all manner of Idolatry and Heresy must be tolerated in some persons. The
Tolerableness therefore of an Error must be measured and judged either from
the nature of the Error it self, or some other circumstances Sometimes the
Error is not only Extrafundamental, but so small and inconsiderable and the
manner of holding it forth so modest and peaceable; and the Condition of the
State such, as that the Magistrate may keep his Sword in the Scabbard, and no
hurt done. Hence that may be tolerable in one State, that is not in another. As
it was well said by a very worthy person in this case: A weaker Body ought not
to suffer that upon it self, upon the account of Charity to Another, that a
Stronger may. No doubt but it belongs to the Magistrate to judge what is
tolerable in his Dominions in this respect. And the Eye of the Civ^l Magistrate
is to be to the securing of the way of God that is duly established. And if any
where, this be the Concern and Duty of Rulers, Surely it is most of all so in
New England, which is originally a plantation not for Trade but for Religion.
Peace and Truth ( H^zekiahs mercies. Isa. 39:8.) have been the great mercies of
this Country. Lose we Truth (of Doctrine Worship and Order) and the design of
our Founders is ruined and we are an undone people. So that it is a most
unreasonable and importune Thing in those that unchurch us, that deny our
Churches to be true Churches, that anti-Christianize our Magistrates,
Ministers, Churches and Ordinances, and must do so in Faithfulness to and
pursuance of their principles and opinions, to demand or expect a free
Toleration. They may as well ask liberty to destroy us. We may justly swear the
peace against them (If I may so speak) and say we go in fear, not of our Lives,
but, of our Religious Liberties and Enjoyments, dearer then our Lives, because
of such men; and supplicate our Rulers that they may be bound to their good
behavior. Boundless Liberty will expose us to great danger, Charity begins at
home: and the Charity of a Christian begins at Christ; I mean the Truths,
Ways, Ordinances, Name and Honor of jesus Christ. We must not be so
com^^ssionate to Sc^ismatical, Turbulen^, Errors is persons, as to be cruel,
injurious, or unkind to the precious Interest of Christ among us. Nature
teaches a man (...) reservation* Grace should (...) Magistrate (If you will
allow me the word, Christ preservation; I mean, the preservation of the Truth
Ordinances, and Interest of Christ. And I make no question but our Lord Jesus,
that in the great day of Account will recount and reward the kindnesses of his
people to himself (in his members) in that they gave him meat, when he was
hungry; Drink when he was thirsty; took him in, when he was a Stranger; clothed
him, when he was naked; visited him, when he was sick or in prison: Math.
25.34, 35, 36. will in like manner remember and remunerate at that day the
kindness and good affection of our pious and faithful Rulers, in that they
preserved and secured him (with respect to his Truth, Ordinances, Interests and
Concernments of his Kingdom) from the Insolences and Enchroachments of
Erroneous and unruly persons. And if it be said, God is to be trusted with the
preservation of his Truth. I Answer, So he is to be trusted with the
propagation of his Truth: Must Ministers therefore neglect to preach the Truth?
or Magistrates to see that the Truth be preached and propagated in their
Dominions, and devolve it wholly upon the immediate hand of Christ? God is to
be trusted with the preservation of thy Life: will thou not therefore in Case
of Ilness, bleed and vomit, and purge out the peccant and noxious humors? God
is to be trusted for the preservation of thy Corn in the Field, when it is
growing up: will thou not therefore weed thy Corn, and take away what offends,
and hinders the thriving of it? If it be replied; But this is no means of God's
Appointment. Magistrates have nothing to do with matters of Religion, to
interpose and exercise their coercive power in and about the things of God. I
Answer. This is a mere begging of the Question, and was never yet proved. But I
must not dispute or further expatiate here. I shall only say for an Issue of
this point, that Apostasy is the great Crime that many of you brand your
Magistrates and Ministers with. What was the judgment and practice of our
first Worthies in this matter is sufficiently known. Let the world then judge
who are the Apostates in this Case, Those that are for, or those that are
against a Licentious boundless Toleration.

11. Consider what will be the Latter End of the neglect of the Encouragement
and Advancement of Learning among us. It is the Observation of wise men, and
indeed a general, sad Complaint, that the Schools languish, and are in a low
Condition in the Country. And what the end of this will be, who cannot
apprehend? Though there are doubtless many Reasons of the languishing of
Schools; Yet I am very apt to think that the bottom of all is ^he want of due
Encouragement to Scholars when they are come to maturity, and fitted for
service in the Churches. If there be no considerable encouragement, when
Scholars are br^d up, parents will have no heart to breed their children to
Eearning. Rich men will not, because they have better ways before them to
provide for the comfortable subsistence of their Children: and persons of a
meaner condition cannot, or at least are discouraged from expending all they
can upon their Childrens Education, because when that is done, and they are
ready for service, there is no Encouragement, through the Slenderness and
shortness of the Ministers maintenance in most places in the Country. I have
nothing to offer by way of Advice. I would be loath to bear too hard in this
Case upon the people, that are generally poor and low enough. But I would
Humbly tender it to the Consideration of the Honorable Court, that so far as
may be without Injury to the people, there may be due provision made in all
places. Jesus Christ will take it kindly at your Hands: For it is one of his
great Concernments in this Christian Commonwealth. Not that I speak in respect
of want. I am the Freer to speak this, because it is not my own Concern.
Through the Goodness of God and the kindness of a good people, and their
professed Subjection to the Gospel of Christ, I have a comfortable Subsistence;
which I desire to acknowledge with all Thankfulness. But I cannot but
sympathize with, and commiserate the Condition of many others, their Family
Straits, and Difficulties, and the many discouragements they labor under. And
it is a matter of sorrowful and sad Resentment with me, that the Nurseries of
Piety and Learning, and liberal Education should languish and dye away, as they
do, (in my Apprehension) on this account. If this were well considered and
provided for, I doubt not but our Schools would revive and flourish again. You
have done well for the New College. Thanks be to God as Paul speaks in a
Parallel Case. 2 Cor. 9.15.) for his unspeakable Gift. Now therefore perform
the doing of it, that, as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a
performance also out of that which you have. 2 Cor. 8 11. You have done very
well for the Reverend President. I beseech that the Fellows may be remembered
also: that there may be a competent, comfortable, and certain allowance made
for their Encouragement, who are, next to the President, the Props and Pillars
of that. Society, and have a c^reful and Laborious Life of it. Think not that
the Common Wealth of Learning may languish: and yet our Civil and
Ecclesiastical State be maintained in good plight and Condition. The wisdom
(...) Foresight and Care for future Times of our first Leaders (...) nothing
more conspicuous and admirable then in the planting of that Nursery: and
N^w-England is enjoying the sweet fruit of it. It becomes all our (...) and
Worthy Patriots that tread in their steps, to water what they have planted, to
superstruct on their Foundations to support and cherish and go forward with
what they have begun, and to carry it on to greater perfection. Otherwise who
sees not what Ignorance, and Rudeness, and Barbarism will come in like a Flood
upon us? Where there is a contempt or neglect of Learning there is a degeneracy
from the Primitive Spirit and Way, as you call it.

12. Last^y, Consider what will be the Latter End of that great neglect of the
Rising Generation among us. The Word in my Text, which is translated Lat^er End
[Acharith] is sometimes rendered posterity: as Psalm. 109 13. Let [Acharitho] his
Posterity be cut off. It is the very same word with that in the Text, which is
rendered Latter End. And it would be happy if we could be wise to understand
this, to consider Posterity. We make very solemn Complaints to God, and one to
Another of the Degeneracie of the Rising Generation. But are not we to blame?
Do we not grievously neglect them? to instruct them, to cherish and promote any
good in them, to go before them with a gracious Example, to watch over them
according to the mind of Christ? we teach them, (I am afraid) by our Examples
to slight Magistrates, to reproach and vilify Ministers, to be proud, and
worldly, and Factious, and Contentious: as if we meant to leave Contention for
a^ Inheritance to our Children, and to provide for the perpetuation of our
Brubbles and Divisions to succeeding Generations. As if men were so much in
love with Contention, that it were not enough for them to contend while they
live, but they had a mind to do it when they are dead: I mean to transmit and
make over their Strifes and Variances, and Emulations, and Wraths, and
Divisions, and pe^^y Enmities to after Ages; And so to contend and quarrel, in
respect of the virtue and influence of their Example; to the end of the World.
But alas! What good do we do them? Our Children are little beholden to us. We
own them so far as to baptize them: But then Fare ye well, Children, we have
nothing more to do with you. This is (as a wise Man said ingeniously) just as
you are wont to Brand you Cattle, and then turn them into the woods: Or as the
Popish Priests in the Indies drive scores of Indians to the Wa^^r, and Baptize
them, and set down so many for Christian Converts they have made, and then let
them run wild into the Woods again to their old Pagan courses. I fear God is
angry with us on this account. Certainly something should be done. If we are
not agreed in all particulars, as to the way and manner and other
circumstances: yet let us practice so far as we have attained; and Fast and
Pray, and Consult the Scriptures, and discourse out things in a Brotherly way
(without Heats and Animositics) and wait upon God for the further and fuller
Discovery of his mind to us, and be willing that Truth should be Truth, how
contrary soever to any of our apprehensions. Sad it is to consider how many
poor Children have their Souls overgrown with Ignorance, Atheism, Security, and
Profaneness, and are going to Destruction without control, whilst we are
contending and quarrelling about these things. Oh consider (with bowels of
Affection and Compassion) how sad the latter end of our shameful neglect of
Posterity will be.

Thus (Honored and Beloved in our Lord) Let us be persuaded in this our day to
consider what will be the latter end of our sinful and unsuitable Depor^ments
before the Lord: and be sure to make a right Judgment of it. To that purpose
take these Directions.

1. Consult and credit Scripture-Testimony in this matter. The good Word of God
informs you what the end of these and those ways will be, and is able to make
you wise in this respect, if you listen to it. The Scripture tells us, that the
end of false Teachers will be according to their works, 2 Cor. 11.15. And of
those that blindly follow them to fall into the Ditch (or Pit of Destruction)
with them, Mat. 15.14. that the end of Worldly- mindedness will be Destruction,
Phil. 3.19. the end of Backsliding and Apostasy will be the loss of Gods
Favor, and Perdition, Heb. 10.38, 39. The end of unfruitfulness will be to be
cut down, Luke 13.7, 9. and burned, Heb. 6.8. That the latter end, and wages of
sin (one word in the Hebrew signifies both end and ways) will be Death, Romans
6.21. The end of the ways of sin depends upon the constitution of God in his
Law and Covenant, and the sanction thereof: and the Scripture acquaints us
faithfully with it. If you would understand the end of man, you must go into
the Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.17. To hear Gods Counsel and Instruction in the
Scripture is the way to be wise in and about your latter end, Prove. 19.20. Make
Gods Testimonies the men of your counsel (as David phraseth it, Psalm. 119.24.)
in this matter.

2. Consult instructing Examples and Experiences in order to a right
Understanding of the latter end of your ways. The Scripture furnishes you
richly with considerable instances. The way of Sensuality, Security, Neglect of
Gods Worship, Degeneracy of the Children of the Church, and corrupting their
way ruined the old World. The way of Uncleanness and of unnatural Lusts ruined
Sodom and Gomorrah, the Cities which God overthrew and repented not. The way of
Persecution and Oppression of the Church of God ruined Pharaoh and his
Copartners and Followers. The way of Rebellion against Civil and
Ecclesiastical Authority ruined Korah and his Company: when they were too hard
for Moses and Aaron (being Princes of the Assembly, Men of Renown and Famous in
the Congregation) God Himself took them into his own hands, and d^stroyed them
in a stupendous and dreadful manner. Contempt and ill usage of the Lords
Messengers, and Idolatrous practices ruined the State of Israel and Judah.
Contempt of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Messengers, and putting away the
Gospel, brought unparalleld Calamities upon the Jews. Nay call to mind all your
own experiences. Have you not known or heard of these and those Professors
abroad, that in the time of their liberty and prosperity were wanton, proud,
worldly, despisers of Gods Ministers, contentious and quarrelsome? And do you
not know the end of it? such Examples are instructing, and for our Admonition.

3. Consider wisely the natural Tendency of the ways themselves. Some ways of
sin do in a way of Physical efficiency, directly and in their own natural
Tendency lead to misery and ruin: as Intemperance to the Destruction of Health
and Life; Prodigality to Poverty and Misery, that it comes on like an Armed
man, violently and irresistably; And so Idleness and Neglect of a man's Calling
and Business naturally works that way, and has the like issue. So Divisions
among a people lead the way to ruin. It is a proverbial expression of our
Savior, a Kingdom divided against it self will not stand. So any
Commonwealth, where the Leaders and People are divided, any Church or Churches
divided, any Societies divided; they must fall, cannot stand: Not only Because
God is angry with them, but also from the nature of the thing it self.
Divisions pull down Societies, open a Door and make a Gap for Adversaries and
Oppressors to break in at, that are watching all Advantages. En quo Discordia
Cives Perdu^it Miseros! The fall of Schools and contempt of Learning will make
way for Rudeness, Ignorance, Want of able Instruments to manage Church and
State Affairs, Irreligion and Ruin to this poor Country. This or that
miserable Event and End lies in the Womb of these and those ways. Some ways
of sin naturally breed, are pregnant, and will in time travel with, and bring
forth this or that woful-issue. Oh Read your End in your way. You may do it
certainly in some cases. As there are (...), Heb. 6.9. things that accompany
Salvation, and have a coherence with it. So there are also (...) Things that
have connection with Destruction, not only in respect of the positive
constitution of God, but also in regard of the Nature and Frame of the things
themselves: The due consideration whereof may be of great use in your passing a
Judgment upon the end of your ways.

4. Beg of God to make you wise in this matter, and to give you understanding
and considering hearts. God only has a perfect and infallible knowledge of
events, and of the latter end of things. It is his Prerogative Royal which he
assumes to himself as his own peculiar, Isai. 41.22, 23. Oh therefore rest not
in your own Guesses and Conjectures, and weak apprehensions, but Address your
selves humbly to the God of Wisdom and Knowledge (who gives liberally to such
as ask him) for thi^ understanding and judicious consideration, that you may be
able to make a true judgment of your Latter End. The Lord says in the Text:
Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter End. Now the best Reply and Return that can be made to it, is, O
Lord, that we were so wise indeed! Do thou wish it for us? So do we through
thy Grace wish it for our selves. But thou alone art able to make us wise, and
thou give wisdom and grace with a liberal hand and upbraidest not. O make us
wise indeed in this matter, and help us to an understanding, serious
consideration of our Latter end. Da quod jubes: Give us that Wisdom, and
Understanding-Consideration thou requirest of us. Let thy Word be Operative to
Work it, as well as Optative to wish it in us.

And now ( much Honored and Beloved) Let me tell you plainly, that the great
sense I have of the Displeasure of God against us, and the sad Apprehension,
and Ab^ding of approaching calamities, unless speedy Repentance and Reformation
of our ways obviate and intercept them, has opened my mouth to you in this
manner. God is certainly angry with New England. Thence many wise men are
infatuated, many good men are become perverse and froward, Counsels carried
headlong, all manner of good almost obstructed in all Societies; our Chariot
Wheels are taken off, we d^^ve heavily along, scarce any thing goes forward as
it was wont to do among us. As if no longer the Light, but now the ^ark and
black side of the Cloud were turne^ toward us, and the Lord were casting such
a dreadful look upon us, as he d^d upon the Egyptians in the morning-watch when
he troubled them. Exodus 14.2^, 24. And which is worst of all, there is no
A^pearance of any Help or Remedy. Oh the Depth of the Counsel, and the Eff^cacy
of the D^^^^^ of God! When misery is determined, nothing shall intervene or
stand in the way to hinder it. Verily, unless the Lord help us to Consider our
ways and repent and return to him, from whom we have deeply revolted, and
recover our standing under the wonted ^nfluences of his Favor and pleasant
Beauty that has been upon us, we may certainly look for sad Times. What should
I say then? But, Rejoice Oh you Adversaries of the Cause and Interest of Jesus
Christ; of the Liberties and sweet Enjoyments of the people of God in
New England. We are doing your work for you; we are putting a Staff in your
Hands even the Indignation of the Lord ( Isai. 10.5.) which is kindled against
us by our sins: We are making God our Enemy, our Defense and Glory is departing
from us, that strong hedge of Protecting Providence that has been about us is
breaking down, we are pulling up the Stakes of it with our own Hands, and
saying our selves open to your In^odes and Incursions. The day of Edoms Sons,
who would not only deface the beauty, break down the ba^tlements and uncovert^^
Ro^f of our Sion: but ras^ our Jerusalem to the ground; even your day, which
you have looked for, plotted for, longed for, is now coming apace, wherein you
shall mo^k at our Sabba^hs, break down the carved work of our Sanctuary, roar
in the midst of our Congregations, spread out your Hand^ upon all our pleasant
things, and say, Aha, thus would we have it. Yet rejoice not against us, Oh our
enemies; For when we ^all, we shall arise; and when we s^^th Darkness, the Lord
shall be a Light unto us. And when he shall have performed his whole work upon
our Mount Sion and Jerusalem, He will arise, and awake to our judgment, and
plead our Cause, and punish the Fruit of the stout heart of Adversaries.

But Oh you dear People of God in New England, however affected or engaged,
Hear, and give ear unto the Word of the Lord, and be not Proud: Give Glory to
the Lord your God (by Confession, Humiliation, Repentance and Reformation)
before he cause Darkness, and your Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, Jerem.
13.15, 16. So Consider with Understanding and Judgment what is like to be the
Latter end of your sinful Dep^rtments before the Lord, as to put an end to
your way of sin, and provocation, and to return to the God of your Mercies whom
you have forsaken; and the Rock of your Salvation, whom you have too lightly
esteemed. Jerusalem remembered not her Last End, therefore she came down
wonderfully and had no comforter, Lam. 1, 9. Not considering aright the Latter
End of your Ways will bring you down, though you had set your Nest among the
Stars* but the due consideration of it will be the way to wonderful Exaltation.

I am not without some Hopes (though many of your wise and faithful Ministers
and Watchmen are almost weary and hopeless) that men of all parties (that are
truly pious and serious) will at last consider and reform what is ami^s, and
accept well what has been spoken by way of Reprehension and Admonition. And
indeed it would be sad with us, if our times should be like those which the
Historian complains of, Q^^bus nec vi^ia nostra, nec Remedia, pati possumus:
Our Distemp^^^ such as will ruin us, and yet our Temper, Disposition and Frame
such, that we cannot bear the Application of the Remedy. Then indeed we do
infeliciter agrotare, and may conclude that our sickness will be terminated in
the Death and Dissolution, in the Loss and deserved Bereavement of those
Enjoyments that are dearest to us. But if the Lord give you Hearing Ears, and
obedient Hearts, that you Consider and Repent, and turn to the Lord your God:
then will he be with you, as he has been with your Fathers and Predecessors
(those Worthies of the Lord that are now at rest, whose Memory is blessed and
whose Names shall be had in everlasting remembrance) and no Weapon that is
formed against you shall prosper. Whether there shall be secret Plottings, or
open Assaulting and Running upon your Civil and Sacred Liberties: God will
either defeat the Counsels and frustrate the Attempts and Hopes of Adversaries;
Or turn all that may befall you in a way of Affliction to your singular good,
the great Furtherance of the Gospel, and Advantage of the Glorious Interest of
Christ among us.

Humbling and Sorrowful times may come upon you: But the Lords design in
humbling and proving you will be that he may do you good at your Latter End:
Though the Earth should tremble and reel to and fro, the Sea roa^, the
Mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea, and there be a Day of Gloominess
and thick Darkness coming upon the Reformed Churches, and there should be a Day
of trouble and Treading down, and Perplexity in this Valley of Vision: yet I
have Commission from the Lord to say, It shall be well with the Righteous.
Isai. 3 10. Oh says Baldam (when enlightened) Let me dye the Death of the
Righteous, and let my last end be like his, Numbers 23.10. Mark the Perfect Man
(says David) and behold the Upright: for the end of that Man is Peace. Verily,
verily says our Savior to his Disciples, John 16.20. You shall weep and
lament, but the World shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy All the Sorrows, and Afflictions, and Sufferings of
the People of God shall end in joy. They may sow in Tears but they shall reap
in (...), Psalm 126^^. (...) their Troubles shall undoubtedly be concluded and
issued in everlasting Consolation. (...) in the end will be the portion of such
and we in pleasure (...) but it will be the happiness of the Children of God to
receive their Good Things at last, Luke 16.25.

Whatever Days may come upon a sinful and secure World that lies in
wickedness, or upon a slumbring, Slothful, licentious Generation of Professors:
yet it shall undoubtedly go well with the humble, waking, faithful Servants of
God, that maintain or recover their first love to the person, Truths,
Ordinances, Messengers and ways of Jesus Christ, and walk with God in a course
of Evangelical Obedience, according to the Tenor of his Covenant; having a
sorrowful sense of the Sufferings of Gods people abroad, and the Sins and
provocations at Home. Verily the Latter End of such men and Women, shall be
Unspeakable peace and Happiness.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4 (...) for yet, read yea. l. ult. ^. Incogitancy. ibid. r. Pagni^^ ^. ^.
l. 15. ^. a good s^ep. p. ^4 l. 33. ^ and to have. p, 4^. l. 26. r. necessity.
p 4. ^. l. ^^. r. Government. p. 53. l. 20. for have, 1. having.


