REFLECTIONS To a Late BOOK, Entitled, The GENVINE REMAINS OF Dr. Tho. Barlow,
Late BISHOP of LINCOLN.

Falsely pretended to be Published from His LORDSHIP'S Original Papers.

With a CATALOGUE of SOCINIAN WRITERS.

Haec volebum, nescius ne esses.

Preface to the Remains. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Hen. Episco. Land. a Sacris Domest.
July 25. 1694.
TO THE REVEREND DOCTOR FVLLER, CHANCELLOR OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH in LINCOLN.
SIR,
AS I shall constantly endeavor to approve my self sensible of my late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln's great Favors in general, so in particular I think my self
happy in your Friendship, which I have not a little Experienced ever since my
first admission into the Church of Lincoln, by virtue of his Lord Bishop's
Patronage.

When I was with you at Lincoln in May last, you were pleased to enquire about
the late Bishop of Lincoln's Original MSS, which were entrusted with my Brother
Chaplain and my self; and to express your Concern very much, that such poor
Scraps of Learning should be Printed under the Authority of so great a Name as
Doctor Barlow's was; and that the Genuine Remains which were Extant, did not
only injure the Memory of him that was a Learned Father of our Church, but
occasioned some Persons to censure and condemn those whom he had left his
Legatees for his Papers: I did then assure you, that we that had the Bishop's
MSS had taken all imaginable Care of them, having never parted with any of
them, nor gave consent that any part or parcel of them should be Printed; and
that what had happened was altogether without our knowledge. And thus much I
gave you for truth under my own Hand, in a Paper which I left with you; the
Substance of which I read to the Reverend Doctor Gardener, our present
Sub-Dean, who was equally concerned with your self, that any thing should pass
abroad under our late Bishop's Name and Character, which might in the least
prejudice the Church and his Memory. I then satisfied you both, that one Sir P.
P. and the late Vicar of Bugden, were the confederate Pedlars, that have
endeavored to impose upon the World so much varnished Ware, for the sake of
Twenty Guineas gave for the Copy; as his Wife informed a Reverend Friend of
mine.

Soon after I left Lincoln, I met with the late Minister of Bugden, who
confessed he did communicate the Directions to a young Divine, which ushers in
the rest of the Remains to Sir P. P. which MSS I told him was not completed;
for being admitted sometime to a freedom of Discourse with his Lordship, upon
my mentioning once the Printing of his (...), he was pleased to say, That he
feared his Directions were imperfect; for having written them at several times,
they required a careful Review, and more Time than he had then to spare for
such a purpose; but said he hoped to be more at leisure to consult hereafter,
what was proper to be done: My Lord in a few Months after died, without
perusing his own Original MSS. or Correcting of any Copy, that had been taken
after it: And many of those Copies which were wrote from the Original were
imperfect; my Lord commanding oftentimes that only some part of his Directions
should be copied out, which, said he, may be sufficient for some who are very
curious in Books, or perhaps not able to buy many.

At my return hither I delayed no time to acquaint Mr. Brougham with the ill
Consequences which I apprehended might ensue, upon our suffering so much
Injustice to be done to our late Lord's Memory, without any Advertisement, or
Notice taken of it by us, who were jointly concerned in our own Vindication, as
well as our Lord's: I desired him (since he had all the Bishop's MSS. in his
custody at Queens College Oxon.) to consult them that were useful for our
present purpose, in exposing the Defects of the Genuine Remains; he readily
answered my Request, and returned me the following Letter which I send you; and
being confident you will be pleased with the design of doing Justice to the
Memory of a Learned Prelate, which has suffered in the Publication of little
things, whilst the more weighty Effects of his indefatigable Pains and Study
have (according to his own Inclinations and Will) been kept from being made
Public.

I am Sir, Your most Obliged Servant, William Offley.
Middleton-Stony, Jun. 23. 94.
REFLECTIONS On a Late BOOK, etc.
SIR,
YOU may remember, that discoursing with you frequently about some Pieces that
have appeared under the late Learned and Pious Bishop of Lincoln's Name,
particularly that of the Genuine Remains, I always expressed my Sense about
them to this effect; That though there was foul play practiced in the
publishing of them, and such as deserved to be taken notice of, yet that those
concerned therein had laid their design (of getting a penny) so open, and their
poor Arts of raising the price and bulk of a Book so obvious and undisguised,
that they were visible to every Eye without being pointed to, and so needed not
be more effectually exposed than they had done it themselves.

And for the clearing us, whom the Bishop was pleased to appoint Legatees for
all his own Original Manuscripts, I thought it sufficient for us openly to
disavow (as for my part, I did upon all occasions) our being either consenting
or so much as privy to the Printing any of them; which if we had been minded to
do, it had been easy to have made choice of such, as were infinitely more
worthy of the Bishop's Character. And to remove all Suspicion at the greater
distance, I failed not to acquaint others (as opportunity served) that the
Bishop, at the disposal of his MSS. showed no inclination to have any of them
published after his Decease; for that the freedom being taken to ask his
Lordship whether he would have any of them Printed, his Answer was, (as near as
I could recollect) that he did not desire that any should. Now though this did
not amount to an absolute Prohibition, yet I told them we took it to be a
Signification of the Bishop's Mind, and accordingly thought our Selves bound
religiously to observe it, notwithstanding the expectations and importunities
of others, or the Advantage we might otherwise propose to our selves.

And thus being in no wise conscious to our selves, of sending any thing abroad
under the Bishop's Name; I hope it may seem the more excusable that we have
been the less concerned to publish our Innocence.

The only thing then that could be expected from us, was, thas something should
be offered in Vindication of the Bishop's Memory, to which upon several
accounts we owe a great Esteem and Veneration, and which indeed would be
extremely injured, if the World should believe (what is suggested in the
Pompous Title) that Those were THE Genuine Products of the Learned Prelate's
long Study and Labor. But the truth is, I could never persuade my self that
any that were acquainted with his Lordship's great Abilities (as few were
ignorant of them) could ever entertain so injurious a thought of him. It was
very well known that as He had made a noble Collection of Books, so he put them
to better use than any thing that is Printed since his Death does show; and has
taken the most effectual way to make them serviceable hereafter, by bequeathing
them to Bodley's and Queens- College Libraries in Oxford, and thereby
accomplishing his own often repeated promises, and the hopes that others had
conceived thereupon.

And these Considerations you know, Sir, wrought so far with me, that I thought
it unnecessary any thing should be offered in print, either for the Vindication
of our Patron, or the Satisfaction of others. And herein you seemed heretofore
to concur with me. Nevertheless, since as well upon the said accounts, as to
justify our selves from some groundless surmises, you judge it needful
something should be said; I am ready to communicate a few things that occurred
to me in the perusal of the Remains (for to take notice of every thing that
would bear a Reflection, would be an endless labor) and shall leave it to your
Discretion to make what use of them you think fit.

It was not to be expected, but that one specious Pretense or other would be
made use of to palliate the matter, and the rather, because the most unbecoming
Actions (like the homeliest Faces) require the most Art to set them off. And
therefore to make Bookseller and Buyer the better to swallow the Pill, nothing
less is pretended than the gratifyng the Learned World, and erecting a lasting
Monument of Praise to the Bishop's Memory, by the Publication of this Book. As
to the latter part of the Plea, it must be owned that the Pious Architect's
Zeal for the Bishop's Honor has transported him so far, that rather than want
Materials for a Monument, he has piled together such despicable ones, as if
compared with others the Bishop has left behind Him, would make Him lamented as
buried in Ruins. How far he designed to oblige the World by this Collection of
Relics, is only discernible to the Searcher of Hearts; but how far he has
compassed that Design, others may judge: And I cannot forbear (on this Occasion)
reflecting on the subtle Trade which the Romish Friars drive in vending the
Relics of their Saints, which, there are shrewd Temptations to believe, is
not so much for the benefit of the People as themselves.

But that which seems a Jest upon the Reader's Understanding, is, that the
Editor would make him believe he is tender of p. 567.
swelling the Volume to too great a bulk, when it is visible he has scraped
together both Old and New, Good and Bad, Genuine and Adulterate, the one to be
a Vehicle to the other, and both together to screw Mr. Dunton up to a Pitch. If
the World be so Superstitious as to be fond of Relics, does he think Men will
renounce their Senses too, and in spite of them believe that he is in good
earnest careful not to be too bulky, when to advance the number of Sheets he
has added several of his own, and patched up a third part of the rest of the
Book out of old Pieces, witness the Preface to the Gunpowder Treason, the
Tract against Baxter, and the two Metaphysical Exercitations; when he has
gleaned up a parcel of private Letters and Correspondencies, and much other
crude and indigested Matter, which we may reasonably presume the Bishop would
never have desired should have seen any other light after his death, but that
of the Flames?

In the Directions to a Young Divine, there are abundance of things marshalled
under that Head, which the Bishop never intended for that purpose. Amongst
others, there is a Syllabus of Socinian Questions foisted in; concerning which
'twould perhaps puzzle the Editor to give a satisfactory Answer to any of these
Four Questions. Why it was Printed at all? Why at such an unseasonable time?
Why under a false and improper Head? And why so lame and imperfect?

Why Printed at all? Was it that the Editor would have the Bishop thought an
Abettor of Socinianism? from which he stood at as great a Distance, as one part
of a Contradiction from the other, as every one knows that was not a mere
Stranger both to his Writings and Conversation. Or was it for the general
Information of Mankind, in a part of knowledge they might with more safety be
ignorant of? The Socinians are looked upon by some as great Masters of
reasoning, and perhaps they bid as fair for it, as the weakness of the Cause,
they maintain, will admit of: So that what M. Cato observed of Caesar, seems in
some wise applicable to Socinus, Vnum ex Omnibus ad Evertendam Rempublicam
[Christianam] Sobrium accessisse. And his Opinions being so dangerous to the
Foundation of Christianity, it is somewhat unaccountable what necessity there
was, to be directed to Chapter, Page, and Section, where to find them asserted
to all the advantage they are capable of: Especially if we consider, that Men
are naturally too inquisitive after forbidden Knowledge: The Experiment cost
our first Parents very dear, and their Posterity have ever had such a fatal
Curiosity to pry into the Errors of former Ages, as never needs to be set on
edge. Whatsoever therefore the Bishop might Communicate to a particular Friend,
and one that was more than ordinarily curious in the Study of Theological
Matters (as the Prefacer has it) yet he could never intend that Syllabus of
Questions (in the dress it appears in) for common and Public Use: Much less
would he ever have consented to the dispersing of it at such a time as this,
when the Pestilent Heresies of Socinus are more industriously propagated in the
Nation than ever.

But there is yet more Injustice done the Bishop, by Printing it under an
improper Head. It Is certain he never made That any part of his Instructions to
a young Divine, either in that Copy the Editor met with or any other. For the
Learned Prelate could not be ignorant, how dangerous it might prove to a Novice
in Divinity, to direct him to a number of Socinian Writers, without Signifying
withal where to find their Errors confuted. This had been to prescribe Poison
without it is Antidote; to pervert and lead astray his young Student, rather
than instruct him in the right Search of Truth, and so to influence his more
injudicious years with the leaven of Heresy, as it might cost him some time
and pains to wear off the Impression.

But lastly, if printed it must be, and at an unseasonable time too, and
moreover under an improper Head; why was it after all sent abroad so lame and
imperfect, I mean, without those references to Orthodox Authors, who have
designedly and successfully writ against the Socinians, and which are found in
the Bishop's Original Papers? I am not willing indeed to believe that the
Collector omitted them, out of any affection to Socinianism. No, to do him
right, he is so true to his main end, and has so carefully inserted (without
Distinction) whatever might serve to promote it, that he cannot be suspected to
postpone his Interest in favor of that, or any other Persuasion whatsoever.
And therefore we may well enough suppose he has left out nothing that was in
the Copy he met with: But then, is there not reason to expostulate the Case
with him, why this or any thing else should be published under a great Name
from Copies defective or unfinished, to the Impairing of the Author's
Reputation, and rather injury than benefit of others? But to make no more words
about it, to show how Genuine a Remain this same (amongst others) is, I have
sent you what I find in the Bishop's MSS concerning the Anti-Socinian Writers,
which I should think, ought rather to have been Printed single, and the other
omitted, than the contrary.

What follows the Directions (to Page 383.) is little else but some private
Letters and scattered Papers, gleaned up from several Quarters; many of which
are not to be found amongst the Bishop's Writings; a certain sign this, that if
they be Genuine, he set little or no value on them; it being his constant
Method, when he communicated any thing he valued, to his Friends, to desire
them to return the Copy, or at least to cause it to be transcribed before he
sent it. Amongst his Papers there are found Letters writ from every Corner of
the Compass, and amongst others, some signed with P. P. and dated from the
Strand, near the May Pole. If all were such as His, it would be worth the while
to make a Present of them to the Haberdasher of Small-wares in the Poultrey.
But I would first know whether P. P. would take it well to have His Exposed to
public Censure. The Prefacer to the Remains, (if that be his Name at large)
says that no Works are more grateful to Critical Readers, than such as are
comprised by way of Epistle. Now I do assure him, His are very entertaining
that way; and if we should divert the Reader at his cost, it would be but a
just Retaliation. However, his Letters will be kept by way of Reprizal for
further Service.

Next in order follow a Preface to a Discourse concerning the
Gunpowder-Treason, an Answer to a Tract of Mr. Baxter's, and a little after two
Metaphysical Exercitations; all which being in Print before, it is hard to say
for what end they are now Reprinted, unless to swell the Volume, and thereby
lay a Tax upon the Subject. I believe few will think the Translator of the
Exercitations has merited any thing by his pains, either from the Bishop or the
Reader. For of good Latin States, he has made them but very indifferent
English ones, and as unintelligible to the English Reader, (for whom, I
suppose, they were designed) as Rosacrusian Philosophy.

The like, nay much worse Treatment have the States of Questions met with,
which begin p. 568. and so in a manner close the Book. These they have given us
in such an Heterogeneous, Equivocal Mungrel Version, as I defy the whole
Fraternity of Translators to match, from the famous R. L. down to M's.
Schoolboys. So that it may truly be vouched upon this occasion, if ever,
Faciunt intelligendo ut nihil intelligant. Besides it is manifest, the Bishop
has writ them hastily and incuriously; And though probably he might sometimes
read them in the College Chapel, yet it can no more from thence be concluded,
that he calculated them for the Press, than that a Man designs every thing he
utters amongst private Friends should be proclaimed at the Cross. But
whatsoever they are in themselves, they have suffered in many places, by being
garbled, depraved and ill Translated, and sometimes by the omission of (what
was of great Use in such short and imperfect Tracts) the References to
particular Authors, who have handled the Points more copiously.

That this Charge may not seem to be laid without Ground, I will give you a few
Specimens of the Translator's or Transcriber's Performance in one of the
States. And to prevent all Suspicion, as if I intended to aggravate the matter,
and with a spiteful Diligence to cull out the worst for a Pattern of the rest,
I will be so fair as to look no farther than into the very first Question that
offers it self, and from thence leave others to judge what may be expected in
the rest.

The first Question then is, p. 568.
An Praescientia Divina a Rebus praevisis tollat Contingentiam? where we need
not seek far before the Translator gives us some Trials of his Skill. For in
the very first Page but one, and within the compass of half of it, there are
half as many Blunders as Lines. Instead of Alicui praesens esse, (lin. 14.) as
it is in the Original, and as the Author's Sense requires it should be, we read
corruptly, Alicujus praesens esse. The Bishop is proving that a Future
Contingent, cannot be actually Present (Scientiae etiam Divinae) even to Divine
Knowledge; and gives this Reason for it, because Alicui praesens esse supponit
esse ex part rei, To be present to any one, etc. not alicujus, but alicui in
the same Case with Scientiae Divinae. This, it is true, may be a slip of the
Press, but it looks much liker an Error elsewhere.

Two or three Lines further the Bishop adds, Cum ideo Deus praescivit Futura
Contingentia ab aeterno, necesse est ut ipsi etiam sint futura, nempe respectu
actualis existentiae. This is rendered, When therefore God did foreknow future
Contingencies from Eternity, it is necessary that they should be to him even
Future. Now any Schoolboy would have rendered [Cum ideo] properly [Since
therefore]; and necesse est ut ipsi etiam sint futura, should likewise have
been turned, It is necessary that they be future even to him, or to him also,
not to him even future; because, it is plain, Etiam makes Ipsi Emphatical, not
Futura; agreeably to the Bishop's design, which was to prove that Future
Contingents are future even to God, is, to him as well as to others; that which
some, whom he mentions, did deny.

But the next words that follow are perverted more inexcusably. The words in
the MS. are, Futura Contingentia ab aeterno non erant, which the unskilful
Garbler has turned, They were not futura contingentia ab aeterno; which neither
answers the Bishop's Latin, nor his Argument, nor makes him write consistently
with Truth, or with himself. It answers not his Latin; For these words Futura
contingentia ab aeterno non erant, are a Proposition secundi Adjacentis (as the
Logicians term it) wherein the Verb includes both the Copula and the Predicate;
and so non erant signifies as much as non existebant, or non erant existentia:
and the Sense of the words will be, that Future Contingents were not existent
from all Eternity. This will appear plain enough, if we consider the Argument.
For the Bishop's Assertion immediately preceding is, that Future Contingents
could not be present with God from Eternity, in respect of their actual
Existence; the medium whereby he proves it expressly, is, because Future
Contingents ab aeterno non erant, were not existent from Eternity, therefore he
infers from Eternity they could not be present with God. Thus it appears the
Translator has neither understood the Sense of the Bishop's words, nor the
drift of his Argument: and yet both these are more pardonable, than to make him
assert that which is really false in it self, and moreover a Contradiction to
what he had said just before. It is false to say, They were not futura
Contingentia ab Aeterno; for future Contingents were such from Eternity; the
matter of this Proposition, for Instance, Petrus Dominum abnegabit, being
future and contingent from Eternity. And if they were not from Eternity, then
they could not be fore-known by God from Eternity; but the Bishop had said in
the words foregoing, that God fore-knew them from Eternity: Therefore to make
Him assert that Future Contingents were not from Eternity, is to make him
inconsistent with himself: For which all due Thanks to the Translator's Care
and Judgment.

If any of the forementioned Mistakes seem too light to be animadverted upon;
yet Mistakes they are, and such as none that had rightly understood what he had
been about, could have been guilty of. And stumbling upon so many within so
short a compass, and at the very Threshold (as it were), I thought I needed go
no further in; looking upon these as an Omen, or sufficient warning what we
have to trust to elsewhere.

But besides the unfaithfulness of the Version-part either the Transcriber of
the States (whom the Editor speaks of p. 567.) took but imperfect Copies of
them, or the Translator has assumed (by what authority, I know not) an
Inquisitorial Power of Purgation, or rather Depravation, through the whole. And
of this also (according to promise) I will seek for no other proof, but what
the first Question furnishes us with.

The Bishop, it seems, resolves it into these two Conclusions:

1. Quod Deus Futura Contingentia cognoscat. 2. Quod cognitio haec eorum
contingentiam non tollat.
The former (viz.) That God does foreknow future Contingents, he proves,
against the Socinians, by three Arguments; the first of which is taken from
God's Foreknowledge and Prediction of the Circumstances of our Savior's
Conception and Birth. This the Purgator has vouchsafed to transmit more
faithfully than the other, though not entirely neither. But for the other two,
he has so contracted them into Shorthand, that they are rather Hints than
Arguments, as is easily perceived by comparing the Arguments as managed by the
Bishop, and as dock'd and mangled in the Remains.

The Bishop's Second Argument stands thus:

2. Joh. 19. v. 36. Christo de arbore infelici Suspenso, una cum Sicariis,
accedunt Milites; reliquorum crura frangunt, sed Christi crura integra
relinquunt and illaesa: Rationem reddit Textus, Omnia haec gesta sunt, ut
Scriptura impleretur, dicens, Non frangetur ejus os unum. Cum ideo hoc Deus
praedixit, cumque contingens omnino erat, (Milites enim potentiam habuerunt
liberam, ut frangerent, and Christi crura talia erant, ut facile frangi
poterant) manifestum est Futura contingentia Deo esse certo cognita. Dico,
Certo cognovit Deus crura non esse frangenda, alias falli poterat, quod tamen
Sacer Textus express negat. Joh. 10.35. Si illos dixit Deos, ad quos Sermo Dei
factus est, and Scriptura solvi non potest, etc. Scil. si Christo fides,
Scriptura (...), non potest solvi, i. e. violari aut irrita reddi; (...), non
possibile est, seu (quod idem) impossible est ut solvatur: Et ideo necesse est
ut Futura Contingentia ita eveniant prout praedixit Deus.

Here is some Management of an Argument in this; but one must have very good
Eyes, or else the Translator's Spectacles, that can discern the true stress of
it, as he has ordered it; which take as follows, at Large.

And then it was foretold, that not a Bone of Christ should be broken on the
Cross, and many Circumstances were verified according to the Prophesies of old
therein.

The same Fate has the Bishop's Third Argument undergon, which in the MS. runs
thus,

3. Deus hoc sibi arrogat ut incommunicabile Deitatis privilegium, quod futura
praenuntiet. Isa. 41.22, 23. Sic enim Deus falsos alloquitur Prophetas --
Annuntiate futura, ut cognoscamus, quia Dii estis. Sic Isa. 44.6, 7. Praeter me
non est Deus: quis mihi similis? Vocet and denuntiet, ex quo constitui populum
antiquum; ventura and futura annuntient iis. Sic Dan. 2. Mysterium, quod Rex
interrogat, Sapientes, Magi, Arioli and Aruspices nequeunt indicare Regi; sed
est Deus in Coelo revelans mysteria, qui indicabit Tibi, O Rex, quae ventura
sunt in novissimis temporibus. Nempe futura in novissimis temporibus revelat
Deus, eaque contingentia: nam (1o.) Futura necessaria non solum Daemones, sed
and homines sapientes revelare poterant; at futura, de quibus sacer Textus hic
loquitur, Deus sibi-ipsi soli arrogat revelanda (2o.) Futura de quibus hic
loquitur Daniel, erant de regno Christi Sub Evangelio, de regno Babylonico,
Persico, Macedonico, Romano; futura scil. per homines liberrime administrata.
At haec omnia certo and infallibiliter praedixit Deus. Ergo, Futura
contingentia certo cognoscit.

Of all this the Epitomizer vouchsafes to give us only a short hint in these
words:

This Foreknowledge in Scripture God assumes to Himself, and upbraids the
False Prophets, because they did not know things to come, Isa. 44. Dan. 2.

The Bishop having said all he thought necessary upon the first Position
abovementioned, viz. That God fore-knows future Contingents, he refers his
Hearers for further Information to several Qui plura vellet, Aquin. vid at P.
1. qu. 14. Magistr. Sentent. ^. 1. ^u. 38. Et Commentatores ibi ^^^^m omnes,
praecip^e Fran^^^ C^mel, ^a^^ar. Disput. in p^^^^m partem Aquin. tibi per (...)
de Praesetentia Dei circa F^^. C^nting. fuse disputat and nerv^^e, etc.
Authors, who handle it more largely; whom the Purgator has very judiciously
passed over, though one would think such References were of most Use in
Abstracts, or short States.

You see I have run through the Book, but after a Desultory manner: Yet these
Evidences (out of many that might be produced) are sufficient to show what an
unlimited and an unwarrantable Liberty is taken, not only to publish things
without the Author's Consent, either express or presumptive, but also to maim,
corrupt and abuse them, and after all to Palm them for Genuine upon the World.

I would here make an end, but that the Editor has contrived such a Remain for
the close of his Book, as deserves not to be passed over without an
Observation. It Is a Letter of the Bishop's to his Clergy, occasioned by an
Order of Sessions, for the Prosecution of the Laws against Dissenters, which
whatever Service or Credit it may do the Bishop, I am sure can do the Editor
neither. For it is notorious that Sir P. P. has been a Champion for Toleration;
witness the Case of Toleration heretofore Printed with his Name to it, and his
Preface to a former Book of the Bishop of Lincoln's Tracts: And yet he has
taken care to let the World understand by this Letter, that the Bishop thought
the Laws against Dissenters good, and their Execution necessary, and that he
not only required his Clergy to publish the abovesaid Order, and diligently to
advance the design of it, but enforced the Reasonableness of Conformity to the
Established Church by such Arguments, as in my opinion, it is scarce possible to
comprise more or weightier in so small a compass. The Letter is but of two
Pages, and if you have read it, pray tell me whether the Bp. has not said as
much as could well be said, in so few lines, and what your thoughts were upon
reading of it. Was it not obvious to conceive, that Considering Men would begin
to question, whether the Discourse for Toleration, Printed amongst others
lately under the Bp's Name, were really the Bp's, or some Supposititious Piece?
(And then let Sir P. see how he will avoid the suspicion of Forgery). Or if
they acquit Sir P. in that, they would at least perceive, that how reasonable
soever in the Theory a Toleration might seem to the Bp. yet when he came to
reduce it to Practice, and have to do with the troublesome Spirit of our
Dissenters, he found it not feasible, nor consistent with the Weal of the
Church: And then let Sir P. (the Champion for Toleration,) see how he will
justify the Publishing so much against a Toleration, and under a Government
too, that he would fain flatter for having granted it, and Established it by Law.

I fear I have transgressed the bounds of a Letter; therefore I shall add no
more, save only to put in a short Caveat or two. And in the first place, Caveat
Emptor, let the Purchaser beware hereafter, how he is imposed upon by
Surreptitious Pieces. All Coins have not the true Stamp; and some that have,
have too great a mixture of the Alloy in the Metal to pass current.

And if I might be admitted for once to be of Counsel to Persons of Quality and
Learning, I would humbly advise them to be very cautious whom they admit a
Secretis, lest it be their lot (as it has been lately of a Spiritual and a
Temporal Vid. Sir Joh. Thompson's Vindication of the E. of A.
Lord) to have their Privacies exposed by some Relick-Monger or other. I am

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Hen. Brougham.
Queen 's-College, June 20. 1694.
What relates to the Socinian Controversy, and is found in the Bishop's MS.
but omitted in the Remains, is as follows:
An Mysteria Fidei a ratione naturali apprehendi possunt?
Negant.

1. LUbbertus de Christo Servatore. l. 4. cap. 12. page 582. 2. Jac. ad Portum
Orthodoxa fidei defensione. cap. 30. page 377. 3. Ludovicus Crocius in
Anti-Socinianismo. Disp. 7. page 64. 4. Andreas Prolaeus in Mataeologia sua
Sociniana. c. 2. p. 21, 22. etc. 5. Christianus Dithmarsus in Coll.
Exercitationum Anti-Socinianarum. Exercit. 2. p. 32. etc. 6. Balth. Meisnerus
Considerat. Theologiae Photinianae. cap. 4. page 310. 7. Joh. Hoornebeck
Socinianismi Confutati, Tom. 1. l. 1. c. 5. fuse. 8. Sam. Maresius in Hydra
Socinianismi confutata. l. 1. c. 25. p. 392. 9. Suarez Opusc. lib. 3. cap. 1o,
2o. 10. Pet. Lombard. Sent. Lib. 2. Disp. 26. Vid. Commentatores, ibid. 11.
Aquinas. 22. Quaest. 2. Art. 3. 4. and Commentatores, ibid.
An Sociniani sint vere Christiani?
Negant.

1. LUdov. Crocius Anti-Socinianismi. Disp. 1.. 4. 2. Andraeas Prolaeus in
Mataeol. Sociniana. c. 1. qu. 5. l. 7. etc. 3. Balthas. Meisnerus in brevi
Consid. Theologiae Photinianae. c. 4. page 294. etc. 5. page 634. 4. Jacob.
Martinus. Synopsi Religionis Photinianae* cap. 6.. 26. page 144. etc. 1.. 14.
5. Joh. Polyander Concertat. Anti-Sociniana. 1a. Disp. 4, 5. 6. Joh. Hoornebeck
Socinianismi Confut. Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 9. page 188.
Authors aliqui qui contra F. Socinum. Senensem, suique sequaces scripserunt.
1. JAcobus ad Portum, SS. Theologiae in Acad. Lausannensi Professor, scripsit
Defensionem Fidei Orthodoxae adversus Christophori Ostorodii Institutiones
Religionis Christianae, Genev. Edit. An. 1613. 4to. 2. Sibrandus Lubbertus
scripsit contra F. Socinum, lib. 4. de Jesu Christo Servatore. 4to. 3. Andreas
Essenius (...), Hug. Grotii scripsit Lib. cui Titulus -- Triumphus Crucis, seu
Fides Catholica de Satisfactione Christi contra Joh. Crellium Fran. 4to. 4.
Johan. Henr. Bisterfeldius Nassovius scripsit de Vno Deo, Patre, Filio, and
Spiritu Sancto, contra Joh. Crellii, l. 2. de Vno Deo Patre. Lug. Bat. 1639.
4to. 5. Wolfangus Franzius scripsit Disp. varias adversus Photinianos pro
Satisfactione Christi, Sub hoc Titulo, Disputationes Theolog. de Sacrificiis
Satisfactionis Christi pro peccatis totius Mundi praestitae. Typis Firmissimis.
4to. 6. Christanus Matthias Dithmarsus in Academia Noricorum Altorfina
Professor, scripsit and edidit Collegium Exercitationum Theologicarum
Anti-Photinianum, in quo Disputationes december. (1.) De Notitiae Dei naturalis
existentia and essentia. (2.) De Notitiae naturalis usu and efficacia. (3.) De
(...), i. e. Nomenclatura Divina in genere and in specie de nomine Jehova. (4.)
De appellatione Deus. (5.) De appellatione Adon, (...), Dominus. (6.) De Dei
definitione, genere and Praedicatorum qualitate. (7.) De Essentiae Divinae
unitate. (8.) De natura Attributorum Divinorum ad intra consideratorum. (9.) De
Attributis Divinis ad extra. (10.) De ordine Attributorum Divinorum. 4to. 7.
Valentinus Legdaeus Suerinensis edidit Examen refutationis Valent. Smalcii,
quam Thesibus Alberti Graweri de Aeterna Deitate and Incarnatione Filii Dei,
opposuit. 4to. 8. Joh. Winterus Naumbergensis edidit refutationem Sententiae F.
Socini de Justificatione hominis coram Deo, quam tractat in praelectionibus
Theolog. cap. 15. Problemata Socini quinque ponit and refellit. 4to. 1. An in
Justificatione nostra peccata nostra deleantur nuda remissione, sine
Satisfactione? Asserit Socinus. 2. An Deus poterat peccata condonare sine
Satisfactione? Asserit Socinus. 3. An Vitae innocentia possit censeri loco
Satisfactionis, and articulum Justificationis ingredi? Asserit Socinus. 4. An
Deus voluerit peccata sine satisfactione condonare? Asserit Socinus. 5. An
Christus pro peccatis nostris satisfecerit? Negat Socinus. Idem scripsit
Collationem and Differentiam Vet. and Nov. Testamenti Sacerdotum: Item
Tractatum de hac quaestione, An Adamus in statu Integritatis fuerit Mortalis?
Asserit Socinus. Negat Winterus.
9. Joh. Junius Ecclesiae Sylvae Ducensis Pastor scripsit Refutationem
Praelectionum Theologicarum F. Socini Senensis, Amstelod. 1633. 8vo. 10.
Balthazar Meisnerus in Academia Wittebergensi Professor scripsit Lib. cui Tit.
Brevis Consideratio Theologiae Photinianae, prout eam F. Socinus descripsit
libello cui titulus -- Quod Evangelici omnino debent se illorum coetui
adjungere, qui falso Ariani and Ebionitae vocantur. 8vo. 11. Jacob. Martin.
scripsit Lib. cui tit -- Synopsis totius Religionis Photinianae ex illorum
Institutione brevi, Volkelio, Ostorodo, aliisque ejus sectae authoribus
repetitae and breviter refutatae. 8vo. 12. Johan. Junius Ecclesia
Assendelphensis Minister scripsit Examen Responsionis F. Socini ad Librum
Jacobi Wieki, de Divinitate Filii Dei, and Spiritus Sancti. Amstelod. An. 1628.
8vo. 13. Johan. Polyander Professor Leidensis scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Prima
concertatio Anti-Sociniana Disputationibus 48. comprehensa. Amstel. An. 1640.
8vo. 14. Joh. Paulus Fetwinger in Acad. Altdorphina Alumnorum Noricorum Ephorus
scripsit Lib. cui Titulus -- Vindiciae Incarnationis Jesu Christi aeterni
Patris aeterni Filii, pro Alberto Grawero Professore olim Jenensi. 8vo. 15.
Andreas Idem Keslerushabet Logicae and Metaphysicae Socinianae Examen.
Keslerus Superintendens Eisfeldensis scripsit Lib. cui Tit. Physicae
Photinianae Examen, etc. An. 1630. 8vo. 16. Jacob. Martin. scripsit Lib. cui
Tit. J. Martini de tribus Elohim Liber primus, Photinianorum novorum, praecipue
Georg. Emeldeni blasphemiis oppositus. An. 1619. Octavo. 17. Andreas Volanus
scripsit Lib. cui tit. Paraenesis Ard. Volani ad omnes in regno Poloniae, magno
Ducatu Lithuaniae, Somosatenianae Doctrinae Professores: and ad nova
Ebionitarum contra Paraenesin objecta respontio. Spirae. An. 1582. 18. Prodiit
not ita pridem Libellus cui titulus, Specimen refutationis libri Johanis
Crellii de Satisfactione Christi. Authore L. V. etc. Trajecti ad Rhenum. An.
1648. 12mo. 19. Extat Meditatio Theologica de usu Vide sis hac de re Joach.
Stegman. de Judice and norma Fidei Controversiarum Libros duos. Eleutheropoli.
An. 1644.
and abusu rationis Humanae in interpretandis and aestimandis rebus and
Scripturis Divinis. per C.S.A. Lug. Batav. 1633. 12mo. 20. Ambrosius de
Penalosa scripsit Opus egregium de Christi and Spiritus Sancti Divinitate, and
Trinitatis Mysterio contra Socinianos. An. 1635. Fol. 21. Nicolaus Arnoldus
Polonus Ecclesiae Beetkumanae Minister librum edidit cui Tit. Johan. Maccovius
Redivivus, continens. 1. (...) Pontificiorum Socinianorum, etc. 2. Casus
Conscientiae ad normam Doctrinae Socinianae. 3. Anti-Socinum, cum Appendice de
Atheis. An. 1647. 4to. 22. Hugo Grotius de Satisfactione Christi contra, F.
Socinum i. e. Socino.
cui resp. Andreas Essenuis in Triumpho Crucis, and L. V. in Specimine
refutationis Joh. Crellii de Satisfactione Christi. 8vo. 23. Vid. Ludov. Lucium
de Satisfactione Christi contra Michaelem Gettichium. Edit. Basil. 1612. 8vo.
24. Lambert. Danaeus in P. Lomb. Sentent. lib. 1. multa pro Trinitate disputat.
Edit An. 1580. 8vo. 25. Christianus Becmannus Bornensis edidit Exercitationes
Theolog. pro Deitate Christi, etc. contra Socinum, Smalcium, Ostorodum,
Crellium, Mennonem Simonis, Paracelsum, Wiegelium, etc. Amst. An. 1643. Fol.
26. Joh. Paulus Felwingern scripsit Examen disquisitionis brevis edit.
Norembergae. 1637. 8vo. 27. Sam. Maresii Xenia Academica, seu de Divinitate and
Personalitate Sp. Sancti contra Socinianos (cum aliis) 4to. 28. Disputatio
Theologica Orthodoxa de Sanctissima Trinitate. Authore Josepho Voisin. Par.
1647. 8vo. 29. Socinianismi confutati. Tomus 1. Authore Johanne Hoornebecke
Professore Ultrajectano. Vltrajecti. 1650. 4to. 30. Hydra Socinianismi
expugnata contra Joh. Volkelium and Joh. Crellium. per Sam. Maresium,
Groningae. 1651. 4to. 31. Bernardus Paxillus scripsit Monomachian pro
defensione Fidei Trinitatis. Cracov. 1616. In Bibleoth. Bodl. 32. Joh.
Cloppenburg scripsit Vindicias pro Deitate Sp. Sancti, adversus Joh. Bidellum
Anglum. Franck. 1652. 33. Josuae Stegmanni Photinianismus, seu succincta
refutatio errorum Photinianorum, etc. Rhinthelii. 1623. 8vo. Alii pene
infiniti, Pontificii pariter and Reformati sese Socino opposuere, ut passim
videre est. Vide sis. Aegidium Hunnium in Articulo de Trinitate. Polanum in
Syntagm. Theol. l. 3. c. 2. ad 11. Barthol. Terres in 1. part. Aquinatis.
Benedict. Szentkiral. Transylvanum contra Georgium Enjedinum. Hieron. Zanchium
de tribus Elohim, etc. Hannib. Rosseli Comment. in Paemandrum Hermetis.
Calvinum in defensione Orthodoxae fidei sacrae Trinitatis contra M. Servetum,
and Georg. Blandr. Erasmum Brochmannum, qui utraque Controversiarum part
quaestiones Socinianas proponit and discutit. Dionysium Petavium, qui fuse
pariter and docte in Dogmatis Theologicis tractandis contra Socinum disputat,
testimoniis ex intima Antiquitate petitis. Tandem longum Scriptorum Catalogum
(eorum nempe qui contra Socinum and sui sequaces militant) tibi exhibet
Christianus Becmannus Bornensis in Exercitationibus Theologicis Amstelodami
editis An. 1643. page 12. Ubi Authors 56 plus minus enumerat, qui justo Bello
and Mart internecino contra Socinum, ipsumque etiam Socinianismum animose
militant. Qui vellet, videat. Scholastici (quod ad Articulum Trinitatis
attinet) in 1. Sent. P. Lombardi distinct. 2. and in 1. part Aquinatis multa
disputant, curiosa magis fateor quam viro cordato profutura. Quorum omnium
Catalogum laboriose contextum tibi exhibet Johan. Martinez de Ripalda in Lib.
Sent. 1. Disp. 2.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Daily Office for the Sick: Compiled out of the Holy Scripture, and the
Liturgy of our Church. With occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Pantheon, Representing the fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus: Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Both Printed for R. Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.


