The Soveraig^ Efficacy of Divine Providence; Overruling and Omnipotently
Disposing and Ordering all Humane Counsels and Affairs, Asserted, Demonstrated
and Improved, in a DISCOVRSE Evincing, That (not any Arm of Flesh, but) the
right Hand of the Most High is it, that Swayeth the Universal Scepter of this
Lower World's Gover^^ent. Often Wheeling about the Prudentest Management of the
Profoundest Plotts, of the Greatest on Earth; un^o such, Issues and Events, as
are Amazingly contrary to all Humane Prob^^^lities, and cross to the Confident
Expectation of Lookers on. As Delivered in a SERMON Preached in Cambridge, on
Sept. 10. 1677. Being the Day of ARTILLERY ELECTION there.

By Mr. VRIAN OAKS, the late (and still to be Lamented) Reverend Pastor of the
Church of Christ in Cambridge: And Learned President of Harvard College.

Psalm. 29. 10. The Lord sits upon the flood: yea the Lord ^^^teth King for
ever.

Isai. 41. 14, 15. Fear not thou worm of Jacob. I will help thee, says the
Lord, and thy Redeemer. Thou shall thresh the Mountains.

Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things, to whom
be glory for ever. Amen.

BOSTON In NEW ENGLAND: Printed for Sa(...)wall 1682.

TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
WHat thou art here presented with, is a part of the pious, and profitable
Labors of that faithful Ambassador of Christ Mr. URIAN OAKS: who having
served his generation by the will of God, in the Gospel of His Son; and being
willing to exchange this for a better World; did in his passage hence, let
fall, and (as sometime Elijah his mantle) leave behind him this, with other
useful Fruits of his well-studied, and elaborate Meditations: By which, and an
amiable, exemplary, instructive, well-ordered, christian Conversation, he being
dead, yet speaks.

It will be a sin, and shame to such as knew, and had opportunity to enjoy him,
to forget how great a price we had in our hands, while for a few years, we were
permitted by Him, who walking amidst the golden Candlesticks, holds the Stars
in His right hand, to have the heat, and help of so burning, and shinning a
Light: Alike blameworthy shall we be, and guilty of a greatly-provoking Evil,
if we mind not how much we have lost, and are tremendously weakened by the fall
of so principal a Pillar; and what cause we have to lament, that by an
immature, and (as to us) a too too early Death, and dissolution, so
bright-shining a Star is now no more visible; being removed and taken up to
shine in a higher Orb. It is doubtless a sad Omen, and presage of a near
approaching Night of blackness, and darkness, when our heavenly Father calls to
put His children to bed. The removing and taking away of Shepherds, and
principal Men from a People, what is it, but a casting down their Pillars, a
plucking up their Stakes, a bereaving them of their Chariots and Hors-men, and
leaving them without their Defense and Strength. Let not an unaffected,
senseless stupidity under that late dreadful Dispensation, of a provoked God,
give occasion to take up against us that sad Complaint Is. 57. 1. The righteo^s
perishes, and no m^n lays it to heart: and merciful men(or men of Godliness)
are taken away, none consideringetc. Surely, from the going away of such,
survivers may conclude that Evil is coming. Let Noah be sh^t into the Ark; Lot
removed; and zealous tender hearted Josiah laid to sleep in his bed of did:
and the appointed executioners of God's direful displeasure, Elements and
Enemies, shall immediately set upon and assault to their confusion, a People
ripe for ruin. Oh that we were wise to lay to heart and Consider!

The eminent Worth, and rare Accomplishments of the (now blessed) Author, none
but such as knew Him not, or envied Him, can, or will deny. The rare Beauties,
and Sweets of Nature, Learning, and Grace which the Great God had endowed, and
adorned Him with, were such, and so attractive, that nothing but unacquaintance
disingenuity, and prejudice could secure from being captivated, and held fast
in the pleasant bonds of Love, and Delight. Had all the Art, and Grace He was
filled, and furnished with, been tunned up into an ill-sented Cask, tainted
with Haughtiness, Peevishness, and Vanity; their Flavor, and delightful
Sweetness would have been lost in a nauseous unpleasancy. What He was to my
self, I cannot without renewing my grief, express; Only I shall say, He was
(what is rare, and hard to be found in this lower World) a delightful, loving,
profitable, fast and faithful Friend: Being gone, I cannot forbear following
with David's Elegy, and Complaint for his beloved Jonathan; I am distressed
for thee my dear Brother, very pleasant have thou been unto me: but, The Lord
lives, and blessed be my Rock; and let the God of my Salvation be exalted.
Amen.

The design of this Sermon, as left by the Author written with his own Hand,
now Published in Print, is to vindicate the Glory of the blessed God in His
All-ruling, Wonder-working Providence as soveraignly disposing the Issues* and
Events of all humane Counsels, and Affairs. The most High does (...), (as to
His Declarative Glory) even from His dearest and bes^ Servants: For they be
clogged, and cumbered with the (...)me remain^^ers of Ignorance, Atheism,
Unbelief, Carnal Reason, etc. While we are too intent in gazing upon the Living
Creatures, and the dreadful Wheels, (which by their swift, and whirling Motion
do often raise a Cloud of dust) we soon lose the sight of Him who sits above upon
the Throne, overruling, and Working all things according to the Counsel of his
own Will. We are apt to be too fearful, and distrustful in our Entrance upon;
and too forgetful of God in the Issues of great and doubtful Affairs; quicker
of sight to discover an host of Aramites, than to discern an Army of Angels,
like him 2 Kings, 6. 15, 16, 17. and more ready to give too much to Creatures,
than to ascribe unto God His due Judge. 7. 2-6. Prevention of, and help against
Evils, so prejudicial to our selves and dishonorable to God, was the aim of
the Author in this ensuing seasonable, and serious Discourse; worthy to be
perused by all unto whose hands it may come: The Face of Affairs, in the Times
now passing over our heads, is such, and so agreeable to what TRVTH Himself
foretold Luke, 21. 25, 26. as proves it (beyond dispute) needful to be perused,
prayed over, and improved, unto a securing to our selves Comfort; and to the
blessed God His ever due Glory. That it may be so, is the unfeigned wish of him
who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus JOHN SHERMAN.

ECCLESIASTES, IX. XI. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not
to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor
yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of Skill; but TIME,
and CHANCE happens to them all.
THis Book of Ecclesiastes is generally, and probably conceived to be a
Penitential Discource of Solomon, in his old Age, for the Satisfaction of the
Church and People of God concerning his own Repentance; and for their
Instruction and Direction, how to enjoy the best good of the Things of this
world, and yet not to make them their Best Good, but estimate them as Vanity in
this respect, and to steer (...) direct Course toward that which is the last
End of Man, the Glory of God and Fruiton of Him, in the way of Fearing God, and
Keeping his Commandments. As David after his great Fall Penned his Penitential
Psalm (the 51. Psalm) So it is rationally conjectured that Solomon, his Son,
being at last thoroughly awakened out of his Sensuality, Security, and
Idolatrous Courses, or Connivences and Tolerations, by those great Adversaries,
Hadad, Rezon, and Jeroboam (of whom you read 1 King. 11. 14. etc.) that God
stirred up against Him, Penned this Book of Ecclesiastes, and left it
(according to the Counsel of God) for a standing Monument of his public
Confession of, and hearty Repentance for all his Errors, and Miscarriages. The
general Scope of this Book, is to show us wherein the Chief Good of Man does
consist; which was the great Inquiry of the Philosophers of old; about which
they had endless Opinions and Discourses, and could never hit the mark, nor
arrive at thorough Satisfaction, because they wanted the Light, and Direction
of the Word, and Spirit of God. Solomon plainly tells us, that the Happiness of
Man consists in the Fear, and Favor, and Fruition of God: and not in the
Enjoyment of the Honors, Profits, or Pleasures of this World; or any good
Thing under the Sun. And because man, having by the Fall lost God, is turned
away to the Creature; and as it is originally inlaid in his nature to desire
Happiness, so it is the Ben^ and Inclination of his corrupt nature to pursue it
and seek for it in the Creature, and good Things of this Life: therefore He is
very Large and Elaborate in discoursing the Vanity of all these Things, and
their Insufficiency to make a man Blessed, or to make any real contribution
toward the essential Happiness of Man, being never made to be the Chief Good
of Man, nor proportioned and suited to the condition of the Soul of Man, and
being made subject to Vanity, the greatest Vanity! as they were made for Man
and put into his Covenant, and so fell with Him under the Curse, upon his
Apostasy from God. The large Experience this Wise Man had of created Things,
the many Proofs and Experiments, and curious critical Enquiries He had made
into the Nature, and Use of sublunary, or subsolary Enjoyments, together with
the Infallible Conduct of the Spirit of God, advantaged Him to discourse
feelingly, and accurately, as well as largely from point to point concerning
the huge Vanity of all things under the Sun. A great part of the Book is spent
on this Subject. Among other Vanities that fall under his observation, this was
One and none of the Least, that men of greatest Sufficiency in any Course, or
Kind, meet with many unexpected Disappointments in their Undertakings. This He
declares in the words of my Text. Concerning the settling the Connection of
these words, Expositors are not at perfect agreement among themselves. Some
apprehend this to be an Argument of the Epicureans, whereby they would
demonstrate that all Things in the world are rolled up and down, tumbled and
tossed about by mere Chance, and fall out as it may happen, uncertainly and
fortuitously: Because the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the
Strong etc. but the Ablest men are often crossed in their Designs, and defeated
of their Ends and Hopes by these and those Intervening Accidents. Hence they
deny the wise, overruling, all-disposing Providence of God; and make I know not
what Imaginary blind Fortune the praedominant Deity in the World. But there
seems to be no necessity of fixing upon such an Exposition and accommodation of
the words; considering that they may well admit of a better, and more savoury
Construction. Others think that Solomon has respect here to what He had
discoursed before, concerning the unsearchable and uncontrollable Providence of
God, Chap. 8, 16, 17. and Chap. 9. 1, 2. And whereas He had said there, that
the Righteous, and the Wise and their Works are in the Hand of God; He now
shows the Truth of that Assertion by an Induction of Particulars. Others
conceive it is a Correction of that Precept V. 7, 8, 9. of this Chapter,
concerning the Leading a pleasant, and merry Life in the free, and comfortable
Use of outward Blessings; which is here cautioned, and corrected by this
Consideration, that there is a great Uncertainty of Events, nor do things
always Succeed according to a Rational Expectation: which renders it apparent
that no man is secure of the Perpetuity of his earthly Felicity, or assured of
the enjoyment of these Comforts, and of an even course of Prosperity, without
many troublesome Rubbs, and Disappointments. Others judge He has respect to
the words immediately preceding V. 10. where He advises us to do what we have
to do, with all our might, whilst Life, and working Time continues. Vid. Voet.
Select Disput. Theol. Par. 4. P. 739. And lest any one should therefore presume
upon a necessity that all Things should succeed unto him according to his
Abilities, and endeavors, He subjoins this seasonable Admonition, That we
should not trust to our own Sufficiency, and Industry in the management of any
Business, to which there is no sure ^ntail of Success; but depend upon, and
attribute all to the gracious Concurrence, free Favor, and Blessing of God.
But what ever may be conjectured about the connection of the words; evident it
is, that Solomon here acquaints us with a great Vanity under the Sun, which He
had before intimated, when He said, All things are alike to all, and there is
one Event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked, the Good and the Bad, and here
amplifies, and adds, that swift, and slow; strong, and we^k wise, and foolish
have many times like success; and men of the greatest sufficiency, as well as
others, are often disappointed. This Solomon returned and saw under the Sun,
that is, when He took a view of the frame, and posture, and condition of Humane
Affairs, among other vanities which He turned his eyes upon, this was one over
and above the rest, a most unexpected vanity, which He considered over and
over, That Events do not always answer the abilities, and endeavors of men,
and succeed according to their Expectations. The Vanity which Solomon
discovered, and considered, and here acquaints us with, is, that it is not in
the power of the ablest men, or best accomplished for Action, to effect their
Designs, or praestare Eventum, secure, and warrant the Event and success of
their Undertakings: And this is, 1. Argued, and proved by the Induction of five
Instances in particular, to which many more may by parity of Reason be added.
The Race is not to the Swift. It is not in the power of the swiftest Footman
always to evade danger, or win the Prize by Running. Nor is the Battle to the
Strong. The Victory is not determined, or the decision of the war made
always on the side of the strongest and valiantest men. Nor yet Bread to the
Wise. Many wise men are not able to get their Bread, or Livelihood in the
World. Nor Riches to men of Understanding. Many understanding men have not any
success in their endeavors to gath^^ R^ches and get Estates. Nor Favor to men
of Skill. Many times the most Skillful Artists, and Artificers, and the best
Accomplished Persons find little Favor and Acceptance among men, how
deserving, and ingenious soever they be. 2. Illustrated by the Antithesis of a
different, and the true Cause of the Determination of Successes and Events,
signified in those words, But Time and Chance happens to them all. By which
we are not to understand that the Determination of Events is reduc^d and
referred to mere Chance and Fortune, as the Epicurean Philosophers imagined:
but that the Counsel and Providence of God disposes and orders out all
Successes, or Frustrations of Second Causes, casting in sometimes such
unexpected Impediments and Obstructions, as defeat the Labors and hopes of men
of greatest Sufficiency; which though they seem wholly casual and fortuitous
Emergencies (and are so indeed unto men themselves) yet they are governed by
the secret Counsel and effectual Providence of God. The Sum is, that no man,
how accomplished soever, is Master of Events, or absolute Determiner of the
Issues of his own Actings and Endeavors: but the sovereign Counsel and the
Providence of God orders TIME and CHANCE to be an effectual Furtherance, or
Hindrance of the Designs of all men, as seems good in His sight. The
Observation is

Doct. That the Successes and Events of Undertakings and Affairs are not
determined infallibly by the greatest Sufficiency of Men, or Second Causes; but
by the Counsel and Providence of God ordering and governing Time and Chance
according to his own good Pleasure.

I have endeavored to comprize and grasp the substance of Solomon's
Intendment, in this Doct^nal Conclusion: and shall explicate and demonstrate
the Truth of it (as God shall help) in the following Propositions.

Prop. 1. Second Causes may have a sufficiency in their Kind, to produce these
and those Effects: an liability, a congruous disposition, or an aptness, yea a
kind of sufficiency in order to the putting forth this and that Act, and the
giving Existence to these and those Effects: not indeed an absolute and
universal Sufficiency (which can be affirmed of none but Him that is All
sufficient and Omnipotent) but a limited sufficiency, or a sufficiency in their
Kind, and order: The Sun, to shine; the Fire, to burn that which is
combustible; the Rational Creature to act or effect this or that in a way of
counsel, and with freedom of will; the Swift, to run; the strong and valiant,
and well-instructed Soldier, to fight well; the wise man, to get his bread to
gather riches, to gain acceptance among those with whom he has to do. This is
no more than to say, that created Agents and Second Causes, may have the active
power and virtue of causes, all that is requisite on their parts in orde^^ to
the production of their peculiar and appropriate Effects, all that sufficiency
that dependent Beings, and second Causes are capable of. And indeed it belongs
to the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God to furnish his Creatures with
sufficient Ability for the opperations and effects He has made them for: and
so He did at first, when He made every thing good in its Kind; and whatever
Defect there is now in this respect, it is the fruit and punishment of Sin.
Though God is able to give Being to things in an immediate way, yet it is his
pleasure in the course of his Providence to use Means, and to produce many
things by the mediation and Agency of second Causes, and so gives causal virtue
and ability to these and those things in order to the producing of such and
such Effects. It is a good observation, that the Lord is pleased, not through
any defect of power in Himself but out of the abundance of his goodness to
communic^te causal power and virtue to his Creatures, and to honor them with
that Dignity that they may be his Instruments, by which He will produce these
and those Effects: whereby He takes them, as it were, into partnership and
fellowship with Himself in the way of his providential Efficiency, that they
may be Vnder-workers to, yea Co-workers with Himself. Hence He gives them an
aptitude and sufficiency in their kind in order to their respective operations
and effects: though some have a greater aptitude and sufficiency than others.
But without some degree of such suffici^^cy, nothing can deserve the name of a
Cause; the very essence whereof consists in its power, virtue and ability to
produce an Effect. A cause cannot be a cause without an active power, or
sufficiency to give being to this or that Effect.

Prop. 2. The Successes, and Events of Affairs and Undertakings do ordinarily
depend in some respects upon the Sufficiency of Second Causes.

I do not say in the Observation; nor is it the meaning of Solomon, that
Successes and Events of Affairs and Undertakings do not depend at all in an
ordinary course, on the sufficiency of Second Causes. For this were to deny and
destroy their causality, and to make nothing of their efficiency. Second causes
have their peculiar Influence into their Effects, and contribute something to
their Existence: and to assert the contrary, were to say that Causes are no
Causes, and to speak a flat Contrad^ction. This would be to suppose that the
Lord has set up an Order and course in Nature, in vain; and given to Second
Causes a sufficiency in their Kind, for Action, to no purpose; and to deny the
ordinary Providence of God, which is that whereby the Lord observes the Order
which He has set, and that course of Nature which is originally of his own
Appointment, whereby one thing depends upon, and receives Being from another.
Though the Lord is pleased sometimes upon great and important Occasions, to
leave the ordinary Road of Providence, and act beyond and above the usual,
stated course of Things; and not to concur with, and shine upon the
endeavors of created Agents, so as to crown them with that success which
according to an ordinary course of Providence, might be rationally expected;
yet it is not to be imagined that He should ordinarily dispense with the
course, and methods of his ordinary Providence: For why then should it be
called ordinary? God who is the Lord of Hosts, the great Leader Commander and
Ruler of Nature, not only permits, but also effectually commands and causes his
whole Militia, ordinarily, to move and act according to their Natures and
natural Properties respectively, without Countermanding them, or turning them
out of their way. For (as I remember One argues) He will not show such a
dislike to his own workmanship, as ordinarily to cross the Order, and alter the
course He has set in the World. Therefore the meaning of the Text is not, that
Swiftness conduces nothing to the winning of the Race, or Strength, to the
winning of the Battle; or Wisdom and Understanding, to the getting of Bread and
Riches; or Prudence, Art, or Skill, to the getting of the Favor and good will
of Princes, or People: nor, that the Race is never to the Swift, or the Battle
never to the Strong; no nor yet, that the Race is not more frequently to the
Swift, and the Battle usually to the Strong, etc. For the Lord does most
ordinarily award Success unto causes of greatest Sufficiency, rather than
Disappointment and Defeatment. Otherwise, it would be a very heartless, if not
a foolish Thing (in the eye of Reason) to use means, or to think to get the
Race by Swiftness, or Bread by Labor and Diligence, or Favor by dexterous and
prudent Behavior; or Learning, by Study and Industry; or to win the Battle by
good Conduct, and Courage, and numbers of men. Yea then Wisdom would not be
better than Folly* nor Strength more desirable than Weakness; nor Diligence
more beneficial and available than Idleness, and sitting still. This therefore
is evident, that the Issues and Events of Undertakings do in some respect,
ordinarily, depend upon the Sufficiency of Second Causes; insomuch as the
greatest probability of Success (according to an ordinary providence, and in
the eye of Reason) is ordinarily on the side of Causes that are most sufficient
in their kind of Efficiency.

Prop. 3. Second Causes, though of greatest Sufficiency in their kind, have not
the certain Determination of Successes and Events in their own Hands: but may
be frustrated and disappointed.

Though the Successes and Events of Undertakings ordinarily depend upon the
sufficiency of Second Causes; yet they are not infallibly determined thereby.
Created Agents have not Events in their own Hands, but may be disappointed:
they cannot warrant the Events of their Undertakings, or Success of their
Counsels and Endeavors, but may be defeated of their Hopes and Expectations.
Thus no man has the absolute command of the Issue and success of his own
Undertakings. He may be sure of this or that Event, if the Lord Promise it to
him, or Reveal it to be His Pleasure to give such Success to such Endeavors:
but he cannot be secured of it from, or by any Sufficiency of his own. He may,
as a wise man, foresee and say, what in an ordinary course of Providence is
rationally to be expected; but cannot warrant the Success of his Undertakings,
or carv out what Event he pleases, to himself. His Prudence, and Providence,
and Diligence, and Sufficiency for Action, cannot assure him of the Event, or
determine the Success on his side. And there is that Demonstration of it, that
created Agents of the the greatest Sufficiency, are sometimes disappointed. Two
Things I would say here,

1. Agents of greatest Sufficiency are subject to Disappointment, as well (I do
not say, as much, or as ordinarily and often, but as well) as Agents of less
sufficiency. The Ablest Men in any kind may miss of the Success they expect, as
well as weaker men. That Men of great Sufficiency in this or that way, may be
defeated of their Ends and Hopes, Solomon from his own Experience, assures us,
in the Text: and who is it that upon his own observation cannot set his Seal to
what He asserts? He gives five Instances. 1. The Race is not to the Swift: not
profitable, or successful to him always; but sometimes pernicious, and
destructive. Many agood Runner runs Himself into mischief and Ruin. Thus
Asabel, that is said to be as light of foot as a wild Roe, ran after Abner so
fast, that he lost his Life in that overhasty pursuit 2 Samuel 2. 18-23. There
are Times when men that are swift would run from danger, and cannot: they have
neither power to run, nor success in attempting it, Ier. 46, 6. Sometimes the
Flight perishes from the Swift, and he that is swift of foot, or that rides
the Horse, though it be at full speed, cannot deliver himself, Amos 2. 14, 15.
It is not absolutely in the power of the swiftest man to escape danger, or win
the prize by Running. 2. The Battle is not to the Strong. There is in Bello
Alea, the Chance of War, as they use to speak. There is, as it were, a kind
of Lottery, a great Uncertainty in War. Great Armies are sometimes defeated
by small and inconsiderable Forces; the great Host of Midian, by Gideon's three
hundred men; the Garrison of the Philistines by Jonathan, and his
Armor-bearer. This has been often observed in the World. Sometimes strong and
valiant Men are overthrown by those that are in strength far inferior to
them; great Goliath, by little David. Well might David say, as Psalm. 33. 16, 17.
There is no King saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength. An Horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall
he deliver any by his great strength. There are Times, when the mighty Ones are
beaten down, Jer. 46. 5. and The mighty cannot deliver himself, or the strong
strengthen himself; but the courageous among the mighty is put to flight, Amos
2. 14, 16. Sometimes the strong melt like water at approaching danger, and the
stouthearted are spoiled and sleep their sleep, and the men of might cannot
find their hands, to make the least Defense, or Resistance, Psalm. 76. 5.

3. Bread is not to the Wise. Wise men are not able to get their Livelihood,
but have much ado to make a shift to get a bare Subsistence in the world; and,
it may be, are forced to beg for it, or be beholding to the Charity of others.
There have been strange Instances of very wise, and worthy Persons, that have
been reduced to such a Condition. Some of you know the famous Story, Date
Obolum, or (as others have it) Panem Belisario. David was put to beg his Bread
of Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. and Paul was often in Hunger and Thirst, 2 Cor. 11. 27.

4. Riches are not to men of Understanding. Sometimes indeed, wise men get
Estates and gather Riches; and one would think they should be best accomplished
for it: and yet it so falls out, that some understanding M^n cannot thrive in
the World and grow rich, notwithstanding all their Endeavors. So it is, that
many men of great Understanding and rational Forecastings and Contrivances to
gather wealth, though they lay out their Parts and their Hearts this way, and
would be rich, yet they cannot; but are strangely defeated. You read of the
poor wise man, Eccles. 9. 15. Many men of great Understandings are too wise,
and of too great Spirits to labor after wealth; or if they do, their designs
are unsuccessful. 5. Favor is not to men of Skill. Many very wise, and
knowing, and skillfull men, and experienced in Affairs, and prudent also in
their Deportment, yet cannot get, or keep the Favor of Princes or People. Some
Expositors on the Place, instance in Joseph, that was envied, and hated, and
sold by his Brethren, and also lost the favor of Potiphar (though He managed
the Affairs of his House prudently and prosperously, and deserved well at his
Hands) and was cast into Prison by him. David, that was hated and persecuted by
Saul; Daniel, that was cast into the Lions Den, though an excellent Spirit was
found in Him, and great Prudence and Faithfulness in managing the Affairs of
the Empire; and before that, though He had been in great Favor and Esteem in
Nebuchadnezzar's time, yet afterward in the Reign of Belshazzar, He lived
obscure, and as it were buried at Court, as Mr. Cartwright gathers from Dan. 5.
11, 12, 13. Many wise, and learned, and Ingenious Men cannot get the Favor of
men, or keep it, when they have. The poor wise man delivered the City, and yet
no man remembered that same poor man, Eccl. 9. 15. Belisarius (wh^m I mentioned
before) was a most prudent, experienced, faithful General under the Emperor
Justinian, that had won Him many Battles, reduced many Cities and Countries to
his Obedience and approved Himself for a most loyal, and worthy Subject, and
yet after all his Services, even in that Emp^^^^'s Ti^^ was through Envy,
falsely accused, for ought appears by the Story, had his Eyes put out, and was
forced to stand daily in the Temple of Sophia, where He held out his wooden
dish, begging his Bread, and useing those words, Give a little Bread to
Belisarius, whom his Virtue and Valor has raised; and Envy depressed, and
cast down again. Other Scripture Testimonies and Instances, besides those in
the Text, might be produced, if it were needful. But every observing man's
experience may furnish him with Demonstrations of this Truth, That Agents of
greatest Sufficiency among men are subject to Disappointments, as well as those
of less Sufficiency. Again,

2. Agents of little, or no Sufficiency, succeed sometimes in their
Undertakings; when those of greater Sufficiency, miscarry and meet with
Disappointment. There is many times one Event to both as Solomon speaks Eccl.
9. 2. when the ablest Agents are frustrated, as well as the weakest: and there
is sometimes a better Event to weaker Agents, and Instruments; they prosper in
their way, when abler men are disappointed. The Race is sometimes to the Slow,
and the Swift lose the Prize. The Battle is sometimes to the Weak; and the
Strong are put to flight: as we have many Instances both in Scripture and
common History. Weak and simple people have bread enough sometimes, when wise
men are in want of their daily bread. Nobal had good store, when David was hard
put to it. Men of shallow heads grow rich and get great Estates, when men of
understanding can thrive at no Hand. Solomon tells us of the poor wise man; and
our Savior in that Parable, Luke 12. 16, 20. tells us of a rich Fool. It is
ordinarily seen in the World, that the thriving men in Estates, are none of the
most understanding and judicious. Many a man has this world-craft, that yet is
a man of no deep or solid Understanding. So, many weak, worthless, ignorant,
empty Persons find Favor with Princes and People: when men of Skill, and
Learning, and great worth are neglected and despised. This is an Evil under the
Sun, and an Error that proceeds from the Ruler, a great miscarriage in
Government, that Folly is set in great dignity (Fools are favored and
advanced) and the Rich, i. e. men of rich Endowments for Wisdom and Piety, sit
in low places, i. e. are depressed and discountenanced: Servants are upon
Horses, men of poor servile Spirits and Conditions, are set up and honored,
and Princes, i. e. men of great worth, walking as Servants upon the Earth.
Eccl. 10. 5, 6, 7. So that it appears plainly, that Success does not always
wait upon the Counsels and Actions of Persons of great Sufficiency; but they
may suffer Disappointment, when others are prosperous: Which demonstrates that
the Issues and Events of Undertakings and Affairs are not determined infallibly
by the Qualifications and accomplishments of created Agents, and Second Causes.

Prop. 4. The Defeat and Disappointment of Agents of great Sufficiency in their
kind, is from the Happening of Time and Chance unto them.

Some read it (and the Original will bear it) because, or for Time and Chance
happens to them all. For Explication.

1. By Time, understand not barely the Duration, or space of Time, which has
no such determining Influence into humane Affairs. But Time so and so
Circumstanced. Time is sometimes as much as a special Season or Opportunity,
when there is a concurrence of Helps, means, and advantages for the furthering
the Designs and undertakings of men. By Time sometimes, we are to understand
such a Nick, or Iuncture of time, wherein there is a coincidence of
Difficulties, disadvantages, and hindrances to the effecting of any Business.
And this seems the meaning of Solomon in the Text. An adverse or evil Time, Ec.
9. 12. Sometimes the Times favor the Enterprises of men, Sometimes they frown
upon them. At one time, wise and good men stand up for the Defense of their
Country and Liberties thereof, and prosper in it; the Times favor them, there
is a concurrence of all manner of Furtherances and advantages: at another time,
they may endeavor it, and the Times frown upon them, the Spirit and Humor of
the People is degenerated; and they swim against the stream, and are lost in
the Attempt. And we say, Such a Man was worthy of better Times, had been a
brave man, if He had lived in be^ter Times, his worth had been more known and
prized, and He would have had better success. So when the Time of Judgment upon
a People, is come, then wrath arises against them without remedy; and then the
strong man may fight for the defense of such a Country; and the wise man
endeavor to deliver the City: but all in vain; they shall miscarry in the
Undertaking. Aben Ezra (as Mercer tells us) referres this to the Conjunctions,
and Aspects of the Stars, by which He apprehended these inferior Things were
governed. We are sure there are certain Periods, and Revolutions of Time,
respecting the Prosperity, or Adversity of Nations, Countries, Cities,
Churches, Families, Persons. As Time is set to all the Successes, so to all the
Defeats and disappointments of men; and when this Time comes, no Sufficiency of
man can withstand Disappointments.

2. By Chance, Understand contingent and casual Events. Many things fall out
between the Cup, and the Lip; or otherwise than expect or imagine, or can
possibly foresee. Some Event chops in, and interposeth unexpectedly, to cross a
man's Designs, and defeat his Hopes and rational Expectations. When Saul and
his men were compassing David and his men, and ready to take them, then comes a
Messenger to Saul, saying, Haste and come: for the Philistines have Invaded the
Land. 1 Samuel 23. 27. When Haman had plotted the Ruin of the Jews, and brought
his Design near to an Issue, then the King cannot sleep but calls for the Book
of the Records of the Chronicles, and they read to Him of the good Service of
Mordecai, in discovering the Treason that was plotted against his Person; and
one thing falls in after another, to defeat Haman's cruel design, and ruin the
whole fabric of his strong built, and almost perfected Contrivance In this
sense Time and Chance happens to men of greatest Sufficiency, which they cannot
either foresee, ( Eccl 9. 12.) or prevent, or help themselves against them when
they come upon them: and hereby their Counsels, and Undertakings are defeated
and ruined sometimes.

Prop. 5. Time and Chance which happens to men in the way of their
Undertakings, is effectually ordered and governed by the Lord. God is the Lord
of Time, and Orderer, and Governor of all Contingences. Time and Chance that
further or hinder the Designs of men, are under the Rule and Management of the
Lord. His Counsel sets the Times, appoints the Chances; His Providence
dispenses the Times, and frames the Chances, that befall men. The Lord has in
his own power the Dispensation of Times, Ephesians. 1. 10. The Times and Seasons He
has put in his own power, Act. 1. 7. He has such a Dominion over the Times,
that He changes Times and Seasons, according to his own pleasure. Dan. 2. 21.
My Times (says David, Ps. 31. 15. are in thy Hands. He means the state and
condition of his Times; his Prosperities, and Adversities; his Successes, and
Disappointments; and universally, whatever should befall him in the Times that
should pass over Him. Moreover, all the Chances that happen to men, as the
Scripture but now mentioned shows, are in the Hand of God. My Times i.e. the
Chances of my Times. No Contingency, or Emergency, or Accident so casual, but
it is ordered and governed by the Lord. The Arrow that was shot at a venture,
and smote Ahab throw the joints of his H^rness, was directed at him by the Hand
of God. So in that case of Manslaughter, and killing a man casually, as if a
man be hewing Wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the Axe, to cut down a
Tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his Neighbor,
that he die, Deuteronomy. 19 5. God is said in that case, to deliver that man that is
slain, into his hand, Exodus 21. 13. God orders that sad event. All Casualties
in the World, are gu^ded by the steady Hand (...) the great God. Thou (says
David, Ps. 16. 5.) maintainest ^y Lot. The Lord makes and disposes the Lot, or
Chance of every man, whatever it is. He has appointed all Times and Chances in
his Eternal Counsel; and in Time executes accordingly, in the course of his
Providence.

Prop. 6. The great God has the absolute and infallible Determination of the
Successes and Events of all the Operations and Undertakings of created Agents
and Second Causes, in his own Power. His Counsel and sovereign Will appoints
what they shall be, and his Providence (which is not determined by any Second
Cause: but is the Determiner of them all) Executes accordingly. And it must
needs be so, if you consider these two Particulars,

1. God is the Absolute First Cause, and Supreme Lord of all. Of Him, and to
Him, and through Him are all Things, Romans 11. 36. He that understands any thing
of God indeed, knows this to be a Truth. Here we might be large; as they that
are acquainted with the Doctrine of Creation and Providence, in Conservation
and Gubernation of all Things, will readily apprehend: for here we might show
you, 1. That God is the absolute first Cause of all the causal power and virtue
that is in Creatures. He gives them power to act, furnishes them with a
Sufficiency for their Operations. He gives Swiftness to the Runner; Skill, and
Strength, and Courage, to the Soldier.

2. That He supports, and continues the active power of the creature. He
continues Swiftness, Wisdom, Strength, Courage, as He pleases. If He withdraw,
all is gone. The Swift is lame, or slow-footed, the Strong is weak and
timorous, the Wise is foolish and besotted, the man of Skill, is a mere Bungler
at any thing. 3. That He does by a previous Influx excite and stir up, and
actuate the active power of the Creature, and set all the wheels agoing. For
the most operative, active created Virtue, is not a pure Act: but has some
Potentiality mixed with it; and therefore cannot put forth it self into Action,
unless it be set agoing by the first Cause. And the creature cannot be the
absolute first Cause of any physical action. In Him we live, and move, Act. 17
28. Again. 4. That He determines and applies Second Causes to the Objects of
their Actions. When they stand, as it were, in Bivio, as it is said of
Nebuchadnezzar, when he was marching with his Army He stood at the parting of
the way, at the head of the two ways, to use Divination, as doubting which way
he had b^st to march; whether to Jerusalem, or some other way, Ezekiel. 21. 21,
22. Then the Lord easts the Scale and the Lot, and determines them this way,
and not another. He does not only stir up Second Causes to act at large, and
set them agoing, and leave it to their own Inclination, whither they shall go,
and what they shall do: but He leads them forth, and determines them to this,
or that Object. 5. That He cooperates, and works jointly with Second Causes,
in producing their Effects. as He predetermins Second Causes, so He concurres
with them in their Operations. And this Pradetermination, and Concurse is so
necessary; that there can be no real Effect produced by the Creature without
it. And it is a Truth also, that when God Improves Second Causes for the
production of any Effect, He so concurres with them, that He does withal most
immediately, intimously, and without Dependence upon these Causes by which He
acts, produce the Entity, or Esse of the Effect. If this be considered, it will
appear that created Agents, are as it were, God's Instruments, that act as they
are acted by Him; and cannot move of themselves. The busy, bustling, proud
Assyrian was so, Is 10. 15. 6. That all the Ataxy, Disorder, Irregularity,
moral Evil that is found in the Actions of Rational Agents, is by His
Permission. If it were not the Pleasure of God to permit it, no Sin should be
in the World, nor in the Actions of Men. Though there is no Legal Permission,
or allowance of it; (for the Law of God forbids it) yet there is a Providential
Permission of it. God could have kept it out of his World. 7. That He limits
and sets Bounds to the Actions of Second Causes: what they shall do, and how
far they shall proceed in this or that way. He set bounds to Satan, when he
had Commission to afflict Job. He limits, and restrains the Eruptions of the
Wrath and Rage of the Churches Adversaries, Ps. 76. 10. He sets bounds to the
sinful Actions of Men: He regulates and governs all the Actions of Second
Causes, as to time, place, degrees, and all manner of Circumstances. He is not
the Author: but He is the Ord^rer of Sin it self 8. That He serves Himself, and
his own Ends of all Second Causes. He makes them all in all their Operations
subservient to his own Designs: and that not only natural, but rational Agents,
that act by Counsel. And not only such of them as are his professed willing
Servants. Many serve God's ends beside their Intentions, and against their
wills. I will do this and that says God, by the Assyrian, howbeit he means
not so, Is. 10. 6, 7. Wicked men and Devils do God's will against their own
will, and beside their Intentions. Ye thougt Evil against me (says Joseph to
his Brethren) but God meant it for good etc. Genesis 50. 20. God elicites what
good He pleases out of the actions of his Creatures. Whatever this or that
Agent proposes to himself, yet God always attaineth His Ends. He serves
Himself of the very Sins of his Creatures, and brings good out of them. He
makes that which is not Bonum honestum, to be Bonum conducibile: and though Sin
is not good; yet, as God orders the matter, it is good, in order to many holy
Ends, that Sin should be in the World, as Austin observes.

9. That He uses means in themselves unfit, and improves Agents of themselves
insufficient, to bring about his own Purposes and produce marveilous Effects.
Yea, and it is as easy with Him to do any thing by weak and insufficient, as by
the ablest and most accomplished Instruments. There is no restraint to the Lord
to Save by many, or by few. 1 Samuel 14. 6. it is nothing with Him to help,
whether with many, or with them that have no power. 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. Despicable
Instruments, sometimes, do great Things in His Hand. 10. That He renders the
aptest means ineff^ctual, and the Undertakings of the most sufficient Agents
unsuccessful, when He pleases. He has a Negative Voice upon all the Counsels
and Endeavors, and Active Power of the Creature. He can stop the Sun in its
course, and cause it to withdraw its shining; He can give check to the Fire,
that it shall not burn; and to the hungry Lions, that they shall not devour:
and He can order it so, that the men of might shall sleep their sleep, and not
find their Hands. He can break the Ranks of the most orderly Soldiers, take
away courage from the stoutest hearts, send a pannick Fear into a mighty Host,
and defeat the Counsels of the wisest Leaders and Conducters. He can blow upon,
and blast the likeliest Undertakings of the ablest Men. In a word: the Lord
being the Absolute First Cause, and supreme Governor of all his Creatures, and
all their Actions; though He has set an Order among his Creatures, this shall
be the cause of that effect, etc. yet He himself is not tied to that Order; but
Interrupts the course of it, when He pleases. The Lord reserves a Liberty to
Himself to interpose, and to Umpire matters of Success and Event, contrary to
the Law and common Rule of Second Causes. And though He ordinarily concurreth
with Second Causes according to the Law given and Order set; yet sometimes
there is in his Providence a Variation and Digression. Though He has given
Creatures power to act; and Man, to act as a Cause by Counsel, and has
furnished him with active Abilities; yet He has not made any Creature Master
of Events; but reserves the Disposal of Issues, and Events to Himself. Herein
the absolute Sovereignty and Dominion of God appears.

2. Otherwise, the Lord might possibly suffer real Disappointment, and be
defeated of his Ends in some Instances. He might be crossed in his Designs, if
any of his Creatures could do what they will, without absolute Dependence upon
Him. He could not be sure of his Ends, and what He designs in the World, if He
had not command of all Events that may further or hinder them. If there were
any active power in Creatures that He cannot control; or any one event that is
out of his Reach, and absolutely in the Creature's power. exempted from his
providential Command, it would be possible tha^ He might be defeated of his
Ends, and so far unhappy, as to his voluntary Happiness, which results from his
having his (...) in the World, and compassing all his Ends in the works of
Creation and Providence. God has made all Things, ^^eth all Things, and
manageth all Things according to the Counsel of his Will, in away of
subserviency to Himself, and his own Occasions: which He could not do
universally and mi^^str^bly if He had not the absolute and infallible
Determination of all Events in his own Hand. But His Counsel shall stand, and
He will do all his Pleasure: Is. 46. 10. Thus much for the Explication, and
Confirmation of the Doctrine.

USE I. Of Instruction, in these Particulars.

1. We see what a poor dependent, nothing-Creature Proud Man is: Depending
absolutely upon God for his Being, Actions, and the Success of them. Men of
greatest Sufficiency cannot get their own Bread, or bring any thing to effect
in their own strength. Let their Abilities be what they will ( Swiftness, for
the Race; Strength, for the Battle; Wisdom, for getting their Bread, etc.) yet
they shall stand them in no stead without the concurrence and Blessing of God.
Man says, he will do this and that: but he must ask God leave first. He says,
To day or to morrow I will go to such a place, and buy and sell, and get gain;
whereas he knows not what shall be: but it shall certainly be as the Lord will.
The way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps, nor perform any thing that he purposes, without divine Concurrence, or
Permission. He has not the Success of any of his actions in his own power; nor
does he know that any thing he does shall prosper. One would wonder poor
dependent man should be so proud! Any little thing lifts him up. When the
Soldier on such occasions as these, is in his Bravery, in his military Garb
dressed up for the purpose, with his Buffe Coat, his Scarf, his rich Belt, his
Arms, a good Horse under him, O what a goodly Creature is he in his own Eyes!
and what wonders can he do in his own conceit! and yet he has as absolute need
of God's Assistance, if he go forth to Battle, as any naked, unarmed man He
cannot move a step, or fetch his next breath, or bring his hand to his mouth,
or leap over a straw, or do any thing, without help from God, in whose hand his
breath is, and whose are all his ways Dan. 5. 23. It Is strange to see how the
hearts of men are lifted up with nothing! O cease ye from Man: for wherein is
he to be accounted of?

2. We see that there is, and there is not Chance in the World. Chance there
is, in respect of Second Causes: (so some things fall out (...) as our Savior
speaks Luke 10. 31.) but no Chance as to the first Cause. That piece of
Atheism, and Heathenism ascribing things to Fortune and Chance, is hardly
rooted out of the minds of men, that are or should be better instructed and
informed. The Philistines when they were plagued, could not tell whether God
had done it, or a mere Chance happened to them, 1 Samuel 6. 9. They understood
not, that what was a Chance to them, was ordered by the Providence of God.
Truth is, Chance is something that falls out beside the Scope, Intention, and
foresight of Man, the Reason and cause whereof may be hid from him; and so it
excludes the Counsel of Men; but it does not exclude the Counsel and Providence
of God; but is ordered and governed thereby. And it is so far from being
Chance to God, that there is as much (if not more) of the Wisdom, and Will, and
Power of God appearing in matters of Chance and Contingency, as in any other
Events.

3. We see here something of the Power, and Greatness, and Glory of God
appearing in his Efficiency, whereby He works all in all. As He is himself
Independent, so all Things have an absolute Dependence on Him. He gives
Success, or causes Disappointment, as he pleases. So that men are wholly
beholden to Him for all the good they enjoy: for Victory, for Bread, for
Riches, for Favor and Acceptance, for all. Nothing comes to pass without his
Permission, if it be moral Evil; without his Concurse and cooperation, yea,
Predetermination, if it be moral or physical Good, or penal Evil. In him we
live and move, and have our Being. The Counsels of the ablest Statesmen, how
rational soever, shall not prosper without him: Ministers, how sufficient
soever, pious, learned, industrious, zealous, shall convert no man, edify no
man, comfort and establish no man, without Him. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. Though Scholars
study hard, they shall make no proficiency without the Blessing of God. The
Merchant may trade, and project rationally, and yet shall not grow rich upon
it, unless God give him success. It is God that makes Zebulun rejoice in his
Going out, and Issachar in his Tents: that crowns the labors of Seamen,
Merchants, and Husbandmen with Success. Except the Lord build the House, etc.
Ps. 127. 1. Training Days, Artillery Days, tho of great use, ahd very
necessary; yet are all in vain, unless the Lordbless. He must instruct, and
teach, and accomplish you; otherwise the help of your expert Officers, and your
own endeavors to learn War, will signify nothing. And when valiant Soldiers
come to fight; whatever Skill, an Strength, and Courage, and Conduct, and
Advantages they have; yet they will be worsted, if the Lord do not give
Success. We should learn hence to admire the Power and Greatness of God. It is
a lamentable thing, that He that does all, is thought to do nothing! He can
work without Means, by insufficient Means; and blast the ablest Instruments:
and yet is little minded in the World. God gives forth a Challenge to Idols, Do
good, if you can, or do evil. Isai. 41. 23. It is God's Prerogative to do good
or evil, i. e. not the evil of Sin (which argues Defect and Impotency; and
comes not within the compass of Omnipotency to do it) but of Punishment. God
only can give good, or award bad Success; and Reward* or Correct and punish his
Creatures that way. Who is he that says (what Man or Angel?) and it comes to
pass, when the Lord commands it not? Lam. 3. 37. O see, and adore the
Greatness of God in this respect! He works all in all.

USE II. A word of Terror to the Enemies of God, even all Impenitent and
Unbelieving Sinners. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him: for the
Reward of his hands shall be given him. Isai. 3. 11. Their Persons, and Works,
and Ways are in the Hand of God. That God whom they despise, disobey, and
rebel against, disposes of them, and all their Times and Chances; And Who
ever hardened himself against Him, and prospered? Job. 9. 4. Let me tell you
briefly, that either 1. You shall be Unprosperous men, that nothing shall
succeed well with you, as it is said of Coniah, Write this man childless, or
bereaved (of Posterity, Lands, and Goods) a man that shall not Prosper in his
days Jer. 22. 30. Or, 2. You shall prosper to your hurt. The Successes you
have, shall undo you. A godly man may be unsuccessful in the management of his
Affairs; but then his ill Success succeeds well to him; humbles him, weans him
from the World, does him good: his Soul prospers by means of his
unprosperousness: But your Successes and Prosperities make you proud, insolent,
bold to sin, hardhearted, atheistical, and more rebellious against God; and
further your eternal Ruin, Job. 21. 7-15. Because they have no Changes (but a
constant, even, uninterrupted course of Prosperity) therefore they fear not God
Ps. 55. 19. Or, you shall prosper, not for your own sake; but for the good of
others, Job 27. 16, 17. Prove. 13. 22. And (...). The final Issue of all your
ways and actions, and the concluding Event that will befall you, if you
persevere in a course of Rebellion against God, will be most dreadful. In this
Life, one Event may happen to the Righteous, and the Wicked, Eccl. 9. 2. But
the last general great Event that shall befall them, shall be very different:
for the event shall be, that the Righteous shall be saved and the Wicked
damned. This shall be the portion of the cup of Impenitent wicked men, and the
Event that shall be ordered out unto them by the Lord, that they shall be cast,
both Soul and Body, into Hell. He that determins all Events, will at last put a
sad issue to the Prosperity of his Enemies. They must needs be very
Unfortunate, and Unhappy men at last, that persevere in Rebellion against Him
that governs Time and Chance according to his Pleasure.

USE III. A word of singular Encouragement to the dear People of God, that have
an Interest in God through Jesus Christ, and walk with Him according to the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. All your Times, and Chances, and Changes are
in God's Hands; and all that befalls you, is under His Management, and of His
Ordering, and Disposal. Then, Say to the Righteous, it shall be WELL with Him:
for he shall eat the fruit of his doings. Isa. 3. 10. God will give you the
Fruit, the Benefit, the Success, the good Event of all your gracious Counsels,
and Undertakings. He that has the Master and Ruler of Events on his Side; must
certainly do well. Though you are weak, and insufficient, in your selves, to do
Duty, to walk with God in your course, to resist Temptations: yet the Race is
not to the Swift, nor Battle to the Strong: God can, and will prosper your
sincere Endeavors, and give in suitable supplies of Strength and Grace, Is.
40. 29, 30, 31. And though you have many Enemies; Sin, Satan, World, and may
meet with much Opposition; yet God that has all Issues and Events in his Hand,
being on your Side, nothing shall do you real hurt, Romans 8. 31. You need not
fear what Men, or Devils can do against you, seeing God that manages the active
power of the Creature, is for you. They have no power, but what God gives and
hands as He will, Ioh. 19. 10, ^1. and He will not suffer them to do you real
hurt. Nothing shall separate you from the Love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 35-39.
Nay, all adverse Powers, though of greatest sufficiency to do you hurt, and
bent upon it; shall do you good, whether they will or no, Romans 8. 28. And you
shall be sure to conquer at last and have good Success. Indeed you may at
present have many particular Designs and Undertakings, and be frustrated and
suffer disappointment therein: but then, it is good for you to be afflicted,
crossed, disappointed; and Unsuccessfulness is really best for you, and most
conducive to the prosperity of your Souls; and you shall be sure of good
Success, so far as Infinite Wisdom sees it to be good for you. And then however
your particular designs and undertakings may be defeated; yet you have a
general Grand Design, that is paramount and predominant; which is The
everlasting Enjoyment of God: and if you reach that, you are well enough, and
as happy as you would be: and the Lord, who is the Lord of Time, and Disposer
of Events, and Governor of his Creatures to their Ends, will not suffer you to
be disappointed herein. You shall infallibly glorify God and enjoy Him for
ever. This is matter of Comfort to the People of God in the worst Times; when
it is with them as with Jacob, when he said, All these Things are against me,
Genesis 42. 36. when none on their Side, Refuge fails, and no Means appearing for
them. And indeed the People of God in this Country have had great Experience of
this. What Deliverances has God commanded! When few, and weak, and low, and
exposed to the Rage of Enemies, God said, Touch not my Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. The Salvations of New England have been most apparently by
the Lord's Governing Time, and Chance. This or that Chance or Occurrent has
fallen in in the very Nick of Time to prevent Ruin. It has not been from the
sufficiency of the Instruments of our Salvation; but from the All Sufficiency
of God, and His overruling Events wonderfully Therefore let all that fear God,
comfort themselves with this Consideration. And that you may take down, and be
refreshed with this Cordial, Consider two Things. 1. That Events are not to be
judged or concluded of beforehand, from the Aspects of Second Causes. As
Astrologers conclude this or that shall happen, because of this or that Aspect,
the Conjunction or Opposition of Planets, and Positure of the Stars and
heavenly Houses: so do Politicians from the prospect they take of the
Combinations and Confederacies, and various Aspects of Second Causes. Hence
also God's People are discouraged, when they see the World combine, and enter
into Leagues and Confederacies against the Church; now they conclude they shall
be a prey to their Teeth, and swallowed up. And Enemies are ready to Insult
over the Curch, and to say as Pharaoh, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will
divide the spoil, etc. Exodus 15. 9. But this is a wrong way of judging, because
Time and Chance happens, and God may turn all a quite other way. It was a good
observation of Mr. Caryl, When wicked men are nearest their Hopes, godly men
are furthest from their Fears; because then usually God defeats them; and their
Insolence, and Confidence engage Him to do it. 3. That the Determination of all
Events, is in the Hand of God in Christ, or of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
Mediator is at God's right Hand, and has all Power in Heaven, and Earth
committed to Him; all Judgment, and the Command and Government of all Events.
He governs Time and Chance. God is in Christ providentially ruling all Events;
prospeting, or blasting all Affairs, as He will. It is the Man upon the Throne
above the Firmament, that gives out his Orders, according to which the
Living-Creatures (or Angels) move the wheels of Providence, as you may see in
that excellent Scheme of Providence, which is drawn in the first Chapter of
Ezechiel. And it is well for Believers, that themselves, and their works are in
the Hand of Christ, and that all Events in the World are determined by Him.
That Christ, whose Person you love, whose Ordinances you love; whose Truth you
love* whose Commands you love; whose Members you love; whose Appearing you
love: that Christ, that loves you a thousand times more than you can love Him,
and loved you above his own Life, and will love you to Eternity, that Blessed
Lord Jesus Christ has the managing of all Affairs, and of all your Concerns
and Undertakings in his own Hands. And therefore we may conclude that He will
do all in favor of his Members, and it shall be well with them that fear God.
Eccl 8. 12.

USE IV. Of Exortation, in sundry Particulars.

1. Labor to maintain an humble Sense of your own Insufficiency to accomplish
any thing, even in that kind wherein you seem to be most sufficient and best
accomplished. Let worthy Magistrates in Consultations for public Good;
Ministers, in their Ministerial way; Scholars, in their way, and Soldiers, in
their military capacity, walk humbly with God. Truly God has poured Contempt
upon our military Men, our Artillery men, and good Soldiers, New England has
gloried in these Things, Indeed, men of martial Spirits and Skill, ought to be
encouraged: these Trainings and Exercises are very commendable, and by all
means to be supported and countenanced: and it is pi^y that as in other things,
so in this, the good Old Spirit is so much gone: These are not Times wherein
the Nations beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. War, in some cases is lawful, and at sometimes necessary; and
sure then, Learning of War is so also. But I fear we have trusted too much in
Sword and Bow, and gloried in our Numbers; in our Arms and Ammunition: in our
Trainings, in our expert Soldiers: and the Lord has shown us, that all these
things are nothing without his Blessing: and that unless the Lord watch the
Town, keep the garrisoned House, fight the Battle, all is in vain. We have seen
that a despised and despicable Enemy, that is not acquainted with books of
military Discipline, that observe no regular Order, that understand not the
Soldier's Postures, and Motions, and F^^ings, and Forms of Battle; that fight
in a base, cowardly, contemptible way, have been able to rout, and put to
flight, and destroy our valiant and good Soldiers. And I must confess, that
which determined my thoughts to this Text, was this very Consideration. I know
not whether my Discourse upon it may seem so well levelled at the Occasions of
this Day: But I know it is very proper for the Times that have passed over us,
and the Dispensations thereof. And I hope the Gentlemen-Souldiers present will
not blame any of us, if we cannot look upon their Trainings, and
Artillery-Exercises with such an Eye as formerly before the War: nay they are
to blame themselves, if they do not look upon them with another Eye themselves,
considering how God has humbled us in that respect. Whether my Discourse be
pertinent to the Day or no, yet sure I am, it is a Lesson God has been
teaching of us by many sad Defeats and Overthrows by a despicable Enemy, That
the Battle is not to the Strong, or Expert, or Valiant; nor Success always
answerable to the Sufficiency of Instruments; but determined by the Lord,
ordering Time, and Chance according to His Pleasure. Plain it is, that the Lord
has spoken this over and over in his Providence, and it is very proper for the
Dispensers of the Word to speak it after Him, and inculcate the same humbling
Lesson. Nothing's more apparent, than that God's Design at this day, is to
humble Magistrates, our worthy Patriots, to humble Ministers, Churches, expert
and valiant Military-men, Merchants, and Husbandmen, all sorts of men amongst
us. Who sees not that God's Design is to humble proud New England? Therefore
admit I beseech you, an humbling Discourse in an humbling Time and suffer this
word of Exortation, the drift whereof is, not to discourage from the use of
Means, or take off your edge from military Exercises; but to press you to get
and keep a due Sense of your own Insufficiency in your several Capacities, to
do any Exploits, or accomplish any good Purposes of your selves. And may there
not be need of an humbling Word on such Days as these, when there are such
Solemnities, and the Hearts of poor men are ready to swell, and heave and be
puffed up strangely, with great Apprehensions of themselves? Well, Be sensible
of your Insufficiency to effect any thing, whatever your Wisdom and Strength
be: that you cannot of your selves, win the Race, or Battle; get Bread, or
Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18. build the House, or keep the City, Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
Truly we had need be put in mind that we are but weak, sorry men, that cannot
make our own Fortune; but must take what God orders out to us.

2. Depend absolutely upon God for all the Issues and Successes of your Affairs
and Undertakings. For you see the Determinaton of them is in His Hands. Though
wicked men would shame the Counsel of the poor People of God (deriding their
Course in this respect) because they have made God their Refuge (as Ps. 14. 6.)
yet be not you ashamed of your Dependence upon God, nor either jeered, or
affrighted and discouraged out of it. It makes for the glory of God, as well as
your comfort, when you depend upon Him. Therefore, 1. Make sure that all your
Counsels and Undertakings be Lawful and Good. Otherwise you cannot duly depend
upon Him, and expect his gracious Concurrence. Indeed God may shine upon the
Counsels, and way of the Wicked, in respect of outward Prosperity: And so He
may give you Success in wrath, and for your greater hurt, when your
Undertakings are sinful: but you have no Promise of his gracious Concurrence in
that Case, to ground Faith upon. (2.) Do what your hand finds to do, with all
your Might. As in the Verse before the Text. Be not slothful, or neglective of
Duty, because of the uncertainty of Events. Though you have not the Issue in
your own power, yet you are to do your utmost toward the compassing of your
lawful Designs. Do your duty, or you cannot expect God's Blessing, and his
determining Events on your side. Great Complaints there have been from time to
time of the neglect of these military Exercises, even by those that have freely
Listed, and solemnly engaged themselves to attend them; and that such Days are
spent away unprofitably, little done to any purpose; as if they were Days to
meet on, to smoke, and carouse, and swagger, and dishonor God with the greater
Bravery and Solemnity. O make a Business of it, and not a Play. And in all your
lawful undertakings, be serious and diligent. Uncertaintie of Events should not
hinder from Duty and Diligence. Eccl. 11. 6. 3. Renounce all Confidence in
Creatures, or created Sufficiency. I will not trust in my Bow (says the
Psalmist) nor shall my Sword save me, Psalm 44 6. Do not trust in great Men
(they are a Lie, Psalm. 62. 9.) Good Men, any Men, they are V^nity. Do not make
flesh your Arm, nor lay too much weight upon the Ability of any Instruments. Do
not bear too much upon the sufficiency of Ministers to instruct, convince,
convert, comfort and edify: for Paul himself was nothing, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7-2
Cor. 12. 11. Do not say, Wisdom and strength are for the War (as Isai. 36. 5.
and therein we will trust: For Events do not always fall out accordingly. Let
not the strong man glory in his Strength, nor the wise man, in his Wisdom, nor
rich man, in his Riches; but in the Lord, Ier. 9. 23, 24. Do not trust in your
own Wit, Art, Strength, Courage, military Accomplishments, Provisions for War,
Advantages, or any Sufficiency you have. Do not trust in any Qualifications
you have, Natural or Acquired, Civil or Spiritual. Do not trust to the
sufficiency of received habitual Grace. When God said to Paul, My Grace is
sufficient for thee:He does not mean habitual Grace only; but actual,
effiicacious, Assisting Grace that the Lord was pleased to afford him, the
Epichoregia pneumatos, additional Supplies of the Spirit, and Increated, as
well as created Grace, which Paul was to trust to, and so might glory in his
Infirmities, and depend upon the Power of God that rested on him, 2 Cor. 12. 9,
10. Do not trust to your previous Dispositions and Preparations, for any Duty.
It is not in him that wills, or runs. Take heed of Self-fullness, and a Spirit
of Independenci in this respect. Self-Confidence, and Creature-Confidence are
inconsistent with a due Dependence upon God. 4. Beg good Successes, and Issues
of your Undertakings of God, in the Name of Jesus Christ. It is one of the
Characters of a good Soldier, Act. 10. 2. and I am sure it is of a good Man,
to be a Man of Prayer. It were well if all our Artillery and military Gentlemen
were men of this Character. It is well if none of you have come forth to day
without solemn Prayer to God for his Blessing on the Occasions and Services of
this Day. Some read those words Isai. 36 5. Thou say, surely Lip-labor is
Counsel and Strength sufficient for the War: As if Rabshakeh flouted good
Hezekiah for his Confidence in God, and for saying that Prayer (which he
scoffingly calls words of Lips, or Lip-labor) would be in stead of the best
Policy, and Courage, and Preparations for War. But if this reading be
somewhat forced, yet sure it is, that allthough Prayer to God must not exclude
the use of other Means (for how can a man pray in Faith, that does not also use
all due Means in his power?) to get the Victory, and win the Day. Therefore
when you come to these Exercises, beg military Skill of God: and when called
forth to real Service, beg Success of Him. So in other Cases, Prayer is one of
the best Expedients. Our Savior has Instructed us to pray for our daily
Bread. Scholars should beg a Blessing on their Studies. Been Orasse est been
Studuisse. So for Favor and acceptance among men* beg so much as may put you
into a better Capacity to do the work of your place, and serve your Generation.
When Paul was to carry a liberal Contribution to the poor Saints at Jerusalem
(which was like enough to be very welcome) He begs the Romans to strive
together with him in Prayer, that his Service might be accepted of the Saints,
Romans 15. 30, 31. Pray threefore in the Name of Christ, for the good Success of
all your lawful Undertakings. Therein you will express your Dependence on God.
5. Cast all the Care of Events and Issues of your Affairs and Undertakings, on
the Lord. Use all the good Means in your Hand, and then leave Events quietly
with God, on whom all the Issues of things depend. Commit your way to the Lord,
and roll it off thy self upon Him. Psalm. 37. 5. Look to Him to direct thy paths
to a good Issue. Prove. 3. 6. When you have done your Duty in the use of Means
to compass your lawful Designs, and recommended all to God by Prayer, then
trouble your selves no further; but Cast your burden upon the Lord, Psalm. 55.
22. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Take that Counsel, Phil. 4. 6. It is our work to take care our
Duty be done, and the Lord's work to take the care of Events. It was a brave
Speech of that gallant Soldier, though none of the best Men, Ioab I mean, when
he had set his Men in battle array, and used all the Skill and Policy he could,
Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men, for our People, and for the Cities
of our God: and the Lord do that which seems Him good. 2 Samuel 10. 12. We must
not govern the World. nor encroach upon God's Prerogative (which is to dispose
of Events) by taking the care of them upon our selves. Be poor and weak in your
own Eyes, and commit your selves and Concernments to Him. 6. When you have thus
done, then Believe steadfastly that the Lord will give you a goud Issue of your
Undertakings. Though not that which you may desire; yet that which is best for
you. When you have greatest Sense of your own Insufficiency, and the weakness
of Means; yet believe this, and depend upon Him for it according to his
Promise, with whom it is all one to save by many, or few; weak, or strong, to
Convert and edify by weak, or able Ministers; to feed his Children, and make
them look fair and fat, with Pulse and mean fare, as well as with royal
Dainties. This Depending upon God, excludes Presumption on one hand; Despair
and Discouragement on the other. And He that in the Sense of his own
Insufficiency, trusts in the Power and Grace of God, may say as Paul, When I
am weak, then am I strong. 2 Cor. 12. 10. Oh then! Let us depend upon God, with
whom are the Issues of all Affairs. Let our Honorable Rulers depend upon Him,
in the management of public Affairs: Let Ministers depend on God, without whom
they cannot Instruct the Ignorant enlighten the Dark, convince the Obstinate,
awaken the secure Sinners, convert and bring any Souls to Christ, gather
Israel, edify and build up the Faithful in the knowledge and faith of Gospel
Mysteries, and in the Graces and Consolations of the Spirit. Let Merchants
depend on God for prosperous Voyages, and good Success in their Trade and
Commerce: Let Husbandmen depend upon God for their Bread and Livelihood more
than upon their own Labors, and the Fruitfulness of the Ground. God instructs
the Husbandman. Isai. 28. 26. and blesses his Labors, and can soon blast
them, as the experience of many Years has sadly taught us. Let Scholars depend
upon God for Learning, more than upon their Books, or Tutors, or Parts and
Industry, or any other Advantages. Let military Men learn to depend upon God.
The Lord is a Man of War. Exodus 15. 3. He gives military Skill, and other
Accomplishments, and Successes also in their Services and hazardous
Undertakings. Let us all learn this Lesson, to depend upon the Lord, that
orders out all Successes and Events according to His Pleasure.

3. Duly Acknowledge God in all Successes and Events; and in all Frustrations,
and Disappointments.

First, Acknowledge God in all good Successes and Events, so as to be Thankful
to Him for them. Whatever your own Sufficiency may be, yet acknowledge God
thankfully, as if you had been wholly Insufficient: for your Sufficiency is of
God, and He could have disappointed notwithstanding. The ground of our
Unthankfulness for all good Issues and Events of Affairs and Undertakings, is,
because we do not see the good Hand of God dispensing all to us. We make too
little of God, and too much of our selves; either by thinking we deserve better
than God has done for us (Hence a proud Heart is never thankful to God or Man)
or by thinking we have done all, or more than we have done, toward the getting
of this or that Mercy. We put our selves too much in the place of God; as if it
were in our power to make our Endeavors Successful, and to give a good Effect
and Issue to them, according to our Desire. We get up into God's Throne, and
usurp upon his Prerogative, and assume that which is p^^^liar to Him, when we
presume we can bring any thing to pass, or do any thing successfully in our Own
strength. If we make our selves the only and absolute first Causes of our good
Success; no marvel we make our selves the last End also, and deny God the
glory. O do not ascribe good Success to your own Wit, and Parts, and Policy,
and Industry, and say, my Nimbleness has won the Race; my Conduct and Courage
has won the Battle; my Wisom has gotten me this Bread; my Understanding has
heaped up this Wealth; my Dexterity, and Skill, and Complaisance, and
agreeable Conversation has procured me the Favor of Rulers or People; my
Parts or Study has given me this Learning. Say not with the Vapouring
Assyrian, By the Srength of My Hand I have done it, and by My Wisdom: for I am
Prudent. Isa. 10. 13. Let not this be so much as the secret Languge of your
Hearts. Say not, as Nebuchadnezzar, This is great Babylon, which I have built,
and so derogate from God that works all in all; lest He turn you a grazing, as
He did him, with the Beasts of the Field, and teach you better Manners by some
severe Correction. Do not Sacrifice to your own Nets, and burn Incense to your
Drags; as if by them your portion were fat, and meat plenteous (Hab. 1. 16.)
but ascribe all to God. There is that deep Wickedness in the Hearts of Men,
that if they get any thing by any Fraud, and crafty fetches, and overreaching
of their Brethren, in a sinful way, they will be too ready to attribute that
to the Providence and Blessing of God, and say, it was God's Providence that
cast it in upon them; when they have been craftily and sinfully designing it,
and bringing it about: but when they have gotten any thing honestly, by their
Wisdom and Prudence, and Industry, they are too ready to forget Providence,
and ascribe all to themselves. See the Evil of this, and remember that no
People in the World have greater cause of Thankfulness than we have to God, who
has governed Time and Chance on our behalf marvellously. O Bless Him for good
Success, not only when you cannot but acknowledge your own Insufficiency; but
also when ^ou have apprehensions of the greatest Sufficiency of Second Causes.
And Blessed for ever be the Lord, who has Pleasure in the Prosperity of his
Servants, Psalm. 35. 27.

Secondly, Acknowledge God also in all your Frustrations and Disappointments,
so as to resent his Disposals and Dispensations toward you in a gracious
manner. We have met with many Disappointments in the l^te War, and in other
respects. We should see God in all. When He blasts our Corn, defeats our
Soldiers, frowns upon our Merchants, and we are disappointed; now acknowledge
the Hand of God, Ordering Time, and Chance according to his Good Pleasure.
Justify God in all, and bear such Frustrations patiently. When you have done
your Duty, be quiet, though the Event does not answer your Endeavors, and
Hopes. Take heed of quarrelling at GOD's Disappointments. Do you know Whom you
have to do with? I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because Thou did it.
Psalm. ^9. 9. If we look at faulty Instruments, or at mere Chance only, we
shall be apt to murmur. It is the observation of One, That the Reason why men
are more apt to fly out into Cursings and Blasphemies for their bad Luck (as
they call it) in those Unlawful Games of Cards, and Dice, than in other
Exercises, that are governed by Art and Skill, arises partly from the very
nature of those Games: because when they have tried their Lot or Chance over
and over, and their Expectation is deceived, they think that that Power that
governs the Lot or Chance, is Adverse to them. They cannot blame their own Art
or Skill, when no Art can infallibly determine the Event; but curse their bad
Fortune. And if we look at Disappointments, as our bad Fortune and Chance
only, looking no further, we shall be apt to fret and quarrel: but if we do
indeed see God ordering our Lot for us, it may and ought to silence us. When
Magistrates have done their Duty, according to the Law of God, and of the
Country, and endeavored faithfully to give check and stop to the Inundation of
Profaneness and Heresy; and yet the bad Genius of the Times, and degenerous
Humor of the People, and this or that Emergency happens, that frustrates the
Success of their Counsels and Endeavors; truly they may sit down and mourn
indeed; but yet humbly submit to the All disposing Providence of God. When
Ministers have labored faithfully, and yet Israel is not gathered, and their
Labors seem to be in vain, not successful in converting Sinners; they may weep
in secret indeed; but yet patiently bear the Unsuccessfulnes of their Ministry
from the Hand of God. When Soldiers have showed themselves valiant, and
faithful, and done what they can; and yet are worsted: They must acknowledge
God's Hand in it, and that the Battle is the Lord's. 1 Samuel 17. 47. who
governs the War, and determins the Victory on what side He pleases. All
men have Briars and Thorns springing up in the way of their Callings, as well
as Husbandmen; and meet with Difficulties and Crosses there in. Get the Spirit
David had 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. and so acknowledge God in every thing, as to
submit humbly to his Disposals, even when they are Adverse, and cross to your
Desies and ^xpectations.

Thirdly, Be always Prepared for Disappointments. Do not promise your selves
Success from the Sufficiency of Second Causes: God may determine otherwise. We
should be forewarned and forearmed, that we may not Xenizesthai (1 Pet. 4. 12.)
strange at it when it comes to pass, or be dejected and discouraged. Events are
not in the Creatures power. The Lord sometimes disappoints men of greatest
Sufficiency, overrules and controlls their Counsels and Endeavors, and blasts
them strangely. Time and Chance happens to them. If Adam had stood; though he
would not have had the Determination of Events and Successes in his own hand*
yet God would have determined them for him according to his hearts-desire: and
he should never have been disappointed. But since the Fall, as no Man has
power to determine Events (which is God's Prerogative) so it is just with God
that every man should meet with Crosses and Disappointments; and this is the
Fruit of the Curse, under which all natural menly: and as for the People of
God; though they are delivered from the Curse of the Law, in the Formality of
it; so that nothing befalls them as a Curse, how cross soever it be: yet they
are not yet absolutely delivered from the Matter of the Curse, as appears by
the Afflictions they meet with, and Death it self. And indeed it makes
sometimes for the glory of God, to disappoint Men of greatest Abilities. When
men do not see and own God; but attribute Success to the Sufficiency of
Instruments, It Is time for God to maintain his own Right (as Dr. Preston
speaks) and show that He gives, or denies Success, according to His own good
Pleasure. God is much seen in Controlling the ablest Agents, and blasting their
Enterprises; yea more, many times, than in backing them, and blessing their
Endeavors in an ordinary Course of Providence. Herein the Wisdom of God is
much seen. It is best, sometimetimes, it should be so, with respect to God's
Interest and Glory. His Power also appears in giving Check to the Ablest
Instruments, and turning all their Designs another way than they Intended. His
Mercy also to his People, is seen herein; for it is best for them, in some
Cases, to be defeated and disappointed. His Justice also appears herein, in his
correcting and punishing the Self-confident, sinful Creature with unexpected
Disappointments. So that it is our Wisdom, tolook for Changes and Chances, some
Occurrents and Emergencies that may blast our Undertakings, that Faith and
Prayer may be kept a going, and lest if such Frustrations befall us
unexpectedly, we either fly out against God, or faint and sink in
Discouragements. At the first going out of our Forces, in the beginning of the
War, what great Apprehensions were there of speedy Success and ending of the
War; that it was but going and Appearing, and the Enemy would be faced down:
As if the first News from our Soldiers should be, Venimus, Vidimus, Vicimus.
And several times after, great probability of concluding that unhappy War; and
yet all disappointed, contrary to Expectation. When there is therefore
greatest Probability of Success, yet remember there may be Disappointment; and
provide for it, that you may not be surprised thereby. This may be good Counsel
to men of projecting Heads, that are wont to be very confident that they see
their way far before them: but they do not know what Time and Chance may
happen: This may check the Confidence of Man, and teach us not to promise our
selves great Things, or build upon this or that Event or Enjoyment for time to
come. Labor to be prepared and provided for Disappointments.

Fourthly, Fear God, and Keep His Commandments. This is the Conclusion of the
whole matter (faith Solomon, Eccl. 12. 13.) the Conclusion of the Book, and may
be very well drawn from the words of my Text in special, and shall be the
Conclusion of my Discourse upon it, Fear God, and Keep His Commandments. Oh!
Fear God, that is the Lord of Time, and Governor of Chance, and Dispenser of
all Events and Issues; and be sure to please Him in a Course of Evangelical
Obedience. God has the Care of Events, and we must leave that to Him: but our
Care must be to do our Duty. And To Fear God, and Keep His Commands, in the
whole Duty of Man. Who would not fear Thee, O king of Nations? Ier. 10. 7. The
Lord governs Nations and Kingdoms, all the Affairs and Enterprises of the Sons
of Men: All their Lives, and Souls, and Estates, and VVays are in His Hand: And
He can dispose of them, not only for present, but for Eternity, as He pleases.
All the Events that be fall them, are ordered and governed by Him. Therefore be
in the Fear of the Lord all the day long, and walk worthy of the Lord unto all
well-pleasing. If your ways please God, your Enemies shall be at peace with
you, or do you no hurt, if they would; but good, whether they will or no.
Obedience is the best way to Prosperity. Deuteronomy. 29. 9. The Lord takes Pleasure
in the Prosperity of his Servants, Psalm. 35. 27. This was God's Promise to
Ioshuah, Josh. 1. 8. While you are with God, God will be with you. 2 Chronicles. 15.
2. and then you shall have Things prosper under your hands, as Genesis 39. 23.
Every thing shall befriend you. Whilst Solomon trod in the Steps of his
Father, and walked in the Law of God; and neither practiced Idolatry, nor gave
any Countenance, or Allowance, or Toleration thereunto, There was no Adversary,
nor evil Occurrent, or Chance: for it is the same word with that in my Text: 1
King. 5. 4. When he forsook the Law of God, the Lord stirred up many
Adversaries against him. While he was with God, his Affairs prospered, and were
attended with good Success and a Blessing. So it was with Reforming Hezekiah, 2
King. 18. 5, 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 31. 20, 21. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel,
so that after him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that
were before him: For he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following Him;
but kept his Commandments which the Lord commanded Moses. And the Lord was with
him, and he PROSPERED whithersoever he went forth: etc.Otherwise, how should
men expect to Prosper? 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. -- Why transgress ye the Commandments
of the Lord, that ye cannot Prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, He has
also forsaken you. We find generally that when Rulers and People walked in
God's Law, and kept in with Him, their Affairs prospered marvellously: when
they departed from God, nothing prospered with them; unless it were to their
hardening, and Ruin. And the Lord keeps the same Tenor of Dispensations (for
the Substance) unto this day. Oh therefore! Let us all account it our best
Policy, as it is our Duty, to please God, that has the absolute Disposal of
us, and all our Affairs. And let it be the Care of our military Men, that they
do not make Days of Training, and Preparation for War and real Service, Days
of Provocation to God. Please God, if you would engage Him on your Side, to
govern Time and Chance to your Advantage. Take heed of making God your Enemy in
the days of your Peace and of such Solemnities, by spending them away Idly and
Unprofitably, by any unworthy Behavior; by Intemperance, by excessive Drinking
(a Sin grown too much in Fashion with the Generation that is risenup; I wish I
might not say, with many loose Church Members) by idle, rotten, unsavory
Communication, or by any other way of Debauchery, and Provocation: so as to
disarm your selves, to make you naked, to lay you open to the Stroke of Divine
Vengeance, and to render you Unprosperous and Unhappie men in all your
Undertakings. It is a Shame and a Grief to think how such Days as these are
many times spent to the Dishonor of God, and the unspeakable Prejudice of the
Souls of Men; as well as other Days of Solemnity on other Accounts. I beseech
you, look to your selves, and do not make War upon God this Day, nor run upon
the thick Bosses of His Bucklers, Job. 15. 25, 26. Do not dishonor and
displease Christ, that is God the Father's Viceroy in the World, and governs
all Affairs. If you cross Him, and (to speak after the manner of Men)
disappoint Him of his Expectations concerning you (as the Lord has great
Expectations of such a People, so Circumstanced) He will have his Time to meet
with you, and to cross you in your Designs, and to give you Shame, and
Disappointment. I delight not in any pedantick, insipid, trifling Allusions,
below the Gravity of a Sermon: but I cannot better express what I would, than
in your own ordinary Phrases, You Gentlmen of the Artillery, and Militia, Face
to your Leader; or in the Apostle's words, Look unto Jesus, Heb. 12. 2. And
follow your Leader, your Commander in Chief, the Captain of the Host of the
Lord, Josh. 5. 14. the Lord Jesus Christ, in holiness of Conversation. He was
no Glutton, no Wine-bibber, no loose and vain Companion of Sinners; though
blasphemously charged with it by his malignant Enemies. He was the greatest E X
A M P L E that ever was, or will be in the World, of Sobriety, of Gravity, of
Seriousness and Diligence in his work, of prudent and prosperous Management of
his Affairs ( Isa. 52. 13.) of savoury, gracious Communication, and holy
Conversation. Learn of Him, and follow His Example, and you shall be Prosperous
Men indeed: Yea, let us all take this Counsel and Course. New England has
Enemies enough on Earth, and in Hell: woe to us if we make God in Heaven our
Enemy also. The Lord help us to fear Him, and keep His Commandments, and then
we need not be afraid of evil Tidings, or solicitous about Events and Issues of
Things: For all the Paths of the Lord shall be Mercy and Truth to us, and
Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all our Days: and this we know, that it
shall be well with them that fear God.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press a Treatise entitled Covenant-Keeping, the way to
Blessedness, being several Sermons Preached from PSALM. CIII. XVII, XVIII. by
the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard.


