O Rara Show, A Rara Shight! A Strange Monster, (the like not in EUROPE) To be
seen near Tower Hill, a few doors beyond the Lions Den.
IT has the shape of a Man, but in its Nature is a mere Savage Beast; looks as
fierce as a Tiger, but has scarce the Courage of a Mouse. It has vast Lungs,
but no Heart; has wild gogling Eyes, but they are very short-sighted: It has a
huge ravenous Mouth, but that being an open Sepulcher of Religion and Law, and
having the Poison of Malice under its Lips, sends forth a Breath very
offensive. It hates all other Creatures, and delights much in their Blood, but
is very fearful of seeing its own. It has fed so much for five Years last past
upon Blood and Corruption, that it looks as ghastly as Envy and Despair
without, and is as black as Hell within.

An Account of the Birth and Growth of this Monster.
IT was whelp'd and bred in Wales, where it ate so much Goats Milk, that it has
been very subject of late Years to have Horns sprout forth of its Head. It gave
early Proofs of a hardy substantial Impudence, and was never known to blush,
tho sometimes to look pale. Its peculiar Talent appeared to be Yelling aloud;
and that by a wealthy Citizens means, preferred it to be the Common Barker of
Guild Hall, and afterward to be the Foul Mouth of the City, in which place it
continued, till having confederated with some Wolves, and preyed upon some
Sheep Skins that contained the City Charter, three or four hundred Men from
Westminister hunted it from thence. But this Virtue of Falsehood to its Trust
soon advanced it to be chief Inquisitor of the Nation, and then it and its
Confederate Wolves fell upon the old Sheep Skins in the Tower, and devoured
Magna Charta. And now it ranged into the Western Forest, attended with
Jack-calls to hunt down its Game, and was so ravenous, that if great quantities
of Gold and Silver had not been chuck'd into its Mouth, to blunt the Edg of its
Teeth, and fill its Maw, it was thought it would have sucked up the Blood of
the whole Country. At its return, this Monster was dignified with a fine Collar
and a Pouch, to the great Dishonor and Scandal of both; and was trusted with
the Custody of a certain large Conscience, for which it was a proper Keeper,
and had room enough, having none of its own. It exposed this Conscience to Sale
for three Years together, and to such as would give its own lusty Price, it
retail'd it pretty civilly; but at such as begged any, or offered an
under-rate, it roared hideously, even to the disturbance of the whole
Neighborhood.

The Great and Brave Monster-Hunter of Europe being arrived in England to hunt
here, our Monster dropped its gay Trappings, and cteeping into poor Weeds,
resolved (contrary to its fearful Temper) to take the Water, in hope to escape;
but Nature recoyling at the danger, it first sneaked into a little Alehouse to
fortify it self with a Noggin of Brandy, whither it was traced by its strorng
Scent of Man's Blood, and of its Posteriors, and delivered to the Masters of the
Game to be kept for the Chase.

It is agreed to give this Monster fair Law, tho it never gave any to other
Creatures; but it is feared the weight of its Paunch will disable it for
leaping over the Toils, and that it will run its Head into a Noose.

The Price is two Pence for each Spectator; but they are desired not to delay
time, for it will not be to be seen in this place above a Month or six Weeks
longer.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for R. Janeway, 1689.


