OF THE French Monarchy: AND Absolute Power.

And also A TREATISE Of the Three States, AND Their POWER.

Deduced from the most Authentic Histories, for above 1200 years: and
digested: This latter,

By Mat. Zampini de Recanati, LL. D.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXX.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the French MONARCHY AND ABSOLUTE POWER.
WHen the Roman Empire went to wrack, all the Provinces were drained, all the
Inhabitants fit for Arms carried away for Recruits to support it: By these
means the Provinces were left exposed to the violence and invasion of
Strangers, which gave occasion to the many turns and changes in these parts of
the world. Thus the Saxons or English became Masters of Britain, and the French
(another people of Germany) took that opportunity to advance beyond their
borders, and push on their advantage till they got possession of all the fair
Territory; and the very name of Gauls was swallowed up by them; and
henceforward Britain and Gaul began now to be called England and France.

As with us grew several distinctions (from our situation) of Northfolk,
Southfolk, Eastsex, Southsex; so the French were divided into Eastrians and
Westrians: The Country where the former lived, by some corruption was named
Austrasia, and this other Newstria; till such time as the Danes growing
troublesome to their Neighbors, part of them overran England, and another Band
of them that they called Northmans, subdued France; and after much bustle
seated themselves in Newstria, which from thence took the name of Normandy.

How long these French, after they were thus transplanted retained their German
liberty, I shall not now examine; only I find some of their Authors look askue
upon the Court of Rome on that occasion; they had complained that their
Language grew Italianiz'd, their manners Italianiz'd: But when the Pope came to
keep his Court at Avignon, new Phrases and new Forms crept also into their
policy. Then came in fashion those Letters du propre monuement, etc. which that
man of Morals, Monsieur Pi^rach could so ill digest.

^e hay les mots de puissance absolve,
De plain pouuoir, de propre mouuement;
Aux Saints decrets ils ont premierement,
Puis a nos loix la puissance tollue.
The Pope first employed them to render the Laws of the Church of no effect.

Their Champions for Absolute Power ^cknowledge, that the King is tied to
^orms; that his Commands will not move ^ut in the proper Channel; that the
Kings letters have not any force or verture ^nless they be undersign'd by a
Secretary of State; nor his Letters Patents, unless^ they be so signed; and
then sealed by the Chancellor, who has it in his power to cancel them, and who
seals them not without the advice of one or two Masters of the Requests
assisting at the Seal; and who is, as it were, a severe Controuler of the Kings
orders, edicts, wills, commands, and grants. But say they -- ni du^ Pape mesme
n'ont aucune virtue si else no font signees par le greffier, Baracane defense
de la Monarchy, Fr. p. 409.
Secretaire, ou dataire seelees par le seelleur, Gardesaux ou Chancellier, quoy
pour cela? C'est order a este sagement establi par tous les Princes' and
seigneurs, tant spirituels, que temporels, pour se garantir des surprinses and
obvier aux faussetez. Il est plus malaise de contrefaire deux' seings, and
falsifier un seau, que d'en contrefaire un seulement. Le secretaire d'estat, ou
de la coronne ne signera jamais aucunes lettres, si le Roy ne luy command; and
les lettres, qui suivant les Ordonnances du Roy, doivent estre signees par un
secretaire d'estat, ne passeront point au seau, si else ne sont munies du
seeing du Secretaire, and si else sont contraires a la ^olunte du Roy, exprimee
par ses Edicts and Ordonnances, le Chancellier ne les se^llera point, que
premierement il n'en ^ye averti le Roy, tout cela en un mot ^end au service du
Roy: Et de le vouloir ^enverser contre le Roy, c'est tourner la ^umiere en
tenebres, convertir le feu en glance, and mettre la terre par dessus le ciel.
Neither have the Letters of the Pope himself any virtue, if they be not signed
by the Clerk, Secretary, or Dators; and sealed by the Sealer, Sealkeeper, or
Chancellor: What of all this? This order has been wise^y settled by all Princes
and Lords as well spiritual as temporal, to secure them against surprises, and
to prevent forgeries; it being more difficult to counterfeit two Signings and
one Seal, than if there were but one hand to be forged. The Secretary of State
shall never sign any Letters unless the King command him, and they shall never
come to the Seal, unless they be fortified with the signing of the Secretary;
and if they be contrary to the Kings Will expressed in his Laws, the Chancellor
shall never seal them, till he has advertifed the King thereof. All this, in a
word, is for the Kings service; and to count this a lessening of the King, is
to turn light into darkness, fire into ice, and to set earth above heaven.

Then for the power which the Parliament seems to exercise in approving or
refusing any public Acts, Grants, Orders, Officers, etc. made by the King:
This makes no Argument against his Absolute Power, the same Doctor tells us;
Qu'il est necessaire qu'elles soient solennellement reconues, enregistrees, and
publiees, pour eviter les obreptions, subreptions, and surprinses qui
pourroient escheoir en l'impetration des lettres, des offices, and des autres;
and mesmes pour vuider les oppositions qui peuuent estre formees par ceux qui y
pretendont quelque interest. Auquel le Roy n'entend deroger, si n'en est fait
express mention dans icelles; and pour ces causes tells lettres sont
presentees ou Parliament, avaunt que les pourveus des Offices entrent en
l'exercise ou iouissance d'iceux, and quant le Parliament juge, y avoir eu de la
subreption and obreption ou de la trop grande importunite en l'impetration
d'icelles, and que l'execution en seroit prejudiciable au service du Roy and du
public, il refuse de les enregistrer, and done advis au Roy des causes du
refus, fondees sur son service, d'ont il est bien aise, encore que quelquefois
il face semblant a l'impetrant d'icelles en estre marri -- That it is necessary
they be solemnly approved, recorded, and published, to avoid obreptions,
surreptions, surprises, and all the fraud and foul practice that might have
been used in obtaining those Letters, Offices, or other Grants; as also to
avoid the oppositions of those who pretend some right or interest, which the
King intends not to prejudice, unless express mention be made thereof; and for
these causes such Letters are presented to the Parliament, before any who have
the grant of Offices, are admitted to the exercise or possession of them. And
when the Parliament judges that any fraud or foul means had been practiced, or
too great importunity used in obtaining them, and that the execution of such
Grants might be prejudicial to the service of the King and of the Public, then
d^es the Parliament refuse to (...) them, and makes the King acquainted (...)
the causes of their refusal founded upon his service; whereat he is right glad,
though sometimes to him who had the Grant, he makes a show as if he were vexed.

All agree the matter of fact, but how the King is thus bound, and how this tie
lies upon him they want language soft enough for an occasion so tender: It has
always so been, de toute l'anciennete, says one; antiqua consuetudine, says
another; their Kings have always had the wisdom to submit to these forms, says
Baracaue: the modesty says du Tillet, the good Nature says P'asquier, une
debonnairete, a goodness familiar to 'em, to reduce their wills under the
civility of law Some call it a magnanimity Royal and becoming a King, and a
glory beyond that of conquering Nations. Bodin (from the Civilians) ascribes it
to their humanity. See id tamensenatu probante fieri humanum est, says
Theod^sius; which Baldus interprets, non tam necessitatis quam humanitatis: and
to their Majesty; Digna vox est Majestate regnantis legibus alligatum principem
se ^rofiteri; to do otherwise would be a Levi^^ and Vanity, as he cites it from
the Sena^or in Livy Levius est and vanius sua decre^a tollere quam aliorum:
Others venture to ^o a little farther, they says Pasquire, who under the
pretense of an Absolute Power, ^ould flatter the Kings to be above law. ^n lieu
de leur gratifier dirent en un ob^cur language, que les Roys n'estoyent ^oint
hommes, ains lions, qui par le moy^n de leur force s'estimoyent avoir
Com^^andment ^ur les hommes. Instead of saying a grateful thing say be craft
that Kings ^re not men but lions, who think by their ^^ight to have the command
over men. says ^^u Tillet, Si leur puissance absolve n'yest ^eglee, elle
devient dissolve: If it be not re^ulated, their power is not absolute but
disso^ute: And a Spanish Treatise ^f Politics, Iron de santa Maria.
with twenty ap^robations before it, affirms: ^i el monarca sea quien fuere, se
^esoluiere por sola su cabeca, sin ^cudir a su conseio, o contra el parecer ^e
sus conseieros, aunque acierte en su ^esolution, sale de los terminos de la
mo^arquia, y se entra en los de la tyrannia. If a Monarch whoever he be, shall
(...) his own head resolve any thing without the advice of his Council, or
contrary to the opinion of his Counselors, though right in his resolution; h^
breaks out over the bounds of Monarch^ into Tyranny.

This Spaniard took his notion from that passage in Livy, where he gives a^
account, how the last Tarquin was the fir^^ of their Kings that without
advising wit^ any other than a Cabal of his Domestick^ make peace and war, made
and broke League^ and Alliances, and governed all of his own head, never
consulting the Senate and People, as the custom of his Predecessors ha^ always
been, having first by practices lessen'^ the number of the Senators (that
nothing^ but the Rump of a Senate remained) to make them the more contemptible.
Quo contemptior paucitate ipsa ordo esset, minusque per se nihil agi
indignarentur, hi^ enim Regum primus traditum a prioribus morem de omnibus
senatum consulendi solvit; domesticis consiliis rempublicam administravit,
bellum, pacem, foedera societates per se ipse cum quibus voluit injussu populi
and Senatus fecit diremitque.

But I have digressed from the French or rather from Bodin, who concerns us
nearer; having set up for a new discoverer in Politics: He would persuade us
that Plato, Aristotle, Polybius, Hali^arnassaus, Cicero, Sr. Tho. Moor,
Cardi^al Contarini, Machiavel, and who not, were all in a wrong way -- Et
quoni^m haec disciplina maximos in republica ^umultus ac perturbationes ciere
potest, ^ccuratius uobis est ac subtilius explican^a. Their Doctrine tended to
Sedition and disturbances in the Commonwealth, therefore he will handle it
with the greater ^ccuracy and subtlety: And what will be ^he consequences of
Bodin's new learn^ng? Certainly it must either make Mo^archy short lived, by
debauching it into ^yranny; or else it must (as Mr. Hobbs ^ho sees farther, and
who writes En^lish, clears the matter) to establish this ^yranny, banish all
humane Learning and fear of God out of the world.

There have been in all Nations Pens, ^s well as Voices, servile and mercenary;
and such wretches, as that by Virgil damned to Hell.

Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem
Imposuit, leges fixit pretio atque refixit.
Who make and unmake Laws, shuffle and betray both their Laws and Reason, that
they may impose this dominum potentem, this Lordly despotick power, to the
enslaving of their Country.

But whether the love of Novelty corrupted Bodin, or that he knew no better I
examine not: But though our English Politicians have followed him over hedge and
ditch, without ever making use of their own eyes or understanding; other people
do not overmuch admire him; the Scaligerana are too sharp upon him; but that
Charamonte.
Italian does him reason, Il Bodino huomo di molta lectura, ma di confusa and
turbida doctrina, impugnando da per tutto quasi la politica doctrina
d'Aristotele: Bodin (says he) a man of much reading, but confounded and
blunder'd in his Notions, contradicting Aristotle at every turn.

Now Bodin would have us believe that ^^^here can be no such thing as a mixed
Com^^on-wealth, nor will he allow be any ^^nore thann three sorts of
Commonwealths. Nam si rerumpublicarum for^^as bonorum ac malorum finibus, aut
vir^^utibus ac vitiis metimur, infinitas esse com^^eriemus: And a little after
he says, non ^^uae cuique extrinsecus accidunt intueri o^^ortet.

By the way we may note, that the ^^ertues have by the most been reckoned ^^o
be four, others have reduced 'em all ^^o Prudence, Sincerity, and Patience; so
that Commonwealths might have been distinguished by their virtues, without
making such an infinite number of them; and to make several forms from their
several ends, will certainly prove not so very extrinsecal and accidental, but
a real and essential difference. So thought the Ancients all who writ of
Politics before Bodin; therefore if a single Person governed for the good of
the Public, that was called Monarchy; if a few governed for the Public Good,
that they called Aristocracy; if the People governed for the Public Good, that
was Democracy; and these were counted three sorts of good Commonwealths. But
if a single Person governed for his own particular good, that they would not
call Monarchy but Tyranny; if a few governed for their particular profit, that
they would not call Aristocracy but Oligarchy; if the People governed for the
advantage of the Rabble, and not for the common benefit, this they would not
call Democracy, but Oclocracy, or the misrule of the Rabble. The Greeks I say,
who coined these words, made that the current meaning of them.

There are Authors, who to make short work, divide all Commonwealths into
Monarchy and Polyarchy: Either, say they, one governs and that is Monarchy; or
more than one (no matter whether few or many) govern, and then it is a
Poliarchy. They who love the division into two, might better say that all
government is either for the Governors good, and that is Tyranny; or for the
good of those that are governed, and this is a Polity or Commonwealth. But
these ^^e sick men's dreams; may show however ^^at the End is more material than
the ^umber of those that govern, and con^^quently justifies the Ancients, who
di^^nguishing the Commonwealths from ^^eir End, reckoned six several kinds of
^^^ple Commonwealths, as before has ^^en declared. And humane Actions are (...)
distinguished; the same Action may (...) virtuous or vicious according to the
^^d: Give a Wench money to debauch ^^r, and give it her to relieve her
neces^^ies; this is charity, this a virtue, but ^^e other is a kind of a deadly
sin: It Is ^^e End makes the difference, a differ^^ce not accidental and
extrinsecal, as ^^din suggests, but real and essential.

And as high Justice greates upon the ^^rders of wrong and oppression, high
^^urage is near to rashness, liberality to ^^odigality, etc. so does Monarchy
stand ^^on the brinks of Tyranny, Aristocra^^ easily slips into Oligarchy, and
De^^ocracy into popular disorder: There^^re the wiser Statesmen having observed
^^is corruption so ordinary and familiar to the simple Commonwealths, have by
art endeavored of the three good Commonwealths, to compound a mixed one that
might not be subject to the same frailties and decay; to temper Monarchy and
give it that balance and counterpoise by the mixture of the other
Commonwealths with it, which might keep i^ steady, and preserve it from
tottering into Tyranny, which is its ruin. But al^ these matters together with
the growth^ the decay, and changes of Government^ are described by that
companion of the great Scipio Polibius, so accurately and philosophically, that
I cannot forbear to set down the whole passage, which is t^ this effect. That,
Man is naturally civil and disposed to love company, and not (a^ they would
persuade us to believe, wh^ say the State of Nature is a State of War^ more a
beast than those that walk on fou^ feet, than the Bruits themselves that go i^
Flocks and Herds; and in like manner (...) the strongest Bore, and the
strongest Bull (...) always the Captain of the rest; so in these companies of
men, he amongst them wh^ was most hardy to encounter dangers, an^ had most of
bodily strength to overcome ^^em, had the rest for his followers: And ^^ence it
was that so many Nations had ^^ch their Hercules, and that so many ^^ne to be
called by that name: And in ^^ose rude times these were the first sort of
^^ings.

But by conversing together this rudeness ^^aring off by degrees, and men by
little ^^d little coming to be somewhat more po^^^t, to have something of
consideration, ^^d the use of their reason, and to under^^^nd Justice and
honest dealing, and to see (...) advantages that Prudence and a wise ^^^d had
over raw uncultivated strength, not ^^ly in deciding Controversies and
admini^^ing Justice, but even in providing a^^inst and repelling of dangers. He
there^^^e now, who was most eminent for wisdom ^^^d justice, drew most eyes
upon him, and (...) him all ran and submitted their differ^^ces to his
Arbitration, his advice they ^^^k, and his direction they followed on all
^^^asions either of difficulty or danger; and ^^ese were called the Wise Men,
and these ^^^re the true and proper Kings.

Now the Son, who had his Education under such a virtuous, wise Father, and had
been present with him when affairs of the greatest importance had been debated
and by common presumption better capacitated to govern, than any of a stranger
Family: The Son, I say, succeeds his Father in this Kingly Government, no man
envying him the dignity; nor did these King^ differ from other people in their
manner of living, there was no pomp or show, or an^ badge of the Authority
Royal, but the woode^ Scepter which Homer describes, (which perhaps was like
our Constables Staff^ and with this the Authority was hande^ down from Father
to Son, till in tract o^ time some young man came in place, wh^ giving ear to
some loose companions abo^^ him, would not longer be content with the plainness
and ordinary fare of his Ancestor^ but gives himself over to riot and excess
setting his mind on gorgeous Apparel, o^ Trains and Trappings, on Feasting an^
Revels: By these new modes he loses the hearts of his Subjects, draws envy upon
him; that Reverence paid to the Scepter i^ the hands of his Progenitors, now
turns i^ to contempt, and he still running headlon^ after his vain pleasures
and flanting pernicious courses, not heeding the duty of his place, grows a
burden to the people; and instead of being their refuge, their relief and
support, rides and galls their necks, and makes their lives bitter: So that how
to throw off the yoke is now their only care; and matters being thus ripe, or
the young Prince with his Comerades hastening on his fate by some outrage or
rape upon Wife or Daughter of some considerable Subject, some of the most
eminent amongst the people conspire together and put an end to his Life and
Tyranny.

And all eyes being now turned upon these as their deliverers, the Government
and Conduct of all Affairs is committed to their charge and direction. Thus
rises an Aristocracy, and thus we see Monarchy first corrupted into Tyranny,
and the next change from thence in course of Nature is to an Aristocracy.

And these men eminent for wisdom and virtue satisfied with the honor of the
charge and trust reposed in them, above all things studied to serve the
public; but afterward their Sons coming to succeed, who had not that stock of
discretion and sobriety; but degenerating or forgetting the virtue that
preferred their Ancestors, begin to Lord it over the people without other
regard than of their particular lust. And thus the Aristocracy being corrupted
into an Oligarchy, the people are provoked by a general insurrection to rescue
the Sovereignty out of their hands.

And now the people will neither trust so great a charge with a single Person,
nor with any few, they come to their last only and yet untainted hope founded
upon themselves, and contrived a form of popular Commonwealth, and they
themselves took the public affairs under their charge and protection; and thus
was constituted a Democracy.

And because all Governments are good and successful at the beginning, so long
as the men were alive, who had felt the oppression and tyranny under the two
former kinds of Governments, they were content and glad with their present
condition, and liberty seemed sweet and precious to 'em above all treasure. but
this Generation being spent and their virtue with 'em, a new People succeeded,
and the Laws are now trampled under foot: Licentiousness, Faction, and Disorder
turn all things upside down, and they clash together so long till some one
over-^opping the rest, all are brought under the Command of one Master; and so
about a^ain from Monarchy to Tyranny, from Ty^anny to Aristocracy, from
Aristocracy to Oligarchy, from Oligarchy to Democracy, from Democracy to the
Rule of the Rabble, and thence back to Monarchy. This is the ^ound that all
Governments run, this is the ^ourse, the order, and economy of Nature; (...)
that any turns or change of Government ^ay easily be foreseen.

Wise Statesmen observing these changes and corruptions in all simple
Commonwealths to be so constant and certain, and ^nding the mischiefs that
attend so frequent ^evolutions; they set their brains at work (...) contrive
some model of Government that ^ight be steady and durable, which they saw ^ould
not be any simple and uniform Commonwealth: It remained therefore that they
^ixed the virtues and good properties of the ^hree good Commonwealths, and so
tem^er'd them together that no room might be ^^ft for those vices, that, like
worms, breed in the very core of all simple Commonwealths and destroy them.

They joined the three States of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, and
wrought them together into one Body Politic.

This model of Government had the Spartans from the prudence of Lycurgus, and
the Romans were brought to it, made wise by dear-bought Experience: And this is
the Government that all civil Nations have affected, and from hence grows that
notion of the three States, which we hear so much of in most Nations of Europe,
though the meaning thereof is not every where understood.

This is the Doctrine of Polybius, and this was the general sense of mankind,
till Bodin comes forth with his new Heresy in Politics, and denies that there
can be any such thing as a mixed Commonwealth. To prove this, he rambles into a
many stories to show that a King cannot alien or divide his Sovereignty amongst
his Favorites: It Is questionless a trust that cannot be assigned over, but all
this relates to another point, and touches not the mixture in the Original and
fundamental constitution of a Commonwealth, Et ut Corona, si in parts
distracta, aut aperta fuerit, nomen omittit; As the Crown would lose its name,
he says, if pulled ^n pieces. This is common to many other things, a Rose, a
Prickle, if pulled ^n pieces, would lose their name; and ^his being no
particular flower of the Crown, does not illustrate or make much ^o the
business. In another place he says, Monarchiam autem individuam esse opor^ere
diximus, quia si dividatur, Monarchia ^on sit; ea est enim unitatis
inviolabilis na^ura, ut omnem omnino refugiat partitio^em; ut enim Corona --
Monarchy must ^e indivisible, such is the nature of Unity that it cannot be by
any means distributed; ^s the Crown -- which comparison he ^gain repeats. But
his Argument is no ^etter, than with us, should we from ^he nature of the
number five persuade, ^here cannot be seven or eight Cinque Ports; or in France
argue, that the Ad^ocates Cap cannot be square, because ^tis called Bonnet
round: Words are a ^^rt of Clothes that are not always exactly shaped to the
Thoughts that wear them. Another Argument he would bring from a Saying in
Aristotle against Plato, that two extremes would make no good mixture: Nam si
nihil optimum ex duobus extremis existere posse confiteatur, quid fert tribus
inter se confusis? which is as strongly urged, as should he say, if Dover and
Calice cannot come together, how shall the Sea make any intercourse and
correspondence betwixt them?

But because these Reasons seem a little too metaphysical, he would make the
matter plain by Examples; and with a strange confidence suggests that neither
the Spartan nor the Roman were mixed Commonwealths: And it is no wonder if he
find some passages in Historians to prove them either Monarchies,
Aristocracies, or Democracies, as he had a mind. Plato says, that he knew not
by which of these Names to call the Spartan^ And Aristotle to the same effect;
and that this shows the mixture to be perfect and acurate: And Polybius
speaking o^ both the Spartan and Roman, tells us ^^at the (...).
three States had ^^e Sovereignty so equally sha^^d amongst them, that even
^^ose who lived under the Government could ^^^t well pronounce in the main,
whether the ^^^wer was in the People, in the Nobles, (...) in the Monarchick
State.

In the Spartan, the Kings, the Senate, ^^d the People, by their
Representatives ^^e Ephori; in the Roman, the Consuls, ^^e Senate, and the
People, by their Re^^esentatives the Tribunes, made the ^^ree States of the
Commonwealth.

But that we may return to France, ^^ere Bodin swaggers, and would make (...)
Capital to account that of France a ^ixt Monarchy as some had done; ^ho
reckoned the Aristocracy to consist (...) the Peers, and the Democracy in that
^hey call the Third State. Machiavel be^^ev'd it a mixed Monarchy, and to that
^emper imputes all its greatness and du^ation. Seissel who writ expressly on the
Monarchy, affirms the same thing with ^^any more that writ both before and
^^nce Bodin.

He says there is not the least shadow of an Aristocracy in the Peers, --
Parium qui sic appellantur, quod inter se qu^dem pares sunt, non autem
principi, ut n^mis rustice nonnulli opinantur. TRhey ar^ one another Peers, he
says, and not Peer^ to their Prince as some too clownishly imagine.

Caesar called the Army under his Command, Commilitones or Fellow Soldiers and
it would have been a little blunt i^ them to have called him Fellow-Soldie^
again; but whoever shall look back i^ History to the Original of these Peer^
may find that they were in the beginning the Kings Peers, though at this day
the distance is very plain. Du Huillant speaking of Hugh Capet, tells us, that
he -- n'estant si grand guerrier que bien entendu aux affairs, caut et advise,
il (...) voluit proceder par cautelles and douceurs si qu'ayant affair a grand
seigneurs^ manda tous les gouuerneurs des Provin^ ces de son royaume a ce
qu'ils vinssen^ verse lui, pour le consciller au gouuernement, regime and
administration de so^ nouueau estat, leur faisant entendre qu^ totalement il
vouloit dependre de leu^ conscil and avis; voire les tenir pres da (...), come
ses amiss, freres, and pareils en ^^issance and Autorite; -- not being so ^^ch a
Warrier as a wise and wary Person, (...) would proceed soft and fair, so that
ha^^ng to do with great Lords, he sent to all ^^vernors of Provinces within his
King^^m, that they might come to him to advise ^^out the Government, and
Administration (...) his new State; letting them to under^^^nd that he would
wholly depend on their ^^unsel and Advice; and keep them about (...) Person as
his Friends, Brothers, and ^^^uals in Power and Authority. He tells (...)
futher, that some of the cunningest a^^^ngst them, seeing Hugh, from a Mayer
^^the Palace to be made King, did the same; ^^d set up for themselves within
their Go^^rnments, making themselves Lords, ^^kes, and Counts Proprietors;
whereas ^^^re they had been only Governors, viz. ^^^e Dukes governors of
Provinces, and (...) Counts Governors of Towns, and those ^^^les of Dukes and
Counts that formerly ^^re given to the Governors for the time ^^ly, became now
Hereditary and desceneded (...) Posterity. Pasquiere gives the same account of
the Peers at large, and the President Fauchet employed by Henry the Third to
revise the Antiquities of Fran^^ and who writ since Bodin, tells us: Males
urays fondateurs de l'estat Fronca^ont este ceux de la maison de capet; le^
quels de leur gre, ou contraincts par (...) noblesse, de laisser en heritage,
and sa^ l'hommage, les duchez and comtez aup^ ravant tenus a vie (car on ne
trouue poi^ certainement quand and pourquoy ils (...) sont faites hereditaires)
amoindrie^ ceste debordee puissance des ancie^ Roys, de fair toutes chooses a
leur app^tit, and comme ceux de Lacedemon ^^eeurent les Ephores, pour
controlleu^ de leur authorite, ceux-cy establire^ and asseurerent les plus
grands seigneu^ Ducs, Comtes and Pairs de la cour (...) France, pour tenir le
grand Parlemen^ audience and generalle Justice de tout^ les doleances du
peuple; and les Jugemen^ des Seneschauz and Baillifz, and juges inf^rieurs
donnes en grandes causes, car (...) commencement de ceste derniere fami^ le, il
n'y avoit comte, voire signeur chastellain dependant nuement du Roy, q^^
^^^^pensast avoir autant de puissance en ^^^^erre, que ces nouueaux Roys.

But the true Founders of the French ^^^^^e, were these of the House of Capet;
(...) of their own accord, or compelled by the ^^^^^ility, left them their
Dutchies and ^^^^nties formerly held for life only in inhe^^^^nce saving the
homage, (for it is not ^^^^ainly known when or wherefore they were ^^^^e
hereditary) and lessened that unbrid^^^^ power of the ancient Kings to do all
^^^^gs according to their appetite, and as (...) of Sparta took the Ephori for
Con^^^^ers of their Authority, these settled and ^^^^^ed the greatest Lords,
Dukes, Counts, (...) Peers of the Court of France, to hold (...) great
Parliament, Audience, and gene^^^ Justice of all the grievances of the Peo^^^
and appeals from the Judgments of (...) Seneschals, Baylies, and inferior
Judges ^^^^n in great causes: For at the begin^^^^ when this Family Reigned,
there was ^^^^r a Count, nor so much as a Lord of a ^^^^e depending barely on
the King, who ^^^^ght not that he had as absolute power (...) in his own Land,
as these new Kings. ^^^^onfirm this he adds, how the Kings Hugh and Robert,
writing to Audeber^^ Count of Perigueux, to raise the Sieg^^ before Tours, and
twitting him with the Demand, who made him Count? Il (...) fit difficulte de
respondre, ce n'est vo^^ Roys; ains ceux qui vous ont fait Roy^^ He did not
stick to answer, 'twas not y^^ Kings, but those who made you Kings.

And whoever considers the circumstances of Hugh Capet's coming to the Crown,
and the great power the Pee^^ exercised till upon the occasion of the Holy War
and other practices they we^^ reduced and brought to the Crown, man well
conclude: That Pasquiere.
(...) toute anciennete en for^ d'Aristocratie conjoynte avec la Mona^chie,
furent introduits les douze Poi^^ sur lesquels nos Roys ne s'estans reserv^^
que la Souuerainete and hommage, sem^^ que par leur conscil (comme d'un anci^^
Senate) se menassent les affairs. Fr^^ all Antiquity were introduced in the
form^ an Aristocracy joined to the Monarchy, (...) twelve Peers, over whom the
King reser^ing only his Sovereignty and Homage, (...) affairs of State seem (as
by an ancient (...) nate) managed by their advice.

And when scarce the shadow of the ^ncient Peerage remained to them, they
^etain'd the Precedence, and had place before all Princes of the Blood, till
the late Ordinance, Anno 1576. to the contrary.

And it is Baracaue.
said there was ^n Order of Parliament also ^nno 1295. whereby it was declared
that they were called Peers for being one ^nothers Peers, and not the Kings
E^uals.

What Bodin would conclude from those forms, quia sic nobis placuit, and Rex
vobis dicit, may be answered in the words of Dr. Baracaue, where (in another
occasion) he says, this is not like ^he sic volo, sic jubeo, noted by the
Saty^ist. Qu'importe^t il de dire, ainsi nous ^laist, and tell est nostre
plaisir, ou dire and ^our cause, sans exprimer la cause? Les Course des
Parlemens disent en leurs ar^ests, and pour cause sans en render la cause ^our
monstrer la Soveraniete.

What more is it, says he, to say we are (...) pleased, and such is our
pleasure; than to say, And for a Cause, without expressing the Cause? The
Courts of Parliament say in their Orders, and for a Cause, without rendering any
cause; to show the Sovereignty. The Parliament, it seems, have their forms too
to show their Sovereignty, nor is the Argument of Bodin from the form of
directing their Letters, of more force: How should they write but, Au Roy
nostre souuerain seigneur, Regi Domino nostro supremo? Is not this the ordinary
civility of Europe? It Is true that when Suetonius.
a Poet had called Augustus Caesar, Dominus; he set out a Proclamation that
none might presume to call him any more by so proud a Title, nor could the
modesty of his Successor Tiberius bear it.

Yet as their Majesty and real Greatness declined, as the Empire began to sink,
the froth and flattery came above; so that it was lawful to call Domitian both
Lord and God; and his Successors were not satisfied till complemented in the
abstract with your Everlastingness, your Eternity, your Divinity, etc. And when
the wooden Eagle was split in two, that Chip of the Eastern Empire brake ^ut
into blossoms to a miracle, with the Porphyrogenitos and Despots, were blown
about the Sebastocrators, Panhypersebasti, Protonobilissimypertati, etc.

But amongst the Romans, these Titles so fierce and glorious after they had
been worn a while at Court, descended to the City and Country; and even came so
^ow, that Martial could say of the mighty Dominus, Quod voco te dominum, noli
tibi Cinna placere,
Saepe etiam servum sic resaluto meum.


The French words, Sire, Seigneur and Sieur have ran the same fortune; and the
^alling a man Sir, or Monsieur, or Mon^eigneur, or My Lord twenty times, will
^ot amount to a Recognizance of any ^ubjection: nor can the Complement ^ass any
Domination or Despotick Right ^ver us.

If Seigneur and Dominus will not do, ^he word Souverain will not help them;
^eing commonly used in France for any Superior: as, Sovereign of the Accounts,
Sovereign of the Treasure, Sovereign of the Forests, Sovereign Judge, Sovereign
Bailiff, etc.

And now having said so much concerning the direction of these Letters, I shall
add nothing in answer to Bodin, touching the Subscription: all agreeing, that
where the Letter begins with Seigneur, of course, it must end with Treshumble
and Tresobeissant Serviteur.

And that their proceedings with the King are by way of Petition, is no more
than is done even in Poland: where Bodin makes the Government an Aristoeracy.

It is a Rule, Quae ex adulatione, vel indulgentia conceduntur non debent
trahi^ in exemplum. Besides, of all people, this is the worst Argument with the
French; who are so well known to affect soft words, and gentle forms on all
occasions possible. It is not their fashion, like the Justice of Aragon, to
accost their King with a Nos qui valemos tanto como vos, y podemos mas que vos,
vos elegimos rei con estas e y estas condiciones, entra vos y nos un que manda
mas que vos, i. e. We who are as good men as you, and can do more than you,
choose you King on such and such conditions; there is one betwixt us and you,
who commands more than you.

The power of this Parliament, in allowing or refusing the Acts of the King, is
the same in effect as what we call the Negative Voice. And sometimes, when the
Kings would hardly be denied, the Parliament have much valued themselves for
their resolution in opposing them. Thus they overcame Lewis the Eleventh,
Pasquier.
whose wilfulness and Opiniatrete was particularly noted by Historians) and
made him promise to importune them no more, nor send Letters to them that were
not de Commandment Royal; which they interpret, Just Commands. As, an volunte
du Roy, is meant, To the Laws. The most memorable instance that I have met
with, of the Parliament's Authority in this kind, is that in Henry the Third's
time; when he wrote to the Governor d'Angoulmois, to put the Town into
Monsieur's hands; the Governor desires to be excused: the Duke de Montpensier
is sent, and the Gates are shut against him; then is sent an Herald of Arms, to
declare them Rebels and Enemies, unless they obeyed. And at the request of the
Attorney General, the Parliament orders the Inhabitants to appear in person at a
day certain; they send their Deputies. It was insisted upon, that they should
be heard before the Privy Council: but they demanded to be heard in Parliament.
Where, when they came, it was urged that they might not be allowed Council, but
speak for themselves, being charged with High Treason. The Deputies insisted
that, on the contrary, they had done the King good Service; and that, for their
part, they had no Charge to plead otherwise than by the mouth of their
Advocate. Which being granted, they made choice of Pasquier. And the sum of
their Plea was, Que l'ancien order de ceste Monarchy portoit que iamais trefue
de tell importance, iamais paix n'avoit este executee, qu'au prealable elle ne
fust verifiee and emologuee en ceste cour avecque grande maturite de conseil
que cestecyne l'ayant este, nous avions just occasion de nous excuser, and
dispenser de l'ouverture que l'on demandoit. Ceste exception estoit elle bonne
and vallable? Quant a moy ie n'en feray jamais null doubt, voz registres en font
foy, l'usage est tell, and la loy generale de la France. i. e. That the ancient
course of this Monarchy was so, that never Truce of this importance, never any
Peace was executed, but that, in order thereunto, it was first allowed and
recorded in this Court, with great maturity of Counsel. That this for the
delivering up of Angoulesme, not being so recorded, we had just reason to
excuse our selves, and to dispense with the opening of the Gates demanded of
us. Is this Exception good and sufficient? For my part, I shall never doubt it.
This your Records can testify, this is the Custom and Common Law of France.

The Authors that write in Latin call their Parliaments, Sacrum and
Sacrosanctum ordinem, A Sacred and Divine Constitution; Quid tertium and
arbitrum, A third Party, and Umpire betwixt Prince and People: Si tribunitiae
potestati, aut Ephoris Lacedemoniis compares non aberres, says Matherel: Their
Power may be compared to that of the Tribunes, or the Lacedemonian Ephori. Du
Haillan, says they, are truly a Roman Senate, cest un urai Senate Romain,
representant une majesty secourable aux bons, and espouuantable aux mauuais
attendu qu'elles ont cognoissance en derniee resort, and sans appel non
seulement de toutes matieres civiles and criminelles, mais aussi de toutes
lettres royaux; enter antres des graces and remissions, pour juger de la
civilite ou incivilite d'icelles. It is a true Roman Senate, representing a
Majesty giving succor to the Good, but terrible to Evildoers; in as much as
they have cognizance, and give Judgment without Appeal; not only in all Civil
and Criminal Causes, but likewise of all the King's Letters: amongst the rerst,
those of Graces and Pardons; to judge whether they be lawful or unlawful.
Pasquier, on this occasion, tells us, Their Parliament is not like the Pope's
Officers, to judge of the Fraud or Surprises only, but to determine whether the
King's Grants be just and reasonable, or no. and du Hallan affirms, Ceste form
de proceder est si ancienne en ce Royaume, qu' un Prince, quelque deprave que
il soit, auroit honte de la rompre, comme eussi ses fuiets and serviteurs
craindroient a le lui conseiller. This form of proceeding is so ancient, that
any Prince, however depraved, would be ashamed to break it; nor would any of
his Servants or Ministers dare to advise him thereto. And in another place,
Sont tellement inveterees, que pas un roi n'entreprend d'y deroger, and quand
il le voudroit fair, on n'obeiroit point a son commandment. A practice so
settled that no King would undertake to derogate from it: nor if he should,
would any obey his Commands. But Quotations of this kind are endless.

The French reckon several Particulars wherein their King's Power is
restrained; as that, He cannot alter their Coin. He cannot turn out of place
the Magistrates of the Kingdom, till their Cause be heard and approved in
Parliament.

He cannot pardon a Criminal without the Parliament. Regi capitatis paenae
renittendae, and abolendi criminis sine parlamenti auctoritate jus non sit, in
hoc regno. Criminosus deferens litteras remissionis aut abolitionis, sieve
pardonii debet incarcerari, and suas literas offerre Parlamento, etc. Boerius
decis. Burdegal. 65. Don't en y a souuent de condamnez and executez avec leurs
graces. Le Roy, p. 376.

He cannot alien any part of his Demean, nor any part of his Kingdom.

Nor can he dispose of the Succession; that not being Patrimonial or
Hereditary. Sed sola lege and consuetudine regni, as their Lawyers speak. Or
Lege Regia, according to the new Cant in Bodin.

Another of these they call Laws of the Kingdom, or Fundamentals, is their
Salick Law, for excluding Females from the Crown.

And farther, to prove the French King a Civil King, he is not in his Great
Seals represented as the Emperors and other Kings, in Armor, on Horseback, or
with a naked Sword in hand, like Conquerors; but he is pictured, sitting on the
Bench in a long Robe, with Justice in his Right Hand. En habit de Roi Justicier.

In like manner, for the Sovereignty of ^e Parliament, we may observe, that
^hen all other Officers, upon the death (...) their King, are in mourning
Weeds, ^ese, in the midst of the Obsequies, ap^ear in their Robes of Scarlet;
to show, ^at though the Kings be mortal, yet the Majesty of the Crown survives
in the Parliament.

And from hence, perhaps, may be ^awn the true reason of that saying in France,
that their King is Immortal, and ^at he never dies. There being little ^^ound
for the sense that Bodin would ^^ve it from the Succession; seeing that ^esides
the many interruptions by Ba^ards that have reigned, and those great^^ Changes
from the Merovingians, to ^e Charlians; and from the Charlians, (...) Hugh
Capet's Line; their Kings, till of ^^te, never computed the beginning of ^^eir
Reign from their Predecessors De^^ase, but only from the time of their ^wn
Coronation. So that in Bodin's ^^nse, it has not been from any very an^^ent
date that their Kings have been im^ortal.

May be, in imitation of the Vestra (...) ternitas of the Roman Emperors, son^
more bashful Frenchman having vent red to call their King immortal; oth^^
Frenchmen, not understanding th^^ cramp word, got it interpreted. An^ that the
King never dies was a pret^^ song amongst them. But in what sen^^ this could
be, all were in the dark; t^^ at length, a cunning man arose, an^ made it out
most plainly: as Bodin h^^ done.

By what has been said, the Fren^^ Monarchy may seem sufficiently tempe^ed with
a mixture of the other State^ Yet, after all, it cannot be dissemble^ that the
Peers at this day are not th^^ King's Fellows or Equals, as at their Original
Institution. Nor are these (no^^ called) Parliaments the same thing wit^ the
old Parliaments under the Merovi^gians or Charlians; whe^^ Carpento bubus
tracto, etc. Tritenhemius.
by the Team of Royal O^^ en was drawn along in a Wa^gon his hairy Majesty, to
the place appointed for that August Assembl^^

Then were the states called, and consulted on all great occasions. Yet these
^^re the Victorious; the Clovis, the ^^arlemain, the Kings that extended ^^eir
Dominions over Spain, Italy, Dal^^tia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Poland, and ^^ught
even Germany, with their Title (...) Emperor, to the French Crown.

But what if those mighty Warriers ^^uld not call the States? that, possi^^, in
those days of Honesty and true ^^licy, was a point no more thought on, ^^n was
the Crime of Parricide by the (...) Legislators.

In the old Historians we find there ^^re several names for this Assembly;
(...) Conventus Statuum, Curia, Placitum, ^^lamentum.

The many wars occasioned many Par^^, or Meetings, to treat of Peace. ^^m this
Parley, or Parliament, as the ^^nch word it, these Assembleies are cal^^
Parliaments.

Sometimes they were called Curia, or (...) Court: and because those Kings ^^re
not ordinarily seen by the people, ^^e in this Court, afterward the Phrase
^^going to Court came to signify the going to the King's Palace, or place of
R^fidence.

They were also called Plactium, from whence Hotoman thinks, when the Kin^
Edicts came to be writ in the Mothe^ tongue, the ignorance or malice of so^^
Clerks deduced that ordinary from (...) Car tell est nostre plaisir, for the
Lat^^ Quia tale est nostrum placitum.

And those weighty Affairs, and pu^lick business, which were commonly (...)
served for this Assembly of the States, (...) be there treated on and debated,
ca^^ afterward, from thence, to be call^ Matters of State; as also, the Phrase
(...) sitting in State, and the Chair of St^^^ from the Golden Throne on which
(...) Kings wereplaced in these Assemblies.

But when Hugh Capet ascended (...) Throne, new measures and new Polici^ came
in play. He was no Fighter, n^^ cared for enlarging of Territories; b^^ had a
notable head for King-craft, a^^ sought on the best terms to settle (...) Crown
in his Family. To that end, (...) Bishop of Laon, (who had betrayed in^^ his
hands the King and Royal Fami^^ (...) thither for shelter) and the other ^^hops
and great Lords, that had done, (...) might to do him good Offices, were ta^^
in to be his Peers, and share with ^^m in the Administration of the Go^^nment.

Now, by this new Model, the Ari^^cracy, or Nobles, gained very much. ^^t a
great blow was given by this inno^^tion to the Democratical or Popular ^^^te.
For these Peers, besides their par^^ular interest in the Nation, were in
ap^^arance a competent Council for the ^^nagement of all the extraordinary
bu^^ess and Affairs of State, whereby the ^^rliament was not so necessary as
for^^rly. And Capet finding in the people ^ hanckering still for the old Race
of ^^arlemane, was well content to be dis^^^ced withal from calling that
Assem^^; save that for securing the Successi^^ he was fain to keep them in
humor, (...) that he had prevailed with them in (...) life time to Crown his
Son Robert ^^^g.

The same jealousy caused Robert in (...) life time, to do the like for his
Son, Henry the first. And Henry also, for (...) Son Philip the first. And now
one mig^^ have thought the Succession fixed. Y^^ Philip dying without having
made (...) same Provision for his Son Lewis (...) Gross, Lewis was put to his
shifts to g^^ crowned: and was fain to take up wi^^ a kind of an unusual
Bishop, to do t^^ job for him in hugger mugger.

Whereupon, he grown wise du^^ not trust the States for his Son Lewis (...)
Young; but put him in possession of (...) Throne ever he left the World. A^^
this Lewis did as much for his Son Phi^^^ the Second. Till now, after some hu^^
dreds of Years discontinuance, all E^ction-right was pretty well forgotte^^
This however, set the Court a fenci^^ against the States; and the Court thoug^^
it self better at ease without them.

Nor was this concerning the Succe^^ on the only Tie upon the Kings to con^^nue
a good understanding with the Stat^^ but the Peers were often at variance wi^^
the King, and put him hard to it. And (...) these distempers in the Kingdom no
(...) medy was found effectual but an heali^^ ^^arliament. These were the
Umpire be^wixt King and Peers; and generally de^^ded in favor of the Crown.

By which partial Arbitrements, and (...) the advantages made of the Holy ^ar,
when the Peers Adventurers died (...) the Expedition; some without Heirs, ^^me
without other than Females, or ^^ales under Age. So that the Pairyes (...)
Escheat, by the Salick Law, or by (...) way of Guardianship, came to the ^^rown.

By which means, the Power of the ^eers being at an end, and the Equality
^^oken, there remained no farther occa^^^on for Arbitrations, and the sacred
Au^^ority of Parliament quite vanished.

So that now, without much danger, (...) Experiments might be improved, ^^d new
projects of Government set on ^^ot. Accordingly, the old Parliament (...) to be
laid aside; and in their room, a ^^ect knot of men to have the States bu^^ess
committed to their Trust and Con^^^ct.

And these, for their better counte^^nce, must be called a Parliament also.
whatever Power and Authority had bee^ exercised by the States, is now usurpe^^
by this young Senate; and presently (...) new House is built for them, and the^
are fixed at Paris. Where, after a litt^^ while, they became so overlayed wi^^
business, that one Parliament was (...) sufficient; but two were constituted
f^^ the better Expedition.

And indeed, having opened the do^^ for all Civil Causes to come before the^^
it was necessary to draw out from the^ Parliaments a Detachment for State-A^^
fairs: and these had the name of the Close, Privy, or Great Council. When^ by
this Parliament in a little time deg^nerated to a mere Court of Judicature^ as
afterward that Privy Council, b^^ permitting Causes to be heard before them,
gave occasion for the business (...) State to be removed to a particular ^^bal.

But this Parliament I say, ^^ing a new Creature, was tossed, a^^ turned into a
thousand several Shap^^ and Figures, ever it came to any dura^^ Consistence.
One while it was to (...) half-yearly, another while without dis^^ntinuance;
then half of it the one half ^ear, and the other half Parliament the ^her half
year; to the end, that what ^e King's Ministers could not get to pass ^ith the
one, might be carried in the o^^er: thus rendering the Authority of the ^^urt
Pasqniere Res.
A Demy-illusoire, (...) a manner Illusory, (...) But upon the Pope's com^^g to
settle his Court at Avignon, these ^^ovations and abuses fell in like a
tor^^nt, both upon church and State.

Not long before, the Kings, as St. ^^^wis, under a shady Tree, in person, ^ard
all appeals, and determined the ^^uses of their Subjects, and were them^^^ves
the Chief Justices.

Now the Canonists so infected the ^^^tion with their tricks and subterfuges,
^^eir Quillets and Chicancery, and set (...) an itch of wrangling and
vexatious^^ss amongst them, that Courts could (...) be erected fast enough for
them; (...) in a short time, a third part of the ^^^ple, one way or other, got
thereby Employment.

A few years before, this King, Philip the Fair, had been excommunicated, his
Subjects freed from their Obedience, and his Kingdom given away to the Emperor,
by Boniface. Yet now Clemen^ the fifth and he so well agreed, upon hi^ coming
to Avignon, that, as my Autho^ says, Fraternisans en conseils, collogueing
together, they not only made goo^ booty of the Templars, destroying the^ by
consent, for no greater quarrel, (...) supposed, than their Riches. But the
Pope gave leave to the King to levy (...) tenth upon all the Clergy; and the
King, in exchange, was to connive (...) the Pope's Apostolic Indults, Graces
E^pectatives, Tenths, First Fruits, Procur^tions, Mandates, monitorials,
Executo^^als and Laudable Customs.

These inventions and wit of the Min^sters at Avignon raised an Emulation (...)
those at Paris, and they wonderred (...) find in words so strong a Charm, th^^
the Pope thereby could work such wonders, and ride over all the Fences of
Reason, Law and Custom; and that for the^ strange feats, the de proprio motu,
(...) Authoritate absoluta were all sufficient.

Whereupon the Courtiers at Paris ^^ll also arm the King's Letters with ^^ese
new Spells, and send them out upon adventures. But however Canonical ^^d
current they had proved with the ^^urch-men, to the Lay people, this de ^^oprio
motu, and Authoritate absoluta, ^^re uncouth Phrase, and Barbarous La^^^, which
they could no where meet ^^th in Classical Authors, nor understand. Wherefore,
when about these times, ^^on occasions for money, the Layety were ^^adredth
penny, and the fiftieth penny; ^^n with Fortification money, Equiva^^ts and
Loans; then with yet the more ^^eadling terms of Aids, Subsidies and
^^vertions, so it happened, that, let (...) Imposers call them what they would,
(...) people had one name for them all; (...) crying out a Maletoult, knocked
the ^^llectors on the head, with as little ^^uple as ordinary Robbers.

All the great Wars of former days, ^^^der the Merovingians and Charlians,
(...) for a long time under the Capets, had been maintained at the King's
prope^^ Charges: so frugal had been their wa^^ of living, and the Demean of the
Crow^ so large.

But now was no subsisting without Levies upon the people; and these we^^
stubborn and unwilling to be impose^ upon, when no Law or Custom could b^^
shown to oblige them.

This plunge raised again from th^^ dead the old-fashioned Parliamen^^ And in
one of their first Assemblies, (...) was by all declared, that. no Impositio^
could be laid upon the people without their consent. Wherefore it being the^^
part, they took care to relieve the neo^^sities of the Crown. And on this a^^
count there was occasion to assemb^^ them several times.

But these were not now to be call^ the Parliament, but the Assembly of t^^
States; nor yet to meddle with Sta^^ Affairs; those weighty matters bei^^ now
Parliament-business: and there (...) another Parliament in Ordinary for th^^
purpose.

So it is not intended these sho^^^ trouble their heads, unless asked, with
^ther considerations; than only in order ^^o the laying some Tax on the people.
Yet the old Ancestrel Virtue would now and then be boiling up in the breasts of
^^ese States; and they be fancying themselves as full of Power and Sovereign
Authority as the old Assemblies so famed (...) History. But the Doleances, the
Grie^^ances were not to be insisted on, when ^^nce the Mony-Affair was
adjusted: so ^^ey were still sent home, till need for another Tax. But, what
was yet more ^rievous, provision was made that the imposts should be at an end
after a cer^in time: but when the Collector's ^and was once in, they gathered
on, in (...) much that what was designed for Temporary, became Perpetual.

To prevent which mischief, the States, (...) the Reign of Charles the Fifth,
now a^^ndantly wise, granting a Tax, ordain^^d that none of the King's Officers
^ould finger the money: and the King ^as sworn solemnly, that he would not ^^use
any of it to be employed to other ^ses than the War it was given for. The
Commissioners, Assessors, Collecto^^ Receivers were all chosen by the State^
and sworn upon the holy Evangelis^^ not to convert it to other ways, a^^
Command from the King notwithstanding. And if any Officer from the Ki^^ should
attempt to force them, then th^^ to call the Posse of their Neighbors (...)
help them to make resistance. Yet^ find not that all this swearing and cau^^ on
stood them much in stead, the T^^ was continued, and the Commissione^^ that
from their being chosen by t^^ people, were called Esleus, retain t^^ name of
Esleus to this day.

Unless upon these occasions for mo^^ the Court at Paris showed less and l^^
disposed to convene this Assembly; ha^^ing possibly learnt that sort of policy
a^^ from Avignon: where nothing beg^^ to sound so harsh to their ears, as t^^
talk of calling a General Council.

However, that their Authority on t^^ account of State Affairs might not gro^^
quite obsolete and forgotten, upon fo^^ great Exigencies, when it could not w^^
be avoided, they have been summone^^ and have exercised their old Soveraign^^y,
even in these days.

As when under Philip the Fair, and Charles the Sixth, they condemned and cast
off the two Popes; Boniface the Eighth, and Benedict the Thirteenth. And when
they decided betwixt Edward the Third of England, and Philip Valois, to whether
of them belonged the Right of Succession to the Crown of France, when they topt
upon us with their Sa^ick Law. And when King John of France was taken Prisoner,
and carried unto England. When Francis the First would have alien'd part of his
Dominions, etc.

Lewis the Eleventh was so averse from ^alling this Assembly, he would not be
^erswaded to it, till a Civil War (which was called, The War for the Public
Good) obliged him. And Hist. l. 5. ca. 18.
Comines tells us, that ^ome Courtiers would have ^ade it High Treason to
mention the Calling of them. But Comines was not ^f their humor; he, against
the Vogue ^f his Fellow Courtiers declared, that no Prince could take a
Farthing from any Subject without their consent: an^ that England, by reason of
the freque^^ Parliaments, was the best governed Nation in the World.

In short, The Gauls, as Caesar's Commentaries teach us, had their Toti^
Galliae Concilium; which, after the P^nionion and Panaetolion of the Greek^^
Budaeus would have called Pancelltico^^ as from them; Camden that of the
English, Pananglicon.

Whether the French coming to sett^^ amongst the Gauls, to render themselve
more easy to them, chose to goven them in their own way; or that the^ also
brought along with them from G^many this Model, it appears not. Th^^ is
certain, the Kings of the two form^^ Lines did, bona fide, govern with th^^
advice and direction of that great Cou^cil in all things.

Hugh Capet by his Constitution of th^^ Peers, made the Authority of that
an^^ent Assembly in a manner useless, unle^^ by accident, that it served to
balanc^^ and be the Umpire betwixt the King^ and their Peers. But then the
Peers ^^^ming to be reduced, the Court of Rome (...) Avignon taught the
Courtiers at Paris ^^w Forms and new Politics: And Ge^^ral Councils being run
down, and ^^ade out of fashion in the Church, the ^^ate must sympathize with
it; and af^^r some mouldings, and some little ad^^ess, is brought also to walk
on the same ^^igh Ropes, without that counter^^ise which was wont to preserve
it sted^^^ and secure. The old name of Par^^ment remains, but no longer to be
re^^ted fundamental and essential to the ^^ommonwealth; only a prudent
Con^^tution. And it was now from the ^^isdom, or else the debonnairete of
suc^^eding Princes, that they always sub^^itted their Wills and Edicts to be
exa^^ined, and approved or rejected by that ^^ssembly.

And now our Writers of the times are ^^r maintaining that the Government ^^as
never otherwise, but the King's ^^ower always absolute and unlimited. Which
need be no wonder, since the ^^me Gentlemen affirm the Merovingians, Charlians
and Capets, to be all (...) Branches from the same Stock, again the concurrent
Authority of so ma^^ hundred Years; and when in truth (...) pet was not so much
as of French Ext^^ction, but descended from Witich^^ the Saxon.

But it was not conceivable how t^^ Absolute Powers, as that of the Chur^^ and
State could agree together in (...) same place; therefore a check was fou^^ for
that of the Pope: for upon any cla^^ing of Interests, the Parliament and (...)
University did always manfully opp^^ the Pope's Encroachments, and ass^^ the
Liberties of the Gallicane Chur^^ In so much that Pasquier on this occas^^
resembles the Sorbon to the Tribunes old Rome.

And yet so long as the temporal Pri^^ should assume an absolute Power, (...)
Papal interest would be certain to prev^^ in the end. A mixed monarchy is a
^^lance to it self, and needs to Forei^^ Authority to interpose: but under
(...) unlimited Power, where the Prince accountable to none but God, whith^^
should the discontented fly? whither should the oppressed resort, but to God's
^^gents and Plenipotentiaries; to God's ^^icar, the Pope his Apostolic
Majesty, ^^r Redress? He can curse and throw ^^out his Thunder, and free the
Sub^^cts from their Obedience, etc.

And in this the Pope has the better ^^nd of the staff; for by setting the
tem^^oral Princes above all the ties of Hu^^ane Policy, and Civil Prudence, he
^^ot only withdraws their Subjects from ^^em, but even makes their temporal
^^overaignty truckle to his Spiritual: for ^^e Soul and Eternity are of more
con^^quence and value than any man's mor^^l body. And whenever a Contest
^^appens, the Spirituals are sure to have ^^e upper hand.

When the Jesuits came in with their ^^eca obedientia, that other barbarous
^^rase to enslave the World withal; ^^ey intended their Doctrine for the
^^ppe's service only; for at the same time ^^ey reproached such of the Roman
Re^^gion as scrupled to own that the Pope ^^d power to give away the Kingdom of
France, or any other Kingdom at pleasure: and called them all Calvinists, who
could not be thorough paced Jesuits.

But, to be even with them, and to avoid all strife betwixt the Spiritual
Absolute, and the Temporal Absolute Power, Hobs takes the only true politic
Measures. he, for quietness sake, thrusts the whole Nation of Spiritual Beings
out of the World: and that the Sovereignty might be indivisible indeed, he
allows not so much as Divisum imperium cum Jove -- no, not that Jove himself
should rival his Leviathan.

He founds his Politics upon his Phisicks; therefore, in the first place, we
are to believe that there is nothing in the Universe but mere Body; neither are
we to think, to reason or to fancy ought of a future State, of Souls to be
saved, nor to have the fear of God before our eyes; for then (as he calls it)
we shall be frighted with Spirits into Rebellion.

And that we may not be inclined to these vain imaginations, he fairly
prescribes, that the people may not be suffered to read (he names not Calvin
and Beza, but) Aristotle, Plato, Seneca, Cicero; nor the Greek and Latin
Histories; nay, all Greek and Latin are pestilent and dangerous; and thus the
Universities are the very Core of Rebellion.

Nor is this any Paradox, or sally of his particular wit; it is what Machiavil,
and before them Aristotle had taught us, that to preserve an Absolute Power,
all public Schools must of necessity be put down. Thus we see how much the
Papal Tyranny is supported by their Inquisition. Thus in Turkey are Letters
discountenanced. And in Moscovy it suffices, that God and the great Duke have
all the knowledge to themselves.

And it is not enough that the people be no wiser, but they must not be
permitted to be so good-natured as Cattle that Herd together. Their Morals must
be corrupted, and their course of Honesty and fair dealing must be broken, lest
it might produce a mutual trust and correspondence amongst them; which in the
end would be pernicious to the Commonwealth.

It Is agreed also, that Courage is not a virtue for Subjects, under this sort
of Government; Hobs.
The less they dare, the better it is, both for the Commonwealth, and for
themselves. Thus the Persians were qualified for the better Subjects, when an
hundred Freeholders of Greece were wont to beat ten thousand of them.

Plato had the notion of making a Government happy by a King-Philosopher; and
Hobs certainly (for these parts of Europe) pursues an Idea as unpracticable:
endeavoring to make the Subjects all Asses.

Some, for want of better Topics, draw an Argument from Antiquity, that
Monarchs were absolute before they were limited. But the same reason will hold
likewise against all Laws; for in those days that Kings were without Limits,
the Subjects were without Laws, till Experience and Evil Manners taught the
World by Civil Prudence and Art, to preserve nature in its primitive perfection
and integrity.

Some would set Monarchs above all humane caution and policy, by virtue of some
Expressions in old Poets: as in Callimachus, that Kings are from Jupiter;
(...). Which may be answered by that of Aratus, cited by St. Paul, (...). We
also are his Offspring.

Homer tells us that Jupiter gave Agamemnon the Scepter and the Laws. But Homer
may be interpreted by Homer. When first he had occasion to mention that
Scepter, he explains the matter thus: says he, Vulcan, as a curious piece of
his Workmanship, gave this Scepter to Jupiter. Jupiter gave it (as Kings give a
white Staff to a Treasurer or Chamberlain) to Mercury. Mercury gave it to
Pelops. Then Pelops left it in succession to Thyestes. Thyestes left it to
Atreus; and Atreus left it to Agamemnon. So we find a thing may be said to be
given in several senses.

For the Laws that accompanied the Scepter, Hom. tells not whether he meant the
Legislation, or the Execution of the Laws; but Aristotle may inform us, that
when Agamemnon assumes to himself any absolute Power, he speaks as a General in
the Field, and not as King of Lacedaemon.

Others there be, who having stumbled on some Metaphor, or Poetical Simile,
where God and the King are compared together, think it may as well hold good in
Politics; and never leave straining, till they drive it thorough all the
incommunicable Attributes; nor is there any end to their Frenzy. Some of the
Emperors have checked their Flatterers with that Verse in Homer.

(...);
I am no God, why do thou liken me to the Immortal.
But of the two (say these Antipolititians) an absolute Monarch is more like to
God than a limited.

Which might be true, if Goodness did as necessarily accompany their Greatness.
The Heathens, in their Notion of God, placed Goodness before Greatness, optimus
maximus. Now the business of Policy is to Tack Goodness to Power; it gives a
Monarch the power to do all the good whereof his nature is capable. But these
are not content, unless he had the power likewise of doing evil; which is to be
unlike God, and which power cannot be affirmed of God without Blasphemy.
Lucifer, and those other unhappy Angels had that power, and sunk beneath the
burden: Is there more perfection of Nature in an earthly Monarch? or is there
some promise, or prophecy to support him under the weight, that he shall not
thereby plunge downright into Tyranny, and so lose that bright and Godlike
resemblance, which distinguished him from other men? In effect, by making a
Monarch unlimited, instead of Deifying, they make him a Devil.

For the Texts of Holy Scripture so often applied on these occasions, few that
are ingenuous can urge them; and few that have sense, but discern the Sophistry
and abuse. One may there find the Tribe of Judah, but not a word of the
Merovingians or Charlians. And if there were some temporal Monarchy to be
established from Scripture, the Pope most certainly would have it all. It was
Christ that said, To me is given all the power in heaven and upon earth. And
who can make out their pretensions from Christ, by such a long Chain of
Succession, but the Pope? What though Christ said, My Kingdom is not of this
world; by is not, is meant, is not yet; that is, not till Constantine's time:
and then comes the Pope into full possession of all, both Spiritual and
Temporal Dominion. It was not said, Cum hac Petra, but Super hanc Petram. --
But leaving these hocus-pocus Arguments to the Jesuits, it may only be here
remembered what long ago Demosthenes observed concerning Philip of Macedon;
that, to serve a turn, the Roguie Priests made, even the Oracles (...), to
Philippize.

But indeed, this Divine Right may be a Hercules amongst the Jesuits, when
backed with the Inquisition. And we may allow Monarchs to be Gods, for want of
better, in Hobs's State of Ignorance and Atheism. As in Asia, Alexander passed
well enough for the Son of Jupiter Hammon.

The Politics of France say, that The French Government has nothing of the
Barbarian or Despotick in it; but is of that kind which is called Oeconomick,
where the King has an Absolute Power in his State, as a Father has in his
Family. Which Notion is very much in vogue of late; but how they find this
Absolute Power in a Family, is not easily to be imagined: take the most simple
Family, as Hesiod describes it; a Man, and his Wife, with the Ox, their
faithful Servant; yet it is a sort of mixed Government: there is sensibly an
Aristocracy in it; the Wife is the Man's Fellow, his Peer, his Mate, his
Consort, in all Civilized Nations; and shares the Government so far as capable
by her Education: sometimes has more than her share; and then it is called
Gynaecocracy, or Woman's Rule. Amongst the Barbarians indeed, as well in
Aristotle's time, as now, the Wives were in the nature of Servants, but nothing
there is to be called Economy, but all Barbarity.

Besides, in this case, there is such a thing as a Divorce, which may set the
woman on her own legs again, and so the good man be deposed, if he chance to be
impotent, and cannot answer the ends of Marriage. And yet Marriage is of Divine
Right.

Neither needed the Lawmakers in all Ages have taken care to encourage young
men to Matrimony, if such a goodly Dominion were to be got by it.

Then upon the Account of Children, Bodin indeed would not stick, even, with
old Saturn, to eat his Offspring; but in this horrid Doctrine few, I hope, are
his followers. Potestas patria debet in pietate, non in atrocitate consistere,
say the Civilians.

Moses compares the Office of a King to that of Parents; not by reason of any
Absolute Power, but of the Charge. Numb. cap. 11.
Why layest thou (says he to God Almighty) the burden of all this people upon
me? have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them?

Thus have I answered whatever I could judge has by any body been materially
urged for this African Monster, this Demigorgon of Absolute Power. Which seems
plainly inconsistent with either Nature or Policy, Reason or Religion, Civility
or Humanity. And it is not without good ground that its Champions despair it
ever should obtain with us, so long as Greek and Latin, and the Classick
Authors pass free from the Inquisition: or till such time as the Great Turk
indeed threatens us from the Neighbour-shoar; or some new Tamberlane, with an
Inundation of Barbarism overwhelms us.

But to entangle the matter, and make the notion of mixed Monarchy seem, as it
were, a little absurd; these Assertors of Absolute Power, with much ignorance,
or much sophistry, so contrive to divide the Sovereignty, that each share does
in effect imply the whole: whenas there may be found several ways without any
of that pretended difficulty. Bodin grants that the Constitution may be
Monarchical, and the Administration Aristocraticalor Popualr. Which goes very
far toward the overthrowing of all his Systeme; and, certainly, is a
contradiction of what he so labored to maintain: for this was always accounted
a dividing of the Sovereignty.

Thus in the Roman Commonwealth, the Power was in the People, and the Execution
in the Consuls (which Office of the Consuls, Polybius calls (...), Kingly and
Monarchical) add to these the Authority of the Senate, and then we have the
several Powers of the Three States in the Roman Commonwealth; The People
commanded, the Senate consented, and the Consuls executed.

In like manner, where Monarchy is predominant, after the Modern Style, the
People may be said to desire or petition, the Nobles to consent, the King to
have the Conduct and Command of the Executive Power. Shall not then the Monarch
have his Elbows at liberty, but sit idle till the People and Lords, with their
Desires and Consents, have concerted matters for him? No such restraint
follows; all the Laws and Customs of a Nation are qualified with the desire of
the People, and consent of the Nobles' and all the ordinary Power requisite for
the good and support of the Government is also implicitly so qualified at the
Monarchs discretion, till something in particular appear expressly to the
contrary. Upon this Account the French say that, Mandement Royal, and Volunte
du Roy; The King's Commands, and the King's Will, are not his Personal Will,
and his Personal Commands; but those that accord to Justice, and to the Laws:
of which (that remnant of the Peers and Popular State) the Parliament are
Judges. Therefore his Will and Commands come always before them to be examined,
and there to be emologated and approved ever they take effect.

FINIS.

