The Last Sermon and Sayings Of that most Pious and Reverend Divine, Mr. John
Oaks, Minister of the Gospel in the City of London, who was struck with Death
in his Pulpit, in the Afternoon after he had preached this Sermon; to the
admiration of all his Hearers. A Subject of great Account, worthy to be Written
in Letters of Gold.

Being a Thanksgiving Sermon, for God's great Goodness in delivering this
Nation from Popery, Slavery, and Destruction, by that Eminent Instrument of
God's Glory, King William King of England.

Discoursed of from these words,

Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you,
but rather rejoice because your Names are written in Heaven. Luke 10. 20. And
having preached upon the first part of the Text in the Forenoon, of God's great
deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery, etc. and coming to treat more fully in
the Afternoon, What it is to have our Names written in Heaven, God took him to
himself, and gave him a full Enjoyment thereof.

With a brief sum of his Funeral Sermon preached the next Sunday after, by the
Reverend Divine Mr. Williams.

To which is added two Godly prayers.

Printed for J. Conyers in Holbourn. 1689.

MR. Oaks His Last Sermon, etc.
Luke 10. 20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject
unto you, but rather Rejoice because your Names are written in Heaven.
THis Text read unto you, may at the first view seem to be like Rain in the
Harvest, or Snow in Summer, very unseasonable, and may seem to contradict the
loud Calls of the present Providence, which God's Providence at this day seems
to call on us for, when we are called to Rejoice, for that signal Mercy and
unparalled Deliverance which God has wrought for us and this poor Nation at
this time when God has in so short a time, and by such unlooked for means and
by such an unexpected way so suddenly altered the Scene of our Affairs; when
God has broken the Snare the Wicked had prepared for us, and suffered them to
be taken by the works of their own hands, and found out a way for the
accomplishing of such a Delivrance as this is, which you will every day be more
and more convinced of.

Surely the Lord calls for People at this day to rejoice, and yet my Text seems
to put a check on this rejoicing.

Rejoice not in this, that the Lord has thus delivered us; Why? The various
Circumstances as attends this mavelous Deliverance calls for Joy and Singing
of Praises unto the Lord: Psalm. 126. 1, 2. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream. So suddenly, and by such
unexpected means, God turned about the Captivity of England, and turned away
from us that bondage we were like to be in; we were like them that dream. And
what were the Consequences of Ziors great Deliverance? Then was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing; then said they among the
Heather, the Lord has done great things for them. The very wicked Atheists may
take notice of this, and may say, the Lord is God, and he has done great
things for us, and shall not we say so? the Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad, and have reason to be so This is that God calls for, But
let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God; yea, let them
exceedingly rejoice: s^ng unto God, sing praises to his Name, Psalm. 68. 3, 4

And this is that which the generality of Protestants are disposed for; now you
cannot but expect every one you meet withal will have a smile in his or her
face, except it be in the face of a Papist, who have cause for sorrow: But
whence is it God's People have cause to rejoice? It is a necessary duty to
rejoice; praise is comely for the Saints; when God delivers Zion, we should
rejoice and be glad; yet says my Text, Rejoice not. Now how shall we reconcile
these seeming contradictions, to put our hearts into a right frame? we must
look into the Context, and see how these words are brought in, and what is the
drift of them.

In the foregoing Chapter, you find our Savior gives commission unto his
Apostles, to go forth and work Miracles, and to preach the Gospel; and to
encourage them, he promises to protect them and to give them success in it: And
in this Chapter ^e sends forth other seventy, and they go forth, and afterward
they return to their Master, to give him an account of their success, ay in the
17th. verse, And the seventy returned again with joy, and said, Lord, even the
Devils are subject unto us through thy name. They returned to their Master with
joy.

By the way let me tell you, We are Ambassadors sent forth by our Lord and
Master Christ, and in a little time we know not how soon we must return unto
our Master, and give an account unto our Lord and Master, of our success, what
it has been.

And Sirs, by the Call of God, I have been among you nigh Ten years; What
success shall I give account of unto my Master, as to you? what account shall I
give of you to my Lord and Master at my return? shall my return be with joy? or
shall I say to my Lord and Master, Lord, I went and stretched forth my hand to
a gainsaying people, they would not be prevailed with, they would not hear,
they would not hearken: This would be a sad account as to you.

Well, but these Apostles return with joy, and had good success, and amongst
the rest, they tell their Master, that the very Devils were subject unto them:
wherever Gospel Ministers are sent forth, the Devil raises all the force he
can; if possible, he will raise all the power of Hell, that if he can help it,
one Sinner shall not be gained to Christ. The Devils are subject unto us. This
was the power the Devils then had; it was to torment the members of the body,
but now it is very rare the Devils power is lengthened out so far; if he had
power to torment our bodies, he would make sad havoc of men's bodies, but
blessed be God, all the power of Devils is limited, they are chained up now,
they cannot go no further than God permits them: But then, it was a common
trade for Devils to possess men's bodies, and to to: meant them.

The Proverb is, he will play at any Game; Now for wise ends God permitted the
Devil to have such encursions upon men's bodies, so he had upon Job's body, he
filled it with Diseases, noisome Diseases, to try Job, but his aim is to
possess the heart mostly, there he does the greatest mischief: but now God lets
not loose the Devil on men's bodies; O dreadful and sad would it be if God
should let go the Devil to possess peoples bodies, he then would make them mad;
and it would be a sad judgment of God, but sadder it is for the Devil to
possess the heart, as he does of thousands, even of all who are in an
unregenerate estate, the devils dwells in their hearts, there he rules and
reigns, yet people, through their folly, are not sensible of it.

I do not quote this Text as an instance to quench or put a stop unto those
joys or rejoicings in God, on the account of that most astonishing Deliverance
which God lately has begun to work upon us; no, but to rectify our joys and
rejoicings,

We are not to rest in Rejoicing in our Deliverance from our dangers, without
we are now delivered from dangers within; but alas, Sirs, let me tell you, for
us to be preserved from our dangers without, and not to be preserved from our
dangers within, it all signifies nothing, all our temporal deliverances will
signify nothing.

From this prohibition I note,

Doct. That the best of Gods people are liable unto Irregularity in their
Actings of their Affections.
These Disciples were so, our Savior checks them here for it, and so are we
too much prone to be irregular in the acting of our Affections: The Affections
are the wings of the Soul, by which they do carry a kind of vehemence and
readiness to the Objects set before them, as they are distinct, Lode, Delight,
Joy, on one hand; Hatred, Fear, Sorrow on the other hand; These God has planted
in the Understanding enlightened, and in the Will rectified; so that these
considered aright, are of great use to us. These were rectified but when Man
became depraved in his Affections, and rose up in Rebellion against God
himself: These Affections became rustic and rude, and in rebellion against
God, until God brought the faculties of the Soul into due order again.

Man in his imperfection, those Affections, as unsanctified, does a World of
mischief, but when rightly considered, they are of great use whilst
unfanctified, they are set on wrong Objects; as for instance: Man's Love being
corrupted and depraved, his Love is liable to be set on such things as he
should rather loath than desire: Christ is lovely, yea, altogether lovely; yet
such is the corruption of man's Nature, that see not any form or comeliness in
Christ.

Those Objects that are set before us and offered to us, as most desirable and
delightful in themselves. the corruption of man's Nature is such, that that
which it should love it loathes; it calls Evil Good, and Good Evil: Thus is man's
Nature, till it is renewed, and when it is renewed, we have not such Affections
for Christ as we should have. Alas, that disease of man's Affections is not
fully cured. So, for worldly desires, they are in many so immoderate, their
Affections for the World are so immoderate, that they set their hearts on the
world, they make a God of it; many will not have Idols in their Houses, oh! but
they will set up an Idol in their Hearts, they do not think of spiritual
Idolatry, Covetousness is Idolatry, which is set up in their Hearts

Solomon directs us in the day of prosperity to be joyful, etc. Eccl. 7. 14.
It Is true, the very dawning of the day of our temporal prosperity, is great
ground for our Rejoicing, if our joy be managed aright: In the day of
prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider, God also has set
the one against the other, to the end that man should and nothing after him;
but there is a Generation who are not concerned either the one way or the other
for adversity or prosperity. God in a way of Judgment has threatened to ruin
us of this Nation, and that deservedly enough, God knows, but now God in a
stupendous way has turned the Scene of his Providence, and smiled on this
Nation, He now smiles on England, that has not deserved it, God knows.

But whether God smiles or frowns, it is all one with some, they are not
concerned, they care not so they may thrive in their Enterprises, they care not
how it goes with the Church of God.

But this is a sinful life indeed to live thus.

Now, Sirs, how is it with you? you are not it may be concerned at this great
turn of Providence in Gods so wonderful Delivering us, notwithstanding our
provocations of him. How is it with you? Did you take notice what God did this
last week past, we were in fear we should have been destroyed, and our Enemies
design The Prince of Orange's Arrival at St. James'.
was, that we should be cut off, but God sent a Deliverer to this Nation,
though unexpected. Notwithstanding what God now has done for England, for
London just sinking, and for the Protestant Interest, that was even gasping for
life, bleeding, yet some do not Rejoice in God for these temporal Deliverances,
and on the account of these temporal Immunities, which are again restored, and
in respect of those Cockatrice-Eggs, which shall all be removed.

Certainly now the Heathen will say there is a God; I must tell you, there has
been a great deal of Atheism amongst us, but now sure the Atheist will own
there is a God, for none but God could bring about such a miraculous work.

Use. If these outward Deliverances be sanctified, then have we cause to
rejoice.
These are great Blessings and Deliverances; but let me tell you, if they be
not sanctified, they will be great Plagues to us, therefore rejoice in them
that God would sanctify them to you, as to lengthen out the Gospel-Liberty,
that Sinners who are strangers to God, may be brought home to God, that God may
smile upon us, that God may pardon our Sins; if this be, then you may joy and
rejoice, and that abundantly, excess of joy is forbid, but herein we cannot be
excess in our rejoicing. If your names are written in heaven, you have cause to
rejoice in God that you are freed from those snares and temptations that might
hinder you in the Joy of your Salvation; and if you are as yet strangers unto
God, you have cause to rejoice in God for this temporal Deliverance for the
hopes you have of God's continuing the Gospel, for the hopes you have of the
means that you may be brought home to God, otherwise you are not to meddle with
this Joy; for it is true, you are delivered from Papists and their bloody
designs, but let me tell you, if you are not brought home to God, you are yet
brought into Slavery, the slavery of the Devil, and are dropping into Hell.

Let all rejoice primarily, not in this merely, as it is an outward means of
deliverance, but as it may be a means of Repentance, and of bringing the Sinner
home unto God, as this outward means may be sanctified, otherwise I know not
what cause you have to rejoice.

Let us labor to get our Hearts into such a frame as to joy and rejoice on
account of this temporal deliverance. Now I shall show you in four
considerations the foundation of your joy, on the account of this our begun
deliverance.

1. Consider what Evils this Providence has delivered us from; it has
delivered this Nation from Popery and Slavery; if God had not delivered us from
Popery and Slavery, (both which coming in upon us like a Corent) if God had not
prevented it, we could not have escaped.

1. God has hereby delivered us from Popery.

Oh what a dreadful dangerous thing is Popery! It is that Religion which does
teach men to keep no Faith; it is a Religion which teaches men to worship
Stocks and Stones, and that on penalties too: Oh what a dreadful damning thing
is Popery! that they may be Converts, they will cut your throats, so that it is
not your Estates will serve them, but they would have your Lives too.

2. God has hereby delivered us from Slavery too, even from serving an Idol:
If God had not delivered us thus; then what would have become of us and our
Children? Could you be content to have your Children brought up to fall down to
a Crucifix, and to worship a Breaden God, to the ruin of their own souls;
certainly, if any persons were ever under such a Character as in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
11, 12. it must be Papists, And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions, that they should believe a Lie; That they all might be damned who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Oh the tyranny we
are in part delivered from! we are delivered from their infringing upon those
Immu^ities and Privileges of our Forefathers, which was from our Forefathers
care, and to their great Cost, that we might not be brought up into Popish
Slavery.

2. Another foundation of joy and rejoicing for this begun Deliverance, is the
time when God thus interposed between us and our danger, it was at the time
when we were even ripe for our destruction Indeed we do not know yet what our
danger was: Oh had not God just at that very time interposed so seasonably,
when the Knife was just at our Throats, in what a sad condition had we been in
at this day, but the Lord was seen in the Mount.

3. Consider the means God did make use of; this is a Foundation of our joy and
rejoicing, that God should put it into the Heart of a stranger, even of a
Foreign Prince, and that God should Spirit him for such a Work, and put
resolutions and courage into him to run the hazard of his life, and should make
him of such a public spirit, which many Englishmen have lost; that he should
come from that plenty, that splendor he was in, to bring about this our begun
Deliverance.

4. This should raise our hearts to rejoice from the manner of this begun
Deliverance, that it was so suddenly, speedily, and in so short a time: Indeed
God has said, As the Birds flying, so will I save Jerusalem. That such a work
should be done without the Effusion of blood, whereas he might have answered
the Prayers of his People in terrible things, as might make our hearts to
quake; our streets might been running with blood; our garments might been
rolling in blood; and when the Sword was drawn* it might have eaten up much
flesh, and drank up much blood, but it pleased God to interpose all this. This
might cause us to rejoice. I might suggest one thing more, to raise our hearts
up to this frame: For whom was this wrought? what were we Protestants? Ay; But
are we a reformed People? if not, we are for all this an undone People.

2. I now come to the second part of the Text; But rather rejoice, because your
names are written in heaven. This is a precept or direction what we should
chiefly rejoice in. [But rather] Rather is a Note, sometimes signifies the
difference or inequality of the thing by a Figure. But rather rejoice; that is,
rejoice more, let your joy be raised higher, let your hearts be enlarged wider,
unto an higher acknowledgment of such a thing: It should be taken uppermost in
all our thoughts; rejoice in nothing else absolutely.

If thou be one who art assured thy name is written in Heaven, whether this
temporal Salvation came or no, you have grounds of rejoicing. Here are two
things before us, 1. The Object.

1. What is that we are obliged so much to have in our thoughts and to have so
much on our hearts? It is expressed, to have our names written in heaven. 2.
The act or duty, with respect or relation unto the Object, it is in that one
word Rejoice.

Doct. That a Christian having evidence of his Name being written in the book
of God in heaven, this affords him sufficient matter for his continued joy, and
rejoicing here on Earth.
I say, if a Christian have good satisfaction in this point, it abundantly
affords him just and sufficient matter for his constant joy and rejoicing on
Earth, let matters go how they will. Sirs, whatever circumstances you may live
to be under here in this world, if you have a satisfactory Evidence of your
Names being written above, you may not only be reconciled unto, but may smile
on every dispensation of Providence. There are three things lies before me to
be considered.

1. What it is to have our Names written in Heaven; that is one great thing
wants to be explained.

2. What those Evidences are which a Christian may have, that he is in that
blessed number of such whose Names are written in Heaven.

3. On what account this affords such matter of Joy as continually to rejoice.

1. What it is to have our Names written in Heaven. It is a Metaphorical
Expression, which alludes unto the custom of City or Corporation Communities,
where persons who are Members of that City or Corporation, are invested with
some peculiar privilege or immunity* that are not common to all persons, but
only unto those peculiar Corporations where they are related; unto these
Corporations particular Laws are proper unto them, and Free persons thereof
have a propriety unto those privileges. Now these privileges are recorded and
registered where these persons may find out their Names: Thus Names are written.

1. There is God's opened Look, which is the revealed Will of God in the
written word of God, wherein God reveals and discovers unto us his will, in
order unto our Salvation.

Oh! this is a Book God has put into our hands to be our daily study, and
blessed be God, who has delivered us from a Generation of men, who would have
taken this book out of our hands, such who will not enter into the Kingdom
themselves, and would shut you out, and hinder you also from coming there. Let
me tell you Sirs, that a Bible would been a precious thing in your hands,
(however now you slight it) if God had suffered them to go on; but seeing God
has so priviledg'd us, as yet to continue this Book among us, let us study
this Book often: There you have a discovery of the sinful and miserable
condition we exposed our selves to, which we have plunged our selves into by
our causeless Apostasy; and there we have a discovery, blessed be God, of that
Estate we were restored to, of Life and Salvation, which God of infinite wisdom
found out, and proposed unto fallen Man; and you know how you may be delivered
from that woeful and miserable condition you were exposed unto.

FINIS.
The Substance of a SERMON preached the next Lords Day after the death of the
Reverend Mr. John Oaks, by Mr. W. Williams, Minister of the Gospel.
Psalm. 39. 4. Lord, make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what it
is, that I may know how frail I am.
THe meaning of the words of David is this, Though I am convinced I Am a dying
man, and am persuaded that I shall not abide long here, here is no abiding
place, yet do I not feel this on my heart and mind, do not answer and comply
with these convictions, I do not understand this truth aright, therefore Lord
teach me; let it come with such light and power on my mind, to influence light
into my mind, heart, and life; make me to know my end* clear up this truth to
me, that I may know how frail I am.

Doct. That Man is frail, and that every Man ought to entreat GOD to make him
to know how frail he is.
Man is frail, as appears by the shortness of his days; Man's days are short,
though he should live to his full Age; Man lives by Divine support, he lives
not by his own strength. 2ly, It is evident Man is a poor frail Creature,
subject to be cut off in his full strength; so says Job chapter 23. one dies in
his full strength, being at ease and quiet, very many do so without saying, I
am sick, they suddenly drop away, as many of you were spectators of an instance
in this very Pulpit: Our breath is soon stopped, and we drop, the Thread is very
short that holds every man, he steps into his grave in the midst of his walk,
therefore man's life is compared to a vapor which soon empties, and is gone:
Lord, teach me, as a dying man, that I may be earnest and diligent after the
things by which I may honor and glorify thee; therefore he that would obtain
the honoring and glorifying of God and enjoying of him, must d^ these things
by which he will be glorified: First, we must believe in God, and we must
repent of our sins; we must be examining our selves, know our selves, we must
live above the world, we must converse with God, and be sanctified and made
pure before we can glorify or enjoy God; therefore we should pray, Lord help
me as a poor dying Creature, to see my need of believing ^o^k of repenting and
sanctifying work; Lord, teach me so to number my days, as to apply them to
true wisdom; Lord, help me so to live, that I may be always ready for death:
Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house comes, at
evening, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning, lest coming
suddenly, he find you sleeping; for men are very backward to know their
frailty; there is no season plainer, and yet how backward are men to learn it!

Use of Reproof to those that are ignorant of their Frailty.
Have thou a thorough Conviction of this? but oh how little do we live in the
consideration of this! Death is far off the thoughts of young ones; they have
made a Covenant with Death and Hell, but their Covenant shall not stand: Yt
young ones, how many are dead younger than you, and some of the same age! and
might not that have been you? does not every distemper tell you how frail you
are, and may be soon snatched away? How many distempers might have been your
death, had not God sealed your Deliverance? and yet you know not how soon you
may be called away, to give an account of your stewardship. O how attentive
would carry one of us be unto this Sermon, did we believe it would be our last
Sermon!

The next sort of persons this reproves, is Worldlings, who lay out their
strength and time only in present things, which are not worth the looking
after. Oh, let me urge this upon you: First, Consider how soon your breath is
gone, and you come to nothing; you who please your selves in vain f^ncies* and
think, if you may be rich, your Riches may last, oh consider, all you have or
desire can do no good when Death comes: Consider, Heaven will be worth all you
can do for it in so little a time as this Life is; none can say their labor is
lost that they laid out for Heavens Glory.

Again, You who were careless Christians, even you will repent that you were no
wiser when you come to die; you careless negligent Christians, when you come to
die, you will cry out, Oh that I had been more circumspect in my ways and
walking! Oh that I had made Religion my business! oh that such and such a day
had been better spent! oh that such and such a season had been better improved!
Such wishes you will have at death: And, Why will you not be as wise now as at
death? Consider that the estate of your Souls will afflict you when you come to
die under your neglect.

2. Use, by way of Exhortation.
And I beseech every one of you to beg of God to make you know how frail you
are; be earnest with God, that he would make you know it; let every one go home
under a thorough Conviction of it; I am a poor fading Flower, perishing Dust,
yea, a Bubble. And reason thus with thy self; Have I employed my time to its
proper sense, for to learn this Lesson, and to live it? I may die soon,
therefore live always on your watch, do, and do what you would be contented to
do and be when you come to die, if Death should seize on you suddenly: Now
think how few your days may be, and how soon they may be gone, and that I may
never have time to receive or do good: Oh labor to know your own frailty.

Sirs, I am willing to take the advantage of the awful Providence which was on
this Congregation, very lately, on the sudden departure of your Minister Mr.
John Oaks.

Certainly this I may say of him, That few were fitter to die suddenly than he
was, and no man could desire to die in a better Work; no Minister who died
suddenly, could die in a better Employment than he did; no Minister could die
fitter than he; all who was seeing him so suddenly stricken by death, in the
Pulpit, could not but perceive him in the view of Eternity, and that very Text
he was at his departure upon, tells you of the great Rejoicing he was under,
the words are these, rejoice rather because your Names are written in Heaven:
This ought to have refreshed your minds, he was pressing you to labor after
this subject of Joy: He was of an acute temper, not of a moross spirit, but of
an even meek spirit: He could not, I say, desire to die* a better pasture, he
in his Work with his God; and indeed many Divines desire to die in such a
pasture to be found in their Lord's Work when he calls for them: He was struck
with death in his work in this place, in this very Pulpit; and you who often
and usually heard him calling on you to close with Christ, to leave your sins,
and to turn unto God, and be converted; but as to this day, all of you have not
hearkened to your Ministers calls and entreaties, in the Name of his Lord, but
you are still in an unconverted estate; Will you believe now these words to be
his last and dying words unto you? You cannot hear me any more; you will hear
me to declare the Truths of God no more; you can hear me no more to urge you to
do your duty; you are as like to die, and may die suddenly as I, you may
provoke God to cut you off as suddenly as I am; you may provoke God by your
Sins to cut you off as I am, by your provocations of and rebellions against God.

Sirs, your Minister is gone, have you gotten all the good you should have
gotten? God has cut him off without his taking his leave of you. Oh therefore
labor to reflect on what ye have done; ye were often under his Ministry, and
yet are unconverted, and were spectacles of this sad and sudden stroke;
consider with your selves what ye have done: Oh, what have I done to contribute
to my Minister's death? was he not thus stricken speechless for your Rebellion
against his calls; O Lord, what have I done? Have thou no hand in thy Ministers
death, by your unfruitfulness under his Ministry? the thoughts of your
Ministers death is matter of bewailing, sspeciasly to you that do know the
estate of your Souls are concerned in it: Howe^er, I beg this of you, who stood
and beheld this sad spectacle, of the sudden departure of your Pastor, never to
let the sight go out of your minds.

Oh, how ought I to die, and be in a readiness to be dissolved! and, how ought
I to pray, and never to set the thoughts of death out of my mind! how ought I
to pray, and to be earnest with God, that I may die in my Work, as this
Minister did!

The Dying Ministers last Prayer.
O Most Gracious and everlasting Lord God, whose mercy endures for ever, whose
blessings have cherished me even from my cradle to this very moment of death,
that now am lauching forth into the ocean of eternity; be pleased to assist me
in my dark passage through which I must go, before I can come to enjoy the
blessedness of thy presence. Into thy hands O Lord, I recommend my dear and
immortal Soul, ransomed by the blood of thy Son, from the lake of bitterness;
in and through whom I expect to be made eternally happy, and a coheir with the
Saints and Angels: For his sake I humbly beg the pardon of all my
transgressions, hoping to live with thee for ever in thine everlasting Kingdom
of Glory. Lord hear my Prayers. and grant my Petition for his sake in whom thou
art well pleased; to whom with thee and thine ever blessed Spirit. Be all
honor, glory and praise, Amen.

A Prayer for his Most excellent Majesty King WILLIAM.
ALmighty God, who in times of Trouble, and Danger, do raise up Deliverers of
thy people, and sillest their hearts with zeal for thy Service, We beseech Thee
to bless His Majesty King William, whom thou have sent to be the Defender of
our Laws, and Religion; Protect his Person, strengthen his Hands, let thy holy
Fear evermore Rule in his Heart; that, having Thee only before his Eyes, he may
in all things seek thy Honor and Glory, and study to Unite this divided
Nation, and establish it upon the sure Foundations of Mercy and Truth,
Righteousness and Peace. This we beg for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord
and Savior, Amen.

minister preaching from pulpit to a group of people

With Allowance.

FINIS.

