A SERMON Preached At the Assizes HELD AT READING, In the COUNTY of BERKS, July
12th. 1681.

By JOHN OAKS M. A. and Vicar of Shinfield in the County aforesaid.

LONDON: Printed for Joanna Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1681.

To the Right Honorable HENRY EARL of CLARENDON, Treasurer to the Queens
Majesty, AND One of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
WHen I preached the ensuing Sermon, I designed nothing less in the world, than
the Printing of it; nor am I yet so vain as to think it worthy of the Press.
This is a critical and censorious age, wherein none indeed should present their
labors to the public view, but such only, whose great abilities may prove
serviceable to the Common good.

But as for this plain Sermon, it has nothing at all to recommend it, but your
Lordships approbation at the preaching of it, together with those worthy
Gentlemen, the High Sheriff and Grand Jury of the County, who afterward
requested me (as the world may see) to print it: I shall therefor make no
other apology for appearing now in public, but say, it was their request that
caused it. These being all persons of worth, and true Loyalty (which appears by
their Address lately made to his Majesty) I could not but bend my inclinations
(though with much reluctance) to satisfy their desires, and choose rather to
expose my self to the Censures of the World, than deny their unanimous and
importunate request.

I wish (though I much doubt it) that it may have the same effect, as was by
some of them intimated, who used this as an argument to me, That the printing
of it may be for the public good, whereas the preaching could reach only a
few that were then present. I was likewise informed by some others of them,
that they heard it reported, this was but the Copy with some little variations
of a printed Sermon. But ala^! that did not at all move me, I looked upon it
only as the impertinence of some peevish Zealots, whose usual method it is to
make something to cavil at, rather than want exercise for their reviling
faculties.

Having thus showed the World the true and only reason that moved me to print
this short discourse; for such indeed it is, and the reason of that was,
because I thought brevity most suitable to the occasion for which it was
designed: I am now only to beg your Lordships pardon for prefixing so great a
Name before a Tract of so little worth; it was only the experience I have had
of your Lordships goodness, that emboldened me to do it; and therefore I was no
sooner prevailed upon to print this Sermon, but I resolved at the same instant
to offer it (how mean soever) to your Lordship's Patronage: and I hope in some
sense I may justify the doing of it, because the sole design of this Sermon
(how meanly soever performed) is to set forth our duty to God and the King, and
therefore most proper to be dedicated to your Lordship, the most exact observer
of both. If therefore your Lordship please to accept and favor it, I shall
think my self and it secure, notwithstanding all the Censures of the World. I
value them not, but shall rest satisfied in this, that I have made some, though
but a weak acknowledgement of that duty and service I owe your Lordship, but
more especially that your Lordship will vouchsafe to accept such weak
performances.

And therefore that Almighty God would bless your Lordship, and your most
excellent good Lady (from whose joint benevolence I have received many and
great favors) with long life, and much prosperity here, and with eternal bliss
and happiness hereafter, is, and ever shall be the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted humble Servan^ John Oaks.

MARK 12.17. And Jesus answering, said unto them; Render to Caesar the things
that are Cesars, and to God the things that are God's.


THese words are our Savior's answer to a certain Question proposed to him by
the Pharisees and Herodians concerning the lawfulness of paying Tribute, as
appears by the foregoing Verses: being armed with their Foxlike subtilty, they
came unto him, and said, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no
man; for thou regardest not the person of men, but teach the way of God in
truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, ort shall
we not give? The deceit that lay hid under this Question, may be probably
conceived to be thus: (for they came on purpose to try if they could catch him
in his words) That if Christ had answered, that it was not lawful to pay it,
they would have accused him, and delivered him into the hands of the Roman
Governor for a seditious man, according to Luke 20.20. And they watched him,
and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might
take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and
authority of the governor.

And on the other side, if he had said that it was lawful, they would have
disgraced him among the people, as one that consented to the Romans Tyranny and
Impiety: but he knowing their hypocrisy said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring
me a penny that I may see it: Or, as St. Matthew expresses it, Show me the
tribute-mony: and when they brought it unto him, he says unto them, Whose is
this image and superscription? and they said unto him, Caesar 's.

And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar
's, and to God the things that are God's.

As if he had said, Seeing that God has subjected you to the Romans, as
appears by the Stamp of your current Coin, which is a sign of Supreme power,
bear it patiently, that does not any way hinder the service you owe to God as
you are his people; and besides it is an easy matter to satisfy both God and
Caesar in this payment, which consists but in a little sum of money.

From our Savour's thus stating the Question, we may infer this Proposition:
That the duty and service which we ought to perform directly and immediately to
Almighty God, does not acquit or exempt us from paying our due obedience to the
civil Magistrate.

For he supposes something to be necessarily due to both, when he commands us
to pay what belongs to each. In the prosecution of this, therefore, I shall
insist upon these two things plainly implied in the words of my Text.

1. Our duty as it relates to the Civil Magistrate: Render to Caesar the things
that are Cesar's. 2. Our duty as it relates to God: Render to God the things
that are Gods.
1. Of our duty as it relates to the Civil Magistrate: In the handling whereof,
I shall endeavor to show what we are to render as due from us to him. The
first thing that I shall mention is Honor; and this must extend it self to our
thoughts, words, and actions.

1. First, we must honor him even in our thoughts and intentio^^, we are not
to harbor an ill opinion, no^ ^^^^^tain a prejudicial thought: for though the
secrets of the heart are not accountable to man, because not to be fathomed by
a finite understanding; yet there is a God that tries the very Heart and Reins:
he (to whom the darkness is no darkness, but the night as clear as the
Noonday) can as easily discover the most obscure thoughts as the most apparent
actions, and as easily punish them as the most notorious and scandalous crimes.

Curse not therefore the King, no not in thy thought, and curse not the rich in
thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter, Eccles. 10.20. A contemptuous thought of
King, or lawful Authority, is a sin of an high nature, and therefore not to be
indulged by any that think themselves concerned either to be good Subjects or
good Christians. We must resist the very first motions, and Check the most
secret inclinations to evil; otherwise it will steal upon us by degrees; and if
once we get a habit of thinking ill, who knows how soon it may break forth into
bitter words? (for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks;) and
though our thoughts were our own while confined to our breasts, yet being thus
vented they cease to be in our power, nor will it be easy to hinder the ill
consequence that attends them, or to heal a Wound made by such sharp Arrows;
and therefore first let us restrain our thoughts. And

2. When we speak of Kings and Princes, our words must be reverend and
honorable: it is not meet for Christians of any sort to revile and censure one
another, much less for Subjects to pretend to judge the actions of their
Sovereign. It would be much better certainly, if every one instead of talking
of the duty of their Governors, would seriously think on their own.

St. Peter foretelling of a sort of false Teachers, to the end they may be
better avoided, describes them by their manners thus, 2 Pet. 2.10. viz. Such as
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleaness, and despise government.
Presumptuous are they, self-willed: they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities.

Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not railing
accusations against them before the Lord, verse. 11.

And St. Jude charge them with the same thing, verse. 8. of his Epistle:
Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and
speak evil of dignities.

And it were to be wished, there were none among us, that endeavor by such
Stratagems as these to amuse the people, and so carry on their own private
Plots, and secret designs, by speaking evil of things they understand not.

Reverence to Magistrates is a duty frequently inculcated in Holy Writ: Thou
shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people, Exodus 22.28. I
counsel thee to keep the King's commandment, and that in regard of the oath of
God, Eccles. 8.2. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil
thing; for he does whatsoever pleases him, verse. 3.

Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What
do thou? v. 4. If he do ought amiss, he must answer it before the King of
Kings; it is the Subjects duty in the mean while to follow the advice of the
Apostle, whose words are these, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first
of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men:

For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

And this ought to be done for them, though they were Infidels and Enemies to
the Gospel; yea, though they were persecutors of them that make profession of
it: How much more then should we respect good Kings, when they not only
profess true Religion themselves, but establish, confirm, and settle the same
by good and wholesome Laws?

3. As our thoughts and words must be honorable, so in our actions we must
show a reverence, by being humble and submissive in our carriage and behavior.
There is a civil respect due from Inferiors to their Superiors: and though
there be a sort of godly men among us (as they call themselves) that refuse
this outward civility, and deny that which others more reasonably pay; I shall
not now spend time in answering their frivolous pretensions. St Paul bids us
render fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor is due.

And St. Peter, in the very same verse, bids us fear God, and honor the King:
And that we ought to show a reverence by some civil behavior, or outward
submission, is plain from Levit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God.

And we may add to this the words of the fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father
and thy Mother; the meaning and scope of which is, That the quality of men's
persons and places in whatsoever estate, whether Natural, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, and with whatsoever relation to us, ought to be duly
acknowledged and respected.

Now such submission and duty cherished in the hearts, and shown in the words
and behavior of Subjects, would render the difficulties of Government more
supportable, and aleviate those cares and troubles which the most lawful
Governors need continually undergo.

2. The second thing required as due from us to the civil Magistrate, is
Obedience: This is a duty frequently inculcated in holy Scripture, Tit. 3.1.
St. Paul directs Titus to put them in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work. And Romans 13.5. the
same Apostle says, Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience Sake. Into what dregs of times then are we fallen! St.
Paul urges obedience to Magistrates for Conscience Sake, and yet in our days
that has been made an argument for the contrary; we have some among us that
pretend for Conscience Sake to disobey them.

When Rebellion and Hypocrisy pass for Duty and Obedience, the best and most
sacred things are not secured from being abused: Religion it self is no longer
accounted so by some men, than it serves their turns and interests; and
therefore that has been made use of to cloak the most absurd and wicked
designs. Devotion has been, and is still, a Plea for disobedience: and the
pretended tenderness, which others may more justly call the niceness of a
disaffected Conscience, will not permit men to obey the King, for fear of
disobeying God. And yet there is nothing more plain in the whole Scripture than
this, that every soul ought to be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. And
that we may not mistake the meaning of those words, St. Peter tells us more
distinctly what is meant by higher Powers, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves
to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as
supreme, or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

But alas! Fancy and Opinion sometimes overruled Reason and Scripture both; or
else we should never have known such horrid impieties committed among our
selves, as to see a King dethroned, and murdered by his own Subjects; and the
House of God, which our Savior denominated a House of Prayer, to become a Den
of Thieves; which was too truly so indeed, when our Churches were profaned,
robbed, and plundered of their decent Ornaments, by wicked and cruel hands; and
pure Religion which is there professed, forced to retire, and hide its head in
a corner; and our Clergy (the lawful Ministers of Christ) sequestered from
their Livelihood, and employment too: all which was violently carried on under
the specious names of Reformation, and Liberty of Conscience; and the actors
all this while, the greatest pretenders to Religion and Holiness, carrying a
fair outside, whatever was within. But even thus did the Pharisees of old, who
could devour Widows houses under pretense of their long Prayers.

How far such practices as these are from that duty we stand obliged to by the
Laws both of God and man, must needs be plain and clear to every one that is
not wilfully blind: They are the greatest reproach to the Protestant Religion,
and even a scandal to Christianity itself; and therefore to be exploded and
for ever abominated by all that put on the name of either.

The obedience required of us, is a voluntary and hearty doing what our lawful
Superior commands, or patient suffering what he inflicts, though it should be
either without just cause, or somewhat more excessively than the cause
requires: but in all lawful commands, we stand obliged to do what he requires
by Law to be done; and a Passive obedience in this case is not a sufficient
discharge of our duty, (much less can an active disobedience find any Plea.)
For such as refuse to do what the Law commands, though they may seem content to
suffer the punishment it inflicts, are no better observers of the Law, than a
Thief, who is content to be hanged after he has robbed his Neighbors. If
either of them suffer the Law, it is for their offense in transgressing it; and
what glory is it, if when men be buffeted for their faults they take it
patiently?

This makes them neither the better men, nor the better Christians; for besides
that it is to be supposed that they would not suffer any penalty if they could
find a way to escape it: This does not answer the end and design of the Law,
which requires our obedience in an active performance of the things commanded;
and the punishment is only added in case of contempt and disobedience. Such
therefore a^ refuse to obey the Law, though they suffer the penalty it
inflicts, cannot reasonably be thought good observers thereof, because it is
not the punishment that the Lawgiver intends but the doing that which he
requires; and such as refuse to do this, or act contrary to it, not only
offend the Magistrate under whom they live, but even God himself, who commands
us to reverence and obey him. This therefore can be no refuge for those
pretending Zealots, who endeavor to make the world believe they are peaceable,
good Subjects, if they quietly suffer the penalty of the Laws: Alas! this is no
discharge of their duty; the Magistrate only suppresses their rebellious
practices, for which they make Religion a Cloak, and punishes their
disobedience, which they endeavor to palliate with Devotion; but the duty
required of them, remains still unperformed, and sin lies at their door; who
invert St. Paul's rule, and think it sufficient to obey merely for wrath, and
not for Conscience Sake. The Authors and Abettors therefore of such absurd
Doctrines, would do well to consider, that when they fall under due correction,
this does not acquit or free them from their first offense in breaking the Law,
but is designed only to keep them in better order, and make them better
Subjects for the time to come.

Nor will it at all justify our disobedience to lawful Authority, what some
men urge, viz. That the things required are not commanded in the Word of God;
it is sufficient if they are not therein forbid, nor contrary to it.

That the powers ordained of God, and by him set over us, have authority to
order and determine some things not directly and expressly commanded in the Word
of God, is plain and evident even from those many Texts of holy Scripture which
required and enjoin obedience to the Magistrate. As for those things positively
set down in the Word of God, there we have directions for the performance of
them: but then, when we are commanded moreover, even by the same Word of God,
to obey the Magistrate, this must necessarily suppose him invested with a power
to command us some things not before specified, but left to his determination;
and so far as his commands are agreeable to the Word of God, we are bound to
obey them.

If the Magistrate command us any thing that is manifestly impious, and
contrary to the known will of God, we are then with reverence to refuse, and
allege our duty to God for our Warrant; but this refusal must be with
submission and reverence, still reserving our lawful subjection and Loyalty;
this must be with a passive obedience, not resisting, but submitting to the
penalties of the Law: and in this case we must betake our selves to the weapons
of the Primitive Christians, viz. Prayers and Tears. But thanks be to God, we
have no ground for any such complaints; we have no Commands imposed upon us,
but such as are easy to be born, and very agreeable to a good Christian temper.

May it therefore please Almighty God long to continue such a Prince among us,
whose endeavors may always be to protect and support such as are committed to
him, and to govern them prudently, and after a holy manner!

And may it enter into every Subjects heart to be faithful, submissive, and
obedient to his Sovereign; not in outward appearance only, but in truth and
sincerity. It is not enough for us to own his Supreme power and authority,
unless we assert them in our actions, and demonstrate the reality of our
intentions by all the outward acts of fidelity and love. Nor must we be
wanting, if need so require, to assist him with our Estates: We are bid by St.
Paul to render Tribute to whom Tribute, as well as Honor to whom Honor is
due. And that Tribute was anciently paid, is evident by our Savior's
determination in my Text of the Question proposed to him; and elsewhere he
confirmed the same (though at the expense of a Miracle) even by his own
practice, Matthew. 17.27. Go thou to the Sea, speaking to St. Peter, and cast an
hook, and take up the fish that first comes up: and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of money, that take, and give unto them, i. e.
the receivers of the Tribute-money, for me and thee.

Would every one in their proper places thus perform their respective duties,
we may by the blessing of God continue long to be a happy people.

There would be no need of affixing penalties of the Laws, if men would be
persuaded to do their duties; till then (which is daily to be wished) there is
need of a Sword of Justice to restrain the extravagant errors of froward men,
at least to correct their folly and obstinacy, if they still persist in them:
for the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain; he is the Minister of God to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; and to him in a great measure we owe the
security of our Lives and Estates: for though the Law of God forbids the
commission of murder, robbery, and suchlike crimes, yet it is to be feared,
through Atheism and Irreligion, which too much abound in these our days, those
Laws would soon be forgotten, if the Law of the Land did not provide a
punishment answerable to those and suchlike crimes; it were well if one or the
other, or both, would keep men in awe, and bring us to a sense of our duty, so
as to make us voluntarily and freely Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar
's, and unto God the things that are God's; which brings me to speak of the
second thing I mentioned contained in the words of my Text, Viz.

2. Our Duty as it relates to God.

Him we must serve with reverence and a holy fear, and frame the whole of our
lives and actions according to the rules prescribed in his Word; there we may
be directed how to walk, and there we have the general rules whereby things are
to be ordered in the Church, according to which our Governors are to make
particular Laws, and we to obey them; to prevent that disorder and confusion,
which would otherwise unavoidably happen, if every one was left to his own
liberty of prescribing his own way of Worship (I mean in public) according as
his fancy or humor leads him.

Since God has not appointed any certain Model of Worship whereby he will be
served, and no otherwise, it is very rationally to be supposed that he has
left it to the prudence of our Governors to consider and determine how
Christian Societies, when they meet together, may most solemnly and decently
perform that duty which God requires of them.

And where is or can this be better practiced, than it is now in the Church of
England? the best modeled Church this day in the Christian World. Her Doctrines
are all heavenly and divine; and that Worship which she prescribes is pure and
undefiled, attended only with some innocent, harmless, Ceremonies, in
themselves indifferent, but appointed to be used for Decency, Order, and
Edification. I shall not now spend time to prove the lawfulness, or urge the
usefulness of a set Form of Prayer to be used in the public Assembly: that
has been sufficiently cleared by the Pens of our learned Writers.

Now it has pleased God to make the Magistrate his Vicegerent on Earth, to
take care of, and defend his Church: (and then indeed may Kings and Queens be
fitly styled nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers, when they cherish and
propagate that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.)

And because we are beset with many both public and private Enemies, who would
gladly destroy our Church, and lay her Name and Honor in the dust; she is
therefore fenced about with good and wholesome Laws, such as provide a
punishment for her disobedient Children, and a scourge for such as will not be
reclaimed: these (if they were duly executed) would preserve that reverence
and esteem that is due to her; these would reduce many of those already
departed from her, and preserve those that are yet in her Communion from being
infected with the poison of Schism and Sedition, as too too many have been
already.

But I could wish rather that every one would be persuaded to reform his own
errors, and endeavor, as much as in him lies, to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. Would men lay aside their prejudice, and embrace truth
for the truth's sake, there would be then some hopes of a general
reconciliation. But when they divide themselves into Schisms and Factions,
there is no hopes of effecting that which is of all good men to be wished,
namely, that we might be all of one mind, as there is one Lord, one Faith, and
one Baptism.

If we could, or rather indeed if we would walk together to the house of God as
friends, this would conduce much to the honor of God, the credit and advantage
of our Religion, and the settling of a lasting Peace in this our troubled
Nation; this would be the way to discourage all the Plots and Conspiracies of
the Romish Party, and would be the best Bulwark against Popery it self, so much
dreaded among us: it is their business and endeavor to keep us at odds, the
better to carry on their own designs; and therefore they have their Emissaries
up and down to preach Schism and Sedition into peoples ears.

By such arts as these, they insinuate themselves among the poor deluded people
of our separate Congregations; and joining with them in their clamours against
the Church of England, crying it down for superstitious, and Popishly affected,
they pass there for gifted Brethren; and real Popery is carried on by such
disguises: Whereas, were we united among our selves, they would soon find it in
vain to make any such attempts upon us.

But alas! while the breach is kept open by those sad Distractious and
Divisions that are among our selves, how easily may the Pope enter in?
Schismatics, whatever they pretend, do but carry on the Pop^^^ Cause; for the
more strength and number any Faction draws from the Church, so much is added to
her Enemy, who has, perhaps, no other hopes of destroying, but by dividing us.

If therefore those (good) men that cause such Schisms and Divisions among us,
had that love for the Protestant Interest as they have for the bare Name, they
would be more zealous for the preservation of it; and think it their duty, at
least in this juncture of affairs, to comply with the Church, and join in her
Communion for securing our Religion, rather than by perverseness and obstinacy
endanger its total ruin. If they had that love for Peace which they pretend,
they would seek more after it, and prise it at a higher rate, than to break the
unity of the Church upon such slender accounts as now they do.

Oh that they would yet in time bethink themselves! that we may at last with
one mind and one accord praise and glorify that God who is the God of Peace
and Order. This if we would do heartily and sincerely, he would certainly
reward us for it: for they that love and seek peace, shall enjoy everlasting
peace hereafter.

Now to our God, who is the God of Peace; to his only Son, who is the Prince
of Peace; and to the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of Peace, be ascribed, as is
most due, all honor, glory, praise, power, and dominion, henceforth and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

