THE First, Last.

OR, The Formal Hypocrite further from Salvation, (as to the Way of God's
ordinary working) than the Profane Sinner.

Being the Substance of several SERMONS Preached in Course at a LECTURE in the
Country, By J. O.

A Discourse tending to draw the Profane Sinner to God, by working on his
Hopes; and to drive the Formalist out of his Formality, by working on his Fears.

2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from
such turn away. Phil. 3.3. For we are the circumsion, which worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
LONDON, Printed for R. Boulter, at the Turks-Head, in Cornhill. 1666.

To the PARISHIONERS of C. and W. in the County of D. Grace and Peace from God
the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT is an undoubted Truth, pronounced by Truth it self, That except a man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. That Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.
nor corruption incorruption. Such is the connection betwixt Conversion and
Salvation, Holiness and Happiness, That I may truly say, (yet not derogating
from the infinite worth of his Sufferings) that Christ cannot save an
unconverted Soul; he saves none from Hell, but whom he saves from their sins;
nor will Free Grace it self save a graceless person. It is therefore one main
Piece of a Ministers employment, (whose work is the salvation of souls) to
endeavor the bringing of men from Self to Christ, from sin to holiness; to
deal with them, as Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech them by
us, even to pray them in Christ's stead, that they will be reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5.20. In order to this great End, nothing seems to me more effectually
conducing, then the discovery and removal of those things, which are the
ordinary impediments of Conversion, amongst which these two are very common.

1. Some think they are past hope, they are in their own apprehensions out of
merci's reach; and therefore, either desperately, or despairingly throw away
their own souls.

2. Others think they are past fear, that they are escaped the wrath to come;
say, as Agag. 1 Samuel 15.32. Surely the bitterness of death is past; when, alas,
they do but deceive themselves with a vain show, and are but in a cleaner way
to Hell.

The first of these is incident to gross Sinners, when it pleases God to awaken
their Consciences, and cause a Dart of Conviction to stick in their hearts;
Yea, the least sin discovered, and set home to purpose on the soul, is apt to
work this way: Nor can I think that those Ranting, Roaring Desperado's, who
spend their days in Riot and Excess, and commit all uncleanness with
greediness, are altogether free from such thoughts.

The second is the common Remora of the Formalist's Conversion, who flatters
himself in his own eyes, till his iniquity be found hateful. Now to discover to
the former, their grounds of hope, upon their Humble, Penitent return to God;
and to the other, the cause they have to fear least they be cast off by God,
seems the most probable rational way to prevail with them, in order to their
Conversion and Salvation.

This was the Design of these poor Labors, when Presented to your Ears from
the Pulpit; and upon the same account are they now Presented to your Eyes from
the Press. If thou art (Reader) in either of these conditions, (and how great a
part of the Christian World will be found in the one or other of them!) here is
something in this small Treatise, that may, by the blessing of him that
teaches to profit, be of use and advantage to thee. Or if thou be an Israelite
indeed, thou will find something that may suit thy condition, and that may put
thee upon more vigor and activity in Gods way.

I shall not trouble you with any Apology, either for my self or the Work;
weaknesses (the Lord knows) abound in both: Nor is it the design of this poor
Labor to satisfy thy Curiosity, or please thy Fancy, but (which is far
higher) to profit and edify thy Soul. That this may be the Fruit of it, is the
hearty prayer of him, who desires to be, and earnestly beggs thy prayers that
he may be

A public Helper on of thy Faith and happiness, J. O.

The First, Last, etc.
Matthew 21. latter part of 31. Verse. Verily I say unto you, That the
Publicans and the Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you.


CHAP. I. A Threefold use of Parables; the Text Divided and Explained; the
Doctrine Proposed and Proved by Scripture.
PArables in Scipture are used especially upon a Threefold account: First,
Judicially, to blind the eyes of those who wilfully close their eyes against
the light, Mark 4.11, 12. Secondly, to Illustrate the Truth to those that are
willing to understand, Joh. 3.12. If I have told you earthly things, etc. i. e.
Heavenly things illustrated by Earthly Parables and Resemblances. Thirdly, to
blind men at first, that they may see better afterward; or to make them own
their sin and condemn themselves unawares in a third person, which directly
they would not do. Of this sort is Nathan's Parable to David, 2 Samuel 1^. and
many of Christ's Parables to the Jews; two whereof we find in this Chapter.
viz. That of the two Sons commanded to work in the Vineyard, verse. 28, 33. and
that of the Vineyard let out to the ungrateful Husbandmen, verse. 33.42. The
Text in hand is the Reddition and Application of the former, wherein our
Savior wresteth from the Priests and Elders (for to them especially the
Parable was spoken) a sentence of condemnation against themselves, Verse. 23.
under the resemblance of that Son, who said, I go Sir, but went not. Yea,
forces them to judge the Publicans and sinners (shadowed by the other Son)
better and happier then themselves: having brought them to acknowledge the
Premises, in the Text he plainly lays down the Conclusion.

The words are an Assertion; in which observe,

1. The Assertor; Jesus Christ, who was Truth it self. 2. The note of
Assertion, or Assercration; Verily, 3. The Assertion it self; wherein there is
observable, 1. A Collation, or comparison betwixt the Priests and Elders, and
the Publicans and sinners. 2. A Praelation, or preferring the later before the
former. 3. The thing wherein they are preferred, viz. their greater readiness
to embrace the Gospel, and to go into the Kingdom of God. -- A little for
explication.

[Publicans and Harlots] are here Synechdochically put for the worst of
sinners; for so they were deservedly esteemed.

Publicans were Officers belonging to the Romans, (though, for the most part,
Jews by Nation) not much unlike our Excise-men, or Tole-gatherers; amongst
whom, some were, as it were, Farmers, (such I suppose was Zacheus, Luke 19.2.)
Others of an inferior Rank, Collectors: both given to Rapine, Oppression,
Injustice, Violence, and were the Romans chief instruments to grind the faces
of their poor Brethren: hereby contracting upon them the just odium of the
Jewish Nation. Hence that suitable counsel of John to them, Luke 3.13. Exact no
more then that which is appointed you. Upon this account Zacheus (as a special
testimony of his sincere repentance) offers a fourfold restitution of any thing
got by false accusation, Luke 19.8. That being the sin of his calling. Yea so
wicked they were, that in Scripture, Heathen and Publican are equivalent, Mat
18.17. So that when our Savior would beat the Jews out of their carnal
confidences, and high conceits of themselves and their doings, he ordinarily
compares them with Publicans, showing them, that they either come up no higher
then they, as Matthew. 5.46, 47. or, that they fall short of them, as Luke
18.10-14. and this Text. Yea, so wicked were they thought, that it was judged a
crime in our Savior to converse with them, Matthew. 9.11. and cast upon him, as
a grand opprobrium, that he was a friend of Publicans and sinners, Matthew. 11.9.

Harlots (their sin is too well known amongst us) Gr. (...) Vendor: properly
those, quae corpus habent venale, who prostitute their bodies for money. If you
would see their wickedness, read Proverbs 6, and 7. Chapters, and 23, 27, etc.
Some think that 27. Chapter to be Allegorical, and that under the shadow of an
Harlot, is represented the deceitful and destructive nature of sin: if so, this
sin is exceeding sinful, which (though but one species) yet contains in it the
whole nature and properties of its genus; and is, as it were, an Epitome of all
sin.

[Kingdom of God] is used in many senses; to pass by other, it is taken
sometimes for the state of Grace, the Church Militant; sometimes for the state
of Glory, or Church Triumphant: here both may be taken in, the one as the Way,
the other as the End. So that the plain sense is, Publicans and Harlots,
notorious vile sinners, sooner repent, believe, embrace the Gospel, etc. so
consequently come to Heaven, then you formal, self-conceited Jews, Priests and
Elders.

[Before you] The speech is something improper, (as Beza notes) Improprie hic
dicuntur praeire, quos nemo sequitur. They go before you; i. e. they are saved,
and you perish; as appears by comparing this with Matthew. 8.11, 12. The children
of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. They upon Faith and
Repentance are made happy in glory, while you continuing in unbelief and
impenitency fall into eternal perdition.

The words thus opened, take the sense of them in this plain Doctrinal
Proposition or Conclusion.

Doctr. That the vilest sinners, Publicans and Harlots, etc. often believe,
repent and are saved, while Pharisaical, self-justifying Formalists continue in
Unbelief and Impenitency, and so perish eternally.

Proof. Thus you see it was in the course of John's preaching, verse. 31. and
thus it fell out in our Saviors preaching. Levi the Publican becomes Matthew
the Evangelist, Luke 5.27. with Matthew. 10.3. Zacheus the chief of the
Publicans, and very rich, becomes a Son of Abraham; i. e. a Penitent believer:
Luke 19.9. Magdalen the Harlot, is made Magdalen the Convert, Luke 7.37. -- Nor
was it only so with these two or three; but, Mark 2.15. Many Publicans and
sinners followed him, Luke 7.29, 30. The Publicans justified God -- But the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, etc. Nay,
Luke 15.12. Then drew near unto him all the Publicans and Sinners for to hear
him, and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured -- Amongst these self-conceited,
self-justifying Formalists, there was but Vnus and alter, one Nicodemus, one
Joseph, one Paul; and not many more that I remember. That question, John 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? implies the rarity
of such men's coming in. So that as it is said of Ministers, Quis unquam vidit
Cl^ricum paenitentem; (though I hope such are no black Swans in this age) so it
might have been said in that age, Quis unquam vidit Pharisaeum paenitentem? Who
ever saw a Pharisee, a Scribe, a Ruler, a Lawyer repenting? Nor was it
otherwise in the Apostles time; (the immediate Successors of Christ) you will
find throughout the History of the Acts, that the formal Jews were the greatest
contemners of the Apostles Doctrine, and the most deadly inveterate haters and
persecutors of their persons; while whole Cities and Countries of the profane
Idolatrous Gentiles, readily embrace, steadfastly believe, and cordially obey
their Gospel. Take a few instances among many, Acts 8.5. -- Philip has
incredible success in Samaria, the Gospel is received there with great joy, v.
8. which the Jews had driven away from them by a great persecution, verse. 1. So
Acts 13.45. The Jews seeing the multitudes, are filled with envy -- contradict,
blaspheme; but verse. 48. The Gentiles are glad, and glorify the word of the
Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed; whereas the Jews,
v. 50. do, Omnem movere lapidem, stir up the devout and honorable women, and
the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas,
and expelled them out of their Coasts. Go to the 14 Chapter, at Iconium a great
multitude both of Jews and Greeks believed, v. 1. But then, v. 2. the
unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, etc. -- At Lystra, the Idolatrous
people mistaking the Apostles, for their supposed Heathenish Deities, are
scarce restrained from doing sacrifice unto them. Here was a wide door opened,
and might in all probability have proved more effectual, had not the inveterate
enemies of the Gospel, the carnal Jews, stopped the passage by enraging the
people against the Apostles, as you may see, v. 19. Go on to the 17. Chapter,
v. 1.5. -- You find the Apostles succesfully preaching the Gospel at
Thessalonica, a great multitude of devout Greeks believing, and of the chief
women not a few, v. 4. But v. 5. the Jews their old adversaries oppose, etc.
The like success they had at Berea, v. 10, 11, 12. and the same opposers, v.
13. At Corinth, Acts 18.8. with 12, 13. At Rome, though few of the Jews
believed, Acts 28.23. -- to the end; yet the seed which Paul cast there, sprung
up into a flourishing Gentile-Church, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the
whole World, Romans 1.8. It Is needless to heap up instances of this nature, they
being common and obvious to any that observe them. Thus you see that de facto
it was so; (and the case is not much altered now) that it was much more
ordinary and frequent, to see a penitent Publican or Harlot, or the like gross
Sinner, then to see a proud, self-justifying Pharisee, or Formalist, repenting
and embracing Christ.

CHAP. II. A first sort of Reasons, ( viz. What may move God to call the
Profane, rather then the Formalists) Negatively, and Positively.
NOw it will be well worthy of our pains, to enquire into the Reason of this
evident Truth; and those may be two ways considered.

1. Quoad Deum, in reference to God, what may move God rather to call Publicans
and Harlots, etc. then Self-conceited Formalists?

2. Quoad media salutis, in reference to the means of Salvation: Why the
Preaching of the Gospel should more frequently and kindly operate upon
Publicans and Harlots, (seemingly the most incapable subjects) then upon
Morally Righteous, and seemingly holy persons; who may seem more then halfhew'd
and squared, even ready to be laid into the building of the Church?

Concerning the first sort of Reasons, it is not always safe, I confess, to
enquire into the secrets of the Almighty; I shall therefore endeavor according
to the Apostles Rule, Romans 12.3. (...); To be wise unto sobriety: Nor shall I
enter any further into this Labyrinth then I am guided by the thread of
Scripture; something I shall hint negatively, and something affirmatively.

I. Negatively: And first, It is not from any want of Power in God to make the
means of Grace effectual to the Conversion of one as well as another, Genesis
18.14. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Suppose the Conversion of a
Formalist a work of more difficulty then of a Profane Sinner; yet to Infinite
Power all things are alike feisable; to Infinite Wisdom all mysteries alike
discernable, to Infinite Mercy all Sins alike Pardonable.

Nor, Secondly, is it to to be supposed, that there is more of merit in the
one, then in the other, to induce God to call the one, and pass by the other:
Nay, if this might carry it, we should rather imagine that the moral, formal
person should be called, and the profane cast off: The former being (at least
in appearance) like Stone or Timber, almost prepared for the Building; the
other like crooked, knotty Timber* or rugged Stones, which require abundance of
pains in hewing and squaring, before they can be fitted for God's use: so that
if merit, or that congruous, praevious disposition which the Papists dream of,
were any inducement to move God; then it is likely the Formalist, and civilly
righteous Person, should be the first in God's Eye; But the Truth is, God
orders it otherwise, that it may appear, That it is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, etc.

Romans 9.10
And then, Thirdly, Least of all is it to be imagined, that God calls the
Publican, Harlot, or other Profane Sinner, as having any greater delight in
them as such: No surely, sin is the sole object of God's hatred; Hab. 1.13. He
is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. And for Publicans and Harlots, whom
does God more abhor? Jam. 5.1-5. Oppression, and grinding the Faces of the Poor
(which was the Publicans sin) cries in Gods Ears. And Habbak. 2.11, 12. The
Stone shall cry out of the Wall, etc. and for Harlots, see Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; Far be it from us, to think that God
therefore calls such, because he takes complacency in them as such: No, when
they are called, they must come home by weeping Cross; they must cleanse their
hands, and purify their hearts, before they can have any Communion with the
unspotted Majesty of Heaven. This Negatively.

2. Affirmatively, to make it evident to all the World, that he is no respecter
of persons; that there is nothing out of himself, which is the least inducement
to him to call one, or reject another. Particularly:

1. To depress Man's Merit, 1 Cor. 1.26-30. Not many wise men after the flesh,
etc. are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of the World to
confound the wise, etc. And why so? The reason is rendered, v. 29. That no flesh
should glory in his presence. God's design is, to exclude man's boasting, Rom
3.27. Ephesians. 2.9. And what more effectual way to do it then this?

2. To exalt his own Mercy, (a necessary consequent of the former) Man's Merit,
and God's Mercy being like a pair of Scales or Buckets, as the one rises, the
other falls. This you see, Jer. 9.23. Romans 9.15. Ephesians. 2.7. When those are
called, justified, sanctified and saved, who were the vilest and basest of men,
the greatest of sinners; and in the mean while, others of high Parts, moral
Accomplishments, of much seeming Sanctity, rejected. Oh, what admiring thoughts
must such needs have to all eternity, of the freeness of God's Mercy! See 1 Timothy 1.12,-16. This will fill their mouths with the High Praises of the most
High God, and make them strive to raise their hearts to the highest pitch of
Thankfulness. Thus much for the Reasons respecting God.

CHAP. III. A second sort of Reasons ( viz. Why the Word sooner works on the
Profane, then the Formalist) in general.
2. BUt that which more concerns us to enquire into, is, Why the means of
Salvation has an easier influence upon, and finds readier acceptance with the
Publican and Harlot, etc. then with the Formalist and hypocritical Professor?
For since God ordinarily works by means, and that means ordinarily has more or
less operation, according to the greater capacity, or incapacity of the subject
it meets with; why should not the Word rather find entertainment into the
hearts of the Moral Formal person, then the Profane Sinner?

In general take this account of it; There are more obstructions and
impediments lie in the way of the Gospel, to hinder its work upon the
Formalist, then upon the Profane: though in respect of God's absolute power it
is alike easy; yet in respect of his ordinary way of working, it is more
difficult to convert the former than the later: And these Obstructions, are
either, 1. Ab intra: or, 2. Ab extra.

Sect. 1. Inward Impediments of the words effect upon the Formalist, viz. such
as are in himself.

1. Ab intra. There are many things in the Formalist himself to hinder his
Conversion, which are not found in the Profane.

Reason 1. It is much more difficult to convince a Formalist of Sin, (which is
a necessary Anticedent to Conversion) then a Profane person; and this I make
out by a twofold consideration.

1. It is evident that man, every man, is naturally averse to Conviction: Like
an old Thief, that will stand it out as long as he can, will justify himself,
and plead, Not guilty. Sin and Shifting came into the world together. Adam
lays the fault upon his Wife, she upon the Serpent, Genesis 3.11, 12, 13. Thus
the Jews deal with God, they put him to prove, Jer. 2.23, 29, 35. and stand
upon their own justification. So often in Malachi, Chap. 1.7. and 2.13, 14, 17.
and 3.7, 8, 13. Wherein have we polluted thee? And wherein have we robbed thee?
And what have we spoken so much against thee? They will not own their sin and
shame. Man is loath to see and own his fault; it is death to him to be found
guilty; as Job 24.15, 17. The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, --
If one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death: till we deal
with them, as Tamar with her Father in Law, Judah, Genesis 38.25. Produce the
Signet Bracelets and Staff; undeniable testimonies of their guilt, Sinners will
not be convinced. How will they deny, elude, excuse, extenuate, and as Michol,
lay an Image in the Bed that David may escape? cloak their sin with the name of
virtue, that the Hue and Cry of the Word may not find it out? A Fig-leaf rather
then nothing shall cover their nakedness. It Is discernable in the best, David
owns not his sin, till it be directly charged upon him, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7. Asa (though a good man, 2 Chr. 4.2.) is wroth with the Seer, 2 Chapter
16.1^.
puts him in a prisonhouse, and is in a rage with him, because of his plain
and home reproof. Man, like a stout enemy, will not yield so long as he has
any Fortress to fly to. And then

2. The Formalist has more shifts and evasions, then the profane Sinner; he
has more to say for himself, more excuses and pretenses to cloak his sin
withal: as some wild Beasts have many Burrows, or Shelters to fly to when
pursued; Achan confesses not, till his very person be taken. Though the Tribe
be taken, yet possibly the Lot may fall upon another Family; the Family is
taken, but perhaps his Household may escape; his Household is taken, yet it may
be the Lot may light upon some other person; while there is any hope, Achan
yields not. Thus it is with the Formalist, many things lie betwixt him and the
Word; he has a very thick covering; whereas the profane person lies more open
and naked before the Word. Some of these shifts I shall mention, to which it
will be easy to add many more.

1. The Letter of the Law justies him in a great measure, whereas it condemns
the profane person: He looks upon the bare letter and shell of the Law, and is
ready to say as he Mat. 19.20. All these things have I observed from my youth:
Thus the Jews, Romans 2.17. Thou art called a Jew, and (...), restest in or upon
the Law: and v. 23. Thou make thy boast of the Law, (i.e.) as being an exact
observer of it, and so expecting to be justified by it. So it was with Paul,
while a Pharisee, Phil. 2.6. as touching the righteousness of the Law, (...),
blameless, without fault, no just charge or complaint could be brought against
him, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10, 11. The Law is not made for (the condemnation of) the
Righteous, but for the Lawless and Disobedient; for the Ungodly, and Sinners;
for unholy, and Profane; for Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers;
for Man-slayers, etc. The Formalist assumes, But I am no such person, and
therefore concludes, that the Law condemns him not. It Is true, in Thesi, men
will easily acknowledge that the Law is comprehensive, that more is included in
it then is expressed; But bring it down ad Hypothesin, to their particular
cases and sins, and then they will scarce acknowledge any thing a Duty but what
is expressly commanded; or a Sin, but what is expressly forbidden. The Jews had a
Proverbial Speech, That upon every apex or tittle of Scripture did hang a
mountain of sense; yet in point of practice, or conviction, or confession of
sin, little or nothing is owned as a duty or sin, but what has the express
injunction or inhibition of the Word: See it in the example of the
self-justifying Pharisee, Luke 18.11. He mentions no sins but such as the very
letter of the Law condemns; Extortioners Unjust, Adulterers, etc. as if,
because he was none of those grosser sinners, therefore he was no sinner at
all. It Is evident also by that narrow gloss which the Jewish Rabbis had put
upon several of the Commandments, refelled by our Savior, Matthew. 5.21. And
thus it is with a formal Professor of the Gospel; and because he finds not
himself guilty of those grosser sins condemned by the letter of the Law, and
light of Nature, he declines the convincing, humbling power of the Word, and
shrowds himself from it under this shelter, whereas the Profane Person, the
Common Drunkard, Adulterer, Swearer, etc. lies naked before the very letter of
the Law, and every blow is upon the bare.

2. As the Letter of the Law, so natural Conscience acquits him, and speaks
peace to him. It Is dim-sighted, and, till illightned by the Spirit of God,
takes no notice of motes, smaller sins: and withal it is (while natural)
corrupt and partial; justifying, when it should condemn. It Is like an ignorant
and unjust Judge, who either, through blindness cannot, or bribery will not,
take cognizance of the Malefactors crime. Now this is requisite in order to
conviction of sin, that Conscience see and own, and charge it upon the sinner.
It Is not all the witness from without, that will convince a man, till
Conscience do (...), join its Testimony, and charge the crime home upon the
man. Conscience, whether its Testimony be true, or false, is Mutus Ahaeneus, a
Brazenwall to fence off Conviction: What will a man care though all the World
accuse him, while Conscience acquits him? And thus it is with a Formalist, his
Conscience is an easy Judge, like that Steward, Luke 16.6. willing to take up
with duty to the halves, Fifty for an hundred; and not finding him guilty of
grosser sins, passes a sentence of Absolution upon him; and being thus
fortified, he can easily outface the word of Ministers, and withstand all
attempts made upon him for his Conviction. Now with gross sinners it is
otherwise; even natural Conscience bears witness against him; even Heathen's
Consciences accuse for sins against the light of Nature, and those impressions
of the Law of God which remain upon their hearts: See Romans 2.14, 15. Natural
Conscience takes little notice of Habits, but when they break out into gross
Acts, as Murder, Adultery, etc. here, it cannot be altogether silent. Most
profane Sinners are (as it is said of a convinced Heretic, Tit. 3.11.) (...),
selfcondemned persons, and therefore it is ordinarily much more easy to
convince them of a sin, when we have the advantage of a witness in their bosoms
to join with us: It Is the proper office of Conscience to witness with, or
against a man, to acquit, or condemn him (in subordination to God's Word:) But
having in a great measure, lost both its knowledge and honesty (the two
essential requisites in a Judge) by the fall, it will not accuse, except the
crime be palpable and undeniable, unless the sin carry a dreadful aspect, and
have disobedience written in the very forehead of it; Till the beams of the Sun
of Righteousness be darted in, the Formalist's motes lie undiscovered, and his
blind and partial Conscience gives an absolving Verdict.

3. Another shroud or shelter, under which the Formalist lurks, and by which he
declines the convincing power of the Word, is the secrecy of his sins: He
thinks he dances in a Net, and acts unseen. So that though the Arrow of the
Word be directed to his Breast and hits his sin, yet he persuades himself it
was not intended; though Conscience sometimes owns the sin, being struck at by
the Word, and begins to charge it upon him, yet he soon stops its mouth, by
persuading himself, that the Minister did but accidentally light upon it, that
it was intended against some other person: whereas the profane person, being
conscious of the notoriousness of his sins, and that they are such as are
obvious to the worlds eye, he is ready to think that every word is directed to
him; and therefore more apt to apply it. The Formalist, though conscious of a
sin reproved, yet is ready to think, who imagines that I am guilty of such a
sin? I pass for a godly man, a sincere Christian, in the opinion of good men;
my Minister, I know, judges better, and has other thoughts of me; and thus he
waves the Charge. A stout Thief will stand upon his own justification, and
outface the Judge, when he knows the Act was so secret that there can be no
Testimony produced; thus it is with a Formalist, whose sins for the most part,
are Chamber-sins, Closet-sins, such as are out of men's cognizance. The
notoriousness of a sin, is many times a help to conviction. It Is an easier
matter to make a Malefactor own, and confess that crime, whereof he knows an
hundred Witnesses may be produced, then of that which he presumes is known to
none but himself. I may use that (at least ellusively) to this purpose, 1 Cor.
14.24. If one come in that believes not, or is unlearned, he is convinced of
all, he is judged of all: So the notoriously profane person, when his
drunkenness, uncleanness, swearing, etc. are spoke to, he is ready to think,
this is intended against me, and that every one in the Congregation, will
interpret it as spoken to him; and though it is true, that sometimes this
heightens his hatred against the Word and Minister, yet if God set in with it,
it has a contrary operation, viz. to edge the Word, and facilitate conviction.

4. (Which is of affinity to all the other) The smallness of his sin, is
another shelter; they are not aggravated by those bloody and heightning
circumstances, as the sins of others. He baptizeth them with the name of slips,
infirmities, sins of daily incursion, unavoidable weaknesses, spots of God's
own Children, such as are incident and common to the best of men; nothing
befalls him, in this, but what is ordinary; yea, he compares his sins with
those of the godly, recorded in Scripture; Abraham's Lying; Noah's Drunkenness;
Lot's Incest; David's Murder and Adultery; Peter's Denying and Forswearing his
Master, etc. And finding his sins to fall very much short, in point of guilt
and scandal, he not only concludes his condition good and safe, but applauds
himself as a Christian of a high form, and great seize. Now while a man
judges thus of himself, it is impossible to fasten any humbling conviction upon
him. It Is necessary, in order to conviction, that a man not only see sin, but
see its sinfulness, hainousness, and aggravated by its circumstances, till a
man say, as David, Psalm 25.11. Pardon my sin, for it is great; till with Paul,
he apprehend it, (...), Rom, 7.13. Out of measure sinful; till he look upon
himself as the chief of sinners, he will not be to purpose convinced, or
humbled. Then will he cry out with Paul, Romans 7.14. I am carnal, sold under
sin. It Is sin, clothed with exaggerated circumstances of Guilt, Scandal,
Rebellion, Atheism, Contempt of God, etc. that awakens the Conscience, and
fastens the Dart of conviction in the heart of a sinner. I acknowledge indeed,
that the same light is requisite to discover the hainousness of a profane
persons sin, and the Arrow must be shot with the same Hand, out of the same
Bow, that pricks and pierces his heart, (for we see, that even those grosser
sins of drunkenness, adultery, etc. are by many counted venial infirmities,
tricks of youth, etc.) yet if we consider the means, whereby God ordinarily
works on men, it will appear, that where sins are greater, more palpable, more
directly against the express Letter of the word, it is an easier thing to bring
the sinner to acknowledgment and conviction; since, in such cases, the Law and
Conscience will bear witness against the sinner. That sin, the very act and
matter whereof is expressly condemned by the word, is more easily set home upon
a man, then when only some circumstance makes it to be a sin: Yet on the other
hand, I acknowledge, that the smallest sin, aggravated upon the conscience by
the Spirit of God, (whose work it is to convince of sin, John 16.8.) will
appear exceeding sinful. Bolton's Soul-exaltation, p. 118.
Augustines robbing an Orchard, when a Youth, was afterward a sin very heinous
in his eyes, when he considered it in its circumstances; and he aggravates it
upon himself, by considering that it was against the very light of Nature; that
he did it with a full propensity of will; not for want, but wantonness, having
better fruit of his own; not so much out of love to the Fruit, as out of love
to Sin; that he joined himself with wicked company, did it at Midnight, having
spent the time before in Luxury and Vanity; that they carried away great
Burdens; when they came home, they had no such desire to eat them, but cast
them to the Swine. Upon these and the like considerations, he breaks out into a
passionate indignation against himself, and exclamation, to God; Behold my
heart, O my God, behold my heart, which thou have pitied in the lowest Hell.
Thus a small sin, seen in Gods light, appears odious and exceeding heinous:
Even those, Motus primo primi, (as the Schools call them) the sudden and
indeliberate suggestions of sin, not coming up to consent, or action, have been
matter of strong conviction and deep humiliation to some souls; yea and have
more affected them, then the grossest acts, and greatest exorbitancies: Yet if
we look at God's ordinary way of working, which is by the Word and Conscience,
it will be easy to conceive, that a Profane scandalous sinner, is in a nearer
capacity of conviction; then he whose sins are but as Motes to the others
Beams, as Mole-hills to the others Mountains.

5. The last refuge I shall mention, is the seeming Graces he has, and the
Duties he does. Many good things are found in him, and proceed from him; these
he ballanceth with his sins, and finding his Sins small, his Graces (as he
supposes) strong and vigorous, his Performances many and excellent, he
concludes well of himself; and under this thick Covering, he shrouds himself
from the power of the Word; behind this Bulwark he secures himself from the
Gunshot of Conviction. Thus the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. I am not as other
men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, nor even as this Publican: Here you
see he looks upon himself, as free from great enormities; then v. 12. I Fast
twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess: Here Is his more then
ordinary piety toward God; he is twice a week in a duty of an extraordinary
nature; and here is his more then common equity toward man; he pays Tithes of
all, even those things which the Law had lest doubtful. Oh what magnifying and
self-applauding thoughts may we imagine him to have! How hardly could a man
have fastened any humbling, convincing word upon him? Thus it is with the
Formalist, he looks upon his Zeal, Meekness, Love to God, and other like
Graces; (for so they appear to him, though indeed but common at best) then
considers his Piety toward God, in his constancy in ordinary, and frequency in
extraordinary Duties; his Equity and Mercy toward man; his Sobriety toward
himself; and finding himself, Rich, Rev. 3.17.
and Full, and increased with Goods, he thinks highly of himself, and admires
himself, as much above the pitch of ordinary Christians. Now being thus lifted
up, it is no easy matter to bring him down; charge him with any sin, he will
weigh it down with many good duties: His course and the tenor of his life is
for God and Holiness, and those sins are but such slips as the best are guilty
of, in their journeying toward the heavenly Canaan Now with the Profane
person it is otherwise, he has no such Asylum; you take him Naked, and so the
Dart will more easily hit, and pierce deeper. Thus you see the Formalist has
more Evasions, Refuges, Fortifications against conviction, then the Profane,
and consequently more difficult to convince him.

Reason 2. As it is harder to convince him of sin, so to beat him out of Self;
which yet must be done, or else a man is no true Convett; Self-denial, is the
first Lesson we are taught in Christ's School; it is the A, B, C, of Christian
Religion, and especially in point of justification, to disclaim our own
Righteousness, and cast our selves, venture our hopes upon Christ and his
Righteousness, is the very (...) of a Christian, and that which gives him, both
the Name and thing. This is Paul's frame, Phil. 3.7, 11. he quits all for
Christ. Now its no easy matter to bring a man to this; but especially the
Formalist is hardly persuaded to it. He that thinks he has something, yea
enough of his own, will not easily be persuaded to go a Begging to another
Door. Man is a proud creature, and loath to be beholding to any, till mere
necessity force him: A Prodigal that has wasted his Patrimony, and rioted away
his estate, yet would fain appear as good a Man as his Father, and maintain the
Garb and Custom of his Ancestors; while he has any thing left, he will not let
his poverty appear: Thus we; Our first Parents had a Stock of Righteousness,
though they prodigally spent it, and beggard themselves and all their
posterity; yet we are loath to go a begging, till necessity wear out shame, and
whip us out of our pride. Now the Formalist conceits, he has a stock within
himself to live upon; he can spin a Web out of his own Bowels to cover himself
withal; and if he have but a Rag of his own, he values it above Silks of
another giving; Homespun cloth is better then the costliest cloth of Gold
or Slver, of another providing. This is the great Impediment to a Formalist's
conversion; how hard is it to persuade him, that his seeming something, is
really nothing! It Is not the Precellency of Christ's Righteousness to ours, but
a sense of our absolute need of his Righteousness, that drives to Christ. There
is a more direct opposition betwixt Self and Christ, then betwixt sin and
Christ; for sin does (at least accidentally) drive us unto Christ, but Self
does altogether draw us from Crist, Romans 10.3. Going about to establish their
own righteousness, they have not submitted to the righteousness of God: Setting
up Self, is the pulling down of Christ. He is nothing to that man, that is any
thing to himself; flesh and blood taught not Paul that Lesson, Phil. 3.7,-11.
As many Prayers, Fastings, Alms-deeds, good Works, or seeming Graces, as the
Formalist has, so many Bulwarks against conviction, and Arguments to dissuade
him from a close with Christ. Now the Profane person is an absolute Bankrupt,
an arrant Beggar, one that has not so much as Husks of Duty (that I may allude
to it) to fill his Belly, or satisfy his conscience. He will be ready to cry
out with the Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. while the
Formalist (Phariseelike) is at his, God I thank thee, etc. I fast, I pay
Tithes. I, and I still; Self is magnified in all. Now is it not easier to
persuade a Beggar to ask an Alms, then one that is Rich, increased with goods,
and needs nothing? He that is stark naked, will sooner be persuaded to put on
clothes of another Free-gift, then he that is clothed, and warm to his own
apprehension.

Reason 3. As the Formalist is more hardly beaten out of self, so he is more
difficultly persuaded of his unregenerate estate, then the profane Person. He
that thinks his estate good enough already, will not easily be persuaded to
change it: It Is one step to Conversion, to see our selves unconverted; to
Happiness, to see our selves miserable. It Is Seneca's expression, Ideo mutari
nolumus quia nos optimos esse credimus; The great reason of our persisting in
our present condition, is, because we conceit it good and happy. This conceit
damps all. While men think their Prison a Palace, they will not come out of it.
Heretics are confidently persuaded they are in the right, and therefore their
ears are stopped against means of reducement. True, the profanest think thus of
themselves, but they have no ground, and therefore are sooner beaten out of
this hold; but the Formalist has much to say for himself, can produce many
evidences, whereby he deceives himself and others. What Graces are peculiar to
a Christian which he has not in appearance, and in his own apprehension? He
loves God, Christ, the Word, Ordinances, the Brethren, yea, his Enemies; he
has Faith, Patience, Zeal, etc. yea, he can remember the time when it was
otherwise with him; he experienceth a real change in himself; he hates where he
loved, and loves where he hated. Now here is a double work to do; we must first
raze those false foundations, walls as high as Heaven; confute his reasonings
and arguments, which he produces to prove his Conversion, before we can fasten
any thing upon him to draw him to Christ; and how hardly this will be done, is
easy to imagine: Will a man be easily persuaded to pull all down, and begin
upon a new Foundation, when he has brought it to the finishing? Will one that
is at his journeys end, be drawn to begin it again? Can you prevail with a man
that thinks himself at Heavens door, to return again by the gates of Hell? He
that feels himself well, and is, to his own apprehension, strong and healthful,
finds a universal Eucrasie; head and stomach, and each other part in its due
temperament, will be hardly persuaded that a mortal disease has seized upon
him, or to take Physic as one lying at the point of death. Men are not easily
persuaded out of an opinion of the goodness of their condition, when they seem
to have taken it upon warrantable grounds.

Prona venit cupidis in sua vota fides. Men are easily persuaded to believe
that which they would have to be; and as hardly dissuaded from believing it.
Now a profane person has no such evidences to produce: To convince him of his
unregenerate condition, we need go no further but to his life and actions, the
very tenor whereof speaks him wicked: But to convince the Formalist, it is
necessary to dive into his heart, to discover his principles, ends, and
intentions; and this is no easy matter; the heart is so full of windings, that
neither we, nor himself can discover it: It is a grand cheat, 'twil pretend
fair for God, Christ, and Holiness: David suspects his own heart, and therefore
puts it under God's search, Psalm. 139.21 -- end. Thus we have discovered some
of those inward impediments which render the Conversion of a Formalist more
difficult, then of a Profane person: We come now to those Ab extra; such
hindrances as are without him, from others; and these I shall reduce to two
heads, (omitting others) viz. either 1. From Ministers; or, 2. From People,
especially the Godly.

Sect. 2. Outward Impediments of the Words effect upon the Formalist, viz. such
as proceed from others.

Reason, 1 Something may be found in Ministers, which renders the Conversion of
a Formalist very difficult, viz. Their want of skill and industry this way; God
having appointed them as Instruments in this work, and the effect being more
hardly or easily producible, not only according to the skill of the Principal
Agent, but the aptitude or meptitude of the Instrument he uses: Hence it
follows, that the work miscarries, through their ill-management of it. It Is
true, in reference to God's absolute Power, it matters not what the Instrument
be; Clay and Spittle shall open blind eyes; The blowing of Ram's-horns shall be
more prevalent then Iron-rams, to dismantle a City; A Plaster of Figs shall
cure a Boil, or Plague Sore, if God please: Nor is it less true, that the word
is in its kind, a powerful weapon to batter Fortifications, to level towering
Imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. That it is sharper then a Two-edged sword,
piercing to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit -- (...) a critical Judge of
the hearts, thoughts, intentions, Heb. 4.12. But yet it cuts according as it is
managed and weilded; A Scanderbeg's arm can do wonders with an ordinary Sword;
(though I would be loath to ascribe so much to the Ministers skill and industry
as that instance may intimate, nor is it always according to a Ministers
ability or conscientiousness:) yet where there is a manifest defect of parts or
piety, skill or industry, the work is less succesfull. Now in nothing are the
generality of God's Messengers more deficient, then in this Divine skill, to
unfold the mysterious Labyrinths of the heart of man; to uncase an Hypocrite,
anatomize a Formalist, to get within men, and discover those Depths of Satan
that are in their hearts: This, though the highest Learning, and most necessary
for a Minister, is least studied: The Eagle-ey'd Schoolmen were but Bats and
Owls in this kind of Learning: We alas! are more apt to spend our time and
pains in high Speculations, curious Disquisitions, questions more tending to
strife, then the edification of the hearer; then in this necessary, very
necessary study of unmasking the Formalist, and cutting the Thread betwixt the
Hypocrite and the sincere Christian. It was Mr. Dod's expression, that most
Ministers of England shot over the heads of their Auditors; sure I am, too many
shoot short of their hearts. This proceeds partly from our unacquaintance with
our own hearts; partly, from our not studying the spirituality of Religion:
Alas do we not draw men out of Profaneness into Formality, and there leave
them? If we bring them up to a Form of Prayer, Hearing, Family-performances, do
we not think the work done? We are too like some curious Carvers and Painters,
that carve the Image, draw the Lineaments, and lay the Colors of Christianity
upon them, but do not labor to beget in them the life of Christians: We do not
tell them as Mark 10.21. One thing is yet lacking: that power must be added to
the former, as the Soul to the Body. Oh that it might not be justly charged
upon us, that we are content to see the image of Christianity drawn upon our
people! Besides, it may partly proceed from hence, that the greatest part of
our Congregations consisting of profane ones, we bend our Studies and
Discourses mainly against them, and by delivering things too generally, and
indistinctly, we strengthen the hands of the Formalist and Hypocrite. Add to
all this, (which is, and ought to be for a lamentation) we lead our people no
higher then a form by our example: It Is our too much formality in our lives,
that teaches it our people; if they saw more of the power of godliness in us,
our preaching would have more power to beget real godliness in them.

Reason 2. Something lies upon the generallity of Christians, especially the
godly, which renders the conversion of a Formalist very difficult.

As 1. The godly, not being able to discern them, (or if they discern them,
having no warrant to separate from them) do give them the right hand of
fellowship, admit them into their most intimate Society, lay them in their
Bosoms, and they are reputed amongst the best of Christians. This mightily
confirms them in their good opinion of themselves, and becomes an occasion of
hardening them against conviction. They abuse this indulgence of the godly into
their own obduration, and to the heightning of their security. I speak not
this, as blameing the godly for admitting them (for Tares, though not Briars
and Thorns, must grow amongst the Wheat till Harvest) but to show, what bad use
the hypocrite makes of the good esteem he has with the godly: Though perhaps,
sincere Christians may justly deserve to be blamed, for want of plain dealing
with such, whom they have just cause to suspect of formality, or hypocrisy.
Well, this, (as I said) hardens the Formalist in his self-conceit, and sets him
at a further distance to conversion. Under this shelter Judas lay secure, and
presumed that his condition was as good as the rest of the Apostles. A
Formalist carries so smoothly, that the truly godly, (who are always
self-suspicious) are more apt to suspect themselves, then those with whom they
converse. Now the godly (on the other hand) are shie of the company of profane
persons, knowing they have express commands, to avoid unnecessary converse with
such, as, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. and this sometimes, (through God's setting
it upon their hearts) becomes an occasion of putting them upon a more serious
consideration of their condition; even, a Cain fears and abhors the thought of
being an Outcast; those Censures of Suspension and Excommunication, appointed
by God himself, work by way of shame and disgrace. But,

3. There is so little liveliness in the best of Christians, that the Formalist
concludes himself as good as the best, and so rests in his present condition.
Where there is something of the power of godliness, yet there is too much of
mere form; and this encourages others to rest altogether in a form. Where
there is some life, there is too little liveliness; the best do not to the life
hold forth the word of life, Col. 2.16. There is something in the lives of
Christians, to convince and condemn the Profane; they see their swearing,
drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, etc. condemned in the practice of Christians,
shunning and abhorring those sins; but they do not so live, as to condemn the
Formality of those amongst them: There is not that warmth in their discourses
and duties, that vigor in their affections and actions, that may quicken and
heat others. Men are apt to make a stand at others deadness, as the people did
at the dead body of Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.12.

It Is storied of Janias, before his Conversion, that meeting once with a
Countryman, as he was in a journey, and falling into discourse with him about
diverse points in Religion, he observed the plain Fellow, to talk so
experimentally, with so much heartiness and affection, as made him first begin
to think, that there was something more in those Truths, then his
Notional-humane Learning had yet discovered; which occasioned his more serious
inquiry into them, and afterward his Conversion. Liveliness, and
affectionateness in Christians, is a singular Spur to incite others; but alas!
how rare is it? This wanting in the best, does strengthen the hands of the
Formalist, and beget in him a conceit, that he is as good as the best. Thus we
have laid down some of those impediments, (both in himself, and from others)
which lie in the way of a Formalist's Conversion, and render it more difficult,
then of the Profane.

CHAP. IV. Misaplication prevented.
BEfore I come to Application, it will be requisite to say something for the
preventing of m sapplication. Some may possibly hence draw this Conclusion,
That the next way to onversion, is to turn Profane; that to lay aside Prayer,
Hearing etc. and to become a Swearer, Adulterer, etc. is the best way to become
a Saint; an inference much like that, Romans 3.8. Let us do evil that good may
come; and Romans 6.1. (...) 1 Timothy 5.8.
Let us continue in sin, that grace may abound. But let such * perverse
Disputers know,

1. Though the word has, many times, an easier influence upon the Profane,
then the Formal^; yet this makes nothing for the comfort of Profane persons,
so continuing, though many such are converted and saved; What is this to him
that lives and dies unconverted? It Is as if one sick of a Fever, refusing the
Physician's help, feeding and nourishing his Disease, should comfort himself in
this, That his condition is better then one that is sick of the Plague, because
many are by Physic cured of the one, few or none of the other; when the one as
well as the other, is Mortal without the Physician's help. Though many Profane
Wretches are saved upon their Faith and Repentance, what comfort is it to thee
that continuest Profane, without Faith or Repentance? If Zacheus the Publican,
Magdalen the Harlot, Paul the Persecutor, are converted and saved, can thou,
who art an impenitent Oppressor, Harlot, Persecutor, etc. promise Salvation to
thy self? They are saved, not because they were such, but because they Repent.

2. Though profane persons are more frequently converted, then Formalists, yet
profaneness is no cause of their Conversion. If you suppose so, you admit a
Falacy, Non causae, pro causa; assigning that the cause, which indeed is not:
Many, being Profane, are converted, but not because they are Ptophane; they
are converted from, not for their Profaneness. At most, it has but an
accidental causality; as an enemy intending to kill you, may accidentally let
out the corruption, and so intending to be your Murderer, may unwittingly, and
contrary to his intention, prove your Physician; But that Profaneness can have
no proper causative influence into your conversion, will thus appear: If so, it
must be supposed, either, 1. To move God to call you; or, 2. To dispose, and
incline you to conversion: but to imagine either of these, is very foolish and
irrational.

For the first, you must know, That nothing out of God himself can be an
inducement to him, to call, or convert any; God's Eternal Decree, which is the
proper Efflux of his own Will, and of his Free Grace, is his only Motive in
this; See Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 11. 2 Timothy 1.9. It Is not the good
works of any foreseen, that move God to call them, (they being effects, not
causes of conversion) much less then their evil works: what can be more
absurd, then to suppose that that which God loathes, should induce him to love
us?

And for the second, it is equally absurd; for how can that which is in the
nature of it, an aversion from God, produce, as an effect, conversion to God?
As rationally may we imagine darkness to be the cause of light, sickness of
health, death of life, as that sin can any way be a cause of, or dispose unto
conversion. Could Profaneness dispose a man to Conversion, then it would
follow, the more Profane, the nearer to conversion; which is all one, as to
say, the nearer Hell, the nearer Heaven.

3. Neither is it the good that Formalists do, but their hypocrisy in doing,
and the bad use they make of their good actions, that renders their Conversion
difficult. Here a so you admit the same falacy, if you suppose their praying,
hearing, etc. to obstruct their Conversion. These duties rightly performed, are
both means and evidences of Conversion, and incumbent upon the converted.
Hearing is the way to have Faith (and other Graces) begotten in us, Romans 10.17
Prayer is prescribed to Simon Magus, yet being in the g^^ of bitterness and
bond of iniquity, in order to his Conversion, Acts 8.22. So we ma say of
other-like duties: As Profaneness is not dispositive to Conversion, so neither
are Pious duties any hinderance, but furtherance to it. Nay more, if ever you
be Converted, you must do what they do, though not as they do. You must pray,
hear, meditate, etc. though not in a form, as they do, but with power; not
relying upon them when done, but denying them, putting no confidence in them.
It Is not the form of godliness that hinders Conversion, but because it is but a
form, and yet rested in.

4. I may add, (though it is not so much to the business in hand) though
Formalists hurt themselves, yet they may be, and often are useful and
beneficial to others; whereas the Profane person is offensive, or unprofitable
to all: they may teach others, though not themselves. Profaneness, gives
occasion of stumbling and offense to them without; the Formalist's life carries
some conformity to the Rule, (and is so far imitable) though his heart be
naught and hypocritical; his practices are good, though his principles and ends
be naught: Others may see what they ought to do in him; but the Profane
person, as his heart is naught, so his life is irregular, not to be imitated.
The formal persons praying, hearing, etc. may possibly excite others to do that
in sincerity, which they do in hypocrisy, their parts and performances may be
useful to others, though accidentally hurtful to themselves. So that there is no
Reason to draw such an inference from the Doctrine in hand, or to suppose
profaneness the nearest cut to conversion. If any will yet abuse this Truth to
their own obduration in wicked and debauched courses, yet I hope what I have
said by way of prevention, will sufficiently acquit me from the guilt of the
blood of such Souls: now for Application.

CHAP. V. The first Use of the Point, in several Inferences, for Information,
or Instruction.
THe first Use may inform, or teach us several good Lessons.

1. An outward conformity to the Rule of the word, is not conversion; it is more
then cleansing the life from gross and palpable miscarriages, or washing the
outside of the Cup or Platter; if this were all, the Formalist would not only
go into the Kingdom of heaven before the profane person; but would be there
already. If prayer, hearing, fasting, talking religiously, were all, who would
be saved sooner then the Formalist? Then might we say of such, as the Jews of
the Scribes and Pharisees, if but two go to heaven, the one of them should be a
Formallist. Press him to reading, hearing, prayer, etc. He will be ready to
reply (and in some sense truly) All these things have I done from my youth:
what lack I yet? He can say with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. I thank God that
I am not as other men are; and with Paul, Phil. 3.6. As touching the
Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless: his life is not spotted with any
notorious, scandalous sin; his Conscience accuses him of nothing, but that
which is incident to the best; in a word, take him, as to his outside, his
life, his frequency in duty, etc. you may rank him with those of the highest
form; yet this man may be possibly at a further distance to Christ, his
conversion more hopeless, his heart more obdurate then the vilest drunkard,
swearer, etc. One thing, yea many things are lacking, especially these three,
which are essential to a Christian.

1. He wants a thoroughly humbling sight of sin, especially of the sin of his
nature and of his heart; he sees not that Atheism, pride, unbelief, hypocrisy,
etc. which lodge in his bosom: this is a main thing in order to conversion. Paul
had all abovementioned while a Pharisee, but till the law revived and he died,
Romans 7.9. till he saw himself carnal sold under sin, he remained unconverted.
The formalist is ready to say with that proud Monk, Isidore, non habeo domine
quod mihi ignoscas, I have nothing that needs a pardon; but if ever the true
work be begun he must change his note, and cry out with David, Ps. 25.11.
Pardon my sin, for it is great; and with the Publican, Luke 18.13. God be
merciful to me a sinner. There is no conversion without some conviction, none
were ever saved (in Gods ordinary way of working) but they have seen themselves
lost. There will be some sense of sin, and solicitousness about the pardon of
it, in all those that are truly converted.

2. He wants self-denial, to wit, a total and absolute disclaim of his own
righteousness; abnegation of self is necessary, praerequisite to acceptance of
Christ; this is more then whole burnt offerings and sacrifices. He can do
duties, but cannot deny them; he cannot with Paul, count all loss and dung for
Christ, etc. Phil. 37.10. He does, and expects for doing; looks for heaven not
as a gift of grace, or the purchase of Christ's blood, but as wages for working.
He is much of the temper of those two Monks, or Popish Priests, the o^e whereof
proudly challenges God, Redd^ mihi vitam aeternam quam debes. Pay me eternal
life, which thou owe me; the other as scornfully refuses heaven as a gift,
Coelum gratis non accepiam, I will not take heaven on free-cost; now hence, all
becomes odious to God that such a one does: his duties no more acceptable then
killing a man, cutting off a dogs neck, offering Sw^nes blood, or blessing an
Idol, Is. ^^.3. He is but ( Ephraim-like, Hos 10.1) An empty Vine br nging
forth fruit unto himself. Self is that great Idol, which (like Bell in the
Apocryphal story) devours all; self is prayed to, self is praised, self is the
principle and end, the Alpha and Omega of all this speaks him short of true
conversion.

3. He wants sincerity (which is Evangelical perfection) in all he does: that
which he does, is good, but he does it not well. The Scripture distinguishes
betwixt doing that which is right in the sight of the Lord, and doing it with a
perfect heart, Asa's heart was perfect all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. And he did
that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God. Chap. 14.2. not
so Amaziah, Chapt. 25.2. He did that which was right -- but not with a perfect
heart: God looks at the principle, manner, and end of our actings, as well as
the matter; here the Formalist is deficient: non factum sed modus in culpa: the
matter is good, but the manner is culpable. God may say to such as the Jews of
old, Psalm. 50.8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt
offerings to have been continually before me; I will not blame thee for neglect
of, but want of sincerity in duty: God will draw up a charge against them, like
that Zech. 7.5, 6. When ye fasted and mourned, did ye at all fast unto me, even
to me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves? They failed, you see, in the end of their
duties: Self, and not God, was their End; and this is a great piece of
insincerity. Conversion, if right, not only rectifies a man's actions, but
chiefly his Principles and Ends; so that the Formalist, in this, appears to be
short of true Conversion.

2. A second Lesson we may hence learn, is this, viz. The Reason, or at least a
reason why Conversion is so rare in these last days: Men are got up to a Form,
and there they stick: It was long since foretold, that Formality should be a
sin of the Last days, 2 Timothy 3.5. There are few but they have got some
knowledge, and do something in a Form, and they think this enough, and all. Some
Diseases are called Opprobria Medicorum, the shame or reproach of Physicians,
because they cannot find out the cause and rule of them. This, if any, is the
Opprobrium Ministrorum, very hardly discovered, and more hardly cured. Though
it cannot be denied, that there is too much Profaneness in the World; yet even
Profaneness it self is got under this shelter: A Form of Godliness is many
times found amongst those that are under the Power of open Wickedness. Relig^o^
g ins in breadth, ^t has more Professo^s and Practisers of it in a Form; but
loses in depth and height, never so little sincerity and seriousness in the
profession and practice of it. Knowledge and Means abound; Light gets into the
Conscience. Men cannot keep their Consciences from being Clamourous, without
doing something; loath they are to forgo their sweet, their profitable sins:
Hence arise a civil Commotion, (as the Philosopher speaks of the morally
wicked, (...), their Souls are at odds with themse ves) light and lust are
together by the ears; now to take up the quarrel and comprim^ze the
differerence, Satan and their own hearts find out this expedient, to set up a
form of Godliness, that under this cloak they may more securely practice the
power of ungodliness: they will do something that is good, supposing they may
have the better leave to do evil; when men are got to this, they stick at it,
and make it their non ultra: thus they think to satisfy both Interests, viz.
of their sins, and of their souls. It Is true, there are Formalists of different
forms and degrees; some more gross and palpable, others that spin a finer
thread, and waste more in the dark; but this sin, more or less, is to be found
in the generality of professed Christians, and this renders Conversion a very
rare and difficult work.

3. This shows us, that (although nothing is common, yet) nothing is more
dangerous, to step out of Profaneness, into Formality: how ordinary is it for
notorious sinners, when beaten out of open wickedness, to take Sanctuary in a
form of Godliness? What Is this, but to run further from God, while we seem to
come nearer him? at best but to come out of Egypt, and stay in the Wilderness?
such men turn sin (like some thief or lewd Companion) out of the street-door,
and then receive it in at a backdoor, lodging it in the secret Chamber of
their hearts; they retire out of the field of a more open hostility against God
and Holiness; but betake themselves into an impregnable Castle, where they set
God and Christ at Defiance: under a pretense of Kissing, they do more certainly
kill Christ: shunning Scylla, they fall into Charybdis: thinking to deceive God
by a show, they deceive themselves really. For,

1. You, (that I may turn my speech to such) do but more obstruct the way to
your own Conversion; get further out of the reach and power of the Word: the
Plague, when it comes outward in a boil or sore, is less dangerous, then when
it strikes inward, and seizes upon the Brain or Vitals. Formality is but a
striking in of that disease, which formerly appeared on the Face and Body, and
therefore makes it more incurable. It Is sad to think, how many have left the
fouler way of Profaneness, in which they were walking toward Hell, and are
now more certainly, and swiftly posting thither, in the cleaner way of
Formality! Well, let me tell you, the Devil thinks none so surely his, as
those, who serve him under Christ's Livery. They that think themselves Free,
and yet are not, are most likely to continue in Bondage, He is twofold more the
Child of Hell, who has got a Cloak of Religion to cover his Rags and
filthiness withal; and has got the Art to keep up a practice of duty, and a
course of sin together. That disease is most Mortal oftentimes, that is least
fealt: Formality only serves to Brawn the heart, and Sear the conscience, and
then there is but little hope of such a soul's Conversion. He that is become
insensible, (and such is the Formalist) is next door to incurable.

2. As you do more effectually shut Heaven's door upon you, so you open a wider
door into Hell; (that I may allude to that Scripture, 2 Pet. 1.11.) A more
abundant entrance you have into Satan's Kingdom: your evidences are hereby made
clearer, your title surer. Hell is the hypocrite's Fee-simple, Matthew. 24.51.
The nearer Heaven, if you fall short of it, the greater will your fall be, and
the heavier your condemnation, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. etc. If you have escaped the
pollutions of the world -- and are again entangled, (as certainly you will be,
if you rest in formality) your later end will be worse then your beginning;
better you had never known the way of righteousness, then afterward to turn
from the holy commandment. A great part of Hell will doubtless be a sad
recapitulation of the possibilities, probabilities, advantages, convictions,
motions, etc. which we had, and slighted; the more of these here, the more of
Hell hereafter. And who then may expect a hotter Hell then your selves? Oh,
will it not be a heart-cutting consideration, to think how many steps you had
taken, and all in vain, for want of one step further? Yea, to think, that there
are many now in glory, who took less pains (as to the matter, and frequency of
duty) then thou did, who shall yet lie down in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone
for ever.

4. This shows us, that the Formalist has no reason to boast, or lift himself
in his own conceit, above the prophanest wretch that he sees or knows of: It Is
ordinary with such to bless themselves with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. God, I
thank thee, that I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican. To stand upon
their comparisons, or rather disparisons Isaiah 65.5. Stand by thy self; Come
not near me, I am holier then thou: but there is a checking word follows, These
are a smoke in my nose, and a fire that burns all the day; highly and
continually offensive to God. It Is a speech much like that o^ our Savior to
Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. Poor deluded,
self-deluding souls! You think your state incomparably better then your
profane Friend or Neighbor; when, alas, it is worse, in this at least, that
you think it better: What difference do you think, will God make betwixt an
open Enemy, and a counterfeit Friend; surely, if any, the later is worse. God
seems to be pusled, and at a nonplus, what to do with such as thou art, Rev.
3.15. I would thou were either hot or cold; but verse. 16. comes to a peremptory
and terrible resolution; So then, because thou art neither hot nor cold, I will
spue thee out of my mouth: Is this a condition to be proud of? What more
loathsome then vomit? Can the vilest wretch on-earth, undergo a heavier doom?
Indeed, could not God find thee out, thy case might be more hopeful, but he
can, and will unmask and uncase thee: Then thy condition will be so much the
worse, by how much better it seemed to thee, Psalm. 125. 5. Such as turn aside
unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity. Such are the ways of the hypocritical Formalist, tortuous and
crooked; full of windings, and turnings, like the Hare's doublings before the
Dogs; but God will find them out, and lead them forth with the wor^rs of
iniquity, In tortuosi talibus.
i. e. They shall be numbered with the profane and open Sinners, and fall with
them into the same condemnation. Let me then say to thee, as the Penitent Thief
to his Fellow, Luke 23.40. Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? Why boastest thou against the profane, when both must lie down
together in the same Hell? Yea thou, in the hotter place: The Tares, as well as
Briars and Thorns, must be burnt with fire unquenchable, Matthew. 13.30, 40. Your
boasting therefore is not good.

5. This may intimate a twofold duty incumbent on Ministers, in reference to
this sin of Formality.

1. Let us take heed of driving our People out of Profaneness into Formality,
and there leaving them. What skill and prudence is necessary, so to manage our
Work, that we, not only draw upon them the Lineaments, but beget in them the
life of Christianity: Lest we be like the unskilful Chyrurgion, to skin the
sore, and let it fester inwardly; this is instead of curing, to render them
more incurable. Two things will much conduce to a through work.

1. Let us be sure to press an inward, as well as outward change; labor we to
get into their hearts, and convince them, that the Root of all their Malignity
is there, according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 15.19. Let us tell them, and
tell them again, That they must be renewed in the spirit of their minds, Ephesians.
4.23. That it is not enough to cleanse their hands, except they also purify
their hearts, Jam. 4.8. That it is not only the course of their lives, but
chiefly and primarily the frame of their hearts that must be changed: while we
only press outward Reformation, and performance of duties, we do but teach
them to do as Christians, not to be Christians; it is good to begin at the
heart, and bring the disease outward.

2. Let us be much in pressing Faith and Obedience to Christ, as well as
Repentance and Reformation. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, were the sum of Paul's Doctrine, Acts 20.20. Both must be
preached; the former in subordination to the latter: Luther used to say, he
that can well distinguish betwixt Law and Gospel, is a good Divine; I say, he
that can join them well together, is the skilful Preacher: we should be very
careful that we separate not Faith and Duty, Law and Gospel, or make those
opposite, which are subordinate; while we press Repentance, Prayer, Hearing,
etc. with little or no mention of Christ, we teach men to be Loyalists; while
we preach Christ, Free Grace, the Saints Privileges, etc. without the Law, we
teach men to be Libertines, and Licentious Antinomists: The mean is best; a
prudent mixture of Loyal severity, with Gospel sweetness, is the way to make
men thorough Christians.

2. The other branch of our duty is this, That we bend our study much against
this sin, it being the sin of the age we live in. What charge the King of Syria
gave concerning the King of Israel, 1 King. 22.31. Fight neither with small nor
great, etc. The same should our care be as to this sin: It Is the Devil's last
and strongest hold: beat him out here, and we are Conquerors. Two things
(omitting other) I commend to this purpose.

1. (To make us more able for this work) Let us diligently observe the windings
and formality of our own hearts: For as it is, Proverbs 27.19. As in water,
face answers to face; so the heart of man to man. (Though I will not be
confident that is the sense of that Text) we are all of the same mould: Books
may make us able, but this will make us profitable Ministers: The best way to
fit our Sermons for others hearts, is to try them upon, or rather to dig them
out of our own: What our people do most industriously strive to hide from us,
viz. the naughtiness of their hearts, we may in despite of them see in our
own: (and possibly this may be one reason why the Wisdom of God has chosen men
of like infirmities with others, to be the Preachers of the Word.) Well, my
Brethren, let us but shoot home at our own hearts, and it is a thousand to one if
we hit not some, yea, many in our Congregations.

2. (To make us more successful in this work) Pray over our studies: Some steep
seeds before they put them into the Earth, and water them after: How well might
we hope that spiritual seed would thrive, that has Prayer to go before, and
follow it: and truly, if ever we have need to pray, it is when we are to
grapple with this sin. This formal Devil will scarce out without prayer and
fasting; What need have we to beg that the searcher of hearts will direct the
arrow of his Word to the heart? The Apostle in Heb. 4.12, 13. speaking of the
words discovering power, ties with a strange connection, the Omniscience of God
to it. Surely, if the All-knowing God do not more immediately concur, the Word
will not so pierce to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, joints and
marrow, etc. It Is fabled of Pigmalion, that having made the Pourtraicture of a
curious Woman, falling in love with it, he prayed to Venus, and she put life
into it: Have we drawn the amiable Picture, or carved the lovely image of a
Christian upon any of our people? O let us beg down life into them from God.

6. Once more: We may hence learn, that God looks not at worthiness or
unworthiness, at preparitory dispositions, previous qualifications, or that
Popish fiction of merit of congruity in those whom he calls: (I desire here to
be understood of what we may imagine to dispose a man, or put him in a nearer
capacity to conversion; otherwise there is no such thing as fitness or
unfitness really, as to Gods Omnipotency) should God judge as man judges, or
look upon the outward appearance, as man looks, Whom should he sooner call
then the Formalist? were we to guess according to carnal Reason, whom the Lord
would choose, would we not say of the Formalist, as Samuel of Jesses eldest son;
1 Samuel 16.
surely the Lords anointed is before him? these seem to meet God half way, and
not to be far from the Kingdom of God. Who would take (as was before hinted)
the knottiest, crookedst timber to lay in his building? the roughest stones to
make his wall? yet so it pleases God to do: God looks with other eyes then we
do. Mat 9.12, 13. Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. God delights to make all his works Creations, and to build where
there is no appearance of foundation; and this to exclude man's boasting. He
will have his grace to be, and to appear free. But to proceed to a second Use.

CHAP. VI. The second and third Use of the Point, Viz. Terror to the Formalist,
and discoveries of such.
Belshazzar, Dan. 5.5. And passes the same sentence upon him as that did, Thou
art weighed in the balance, and found wanting. How does the Formalist bless
himself in comparison of the profane? He would not for a world be as they are;
when alas, he is worse. If I may say of the unconverted, That one is further
from conversion then another, (as that Text seems to intimate, Mark 13.34. Thou
art not far, etc.) then these surely are at the farthest distance. That
forecited Text, Mat. 9.12.13. Christ came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance; seems to hint, that such self-conceitedly righteous
persons, are out of the care and call of Christ, and that is sad. But I cannot
expect that any should take home this Terror, till it be charged home upon
them; till Conscience say, Thou art the man: we are apt to catch at comforts,
and decline terrors; it will be necessary therefore, to give some Signs and
Characters of the Formalist (though something has been already hinted) that so
being convinced, he may apply it.

This may (if you please) be a distinct

1. He whose duties and personal righteousness stand in opposition, not in
subordination to Christ and his righteousness, is the person we speak of:
possibly his Baptism and Education make him affect the name of Christian; but
he sees not the absolute necessity of Christ's righteousness to justify and
save him; supposing he has enough in his own store. Had this man heard Christ
speaking of his sufferings in order to man's salvation, he would have been ready
with Peter, to say, as Mat. 16.22. Master spare thy self; or as Judas
concerning the precious ointment, To what end is all this waste? He may be a
professed enemy to Popery, yet has in him this Popish principle that he can
keep the Commandments, and it may be supererogate also. such a one deals with
Christ, as those women the Prophet speaks of, Isa. 4.1. We will (say they) eat
our own bread, and wear our own apparel, only let us be called by thy name,
to take away our reproach; So they will be clothed with their own
Righteousness; only they love the name Christian, because its a name of honor:
How is it then? the more strict and holy thou seem to thy self, does Christ
seem of less necessity to thee? do thy duties set thee further off, or bring
thee nearer Christ? do thou live more within, and upon thy self? surely if
so, to thee this terror belongs; It Is quite contrary with the sincere
Christian, his duties and performances drive him nearer Christ: see Phil.
3.3.-10. though he grow in inherent holiness, yet he grows daily more
apprehensive of the necessity of imputed righteousness, because he sees more of
Gods holiness, the laws purity and strictness, and the impurity and filthiness
of his own heart: when he has done all, he cries out, Unprofitable Servant!
and woe to me, for my Duties, Prayers, Hearings, Graces, etc. if I had not a
Mediator. When he rises highest in Duty or gracious actings, yet his suit to
Christ (as Ruth's to Boaz, Ruth. 3.9.) is, Spread thy skirt over me. It Is
remarkable, Phil. 3 3. For we are the Circumcision which worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

2. (Which is the root of the former) He whose Duties and Holiness are the fuel
of Pride, is the man we enquire after; Thus it was with the Pharisees, Isa.
65.5. Luke 18.11, 12. John 7.48. Formality comes off ordinarily more proud from
a Duty, and goes on the next time more self-confident (except perhaps God has
notably cut him short, as to the exercise of his gifts:) True, pride may rush
(as one says) into the heart of a sincere Christian; but it rests, grows, is
cherished in the heart of a Hypocrite: where Pride leads on in any Duty, Dike
on the Hearts Deceitfulness.
yet Humility brings him off: what the sincere person wants in antecedent
directing humility, he makes up in subsequent and correcting humility, 2 Chronicles.
32.26. Hezekiah was humbled for the pride of his heart: a true Christian is
humbled for his Pride, an Hypocrite is proud of his Humility: There Is a Monitor
within the sincere Christians heart, that is often jogging him, and brings him
down when he begins to swell. Try then, is this worm of pride bred and
nourished by thy duties? Do thou pray, and hear, and discourse thy self more
proud, haughty, self-conceited? It Is a sad symtome thou art yet but a
Formalist: It Is storied, Heylin.
that the Isle of Man (the Title being doubted whether it belonged to Britain
or Ireland) was adjudged to Britain, because it fostered venomous Serpents
brought from thence into it: Sure I am, if thy duties foster and cherish this
venomous Serpent of Pride, they are the duties of a Formalist, not a sincere
Christian.

3. He that is altogether a stranger to Godly sorrow, Humiliation for sin, (and
this is the cause of both the former) he that never knew what compunction or
contrition meant, whose heart was never broken up, and furrowed with the Plow
of conviction; who has had but a superficial work, has but cleansed the
outside of the Cup or Platter? It Is observable, The stony ground received the
word ((...)) Matthew. 13.20. immediately with joy, but soon witherered: whereof
the Evangelist Matthew, Chap. 13.5. gives the reason, because it had not depth
of Earth: Luke, Chap. 8.6. because it had not moisture: Both the Evangelists,
as also Mark Chap. 4.16. tells us, They received the Word with joy and
gladness: What can be understood by depth of earth, and moisture, but heatings
and meltings by Humiliation? This the stony ground wanted; and therefore they
being yet a rock not broken, not humbled, the seed though suddenly springing
up, withers, and comes to nothing: heat and moisture are joint-causes of growth
and fruitfulness; the latter without the former drowns and suffocates the seed;
the former without the latter does scorch and wither it: and this is the case
of this ground, they have some heat of joy and raptures, which (like the
flattering rays of the April Sun) draw forth some early blossoms; but when
some cold chilling frosts, or scorching heats come in the following Month, they
are either nipt by the one, or scorched and shrunk up by the other: Praemature
fruits never come to maturity: The Child that thrusts its self forth into the
world before its time, seldom proves long-lived. Such are Formalists, they
hastily catch at Christ, before they are humbled for sin, or melted by godly
sorrow, and therefore do as quickly forsake him: The like may be gathered from
that other Parable of the wise and foolish builders, Luke 6.47, 48. The wise
Builder, (...), dug deep, and laid his foundation on a rock; the foolish
built without a foundation on the Earth; surely Humiliation and through
conviction is (at least in part) the import of that digging deep; and for want
of this digging, the building does, mola sua ruere, fall by its own weight: for
want of these dews and moistures the root is dried up from beneath, and above
the bud is cut off, Job 18.16. As the natural, so the spiritural birth is
attended with pangs. Now the Formalist is one that never felt these, or not to
purpose; never so as to bring him off his own righteousness, or to subdue his
will to an acceptance of Christ upon Gospel terms. But here I desire to be
rightly understood; I prescribe not such a measure of humiliation as necessary,
nor to all the like measure: there is great difference as to the manner,
measure, and continuance of it; all are not thrown upon the ground, and
deprived of their sight as Paul was; all walk not in the Region of the shadow
of death, nor go bowed down 18 years with a spirit of Infirmity: To some God
comes in a fire, thunder and whirlwind, to others in a still voice; as God
teaches us to put a difference, Jude 22,23. so himself does does; on some he
has compassion, others he saves with fear, pulling them out of the fire; the
convictions and humiliation of some are more sensible and terrible, like the
breaking of stones with a hammer; they are brought by the gates of Hell to
Heaven; of others, more sweet, kindly and insensible, like the melting of wax
before the fire, and Ice or Snow before the Sun. The Souls of some are taken by
storm, others by a long and tedious siege and battery; some are surprised, as
it were, by stratagem, and some surrendered upon Parley; yea, some are so
wrought upon, that the first (sensible) work they experience, is Grace, drawing
them to a voluntary resignment of their souls to God. All these works our
gracious God according to his own Will and Pleasure; nor can any certain stated
Rules be laid down about the various workings of God with poor souls.
Nevertheless, these two things I conceive may be safely asserted:

1. That before a soul is brought, or upon a souls coming over to Christ, he
has such a convincing sight of sin, and of his own sin original and actual,
with such a measure of compunction and contrition (be it less or more) as does
make him both see an absolute necessity of Christ, and willingly close with him
upon Gospel conditions. (I speak here of God's working upon the adult.) It Is
not merely the love of Christ, or his excellency appehended, that attracts the
soul to him; but withal, he sees he stands in need of him, and is undone
without him. I would fain know of any of those pretended Patrons and Assertors
of Free Grace, how a soul can have any apprehensions of the love of Christ to
purpose, without some praevious apprehensions and convictions of its own
sinfulness and misery: Is it not the very Emphasis of the love of Christ, that
while we were yet sinners he died for us? Romans 5.8. That when we were lost, he
came to seek and save us? take away this sense of sin and misery, and you take
away the very accent of Christ's love. Is not this the language of a Soul under
the most kindly workings? O infinite Love! that such a vile, sinful, lost
wretch as I am should be sought for, inquired after! much like the language of
Mephibosheth to David, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant, that thou should
look upon such a dead dog as I am? And Chapter 19.28. All my fathers house were but
dead men before my Lord the King, yet did thou set thy servant among them
that did eat at thy table. Here Is deep and deep; depth of Misery, and depth of
Mercy; these jointly apprehended, melt the heart of a poor sinner, and make it
as water, or rather as wax, fit for any Divine impression: so that there is in
the soul, under most ingenuous and kindly workings, sense of sin, and sorrow
for it, though swallowed up in the joyful sense of God's love in Christ Jesus.

2. And after a soul is come to Christ, the frame of the heart is such, that
it is ready to grieve and melt upon the sight and conviction of a sin now
committed, or the remembrance of a sin formerly acted: Hezekiah humbled himself
for the pride of his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. We find Peter in the same temper,
and David often; the stone being taken out of the heart, there is an habitual
tenderness, ready to exert it self in kindly meltings, upon sight of any
unkindnesses, and disingenuous actings toward God, Christ, or the Spirit: Now
to both these, the Formalist is a stranger: his will was never subdued, his
heart never molified so far, as to go out of himself: Bring this note home, and
try your state by it, I beseech you.

4 He is a Formalist, who though he is constant in the matter, yet is little or
not at all conscientious in the manner of duty: That it be done, he is very
careful; but how, he regards not. The Formal Jews were so constant at their
sacrifices, that there God will not blame them, Psalm. 50.8. The sincere
Christian is no less troubled for his carelessness, customariness, wanderings and
distractions in, then for his omissions of duty; he accounts that, as not done,
which is not done with some suitableness of affection, and exercise of grace:
he thinks he has but mocked God, and taken his Name in vain: But this troubles
not the Formalist; he is a good Churchman (as they call him) constant at his
Family Duties, etc. and never matters how cursorily and slubbringly they are
performed: his care is to get it done, the sincere Christians, to get it well
done; thinking himself never the better for that Duty that makes him not
better; never the nearer for that which brings him not further out of himself,
and nearer God. Try then; Can thou never remember the time when thy heart
smote thee for thy negligence in, as well as neglect of Duty? Do thou go on
merrily and confidently in a cold, dull, heartless course of Religious
Performances? It Is a sad sign thou art yet a Formalist, and to thee the Text
speaks terror.

5. He is a Formalist whose Duties do no execution upon his sins; he Prays, and
sins; Hears, and sins; goes in a round, as a Horse in a Mill: Take him at his
Prayers, you may hear him perhaps confessing his Worldliness; but take him in
the World, and you find him as covetous, as griping, as apt to defraud as ever:
he comes off his duties, as if he had but begged leave to sin; yea, sin gets
strength by his performances: As the Harlot, Prove. 7.14, 15. I have
Peace Offerings by me, this day I have paid my vows. Come, let us take our fill
of love -- So he thinks his morning and evening-Duties procure him liberty to
sin all the day; when he has heard, though the Word was never so pierceing, he
never thinks more of it, to reform his heart or life by it; that he has heard
satifies him, never thinking what, or to what end he has heard; hence it is
that no execution is done upon his lusts. Now with the sincere Christian it is
far otherwise; his Duties give sin a shake, loosen it at the root: True indeed,
a corruption may outlive many a Prayer, Sermon, Humiliation-day, without any
sensible decay; yea, may seem to get head, and grow more turbulent; yet every
Duty rightly performed, does something toward the mortification of it: as in
cutting down a tree, every stroke does not bring it down, yet some chips are
cut off; and in battering a Fort, every shot does not beat it down, yet makes
it weaker, and prepares it for the next. So every Duty does something weaken
sin, at least thus; for that it increases the Soul's hatred of it, and puts
upon him a fresh engagement to pursue it to the death: examine then; does sin
get strength by thy Religious duties? do thou grow into more love and liking
of thy bosom corruptions? (for that is the surest evidence of sins growth:)
Then have thou just cause to suspect thy self of formality, and to apply this
terror to thy self.

6. The Formalist is ordinarily full of confidence and self-conceit, very
supercilious toward poor bruised reeds, and doubting souls: he looks upon the
weak Believer as no body in comparison of himself. Thus you see it in the
Pharisees, Joh. 7.48. Luke 18.9 -- 12. Paul was once of this temper, Romans 7.9.
He was alive without the Law once; i. e. highly conceited, and strongly
confident of his good condition: so the Formalist seldom suspects himself,
never is at a loss for his Evidences. The Devil befriends him, and helps him up
to this Pinnacle; he is not more an enemy to true saving Faith, then a friend to
Presumption: The sincere Christian (on the other hand) is very suspicious,
often trying, dougbting, searching; works out his salvation with fear and
trembling. It Is true some healthy, well-complexion'd Christians, (but oh how
rare are they!) keep up faith in a lively and constant exercise; can look
within the veil, and are not subject to those frequent tossings and doubtings
as others; but then they do not brow-beat, and carry scornfully and
contemptuously toward those that have not attained to their Measure: they are
very tender toward the weakest Lambs in Christ's fold, and can sympathize in
their weaknesses, and help to bear their Infirmities. That supposed assurance
that is joined with the contempt of weak ones, and separated from a holy,
humble, watchful walking with God, is a sure note of a Formalist. There is fear
and jealousy in the best; David, Psalm. 139. 20 -- end. professes his
sincerity, yet suspects there ma be some way of wickedness in him: so that if
thou have high presumptions, and low performances, strong confidence upon weak
grounds, and this lifts thee up in thy own conceit above thy weak brethren;
conclude thy self but yet a Formalist.

7. The Formalist has some regard to the matter of the first Table, little to
the second: Piety, as to the face of it, he practices, but equity and charity
he little looks at, perhaps nor sobriety neither, he thinks his duties toward
God may excuse his deficiencies toward men (And herein by the way, the
Moralist and Formalist differ; the former being only or chiefly for second
table duties, though both do convenire in tertio, agree in this third thing,
that they neglect Christ, and put confidence in their own righteousness.) This
that I say of the Formalist is evident, Psalm. 50.8. with verse 18, 19, 20. They
were constant at their sacrifices, but deeply guilty of Theft, Adultery,
evil-speaking, and false accusations: with the same mouth did they bless God,
or curse or speak evil of man made after the image of God, Jam. 3.9. so Jer.
7.4. They cry The Temple of the Lord. i. e duties, sacrifices; but verse 5, 6.
They did not execute judgment between a man and his neighbor, they oppressed
the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, they shed innocent blood, etc. so
verse 9. They did steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely. The like
you may see Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, etc.
yea, verse 3. They challenge God, and charge him as not having regard to their
fasting, and afflicting their Souls: yet these, verse 4. did fast for strife
and debate, and to smite with with the fist of wickedness. See more of their
failings toward their neighbor, verse 6, 7, 9, 10. Where Gods calling for
such duties at their hands, sufficiently intimates their defectiveness in them.
Possibly some smaller acts of righteousness or mercy they may do; so did the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.23. They tithed Mint, Annise and Cummin, but the weightier
points of the law, judgment, mercy, or faith, (that is, as some with good
reason interpret, faithfulness in their dealings with men) these they
neglected. Yea, by their rare device of Corban, i. e. a gift given to the
Priest or Temple, that their Parents might be prayed for, disoblige the child
from that necessary duty of succouring his necessitous Parents: Matthew. 15.5.6.
with Mark 7.11, 12. Thus making pretended piety toward God, a cloak for
neglect of duty toward man: and upon this account how many Formalists are to
be found amongst us? are not many, that have set up Prayer and reading in their
Families, who frequent Ordinances, and seem to be eminent in piety, as bad, yea
much worse in second-Table-duties, then the prophanest? Who more griping and
oppresive? Who more ready to overreach in Bargaining? To defraud or abridg
their Minister of his due? So that (as to the business of equity, and justice
of people toward their Minister) we could rather desire to be cast upon a
profane, superstitious, ignorant people, then amongst knowing Formalists:
Besides, who more quarrelsome? fuller of strife and debate? more apt to go to
Law for trifles, then these? Can these things consist with sincertty? are they
not plain evidences of a rotten heart, a mere Formalist? Surely sincerity has
an equal respect to all God's Commandments, will not knowingly bank any; much
less make obedience to one, a cloak of disobedience to another.

8. Add one more briefly: The Formalist is regardless of his own heart: A
stranger to that Duty Solomon presses, Prove. 4.13. Keep thy heart above all
keeping. This is (if I may so speak) the very Formalis Ratio, the Essence of
Formality, that the heart is wanting in all he does: he has an eye to his
Conversion, (as far as it is obvious to the eye of others) but lets his heart
run at liberty. Now the sincere Christian's work is most within; his greatest
care is in weeding, dressing, keeping clean, watching over his own heart: he
has a wary eye to every entrance and out-going of the soul. Thus you see some
rude draught of a Formalist: Judge your selves by these Characters; and, if you
find cause, apply the Text and Doctrine to your own hearts; rectify your
mistakes, and judge of your selves as the Word judges of you; it may do you
good: for this is not a judgment of final decision, but of trial and
discussion, which may bring you into the right way.

4. The fourth and last Use I shall make of the Doctrine, is Exhortation; in
which, 1. A word to the Profane, 2. To the Formalist.

CHAP. VII. The fourth and last Use of the point, viz. Exhortation: And first
to the Profane, That they will improve their hopes: Prosecuted, 1. by
Directions. 2. Encouraging Motives.
1. TO you that wallow in the mire of sin, and drink the very dregs of
iniquity; see your hopes, your possibilities, your probabilities for Heaven,
and lay hold on them: possibly some of you may conceit your case hopeless and
desperate, but take not up such sad conclusions: There is yet hopes in Israel
concerning this thing; say not then with the Eunuch and stranger, Isa. 56.3.
The Lord has utterly separated me from his people, Behold I am a dry tree: Nor
with the Apostate Jews, Jer. 2.25. There is no hope, etc. Despair will make you
desperate: It Is the Epicures language. 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we die: (q. d.) Let us take our fill of pleasure and voluptuousness
here, we know not what our portion will be in another world; none are so
obstinately wicked, as they that have hardened themselves by despair. I have
read of one, who after a first and second relapse from purposed and promised
Reformation, being the third time visited with sickness, sent for his Minister,
who minding him of his former promises and failings in performance, aggravating
his sin upon him, he told him, that except he did speedily and seriously
repent, and put away his Harlot (who was then in his house) there was no hope
of his Salvation. His reply was, Say you so; can I not be saved except I put
her away? Then I will do as well as I can while I live; so calling for Wine,
Cards, and that Woman, he spent his time (which was but three or four days) in
mirth and pleasure, and so in a moment went down into the grave. Oh take heed
of bringing your selves to this pass! That Scripture is notable, Job 15.21, 24.
A doleful sound is in his ears, Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid.
Here Is his despair, or horror of Conscience: see the effect of it, Verse. 25,
26. He stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against
the Almighty: he runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of
his bucklers. Some wild Beasts, when hunted to a stand, will turn again, and
fly in your face: So do sinners, when grown desperate, even fly in the face of
God himself. It Is the Devils ordinary way, when he has drawn men into sin, and
kept them in it as long as he can, when they begin to think of turning, to
persuade them there is no hope. Oh but consider the Text, possibly thy case may
be more hopeful then many a one that passes in the world for a sincere
Christian: yet the door is open, the Golden Scepter is held out; thy case is
not desperate; make it not so by going on still in thy wickedness: Presumption
begins obduration, but despair heightens and compleats it. If once thou drink
in this deadly conclusion, That there is no possibility of Salvation for thee;
thou will then bid defiance to God: This made one shoot his darts against
Heaven; another throw up handfuls of his own blood, crying out Vicisti
Galilaea, O Galilean, thou have overcome: A third, wish himself above God, that
he might be able to grapple with him; and a fourth lay violent hands upon
himself, and become his own Executioner. This is it that makes the Devil a
Devil, Jam. 2.19. He believes and trembles: It Is a Hell worse then Hell it
self: See therefore, and lay hold on thy opportunity: Publicans and Harlots,
(says the Text) go into the Kingdom of God, art thou worse? 'Twas a cheering
word to poor blind Bartimeus, Mar. 10.49. Be of good comfort, rise, he calls
thee. The same I may say to you, he came to call sinners (and are not you such)
to repentance: Oh that you would now imitate that poor blind man, who V. 50.
cast away his Garment, rose and came to Jesus, Acts 13.43. with 47, 48. See how
the Gentiles rejoiced and flockt in, when God vouchsafes them an invitation.
Poor souls! They thought God had cast them off, and not reserved such a
blessing for them; therefore they are even ravished with the glad tidings, and
become as Corn fully ripe, that shakes into the hand of the Reaper; or as
mellow fruits, dropping into the mouth of him that gathers them: Oh that this
discovery of the like hopes for you profane sinners, might have the like
operation upon you! Oh that I could hear some poor soul pouring out such
breathings as these! What? Is there hopes for me? for me an old Drunkard, an
unclean wretch, etc? Will Christ vouchsafe to give me a call, an invitation? Is
it possible, that I that have spent my choice time, exhausted my best Spirits,
etc. upon sin, should yet be in a possibility of Heaven? Is it thy pleasure,
dear Savior, to bestow thy Blood and Merits, thy Grace and Spirit; yea, an
heavenly Inheritance, a Crown of Glory on such a dead dog as I am? Surely
though none could have less hope, yet none has more need then I; since there
is a peradventure, I will go in; if I perish, I perish: Oh take the Prophets
Counsel, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Give me leave to sub-join two or
three words of Direction, and as many of Encouragement.

1. Come within the call of Christ; lie at the Bethesda of Ordinances; put your
selves under the Physicians hands, if you will be cured: Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10.17. Miss not an opportunity; you know not when the Spirit will
blow, or the Angel descend to move these waters: Though God has called some
from the Ale-bench, Tavern, Stews, Receipt of Custom; yet it is not to be
presumed God will do so; it is out of Gods ordinary road. Those whom Christ
cured, or called, were such ordinarily as were in his way: So the ten Lepers,
Luke 17.12. The blind man, Luke 18.35. The wounded man lay in the way betwixt
Jerico and Jerusalem, etc. Zacheus got into the Sycamore-tree where Christ was
to pass by, Luke 19.4, 5. and he hears that glad tidings, Come down Zacheus,
etc. Ezekiel 16.6. When I passed by thee -- I said unto thee, live: It Is good to
be where Christ may pass by us, and that is in his Church, amongst his people;
for his walk is in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1. Wisdom
cries without, she utters her voice in the streets; she cries in the chief
place of concourse, etc. Prove. 1.20 -- What hope may thou conceive if thou
waitest at her Gates, and watchest daily at the posts of her doors, since such
are pronounced blessed, Prove. 8.34? Some have been caught in the net before
they were aware, (a happy catching!) yea, when they came to catch, carp and
deride: What hope may thou have, if thou will constantly and conscientiously
wait upon God in his Ordinances?

2. Call upon Christ; cast thy self at his feet, with the Lepers, and the blind
man, Luke 18.41. Lord, that I might receive my sight. Learn the Publicans
posture, Luke 18.13. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Take the Apostles counsel
to Simon Magus, Act. 8.22. Pray that the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven
thee: such prayers, (whatever some say) shall not be rejected; else why does
the Holy Ghost direct to the use of them? Christ has taught thee importunity,
Luke 18.1-8. Put his Lesson in practice; beg pardon and justification: say to
Christ, Lord spread thy spirit over me, since thou art become a near kinsman:
Beg Sanctification; Lord here is a filthy heart, O cleanse it; a hard heart, O
mollify it; a dead heart, O quicken it: Plead such free Promises as that, and
put them in suit, Ezekiel. 36.26. Take, Lord, the stone out of my heart, and give
me an heart of flesh: sprinkle clean water upon me, etc. Take up Ephraim's
words, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord
my God; And Hos. 14.1, 2. Plead the examples of such as thou art, whose
conversion is recorded for thy encouragement; Magdalen, Zacheus, Paul: see that
sweet Scripture, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. How be it, for this cause I obtained mercy,
that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Cast
thy self upon him, in confidence of that word, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto
me, I will in no wise cast off: Plead as the servants of Benhadab, 1 King.
20.31. I have heard the God of Israel is a merciful God: A mere peradventure
should be enough to an undone Creature, as it was to the four Lepers, 2 King.
7.8. much more when thou have such invitations and encouragements to allure
thee to come in.

3. Cast away thy transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.31. Thou can not be saved in them,
but from them thou may: This is the good old way wherein only thou shall
find rest for thy soul. Jer. 6.16. This doctrine will abide the fire, when all
the wood, hay and stubble of novel and unscriptural speculations, will be
burnt: It Is Christ's own Doctrine, Luke 13.3, 5. Away then with thy lewd
companions, excess, revellings; put away those works of the flesh, Gal. 5.22.
else take no comfort in all: I have said, read over the examples of all those
that were saved, especially such profane ones as thy self: Was not this valley
of Achor, bitter Repentance, their door of hope: It Is not Paul the Persecutor,
but Paul the Penitent, the faithful Apostle, that is in Heaven: Not Zacheus the
Oppressor, but Zacheus the Restorer: Not Magdalen the Harlot, but Magdalen the
Penitent; weeping Magdalen, washing Christ's feet with her tears, and wiping
them with the hairs of her head: And what is there in any sin, that hopes of
future glory should not make thee willing to part with it? Is the Favor of
God? Are the Consolations of the Spirit? The Privileges of the Saints? Is
Heaven, and Glory, and the eternal fruition of the Beatifical Vision, so
contemptible, that they cannot out-bid one base lust? Are the pleasures of sin
for a season, better then the eternal recompense of reward? Are devouring
flames, everlasting burnings such light matters, so easy to be endured, that
for the enjoyment of some worldly delight or contentment, perhaps for some sin
that has in it neither profit nor pleasure, (such as swearing is) you should
plunge your selves into them irrecoverably? Do you believe those eternal
things, or no? If not, Why do you come to hear? Why do you not declare your
selves professed Atheists, and lay aside all Profession of Religion? Why do you
not take your fill of carnal pleasures? But if you do believe them, (as I know
you will profess you do) why do you not put away your abominations? Why do you
not fly from the wrath to come, by bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance?
Will you yet say, my case is hopeless, I have sinned away my opportunities?
Look once again into the Text, see who the persons are; Publicans, and Harlots:
What their privilege is; they go into the Kingdom of God: To whom they are
preferred, as to their hopes of Salvation; the Morally Righteous, the Formal
Professor, you may (if you will take the course prescribed) step into Heaven
before them: But that I may leave you without scruple in this particular, take
these two considerations further along with you.

1. Will not God, think you, be most ready to do that which best pleases, and
most honors him? and what is that but pardoning the Penitent, embracing
returning Prodigals? Do you question this? A great part of Scripture, yea, the
very scope of the Gospel may convince you. Read Jer. 9.24. Mich. 7.18. Exodus
34.6, 7. Isa. 55.7. Joel 2.12, 13 -- Will you believe God upon his word? he
has told you, Ezekiel. 18.32. that he has no pleasure in the death of him that
dies: will you have his Oath? Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live; [herein he has pleasure:] turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways,
etc. If neither Word nor Oath will serve, yet I hope his Actings, and gracious
Dispensations toward the sons of Men, toward your selves, may pass for a
Demonstration: Had God delighted in the Destruction; yea, had he not had
unspeakably more delight in the salvation of poor sinners, would he have sent
his Son? Would he have published the Gospel? Would he wait, and beseech, and so
pathetically beg your souls? 2 Cor. 5.19. And for thy own case, could not God
have thrown thee into Hell so soon as thou wast born, if that had pleased him?
Would he have been at so much cost and pains with thee? Or if thou now
returnest, will he not accept thee; yea, meet thee while yet afar off, fall
upon thy neck, and kiss thee, who has been so long waiting that he might be
gracious unto thee? And then for the honor of God; it is true, he can get it in
thy destruction, but he had rather thou would give it him in thy Salvation:
Such is his Philanthropy, and love to man, that he esteems that his greatest
honor, which consists with his creatures greatest happiness. Let me speak a
serious word; Which do you think will make the sweeter melody in God's Ear?
whether the eternal howlings and yellings of the damned, blaspheming, and
tearing his Name in pieces; or the incessant Blessings and Hallelujahs of
glorified Saints, singing Praises to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever? And for you to whom I am speaking [Prophane sinners]
How singularly pleasing will it be to God? How delightful to the Angels, etc.
to entertain you into their heavenly society? (to entertain you, I say, not
such as now you are, but washed in the blood of the Lamb, clothed with white
linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints) read, and read again those
three Parables of the Prodigal son, the lost groat, and lost Sheep, Luke 18.
They tell you, there is more joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, then
over ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance; and for the glory of
God, he will both get more by you, (for the Physician's skill is commended by
the desperateness of the disease he cures) and you will (at least endeavor)
give him more then others: If we may imagine an holy strife and emulation
amongst the glorified Saints, to excel each other in praising God; surely they
that have exceeded others in sinning here, will in singing hereafter: they to
whom most is forgiven, will love most, admire most, and labor to rise highest
in their praises: So that this may be helpful against any d scouraging fears of
being rejected: It Is singularly pleasing and honoring to God, that you should
come in; you cannot suppose God unwilling to receive you upon your serious
return, but you suppose him also false in his word, his oath; deceitful in his
actings, and unfaithful to the great interest of his own glory: all which is no
less then blasphemy to imagine.

2. Will Jesus Christ, think you, be more willing that his blood should be
spilt, and the great end of his undertaking frustrate (as to you) in your
destruction, then accomplished in your salvation? Did he take all that pains,
undergo such a shameful and ignominious death, the wrath of God, the terrors of
Hell, to save poor lost souls? and now all is done, and ready, nothing wanting
but your consent and application; And can you imagine, that he will rather lose
all, then freely bestow what he has so dearly purchased? True, he is not so
prodigal of his blood and merits as to throw them away upon those that neither
set their need of them, nor will thank him for them; but when you are sensible
of your necessity, and humbly sue to him for an interest in them, and cast your
selves upon him, do you think he will cast you off? Has he done the painful
part, and will he not much more do the pleasant part of the work? Will it not
be abundant satisfaction to see the fruit of the travel of his soul, in the
Conversion and Salvation of yours? O with what contentment and complacency will
Christ embrace you? Welcome poor Prodigal, lost, weary, heavy-laden soul; now
it repents me not of all my toil and travel: it is enough that thou will accept
what I have done and suffered for thee; I freely give thee my Blood to justify
thee, my Merit to procure thy acceptance with the Father; my Grace to sanctify
thee, my Spirit to seal thee to the day of Redemption; yea, Heaven it self for
thine Inheritance: mine it is by purchase, and on thee I bestow it; I expect
nothing but thy ingenious acceptance, and grateful obedience: Oh, you cannot
more disgrage the wisdom or mercy of Christ, then to imagine him unwilling to
bestow himself, and all he has done, upon those that humbly beg it, in the
deep sense of their own necessity: so that let not the vilest wretch, the
prophanest sinner in the Congregation, stand off upon supposition that God will
not accept him, or that Christ will cast him off: You see in the Text, who were
the chief materials of that stately Fabric, the Chuch, when Christ and his
Apostles were the builders, even Publicans and Harlots, sinners, such as your
selves are: With whom did Christ converse? Whom came he to call? Who were they
most commonly embraced by him, but such? Nay, such were not only stones in the
building, but Masterbuilders, even Paul (though a Pharisee yet) in his own
account, a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, Injurious, 1 Timothy 1.12. If you want not
hearts, you want no hopes for Heaven. All this I have spoken, not in the least
to strengthen your hands in wickedness, (Woe to him that shall so turn this
grace of God into wantonness) but to remove that scruple which possibly may
keep some at a distance from Christ; nor would I be understood as encouraging
any to delay their turning to God, presuming upon acceptance at last gasp.
Remember that of Austin, Qui dat poenitenti gratiam, non semper dat peccanti
poenitentiam: He that gives pardon to the Penitent, does not always give
Repentance to the Sinner. Come then, Profane Sinner, come speedily, seriously,
humbly, and self-denyingly to Christ, and I promise thee acceptance; Make good
the Text, Step into Heaven, and lay hold on Eternal Life before the proud
Formalist. Then, though such as they despise thee, God will accept, and prefer
thee before them: Then, however filthy and polluted thou art, thou shall be
washed in the Lambs blood, clothed with his Righteousness, made comely with his
comeliness, and admitted into that blessed society, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. there
to continue to all Eternity.

CHAP. VIII. The second branch of Exhortation, viz. to the Formal Hypocrite, to
hasten out of his dangerous condition; urged by diverse Motives.
2. ANd now I turn to you the other subjects of my Text, Formal Christians, who
are painted Sepulchers, Graves that appear not, Luke 11.44. I have endeavored
to work upon the others hopes, I shall now endeavor to work upon your fears:
your condition, you see, is sad and deplorable, yet not desperate: Have you not
often in your thoughts (and it may be in your speeches) passed a sad doom upon
the profane? When you have heard them swearing, and blaspheming the Name of
God, imbruing their tongues in the blood and wounds of Christ, when you have
seen them wallowing in their drunkenness, etc. have you not thought, O I would
not be in that man's condition for all the world? yet by what has been said,
you see your state in some respect worse then theirs; that there is a greater
likelihood of their salvation, then of yours: What remains then, but that you
turn your eyes inward, and take up the same thoughts concerning your selves,
which formerly you have had of them? you see what thoughts our Savior had of
such as you are, Luke 18.9-14. there he tells you that a poor penitent Publican
is rather justified (and consequently saved) then proud self-justifying
Pharisees: in all his Preaching, What do such as you hear, but woe, woe, as
Matthew. 23.13 -- end? when a brokenhearted Magdalen hears a sweet word, Luke
7.48. Thy sins are forgiven: Zacheus a gracious call, Luke 19.6, 9. Come down
Zacheus, this day is salvation come to thy house, forasmuch as he also is the
Son of Abraham: and generally, weary, heavy-laden sinners have a loving
invitation, Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
backed with a sweet promise, I will give you rest. Oh then, let fall those
plumes of pride which have been lifted up so much above others; glory not in
your specious formalities and outside cleanliness: That which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. Luke 16.15. Bear not
your selves high upon your parts, morality, or external performances, while
there are seven abominations in your hearts, Prove. 26.25. Think not that your
credit amongst men will bestead you before the all-knowing God. But hasten out
of your woeful state; learn that first and hardest lesson of Christianity,
self-denial: labor to get what yet you want, a heart deeply humbled for sin,
an absolute disclaim of self-righteousness, and submission to the righteousness
of Christ, and Truth in the inward parts. Something I shall add by way of
motive, and then directions.

1. Will it not grieve thee to the heart to have lost so many duties, prayers,
days of hearing; fasting, thanksgiving? It may be many tears and sighs, yea
many scoffs, reproaches and injuries suffered for thy profession. Let me take
up the Apostles words, Gal. 3.4. Have you suffered so many things in vain, if
they be yet in vain? Will it not cut thee to the heart, to be separated from
that society in heaven, with which thou have associated here on earth? That,
that which has helped others to heaven, should accidentally plunge thee deeper
into hell? That thou have done and suffered more then many a one in glory, for
the name and profession of Christ, and all lost? Lost, 1. As to any acceptance
with God here. 2. As to any advantage to thy self hereafter: How will it repent
thee of what thou have done and suffered in the profession of Rel gion? how
will thou wish that thou had joined with the profane crew? that thou had
never had those gifts, made that profession, done those duties, which shall be
(not only lost as to any benefit of thy self, but) as so many weights to press
thee deeper into hell; Stings in thy torment, and brands to increase the flame,
and shall stand uncancelled, as so many dreadful Items in God's Book of
remembrance, rendering thy account more heavy? Oh, will it not grieve you, when
others have sworn, and drunk, and whor'd themselves into Hell, that thou have
heard, and prayed, and fasted thy self thither? (pardon the harshness of the
expression, I mean by an ill management of those duties) when others are damned
for profaneness, thou for thy (hypocritical) profession? others for their
sins, thou for thy (feigned) services? 1 Cor. 15.19. If a Christian has hope
only in this life, he is of all men most miserable: the reason is, because
they deny themselves of worldly contentments, expose themselves to continual
crosses and vexations, in expectation of future glory, which, if they miss of,
they are every way miserable. This is thy condition: further, will it not
grieve thee to be thrust into Hell with that company which here thou
abhorredst? to be turned out with the workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 125. last.
Nay, to have a hotter Hell then they? All this perhaps may sound harsh in your
ears, and you may suppose them to be but the Hyperbolical expressions of an
Orator, declaiming against this sin, or the overheated eructations of mistaken
Zeal, and misguided Passion: No, my Brethren, they are the words of Truth and
soberness: The greater sin shall have the greater punishment, (that is a known
and granted maxim:) Now thy sins are greater then many (I will not say then
any) profane person's: Is not contempt of Christ, and setting light by him,
setting up your own Righteousness in opposition to his, trampling upon his
precious blood, a greater sin then Swearing, Drunkenness, etc? Is it not
Rebellion at the height, Romans 10.3. -- have not submitted themselves unto ( i.
e. have rebelled against) the Righteousness of God? Hereby you evacuate the
sufferings of Christ, expunge the Gospel, and charge Christ with an unnecessary
undertaking, yea, with self-murder. Tremble then at the sight of your
condition. Truly, when I look on a Formalist, and consider what pains he takes;
his constancy in Hearing, Prayer, and other duties; when I look upon his almost
spotless and unblameable conversation; me thinks it is pity such should be
thrown into Hell: But when I consider that pride and opposition to Christ lies
at the root of all this; when I see him strutting in his own rags, and will not
be beholden to Christ; then me thinks the greatest severity as little enough,
and the hottest corner in Hell cool enough to punish his desperate madness. Oh
to slight the love of Christ, to make void his sufferings, to ex-authorize him
of his Mediatory office, how great a sin is it, and how great punishment does
it deserve? But I am almost digressed from that which I propounded. Well, if
thou will not lose the work which thou have wrought, 2 John 8. if thou will not
lose thy duties, or be a loser by them, Get out of this condition.

2. Will it not grieve thee to see Publicans and Harlots admitted into Heaven,
and thy self cast out? See Matthew. 8.11, 12. Many shall come from the East, and
West, and shall sit down, etc -- But the Children of the Kingdom (the formal
Jews) shall be cast out into utter darkness, There ('it is emphatical) there
shall he weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Possibly thou live amongst a company
of profane Neighbors; and when thou nearest some cursing and swearing, see
others profaning the Lord's Day; some Drunkards, others unclean and debauched
in their lives; all of them scoffing at God, and Holiness, which thou
profesest: thou blessest thy self, and say in thy heart (and not without
good reason) as Luke 8.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
etc. But what if some of these, upon Repentance, step before thee into Glory?
What if thou see hereafter some of these in Abraham's bosom, and thy self in
a Lake of brimstone? What if these, washed in the blood of the Lamb, clothed in
the long white Robe, stand amongst the sheep at Christ's right hand, when thou
in the filthy, stained rags of thy unrighteous righteousness, shall be thrust
amongst the Goats on his left hand; and when they hear, Come ye Blessed, etc.
thou hear, Go ye Cursed? Will not this even rend asunder thy heart strings, and
fill thy soul with unspeakable horror and consternation? Thus doubtless it will
be if thou live and die in thy condition. Oh that I could provoke you to
jealousy! as God threatens to do, and did provoke the Jews by the conversion
of the Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 11.11. One day, doubtless, you will be
provoked to a sinful and malicious jealousy at th s sight; but I had rather
now provoke you to a virtuous and holy jealousy, such as might rouse you out
of your Formality, and make you altogether Christians. The Jews were never more
incensed, then when they were told God had rejected them, and embraced the
Gentiles, Act. 22.21, 22. They gave him audience to that word, and then lift up
their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the Earth, for it is not
fit that he should live. The elder Son grows sullen and envious at his Prodigal
brothers entertainment and welcome, Luke 15.28, 29. It Is not this sinful envy
that I would excite in you; but an holy jealousy, fear, emulation; lest such
profane ones should get before you into the Kingdom of God: If such a sight
would be (as needs it must be) grievous and tormenting; endeavor now to
prevent it by a timely escape from Formality; otherwise I shall say, Averroes a
Mahumet n.
as the Heathen Philosopher, who seeing the Christians eat their pretended God,
cried out, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis; so I, Sit anima mea cum prophanis,
(scil. penitentibus:) I had rather be a penitent Thief, then a proud Formalist
or Judiciary.

3. Thou never knew, nor shall know the real comforts of Christianity, while
thou continuest in Formality: a painted Christian has but imaginary comforts;
the Hypocrite has but (...), Mat. 6.2, 5. a Hypocrites reward, proportionate
to his service: Sincerity, as it shall only wear the Crown hereafter, so it
only enjoys true solid consolation here: The joy of the Holy Ghost is their
privilege, who are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, not in his common gifts,
but saving graces: The true waters of consolation are drawn out of those wells
of salvation, the sense of God's special love shed abroad in the heart, the
blood of Christ sprinkled upon the conscience, and the sanctifying spirit of
God, first working, and then shining upon his own work: He that is a stranger
to these, is a stranger to true joy, and who but the sincere Christian has
these things? The stream can neither rise higher, nor continue longer then the
fountain whence it arises; and what is the fountain of a Formalists comfort,
but his own spotted righteousness, and sorry performances? the web wherewith he
covers himself is spun out of his own bowels, and this can neither afford him
warmth, nor long endure: The sparks wherewith he encompasseth himself, are but
from a fire of his own kindling; all the light and warmth he has, is thence;
and what then can his portion be, but at last to lie down in sorrow? Is. 50.11.
When he is brought to the King of terrors, his confidence shall be rooted out
of his tabernale, Job 18.14. His comfort is but a land-flood, violent, but not
lasting. It Is evident; for,

1. All true comfort flows from Christ, from a saving interest in him, and
reconciliation with God by him: this the Formalist has not; he never drunk of
that rock, but only out of the muddy puddles of his own polluted duties, which
have nothing but filth and gravel at the bottom.

2. True Consolation is the consequent of sound Humiliation (to which he is a
stranger) Psalm. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, etc. Isa.
66.10. There seems to be something to purpose intimated in that, Prove. 14.10.
The heart knows his own bitterness, and the stranger intermedleth not with his
joy. Why may not the meaning be this, That as the heart has its sorrows that
others know not, so its comforts also; and he that never knew the one, shall
never taste the other? however the thing is a Truth. The vapors of a truly
humbled soul's tears, sighs, sorrows, exhaled, do afterward come down in
refreshing dews, and showers of consolation. Liquors bottled up, increase their
strength and virtue: God bottles up the tears of his people, and these waters
so bottled, are turned into wine of consolation. But the Formalist never knew
how to weep for sin, as sin; he is a stranger to those Evangelical meltings,
and therefore cannot have those reviving cordials of comfort.

3. True comfort is the fruit of a conscience pacified, purified, sanctified: 2
Cor 1.12. This is ((...)) our exultation, the Testimony of a good Conscience,
etc. such is not the Formalist's Conscience; silent and peaceable it may be,
not pacified; for that is only by the blood of sprinkling: it may bring in an
absolving verdict, but it is upon mistake, which will be rectified by the
supreme Judge at the last day. Well then: Would thou drink the pure wine of
Consolation? Would thou taste of the hidden Manna? Have the new Name? The
white stone? Get out of thy Formality; Be that indeed, which now thou woudst be
accounted, and desire to be found at last, A sincere Christian.

4. Let this consideration drive thee out of thy Formality: He that is no more
then form, will, very probably, ere long, become less then form: Formality is
but a water-colour, not laid in the oil of grace, not dried in the grain of
Christ's blood, and therefore will fade: it will either wear off in time, or
wash off with the waters of affliction. The Stage Player who only bears the
person of a Prince; when his part is acted, and the Comedy ended, puts off his
habit, and is but what he was before: The Formalist does but personate and
represent the Christian, and this will not always continue, Job 27.10. Will the
Hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? He
will not: Artificial Christians will be but Temporaries: Such were Judas,
Demas, Julian: nor will thou only lose what thou seem to have, but become
worse: The salt that has lost its savor, makes the very ground it is cast
upon, barren. The counterfeit friends of Religion, have often proved her most
embittered Enemies. Julian's little finger (who once professed Christianity)
was heavier then the loins of the other persecuting Emperors: rottenness in
profession, often turns into ranchor and malice against it. Had some of the
Apostates of this age been told, while they made profession of the Truth, that
they should become revilers of Ministers, contemners of Ordinances, violent
Persecutors of that way they then professed; that they should be ready to pull
out the eyes of those, for whom they seemed willing even to pull out their own:
would they not have been ready to say with Hazael, 2 King. 8.13. Is thy servant
a dog, that he should do this great thing? Yet this is the fruit of Formality
and Hypocrisy: well, if you would stand, and keep your station, be more then
form. They that are but Comets will fall: and he that begins in Hypocrisy,
will end in Apostasy: if thou have only a name to live, it will ere long
appear that thou art indeed dead: a mere name will not long preserve a man from
rottenness and putrefaction: Formality will shrink in the wetting; the fire
will discover who are but dross, Luke 8.13. Times of persecution, are times of
falling off, to those that are not truly fixed: whence are all those sad falls
in our days but from want of Truth in the inward parts? Ps. 37.31. The Law of
the Lord is in his heart; none of his steps shall slide: The Formalist has the
Law only in his head, and on his tongue; this is not enough to keep him from
falling. And oh think what a Discredit it will be to turn Apostate, Renegado:
How will God and man abhor thee? good men because thou art not what thou once
seemedst to be; bad men, because thou did once seem to be good: get therefore
out of this condition, which will have so sad an issue.

5. But suppose thou may hold out, it will be bitterness in the end; however
thou may escape the discredit and shame of Apostasy here, thou can not
escape the danger and damnation of thy Formality hereafter. The Text tells
thee, that Publicans and Harlots go before thee into the Kingdom of Heaven;
but as they go, not before, but upon repentance; so neither shall thou follow
after, but upon the same condition. Formality will as certainly damn thee as
any other sin; and thrust you as deep into hell, as almost any other, and what
comfort will it be, that thou have left a good name behind thee, that thou
did live and die under the repute of a sincere Christian? the mistaken
commendations of surviving Christians, will be but a poor allay to the
scorching flames of hell: yea, it will aggravate thy torment to think, (as
probably thou may think) Now some are speaking and hoping well concerning me
on earth, while I am howling and yelling in these flames. It Is some addition to
a man's grief under extremity of pain or sickness, to be judged by others in a
better state then indeed he is: To be canonized on earth is but sorry comfort
to him that is condemned in hell! what good did the honors that were done to
Nero, Sueton.
at, and after his death, do to him; though as the Historian tells us, Non
defuerunt qui Neronent vernis aestivisque coloribus ornarent: There wanted not
some to strew his cursed grave with the flowers of the spring: Salvian (as I
find him quoted) complains, that Multorum corpora splendent in sepulchris
quorum, animae ardent in Gehema. Some were rendered glorious at their funerals,
whose miserable souls were frying in hell: a poor recompense! this is no allay,
but is, or would be an aggravation of their torment, if they knew it. It Is
storied of one preaching at the funeral of a supposed religious man, and giving
him large commendations, a voice was heard, saying, Mortuus sum, judicatus sum,
condemnatus sum: for the truth of the story, I shall leave it to your own
discretion, whether to believe it or no; the moral may be good that damned
souls take little delight in the commendations of Survivors; for a man that
takes a good Conscience with him; and whose good works follow him, it is
something to leave a good name behind him, for Prove. 10.7. The memory of the
just shall be blessed; but where the two former are wanting, the last will rot
sooner or later; the great day will rectify all mistakes in that kind. If we
would have a name that might outlive that day, we must get out of Formality,
and come up to sincerity, which is Gospel-perfection.

CHAP. IX. Helps or Directions to the formal Hypocrite, in order to his coming
out of that condition, and becoming a sound and thorough Christian.
BUt that I may propound something by way of Cure and Remedy, (for what is it
to discover a disease, and leave the Patient in it?) Take these helps against
it.



1. Then, that thou may have a convincing sight of this sin, and that thy
heart may be forced to acknowledge it, (besides the Notes and Characters before
laid down) make use of these two Directions.

1. Be a narrow vigilant observer of thy own heart. The very essence of
Formality lies in this, That all is done without heart or life. So that if thou
find thy heart stupid, senseless, without motion in duty, and this be thy
constant frame: thence conclude thy self a mere Formalist. Were I to describe
such a one, I would in short, call him, the Carcass of a Christian, one that
has the outward lineaments, but wants the life and soul of a Christian; that
has much of Religion in his head, and upon his tongue, but nothing of it in
his heart: One that is moved and acted like a Puppet or Engine, not from an
inward principle, but by an external poise or impulse. It Is true indeed, the
best of Christians have their dead and cold fits; but these, as they are not
constant, so they are their grief and burden, the matter of their complaint and
humiliation. If therefore thou art constantly dead, and so far, as to be secure
and senseless in, and of thy deadness, this may fasten the conviction of this
sin upon thy heart.

2. Observe thy non-proficiency under Means. This is another evidence. A
painted Tree or man is always in the same state, but the living grows; the
living Christian thrives, and gets ground of corruption: Where there is a
principle of Life, there will be growth. How did Nicodemus grow in Christian
courage? John 3.1, 2. compared with John 7.50, 51. The smoking Flax will
become a flame, and the morning-glimpse come on to a noonday brightness. True,
the Christian is not always sensible of his growth, nor a fit Judge of it. That
of the Orator concerning growth in knowledge, may be fitly applied hither; As we
see the shadow of a Dial to have gone, but see it not go; and the Herb or Grass
to have grown, but do not see it grow; so the increase of knowledge, (and the
same may be said of Grace) because it consists of very small additions, is seen
only at some distance: Yet with these limitations, I may affirm, That every
true Christian is in a constant, thriving posture.

1. That he grows downward (like Trees in Winter) when he seems to decay
upward: he grows more humble, when he seems to be less holy; and this is real
growth. God in wisdom suspends his influences as to the growth of other Graces,
that there may be a proportionable growth in that. Christians, like the
Athenian Students, the more they grow in Grace, the more out of conceit with
themselves: As they at their first coming thither, arrogated the Name of (...),
Wise men; then (...), Lovers of wisdom: Afterward (...), Speakers of wisdom.
At last (...), Idiots. So it is with Christians.

2. That he grows more into hatred of sin, when he seems to decay in strength
against it; when he feels corruption prevail, lusts predominant; he cries out
with the Apostle, Romans 7.15. What I hate, that do I. And v. 24. O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? He more loathes sin
and himself, that he cannot conquer it; he abhors the very thoughts of it, and
grows more impatient of its yoke.

3. That he grows in depth of Judgment, when he declines in height of
Affection: possibly when young, he had more leaves and blossoms, stronger
affections, and more serverous motions; but now is more sober and solid. At
first he was sick of love; now more rooted in love.

But now it is otherwise with the Formalist; he experiences no such growth, but
the contrary; he goes backward, and not forward, Jer. 7.24. grows more proud
and self-confident; sin grows less burdensome, or more delightful to him; as he
has less strength, so he has less heart then formerly to resist sin, or
perform duty. Conscience is in a consumption, and he that would have strained
at a Gnat, can after some time swallow a Camel; he loses his seeming love to,
and savor of Religion. Observe then if it be thus with thee; for by these thou
may discover thy Formality.

2. But it is not enough to get a convincing sight of this sin, i e. that thou
art a Formalist, except thou have also an humbling sense of it; there is a great
distance betwixt the eye and heart; a man may clearly see that he is a sinner,
yet be little affected with it; the Drunkard, Swearer, etc. cannot but see
their sin, yet are far from feeling it: It must be therefore our endeavor, in
order to the cure of this sin, to get the heart affected, as well as the
Judgment convinced: Sin must be our burden, else we shall never look out for
ease: To this end therefore it must be thy endeavor to view this sin in its
aggravations; to consider, and dwell upon the consideration of its hainousness,
till thy heart be pressed with the weight of it. To help thee a little in this,
take a few things of many.

1. It is a sin that turns the greatest reality in the world into a mere show
and shadow: Religion is the greatest reality; all we do in the World, besides
the work of Religion, is but a mere dream; Regeneration, Communion with God,
the Spiritual combat, the Life of Faith, Mortification of sin, etc. these are
realities indeed: Now Formality turns all these into a naked, empty Profession,
a vain Theatrical show; (as the Poetical Fiction of the Echo, metamorphosd
from a real Virgin, to a mere Sound) as the Papists have turned the true Fast,
into a m^ck-fast; Repentance and afflicting the soul, into lashings of the
Body, and Pilgrimages; the Sacrament of the Supper, into a dumb show; and the
whole Worship of God into a ceremonious Interlude: So the Formalist turns
Prayer, Hearing, Sacraments, etc. into shadows; and is this a small sin, think
you? Dwell upon this consideration; how soon would Religion vanish into
nothing, if there were not a few serious spirits to uphold it in the power of
it? This eats out the kernel, the heart, the life of Religion. It was no less
serious, then witty a division which one gave of that Text, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having
a form of godliness -- Here (said he) you have, 1. The Body of Religion, viz.
Form. 2. The Soul of Religion, viz. Power. 3. The death of Religion, and that
is the separation of the Soul from the Body, Power from Form. This is the
effect of thy sin, it murders Religion.

2. It is a mocking God to his very face; it is a lying to God, and will God
endure it? What are your formal Petitions, Confessions, Thanksgivings, etc. but
mere mockeries? Thou come to hear, but it is as they in Jer. 42.5, 6, 9. who
when they received a Message contrary to their designs, tell the Prophet to his
face, that he lies; or as Isa. 58.2. who were but as a people that did
righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God -- Or as they are
described in Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. The Prophet's Preaching was to them as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice -- They heard his words, but did
them not: And what greater abuse can be put upon God, then for men to come, and
pretend a desire to know his Will, yet to take no care of performing it? As to
your prayers, I may invert that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 14. Your
understanding prays, but the spirit is unfruitful. Your approaches to the
Lords Table, are no better than a Judas's kiss; nor can God take any more
pleasure in your approaches, then he did in the like service of the Jews, Isa.
1.12-15. and 66.3 You do but complement with God, and that is no better then
mere mockery: O think how wretched a thing it is, how highly displeasing! your
duties all of them, while you continue in Formality, are so many jeers and
abuses put upon God.

3. By this sin you put a cheat and fallacy upon your own souls; you mock God,
but deceive your selves. Gal. 6.3. If a man think himself to be something when
he is nothing, [(...)] he deceives himself, seduces his own soul. Jam. 1.22.
Bare hearers do (...), play the sophisters, put tricks and fallacies upon
themselves. So v. 26. He that bridleth not his tongue, (and such ordinarily is
the Formalist, bitter, railing, censorious) but deceiving his own heart, his
Religion is vain: And what greater madness than for a man to cheat himself? Lay
this home, and aggravate your condition by it: Wretch that I am! I think to
deceive God and the world, but I shall find at last that I have deceived my own
soul: Psa. 125.5
Will not God both find me out in these crooked ways, and turn me out with the
workers of iniquity? He that perverteth his ways, shall be known, Prove. 10.9.
The self-flatterers iniquity shall be found hateful, Psalm. 36.21. Can I carry
it so closely, that God shall not find me out? Does not his eye pierce, and his
eyelids try the children of men? Does he not set our secret sins in the light
of his countenance? Is there not a woe to them that dig deep to hide their sins
(as well as their counsels) from the Lord? Isa. 29.15, 16.
Thus labor to make thy heart sensible of this sin.

4. It is a sin of evil influence upon others. Warm and lively Christians are
the great blessings of the places where they live; their zeal provokes many, 2
Cor. 9.2. But a dead and heartless profession (especially if of any eminency in
the Church) puts a stop to others who are apt to come up to their measure, and
there to rest. The whole Army made a stand at Amasa's dead body; 2 Samuel 20.12.
so do many at one dead Christian. How may a dead and formal Minister or Master
of a Family, read his own in the Temper of his People or Family? As face
answers face in a glass, so for the most part does the complexion and temper of
the Followers, answer that of their Leaders. Aggravate thy sin by this
consideration upon thy own heart. Vile wretch that I am! how many do I hinder
in heaven's way? how does my formality give occasion to some to think there is
no reality in Religion; and to others to rest in the same temper? Were I a
better Leader, my People, Family, Neighbors would be better Followers: If they
perish in that sin, how justly may their Blood be charged upon my head?

5. It is a sin that insensibly hardens the heart; every sin is of that nature,
Heb. 3.13. But as none is (I think) more deceitful, so scarce any more
hardening. One or two duties customarily and formally done, will be found
mightily deadning and indisposing the heart to other duties afterward: By
Formality in prayer, you may in time pray away both your Graces and Gifts; so
you may by customary hearing, hear your selves quite deaf to all Gods counsels.
2 Timothy 1.6
This makes the heart of many like the trodden path, or nether Millstone.
Formality is a lazy sin; it does not (...), blow up the Gifts and Graces of
Gods Spirit, and so the Fire goes out. Habits of laziness are hardly shaken
off, as we see in common Beggars; indulging a lazy temper, (which is the
Formalists sin) must needs increase it. It Is the Formalists frame, that of the
sluggard, Prove. 6.10. and 26.14. Yet a little sleep, Ver. 11.
etc. -- And what is said of him, may well be applied hither, So shall thy
poverty come as an armed man -- By this lazy, formal temper, spiritual poverty
invades and seizes upon the soul. Besides, this sin, as it has a natural, so a
judiciary tendency to hardness of heart; i. e. it provokes God to give up to
obduration; Luke 19.26.
From him that has not (so as to improve) shall be taken even that he has, or
seems to have. God will say to such in his just Judgment, Sleep on, and take
your rest; and as that great Commander, finding his Sentinel asleep, run him
through, saying, Dead I found him, and dead I leave him. Thus God deals with the
lazy, formal, sluggish Christian. Work this also on thy heart.

6. It is a sin that broodeth, hatcheth, cherishes many other; Pride,
Self-confidence, Contempt of others, are the natural products of it. Upon
account of a constant course of formal duties, men are apt to encourage
themselves in sin; see Jer. 7.8, 9, 10. It Is storied of one (an Italian as I
remember) who used to patter over his prayers in the morning, and then
challenge the Devil to do his worst. Let but a Formalist observe his own heart,
and he shall find, That when he has done something more then ordinary in a way
of duty, he is apt to draw encouragements thence of being more loose afterward.
Set this home: Oh what a Viper have I harbored in my bosom! How many sins
has this one sin let in, and drawn me into, etc?

7. It Is a sin that brings both the surest and soarest destruction. To such is
that cutting word of our Savior directed, Matthew. 23.33. Ye Serpents, ye
generation of Vipers; how can you escape the damnation of Hell? Hypocrites are
Leaders in the Black Roll, Matthew. 24. last. And as dissembled Sanctity is
double iniquity, so shall it have a double portion of Misery. These things I
have suggested to help you in aggravating this sin upon your own souls; it were
easy to add many more, but any one of these laid close to the Conscience, will
through the blessing of God, make the Soul groan under the weight of this sin.

This is the sum of the first step which a soul is to take in order to cure;
Get a convincing sight, and humbling sense of thy sin; and would but the Lord
bring on the Work thus far; could I but see your hands on your loins, could I
but find you ( Ephraim-like) smiting upon your thigh, ashamed, confounded; were
you but thoroughly convinced of the guilt, and sensible of the weight of this
sin, how hopeful might I be of effecting the Cure?



1. Fall down before the Lord in the shame and grief of thy own Soul, making
self-condemning Acknowledgments, and aggravated Confessions of this sin. Thou
that have been hitherto a proud Pharisee, Luke 18.13
now become an humble Publican. Learn David's posture, Psalm. 51.3. This is a
singular way to get thy own heart affected; for indeed, it is a principal end of
confession; we do not confess sin to inform God, but to humble and shame our
selves. In confession thou may use the forementioned aggravations.

2. Add Petition to confession; beg a more lively sense of this sin; for it is
not all thy own aggravating this sin upon thy soul, that will make thee feel it
to purpose, till God take it, and set it upon thy Conscience; it is the Spirit
of God that must to purpose convince of sin, John 16.8. the sins which look but
as Moats, will appear Beams in that Light which the Spirit of God darts into
the Soul. Beg Contrition also, that acceptable Sacrifice of a broken heart,
must be of Gods own preparing, the sorrow which is (...): according to God, 2
Cor. 7.10 -- must be from God, Zech. 12.10. Beg pardon with the Psalmist, Ps.
51.1. Fitly may you use his Petition and Argument, Psalm. 25.11. Pardon my sin
-- for it is great; Luke 18.13
and take up the Publicans Posture and Petition, smite on your breast, and say,
The Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Beg strength against this sin; pray for
Truth in the inward parts; pray as Psalm. 119.80. Make my heart sound in thy
statutes, that I may never be confounded. Lord, I have the Lineaments, put into
me the Life of a Christian; make me what I seem, lest at last I be found what I
would not; and here, take heed you be not formal in confessing and praying
against your formality; a hypocrite, that has got the Art to confess his
hypocrisy in hypocrisy, and seems to be displeased with himself for that sin,
when he is not so indeed, may well have [Lord have mercy] written upon his door.

Labor to get those things which are the those things which are constituent
of, and difference a Christian from all others. Some of these things have been
hinted already, in showing what a Formalist wants; I shall touch upon them
here, and add more. In general, Content not your selves to act as Christians,
or in doing what a Christian does; it is one thing to be and do as a Christian,
and another to be a Christian. There are especially five things which
constitute, and are, as it were, ingredient into the very Essence of a
Christian.

1. A sound conviction of, and deep humiliation for sin. This (as you heard
before) the Formalist wants; this is the ordinary Foundation of all that
saving-work which the Spirit of God does upon the Soul, John 16.8. This is the
ordinary forerunner of true solid Comfort: Conviction and Contrition are the
inlets and preparatives to Consolation. Here begun the work upon those three
thousand Converts, Acts 2.37. upon Paul, Romans 7.9. And though its wrought in
some insensibly, or with less noise and horror; yet it is wrought in all
really, who are saved in Gods ordinary way, and who are truly wrought upon.

Labor then to feel sin your heaviest burden; and that not only some one or
few sins of your life, 2 Chronicles. 32.26.
but especially your heart-pollutions; be humbled (with Hezekiah) for the pride
of your heart, and so for other inward lusts; yea, let your humiliation reach
to your very duties; be ashamed at their deficiency and defilements; labor to
see and be sensible, that all your righteousness is as a filthy rag; Isa. 64.6.
and cease not to follow the streams; until you are come to the Springhead,
viz. the corruption of Nature; and here sit down and weep, as the Jews by the
Rivers of Babylon: Never think your conviction and humiliation right, till you
arrive at this, viz. A clear sight, and deep abiding sense of the universal
pollution of your nature, and the utter inability to any thing truly and
spiritually good. Thus you must, as it were, begin the work again, raze all
other, and lay this as a sound foundation; he that has this, has the root of
the matter in him.

2. Labor after a total abnegation of your own righteousness, duties,
privileges, performances -- This is essential to a Christian; in that brief,
but full description of a sincere Christian, Phil. 3.3. this is one of the
three Ingredients, To put no confidence in the flesh. The first Lesson in
Christ's School, is Self-denial, Matt. 16.24. We must learn that counsel, Luke
17.10. to acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants; it is one of he hardest
Tasks, but exceeding necessary. True Grace, and Christian Religion, is,
[perpetua naturae violentia] a doing violence to our selves, thwarting our
passions, depluming our selves of all those. Feathers wherewith we are wont to
strut, and in which we have prided our selves. We must learn to acknowledge with
the Prophet, Isa. 64.6.
That all our righteousness is but as a filthy rag; that our best Duties, or
seem ng Graces, are in themselves but a beautiful Abomination; and to trust in
them, is but to go a cleaner way to Hell. And what should hinder from this
self-denial? What is thy righteousness more (nay, is it not in many respects
less) then that of the Scribes and Pharisees? Read Luke 18.10, 11 -- and
compare; yet ver. 14. the self-abasing Publican went away more justified than
the Pharisee; that is, the Pharisee was not at all justified; for there is not
magis and minus in Justification Away then with all thy proud self-reflections;
think but how strict a disquisition shall be made at the day of Judgment, and
how piercing the eyes of the Judge will be; and then consider whether thou shall
be able to stand before him in thy own rags; and if thou will not be able then
to stand, why should thou now glory in them? Oh! surely God can see beams in
those duties, where thou can not discern moats; and will discover blemishes,
where thou conceitest there is the greatest beauty.

3. Endeavor a cordial close with Christ upon Gospel-tearms. Here lies the
main to which the two former are preparatory. This was Paul's great desire,
Phil. 3.9.
To be found in Christ -- Get therefore that precious Grace of Faith, which is
the hand wherewith thou must accept Christ; whatever thou have, if this be
wanting, thou shall certainly perish; John 3.18, 36. The grand Enquiry at the
great Day will be, Whether you believed or no; though it is true, your work will
be looked into, but those as the proofs and evidences of the sincerity of your
Faith: There will be no standing before the Judge, except himself be thy
Advocate; and this he will not be, but upon thy cordial acceptance of him now.
On make out for Christ; cry out, Give me Christ, or I dye. And that you may get
Christ, you must not (as Peter) gird your Coat (your own righteousness) to you;
but as Bartimeus, cast it from you. Neither think that a blind, bold,
adventurous rushing upon Christ, a mere adherence to him, or a confident
persuasion of his good will toward you in particular, is the all, or main of
this Faith and Acceptance I am pressing; (this mistake will, I fear, be the
ruin of Thousands,) There must be an absolute resignment of thy self to
Christ, as well as reliance on him: It Is a (...), a gross and grievous mistake,
to think that the strength of Faith lies in the strength of a man's Fancy or
Imagination, or of his persuasion that Christ dyed for him in particular: True
Faith gives as well as takes; when you send for a Physician, and he undertakes
and promises your cure, it is supposed you accept of him, and resolve to follow
his Prescriptions, else you may miscarry: To accept Christ as your Savior and
Soul-Physician, necessarily includes your giving up your selves to follow his
Prescriptions, else you but dissemble with him. This I hint to prevent mistakes
about the nature of true Faith, (which are too ordinary.) Well, if thou who art
yet a Formalist, would be a Christian indeed, get out of all, and accept
Christ as tendered in the Gospel.

4. See that thou have a through change of heart, Ephesians 4.23. Be renewed in the
Spirit of your mind. 1 These. 5.23. Sanctified throughout, It Is not building on
the old Foundation, repairing and decking up the old man, will serve turn? It Is
not putting a new piece upon the old Garment; all is depraved in Adam; All must
be renewed in Christ; it is no less then a new Creation, that makes a Christian.
That which is born of the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 17
(even the best of it, is no better than flesh, Joh. 3.3, 6. The best of a
carnal man, is carnal; no man is born a Christian. There must be a putting off
the old man, and putting on the new man, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Col. 3.9, 10. Psalm. 4
5.10 Bialt.
a forgetting and forsaking thy own People and Fathers house; that is, as one
well glosses, Quic quid corruptionis ex utero afferimus aut quaecunque ex placa
institutione nobis adhaerent: Whatever corruption we derived from the Womb, or
contracted by Education, etc. Well, see that not only the branches of
corruption be lopt off, but the root dug up; let sin be not only left, but
loathed; let duty be not only done, but delighted. See that the change be not
only in the face of your conversations, but in the frame of your hearts, and
bent of your affections; and see that it be the whole inward man, not
understanding only illightned, or affections enlarged; but each faculty having
its proper work of Sanctification wrought upon it, and above all, the Will
brought to a cheerful submission to, and compliance with the Will and Commands
of God, even in those things that are most opposite to your natural
inclinations. This is a fourth Essential in a Christian.

5. Endeavor liveliness, vigor and sincerity in every duty; content not thy
self, till thou have got thy heart engaged in duty. I bid thee not lay aside
duty; (nay, rather be more frequent) but withal, more fervent and serious in
it. Hear and practice; pray in the spirit; turn thy dead and heartless
confessions, into heartbreaking acknowledgments; thy formal petitions, into
earnest groans and breathings of soul, etc. and withal, see that thy end in
all be right, viz. Gods glory, and thy souls advantage. Rectitude of ends, is a
great piece of sincerity: Oh, this is very essential to a Christian, not only
to do duty, but to be lively, vigorous and right-ended in it; not only to do
it, but to do something by it, and receive something through it; and that it may
be thus, make Conscience of seriousness and liveliness in the smallest duties,
in thy daily Family Duties, yea, in thy very begging a blessing upon the
creature. Formality creeps in at our ordinary and lesser duties, and by degrees
mixes it self with our greater; out it (as much as possible) of your common and
ordinary, and there is less danger it should spoil your extraordinary duties.

And thus I have in these five particulars, included (I think) m^st of that
which is essential to a Christian. Oh that the Lord would persuade your hearts
to endeavor after them, and that they may be found in every soul of you! These
are they that do specify and constitute a Christian indeed, and that do
distinguish him from, and set him above all others in the world; get these, and
you are more then Formalists; but get them all; the third cannot be without the
first and second; nor can the fourth and fifth, really be without the third;
but where all these are found in conjunction, that soul may undoubtedly
conclude its real Christianity.

As a singular help to rowse thee out of Spirituality, his Omniscience,
Omnipresence, etc. together with the dreadfulness of the day of judgment.
Formality is the souls sluggishness, and therefore it needs those helps that
are most awakning. And oh how would the lively representation of these things,
startle you out of this drowsy temper! Is not God a Spirit? and Spirits are
active; and how ill do they that are themselves active and vigorous, brook the
lazines of others? Again, Is not Gods eye upon me? Is he not present in a
special manner to those that are in his service? and must not such a cold and
careless temper be highly displeasing to him? Again, How shall I be able to
stand before the Tribunal? Will not my Formality be then discovered? will not
the careless performance, as well as total neglect of duty, be inquired into,
and severely punished at that day? Such workings as these will be upon the
heart that lies under the lively sense of those things; and they must needs put
life into thy duties, and put thee out of thy dull and sluggish temper.

David, Psalm. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me --
He calls upon his soul, thus must we, Prove. 6.9, 10.
be often jogging them; say not, A little more sleep, a little more slumber --
but rather, Why sleep thou, O sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy
sleep? Yea, when they seem to be most wakeful and active, there is need to
watch them, especially after a duty done with more than ordinary fervor;
intensness of action, causes weariness, and weariness inclines to sleep and
sluggishness.

Earnestly beg the continuance of lively quickening Ordinances, and beg life and
quickening into those Ordinances. 1. Beg lively and quickening Ordinances. They
are the means which God has appointed to beget and keep life in the soul; the
word is, The immortal seed whereby souls are begotten to God, 1 Pet. 1.23. But
if this and other Ordinances lose their liveliness, by a dead, heartess, formal
management; they will instead of rousing us out, lull us asleep in our
formality. Cor non faciunt quae non habent: How can those Ordinances make
hearty Christians, which have no heart in them? Ordinances that are not good,
Ezekiel. 20.25.
and statutes whereby a soul cannot live, are amongst the saddest of judgments:
Dead forms are like the stone at the foot of the Bird, which hinders it from
the first use of its wing: Also how prone is the last age of the world to fall
into this drowsy temper? We have need of the most lively Ordinances, and all
too little to keep us waking: Dull, heartless Preaching, Prayers, or other
Ordinances will charm the Soul into a dead sleep, and will be as a soft Pillow
under the elbow of drowsy sinners; and this (I am persuaded) is the great
reason why the multitude dote on their old forms; because they will break no
bones, they will not come near the quick: Men love to be rocked and hushed
asleep in their Formality: Oh, but if ever you would get from under this
corruption, it must be by quickening Ordinances: Oh let us beg of God, that his
Worship may be dispensed in that way that is most advantageous to the putting
souls into, and keeping them in a waking posture.

2. Beg life and quickening into Ordinances; the best Ordinances have no power
in them, if they be not quickened by the Spirit. They are but like the Prophet's
staff, 2 King. 4.31. We shall never stand upon our feet, though the Word bid us
stand, if the Spirit do not enter into us, and set us upon our feet, Ezekiel 2.1,
2. The weapons of our warfare are mighty, but it must be through God, 2 Cor.
10.4. If we must have heartless Ordinances, earnest Prayer will either procure
better, or a blessing upon what we have.

Cor. 9.2. Your zeal has provoked many: If there be any spark under the ashes,
they will help to blow it up: If thou have not the opportunity of conversing
with living Christians, yet converse in the Scriptures, and other Records,
wh^re the lives of such are Recorded for thy Im^tation, they will shame thee
out of thy Formality: they will mightily quicken thee, if there be any thing of
true piety in thy heart: their zeal, forwardness, diligence in duty, their care
and conscientiousness will put thee on in heavens way; Example is often more
prevailing then Precepts Therefore the Holy Ghost enjoins subjection, chastity,
meekness, and other Christian virtues, to the Wife, that if the unbelieving H
sband obey not the Word, he may be won by the W^ves conversation.

Think often in what manner you hope to serve Psalm. 103.20 The Angels excel in
strength, doing his Commandments; and the glorified Saints, ( Rev. 4.8 ^5.8, 9,
13.) Rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty --
Do thou hope to be of that blessed society, and yet act so unlike them now?
Should we not labor to be, and act, as we hope one day to be and act? It ill
be seems him who hopes one day to j in in consort with that heavenly quire, to
be so unskilful and heartless in the service of God, Phil. 3.11. It was Paul's
endeavor and ambition, it by any means, to attain to the resurrection of the
dead, i.e. to that measure and perfection which he hoped then to arrive at.
True, we are clogged with flesh and corruption; it is impossible that our
services should be so pure and undefiled; but we should be aspiring toward it;
we should do violence to the flesh, that we may serve God in the Spirit: How
unsuitable are cold, worthless and lifeless services to the eternal Reward? Let
your hopes of Glory, and your expectations to be of that blessed society,
quicken and wind up you hearts to a high pitch of zeal and fervency; so it did
the believing Jews, Act. 26.7. To the which promise our 12 Tribes instantly
serving God day and night, hope to come. Heb. 6.11, 12.
Let us show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope, unto the end:
Let us not be sloathful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the promises. Thus I have proposed some Remedies, which (if the Lord
bless unto you) may be effectual, both to bring on those who are mere
Formalists, to become sincere Christians, and to quicken those that are
Christians indeed, to more vigor and liveliness in the practice of all
Christian Duties. It were easy to have added many more; but I shall entreat
you to think of these, and work them upon your hearts, and you shall, by the
blessing of God, find them helpful to the end for which they were propounded.
And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, -- Act.
20 32.

FINIS.

