Asian scene ASIA


ASIA, THE FIRST PART. BEING An Accurate Description OF PERSIA, And the Several
PROVINCES thereof. The Vast Empire OF THE GREAT MOGOL, And other Parts of
INDIA: And their Several Kingdoms and Regions:

WITH The Denominations and Descriptions of the Cities, Towns, and Places of
Remark therein contained.

The Various Customs, Habits, Religion, and Languages of the Inhabitants.

Their Political Governments, and way of Commerce.

ALSO The Plants and Animals peculiar to each Country.

Collected and Translated from most Authentic Authors, and Augmented with
later Observations; Illustrated with Notes, and Adorned with peculiar Maps and
proper Sculptures, By JOHN OGILBY Esquire; His MAJESTY's Cosmographer, Geographick
Printer, and Master of His MAJESTY's Revels in the Kingdom of Ireland.

LONDON, Printed by the Author at his House in White-Friers. M.DC.LXXIII.

TO HIS Most Serene, and Most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES II. By the Grace of
God, OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, KING, DEFENDER of the FAITH, etc.

This Fifth Volume of His ENGLISH ATLAS, Viz. ASIA, Being the Latest, and most
ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF THE Kingdom of Persia, THE EMPIRE of the GREAT MOGOL,
And other Parts of INDIA, Is Dedicated, and with all Humility Presented, BY
Your Majesty's Cosmographer AND LOYAL SUBJECT, JOHN OGILBY.

A NEW MAP OF ASIA
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE GOVERNOR DEPUTY AND COMMITTEES OF THE HONBLE.
EAST INDIA COMPANY

This new Map of ASIA, according to the best and latest Observations and
Discoveries is most humbly Presented and Dedicated by John Ogilby Esquire; his
Majesty's Cosmographer



THE General Description OF ASIA.
ASIA, by some called Semia, from Sem the eldest Son of Noah, to whose Lot it
fell; and now by Navigators, The Levant, from the Italian Word Levante, i. e.
The East, from its Easterly Situation; has been generally accounted, by
Ancient Writers, the biggest of the Three formerly Known Divisions of the
WORLD, and by some estimated equal to the other Two, EUROPE and AFRICA; and is
moreover Ennobled with several grand Prerogatives above the rest: For here that
Glorious Work of Creation first manifested it self, and terminated in that
greatest of God's Handy-works, the Formation of Man: Here flourished the
Terrestrial Paradise, or Garden of Eden, which our first Parents Inhabited,
Cultivated, and in the end, by their Disobedience, lost. And as the Creation,
so also the Redemption of Mankind was here wrought, by our Blessed Savior's
Incarnation, Nativity, Preaching, Miracles, and lastly, Suffering upon the
Cross, and Resurrection: And here the Divine Monument of his Passion, the Holy
Sepulcher, is yet preserved, by God's Providence, even under the Guardianship
of Infidels themselves. From hence, as from the Fountain of Plantation, and
first Inhabited Part of the World, Colonies were sent forth into all Parts, and
the whole Globe of Earth was supplied with People. Here was the first
Foundation of Cities, Institution of Laws and Government, Civilizing of
Manners, Original of Arts and Sciences, and the Communication of all
Literature, both Divine and Humane, to the rest of the World. And as the two
first Great and Famous Empires of the World, the Assyrian and Persian, were
here Founded, and succeeded each other, continuing for the space of 1368 Years,
namely, from the Year of the World 2000, to the Year 3368; so at this day the
greatest Empires of the Universe are contained in this Part thereof; as namely,
the Turkish Empire, which though it extend it self into Europe, yet the
greatest part of it is contained within the Verge of Asia; that of the Sophi of
Persia; that of the Emperor of China; that of the Great Cham of Tartary; which
two last Empires are now by Conquest united under one Head, viz. the Great
Chan: and that of the Great Mogol.

Of the Seven Wonders of the World, Four were in Asia, namely, The Temple of
Diana, at Ephesus; The Mausoleum, or Sepulcher of Mausolus, at Halicarnassus;
The Walls of Babylon; and the Colossus, or Statue of the Sun, at Rhodes. Of the
other three, one is in Europe, viz. The Statue of Olympic Jupiter; the other
two are in Africa, viz. The Pharos or Watchtower, and the Egyptian Pyramids.

Lastly, Of the Fruitfulness and Pleasantness of this Part, this may serve for
a great Argument, That here was chosen out by God himself that Land of Promise,
for his Chosen People to dwell in, which the Scripture it self sets forth by
the Commendation of A Land flowing with Milk and Honey: And Cicero represents
it no less advantageously, in one of his Orations to the People of Rome, in
these Words; Caeterarum Provinciarum, Vectigalia, Quirites, tanta sunt ut iis,
ad ipsas Provincias tutandas vix contenti esse p^ssumus, Asia verotam opima est
and fertilis, ut and ubertate agrorum and varietate fructuum, and magnitudine
Pastionis, and multitudine earum rerum quae exportent facile omnibus terries
antecellat: The Tributes and Taxes, Renowned Romans, gathered from other
Provinces, are scarce sufficient for the Maintenance and Defense of the
Provinces themselves; but Asia is so fertile, that in the plentiful Production
of its Cornfieldsd, the variety of its Fruits, the richness of its Pastures,
and the multitude of those things which for their Rarity are Exported into
other Parts, it far excells all the Earth beside. And thus far Cicero's
Commendation of Asia agrees with the common Suffrage of other Writers, namely,
That Asia in general, for Fruitfulness, Delight, and being well Peopled, is far
superior to Africa; and for costly Traffic, and its abundance of high-valu'd
Commodities, which hereafter shall be particularized, exceeds Europe also, and
may well stand in competition with the newfound World America, with all its
Mines of Gold.

Of the Denomination of Asia.
COncerning the Denomination of Asia, there is some variety of conjecture, as
upon all such Occasions happens; but the most generally received is (and that
by the Authority of Herodotus) That it is derived from the Nymph Asia, who is
reckoned by Hesiod among the Forty Daughters of Oceanus and Thetys, in this
Verse:

(...) Crisia, and Asia, and Calypso fair. This Nymph, the Wife of Japetus, and
Mother of Prometheus, is said to have been a Queen of great Power and
Authority, extending her Dominions through a great part of Asia, and thereby to
have given Denomination to the whole. However, others derive it from Asius the
Son of Cocytus; others, from Asius the Son of Manaeus the Lydian; others, from
another Asius, an ancient Philosopher, who gave the Palladium to the Trojans.
But the Learned Bochart, as in all his Etymologies he goes a more critical way
to work, so also in this, deriving it from the Word Asi, which in the Punick
Tongue signifies A Middle, because it lies in the Hinc intranti dextra est
Africa laeva Europa, inter utrasque est Asia. Plin.
middle between Africa and Europe; or perhaps because the Mountain Taurus runs
through the middle of it, from East to West, as Strabo observes, thereby
dividing it into two Parts, Asia Interior, and Exterior; that Part to the North
being called Asia within Taurus; that to the South, Asia without Taurus. The
Extension of this Mountain Taurus, from Pamphylia Eastward, through the midst
of Asia, as far as the Indies, is elegantly described by Dionysius Afer, in his
Poem de Situ Orbis.

(...)
(...)
A Mountain from Pamphylia extends
It self through Asia, and at India ends.
The Form and Bounds of Asia.
THE Form of Asia is observed by Laurentius Corvinus, out of Anthoninus
Veronensis, to be Conical; that is, beginning from the West with a more ample
Extent, and falling sharper and sharper toward the East, and ending, according
to the Account of the Ancients, at a Place which being called Dionysii
Columnae, or The Pillars of Bacchus, was once thought to be the utmost part of
India.

The Partition between Asia and Europe was generally by old Geographers agreed
to be the River Tanais, now Don. (...) (says Scylax Cariandensis in his
Periplus) (...). From the River Tanais begins Asia. This he says, as having
just before finished his Course through Europe. To the same effect Strabo; To
Europe, Asia is continuous, joined to it at the River Tanais. And Pliny, though
he determine not the Bound between Europe and Asia, yet when of two distinct
Portions of the Earth he makes Europe one, he continues thus; In duas parts ab
amne Tanai ad Gaditanum Fretum Universo Orb diviso: The whole World being
divided into two Parts, by a Line from the River Tanais to the Bay of Cadis,
which is now the Streights Mouth. Moreover, Strabo makes mention of a Peninsula
made by the River Tanais, the Lake Maeotis, and the Euxine and Caspian Seas
(with which, that Dorsum of Ptolomy, between the Lake Maeotis and the Sarmatick
Ocean, above the River Tanais, which he makes the Bound between Europe and
Asia, seems to have some correspondence) the Entrance into which Peninsula is
that Isthmus with which the Poet Dionysius parts Europe from Asia, and
describes to be between the Euxine and the Caspian Seas, in these Verses.

(...)
(...),
(...)
Between the Caspian and the Euxine Strands,
An Isthmus shooting, as a Limit stands
'Tween Asia's Rich, and Europe's Fertile Lands.
This Tanais which parts Asia from Europe, being the Western Bound of Asia; It
is plain from Pliny and Pomponius Mela, that the ancient Bounds on the other
three Sides were, Eastward, the Eastern Ocean; Southward, the Indian Sea; and
Northward, the Scythian.

The Boundaries of Modern Geographers, agreeing in the main with those of the
Ancients, are yet somewhat more exact. Cluverius bounds Asia, Nothward,
Eastward, and Southward, in like manner as Mela, only to the Indian Sea he adds
the Term also of the Red Sea; Westward, with the Arabian Gulf, and the Isthmus
between the Arabian Gulf and the Mediterranean, then the Phoenician and
Aegaean Seas, the Propontis, Pontus, Lake Maeotis, Rivers Tanais and Ob.
Golnitzius his Bounds are also very near the same; only he differs from
Cluverius in this, that in stead of making the Indian and the Red Sea one, or
on the same Side, he puts the Red Sea among the Western Bounds: He also calls
the Eastern Ocean, The Sea of China. Matthias Quadus sets Asia for its Western
Bounds, Tanais, the Euxine Sea, part of the Mediterranean, the Isthmus which
dividing Asia from Africa, separates the Red Sea from the Mediterranean, and
also the Mediterranean Sea it self: Antonius Maginus, the Arabian Gulf, or Red
Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Pontus Euxinus, and the River Tanais, by all
which it is bounded both from Europe and Africa. Martiny, the Aegaean Sea, now
the Archipelago, the Anciently called the Hellespont.
Arm of St. George, or the Straight of the Dardanelli, la The Propontis.
Mer di Marmora, the Bosphorus Thracius.
Straight of Constantinople, the Pontus Euxinus.
Black Sea (otherwise called Mar Maggiore, or the Greater Sea) the Straight of
Caffa, the Sea called Della Palus Maeotis.
Zabache, the River Tanais, and a Line drawn from the said River as far as the
Northern Ocean; also the Red Sea, and the Straight of Suez, which separate it
from Africa. The Northern Bound, commonly called the Scythian or Tartarian Sea,
he calls Mer Glaciale, or the Frozen Sea, Lucas de Linda, the Arabian Gulf,
the Bay between that and the great Mediterranean Sea, the Mediterranean Sea it
self, the Phoenician and Aegaean Seas, the Propontis, Pontus, and Lake Maeotis,
the Rivers Tanais and Ob. P. Bertius divides Asia from Europe by the River
Tanais, now Don; the Lake Maeotis, now Mar del Zabache; the Cimmerian Bosporus,
now Bocca di S. Giovanni; Pontus Euxinus, now Mar Maggiore, or Mar Negro; the
Thracian Bosphorus, now Stretto di Constantinople; the Propontis, now Mar di
Marmora; the Hellespont, now Bras de S. George, or Destroit des Chasteaux; the
Aegaean Sea, now the Archipelago; and lastly, the Syrian Sea: From Africa, with
the Isthmus, and the Arabian Gulf: And all the other Coasts of Asia, without
these Bounds, he environs with the Arabian Sea, the Indian, Oriental, and
Sarmatick Oceans. P. du Val of Abbeville separates Asia Westward from Africa by
the Red Sea, and the Isthmus of Suez: From Europe he divides it with 1. The
Archipelago, otherwise called the White Sea, anciently, the Aegaean Sea: 2. The
Straight Gallipoli, or the Straight of the Dardanelli, otherwise called The Arm
of S. George, anciently, The Hellespont: 3. The Mer de Marmora, anciently, the
Propontis: 4. The Straight of Constantinople, or the Canal of Mer Maggiore, i.
e. the Great Sea, anciently, the Thracian Bosphorus: 5. The Black Sea, or Mer
Maggiore, anciently, Pontus Euxinus: 6. The Straight of Caffa, or Vospero,
otherwise called The Mouth of S. John, anciently, the Cimmerian Bosphorus: 7.
The Limen, otherwise called Mer Zabaque, and Tanna; anciently, The Lake
Maeotis: 8. The River of Don, or Tana, anciently, Tanais: 9. A Line drawn from
the most Easterly deflection of the River Don, as far as the Septentrional or
Northern Ocean, near the River Ob. Where note, That in the Northern, Eastern,
and Southern Limits of Asia, the Modern Geographers precisely agree with the
Ancients, and among themselves; and in the VVestern Bounds, or Division from
Europe, they also agree in the main, and differ little otherwise from each
other, than in being more or less particular.

Of the Measure and Extent of Asia.
FRom the Mouth of Canopus to the Mouth of Pontus, Timosthenes, quoted by
Pliny, accounts XXVI. XXXIX Miles. Which though according to the common
Interpretation of these ancient Roman Numbers, it seems to be in the vulgar way
of Numbering, 26039; yet in regard of the extravagant reckoning, and so
exceeding all bounds of Truth that would follow hereupon, the Translator of
Pliny reckons the first XXVI only so many Hundreds, and brings down the Number
to 2639, as indeed in probability it can be no other; and so consequently in
the rest. From the Mouth of Pontus, to the Mouth of Maeotis, Eratosthenes
reckons XV. XLV, or 1545 Miles, which together comes to XLI. LXXXIV, or 4184
Miles: But Artemidorus, and Isidorus, reckon the Whole, with Egypt, as far as
Tanais, LXXXVIII, or 8800 Miles. Pliny himself, by whom all these Authors are
quoted, in more express Terms affirmed the Length of Asia to be LXIII. DCC
Miles; which to hold proportion with the former Numbers, can be but 7050.
However here the Plinian Interpreter forgetting himself, suffers it to run on
to 630750, perhaps because of the DCC that comes after the LXIII: But this, as
it would exceed the Proportion formerly observed, so it would bring back that
Contradiction to common Sense and Reason, which he seemed before to endeavor to
avoid. The Breadth, from the Aethiopick Sea, to Alexandria, XVIII. LXXV, or
1875 Miles, reckoning the Miles as the manner then was, by so many thousand
Paces. Strabo speaking of the Mountain Taurus running through the midst of
Asia, from West to East, and measuring the Length of Asia by it, affirms the
Length of the Mountain to be 45000 Furlongs, which comes to 5625 Italian or
English Mile. Matthias Quadus, though he almost follows the Words of Strabo,
yet he makes a longer Mount Taurus; for he accounts the Length of it 58060
Furlongs, that is, 7257 of our Miles, and four Furlongs over; and without
particularizing the Breadth, affirms it to exceed the Breadth of Europe and
Asia put together. Mercator extends the Length of Asia from the most Western
Meridian, passing through the 57th Degree of Longitude, to the most Eastern,
passing through the 178th Degree, including 121 Degrees, which reduced to
Miles, comes to 7260. The Breadth he reckons from the Equator to the 80th
Degree of Northern Latitude, which amounts to 4800 Miles. Cluverius allots to
Asia, between the Hellespont and Malacca, the farthest Emporium of India, the
length of 1300 German Miles, which is of our Miles 5200: And for Breadth,
between the Mouth of the Arabian Gulf and the Promontory Tabis, which is at
the Straight of Anian, 1220 German Miles, which is of our Miles 4880. With this
Measure Golnitius, and Lucas de Linda, exactly agree. Martiny determines the
Extent of Asia from West to East, that is, from the Archipelago to the Chinese
Ocean, to be 1750 Leagues; from South to North, that is, from Malacca to the
Sea of Tartary, 1550 Leagues P. du Val accounts its Length from West to East,
that is, from the most Western Parts of Anatolia, to the Eastern Parts of
China, 2500 French Leagues; the Breadth (not comprehending the Isles) 72
Degrees, that is, 1700 of the same Leagues; and all under the Septentrional
Temperate Zone, except some Peninsula's, which are found in the Torrid Zone.

Now to reduce all these several Computations to one Standard, viz. of our own
Miles; there will be no great difference among the three Moderns last
mentioned, provided we reckon in Martiny's Account three Leagues to a Mile, and
in P. du Val's, two French Leagues to a Mile; according to which Reckoning, all
the Modern Accounts come short of the Ancient: which is the more strange, in
regard late Discoverers have penetrated into such remote Easterly Parts of Asia
as were altogether unknown in Strabo's, Pliny's, or Ptolomy's time, and
therefore may well be supposed to have stretched it to a far greater extent.
But some Mistakes may possibly arise from our not exactly enough accommodating
of the Ancient Numbers or Measures to our own, as may evidently appear by the
vast Error that might easily have slipped from an inanimadvertency of Pliny's
Numbers.

Of the Lakes or Seas of Asia.
THE greatest Lake (if it be not more properly called a Sea) not only of Asia,
but (generally so reputed) of the World, is the Hircanian Lake, which contains
in Length 270 German Miles; in Breadth, above 100: and although there be no
visible Entrance of any other Sea into it, yet in regard its Waters are
generally Salt, it is supposed to communicate with the Ocean, or some other
Sea, by certain Subterraneous Passages; as undoubtedly it partakes also of
several great Rivers, since in many Places it has Fresh Water, and abounds
with some sorts of Fresh Water or River Fish. The Ancients believed this to be
a Bay of the Scythian Ocean; but Herodotus, one of the most ancient of the
Greek Writers, as also Aristotle, and Diodorus, were of a different Opinion,
affirming it to be a particular Sea by it self, as being no where mixed with
the Ocean: And Ptolomy, for that Reason, would rather have it called a Lake
than a Sea; to which Opinion of his, many other Writers have given their
Suffrage. However, it has commonly had in times past the Appellation of The
Caspian Sea, and at present is termed Mare di Sala, or The Sea of Sala.

The next great Asian Lake is called Lacus Asphaltites, or The Lake of
Brimstone; the same which in Holy Writ is called Mare Mortuum, or The Dead Sea,
in regard the Water remains fixed and immovable in so vast a Circuit. Upon this
Lake stood the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra, Admah and Zeboim, the two first
whereof are mentioned in Sacred Scripture to have been destroyed by Fire from
Heaven; whereupon it has been also known by the Name of The Lake of Gomorra.
And if the forementioned, much more this may be termed a Lake, in regard it is
but very small in respect of that. Over this Lake, like as over that of Avernus
or Aornus in Campania, no Birds endure to fly, neither are any Fish able to
live in it, by reason of the evil and noxious Savor and intolerable Stench of
the Water, which is not moved or stirred by any Wind, because the Bituminous
Quality thereof resists, by condensing the Surface of the Water, which is so
thick, that the heaviest Creatures are born upon it without swimming: But it is
not Navigable by any Ships, both in regard of the thickness and immovableness
of the Water, and the noisomness of the Lake to all Passengers.

The next is the Lake or Sea in Persia called El-Catif.

The fourth is the Lake of Genesareth, otherwise called Tiberius, and by some
The Sea of Galilee.

The fifth is the Lake Samochonites, between which, and that of Gennesareth,
the River Jordan flows.

Of the Chief Rivers of Asia.
THERE are many Rivers of Principal note in Asia, as Euphrates, Tigris, Jordan,
Indus, Ganges, Ob, etc.

Euphrates rises in Great Armenia, and is called by the Inhabitants generally
Phrat: But in its Progress through several Countries, it changes its Name;
for, some space from its first rising it is called Pyxirates; toward its
entrance into the Mountain Taurus, Omira; again, coming forth from out of the
said Mountain, it takes the Name of Euphrates; afterward it touches upon
Mesopotamia on the Left Hand, and Syria, Arabia, and Babylonia on the Right,
and then divides it self into several Arms, one whereof takes its Course to
Seleucia, and falls into the River Tigris; another runs through Babylon, and
loses it self in certain Lakes of Chaldaea, but afterward shoots it self
forth again, and from thenceforth anciently it ran directly toward the Sea,
where it disembogu'd it self with a great Mouth; but since, having that Course
stopped by the People thereabout, for the fertilising of the Ground, it was
forced to take its way through the Tigris again. This River swelling like Nilus
in some places, uses to overflow the Fields of Mesopotamia, and make them very
Fruitful.

The River Tigris, by the Inhabitants called Tigil, in like manner has its
Source in Great Armenia, in a plain Champaign place. There where this River
runs with a slow gentle Stream, it is called Diglito; where it carried with a
swift precipitous Course, Tigris, which in the Median Language signifies A
Dart. It breaks through the Lake Arethusa, and a little after, the Mountain
Taurus hindering its Course, makes it self a hidden way under Ground, and rises
on the other side of the Mountain; then having pierced through another Lake
named Thospites, sinks again under Ground, and with another Subterranean Course
measures six German Miles. After it has taken in other Rivers in Assyria and
Armenia, it separates Assyria from Mesopotamia, and at Seleucia is divided into
two Branches, one whereof glides to Seleucia, and the other to Ctesiphon, and
so makes, as it were, an Island, though of no great Magnitude: As soon as its
Streams conjoyn into one again, it is called Pasitygris. At length it
insinuates it self into a Lake of Chaldaea, out of which having broken forth
with great violence, it directly tends to the Persian Gulf, in which it
terminates with two Out-lets.

The River Jordan springs from two Fountains, though not far distant frnm each
other, the one of them named Jor, the other Dan, of the contexture of which two
Words is framed the Name of Jordan. This River is extremely pleasant and
beautiful in its Prospect: About twelve Miles from its Source it runs into the
Lake Samochonites, thence into the Lake Genesara, or Tiberias; after which it
waters Judaea and Samaria; and lastly, is immerst into the Lake Asphaltites, or
Dead Sea, in the way making several Turnings and Windings, as if loath to lose
it self and its sweet Waters in such a noisome Sea.

In India are two most Noble Rivers, Indus and Ganges. Indus, vulgarly Hiind,
or Inder, rising from the Mountain Parapomisus, takes in nineteen Rivers,
whereof the Chief are Hydaspis and Hypasus. The greatest Breadth of this River
is fifty Furlongs, and the Depth of it fifteen Paces: With seven Mouths it
empties it self into the Sea.

Ganges (now Guengam) arises out of the Scythian Mountains, affords in many
places very rich Pearl, and plenty of Gold-dust. The least Breadth of this
River is said to be two German Miles, and its least Depth 100 Foot.

The grand Rivers of Tartaria Asiatica are Ob, and Parapomisus, now Orchardus;
both which fall into the Northern Ocean: Rha, now Volga; Jaxartes, now Chesel;
and the River Edel, which disgorge into the Hircanian Sea. Of Persia, Oxus, now
Abia, or Abiamu; Arbis, now Ilment; and Samydaces. Not to omit in Media the
Rivers Cyrus, Cambyses, Amardus, Strato, and Corindas: Of China, Cantao

Of the Chief Mountains of Asia.
THE Principal Mountains of Asia are in Colchis, under the Turkish Empire,
Corax: Not to speak of Caucasus, which is accounted part of the Mountain
Taurus; as likewise Imaus in Scythia; in Media, Coronus, Jasonius, Orontes,
Zagrus, and Choatras: In Galatia, Olgasis, Didymus, and that called The Tomb of
the Celaeni: In Bithynia, Orminius: In Phrygia, the greater Cadmus: In Mysia,
the lesser Mount Ida: In Lydia, Sipylus, Tmolus, Mesogys, and Mimas; In Caria,
Phaenix, Mycale, and Larmus: In Phoenicia, Mount Libanus, Antilibanus, and
Carmelius: In Antiochia, Casius and Pieria: In Mesopotamia, Masius and
Singaras: In Arabla Petraea, Sinai and Horeb: In the Isle of Cyprur, Mount
Olympus: In Palaestine, Mount Gilead. But the Mountain Taurus, which extends
from the Coast of Pamphylia, over against that of the Isle of Rhodes, through
the whole length of Asia, as already specified, is certainly the biggest
Mountain not only of Asia, but of the whole World, if it be not rather a
Conjuncture of several Mountains into one; for so it seems to be, by taking
several Names, as it passes through several Places; as, Imaus, Emodus,
Parapomisus, Circius, Chambades, Pharphariades, Croates, Oreges, Oroandes,
Niphates, Caucasus, Sarpedon, Coracesius, Cragus, and at last Taurus again.
Those Gaps where the Mountain divides, and affords Passage through, are called
Pylae, i. e. Gates; as, the Pylae Armeniae, Pylae Caucasiae, Pylae Ciliciae,
which last is famous for that grand Overthrow given by Alexander the Great to
Darius Codomannus King of Persia.

Of the Productions of Asia.
NO wonder the Luxury of the Persian Empire still overcame those that were
Conquerors by the Sword, as being anciently the Chiefest, and still one of the
Principal Kingdoms of that Quarter of the World; which besides its fruitfulness
of all things necessary for Humane Sustenance, produces also all those richest
of Commodities that have in all Ages been sought for from other the remotest
Parts of the Earth; and which, especially at this day, now that much more of
Asia is discovered than was formerly known, render the Levantine Trade the
richest and most flourishing of all others.

The Ancients were not silent of the great Riches of Asia; but seemed not to
have that particular knowledge thereof, that the late Voyages, and the
Relations of those who Traffic thither, give us. Pliny writes of great
Quantities of Crystal found in several Parts of Asia, particularly at Alabanda
and Orthosia; and Xenocrates of Ephesus is quoted by him to affirm, That in the
Isle of Cyprus, and diverse Parts of Asia, great Pieces of Crystal have been
thrown up in the Plowing of Lands. The same Pliny makes mention of the Stones
Alabastrites and Coralliticus, the first to be found about Damascus in Syria,
the other in some other Parts of Asia.

Solinus having described those two rich Gums of Arabia, Frankincence and
Myrrh, and those two rare Birds, the Phoenix and Cinnamolgus, comes to speak of
the Gems or Precious Stones of this Country, and in particular of that famous
Sardonix Stone which from the Coast of Arabia was presented to Polycrates King
of Samus. The other Stones he mentions, are the Molochites, something
resembling in Color a Smaragdus or Emerald, only of a deeper Green; the Iris,
so called because held in the Sun, it represents all the Colors of the
Rainbow; the Androdamas, so called as partaking something of the Nature of the
Adamant, or else because it abates the force of Anger and Passion; and the
Paederotes, a very beautiful Stone, and by some thought to be the same with the
Opal. Neither forgets he the Balsom of Judaea, which indeed is generally
accounted the richest of all other Balsoms (not that of Peru it self excepted:)
nor in India the Pepper and Eben-wood which are produced about Mount Caucasus;
nor in other Places, the Adamant, Mag^^^, and Lychnites Stones: Neither omits
he to describe the manner of the Conception of Pearl in those sorts of
Shellfish which engendered them; of which in those days great Traffic was made
by the Natives that were expert in diving for them.

But at present, as there is much more of India, and other Parts of Asia,
discovered, than was formerly; so we have a more perfect and certain Account of
all the Chief Places of Trade, and what the peculiar Productions and
Exportations are of the several Provinces and Emporiums of Persia, India, etc.
Olearius. Tobacco in Asia.
For the Province of Chilan in Persia abounds with Silk, Oil, Wine, Rice,
Tobacco, Lemons, Oranges, Pomegranates, and other the most delicious sorts of
Fruit. The Provinces of Iruan, Nachtxuan, Kerabath, Aderbeitzan, and Chorasan,
bring forth in very great plenty Cotton, which the Persians call Pambeh. The
Trade of Pearl-fishing is most especially eminent in three Places, near the
Isle of Baharem in the Persian Sea, near the Isle of Manar upon the Coast of
India, and near that of Ainan toward China.

Near the City Saha, in the Province of Erac, grows abundance of Cotton and
Rice, in which the Inhabitants drive a great Trade.

In the City Katschan is a great Trade driven of Silk Stuffs, and Gold and
Silver Brocados. At Caswin, the Chief City of Erac, are bought Turqueses, which
the Natives call Firuse (and which are found near Nisabur and Firusku) as also
Rubies and Granats, very cheap. At Scamachie, the Principal City of Media
Atropatia, the Chief Commerce lies in Stuffs of Silk and Cotton, as also Gold
and Silver Brocadoes, and rich Scymitars. The Provinces of Kilan and Sahetzan
are noted for Silks. Near Baku are several Sources of Nefie. From the Salt Pits
of Kutb, Urum, Kemre, Hemedan, Bisethun, Suldus, and Kilissim, there is drawn
out great quantity of Salt as clear as Crystal.

The Country of the Malabars in India, Mandelslo.
i. e. from the City of Goa as far as the Cape of Comory, is very fertile of
Spices, but particularly of the best Pepper of the Indies. The principal
Commerce of the City of Cochim is in Pepper, Ginger, and Cinnamon.

The Isle of Ceilon produces Cinnamon, all sorts of Precious Stones except
Diamonds, Pearls somewhat-inferior to those of Baharam; but the best Ivory of
the World. It abounds also in all sorts of rich Fruits, as Ananas, Bananas,
Cocos, Jacques, Mangas, Citrons; and has whole Forests of Oranges and Lemons,
and also Mines of Brass and Iron, and, it is thought, of Gold and Silver,
especially in the Kingdom of Candy. The Soil also is very Productive of Corn,
Wine, Oil, Cotton, several Roots for Dyers, Ginger, Nutmegs, Cardamoms,
Mirobalans, Corcoma, and diverse other Medicinal Drugs.

In the City of India, the Chief City of the Province Odya, the principal
Commerce consists in Stuffs brought from Suratta and the Coast of Coromandel,
all sorts of China Commodities, Precious Stones, Gold, Benzoin, Wax, Copper,
Lead, Indico, Calamba Wood, Brasil Wood, Cotton, Saphires, Rubies: Likewise
great quantities of Rice are hence transported to the neighboring Islands, and
Deer-skins to the Japoneses.

The Isle called Java Major is termed by Julius Scaliger, in his Exercitations
against Cardanus, The Compendium of the World, because there is not that
Animal, Plant, Fruit, Metal, nor Drug, which is not here in greater plenty than
in any other part of the Universe beside: Particularly, the costly Drugs of
Java are Wild Cinnamon, Carcapuli, Costus Indicus, Zorumbet, Galanga, Benzoin,
Sandale, Ginger, Anacardium, called by the Portuguese Java di Malacca, the Wood
called Pala di Cuebra, Lignum Aloes, called Palo d' Aguila, and by the Indians,
Calamba; the Drug Pody, the Root Carumba, the Wood Conjuapi, the Root
Samparentam, the Fruit Gatogamber, with innumerable others.

At Bantam they vend great store of Gum Lacca, of which they make Spanish Wax,
and the curious Varnish wherewith the Cabinets, and other choice Pieces of Art
of China and Japan, are overlaid; also Anil, or Indico, Sandal-wood, Nutmegs,
Cloves, Tortoise-shell, whereof they make Cabinets; and Ivory, which the
Mandorins, who have their Chairs made of it, prefer before Silver.

The Island of Sumatra is rich in Diamonds, and other Precious Stones, Silk,
Spices, Wax, Honey, Camphire, Cassia, White Sandal in great abundance, and
Cotton: There is said to be also in this Island a Fountain of Balsom,
incessantly running. It likewise contains rich Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper,
Iron, Brass; and abounds with Rice, Millet, and the most delicate of Fruits, as
Oranges, Lemons, Bananas, Tamarinds, Batalas, and that rare Tree called in the
Malayan Tongue Singadi; by the Persians and Turks, Gul; and by the Portuguese,
Arbor triste di Dia; of which we shall speak more particularly in its proper
place, having already spoke sufficiently concerning the Riches of Asia in
general.

Of the several Religions professed in Asia.
OF the four Religions professed in this Quarter of the World, viz. The Jewish,
the Mahumetan, the Pagan, and the Christian, the last is here of the smallest
extent, and the Mahumetan of the greatest: But here it was that they were all
first planted, Idolatry, or the Pagan Religion, was first broached among the
Syrians: Judaism, among the Hebrews: Christianity began in Palestine, or the
Holy Land: Mahumetanism in Arabia.

Several Missions have been appointed by Christian Princes for the Propagating
of the Christian Religion: that is to say; Those of Turkey, under the
Protection of France; Those of India, under the Protection of Portugal; Those
of the Philippines, under the Protection of Castile. In the East Indies are
four Archbishopricks, and seven Bishoprics: There also the Jesuits have three
Provinces; that of Goa, that of Malabar, and that of Japan. From France the
Bishops of Heliopolis, Metellopolis, Beritus, and Coesarea were sent to
propagate the Christian Religion in China.

Mahumetanism has been received by the four Principal Nations of Asia, Turks,
Arabians, Persians, and Tartars: The Turks are the most free, the Arabians the
most superstitious, the Persians the most rational, and the Tartars the most
simple.

Of the Mahumetans there have been reckoned sixty two Sects, which nevertheless
are reduced to two Principal ones; that of the Turks, which follows the
Doctrine of Homar; and that of the Persians, following the Doctrine of Ali. The
Persians have their Patriarch at Ispahan, the Turks theirs at Bagdat.

The Christians of these Parts are principally those of the Greek Church, who
have also their two Patriarchs, the one at Antioch, the other at Jerusalem. The
other Chief Sects are, the Jacobites, who have a Patriarch at Caramit; the
Nestorians, the Cophites, the Georgians, the Sirians, so called from Sirus
their first Teacher, not from the Country of Syria; the Armenians, who have
their two Patriarchs, the one at Massivan in Media, the other at Ciz in
Cilicia; and lastly, the Maronites, who have theirs at Canobin in Mount Libanus.

Of the Ancient and Modern Division of Asia.
THE Ancients divided the whole Continent of Asia into Asia the Less, or Asia
properly so called, and Asia the Greater, which is also subdivided into the
more Westerly Part, and the more Easterly part. The more Westerly Part, into
India the Less, and India within the Ganges; the more Easterly Part, into India
the Greater, and India without the Ganges.

Ptolomy, in his fifth, sixth, and seventh Books reduces the Provinces of
Asia, which he makes to be forty eight, into twelve Tables. In his fifth Book
are comprehended these Provinces; Pontus and Bithynia, properly called Asia,
Phrygia, Magna Lycia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, Pamphylia, Cappadocia, Armenia
Minor, Cilicia, Sarmatia Asiatica, Colchis, Iberia, Albania, Armenia Major, the
Island Cyprus, Coelosyria, Phoenicia, Palestina, Judaea, Arabia Petraea,
Mesopotamia, Arabia Deserta, Babylonia. In his sixth Book, Assyria, Susiana,
Media, Persis, Parthia, Carmania Deserta, Carmania altera, Arabia Faelix,
Hircania, Margiana, Bactriana, Sogdiana, the Sacians, Scythia within the
Mountain Imaus, Serica, Aria, Parapomisus, Dranchiana, Arachosia, and Gedrosia.
In the seventh, India within the River Ganges, India without the River Ganges,
China, which is by him called Sinarum Regio, and the Island Taprobane.

The Modern Division of Asia is generally into those five Great Kingdoms
already mentioned, viz. The Turkish Empire in Asia, The Kingdom of Persia, or
the Territory of the Great Sophi; The Tartarian Empire, or the Territory of the
Great Chan; the Empire of China, which is now in the Possession of the Tartar;
and the Empire of the Great Mogol.

But to be more particular: Our first Part of Asia we shall divide as
follows; viz. into

1. The Kingdom of Persia, containing the Provinces Schirwan, anciently Media
Atropatia; Erak, anciently Parthia; Aderbeitzan, anciently Media Major, or
Satrapeni; Iran, or Carabach; Sagistam, anciently Drangiana; the Country of
Nixabur; Kilan, or Gilan; Mazanderan, Chusistan, anciently Susiana; Kirman, or
Caramania; Circan, anciently Gedrosia; Moghostan, Lorestan, Chorasan, Siston,
Aria, or Ery; Dagestan, or Tagestan; the Kingdom of Amadan. 2. The Country of
Georgia, anciently Colchis and Iberia, etc. containing the Provinces of
Imereti, or Basciaciuk; Cacheti, and Cardel, or Carduel; Guriel, Mengrelia,
anciently Colchis; with that of Avogastes, or Avogasie. 3. The Province of
Circassia, with Albania and Curdistan. 4. India, and particularly the Empire of
the Great Mogol, containing these following Kingdoms and Territories, viz.
Parapomisa, or Candahor; Sablestan and Balassy, the Kingdom of Cabul, Territory
of Multan, the Kingdom of Ballochi, or Hangichan; the Province of Buckor, the
Kingdom of Send, or Sind; the Provinces of Sorit, Jesselmeer, and Attack; the
Province of Penjab, the Kingdom of Caximir, the Territories of Banchosh,
Jangapore, and Jenba; the Kingdom of Dely, the Kingdom of Mando, the
Territories of Sanga and Utrad, the Kingdom of Zurratte, or Cambaya, the
Kingdom of Candish, or Sanda; the Provinces of Berar and Narvar, the Province
of Gualiar, the Kingdoms of Agra or Indostan, Decan, Ballagate, Cuncan, or
Visiapour; the Country of Bulloits; the Provinces of Hindows, Nagracat, Siba,
Kakares, Gor, Pitan, Canduana, and Patna.
map of Persia (Iran) PERSIA Sive SOPHORVM REGNVM


THE DESCRIPTION OF THE KINGDOM OF PERSIA.
Description of Persia.
THE Kingdom of Persia has for several Ages by that Name been known to the
ancient Greeks and Romans, and at this Day to most People of Europe; and it may
properly be so called from Perseus, Son of Jupiter and Danae. The Inhabitants
term it Agem, or Agiam. By the Turks it is called Agem Vilager, or Agem
Memlaket; the first signifies The Country, and, the second The Kingdom of the
Persians: But the proper Name, as Texeira affirms, is Agem or Pars; and that of
the Inhabitants, Parsey or Agemy, though the Name of Pars belongs peculiarly to
the Province of Persia. It was anciently a Noble and very famous Country,
having for two hundred and thirty Years been the Head of the second Monarchy;
nay, it rose to that height, that (according to Brisonius) no Kingdom upon
Earth could either in Power or Riches compare with it; wherefore the Governors
were called The Great Kings, or Kings of Kings, as appears by Plato, Strabo,
Suetonius, and other eminent Writers.

The Borders of this Kingdom formerly extended very far, many populous
Provinces being under its Jurisdiction, as (amongst other Remarks) appeared by
the great Army, and the mighty Train thereto belonging, with which King Darius
prepared to oppose Alexander the Great, as Quintus Curtius has related at
large.

How far the Limits of this Empire anciently extended, may be found in Strabo,
Pizarrus, and other ancient Writers.

Its ancient Limits and Extent.
Persia in former Times comprised most of the Countries of Asia toward the
East, as also a part of India and Egypt, which then was within the Bounds of
Asia, viz. it extended in length from the Hellespont beyond the Mouth of the
River Indus, two thousand eight hundred English Miles; and in breadth, from the
Pontus to the Jaws of the Arabian Gulf, two thousand: in which Circumference
were comprehended many Provinces and Kingdoms. But since the downfall of the
second Monarchy of Persia, which flourished two hundred and thirty years from
the first rise thereof by Cyrus.

This Kingdom, partly by Intestine Wars, and partly by the Invasion of Foreign
Princes, was so much abated in its former Splendour, that the Inhabitants
thereof were absolutely enslaved, and after the Arabians had Conquered them,
forced to deny their Name, and from that time forward were not permitted to
style themselves Persians, but Saracens. Not long after which it was subdued by
the Tartars, and first brought under Subjection of the Chinguis Chan, and then
under Tamerlane; yet at length it began again to flourish, and regained much of
its ancient Luster in the last Age, by the Valor of Ismael Sefi, and is now
reckoned amongst the most powerful Monarchies of the East.

As to the present Extent of Persia, it cannot certainly be said, because of
the various Alterations in the Frontiers, by means of the War against the Turks
and Tartars, diverse times losing a Province or two, and sometimes regaining
them, or others in lieu thereof, from the Enemy.

The Extent of Persia.
Olearius, from his observation of the Persian Maps, makes Persia to extend
(taking in all the circumjacent subdued Provinces) from the North to the South,
from the Caspian Sea to the Bay of Persia; from East to West, from the Borders
of Candahar to the River Euphrates or Moratsu; nay, it extends half way on the
West side, from the Caspian Sea upward, to the Armenian Mountains; and Eastward
toward the River Ruth Chane, formerly Oxun; on the North side whereof dwell
the Usbeki and Bucharian Tartars, who partly pay Tribute to the Persians.

Maginus makes Persia extend from East to West 38 Degrees, because its
Longitude from the Meridian of Tenariff, is in 82 Degrees, and the most Eastern
in 129. but from the North to the South, to 20 Degrees, viz. from the 23. to
the 43. Degree: So that the Dominion of Persia has five hundred and sixty
Leagues in length, and three hundred in breadth, a Degree being reckoned to
contain eighteen German, or sixty English Miles.

According to Cluverius and Golnitius, it makes out the same length, reckoning
from Araxis to the River Indus, a thousand eight hundred and forty English
Miles and the breadth, from Oxus to the Persian Sea, eight hundred and ten.

Botteras makes the breadth from North to South to be eighteen Degrees, a Tract
of eight hundred and ten Miles.

But Olearius confutes all these Writers in this Point, and affirms, That
Persia has 12 Degrees in breadth from North to South; for if you take the
utmost Limits or Corners which lie at both the opposite Seas, viz. the Caspian
Sea and Persian Gulf, you will find that the City Hasum, by the Inhabitants
called Resht, is situate scarce two Leagues from the Caspian Sea, under 37 Degrees.
and Ormus at the Persian Gulf in 25 Degrees; so that the extent of this breadth
is but 12 Degrees, a Tract of two hundred and eighty German Miles.

Its Borders.
This Kingdom has for Borders in the East, the River Indus, the Mogol's
Country, as also the Country of Zakatey; On the West it conterminates with
Diarbek and Great Armenia, the Countries of the Turks, the River Tigris, and
the Lake Giocho; on the North it verges with the Caspian Sea or Bachu, besides
the Tartars from Usbeki or Zagatey, and a part of Muscovy, to the Eder or Vola;
and on the South is partly washed by the Persian Gulf, the rest limiting with
Ormus and a little part of the Indian Sea.

Cluverius affirms, That the Empire of Persia is on the North enclosed with the
Caspian Sea, the River Oxos, and Mount Caucasus; on the East, with the River
Indus; in the South, with the Indian Sea and Persian Gulf; and in the West,
with the Euphrates and Tigris, the Nifean Mountains, and River Araxis.

The same Borders are set down by Golnitius, viz. on the East, the Stream
Indus, and a part of Tartary; on the North, the Tartars, besides the Oxos and
the Caspian Sea; on the West, the Turks, the Lake Giocho and Euphrates, Tigris
and Araxis; and on the South, the Persian Gulf called Elkatist, and the Indian
Sea.

In ancient Times Persia also comprised the Countries of Gedrosia, Carmania,
Drangiana, Arachosia, Paropamisis, Bactriana, Marigana, Hyrcania, Aria,
Parthia, Persis, Susiana, Assyria, and Media, most of them in this Age having
received new Names, as shall be made appear more at large hereafter.

The same Cluverius divides the Modern Dominion of the Sofi into the following
Countries or Provinces, to wit, Sark, Cusistan, Elaran, Tarsi, Arak, Elsabar,
Diargment, Corasan, Sablestan, Candahar, Sigestan, Sigesimur, Kirman, and
Goadel, besides the Kingdom of Ormuz, and the Indian Province of Guzaratte; but
this last is now under the Great Mogol.

This Dominion comprehends the Province of Persia or Forsistan, which comprises
the Regions of Lahor and Sofian, Servan, Adherbajon, Arak or Hierak, divided
into the Provinces of Casbin and Armadan, the Country of Guilan or (as Texeira
says) Gheylon, or Kilan, Sayabat, Strava, Diargument, besides the Substitute
Countries of Mazandaran; beyond which Texeira places along the Caspian Sea,
Bostam, Sabzabah, and Nixabur, formerly Metropolises of so many Kingdoms, but
of late reduced to peculiar Lordships or Dominions.

But the Persians at this day possess Korazan, Candahar, the Kingdoms of Sistan
and Hucenche, besides the three Kingdoms of Curdistan, one of which is
peculiarly called Malaga or Miraga, containing part of Chaldea and Assyria, and
extends to Bagdat. Sagistam, Tabastan, Kablestan or Sablestan, Nimruz, Stakar,
Lorestan or Luristan, Ciran, Eri, Kirman, and several other Isles, are also
under the Jurisdiction of the Persians.

The most eminent Provinces in Persia are at this day (as Olearius affirms)
Pasargadas, the most South-East Province of Persia, Erak, Fars, Schirwan,
Kilan, Adirbeitzan, Thabristan or Mazanderan, Iran or Karabach, Chorasan,
Sablustan, Sitzestan, Kirman, Chusistan, Tzisire, and Diarbek.

Others make the Kingdom of Persia to contain the Province of Persia, in the
Country Language called Fars, Erak, Adirbeitzan, Iran or Karabach, Drangiane or
Sagistan, Nixabur, Kilan, Mokan or Mogan, Betziruan, Mazanderan, Chusistan,
Carmania, Gedrosia or Cirkan, Kache, Guadel, Nakran, Mogostan, Lorestan,
Chorazan, Siston, Aria or Erie, Dagestan, and Amadan.

The Province of Persia or Fars.
THE Province of Persia, (anciently called Persis) from which the whole Kingdom
is so called, is in the Country Language named Fars and Farsistan; which last
properly signifies The Country of Fars; for Stam in the Persian Tongue
generally signifies A Country. Niger, besides several others call it Azamia,
and the Turks, according to Megisser, Farsik. It is a great Country, and has
on the East the two Carmania; the West part thereof borders at Susiana, now
called Suse or Suster, otherwise called Kusistan; the North verges with Media,
now Sarch; and the South shoots to the Persian Bay or Sea of Ormus.

The Coast of Persia is every where an open and sandy Plains, and without
Harbors; yet the Inhabitants call all those Places where Boats can put in,
Brendor, that is, A Haven.

The Seacoast of this Province comprehends the Country inhabited by the
Nautaques, Arabians, and Mihelus or Nichilu, which have their Name from that
Seacoast, and maintain themselves by Piracies: They pay Tribute to the Sefi;
yet some of them own the Portuguese, and Sail freely with their Passes, which
secures them from being molested by the Portuguese Carraks.

On the Bay of Persia stands the Fort Rexel; and more Northward into the
Country lies Resh Ceyfadin, that is, The Tract of Sand of Ceyfadin.

The Metropolis of this Province is Schiras, by the Italians and Sir Walter
Raleigh named Siras, and (according to Mr. Herbert) from the pronunciation of
the Persians themselves, Scheraz. By reason of its Situation on a Plain, some
term it Imurezam, that is, A Plain-City. Ben Jonas calls it Syahaz; Osirus,
Niras; Sephanus, Cynebatha; and Ctelius, Cyropolis, though mistaken, as Mr.
Herbert affirms, because all the ancient Geographers place the City of
Ciropolis near the River Cyrus in Hyrcania, lying in 39 Degrees and a half
Northern Latitude, whereas Sciras lies in 28 Degrees and 44 Minutes.

Aelian affirms, That there is a Ciropolis in India, and Pliny has observed a
River of the same Denomination in Armenia; but none of the Ancients make
mention of any City of that Name: yet nevertheless Garcias de Sylva and
Fiqueroa certainly believes Schiras to be the ancient City of Ciropolis, lying
in the Province of Pasargadas.

Herbert would have Scheraz to be derived from the word Sheer, which signifies
Milk in the Persian Tongue; or else from Sherap, which is A Bunch of Grapes;
for no Place in all Asia affords better Vines.

Some, but especially Philips of Ferrara, would have Sciras to be the ancient
City Persepolis, or at least that Sciras was built out of its Ruins on the same
Foundation: but this is a grand Mistake, because Schiras is not an ancient
City, and the Place where Persepolis stood, is above ten Persian Miles to the
Northward from Schiras: Yet nevertheless Mr. Herbert affirms, that Schiras was
raised out of the Ruins of Persepolis.

Some ascribe the building of this City to Jamshid, fifth King of Persia, who
(as the Chronicle makes mention) was succeeded by Chedorlaomer, not long after
the Death of Noah.

Botterus tells us, That Schiras was built when Grand-Cair was but a Village;
but according to the Registers of the Country, it was built not above seven
hundred and fifty years ago, a considerable time after the Arabians made
themselves Masters of Persia. Moreover, if ancient Traditions may be credited,
which are there certainly believed, this City is much elder, especially if it
be true what is related of an Asian General called Jenpsit, who is said to have
lived many Ages before their Account of Time: And though they differ amongst
themselves in the Time and Reign of the forementioned Hero, yet it is very
probable that he lived a thousand years after the Flood. They affirm that he
was the Person who made the great and strange cut Channel, which so abundantly
waters the whole Country of Schiras, by undermining and cutting through the
great Mountains that lie between the City and Springs, and thereby brought them
to their present Perfection; and by this means they furnish the City with such
an abundance of Water, that if all the Channels were cut into one, they would
make a very large River.

The City of Schiras, lying in 28 Degrees and 44 Minutes Northern Latitude, is
situate about ten Leagues from the Ruins of Persepolis; near the Stream
Bendamir or Bendimir, on a great Plain enclosed with Mountains (except on the
side where you go over a Bridge from Pasa into the same) two Leagues distant
from the City, but on the North scarce half a League.

This City was formerly much bigger, and had many more magnificent Buildings
than at this day, as plainly appears both within and without its Walls: And the
Arabian Geographer Ulug Becig, Nephew to Tamerlane, affirms that it was in his
Time three Leagues and a half in Circumference. The like bigness Contasing
ascribes to the same, as also the number of twenty four thousand Houses.

In the beginning of this Age Schach Abbas, to punish the Insurrection of one
Jacob Chan, Governor or Lord of Schiras, pulled down that part of the Wall
which was then remaining, and filled up the Moat and Trench which surrounded
the City.

Both without and within the City are many Mosques or Temples, amongst which
some are built very magnificent and beautiful, and especially one, which being
of an extraordinary bigness, has a much higher Steeple upon it than any of the
other. These Towers, which the Persians call Alcorons, are narrow, but high,
having without two or three Galleries one above another; from whence the
Marabouts (a sort of Priests) publicly read their Prayers with a loud and
strong Voice three times a day, and walking round about the Gallery, that they
may be the better understood.

There are very few handsome Structures either without or within the City,
except the Mosques; for besides three Royal Palaces, (of which one is in the
City, and the other two in the Suburbs) there is not one fair House: it is true,
that of the Chan or Sultan, thoug it be not very beautiful on the outside, yet
large, and has many Painted and richly Gilded Apartments within, besides
Galleries, Gardens, Orchards, and pleasant Walks. All the other, inhabited by
Citizens and other eminent Persons, are small and mean; the Rooms, except the
Hall and two or three Chambers, are so little, that an indifferent Tradesman
here, has better Accommodation than a Nobleman there.

The City has several Gates, one of which respects the River Pasargadas, and
is called Darvaza Pasa, that is, The Gate of Pasa, anciently Pasargadas: it is
very little, and supported only by the Relics of an old Mud Wall. Opposite to
this Gate, toward the West, is another called Darvaza Achem, that is, Iron
Gate, at which begins a very fair Street above 2000 Paces long, and every where
exactly 90 Paces broad. On each side of this Street is a Wall of about sixteen
Foot high, Plastered over with Mortar, and without any Houses; behind are
spacious Gardens and Orchards, full of Fruit Trees and curious
Banqueting-houses, which belong to the King, and are neatly built, with large
Galleries and pleasant Prospects.

In this fair Street the Persians run Races, and perform their Exercises on
Horseback. At the end of the Streets stands the King's Palace, very handsomely
built, with Balconies and Terrace Walks. Before the Court you ascend by two
Steps to a little Plain, which is raised higher than the Street. At the
Entrance, and near the Gallery, in the midst of the Plain, lies a fair and
large Pool of Water.

Most of the Inhabitants of the City appear every Friday, being the Mahumetan
Sabbath, in a spacious Plain, both on Foot and Horseback, and are there
Exercised and Trained, and afterward dispose themselves to other Recreations
as they think fit.

Near the King's Palace is a fair House with a pleasant Garden, the Work of the
Great Ismael Sofi, very curiously built three Stories high; in the second of
which, among other very convenient Apartments, is a large and spacious Hall,
having in the middle an Arched Lover, full of Glass Windows. In this Apartment,
as also in the rest on this Story, are diverse Pictures of Women, most of them
Clothed after the Italian manner.

Under the Galleries which surround this Structure, two are much bigger than
the other; one of which being over the Gate looks into the Street, and also to
that Gate of the City which is called Darvaza Pasa. The other standing above
the first, is over the Gate, through which you pass to go into the Garden, and
respects the West. Each of these have three Doors one against another, so that
being in the Hall, which is in the middle of the Edifice, you have the Prospect
not only of the forementioned Streets and Walks, but also of the City Gate, and
that of the Haram or Seraglio, in the middle of the Garden, which may justly be
accounted a Wood of all sorts of Fruit Trees, divided into Walks, but those of
the Cypress and Palm are the chiefest, which begin at the Court Gate, and
extend nine hundred Paces in length, and thirty in breadth; the Walks are very
straight and even Planted on both sides with tall Cypress-trees, which are so
big that three Men can scarce fathom them, and so high and straight, that they
represent great Obelisks. At the bottom of the Trees is raised a Gravel Path or
Bank, somewhat higher than the middle Walk, and about five or six Foot broad,
where all People walk; for they go not into the middle part, because that must
be kept always green. At the bottom of these Cypress-trees, on the outside of
the Walk, runs a pleasant Brook, which afterward dividing it self into several
Branches, waters all parts of the Garden. At the end of the Walk is the Haram
or Seraglio, built after the same manner as the House before mentioned, but not
so large nor high: It is erected on a Plain raised seven Foot higher than the
Garden. On each side of this Structure is forty Foot of Ground, in which are
ten eight-square Ponds, which are each half a Fathom deep, to serve the House
with Water. This Edifice is not covered with Tyles, but with Lome and chopped
Straw or Chaff, which being tempered together and baked, becomes so hard that
no Water will soke through, but runs off into Gutters joined to the Wells. On
this Roof, as also on those of all other Houses, stands a Marble Pillar of
about three or four Foot long, and one thick. On the top of the Seraglio you
have a Prospect of the whole Garden, as also a cool walking-place in the hot
Summer Nights.

This Garden affords all sorts of European Fruits, but especially Pears, and
Grapes of diverse sorts, beautiful to the Eye, and very large; also Pistacho's,
Almonds, and Filberds.

Sixty or seventy Paces from the Haram appears a square Fountain, with a
handsome Ascent; each Square is about a hundred Foot long, and Walled with
Marble; also filled with Water, in which are kept two Pleasure-boats for the
Women to recreate themselves with.

All the Walks are on both sides Hedged in with Province-Roses, out of which
they Distill abundance of Rose Water, and send it in great quantities to Ormus,
and India, and other remote Countries.

In this large Garden are abundance of great Pheasants, Woodcocks, and other
Fowls, which are there as in a Cage, breeding and hatching up their Young.

Ten Leagues from Schiras is a Village called Maragaskan, otherwise Mardash; it
lies in 28 Degrees and 48 Minutes Northern Latitude, four League North-West
from the Village Mahin; between which the Way is very straight, pleasant, and
delightful, being overgrown with Grass. This Village contains about two hundred
Houses, so enclosed with Trees, that at a distance it appears to be a Wood
divided into several small Parks. The Air thereabouts is very temperate, and
the Water good and fresh, besides which all sorts of Provisions very cheap.

Near Mardash, at the end of a neighboring Plain, nigh the Foot of a high
Mountain not far from the Brook Sirt, may be seen the Ruins of an old Castle,
in the Persian Tongue called Tzehilminar, that is, Forty Towers, though at this
Day only thirty of them remain, viz. nineteen high ones, and eleven broken
ones; but (as Della Valle affirms) there are not above twenty, which may be
true, and the Place not misnam'd; for though now so few remain, without doubt
there were more at first, the Persian word Thehil signifying Fort, and Minar A
Tower.

Joseph Barbaro affirms, that the Towers before mentioned are as big as three
Men can Fathom, and (as Mandeslo relates) consists of black and white Marble.

The Persians relate, that this Edifice was erected by a King called Tzemshied
Schach, famous for Wisdom; but Olearius questions that. Others say That King
Solomon built it: and some believe that Darius was the Founder thereof, and
that Iskander, which is Alexander the Great, ruined it: But Aelian ascribes the
erecting thereof to King Cyrus.

The Foundation or Platform of this Structure is about eighty Yards, being cut
out of an entire Rock of Marble: They ascend the same on four pair of Stairs,
consisting of ninety five Steps; cut out of white Marble: On the top, not far
from the Stairs, appear four Pieces of a broken Wall, that seem to have been
two large Gates; on the first two are cut two great Horses, with strange
Furniture; and on the other two are other kind of Beasts, with Bodies like
Horses, but Heads like Lions with Crowns upon them, and Wings at their
Shoulders. Not far from hence, on the right side, stand the thirty
forementioned Pillars. A little distant from these Towers, and somewhat higher
were two indifferent large Chambers, of which are remaining some of the Doors
and Windows, which are of Marble, as also the Walls, which are so polished,
that one may see their Face therein as in a Looking-Glass. Farther in, on the
side near the Doors, are all manner of ancient Shapes and Figures, hewn in
Stone, and bigger than the Life, some sitting, others standing, with long Hair,
broad Beards, and long Coats down to their Feet, with wide Sleeves, a Sash
about their Middle, and strange round Caps on their Heads. Not far from these
Chambers stands a square Pillar, with a great polished Stone in the top, which
some judge to be a Jasper; on this also, as on several other Columns, are
strange Characters Engraven which none can Read.

All that remains of the Relics or Ruins of ancient Persepolis we find very
well described in Mr. Herbert, wherefore we shall give you the Description in
his following words:

The Ribs or Ruins of Persepolis (says he) are at this Day called Chill-Manor,
or Chehel-Manor, that is, Forty Towers in the Idiom of Persia; and might more
properly have said Hashtot-Manor, or Eighty Towers, for so many are easily told
two Yards out of the Ground; and if from so many Pillars as are perfect and
lofty, then may they say Nouzda-Manor, or Nineteen Towers, at this Day no more
standing, one excepted at the East below, above a Bowe-shot thence. The whole
Basis is cut by incredible toil out of the solid Marble Rock, twice the compass
of Windsor Castle, ascended by fourscore and fifteen easy Steps, dissected
from the durable black Marble, so broad that a dozen Horses may go abreast: the
Perpendicular is two and twenty Geometrick Feet, and where the Stairs are not,
the Rock is precipitious: near the highest Step is the Entrance into the
Palate; the Breadth is visible, in despite of Flame and Weather: on one side
of the Gate stands a monstrous great Elephant, on the other a Rhinoceros; the
distance is about twenty Foot; the Portraicts are cut out of the shining
Marble, ten Yards high either of them, fixed and perpetual. A few Paces thence
are of like Work, Bulk, and Matter, two gallant Towers; and (to finish the
Porter's Lodge) near them is another Ruin, a Pegasus, an Invention of the
Sculptor to illustrate his Art: And being past this Portal, the Apollo opens, a
fair even Ground, deplorable in many Ruins, a hundred white Marble Pillars,
whole and broken, dignifying this once most excellent Structure. Upon many of
these white Marble Pillars the Storks have builded their Nests, where the rage
of Wind and Weather is more offensive to them than any dread they have of the
People who inhabit near them. In all unseasonable, stormy, or cold Weather,
they forsake the Region, and fly where the Sun can comfort them. The Persians
have many superstitious Stories concerning them, and suppose them (as
elsewhere I have noted) the Emblems of Piety and Gratitude. The Pillars which
are at this day standing (but seem to groan under the Tyranny of Time) are
betwixt fifteen and twenty Cubits, and rise beautifully in forty Squares or
concave Parallels, every Square having full three Inches, whereby the Circuit
may be gathered. Most excellent is the Matter, most elegant the Work, and no
less commendable the Order and Shape how they are placed; in posture and show
to this day admirable; but when they stood in luster and perfection, were
elsewhere scarce imitable. From the ordinary standing, we easily enjoyed a most
delightful Prospect; but in the Summity or Advantage, a brave Horizon of thirty
Miles unlimited Plains, every way gave it self to this Imperial Palace, as
seeming to submit it self in a happy lowliness.

In part of this great Room (not far from the Portal) in a Mirror of polished
Marble, we noted above a dozen Lines of strange Characters, very fair, and
apparent to the Eye; but so mystical, so odly framed, as no Hieroglyphick, no
other deep Conceit can be more difficultly fancied, more adverse to the
Intellect. These consisting of Figures Obelisk, Triangular, and Pyramidal, yet
in such Symetry and Order as cannot well be called Barbarous: Some resemblance
I fancied some Words had of the Antique Greek, shadowing out Ahasuerus Theos:
And though it have small concordance with the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Letter,
yet questionless to the Inventer it was well known, and peradventure may
conceal some excellent Matter, though to this day wrapped up in the dim Leaves of
envious Obscurity.

Adjoining this, is another square Room, from Angle to Angle ninety Paces, in
circuit three hundred and threescore Paces, beautified with eight Doors, four
of them being six Paces broad, and the other four, three apiece; all eight
severally composed of seven great polished Marbles, fixed one upon another;
each of which Stones are four Yards long, five Quarters high, and most
excellently engraven with Images of Lions, Griffins, Tigers, and Bulls: and in
other Places (for the Walls are durable) Battles, Hecatombs, Triumphs, Olympic
Games, and the like, in very rare Sculpture and Proportion. Above each Door is
engraven the Idea of a Majestic Monarch; his Robe is long, a Tiara or Mithra
on his Head, his Hair very long, and curled; in one Hand he holds a Globe, in
the other his Scepter: A Garb and Session never used by Persian Princes. The
silly Inhabitants (who made no account of it till of late) name him Jamshet,
and Aaron, and Samson, and Solomon: A wonder they leave out Rustan, their
Hercules, and as easy for invention. A third Chamber conjoyns the last we
spoke of: This (if they lie not that told us so) was a Gynecie, or Nursery. It
has four unequal Angles; two sides are sixty, the other two seventy of my
largest Paces. From that, we issued into a fourth Room, two sides whereof are
twenty, and the other two, thirty Paces. The Walls are very eminent in this
Chamber, of black shining Marble, in many Places so bright and jetty, as we
could easily view our Reflex, no Steel Mirror comparing with it. In most parts
the Walls are cut into Gygantive Images, illustrated with Gold, to this day
permanent. Somewhat further, over Heaps of Stones of valuable Portraictures, we
mount toward the most lofty part of this Palace, where we saw the Resemblances
of a devout King, adoring his three Deities, the Sun, the Fire, and a Serpent,
all which are cut upon the perpendicular Mountain. The other side of this high
Hill is a Precipice, down which is no descending. But whether this Fabric was
Ionick, Dorick, or Corinthiack, in the perfection, I cannot determine; the
Ruins forbid a positive Judgment. But such at this day it is, that a ready
Limner in three Months space can hardly (to do it well) depict out all her
Excellencies. Pity it is, it is not done, the barbarous People every day
defacing it, and cleaving it asunder for Grave-stones and Benches to sit upon.
Five Miles West from Chehel-manor is also a gallant Monument, a Giant cut into
a monstrous proportion, whom the Illiterate Persians say was Rustan, and from
him called Nocta-Rustan. I rather judge it the Image of Great Alexander, who
had a desire that after-Ages might think him more than a Man, and his Men more
than Monsters, as appeared in his Conceit to make many Armors big enough for
three Men, and scatter them in India, that the People might not dare to rebel,
lest those Polyphems came to lash them. So far Mr. Herbert.

Some suppose this Edifice to have been a Temple; others, a part of the Royal
Court, or a Burying-place for the Kings: but Della Valle inclines to the first
of these Opinions. This Ruin is, in truth, all that is left or the ancient
City Persepolis, being burnt by Alexander the Great, to satisfy the Humor of
his Concubine Thais.

At the Foot of the Mountains, a League Northward from Hhehel-manor, are
several old Images by the Inhabitants called Nocsci Rostam, that is, The
Figures of Rostam, who was an ancient Persian Hero, for his notable Exploits
and great Achievements, very famous in their Histories, as Hercules among the
Greeks and Romans, and said to have lived in the Reign of Cyrus and Cambyses.

Near these are also carved on a large and smooth Rock several other Statues or
Images; one whereof sitting on Horseback, is clad in a long Garment, with a
Cap or Bonnet on his Head: In his left Hand he holds a Club, as Hercules is
usually represented, and in his Right Hand a Ring, which another Horseman that
is placed near him also holds, both seeming to pull as if they would break it
in sunder. This second Horseman is clothed almost after the same manner with
the first, but is bare-headed, and has very long Hair. There is also in
another place a third Horseman, accoutred after the same manner, laying his
left Hand on the Hilt of his Sword, his right Hand grasping the Sword of a
Footman that stands before him, threatening as it were another Footman, who is
bare-headed, and kneeling on one Knee before the Horseman.

Not far from hence are seen the Representations of several Women, of which the
Inhabitants relate many Fables, but especially of one, who they say was the
Mistress of their Renowned Rostam.

On another side of this Rock, which is very steep like a Wall, are many Holes
like Windows, a great distance from the Ground, and some bigger than others;
yet the least are so large, that a Man may easily lie at length in them: and
therefore it is very probable that these Holes served for Places of Interment
for the Dead; for Diodorus Siculus affirms, That the ancient Kings of Persia
were buried in the Country about Persepolis, in Holes cut in high Rocks, into
which they were lifted with Engines made for that purpose.

On another adjacent Mountain there is, as Della Valle relates, the Image of a
Man called Gemschid, (or as others, Choscid, which signifies The Sun) who is
said to have Reigned a considerabe time in Persia before Cyrus the Great, and
still lives in their Memory, for his great Knowledge in Necromancy. Some take
this Gemscid to be Nebuchodonosor.

About the City Schiras lie many Hamlets and Villages, as also several
Lordships, called in the Persian Tongue Mulk, that is, Possessions, which are
under one peculiar Family; for the Possessors thereof hold them not of the
King, neither can he take them away.

On the North side of the City, as you go to Ispahan, lies a Mountain over
which you travel along a Stony Road, through which runs a Stream which waters
all the adjacent Gardens and Orchards.

Three Leagues to the Northward of Schiras stood a large Caravansera, which
though half ruined, yet by its great Walls and Arches sufficiently testifies
its former Magnitude.

This Province contains four great Cities besides Schiras, viz. Casirum,
Bunitzan, Firusabath, and Astar; as also the Towns Arboy, Chiminar, Sava, the
Metropolis of Savas, formerly the Country of the Massabates: It comprises
likewise Firusbate, Berdezzil, Senorgande, Cazaran, by Texeira called Carriu,
and by Ananie, Casrum; also Camara, Zemilen, Bendarepe, Serustan, Agiane, etc.
Texeira also places in this Province these Towns and Villages, viz. Tarum,
Iaharom or Jarum, Lasta or Lastan, Stahabanon, Neriz, Pacah, Daragued, and
Duzgun, near Lastan, between Comoron and the City Lara, eighteen Leagues from
Ormus. There are also the Cities of Rey and Gibal.

The first City of this Province, according to Figueroa, is Guin, as also
Benaru, with the Ruins of the Castle Gabriel, in the utmost Confines of the
Kingdom of Lara; though both Places lie very near one another, in a great
Plain. The City Guin is separated from the rest of Persia by high Mountains,
over which you must travel to go to Jarum, and thence with the Caravans through
the Desert.

It is apparent that this City has been built many Years, and Peopled by a
Colony of Persians, because the Inhabitants are of a better Spirit, and more
Morallised than the neighboring wild Arabians: Their Complexion also is
whiter, and the Habit of the Women neater and more Civil. On the left Hand
going from Guin lies a Village called Denia, full of fair Houses.

About two days Journey from Guin lies the little City Horum, so called from
its Beauty and great plenty of Dates; as also another of the same denomination,
between Cabrestan and Lara.

Between Guin and Horum you meet with a barren and uninhabited Desert, of three
days Journey, not having in all that way above two Pits of Water.

The Village Tarum, which is the Chief of many Villages, was much decayed Anno
1630. The Inhabitants thereof are subject to the Prince of Lar. It has under
its Jurisdiction the Village Seid Geuder, beyond which is a large Plain, and at
a small distance runs the Brook Absciur, which signifies Salt Water. A little
further is a Village called Pelengon, that is, A Panther; so named from the
great number of that sort of Beasts breeding thereabouts.

Two Leagues from Pelengon you come to a narrow way between the Mountains, in
the Persian Tongue called Der Tenghi Cebar Rud, that is, The narrow Gate of
four Streams; because in Rainy Weather four great Currents, which come from
several Places, unite their Waters there.

After three or four Leagues traveling through a pleasant Way, you come to a
Place called Curihazirgon, that is, The Merchants Grave; perhaps so called
because a Merchant died and was buried there. Four Leagues further lies a
solitary and ruined Place, named Ser Zehi Rizevon, about which stands only a
few Huts, shaded on one side by a Grove of Date-trees: And four Leagues further
is Tastek, inhabited by none but the Rabdary or Watchmen to guard the Way.

Two Leagues from Tastek, along an even Way between the Mountains, lies a Place
called Abi Dungher, the utmost extent of the Dukedom of Lar, and the beginning
of the Country which belonged to the King of Ormus, when he was absolute Master
of Persia and Arabia.

The Road from Schiras to Ispahan.
Traveling from Schiras to Hispahan, you pass by these Places: viz. First, the
Village Zargan, in which is a handsome and well built Mosque. Four Leagues
further you come to Mahin, which being an open Town, contains between five and
six hundred Houses; but is so enclosed with Gardens and Orchards of all sorts
of Fruit Trees, that it rather seems at a distance a shady Grove than a Town.

A little forward from Mahin you come to another Village called Amanzada,
consisting only of a few Houses, all enclosed within a Walled Caravansera, in
which stands also a rich Pagode, out of whose Revenue all Travelers that rest
there are maintained for three days.

The whole way from Mahin to this Caravansera is very craggy, and troublesome to
travel, and is bordered on the left Hand by a high Mountain, whose top lies
crowned with Snow till the middle of Summer.

Three Leagues from Amanzada lies Ugion, a Village on a Plain; and between
both, a very steep Mountain, whose Southern side is full of Lentisk Trees, out
of which drops Mastick.

In this Place stands a Mosque to which the Natives show great Reverence, by
reason of a Tomb in which lies Interred one of Aly's Successors; and the
Villagers report, that many sick, blind, and decrepit People have received
Health, and been restored to their Sight and Limbs, by imploring the aid of the
forementioned Person, whom they account a Saint. The Plain on which this
Village is situate is watered by a small River, whose Stream, though muddy, is
yet very full of Fish.

Four Leagues from Ugion is Acopas, a small Village, enclosed with a Mud-wall,
and surrounded with high Mountains. In the middle of the Village, on a Mount,
stands a small decayed Fort, round about which, and within the Walls, are above
a hundred Houses, most of them Inhabited by Circassians. Hard by stands a large
Caravansera; and not far from it a Garden, planted with diverse sorts of
Fruit Trees, and curious Walks of Cypress and Palm Trees, which one Alavardy
Chan planted a little before his death.

Four or five Leagues from Acopas lies Curcuzar, a small Fortified Town, with a
Caravansera adjoining. All the way between Acopas and Curcuzar is low and
Morassie; the Air also is unwholesom: Wherefore the Persians have not without
great reason called this Place Curcuzar, which signifies Infectious Air.

Beyond this is the Village Dergriger, three Leagues from which stands a
Caravansera, and another pretty Town; next to which follows Comixan, containing
about fifteen hundred Families.

A little beyond Comixan lies the Dorp Mahiar: And lastly, between that and
Hispahan, about a League from the latter, is a Village named Jarustan.

The Province of Persia is watered by a large River, called Cur, which is a
corrupt Name of Cyrus. Philip of Ferara in his Geography, Olearius, and others,
will have this to be the same River which the Latins called Begradas: But Della
Valle contradicts this Opinion, affirming, That Bendemir is the Name of a
Bridge which lies cross the River, near the way coming from Ispahan to Schiras;
but its right name is Curis, as is before mentioned; for Bend-Emir signifies
The Bridge of Emir, because the Persians call a Bridge Bend, and Emir was the
Name of the Builder.

The ancient Writers make mention of two Rivers in Asia which bear the Name of
Cyrus; the one whereof having washed Armenia and Albania, discharges its Water
into the Caspian Sea, and, as Olearius says, is at this day called Cur or Aras.

The other, which we now speak of, glides from the North to the South through
Persia, by the Walls of the City Schiras, and falls into the Persian Gulf.
From the Banks of this River the famous Cyrus was thrown in his Infancy, and
gave his Name to the Place, and not to that where he was born, which was called
Agradat.

Most of the Persian Geographers, as Olearius, Garcias de Sylva, Figueroa, and
others, judge the River Cur, or Bendemir, to be the same; with Araxes.

This Araxes is the biggest of all those Rivers which water the Provinces of
Persia and Lara; notwithstanding which, it is not very broad, but runs in a
narrow Channel, in many Meanders, between high Mountains, being well
replenished with all sorts of Fish.

This River takes its Original out of the Mountain Jessel, lying between the
famous Cities Suster and Margascan, formerly called Susa and Persepolis; and
first directingits Course Southward, bends afterward to the East, separating
the ancient Province of Susiana from the Western part of Carmania, and so
enters into the Kingdom of Persia; and after having received the Waters of many
little Rivolets, and divided the Province of Kerman and the ancient Caramie
Foelix, finding its Current to the Sea stopped by the exceeding high Mountains,
it returns with great force to the North-East, being grown bigger than before,
and much deeper, by the Waters which fall from the forementioned Mountains;
thence it again runs Southward, visiting the ancient Gedrosie, and at last
falls into the Indian Sea, making a spacious Bay.

Near the Ruins of Cehil Minar, and the ancient Persepolis, glides the River
Pelevar, which takes its Course toward the South, and falls into the Cur,
after having first watered one of the fruitfulest Parts of Persia.

Persia is very Mountainous in several Places; but they are not altogether
sterill: for the Mountains of Neriz have many Iron Mines; and some relate that
many Smaragds are found in this Province. About ten or twelve Leagues from
Schiras are several high Hills, full of Palm and Lentisk-Trees, where breed
many Wild Hogs.

The Inhabitants of Schiras, which is common to all the other Provinces of this
Kingdom, are very white, the Women generally beautiful, and the Men
well-proportion'd.

There is also a great Trade driven in Schiras, occasioned by the Caravans,
which coming from Samarcand and Zagatay, pass through this Place with great
Quantities of Silk, Musk, Rhubarb, and Turcoises; all which those of Chorazzan
receive from the Merchants which come from Catay, or the Northern China. And by
this means Schiras furnishes other Countries with Provisions, as Wool, Copper,
and many other things; besides Distilled Rose Water; for they make another sort
than we in Europe, by decocting the Roses. They also get abundance of Silk from
the Silkworms they breed here; and have likewise Rubies, Balayses (which come
from the City Balasan,) and great store of Lazuus Stones, and Tutty.

Persia or Fars is not very cold, though its Situation be more Northerly than
the other Provinces; for in December all the Gardens about Schiras are green,
and the Trees retain their Leaves; because the Ground being moistened by so
many Rivers, is not only preserved from all extraordinary Scorchings, but so
cooled, and the Fruit becomes ripe so late, that it may be preserved all the
Winter, and kept very good till March.

The Country about Schiras, and the Plains between the Mountains and the River
Pasa, is naturally dry and barren.

The Country about Rexel, near the Seacoast, yields very excellent Wheat, and
also good store of Fruit: That Tract of Land which extends Southerly produces
abundance of Dates; as also the Ground about the City Com: but no Vines. The
Country of Tarom, with the other neighboring Places, are all planted with
Date-trees, under whose the Inhabitants sow Cotton. There is also abundance of
Sweet-briar, out of whose Flowers the Inhabitants distill a sort of Water which
they call Gulaep, that is, Rose Water.

Out of the gaping Ciefts of a high Mountain in the Country Stahanon, distills a
Liquor or Juice which the King of Persia causes to be gathered by Persons sworn
for that purpose, which yearly take up thirty Meticals, or about forty or fifty
Ounces of the said Distillation, which by the Persians is called Monmaky Cony,
that is, Precious Water; and is kept only for the King's Use: it being, as
they affirm, an excellent Antidote against all Poison, and an infallible Remedy
against inward Bruises, as also outwardly applied for Sinew-strains,
Contusions, and the like. The King many times bestows some of it upon those
Princes that are in League with him, as an extraordinary Mark of his Favor. In
stead of this, the Turks use Terra Sigillata; the Mahumetans of the Eastern
Countries, Pazar Cony, which is a kind of Jews-Gum, gathered at Maxulpata, or
Musulipatan, in India; but is not of that Virtue and Power as this of India.

About Schiras the Persians find a sort of bitter Root, by the Apothecaries
called Cost, from the example of the Arabians and Persians, though they
generally add the Word Talk to the same, viz. Cost-Talk, that is, Bitter Cost,
to distinguish it from the common Indian Cost, which they call Cost Xerir, that
is, Sweet Cost.

The Bitter Cost has a Root very hard and firm, of a yellow Color, somewhat
inclining to white, if it be fresh and good; but if it be dug out of season,
or carelessly dried, it becomes blue or brown: The Shell or Rind is streaked,
and the Pulp white, and bitterish: The old Roots are very unsavory and
ill-tasted. It is brought into Europe either in round Pieces, or else in long
Slices.

The Country about Lastan produces abundance of Ingo, by the Apothecaries
called Assa foetida.

In Fars and Persia, especially about Schiras, they have very excellent Wine,
the best in all Persia, which they call Xarao or Charab; and it is sent to all
Parts of the Country, especially to the Court; for the King and his Nobles
drink no other: and if any Person of Quality entertains another, he always
treats him with this Wine.

This Province also produces Bezoar-stones, which the Persians properly call
Pazahar, which is a Compound Word of Pa and Zahar, the first signifying
Against, and the other Poison: They are chiefly found in a County called
Stabanon, three days Journey from Lara; where also grows in the Fields a Plant
like Saffron, which the Goats eating, causes the forementioned Stones to grow
in their Stomachs, and are esteemed above all other Gems by the King of Persia:
Nay, the Fields wherein the said Goats graze are constantly guarded, and the
collecting of the Stones looked after by Officers appointed particularly for
that purpose.

There is also a Stone by the Physicians called Lapis Judaicus, that is, The
Jews Stone; and by the Persians and Arabians, Ager Alyud, that is, The Stone of
Judas. There is likewise the Armenian Stone, otherwise called Lapis Lazuli, and
in the Persian Tongue named Ager Armeni, that is, The Armenian Stone.

Amongst many other Beasts which breed in Persia, there is one peculiar to this
Province, which the Persians call Castar, and the Spaniards, Adives; and is
perhaps the Hyena of the Ancients. They breed for the most part in the Hedges
about Schiras, and are, as Garcias de Sylva affirms, a kind of Dogs bred first
in Barbary. They come in great companies out of the Hedges in the Night, to
seek for Prey, making a hideous howling. They are naturally so subtle, that if
they were not so very greedy, they could not be taken. They tear up the Graves
in the Fields, and devour the Dead Bodies; and often, when hungry, they venture
into Houses, where if they find any thing, they call their Companions, by
making a great noise; whereof the Inhabitants taking notice, surround and catch
them.

This Province of Persia comprehends the ancient Kingdom or Dukedom of Lar, or
Lara, with a Metropolis of the same; denomination; from whence the Laryns (a
Coin so current in all the Eastern Countries) had their name, as we observed
before.

The Province of Lara is by Figueroa accounted part of the old Carmanie, as
Oessa (commonly called the Kingdom of Monbareca) the other part; besides the
Countries of Mogosthan. This ancient Dukedom was formerly possessed by a
peculiar Prince, who Governed with an Arbitrary Power, and not subject to the
Crown of Persia. The last Prince, according to Gaspar Bernardino, was called
Abrahi Mochom; but by Della Valle, Ibrahim Chan; by Figueroa, Hambrain Chan;
and by our Mr. Herbert, Erahim Cawn; an Atheistical and bloodyminded Person.
But Alvaredy Chan, Sultan of Schiras, invading him, Anno 1602. by the Command
of Schach Abbas, stormed the City of Lar, and killed the King, besides all the
Nobility and Gentry, to the number of five thousand; causing also the Castles
to be pulled down, and the Walls thrown to the Ground, leaving nothing standing
that was of any Strength or Consequence. And in this manner the Kingdom of Lar
was joined to the Crown of Persia, and added to the Dominion of Schiras.

The City Lar at Lara is a very ancient City, and of great note amongst the
Arabians, being the Metropolis, as Figueroa supposes, of the old Carmanie. It
is situate in 27 Degrees and a half of Northern Latitude, at the end of a great
Plain, so enclosed with Mountains, that they leave only a little Opening or
Way, which leads to Schiras. When this City was first built, cannot certainly
be resolved: Some ascribe the Age thereof to that of our first Forefathers;
others say, it was founded not much above a thousand years ago.

The Walls of the Houses are made of Sundry'd Bricks and Clay, and plaster'd
over with a kind of Mortar made of chopped Straw and Earth, which the Persians
use in all their Buildings, especially in the Provinces of Lara, Querman, and
Persia. Most of them are but one Story high, having few Windows, and those very
small, and cover d with Lattices, or stopped with Mats.

In this City is an ancient Palace, formerly the Residence of the Prince, with
a large Court before it; which had stood empty a considerable time, when the
Chan of Schiras came to Lar to take possession thereof.

Here are likewise two other remarkable Places: The one, a Castle or Fort; the
other, the Bazar, or Exchange. The first, being almost half a League in
circumference, is built of Freestone, on the West side of the City, on a
little Hill, and fortified with thirty eight strong Bulwarks, which defend the
City from any outward Attempts, and also Commands it.

Figueroa affirms, That the Castle covers the whole top of the Mountain, which
is Oval, and fortified with a Stone Wall, and a Breast-work, with diverse
Loop-holes for small Shot. It is very large in circumference, and has a Well
with excellent Water, above two hundred Fathom deep; for it reaches quite down
to the City: yet is the Water nevertheless very easily drawn up, with a Wheel
turned by an Ox.

The other Place of note in this City, is the Bazar; that is, A Street full or
Shops, like the Exchange. This Bazar was the Work of Alvaredy Chan, the
beforementioned Sultan of Schiras; and is without doubt one of the fairest and
best in all Asia. It consists of an exact Square, enclosed within high Walls of
white Stone, each Square being 150 Paces, and in every one a large Gate,
through which you enter into a fair Walk, that opens into four Rows of Shops,
each twenty Foot broad, making a Cross-way; in the middle whereof is a very
high Turret, full of large Windows, built on four Arches of Stone, which taking
their beginning from thence, cover the four Walks: The Materials so neatly
painted and polished, that they outvie Marble: The Ground is also very
curiously paved. In four other Squares, but much less than the former, are four
other small Cross-ways, which have also a Turret in the middle of each; from
whence, as from the great one, run four other lesser Arched Walks of fifteen or
sixteen Foot broad. Almost in the middle, under the great Turret or Arch, is a
Spring of Fresh Water, which is brought thither in Pipes from Places far
distant, and conveyed from thence to all Parts of the City.

In the Bazar are sold all manner of Merchandises, as well in the Shops by the
Inhabitants, as by Foreign Merchants, who stay here all day to vend their
Goods, and return to their Lodgings in the Evening, when the Bazar is locked
up, and guarded by a Company of Soldiers appointed for that purpose. In some of
these Shops are sold both Green, Dried, and Preserved Fruit; as also Inland
Bread, called Hapas or Curichas: But the Country People which bring their
Commodities to sell, have no peculiar Shops, but lay their Merchandise on
Stalls before the Shops, leaving a sufficient space between, for the People to
pass.

Near the Bazar is the Mint, where they Coin the Laryns beforementioned.

There are few Mosques here; but amongst those which are, there is one built
round, to represent Eternity, after the same manner with the Alcaba or Holy
Mosque at Mecha, which Schach Abraham is said to have brought from Heaven. On
some Places thereof are Arabian Letters, Ciphers, and short Sentences graven,
after the Mosaic manner. It is a low Structure, having in stead of Windows
only Carved Ballisters. The Entrance into the same is through a Copper Gate,
near which hangs a great Looking-glass. There are also many Lamps, some of
which are kept continually burning, and others hang only for Ornament. Some of
the Persian Prophets lie here interred; and amongst others, one called Emir
Ally Zedday Amir, who, if what they affirm upon Oath may be credited, has been
there above 1500 Years, viz. 600 Years before Mahomet; yet nevertheless, they
stick not to affirm, that he was a good Muselman or Mahumetan.

At Lar is the usual meeting place of the Caravans or Cafilas which travel from
Persia, Querman, and other Places, to the Isle of Ormus; and come from thence,
and Arabia, to these Provinces: Wherefore this City is much frequented by
Merchants, as well Persians and Arabians, as Benjans and Jews; and to that
purpose are built many Caravanseras, for the accommodation of strange Merchants
that come thither with their Commodities.

This City has been much ruined by Earthquakes, one of which, in Anno 1400.
threw down above a hundred Houses; and another, Anno 1593. above three hundred,
or, as Texeira affirms, five hundred; at which time also many Water-Cesterns,
and the greatest part of the City Walls were spoiled. The ancient Castle
formerly built by a Georgian called Melek, on a Stone Rock on the East side of
the City, was also cast down.

A League from Lar is a Caravansera called Charcaph.

The last Place in this Dukedom of Lar, at the entrance of the Country which
belonged to the King of Ormus, when he was absolute Master of his whole Kingdom
on the Main Continent of Persia and Arabia, is Abi Dunger.

Concerning the Climate, we cannot say there is any great Cold at Lar, the Air
being so temperate, that in March you can scarce get into the City, for the
abundance of Flies and Gnats, which in great Swarms fill the Air. But in June
there blows such a hot and dry Wind, that on all Places over which it passes,
it leaves Impressions as of Fire; and withal scorches the Faces, Hands, and
Legs of Strangers, to their great trouble and pain; called therefore by the
Persians Bad Semum, that is, An infectious and burning Wind.

The whole Country of Lar is very destitute of Water; for there are neither
Brooks, Springs, nor Wells; only in several Places on the Road are placed
Troughs, which catch the Rainwater, which serves for the accommodation and
refreshment of Travelers. Mr. Herbert says, this Water is very unwholesom, and
occasions many Distempers, as well in the Inhabitants as Strangers; viz.
Rheums, Sore Throats, and Worms in the Legs, which causes Itching and Lameness,
and is not to be cured without taking out the Worm; and this must also be done
with great care; for if the Worm chance to break, it causes Putrefaction and
Numbness in the Part affected, which is only to be remedied by continual
cutting and slashing of the Flesh.

There is nothing worthy of praise in all the Country about Lar, but the
Charitable Inclinations of diverse of the Inhabitants, who, besides the Cesterns
which the ancient Kings of Lara and their Governors made, for the Public good
and Refreshment of the Inhabitants and Travelers which come daily hither, in
their last Wills appoint certain Persons to build with their Estates Cesterns,
Caravanseras, and Almshouses; some great, and others little, according to
their Capacities, and Zeal in their Religion: and by this means there are so
many Cesterns, that the adjacent Plain is full of them; and the Water therein
is very clear and cool in Summer, notwithstanding the great Heat.

About Lar and the Parts adjacent are several sorts of Fruit Trees, as Oranges,
Lemmons, and the best Dates in all Persia. Most of the Inhabitants live on
Dates, partly by making them their Food, and partly by selling and bartering
them for other Necessaries.

Between Lar and Gamron grows abundance of Assa Foetida, by the Maleyans and
Javanners called Hin.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were Arabians, of which there are yet
many living.

view of Schamachie SCHAMACHIE


Schirwan, or Scerwan, in ancient Times called Media Atropatia, or Little Media.
The modern Names of Media Atropatia.
THis Province, anciently a Kingdom, is at this day in the Country Language
called Schirwan and Xirwan, or Xyruan, and generally by the Europeans, Serwan.

Magin supposes Xyruan to comprehend all Media, though it be only a part, as
Minadoi* Leunclavius, Olearius, and others have observed, who take it only for
old Media, or Atropatia. Our Mr. Jenkinson will have the same; to be Hircania.
But Schirwan is rather the Northern Media, as appears by the nature of the
Soil; for (accordtng to Herodotus and Strabo) that part of Media is
mountainous, as the Country now called Schirwan is found to be.

The Bounds.
This Province conterminates in the East, with the Caspian Sea; on the West,
with Georgia; on the North, with Albany, and somewhat higher with the wandering
Tartars, which inhabit between Mount Caucasus and the River Volga; and in the
South it juts out against Great Armenia, where the River Canack running
betwixt, serves for a Boundary, and thence passes on till at last it comes to
limit Great Media. Its whole length is accounted about a hundred Miles.

The Metropolis of this Province of Schirwan is by diverse Writers differently
named; by Bizarro and Barbaro, Sumachia; by others, Samachia; and by the
Spaniards, Namachi; but the common Name is Schamachie, of which Namet here is
but one City in Media or Persia; notwithstanding Ferrarius in his short
Geography makes mention of two, one anciently called Ciropolis, and the other
Samunis. It lies in 84 Degrees and 30 Minutes Longitude, and 40 Degrees and 50
Minutes Latitude, about six days Journey from the City Derbend, or Demircapi,
by reason of the turnings and by-ways which you must travel through the
Mountains; but it is not above two days Journey along the Caspian Sea, through
Bacuy and the Mountains of Lahats, and very passable either on Foot or on
Horseback. The Cammels commonly go the first Way, finishing the Journey
according as they are laden. It is situate in a Valley betwixt Mountains, which
prevent its being seen till you come just upon it. The Castle thereto belonging
stands on a Hill near the City Walls, which together with the City, was built
(as the Persians affirm) by King Schirwan Sehach.

The Description of the City Schamachie.
This City formerly was much bigger in circumference than at this day, having
been much ruined in King Abbas's time by the Turkish Wars: It was anciently
divided into two parts, each being severally enclosed with a Wall; but the
forementioned King seeing that the Turks aimed at nothing but strong and well
fortified Places, for the better maintaining of their Conquest, and never
meddled with open Villages; also observing that the Forts lying in the middle of
the Country and not on his Borders, did him more hurt than good, he caused the
Walls of the Southern part of the City to be pulled down, and likewise those
that enclosed the Cities Tauris or Tabris, Nachtzuan, and Kentze.

This South part of Schamachie lies like a peculiar Town, separated from the
Northern by a little Hill, which serves as a public Marketplace to both.

It is said, that when the Turk conquered this City, and went about afterward
to fortify it, he demolished the Persian Tombs, to repair the City Walls with
the Material thereof.

The North part of the City lies at the foot of another Hill, and being
somewhat less than the forementioned South part, is surrounded with a slight
Stone Wall, so ruined, that though the Gates, which are five in number,
belock'd, you may get into the City at any time of the Night over the Walls.

The Streets in both Towns are narrow, and the Houses, built of Stone or Earth,
are very low, after the Eastern manner.

The Caravansera's or Royal Inns.
Hard by the Marketplace stand two great Caravansera's, or Built at the Kings
Charge.
Royal Inns, provided with many Galleries and large Rooms, in which the
Merchants of other Countries dispose of their Commodities which they sell by
wholesale. The one called Schach Caravansera, is appointed for the Muscovites,
who lay up their Goods in the same. The other, named Losgi Caravansera, is
built for the Circassian Tartars, who also bring thither their Merchandise,
which for the most part consists in Horses, Women, young and full grown Maids,
and sometimes little Children, which they either buy, or take from the Russians
on their Borders, or else from one another. Moreover, the Jews have their
Residences in the Caravansera Losgi, bringing very fine Wool thither from
Tabessaran.

The Hamans or public Baths.
There are likewise three public Hamans, or Baths, in the City, which are very
much frequented by the Persians; two of them stand open in the daytime for the
Men, and in the Night for the Women. The third, called Hammam Schech, being
only for Men, near which stand two large Trees, which are held in great
veneration by the Persians, as having been planted there by one of their
Saints, called Schich Murith, who not far from thence lies buried in a Metzit,
or Temple, to which the People flock more than to any other in the City, which
contains in all six Metzits, or Temples. The Revenues which the Baths produce
yearly, are bestowed on those things which go to the setting forth of their
Funerals, and what happens to be over and above, is distributed amongst the
Poor.

The Bazar or Marketplace.
On the South side of the City is a Bazar, or Marketplace, with several little
Streets, or rows of Shops, furnished with all sorts of Cotton, Stuffs, Silk,
Cloth-of-Silver, Bows, Arrows, Simiters, and other Manufactures, which are all
to be bought at easy Rates.

The Inhabitants are generally Persians, Armenians, and Georgians, speaking
each their peculiar Languages besides the vulgar Tongue of Scervan, which is
the Turkish.

There is nothing remarkable, or of Antiquity in this City, excepting the great
Tower, which Mr. Cartwright affirms to be built of Freestone and Flint,
intermixed with the Sculls of their ancient Noblemen, who being overcome and
taken Prisoners in a War against the King of Persia, were put to death, and had
their Heads so fixed for a signal Mark of terror, to prevent future
Insurrections: But this Assertion is by some denied, and judged to have been
grounded upon the appearance only of Heads carved there in Stone.

Half a League Northward from the City, on a pretty high Hill called
Caleculistan, appear the Ruins of a decayed Fort, where there is a large Cave,
Vaulted with Freestone, and near it a deep Well.

Culistan, whence denominated.
The Persians have a Tradition, that Schirvan, an ancient King of this Province,
caused this Castle to be built in memory of Culistan, one of his Concubines,
from whom it also took Denomination. They add moreover, that it was taken by
Alexander the Great, and afterward by him demolished. But it is more probable,
that it received the Name of Culistan from an adjacent Valley, made very
fruitful by a Brook, and exceeding pleasant in the Spring, from the variety of
Tulips, and other diverse colored Flowers, Culistan signifying a Valley of
Roses, Tulips, or whatever sort of curious Flowers, and Cale a Castle, or Fort.

Not far from Cale-Culistan toward the side of Schamachie, stand two Chapels
on another high Hill: In the first and chiefest, which is built in form of an
oblong Square, appears a high Sepulcher Railed about, each Bar armed at the top
with an Iron Spike, and adorned with Tassels, or small Pennons of diverse
colored Cloth. In the other Chapel are other Tombs, bedecked after the same
manner, being the Sepulchers of their Saints, to whom the Persians often kneel,
and pay their usual Devotions. This last Chapel leads to a deep Vault, Amaleck
Canna' s Tomb.
in which (they say) Amaleck Canna, one of their King's Daughters lies buried,
who being forced by her Father, contrary to her Inclination, to Marry a Tartar
Prince, slew her self; and some have reported, that all Virgins thereabouts
come yearly to the forementioned Burying-place of Amaleck Canna, to Mourn there
over her Tomb. It Is true indeed, the Inhabitants of Schamachie, and those also
of the neighboring Villages, in some Weeks in the Summer, do repair to the
forementioned Mountain, not for Amaleck Canna's sake, as some imagine, but
rather for the coolness of the Air which at that Season they find upon the tops
of those Hills, when at the same; time it is intolerabe hot below: Some
Artificers, and those of the meaner sort that use Manufacture, go thither in
the Morning, and having tarried there all day at their Work, return to their
Houses in the Evening; but the Nobility commonly take up their Residences there
for three Months together, during which time the Heat continues. The Cattle at
that time also are driven to Mount Elburs, where there is not only a temperate
Air, but also good Pasturage.

The Elburs is part of Mount Caucasus, bordering on the side of Tabesseran and
Georgia, and may plainly be seen from Culistan and other Mountains.

The Worshippers of Orimasda fled to India.
It is said, that in ancient times the Persians preserved and worshipped their
Orimasda, or everburning Fire, on this Elburs; but at this day neither the Fire
nor the Worshippers thereof, are (according to Texeira and others) to be found
in all Persia nor Jesche; but some relate that they are fled from thence to
India, where they affirm is at this day a sort of Fire-Worshippers.

At Schamachie is yet to be seen a Cross of hard black Wood, which some believe
was a piece of Noah's Ark.

The Village Mordow.
To this City belongs a Village called Mordow, which in the Turkish Language
signifies Morass, because the Country about it is Fenny, and all drowned with
abundance of Water, which descending with the concourse of many Brooks and
Rivulets, falls with such violence, that the disturbed Waters never freeze in
the hardest Winter.

The Rusticks live here like the Tartars in Astracan, in little Houses like
Huts.

In the forementioned Village, and in others thereabouts, dwell a People called
Pedar, which speak a peculiar Dialect, though not much differing from the Turks
and Persians, and are of their Religion, with some different Persuasions: for
they account it a great Crime to eat their Meat hot, holding it as an
Abomination that any should breathe upon it, which if any one chance to do,
they will not touch it, but judge the same to be defiled by their profane
Breath.

Three Leagues from Mordow lies the Village Tachousie; and three Leagues from
Schamachie lies Pyrmaraas, in which is the Tomb of an eminent Saint, or Holy
Man of Persia, called Heid Ibrahim, Heid Ibrahims Tomb.
held in great veneration amongst the Persians, as a very ancient Monument, and
left undemolish'd by Tamerlane, who destroyed all things else hereabouts: It
is, Chappel-like, enclosed with a Stone Wall, having before the access to it,
two fair Courts; in the first whereof appear many Tomb-stones, whereon are
Engraven in Arabic several Inscriptions; under it are also diverse Vaults,
which receive a glittering Light through little low Windows: In one of the
deepest Vaults stands a high Stone Altar with two Steps; on the one side a Door
leads into a Penetrale, or Withdrawing-Room, the Floor whereof is covered with
rich Tapestry; at the upper end hangs a Table of Stone, with this Inscription
in Arabic, To God I commit my Actions, he is my Helper. On the right hand is
another Vault, which contains eight Chapels, or sepulchral Monuments; and from
that you enter into a third, wherein stands the Tomb of the Prophet himself;
round about which are placed great Candlesticks with Wax Tapers, which are kept
continually burning; and from the Roof hang also Lamps. So choice are the
Persians of this Tomb, that they do not willingly admit any Strangers to see it.

Near the Village Pyrmaraas stands another celebrated Monument in a Rocky
Mountain, Tirihabba's Tomb.
in which lies buried a Saint called Tirihabba, the Master or Instructor of
Heid Ibrahim; over the Door of it stands written, O God, open this Door. This
Tirihabba (as the Persians say) was always on his Knees incessantly praying,
clad in a gray Coat, upon which his Disciple Heid Ibrahim obtained from God,
that his Tutor after his Decease, as well as in his Lifetime, might be found
in a zealous and praying Posture; whereupon it is reported, that after his
Death he continued in that Posture, as if he had been living; with other such
like Stories, not over easily to be credited. Round about Tirihabba's Tomb are
diverse Caves cut in the same; Rock, furnished with Beds, where the Pilgrims
Lodge when they come to make their Offerings.

Some Rocks hereabouts are stuck full of view of Derbent DERBENDT.
Mussle-shells, so that they seem composed of Clay and Shells petrifi'd and
incorporated together. The like are to be seen near the Caspian Sea.

By the said Village, next to Ibrahim's Tomb; is a Cavern seventy two Foot
long, and twenty broad, Vaulted with square Stones, in which the Inhabitants
preserve Snow, Ice, and Water, in the Winter against the Summer, for themselves
and their Cattle, because there is little good Water else thereabouts.

Pyr Mardechan 's Tomb.
Two Leagues and a half from Schamachie, toward Ardebil, stands the Tomb of a
Saint called Pyr Mardechan, whose Memory is also in great Adoration amongst the
Persians.

The City Eres.
On the Borders of Armenia lies the City Eres, or Aras, near the River Aras
(whence it takes Denomination) at this day called Arisbar, once the first City
of Serwan on that side of the Country, but much ruined, and in a manner quite
desolate.

On the Borders of Servan, toward Georgia, stands the City Sequi; and on the
Confines of Media, the City Giavat.

The Situation of the City Derbend.
The City Derbend, by the Turks called Demircapi, or rather Temircapi, that is
Iron Gate, lies West of the Caspian Sea, in 85 Degrees Longitude, and 41
Degrees and 30 Minutes Northern Latitude, according to Olearius's observation:
It extends in length from East to West, half a League; and has in breadth from
North to South, and from one Gate to the other, only four hundred and fifty
Paces: The Waves of the Caspian Sea, upon which it stands, beating against the
Walls, blocks up the Passage on that side, which, together with the
inaccessible Mountains on the other side, gives it the forementioned Name of
Temircapi, or Iron Gate to the Kingdom of Persia, it reaches on one end to the
foot of the Mountains, on the other to the Sea.

Not only several Writers, but also the Inhabitants to this day affirm, that
this City was built by Alexander the Great, (whom they called Iscander) as a
Retreat or place of repose for his Army, and from his own Name called
Alexandria, whereas in truth he only erected the Castle and Wall on the South
side; but that on the North side was built by Nawschirwan, an ancient King of
that Country: The Walls are high and broad, built of that sort of Stone before
mentioned, which seems commix'd with broken Mussleshells: Over one of the Gates
of the Wall which was built by Alexander, are certain Lines written in Syriack
Characters, and in another place Arabic, with some strange Hieroglyphics,
worn out by Time, and not legible.

Dee Description of the City.
This City is divided into three parts, the uppermost stands upon an acclivity
of the Mountain, being the Residence of the Governor, fortified with Guns, and
Garrisoned with five hundred Soldiers of two several Nations, viz. Ajurumlu and
Coidurscha. The middle part inhabited by Persians, has been several times
ruined; once by their own King Emir Emse, Chodabende's Son, when he re-took the
City from the Turkish Emperor Mustafa, to whom the Townsmen had freely
surrendered it. The lower part, being not five hundred Paces long, has at this
day very few Houses left standing, being now nothing but a parcel of Gardens,
Orchards, and Plough'd-Lands. It is said, that this part was formerly inhabited
by the Greeks, wherefore it is to this day by the Persians called Schaher Junan
probably from Jones.
Junan, that is, The Greeks City: Both the Walls are founded on Rocks. The
Shore also about Derbend being all very Rocky, is altogether unfit for
Anchorage, and unsafe Harbor for Shipping.

On the Mountains, which are very woody, above the City, appear the Ruins of
a Wall, which (as they say) extended fifty Leagues along the Caspian Sea: it
appears by some parts of it yet remaining of six Foot high, to have been of
equal breadth with the present Walls of the City, which are so broad, that a
Coach may drive upon them. Moreover, on the upper side of the City stand
several Castles apart on several Hills, whereof two, the nearest to the Town,
being built square, are kept in indifferent good Repair, and well Garrisoned.
There are also diverse wooden Watch-houses, from whence they have a clear and
large Prospect, and can timely see the approach of any Enemy, there being
continual Watch kept in them.

Amongst other Remarks near the City, Tzumtzume's Tomb.
is the Tomb of Tzumtzume, of whom the Persians relate this following Story:

Eissi, a great Prophet amongst the Persians, passing by there on a certain
time, and finding a Man's Scull lying on the Ground, desirous to know whose
Scull it was, prayed to God to make it again a living Person; whereupon he
became immediately so inspired, that he breathed the Breath of Life into it;
and asking who he was? he replied, Tzumtzume, once a wealthy King of this
Country, who possessed a great City, abounding with all things; That he had
spent daily forty Cammels load of Salt, A certain number for an uncertain.
had forty thousand Head of Kine, forty thousand Stage Players, forty thousand
Servants, who wore Pearls in their Ears, and as many more inferior Servants.
Then said Tzumtzume to Eissi, Who are you? and what is your Religion? To which
the Prophet answered, I am Eissi, who teach the true Belief. Tzumtzume replied
hereupon, Then I will embrace your Belief. After which he begged of Eisi, that
he would permit him to die again; for he rather chose to die, than to be
deprived of that happy Life he formerly enjoyed: Whereupon his Request was
granted by Eissi, and Tzumzume suffered to return a lifeless Carcass to his
Grave.

Near the same; Tomb stands an old Tree, on a Bank raised in form of a Stage,
enclosed within a Wall four Yards high and seven in the square, to which rhere
is an Ascent by several Degrees or Steps.

One side of Derbend is noted for Tomb-stones and Monuments, amounting to
several thousands, most of them three Foot broad, and on the top of them
Arabic and Syriack Characters Engraven.

The Persians relate the following Story of the forementioned Tomb viz. That
not many Ages after after Mahomet, a King "called Cassan Reigned in Media, who
in a Battle against the Tagestan Tartars, whom the Persians call Lesgi, losing
many thousands of his Men, caused the chiefest of his Officers to be buried in
the forementioned place, with Tomb-stones and Inscriptions to perpetuate their
Memory.

There is yet another peculiar Coemeterie, or Burying-place, toward the Sea,
surrounded with a Wall, within which are to be seen four of the forementioned
kind of Tomb stones together, by the Persians called Tziltenan, and by the
Turks and Tartars, Kerchler. They say also, that forty Princes, all devout Men,
who died in the aforesaid Fight, lay buried there: Wherefore the Persians, both
Men and Women; come daily to kiss the Tomb-stones, and laying their Hands upon
them, Pray very devoutly.

In the City Derbend dwell no Christians, but only Mahumetans, and Jews of the
Tribe of Benjamin.

There is no considerable Trade driven here, except that the Tartars bring
their stolen Children, as also full grown Turks and Russians, to sell, which
afterward are sent farther into Persia.

The Tombs of Pyrhr Mucur, and Imam Churchud.
A quarter of a League from the City, where the Borders of Persia and Tagestan
are separated by a small Brook, are two Sepulchers of Mahumetan Prophets: The
first being that of Pyrhr Muchar, stands in a Plain; and the other of Imam
Curchud, in the Mountains, of whom the Tradition goes, that he was allied to
Mahomet, and that being always with him, he was instructed by him, and lived
three hundred years after him. Moreover, that going to the King of Cassan, he
so prevailed with him by playing on a Musical Instrument, and Singing, that he
drew him to side with the Lesgi, or Tagestan Tartars: But when he undertook to
Convert the Lesgi, who were Heathens, and began to Preach amongst them, they
conspired against him and murdered him: His Grave is in a great Cavity, cut in
a Rocky Mountain, the Coffin being only four Planks nailed together without
any Ornaments, and to be seen by all People, only with the leave of an old
Woman, who sits continually by to watch it. But when they come hither to make
Offerings, they cover the Floor with Straw Mats, and hang Tapestry before the
Cavity in which the Coffin stands. Women and Maids repair thither in great
numbers from the City, and other remote places, and go barefooted into the
Sepulcher, kiss the Chest, and kneel down to Pray by it; which done, they make
their Offerings to the old Woman, who is reverenced as a holy Person, and keeps
a Lamp burning all Night long in the Tomb. Their Offerings consist in Cheese,
Butter, Milk, Bread, Money, Wax, and the like.

The City Bachu.
Another City called Bachu, or as others write, Bacuse, lies also near the
Caspian Sea, and is a safe Harbor for Ships, insomuch that some Writers have
given this Sea the Name of Mare de Bacu, or, The Sea of Bacu.

The Mountain Barmach.
Three Leagues from the Village Tachousi lies the Mountain Barmach, which
appearing at a great distance is round, and has a very high steep Rock on the
top, which in the Turkish Language they call Barmach that is, A Finger, because
it reaches above other Mountains like a pointing Finger. From the Valley there
leads a Way up to the same, which is dangerous to be ascended by those that are
unacquainted with it.

On the top of this Mountain the Air is so cold, that the Grass and Herbs are
as it were candy'd or crisp'd over with Ice, when yet it is very pleasant and
warm Weather below: The broken Walls and other pieces of Ruin, sufficiently
testify, that it was anciently crowned with a strong Castle, and is said to
have been built by Alexander, and ruined by Tamerlane; for at the foot of the
high Rock is a Plain of fifty Rods square, about which are to be discerned the
Foundations of an ancient thick Wall with Bulwarks: In the middle thereof is a
deep Well walled about, and not far from thence two Tombs covered with great
round Stones. On the North side also, and at the going up to the Rock, stands a
great piece of a Wall, and heaps of Stone, which without doubt are the Ruins
of another Castle; from whence several Steps lead to the top of the Rock, where
there is another Arch, which serves for a third resting place. Near the old
Wall on the Stone Rocks, grow Fig Trees in several places.

The Trade of this Province
The Inhabitants of this Country drive a great Trade in Silk, especially in the
City Serwan, where it is sold in such abundance, that it is Transported from
thence through all Muscovy and the East Country. The City Eres also was
formerly famous for the abundance of white Silk, which the Merchants called
Mammodees; but through the long Wars, and destruction of Serwan, both Staples,
formerly so famous, are now failed.

The Military Strength.
The Military Strength of this Province of Schirwan herein chiefly appears, that
the City Schamachie alone is able in time of need to set forth eighteen
thousand Horse. The natural Fortifications are also no less considerable, the
chief whereof is that forementioned Pass called The Iron Gate, being one of the
strongest Bulwarks in the whole Province, securing the Way against the Albains,
Russians, Turks, and Tartars.

Change of Government.
The ancient Kings of this Province, with their several Dynasties and
Revolutions, are sufficiently known in History; but the last of the native
Median Kings was Aydar, who was slain by Farrock Yacar, whose Son Xa Ismael
Sophi reduced the Kingdom to a Province, since which time it has been Governed
by his Chans or Lieutenants.

There belong to the Province of Schirwan the Territory called Muscur extending
along the Caspian Sea from Derbend to Kilcan, comprising two hundred Villages.
But the chief Town in this Territory, which is Governed by the Sultan of
Derbend, and lying near the Sea, is called Schabran.

Description of the Country of Muscur.
This Country of Muscur is every where very pleasant to the Eye, affording a
green Prospect till November. The Soil is fertile, producing plenty of Barley,
Rice, and Wheat, besides all manner of excellent Fruit, and Trees of delightful
shade, and harbor to melodious Birds. The Cattle lie abroad in the Fields as
well in Winter as in Summer, so that they have little need of providing Hay,
more than what just serves for Travelers and Strangers. The Vines grow up and
down without Planting, and run upon the Elms, or such like Trees, as in Italy.
There is likewise variety of wild Fowl here, especially Pheasants; also store
of Hares, and a sort of Foxes, called by the Inhabitants Schacal, having thick
Wool on their Backs, white Hair under their Bellies, black Ears, and a less
Tail than ordinary, which they call Tulki. In the Lakes and Pools about the
Village Mardow are abundance of wild Swans, which are commonly taken in the
Winter, much esteemed for the fineness of their Down. The Rusticks keep
Buffalo's, which are used in their Draughts; their Fodder is Schenbile, or
Grecian Hay, with which whole Fields are Sowed; it is Mowed when green, and
given Seed and all to the Buffalo's, which makes their Milk so rich, that it
yields Cream two Inches thick, of which is made excellent Butter. They never
make Cheese of Cows Milk, but all of Sheeps.

view of Isfahan ISFAHAN


The Province of Parthia or Erack.
The modern Names and Bounds of Parthia.
THe Province anciently named Parthia, is at this day called Arach, Harach, or
Erach, as also in the Country Language Erack, and by some Jex; but (according
to Texeira) its proper and true Name is Hyerack, or (as Olearius will have it)
Erack: But it is to be observed, that the Name Hyerack, or Erack, is given to
two distinct Provinces, one whereof lies in Arabia, or (as Olearius says) it
comprises Bagdat or Babylon, and was anciently Assyria, and is by some named
Eracain; the other lying in the middle of Persia, and is generally called Erack
Agemy, or Erack Atzem, whereas the first has the Denomination of Erack Araly.

This Province of Erack borders Eastward at Arie, and by a long Road at
Corazan; on the West it conterminates with Media; on the North, with Hircania;
and juts Southerly toward the Wilderness of Caramia.

The Metropolis of Erack is Ispahan; the other chief Towns are (according to
Olearius) Casuwin, or Casbin, Solthanie, Sencan, Caschan, Ebbeher, Saway, Rey,
Hemedan, Com, Scha-Herrisur, Dercasin, and Theheran.

The City Ispahan, by Josaphat Barbaro is called Spahan; by Contareno Spaa, or
Spaam; by Peter Bizarro, Aspacham. Spaha was by the ancient Greeks for its
largeness named Hecatompolis, that is, A hundred Cities: A little before
Tamerlanes time it was called Sipahan, partly from its populousness, and partly
because there the Armies had their Rendezvous; for Siphan is the same with the
ancient Persian word Sipa, which signifies an Army, wherefore they at this day
call the General of an Army, Sipesalar; but since Tamerlane's time it has had
the Denomination of Ispahan, by transposing the Letters, and placing the I
before the S. An Arabian Writer called Ahmedbin Arebscha, who writ the Life of
Tamerlane, calls this City Isbahan, and some modern Writers of the Persians,
Isfahan.

Situation and Bounds of the City Ispahan.
This City, lying in 32 Degrees and 26 Minutes, North Latitude, and 86 Degrees
and 40 Minutes Longitude, is situated upon a Plain, and half environed with
Mountains at three or four Leagues distance, viz. toward the South and
South-West, with the Mountains Demawend; and toward the North-East, those of
Jeilack Perjan: It is eight Leagues in circumference, with its Suburbs; but it
is fenced only with a a slight Wall of Earth, six Yards thick at the bottom,
and not above a Foot on the top, with several Stone Redoubts: The Moat about
the same is almost quite dry, insomuch that one may go over it dry-foot in
several places both in Winter and Summer. The Castle, which is also the
Treasury, is built pretty strong, and Plastered over with Lime. On the
South-West side of the Town runs an indifferent large Stream, called Senderuth,
which springing out of the Mountain Demawend, divides it self into two several
Branches, called Haws and Burke. Besides which, there are diverse Wells and
Springs up and down, so that the whole City is very well served with Water. Out
of the same River runs a third Branch just above the City, into a Park of Deer,
called Hazartzirib; and in another place it is conveyed in Pipes under Ground,
into the King's chief Garden, called Tzarbag, a little below which Allawerdich,
Chan of Schiras, built a fair Stone Bridge cross the Stream. Schach Abbas,
during his fourteen years Reign, made it his principal Business to lead another
Stream (which passes on the other side of the Mountain Demawend) through the
said Mountain, though in a manner all Rock, into the River Senderuth, employing
daily a thousand Men about it, allowing each man four Abas a day; but by reason
of the excessive Cold, and abundance of Snow which falls thereabouts, they were
never able to work above three Months in a year, which very much retarded the
Work; yet through the alacraty of the Nobles and Grandees in assisting the
King, it was brought to a great forwardness, and had been quickly finished, had
Schach Abbas lived, but after his Death his Successor never employed a Man
about it.

The Description of the City.
This City was also twice laid waste by Tamerlane, first when he conquered it,
and next when it rebelled against him: In Schach Ismael's time it began to
flourish a little, but when Scach Abbas, by reason of its pleasant Situation
removed his Royal Seat from Casvyn thither, he not only enlarged and
beautified the City with fair Buildings, but also made it very populous, by
reason of the great concourse of People that flockt thither from all parts,
insomuch that at this day the Inhabitants thereof are estimated to be above
five hundred thousand. Every House of the City (which much enlarges it) has
two fair Gardens, being generally much esteemed by the Persians, who though
they beautify them not so much with all manner of various colored Flowers, as
is usual in Europe, yet they Plant them very handsomely with diverse sorts of
Fruit Trees, Vines, and especially the Tzinar Tree; besides which, they adorn
them with pleasant Fountains, and conveying the Water from one Pipe to another,
cause them at their pleasure to overflow the whole Garden. Persons of Quality
have also commonly two or three Pleasure-houses in every Garden, which are
better furnished than their Dwelling-houses. Besides the Citizens ordinary
Habitations, there are several Palaces in the City, which are not so beautiful
without as within; they are for the most part built of Sun-dry'd Brick and
square Tile, and after the Persian manner, many two, some three, and others
four Stories high, each having a peculiar Name; the Cellar they call Sirsemin;
the lower Story, or Hall, Chane; the Rooms or Chambers above it, Cush; the
third Story, Tzaufe; the fourth, Casser; and the upper Chambers or Garrets,
being built like Galleries, winding about the top of the House, Eiwan, which by
reason of their coolness serve them for Sleeping-Rooms in Summer: the Windows,
which are almost as big as their Doors, and reach down quite to the Floor, have
no Glass, but are only Bars or Rails like Balconies, which in the Winter they
close up with Oiled Paper: Their Winter Rooms are commonly below, and have
Stoves in them: Most of the Houses have Courts, through which they go into
their several Apartments. It is said, that the Lanes and Streets were formerly
so broad, that above twenty Men could Ride abreast in them; but since Schach
Abbas built more Rows of Houses, most of them are become so narrow, that two
can scarce pass one by another, especially not far from the Maidan and Basar,
where there commonly walk many People, who are forced when Mules come laden,
which frequently happens, twenty or thirty one after another, to stand still
t^ll they are all passed by.

Description of the Maidan or Marketplace.
On the East side of the King's Palace is a Maidan or Marketplace, of seven
hundred Paces long, and two hundred and fifty broad; the like whereof is not in
any other City. On the West side, where the King's Court stands, are two Arches
built along the Maidan, one against another, under which Goldsmiths, Jewellers,
and other Handicrafts, drive a Trade in Eiwans, or open Shops; before which
stand Trees, by the Persians called Schin-schad, which with their large Boughs
shade the Shops; before the Trees are long Troughs or Gutters of Stone, by
which fresh Water is conveyed all about the Maidan. The East side, which is
opposite to it, has a broad Walk Arched and supported with Pillars; under
which also all manner of Artificers have their Working-places; for the Persians
seldom or never work in their Dwelling-houses. Against this Walk, near the
King's Court, is a Structure, which having two Entries, is called Nacarachane,
where the Kettle-Drums, Sackbuts, and Cornets, are played on every Evening at
Sunset, and whenever the King passes either in or out. This playing at
Sunset, used through all Persia in those places where Chams and great Lords
dwell, has been in use ever since Tamerlane was Lord of this Country.

Description of the King's Place,
The King's House or Court, which is near the Maidan, by the Persians called
Dowbet Chane, or Dor Chane Schach, has a high Wall about it, but is not
otherwise fortified against any Assault: Before the Palace Gate lie several
great pieces of Ordnance, which Nicholas Hemming, a Hollander, who traveled
through most parts of Persia, affirms to have been brought from Ormus, the
least carrying a Bullet of thirty six Pound weight, the biggest, of forty
eight: Over the Gate is a large Forum, or place of Judicature, where the
Diwanbeki, or Judge, commonly Executes Justice: In the daytime the Gate is
guarded by three or four, and in the Night by fifteen Halberdeers; but at the
King's Chamber thirty Men, most Chans Sons, Watch, whilst as many more go the
Rounds. The Kischicktzi, or Captain of the Guard, delivers the King an Account
every Evening, of such Persons as are to Watch that Night, that so he may know
what People are near him. The said Forum over the Gate is a very high Room,
glittering with fair Windows on all sides, and adorned with rich Pictures, and
gilded Carved work. The other chief Rooms of the Court, are first the Tabchane,
or great Hall, in which the King with his Chans and other great Lords keeps a
splendid Feast on Naurus, or New-years-day: next, an open Room, called the
Divanchane, that is, House of Justice, in which the King hears and determines
all Businesses of State, and gives Entertainment to foreign Princes. The
Tabchane, or Banqueting House, ascended by three Steps, is twelve Yards long,
eight broad, and abought six high: The Pillars which support the Roof, being
eight-square, are of Wood, and Gilded: The Room within is also adorned with
Gilded Sculpture, or Carv'd-work: The Floor is commonly covered with rich
Carpets, and has a Fountain in the middle of it: Before the Divanchane is a
long narrow Walk, Planted with Tzinar-Trees: These kind of Walks they call
Chiewan. The third is the Haramchane, or Hall for the Women, in which his
Casseha, or Concubines, which are at other times kept up in private Apartments,
come together to Dance before the King, to the Music of several Instruments,
or the Voices of Eunuchs. The fourth is the Deke, or place in which the King
spends his time most part of the day, and ever, but at Festival times, or when
busied about State Affairs, Dines with his Queen and the rest of his Wives.
Besides these there are other fair Apartments, which contribute to the splendour
and accommodation of a King's Palace, besides diverse brave Banquetting-houses
and pleasant Gardens. But above all the rest, about forty Paces from the chief
Gate, is a Door on the right hand which leads to a great Garden, in the middle
whereof stands a Chapel. This Garden being a priviledg'd Place, is by the
Persians called Allacapi, that is. Gods Gate. Hither Debtors, Man-slayers, and
other Malefactors, fly for sanctuary, and so long as they can maintain
themselves there at their own Cost and Charge, they are unmolested; but Thieves
they will not suffer to be there long.

Behind the Palace is the Taberick Cale, or Treasury, being rather a Castle
than a House, for the word Cale signifies a Castle: It is an indifferent large
Structure, encompassed with high Walls and Redoubts of Earth, which Nicholas
Hemmius takes to be Towers. This Castle is constandy Garrisoned with diverse
Companies of Soldiers; and the King having a considerable Magazine, often keeps
his Court in it. Moreover, on the other side of the Maidan, in a peculiar
Street, is another Sanctuary, or priviledg'd House, called Tseche hit Sutun, so
called from forty Beams or Pieces of Timber, all which resting upon one single
Pilar, which stands in the middle of the Metzid belonging to it, support the
Roof thereof.

Hither the Persians flocked in great numbers, when Tamerlane, going to destroy
the rebelling Citizens, resolved to spare only the Temple and all those that
were in it; for he put to the Sword them that were in the Temple Court, and
caused all the Houses thereabouts to be pulled down, which Schach Abbas
re-building, made it a priviledg'd Place.

The Persians Belief concerning Mehedi,
On the South side of the Maidan is a large and sumptuous Mosque, which being
begun by Schach Abbas, and almost finished, his Successor completed it, and
overlaid the Walls with a rich sort of Marble, brought from Erwend. Anno 1037.
this Mosque was Consecrated to Mehedi, the last of their twelve Imams, or
Saints of the Race of Aali, of whom it is vulgarly believed, that he lies
slumbering in a Cave near Cusa, from whence he is expected to return at the Day
of Judgment, and Riding about the World on Duldul Aaly's Horse, to convert all
People to the Alcoran; wherefore it is called Metzid Mehedi Saheseman, which
words are inscribed over the biggest Gate in Persian Characters.

At the end of the great Hejat, or Court, before the Metzit, is a Gallery or
raised place, Paved with square Stones, in the midst of which is a large
Cistern of Water, where those that go to Pray wash themselves. Behind this
Cistern you ascend by Steps to a Porch through a Row of Marble Pillars; and one
Step higher, to the Temple it self, that being very large and high, and
supported with large Marble Pillars, where the Meherab or Altar, and the Cahib
or Vestry is: The Gate is of fine Marble, and as high as that at Sulthanie, at
the Meschaich of Chodabende; the entrance through which is under an Arch of an
exceeding height, of blue Stone Gilded; beyond which is a broad Walk, the
Floor whereof is spread with Mats, on which the Persians kneel when they Pray.
Over the lower Walks are lesser ones like Galleries, supported by Marble
Columns gilded. On the right-side of the Mosque is a large Garden.

The greatest splendour and magnificence of this Mosque is, that all the Walls,
Galleries, Gardens, and the chief Temple, are from the bottom four Yards high
upwards, covered with polished Marble, each piece, which is for the most part
white, and excellently well polished, being five or six Foot square: The Marble
is all cut out of one Stone, except the two Pillars on each side of the Pulpit.

Schach Abbas caused the like Metzid, though smaller, to be built at Tabris, in
honor of the same Mehedi, all of pure white Marble, and as slick as Glass,
being fetched from the Mountain Erwan.

Places of Games and Exercises.
In the middle of the City, not far from the King's Palace, stands a Pole, not
unlike our Posts in which we put the ^ings that are to be run at, on which they
often put a Melon, Arupus, or Apple, and sometimes a Silver Plate with Money
upon it, at which the King and his Chans run full speed for great Wagers, and
whoever hits off the same, comes off with great honor and applause; but the
Money which falls from the Plate, is taken up by the Pages and Footmen.

Great Lords also have another Exercise called Kuit Schaucan, which they
perform in the same place, viz. Riding full speed, they strike a Ball with a
crooked. Stick to a set Mark; and also toss the Tziud, or Bar.

Near the Maidan stands a little wooden Hut named Chaneschin, which is set
upon four Wheels, for the convenience of its moving from place to place, in
which the King often sits a Spectator of the forementioned Games.

Hereabouts, especially on the West side, not far from the Dewletchane, sit
diverse Soothsayers.

Houses of Entertainment.
Opposite to the Northern part of the Maidan stand several Houses of
Entertainment; the first whereof is the Schire Chane, to which resort the most
loose und debauched sort of People, who hire the Surkers, or Dancing-Boys, as
also common Strumpets, to Dance before them naked, with all kind of lewd and
obscene Postures.

The second is the Tzai, or the Chattai Chane, that is, The Catayan, or Chinese
Tee-house, in which they generally play at Chess.

The third is the Caweh Chane, or Coffee and Tobacco-house.

These three Houses are also frequented by their Pot-Poets and Comedians, who
commonly sitting in the midst of the House on high Stools, tell all manner of
pleasant Tales, and talk continually with a little Stick in their Hands like
our Juglers.

Barbers Shops.
Not far from these Houses two sorts of Barbers keep their Shops; some whereof
practicing Surgery, and called Tezerrah, never shave or Trim Men; the other
called Dellack, shave and cut Hair, and are made use of to Circumcise Children.
To this last sort of Barbers there is continual resort of People, because they
always keep their Heads shaved, and every one brings his own Rasor with him,
because the Persians fearing the Venereal Distemper, will not suffer a strange
Rasor to touch their Heads.

From the North part of the Maidan you go directly to the Bazar, or Street full
of Shops, where there is a square large Portico, under which are all manner of
rich Merchandise to be sold; over the Entrance of which is a stately Dial,
which is said to have been made in Schach Abbas's time by an Englishman,
called Festy, which at first (there being then no Clocks nor Dials in all
Persia) was looked upon as a great Wonder.

The Bazar, or Market-house it self, is divided into many Divisions, with
Passages between them like little Lanes, which are most of them covered on the
top, where all manner of Goods that the Country affords are to be sold, every
thing in a peculiar place.

The famous Coffee-house in Ispahan.
In the Caravansera near the Bazar, where the King receives foreign Ambassadors,
is a House, which is one of the fairest in the whole City Ispahan, and called
The Coffee-house, from the Liquor which is sold in it. In this House also are
brought up Youths of several Nations, but most Mahumetans, though some are of
Christian Parentage, as Circassians, Georgians, and Armenians, who are taught
all manner of Dances. At the Entrance of this House is a Court with a Fountain
in the midst of it. The King oftentimes Dines here with foreign Ambassadors,
but is satisfied with few Dishes, having sometimes but two, whereof one is
Mutton, the other roasted Poultrey, which whilst he is eating, the Youths
Dance before him in a very strange and ridiculous manner.

In Ispahan dwell also Merchants and Shopkeepers of several Nations, of which
some sell their Goods by Wholesale, others by Retail; for besides the Persians,
Indians, Tartars from Chuaressam, Chinese, and those from Buchare, there are
English, Dutch, French, Italians, Spaniards, Portuguese, Turks, Jews,
Armenians, and Georgians. The Indians, who generally have their Shops next to
the Persians, Trade in Silk, Cotton, and other such like Stuffs.

By reason of the great Trade in Ispahan there are many Caravansera's, where
the several Commodities are disposed of by Wholesale.

Amongst other places, the Kings Parks for wild Beasts are none of the meanest,
having towerd Lodges, called Kelemenar, enclosed with Walls, made of several
sorts of Deers, and other Beasts Horns, mixed with Earth.

The Garden Izarbag.
Without the City Walls, not far from the great Bridge, on the South side, is a
Garden called Tzarbag, which has not its equal for curiosity and delight in
all Persia. Tzarbag signifies a Garden, or whatsoever else divided into four
parts, this being so branched into four Squares by cross Ways, and a Brook
named Vendemith, about a Mile in compass, and having four Gates and four
stately Banquetting-houses; one on each side. On the South side stands a Hill,
plain on the top, in the middle whereof, and on each side, are three Aqueducts
of Stone, whose Channels are a Yard broad, which lying very steep, cause the
Water to descend in great abundance; from whence there are lesser Pipes that
convey the Water under Ground, which supplies with much variety several
artificial Fountains, which gliding from thence, fall into a Lake on the
farther side of the Garden.

The Cheiwan.
The Cheiwan, which signifies a pleasant Walk, is Planted thick with a great
number of Tzinar Trees, which afford a delightful shade, and intermixed with
all sorts of Fruit Trees that may enrich a Paradise, especially with Vines,
which the Persians call Hallage, which Schach Abbas first Planted there,
bearing a very large and delicious Grape without Stones. This Garden or Orchard
has forty Gardners daily to prune and dress it, and when the Fruits are ripe,
all Comers, paying only four Casbekies, may taste and eat whatever they please
until they are satisfied, but are not allowed to carry any away.

The Suburbs, of Ispahan.
About this City of Ispahan are several Suburbs, the greatest of which they call
Tzulpha, having in it three thousand Houses, and twelve Mosques or Churches,
which in beauty are not inferior to any within the Walls, being the Residence
of rich Armenian Merchants, whom Schach Abbas removed from Armenia thither,
they pay the King yearly two hundred Tomans for Tribute.

On the other side of the River Senderuth lie the Suburbs Tabrisabath,
otherwise Abasabath, so called, because Scach Abbas brought the Inhabitants
thither from Tabris.

Another part of the Suburbs called Hassenabath, is inhabited by Castilians,
brought thither from Georgia, they are great Merchants, and, like the
Armenians, travel from one Country to another.

The Manners and Religion of the Kebbers,
Another eminent part of the Suburbs lies on the West side, and is called
Kebrabath, and the Inhabitants thereof Kebbers, who are also rich Merchants:
they have long Beards, and wear other fashioned Clothes than the Persians, viz.
long wide Coats, which are open in no place but about the Neck and on the
Shoulders, where they tie them together with Ribbons. The Women go without
Shoes, and barefaced. They are accounted a civil and courteous People,
Extracted from an ancient Pagan Family, and to this day suffering themselves
neither to be Baptized nor Circumcised: They have neither Temples nor Priests,
neither do they (with Hottinger's good leave) worship the Fire, as the ancient
Kebbers did. When any one dies, they drive a Cock into the Fields out of the
House of the Deceased, which if it be caught by a Fox, then they believe that
the Soul of the Deceased is taken up into a better World; but if this proof
chance to be hindered by any Accident, then they try another way, on which their
assurance chiefly depends, viz. they carry the Corpse clad with their best
Apparel, and adorned with Gold Chains and other Ornaments, to the Churchyard,
where they set the Body up against the Wall, propping up the same by placing a
Pole under the Chin, where if the Fowls of the Air pick out the right Eye, then
they assuredly believe the Soul to be ascended to Heaven; but if the left, they
judge it to be gone to Hell. They have also two sorts of Graves, in one they
tenderly lay the Bodies of their supposed Saints; and into the other, those
whom they believe to be Damned are thrown headlong.

In a small circumference about the City Ispahan, are reckoned a thousand four
hundred and sixty Villages and Hamlets, all inhabited by Weavers.

The City Jarustan.
A League from Ispahan, and seven from the Village Mahier, lies the City
Jarustan, pleasantly situated, as it were in the midst of a Garden, on the Bank
of a River: It is full of Inhabitants, and has plenty of all manner of
Provisions, and several fair Structures, but one more magnificent than all the
rest, surrounded with a Gallery, and containing many handsome Rooms; the biggest
and chiefest whereof is built after the fashion of the Chapels belonging to
the Jesuits Cloisters in Europe, with many Windows on the top. The Persians
tell us, that this Structure was formerly a College, wherein Schach Thamas's
time Disputations were held. Near this House is also a Garden with several
Springs and Fountains in it, but not always flowing.

About three days Journey from Ispahan is a view of Qom KOM
view of Saba SABA
Countrey-house with a brave Garden, called Taintabat.

In the Way from Casbyn to Ispahan are several Places whence Salmon, is brought
salted from Kilan, where the best Salmon is caught in the Mouth of the River
Araxes.

From Ispahan runs a straight and pleasant Way, on both sides of which are
several fair Houses and delightful Gardens.

Situation and Description of the City Cashan
The City Caschan or Cashan, lies (according to the Persians) in thirty five
Degrees Longitude, and thirty four Northern Latitude: But Olearius, after three
days observation, found the same to lie nine Minutes more Southerly. It being
built long, extends half a League from East to West, and is surrounded with
Walls and Bulwarks of a clayie sort bf Earth; round about the same is good
arable Land. On the South side of the City is a kind of a Tilt-yard, with a
Post in the middle, where the Persians use to run at the Ring.

On the left side of the forementioned Way is one of the King's Orchards, in
which are two Banquetting-houses, one near the Highway, and the other in the
middle, which last has very many Windows, which (according to the manner of
the Persian Gardens) open the Doors into as many Walks: two Doors amongst the
rest generally stand open opposite one against another; the Walls are a Yard
thick. When the King comes hereabouts, he commonly takes up his Residence in
this Garden.

Cashan is one of the most populous and greatest Cities of Trade in all Persia,
having many fair Houses, stately Caravansera's, and above all, a magnificent
Bazar and Maidan, set out with arched Portico's and Rooms, and being every
where so neatly built, that no City in Persia is comparable to it: It is
inhabited by all manner of People, but especially Persians and Indians, who
have every one their peculiar Trade or Manufacture, which they exercise in
Shops open to the Streets; but most of them are Weavers of Cloth-of-Gold, and
Silks.

The several Names, with the Description of the little Town Natens.
Twelve Leagues from Caschan lies the little, but pleasant Town called Natens,
but by Contareno in the Description of his Travels, Nethas; and by Clavius and
Herbert, Natan; by Anan^as, Jes^i; by Texeira, Yazd; and by Thevet, Jex; from
whence it is said that this Province has received the Name of Jez. The several
Streams of fresh Water which run through the same, make the Country very
fertile in the production of Corn and Grapes: It lies in a pleasant Valley, at
the end whereof toward Ispahan appears a fruitful Mountain, over which they
travel to Ispahan: The Valley is full of little Villages, interspersed with
neat Gardens, and lying at so small a distance from each other, that they seem
to be one entire Town, and therefore have no peculiar Names. Opposite to the
City lie two high spiring Rocks or Mountains, on the highest of which stands a
Turret, which Schack Abbas built in commemoration of a Falcon that conquered an
Eagle: for the forementioned King traveling by this Place, took up one of his
Falcons, which spying an Eagle, broke loose, and flying at him, after a long
and fierce Combat, brought him down. According to Mandeslo's observation, the
Tower on the forementioned Mountain is built of eight-square Brick, or Coctile
Stone, and runs up sharp with a glazed Roof, about which is a narrow Walk: The
Arch underneath is eight Paces crossways, and by the multiplicity of Windows
and Doors, is very light.

Besides this there are several other Structures (upon what occasion built we
find not) on the said Mountain; but the greatest Wonder is, how such a quantity
of Brick or Stone could be carried up such a vast height, it requiring above
three hours time to get to the top, by reason of the steepness of the Mountain.

Situation and Description of the City Saba
The City Saba is by the Persians accounted to lie in eighty five Degrees of
Longitude, and in thirty of Northern Latitude; but Olearius has found the same
to lie fifty six Minutes more Northerly; and Rui Gonzales de Clavaco places the
same in thirty Degrees and eighteen Minutes Northern Latitude. The Plains about
the City are in some places Morassy; the City it self built on a Plain, which
on the right side has the Mountain Elwend, which rising exceeding high,
appears very pleasant at a distance.

This City, which is not very big, lies enclosed with a slight Wall, and has
many ruined Houses.

The glory of this City is the Gardens and Orchards, which are full of
Pomegrate and Almond-Trees. Not far from the City the Inhabitants plant Rice
and Cotton, in which their chief Trade consists.

The City Rhey.
A day and a halfs Journey Eastward from Saba in the same Latitude, lies a City
called Rhey, now very ruinous, and the adjacent Country red and infertile,
occasioned (as the Persians say) from a War raised against Hosseyn, one of
their great Saints, by Omarsand, who getting the better, and having possessed
the Country by right of Conquest, suddenly had a Curse upon his impiety, in
shedding innocent Blood (for he had slain Hosseyn in Battle;) whereupon the
City, then populous, and the Country fertile, suddenly became desolate and
barren.

Situation and Description the City Com.
Eleven Leagues from Saba lies the City Com, which (according to the Persians
observation) lies in 85 Degrees and 40 Minutes Longitude, and in 34 Degrees and
40 Minutes Northern Latitude; but Olearius makes the same to lie 18 Minutes
more Southerly, viz. in 34. Degrees and 23 Minut^o Northem Latitude.

Com, an ancient City, and by Ptolomy called Guriane, was formerly very big, as
appears by several Ruins of Houses, and of an old Wall at a good distance
round about it: It lies in a Plain like Saba, and being enclosed within a Wall,
has the Mountain Elwend on the right side, which appears white with sandy tops
at a great distance; from whence descend two Streams, which are conveyed
through the City in a broad Chanel, which by melting of the Snow in March,
often overflows much of the Town; and some years the Flood has been so great,
that it has washed away many Houses; but in the Summer it is pretty dry. The
Suburbs belonging to the City extend half a League.

When any Strangers come into this City, the Women, either through
Superstition, or the Jealousy of the Men, are not suffered to show themselves,
and especially to Frenchmen; yet nevertheless they make shift sometimes to
procure private access.

Description of the Village Casmabath.
A days Journey from Com lies the great Village Casmabath, where the Houses are
most of them joined to one another with Arches. Four Leagues from Com lies
another Village, called Caem Abao.

According to Texeira, Erack comprises also the Cities Nahaoand, Targazin, and
Damaoand, formerly counted within the Jurisdiction of Aderbajon. Davity tells
us, that Damaoand is the City which Minadoi names Diagman, and places the same
on the Borders between Persia properly so called, and great Media.

Texeira also writes, that the City Taharon is the same with Giem, which Davity
would have to be John the Persian's Guieche, being the Metropolis of a Kingdom
near Aderbajon.

Swaert also places in this Province the Country of Thaparstam, which he
supposes to be the ancient Pathienne, a Country lying Northward, and the
Passage through inaccessible Mountains and troublesome Ways, into Hircania; but
this is certainly the Country Taberstam, which Texeira only names, with Hinel
its Metropolis.

The City Casbin.
Casbin (as the same Texeira and Olearius have it) is a City belonging to the
Province of Parthia or Erack; notwithstanding John the Persian makes it a
peculiar Kingdom, and is in some Maps placed near Aderbajon, in others farther
toward the North-East than Rey Xarear.

Its Situation and Description.
The City Casbin or Caswin, by others called Casbin, and formerly Arsatia, lies
(as the Persians and Arabians inform us) in 85 Degrees Longitude, and 36
Degrees and 15 Minutes Northern Latitude, as Olearius has also observed: It is
situate on a barren and sandy Plain; about half a days Journey from which, on
the South side, begin the high Mountains Elwend, which extend South-West
toward Bagdat or Babylon. The City is a League in circumference, has no
Walls, nor any Soldiers in Garrison, because it lies a great way from an Enemy,
yet (as they say) has a hundred thousand Inhabitants, out of which on all
occasions a good Army might easily be raised. The ordinary Houses are built of
Stone after the Persian manner, which, though they seem mean on the outside,
yet are handsome and well contrived within, having several Apartments, white,
or else curiously Painted. All the Streets being unpav'd, and the Ground
naturally sandy, the least Wind raises Dust, and makes it very troublesome
walking to the Inhabitants. There are no Springs nor Wells, but all the Water
is conveyed from the Mountains in Pipes laid under Ground into public
Cisterns, where it is free for every ones use. There are also many
Conservatories, wherein they keep Ice and Snow to use in Summer. The City has
two great Maidans or Marketplaces, the chiefest whereof is called Atmaidan,
being somewhat longer than that of Ardebil, though not so broad. On the South
side thereof stand large and magnificent Structures, built most of them by the
Princes or Chans of Persia. In the Bazars or Shops of this Marketplace, as
also in the Senke Maidan, which lies more Westward, commonly all manner of
Rarities and rich Merchandises are to be had at reasonable Rates, especially
Turkoises, Rubies, and Granates: But after Sunset another kind of Trade is
driven on the East side of the Maidan, viz. diverse Cahbeha, or Girls of
Pleasure, stand in a long Row with covered Faces, holding up their Coats, and
behind every one of them an old Woman called Delal, who carries a Cushion and
Blanket, or Cotton Quilt on their Backs, and an unlighted Candle in their
Hands, which, as soon as any one comes and discourses with the Cahbeha, she
lights, and presents the Party; whereupon he turning up their Vails, bids her
whom he fancies best follow him

In this City are likewise above fifty Metzids or Temples, Temples,
whither the Persians daily go to their Devotions; the chiefest is Tzame
Metzid, toward the South, not far from the Maidan, where their Sabbath or
Friday Meeting is principally celebrated. There are also many well built
Caravansera's for strange Merchants, and likewise many public Baths.

The King's Palace.
Near the great Maidan is a large and Royal Palace, with an Orchard of vast
extent belonging to it, built by Schach Ismael, some say Schach Thomas; the
Portico's and Arches are of Stone, Painted and Gilded; but the Rooms within are
adorned with Sculpture and Imagery, richly Gilded also and Painted, all in
Grotesque-work after the Persian manner.

Over against this Palace is another Orchard, a Mile in circumference, in which
are diverse Banquetting-houses, and handsome Walks Set with all sorts of
Fruit Trees, as Apples, Pears, Peaches, Morello's, Granates, Almonds, and the
like; but the cross Ways are the pleasantest, being neatly Planted with tall
Tzinar and Cypress-Trees, which make a very delightful Prospect.

The Bath Haman Charabe made famous by the Story of Lockman.
Behind the King's Palace and Garden is an old decayed Bath, which they call
Haman Charabe, and tell the following Story of it, viz. That at Caswin there
formerly dwelt a famous Physician called Lockman, an Arabian Black born, whom
the Persians, not only for his excellent Books of Physic which he writ, but
also for his great Judgment in all things, had in great veneration. This
Lockman was believed by the Mahumetans to have lived amongst the Israelites in
David's time, and to have been a Servant or Slave of one Abyssine, and that he
was no less deformed. Some will have him to be the same with Esop; others, that
he lived in the time of Solomon: Texeira is of opinion, that he lived in the
time of Cyrus, the first grand Persian Monarch. It is farther delivered, that
when this Lockman being arrived at the utmost period of old Age, perceived the
hour of Death approaching, he gave his Son three Glasses full of precious
Water, with advice, that the same would fetch a dead Corpse to life again,
provided it were not putrifi'd; that if they sprinkled the Water which was in
the first Glass on the Dead, it would make them breathe again, and stir their
Limbs; that the second Water would make them rise, and the third restore them
to perfect health. But Lockman alleged, that it was a great Sin for a Man to
undertake that which belonged only to God, viz. to restore Life to the Dead,
and therefore he would not suffer this piece of Art to be often practiced, but
only in time of need, to show what the profound knowledge of Nature could do,
and therefore strictly commanded his Son Lockman Sade to forbear the practice
of it, who accordingly would not try the Virtue of the Water on his deceased
Father; but soon after falling sick himself, he commanded his Servant to try
the Experiment upon him as soon as the Breath should be departed out of his
Body, having first laid the Corpse in a warm Bath, where the Water was to be
used, according to the forementioned Instruction. After Lockman Sade's Decease,
the Servant, to perform his Master's last Command, carried the Body to the
Haman or Bath, and poured the two first Glasses of Water on him, whereupon the
dead Body began to move and rise up; but as he was preparing to pour out the
third Viol, the half recovered Body cried suddenly Bris, Bris, that is,
Tarantula.
Pour, Pour; which sudden and unexpected calling so affrighted the Servant,
that the Glass falling out of his Hands, broke in pieces; so that the Body
dropping down again, was found totally deprived of Life, and immediately
buried. Some say that an Angel struck the Glass out of his Servants Hand:
Moreover, a Voice crying Bris, Bris, is (as the Inhabitants confidently affirm)
heard at this day near the forementioned Bath, called Haman Charabe.

Schahesade's Tomb.
On the East side of the City is a Churchyard, near which Scahesade, one of
Hosseins Sons lies buried in a handsome Metzid; and because he is accounted one
of the chief Saints, the Persians are usually cited to this Tomb, as to several
others where their Saints lie buried, to make Oath of such Matters as require
solemn attestation, and also upon common occasions; if one Party doubts what
the other says, he immediately calls him thither, and puts this Question to
him, Hossein Pile Musef, that is, Dare you affirm what you say by this holy
Tomb and the great Alcoran?

This City Casbin has been the Residence and Seat of the Kings of Persia ever
since the Reign of Schach Thamas, who is said to have been the first that
removed his Seat from Tabris thither.

The Village Achibaba, whence denominated.
About four Leagues from Casbin lies the Village Achibaba, at the foot of the
Mountain near the Road to Sultania and Ardebil. This Village received its
Denomination from an old Man named Achibaba, to whom Schach Sefi gave the
Village, because he got a Ceild after he was a hundred years of age, by a Woman
almost as old as himself. This Achibaba's Tomb is seen to this day in a great
Vault.

Temperature of the Air.
It is almost incredible how cold it is in Ispahan from November till March,
notwithstanding the City lies in one and thirty Degrees and a half of Northern
Latitude; but of this no other reason is generally given, but the pureness and
thinnes of the Air.

Nature of the Soil.
The Soil about Ispahan is much lower than the Stream Senderuth; by which means
Nature prevents the great inconveniences which the excessive Heat would
occasion here in Summer, the Inhabitants being able to overflow their Lands and
Gardens when they please, which John the Persian says infects the Air; but this
is contradicted by Davity, and it is certain that the Air about Ispahan is the
wholsomest of all Persia, except in some places near the Caspian Sea.

In and about Ispahan is plenty of all sorts of Provisions; and the Mountains
lying on each side of the City, are also very fruitful, and the Way from
Ispahan to Arabia full of great Woods. The same Country also produces
excellent Wine, the best whereof is as good as Canary; and of all sorts of
Fruits, the best in the World. Moreover, the Country about Caxion abounds with
all manner of Fruits.

About the City of King Xarear, the Inhabitants gather abundance of Manna, but
it is not so pure and good as that of Hrey.

This Province likewise abounds with Horses and Mules, and such lusty strong
Cartel, that they carry near double the Burden of others.

Scorpions of Cashan.
There is no place in all Persia that is more infested with Scorpions than
Cashan; wherefore if they would wish any ill to befall a man, they commonly
say, Acrab Cashan de Bestet stenet, that is, May Cashan Scorpions sting you in
the Head: Some that are most poisonous are Coal-black, and about the bigness of
a Man's Finger in thickness and length; They run very fast, and are in shape
not unlike a Cra-fish, only they have a blunter Head, and less Body. By reason
of these Animals the Inhabitants never sleep in Ground-Rooms, but in upper
Stories, called Tzarmi. The Townsmen say, that a Stranger coming into the City,
and crying, Men Caribem, that is, I am a Stranger, the Scorpions will not
meddle with him. The most general Cure against the Stings of these Scorpions,
is a piece of Copper suddenly clapped on the Wound; wherefore the Inhabitants
continually carry the Copper Coin called Pull about them, which they
immediately lay on the place where they are bit, and letting it lie a pretty
while, they afterward anoint it with Honey and Vinegar.

The Tarantula of Persia.
There is likewise another sort of Animal about the City Cashan almost like a
Spider (for some hang by Threads and Cobwebs on the Trees,) and are by the
Petsians called Eubureckhan, and by the Italians and Spaniards, Tarantula; they
breed in Rocky places for the most part, under a certain Shrub with broad and
strong scented Leaves, by the Persians named Tremne, and by the Turks,
Jauschan. These Vermin touching any part of a Man's Body, leave a drop of
Poison on it like a drop of Water, which causes great pain, and strikes into
the Stomach, makes the Head to ache, and benumming all the Limbs, casts the
Party into a deadly Sleep, out of which he cannot be awaked by any means
whatsoever, so long as the Poison remains upon him, being for the time bereaved
of natural Sense. The best Remedy is to kill the Animal, and lay the same on
the benumbed parts, which (they say) draws out the Poison again; but if none of
them can be got, then they lay the Patient on his Back, pour as much Milk down
his Throat as possibly they can, notwithstanding he immediately disgorges the
same; then they put him into a Trough, which hanging up by three Strings, they
turn round till the Patient's Head being very giddy, he is provoked to vomit up
all he has in his Stomach, and to Urine (though not without great pain) a
white and thick Water, which eases the Patient, who nevertheless at certain
times in the year endures great pain, occasioned by the remaining Poison. But
that which is the greatest wonder of these Animals is, that the Sheep run very
eagerly after them, and eat them without the least hurt.

The Tarantula of Puglia in Italy.
These Tarantula's of Persia seem to differ very much from those of Puglia in
the Kingdom of Naples, both in the strange operations they produce in the
Persons stung by them, as their admiring and being enamored of Colors,
especially Green, their delighting to walk about, some with a naked Sword,
others with a Glass of Water in their Hands, their desire to paddle in Tubs of
Water wherein green Leaves lie floating, and such like fantastic Humors; as
also their wonderful manner of Cure, namely by the Sound of Music, which stirs
them up to such a furious fit of Dancing, that by the violent motion of their
Bodies they sweat out by Degrees the virulence of the Poison, and by often
repetition of the Action at last recover their Health; but of these things
Athanasius Kircher has a more full Discourse in his Book De Art Magnetica,
and we shall have occasion to speak more largely thereof when we come to treat
of the Provinces of Italy in our Volume of Europe.

The Gardens about Com abound with Fruit, especially Melons.
Both within and without the City Com are Gardens full of all sorts of Fruit,
and amongst others, a sort of Melons about the bigness of an Orange, speckled
with all manner of curious Colors, and of a sweet smell; wherefore they are
called Shammane, and carried in the Hand to smell to like a Nosegay; but their
taste is not so good as that of other Melons, which there are as sweet as
Sugar. The same sort of Melons are to be found in several other places in
Persia, as also a very strange kind of Cucumbers, which are near three Yards
long, crooked, and about the thickness of a Man's Arm, and therefore called
Schunchiar, or Crooked Cucumbers, which, like Gurkins, are laid in Vinegar and
Salt, and eaten raw.

Several Fields about the City are Sow'n with all sorts of Grain and Cotton.

Till within six Leagues to the Northward of Sultanie, the Country is
exceeding pleasant and fruitful, the Fields being either Planted with
Fruit Trees, or flourishing with Corn: They belong to the Lords, or Possessors
of the several Villages thereabouts.

Four days Journey from Ispahan, near the City Niris, the Mountain Demawend
incloses an Iron and Steel-Mine.

The Inhabitants of Cashan and Com are accounted a very thievish sort of People.

Cutlers and Potters the chief Trades of Cashan and Com.
The chief Trades in these Cities are the Sword-Cutlers and Potters, the best
Sword-Blades in all Persia being made there, the richest whereof are valued at
twenty Crowns apiece. The Potters Bake all manner of Earthen Ware, and
especially Cruises and Jugs, which are sent from thence to all the Cities
hereabouts: that which sets the greater value on them, is the Water
thereabouts, with which being filled and let stand a while soon after they are
made, they are exceedingly cooled, and consequently much hardened. Besides the
forementioned Manufactures, there are a great number of People employed in
making of Silk Clothes, Embroidered with Birds, and sorts of Imagery, as also
Lanskips, and the like.

The rich Trade of Ispahan, Yasde, and Coxom.
Ispahan, as being a Place of great Trade, has many large Caravansera's, that
is to say, Inns or Storehouses, where the Merchants, with their Horses,
Cammels, and other Beasts of burden, take up their Lodging, and lay up their
Goods, for which the King receives a certain Revenue: But the places where the
great Riches of this City appear most visibly, are the several Shops of the
Maidan and Bazar, where there are continually to be seen Bars of Gold and
Silver, Damask, Pearls, Precious Stones, raw Silk, and Cloths of all sorts.
There are also vended here great quantities of Anniseeds, and diverse other
Drugs, which the Jews and others put off at a dear Rate.

The Carpets from Yasde, made after the Turkish manner, are the richest and
finest in the whole World. The same Place also produces abundance of Silk and
Rose Water.

Caxom also is very famous for the abundance of Silk which comes from thence.

Lastly, this Province is noted for Horses of an excellent kind, both for shape
and swiftness of foot, which the Parthians for the most part make use of in
their Wars.

SOLTANIE.


The Province of Aderbeitzan, or Aderbajon, formerly Great Media, or Satrapene.
The several modern Names of Great Media.
THe Country of Aderbeitzan, or (according to Della Valla) Adherbaigan, or (as
Texeira will have it) Aderbajon, was anciently called South, or Great Media.
Castald (who names it Adilbegian) takes it only for a Tract of Media, by
Ptolomy called Daretis, and Della Valla for a great part of Media; but the
Places which Aderbeitzan compriseth, sufficiently testify that it is Great
Media; yet by some modern Writers this Country is called Franck-Armenia,
because the Franck-Armenian Christians inhabit the same. The Geography of
Nubius makes mention, that it was anciently the Northermost part of Assyria,
for it borders on Curdistan, the ancient Assyria.

The Bounds of Aderbeitzan.
Aderbeitzan borders in the North and North-West, at Schirwan; in the South, at
Persia; in the East, at the Country of Kilan and Parthia, or Hierack; and in
the West, at Great Armenia: But according to Olearius, it juts against
Curdistan, and is separated from Schirwan by the Desert of Mogam, and a by
certain nnameless River, from Carabach: It is accounted ninety Leagues in
length, and compriseth several other lesser Counties, viz. Erscheck, Chalchal,
Meschin, Tharumat, Kermeruth, Suldus, Serah, Utzan, and others. The chief
Cities are Tabris or Taurus, Sencan, Sultanie, Ardebil, Merraga, Nachtschuan,
Merend, Rumy, Chouy, and Selmaseck.

The Description of the City Tabris.
The Metropolis of this Province is Tabris, commonly called Tauris, and by the
Turks, Tebris, and is the City Terva of Paulus Jovius, the Tigranoama of Nigro,
but according to Ortelius, the same with the ancient City Ecbatane, formerly
the Seat of the Kings of Persia; which is also affirmed by Ananias,
Schrotterius, and Hornius, with many demonstrable Reasons out of Minadoi: It
lies at the foot of the Mountain Orontes, (perhaps the Mountain Carabag, which
Texeira places by Tabris) eight days Journey Northerly from the Caspian. Sea,
with which it conterminates on the West, and on the South with Persia: It has
no Walls but lies open on every side, as most of the Cities in Persia do, and
was formerly (according to Minadoi) inhabited by about two hundred thousand
People (but John the Persian lessens the number above a half part) before its
destruction by the Turks. There are many Caves under Ground; and most of the
Houses, being very low, are either built of a kind of Bitumen, or Clay hardened
by the Sun.

Within the compass of a hundred and fifty years last past, this City has
undergone sundry Mutations, both by the great Turk and the Persians: for in the
Year 1514. it was surrendered to Selymus the Turk, who contrary to his Word
exacted a great mass of Money from the Inhabitants, and carried away with him
three thousand Families, amongst whom were the best Artificers in the City.
Afterward in the Year 1535. it was by Solomon wholly given up to merciless
rage and avarice of his Soldiers, who left neither House nor Corner thereof
unplunder'd, abusing the miserable Citizens with all manner of insolency;
besides the most stately Palace of King Thamas, together with the most
sumptuous and rich Houses of the Nobility, were by the great Turk's Commandment
all rased down to the Ground, and the greattest part of the best Citizens, and
beautifullest Persons of what Condition or Quality soever, were carried away
Captives. And in the Year 1585. it was miserably spoiled by Osman, Vizier unto
Amurat the Third, and remained near four and thirty years under the Turkish
Slavery; during which time the poor Inhabitants suffered most unheard of
Miseries, through the countenanced Outrages and barbarous Cruelties of Osman's
Soldiers. But in the Year 1603. Abbas having obtained the Crown of Persia,
marched with great expedition to Tauris, and (what with the inclination of the
Citizens toward him, by reason of their extreme aversion to the Turkish
Government, and the use of the Cannon he brought with him, which till that time
the Persians scorned, as not becoming valiant Men) after six Weeks Siege took
the City.

Notwithstanding all the several Brunts that this City underwent, Minadoi
affirms, that Anno 1607. it had six Leagues in circumference; but since that
time also the Calamities and Ruins of War have fallen heavy upon it,
especially in the Year 1618. wherein Schach Abbas caused it to be wholly
deserted and lest desolate, upon the Turkish Armies approach.

The Country about Tebris may all be over-flow'd.

The Towns and Places of note in Aderbeitzan.
The most eminent Places near this City, are 1. Salmas, not far from which
Scander and Joonxa, Sons to Cara Issuf, defeated Xarock, the Son of Tamerlane.
1. Maragag, or Mararga. 3. Cuzaculan. 4. Sancan. 5. Sofian, perhaps the ancient
Sofia. Sancan, by the common People called Sengan, but by the Learned Persians,
Zengian, that is to say, Sighing of the Soul, was of old, before its
destruction by Tamerlane, and diverse Invasions by the Turks, a great City for
Commerce and Trade, and full of handsome Buildings, and had also another Name;
for it received this Denomination of Sencan, from a Tartarian King of the
Family of the Usbechies, who having taken and demolished it, put all the
Inhabitants to the Sword, and thereupon it is become at this time a little
unwall'd Town, and meanly built: It lies on a Hill between Tebris and Sultanie,
upon a parching sandy Ground, and in some places overgrown with low Brambles.

Half a League from the City, on the right side, runs a Ridge of the Mountain.
Taurus, in the Country Language called Keider Peijamber, from one of their old
Prophets, who is said to lie there buried: It extends from North to South, as
far as Curdistan. At the foot of this Mountain lies a pleasant Valley, wherein
are several Villages, as Keintze, Hazimur, and Camal.

By Sengan run two Ways Northerly, though the one, which leads to Tebris, bends
more Westerly; and the other on the right hand, leading to the City Ardebil,
more toward the East.

Three Leagues Northward from Sengan flows a a Brook, in the Country Language
called Sarmusack Ciai.

The Situation of the City Sultania.
The City Sultania, a Boundary between the Province of Arack and Aderbeitzan,
lies in 84 Degrees and 5 Minutes Longitude, and in 36 Degrees and 30 Minutes
Northern Latitude, three days Journey Northward from Caswin or Casbin, on a
pleasant Plain: It has on each side pretty high Mountains, especially on the
right side, where stands the forementioned Mo^ntain Keider: It is much more in
length than breadth, and appears at a great distance, by reason of its many
high Houses, Spires and Turrets, but the Walls very much decayed and ruinous:
It is said, that in former times it was one of the most eminent and stateliest
Cities in this Country.

Sultania built by Sultan Choda bend.
About half a League from this City, on the right hand of the Way which comes
from Hamedan, stands a large Stone Gate and Tower, belonging to the City, and
is said to be the remainder of an old Palace, which, as likewise the whole
City, was built by Sultan Muhammed Chodabende, a Tartar of the Family of the
Usbechies, out of the Ruins of the City Tigranocerta (of which Tacitus makes
mention in several places,) as appears by the Name of Sultania; for till after
his time the Kings of Persia did not Entitle themselves Schach, but Sultan, as
the Turks do at this day; as also from an Inscription on his Tomb yet to be
seen.

The Fields about this City (as the Inhabitants relate) were formerly very
unfruitful; but King Chodabende Cultivating the same, made it not only very
fertile, but also exceeding pleasant, moistening it with Water, which was
conveyed a great way under Ground in Pipes. They add moreover, that the same
Night that the forementioned King died (who was going about to add to the
Building of the City, and to fill the same with a new supply of Inhabitants,
fetched from other Countries) the People that were then in it began to leave
it, insomuch that in that Night fourteen thousand Women marched out of the same
on seven thousand Cammels, two on each Cammel: Nevertheless after this it
flourished for some time, and was daily increasing in Riches and Repute, when
Chotza Reschid, King of Persia (whom Josaphat Barbaro calls Giausam) upon a
Mutiny of the Inhabitants, destroyed a great part of it; and not long after
Tamerlane completed the destruction thereof: There remains a great part of the
Walls of a very strong and sumptuous Castle, which was also the King's Palace,
built of Freeston^, with many square Towers, of which some are yet to be seen;
but the only Structures standing yet in view, are two Meschaiches, or Mosques,
wherein Sultan Mahumeth Chodabende lies buried, The Description of Chodabende's
Tomb.
the Inscription on whose Tomb (as we said before) speaks him the Builder of
Sultania, all things about the same being exceeding curious, and above all, its
three Gates, though not of Copper (as Bizarro writes) yet of polished Steel.
The greatest Gate, which is opposite to the Maidan or Market, cannot (as they
say) be opened, though never so many Men endeavor it, unless they speak these
words, Beask Aly Buckscha, that is, Be opened for Aly's sake, and then it turns
so easily upon the Hinges, that a Child may open it. The Roof is very high, and
rises by degrees toward the middle into a round Tower: The Walls are overlaid
with white and blue glazed Stones, formed into several Shapes and Characters:
It has a Gallery or long Walk jutting out like a Balcony, over which are
certain Repositories, where there lie several Arabian Books, some a quarter of
a Yard deep and three quarters long; the Characters in them are three Inches
long, and every second Line neatly written with Gold and Ink, all transcribed
out of the Alcoran. Several Leaves of one of these Books came to the hands of
Olearius, who kept them as a great Rarity.

At the farther end of this Temple, in the Way toward the Meherab or Altar,
the Tomb of the Sultan Mahumed Chodabende appears through a very fine polished
Grate, which is accounted a great piece of Art, because it is made of Indian
Steel, each Bar about the thickness of a Man's Arm, and all of them so neatly
joined together, that no Joints are seen; it is said that it was cut out of a
whole Piece, as also the Gate, and that seven years were spent in India about
the making of them. Moreover there are two great Guns to be seen in the same
Emerad or Mosque, with a Mortarpiece, each placed on Carriages with four
Wheels, besides Demi-cannons, and other Fieldpieces, which belong to the
Castle: On the Mortar-piece is the Figure of a Spread-eagle, and over it two
Letters, A and Z: The Bullets thereto belonging are of Marble. The Tower which
crowns this Structure is eight-square, and surrounded on the top with a
Gallery; a little above which stand eight little Spires like Pillars, to which
there is an Ascent by winding Stairs. Before the Temple is a great square Well,
which receiving its Water from the Mountain Keider, is enclosed within a Wall;
behind which is a large pleasant Garden, Planted with Rows of high and low
Trees, and a stately Banqueting House in the middle.

Schach Ismael 's Mosque.
The other Metzid was built by Schach Ismael the first: the Entrance into the
same is through a very high Door, over which stands a round Tower; near which
also rises a high Pyramid, surrounded by eight Marble Columns. The Temple it
self has lofty Arches and Pillars, as also Galleries round about, and in the
middle a very high Pulpit. To this Structure belongs a very pleasant Garden,
and in it a Tower, whose top ends in the form of a Pyramid. But the most
beautiful part of the Mosque is a peculiar place built like a Chapel, and
separated by a Partition from the rest of the Mosque: In the middle of it,
opposite to the Door, stands like an Altar, a large Tomb, built for one of the
Sultans, and covered with rich Cloth-of-Gold and Silk. This Chapel is entered
at an Iron Door, neatly Carved and Gilded.

Not far from this Temple stands a high Arch, which seems to be the Ruins of
an old triumphal Arch, built between two Towers above a hundred Foot high.

A days Journey from Sultania lies the Village Chorademh, pleasantly seated
among shady Woods and Gardens, and by a sweet River.

The City Ardebil, by the Turks called Ardevil, and in the Maps wrongly spelled
Ardonil, is an ancient City, and of great repute amongst the Persians, partly
for being the Seat and Burying-place of diverse ancient Kings, especially of
Schach Sefi, who also was born there; and secondly for its great Trade to all
parts: It is said that Alexander the Great, in his Journey to Persia, kept his
Court there for a considerable time; and it appears the more probable, in
regard of the affinity of its Name with Arbela, of which Quintus Curtius makes
mention: It lies in 38 Degrees and 5 Minutes Northern Latitude, and in 82
Degrees and 30 Minutes Longitude, thirty seven Leagues Westward from Sultania,
on a Plain three Leagues over, and surrounded with high Hills; the highest
whereof, called Sebelahu, lies West ward, and is never without Snow; but
toward the South-East is the Mountain Bacru.

Ardebil is somewhat bigger in circumference than Schamachie, though without
Walls: Each House has an Orchard belonging to it, which makes it seem rather a
Wood than a City; yet there is no Timber there fit for Building, but what is
brought thither from the Province of Kilan. Through the City flows a little
Brook called Bacuchlu, which coming out of the Village Schamasbu, a League
Southward from the City, and having over it several Stone Bridges, divides it
self into two Branches just before the Town; the one runs quite through, and
the other gliding about by the left side, falls into the Stream Carasu. By
reason of the abundance of Snow, which melting in June, and running down from
the Mountains, this Brook swells into a great Stream, so that if it were not
led in time over an adjacent Plain (which is done by casting up a Bank before
the River,) it would quite drown the City, as it happened in the time of Schach
Abbas, when the Water breaking through, carried away a great number of Houses,
and drowned many People and Cattle.

The chief Streets.
Besides many little Streets, this City has five eminent ones, viz. Derwane,
Tabar, Niardawar, Cambalan, and Cafircutze, all of them pretty broad, and
Planted with Ash and Willow Trees, which afford the Inhabitants a pleasant
Shade in Summer. There is also a great Maidan or Marketplace, The Marketplace.
three hundred Paces long, and half as broad, full of Shops on each side,
wherein Tradesmen of sundry Vocations have their Shops apart, each Trade by it
self; wherein at the Entrance thereof, on the right side, behind Schach Sefi's
Tomb, is a Metzid or Temple, wherein Imam Sade, one of their twelve chief
Saints, lies buried. If a Malefactor escape thither, he is secure from being
Apprehended, and may from thence immediately get to Schach Sefi's Tomb, which
is a place of greater privilege. Behind the Maidan is a Bazar or Exchange,
where under a high square Roof called Caisere, are sold all manner of Gold and
Silver Works, Precious Stones, rich Silks, and other Commodities. Out of this
place passing three Gates, you come to a close Street, where all manner of
ordinary Commodities are to be had at low Rates. The Caravansera's, or Royal
Inns.
There are likewise several Caravansera's or Royal Inn, in which foreign
Merchants as Turks, Tartars, Indians. Chinese, and others, Lodge and put their
Goods. Moreover, there are many Hamans or Baths; and also Metzids, Temples.
the biggest whereof is the Metzid Adine, built in the middle of the City on a
little Hill: it has a round and pretty high Steeple, and is much frequented on
Fridays (the Mahumetans Sabbath.) from whence it has its Denomination, for
Adine in the Persian Tongue signifies Friday. Before the Temple is a Well,
which a prime Minister of State called Saru Chotze, otherwise Mahumed Risa,
caused to be made, and led the Water thither out of a Mountain, lying a League
South-West from the City, in Pipes under Ground. Those that go into the Temple
to Pray, first warn themselves in this Well, according to the Custom of the
Mahumetans.

Description of Schach Sefi's Tomb.
Not far from the Maidan is the forementioned stately Tomb of Schach Sefi, one
of the most renowned of the late Kings of Persia. The Gate through which you
must go into the first Court is exceeding large; from the top of which hangs a
great Silver Chain, which the Chan of Merraga is said to have Offered with
great Devotion: The Court, which is very large, and Paved with great square
Stones, has on each side long and high Arched Walls, under which are several
Shops; and behind the Court a pleasant Garden, where every one may freely
recreate themselves. Not far from hence is another Gate, over which hangs also
a Silver Chain in a Triangle, placed there by Mahumed Chan and Kentz. No man is
permitted to enter into this Temple with any manner of Weapon, not so much as
with a Knife, upon pain of Death: The Threshold of this Gate is of white
Marble, Carved round in form of a Pillar, and not to be trod upon, but stepped
over with the right Leg foremost, because many thousands coming to the Tomb
kiss the same. On the right side of the Garden is a Fountain of excellent clear
Water, which through a great Copper Spout made fast in the Wall, is conveyed
thither in Pipes from the Mountains, lying a League from thence, and serves
those for Drink that are Dieted there. At the end of the Garden on the same
side, is a fair, spacious, and round Arch of green and blue Stone, in the
middle whereof are two great Copper Candle-sticks. Round about the Walls are
Seats, wherein the Priests, Clothed in white Apparel, used to Sing. It is a
Tradition, that Schach Sefi used to sit every year forty days together here,
Fasting and Praying, his daily Sustenance being only one Almond and a little
Water, from whence it is called Tschillachane. Out of this Court you pass
through another Gate, where there also hangs a Silver Chain, given by Allican,
Chan of Gappan. The Entrance into the Tomb is under a pretty large Room over
which is a round Tower, through a Door Plated with Silver, and adorned with
thick Silver Rings: The Floor at the Entrance is spread with Carpets, on which
those that will pass to the Tomb must walk barefooted. When Schach Abbas came
to visit this Tomb, he pulled off his Shoes half a League before he came to the
City, and walked thither barefooted, in testimony of the great zeal he bore to
this Saint. This Entry has a little Wicket on one side, covered with Plates of
Gold, which leads to a stately Room. It is said that Schach Abbas, made this
Door, as also another at the Meschet in Chorazan, before Imam Risa's Tomb, upon
the making of a certain Vow at the time of his marching against the Usbechies
in Chorazan, viz. That if these Saints would help him to drive the Enemy out of
Chorazan, he would give each of them a Golden Door: which he accordingly
performed after his Victory. The Vault is forty eight Foot long, and thirty
broad, and set round with many Silver and Gold Branches for Lamps, of an
extraordinary large size; near which commonly sit twelve Singing Priests called
Hafisan, with little Stools before them, on which lie great Parchment Books, in
which as they look, they move their Bodies after the same manner as those in
the Tschillachane. Passing through this Vault you come into a kind of Sacristy,
ascended unto by three Silver Steps, with Rails and Balasters likewise of
Silver. The Persians commonly kiss these Stairs before they go up the same.
This Room is exceeding costly, and rises with another Step, upon which a Rail
of massy Gold runs cross the Room, and behind it the Tomb of Schach Sefi, made
of polished Marble (not of Gold, as some say,) three Foot high from the Ground,
about nine long, and four broad. The Door of the Golden Rail is always locked,
and may not be opened to any mortal Man, not to the King himself. On the left
hand of this Room is another Vault, in which Schach Abbas, the First, with
several other Kings, lie buried. On the right side of the forementioned
Entrance is a great Vaulted Room, curiously Gilded, and resembling a Church,
the Cieling adorned with several pieces of Carved Work, but not supported by
any Pillars. This Room, being called Tzenetsera, is the Library, where the
Books lie in seveveral Chests, not set side by side, but heaped one upon the
other, and locked up; they are most of them in Arabic, but some in the Persian
and Turkish Language, written neatly either on Paper or Parchment, and the
Histories adorned with various Sculptures. In diverse corners of this Room are
Shelves and Cupboards full of Porcelane Dishes, and other Vessels, of which
some contain the quantity of three Gallons, wherein the King and other Lords
are served when they come hither; for this being a sacred Place, and a holy
Gift, no Silver or Golden Vessels are to be used in it: and it is said, that
Schach Sefi was wont, out of zeal and humility, to eat here out of wooden
Platters. Opposite to the Library or Tzenetsera, is the Kitchen, the Door
whereof Schach Abbas caus^d also to be Plated with Silver: Every thing in the
same is kept very neat; diverse large Cauldrons or Boyling-places are made in
the Wall, with great Covers to them; The Water conveyed in Pipes round about
the Kitchen, and let into great Vessels by Copper Cocks. Out of this Kitchen
above a thousand Servants belonging to the Temple, besides a great number of
Alms-People, receive their Allowance three times a day, namely, Morning, Noon,
and Night: The two first times of Serving are from Schach Sefi's Donation (in
which are daily spent about a hundred and fifty Aba's, or three Tomams, which
is fifty Crowns;) but the third Service is on the King's Account. These
Meal-times are proclaimed by two Officers, who go about beating on
Kettle-Drums, which (as it is said) were used by Mahumed, and brought thither by
Schach Sedredin, together with Medine's Flag; upon which Signal every one
repairs thither, and receives from the Butlers and Manciples in a Dish, Broth,
Flesh, and Rice, in such plenty, that many not able to cat all themselves, sell
it to those that are ashamed to fetch it. Out of the Kitchen you go into the
Garden, where are the Graves of Sultan Aider, Schach Thomas, and other Kings
that lie buried under the open Sky, without either Tombstone or any thing
else.

The chiefest Persons that lie buried in several places of this Meschaich, are
Schach Sefi, Son of Seid Tzeibrail; Schach Sedredin, Son of Sefi; Schach
Tzinid, Son of Sedredin, in the European Histories by a mistake called Guined;
Sultan Aider, Son of Tzinid, who was flayed alive by the Turks; Schach Aider,
Son of Sultan Aider; Schach Ismael, Son of Aider; Schach Thomas, Son of Schach
Ismael; Schach Ismael, the second Son of Schach Thomas; Schach Mahumed
Chodabende, Son of Ismael; Ismael Myrsa, and Chodabende Hemsa Myrsa, Brothers,
and Sons to Schach Abbas.

By whom this Tomb was built.
The Persians relate, that a Platform of this above described Tomb, was dictated
by Schach Sedredin, to the chief Architect, whom he employed in building it
after a wonderful manner; that is to say, he caused him to shut his Eyes, and
showed him, as in a Dream, a stately Edifice, according to which he built the
forementioned Structure; which Schach Tzinid has enlarged, adding a base Court
and several Houses to it, so that now it is like a great Castle, with a
continual concourse of People walking up and down there, as in a little City:
It has great allowance from the King, The great Revenues belonging to it.
besides other Revenues and daily Presents, which makes it worth many Millions;
nay, it is said that this Metzid is able in time of War, with ready Money to
raise more Men than the King; for besides the great Sums in yearly Money, it
has many Houses and Lands belonging to it, which either pay Rent or Taxes to
the same, which amounts in all to to a considerable Treasury, viz. in Ardebil
are two hundred Houses, nine Hamans or Baths, eight Caravansera's, the great
Vaulted Exchange, with all the Shops and Walks about it; a hundred other Shops
in the Bazar, the Cattle, Corn, Salt, and Oyl-Market; the Afrabnischins, which
are those that sell their Goods in Tents; of the Villages belonging to Ardebil,
thirty three belong to the said Tomb, as also five Houses in Serab; in the City
Tabris, sixty Houses and a hundred Shops, besides two Villages near the City;
several Caravansera's and Baths in the City Caswin, as also in the Provinces of
Kilan and Astara; in the Plains of Mochan, the Villages Abchur and Eleschur,
with diverse others in the Counties Chalchal, Kermuth, and Hascheruth, besides
what comes out of Tartary and India, where several Places inclined to the
Persian Religion, pay also Tribute to the same. Moreover, it is a Custom
amongst the Persians, that when they go to Travel, or undertake any Business of
concernment, or when they are in Sickness or Trouble, they make great Vows to
Schach Sefi, which they perform as surely and willingly, as they would desire
to be saved; nay, many of them, when they come to celebrate the annual
Obsequies of their Saint, bring great Presents with them, and often in their
Wills and Testaments leave their whole Estates to the forementioned Tomb, where
also there are daily Offered Sheep, Horses, Camels, Money, and other things.
Those that bring the Presents, receive a handful of Anniseed, in testimony that
their Souls shall receive an extraordinary Consolation for the same. The
Presents are received by two sworn Stewards, by them called Nessurtzian, from
the Arabic word Nessurt, which signifies a Promise or Vow: they sit every day
in a House on the left side, near the Metzid Tschillachane, where between them
stands a round Coffer, covered with red Velvet, into which is put the Money
through a slit at the top. The Camels, Horses and Mules that are Offered, are
immediately sold, and converted into Money; but Sheep and Oxen are killed and
distributed amongst the Poor.

To these Stewards Schach Ismael gave the Revenue of a large Village called
Sultanabeth, a League from the City Ardebil, for their Maintenance; but Anno
1618. this Village was demolished by Schach Abbas, upon the approach of the
Turkish Army, together with the City Ardebil.

Description of the Tomb of Sed Tzeibrail.
In the Village Kelheran, half a League from Ardebil, is a Tomb erected in honor
of Seid Tzeibrail, Schach Sefi's Father: It is built round, in the midst of a
great Garden, and rising with ten Steps from the Ground, has long Glass
Windows of several colors, with Iron Bars;on the top of it stands a round
Tower, made of blue and green glazed Stones the Arched Roof is Gilded and
Painted blue, and the Floor covered with fine Carpets; round about are little
Chambers for view of Ardabil ARDEBIL
Youths, who ate taught to Sing some Portions of the Alcoran by the Hafisan, of
Keeper of the Tomb; there lie also several Books written in Arabic on little
Stools, out of which the Priests, as in Schach Sefi's Tomb, Sing at certain
times: In the middle of the Chapel stands the Tomb made of Wood, neatly
Inlay'd, and joined together with Copper Plates; it rises six Foot from the
Ground, ana being three Yards wide, is hung with rich Embroidery, and over it
are two Silver, and two Golden Lamps, only lighted and kept burning in the
Night.

Opposite to this Tomb is another little Chapel, in which several eminent
Persons also lie buried.

Four Leagues from Ardebil near Sultania, Village B^sun.
lies Busun, a large Village, with several other smaller thereabouts, in a
Valley full of good Pasturage for Cattle.

Five Leagues from Busun is another Village called Sengoa, Sengoa.
beyond which are several steep Mountains; and four Leagues farther another
pleasant Valley, with a remarkable Fountain.

Not far from this Valley Northwardly, appears the Mountain Taurus, by the
Persians thereabouts called Perdelis, near which on the South side is a Cavity,
which is worn by time above three Miles deep from the top of the Mountain, and
two Miles broad, and serves for a Receptacle or Den for Thieves, by whom
Travelers sustain great mischief, if they have not a considerable Party in
company with them. Through this Chasme or Gap runs the River Kisilosein, which
from thence precipitating it self, River Kisilosein.
and descending through Kilan, at last disembogues its white Water into the
Caspian Sea.

Four Leagues from this Valley lies the Village Keintze; and two Leagues from
thence, on the right hand, a Village called Hatzimir; and six Leagues farther
there is another Town called Kamal, beyond which lies Sencan; to the Southward
whereof appears a large Sandy barren Desert.

The City. Caxem.
Caxem, which Texeira calls Cahem, and which Davity places in Margiana, is the
first City in Media upon the Road from P^rsia. It is considerably large,
comprising at least five thousand Houses, standing on a Plain, where sometimes
they feel excessive Heats, being under 32 Degrees and 5 Minutes Northern
Latitude. In this City is a very long Street, being rather a Marketplace full
of Shops, with all sorts of Commodities, which though it be not so long as that
of Schiras, yet is much broader, and beautified with Trees that stand ranging
on both sides, and are a shade to the Houses. But that which is most ornamental
to this City, is their stately Caravansera, built An. 1610. being able to Lodge
very many Strangers, with all accommodation and convenience of Reception. Near
this stands a stately Palace, erected by King Abbas, which though but
indifferent on the outside, yet magnificent and beautiful within, and indeed
one of the best contrived Houses that the King has in his whole Dominions;
within whose Walls having passed one Garden, you enter into another larger than
the former, being the Haram or Seraglio for his Women, and surrounded with a
Hedge of delicate Fruit Trees.

The City Caxem is none of the biggest, nor the least in this Province, yet the
Kings of Persia always held the same in great esteem, partly because the People
were civil and quie^, and in their Dealings just and honest; and party for its
Wealth and flourishing Trade in all manner of Silk-Stuffs, but especially the
best and fairest Carpets of all Persia, made in the Villages belonging to the
Jurisdiction of this City, none, in all Persia comparing with them, except
those of Ispahan. The Weavers live all together in a little part of the City,
enclosed with a Wall, and all those other Workmen who prepare and make ready
the Silk. But the Suburbs are much more pleasant than the City it self, being
full of delightful Gardens, and having many fair Caravansera's, for the
reception and accommodation of Strangers. There is no Water about this City,
but what is in Wells, which nevertheless is very wholesome. Moreover, there is
little good Water all the way between Ispahan and Casbin, by reason of the
thirsty and hot Earth; but this want is supplied by the abundance of Snow,
which lies thick on the tops of the Mountains all the year.

A days Journey from this City is a Village, Village Cencem.
called Cencem, whose adjacent Hills exhale bituminous and sulphurous Vapors,
which makes the Air very unwholsom, especially in the Night, when these Vapors
chiefly rise; they also make the Summer Heats extreme sultry. This Town has
only one small Mosque in it, and that not remarkable for any thing that may
require a Description: In the Year 1617 it had a hundred and fifty Families,
but the next year following they had been all swept away with a pestilential
Distemper, had not the Spanish Agent Garcias de Silva, coming there by chance
in his way to Hispahan, given them advice to be Let-blood, which proved a
present Remedy.

Places lylng between Ardebil and Caswin.
In the Way from Ardebil to Caswin (according to Della Valla) lie these Places,
viz. Halfa League beyond Ardebil is a Village, in the Turkish Language called
Task-Chiesen, that is, Stone-cutters Town, from the Artificers that Carve there
in Stone. Four Leagues farther stands Tagi Bujur; and five Leagues beyond that,
Chivi, where the Way which leads to Caswin parts into two Roads, one whereof
runs through the troublesome Valley of Perdelisk, and the other extends
Eastward. Three Leagues from Chivi lies another Village called Hoin, and beyond
it a Valley that is scatteringly inhabited. Five Leagues from the
beforementioned Hoin appears the City Scial, at the foot of a Mountain, so
inconsiderable that it is scarce worth the mentioning; from whence you go
through narrow Roads, very foul and troublesome, which brings you first to
Derram, in the Country of Taron, where all the Fields quite to Caswin are
Planted with Cotton. Eight Leagues from Derram is the Village Ibrahim, so
denominated from the Builder thereof. A League farther runs the Stream called
Chizil-Uzen, which augmented with several Brooks and Rivulets, falls into the
Caspian Sea: From thence you soon arrive at Caswin.

The Province of Iran or Carabach.
Situation and Description.
THe Province of Iran, by most, especially by the Vulgar, called Carabach, lies
between two famous Rivers, viz. the Araxes and Cyrus, now called Aras and Cur:
It compriseth part of Armenia and Georgia, or Gurtz, and is divided into
sixteen Counties, viz. Cappan, Tzulfa, Schabus, Sisian, Keschtas, Sarsebil,
Eruan or Iruan, Kerchbulach, Achstawa, Aberan, Schorgel, Sarschat Intze,
Thaback Meleck, Thumanis, Alget, and Vzilder. In these Counties are several
fair Cities, Villages and Fortresses, of which the best known are Berde,
Bilagan, Schemcur, Kentze, Bercuschat, Nachtschuan, Ordebat, Bajefied, Macu,
Magasburt, Tiflis, and Tzilder. It is a very fertile Country, abounding
especially in Silk, and has been often Invaded by the Turk, who borders upon
it.

Drangiane or Sagistam.
Borders of Sagistam.
DRangiane, at this day called Sagistam, borders in the North and West, with
Aria; in the East, with Arachosia or Cabul; and in the South at a part of
Gedrosia.

The several Names of its Metropolis.
According to Olearius and Ananias, the Metropolis of this Province is called
Sistam, which Ananias will have to be the City Propstasia of Ptolomy, otherwise
named Phrada; whereas Davity says Sistan and Sagistam are two several
Provinces, and will rather have the City which Ana^ias calls Asiam, to be the
Propstasia of Ptolomy, by reason of the similitude in the Names, which will not
hold good, if (as some are of opinion) Sistan be a contraction of Sagistan.

The other Towns (according to the same Ananias) are Bigui, which is the Begis
of Ptolomy, Canasi, Mulete, Bachagi, Aeloud, perhaps the ancient Aricada of
Ptolomy, and Timocaim; of which last Marcus Paulus Venetus makes mention.

The chief Towns.
The chiefest Towns in this Province (according to Olearius) are Sistan,
Chaluck, Ketz,etc.

Ptolomy also places the River Drange in this Province, which glides Southerly
from the side of the Mountain Bagoe. In the Maps, and by Ananias, this River is
called Ilment, but the whole Country being surrounded with Mountains, has so
pent it up, that it can scarce find any Passage.

There are but few Towns in this Province: the People are under the Subjection
of the Persian Sophi, and use Persian Manners and Customs.

Here Texeira makes us believe, contrary to the received Opinion, that there is
a Mountain, on which some of the Persians, to this day, worship their ancient
God Orimasda, or the neverdying Fire.

The Country of Nixabur, or Nisabur.
Situation of Nixabur.
THe Country of Nixabur is by Texeira placed between that of Carason, Usbeck,
Tartary, and Turkestan. The Metropolis is also called Nisabur, and (according
to Olearius) not far from Mesched, being in 102 Degrees and twenty Minutes
Longitude, and in 38 Degrees and 40 Minutes Northern Latitude*

The Country is full of Sandy Deserts, which are in a perpetual motion, as if
they boiled, though there be no Wind.

Near the City Nisabur lies a Mountain, on which are found excellent
Turkoises, so called perhaps from the Name of the Country in which the Hill
lies, namely Turkestan.

The Province of Kilan or Gilan.
Denomination and Situation of Kilan.
THe Province of Kilan, or Gilan, by the Ancients called Hircania, has received
that Denomination from a peculiar People named Kileck: It lies between high
Mountains and the Caspian Sea, like a Cross on an even Plain, which being
clayie Ground, is much fertiliz'd with many Brooks and Rivers that fall from
the neighboring Mountains; but in some places it was heretofore unpassable, by
reason of the Water, until King Abbas raised a Cawsey, which crosses the whole
Country from Astarabath to Astara, so that you may now travel with great ease.
It conterminates in the South, with the Province of Erack; in the North, with
the Caspian Sea; and in the West and North-West, at Schirwan, or the Mountains
of Schamachie and the Plains of Mocan.

This Province af Gilan is divided into twenty Counties, Division.
in which there are several Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, viz. Kisilagatsch,
Maschischan, Buladi, Cilekeran, Disekeran, Rihk Lahetzan, Deschtewend,
Lengercunan, Schichkeran, How, Lissar, Kesker, Masanderan, Marancu, Astara,
Nokeran, Lemur, Tzeulandan, Rescht, and Astarabath.

You enter this Province on the South from Erack, through a narrow but well
known Road, by Writers called Caken, or The Straight of Hircania; but in the
time of Alexander it was called Pylae, and is the same which Olearius calls now
The Caspian Gate.

The Way is very narrow through which you come into the Province of Kilan.

At the Mouth of this Pass are two Streams that coming from the right and left
side of Erack, conjoyn their Waves, and gliding along, come at last to a Stone
Bridge, which being Vaulted, and accommodated with several Rooms of
Entertainment, supplies the place of a Caravansera; and passing thence, divide
again and fall by two Mouths into the Caspian Sea. Beyond the Bridge you come
into a fair Road, which presently divides it self into two Ways, one leading to
Ardebil, and the other to Kilan; the first is very troublesome and dangerous, by
reason of many Rocky Descents, and steep Passages, encumbered with great Stones,
and often so narrow, that a Camel and a Horse can scarce pass one by another;
but the right Way that leads to Kilan is rather worse, having such Caverns and
Precipices, that Travelers are forced to walk afoot and lead their Horses over
the Mountains, of which, at the same Season, one side is very cold, and the
other extreme hot; but more Northerly through Kilan, are very pleasant Shades,
with all manner of Fruit Trees, and others fit for Timber.

In a Valley near the Stream Isperuth, lies a Village called Pyle Rubar
encompassed with Hills. Though this Village be at the Entrance into Kilan, yet
the Persians will not allow it to belong thereto, but to the Mountains of Tarum.

A League from Pyle Rubar, in the middle of the River Isperuth, are to be seen
the Ruins of an old Wall and Bridge, destroyed (as they say) by Alexander the
Great.

The Country of Rescht.
The County of Rescht borders North, on the Caspian Sea; West, with Kesker; and
East, with the River Isperuth: It has a City of the same Name, which is also
the Metropolis; it stands two Leagues from the Caspian Shore, and half a League
Eastward from the Persichan, by the Arabians called Husan, placed in 85 Degrees
and in 10 Minutes Longitude, and in 37 Decrees Northern Latitude, to which
Olearius adds 35 Minutes. The Houses in the City are not so beautiful as in
other places, though most of them are covered very artificially to keep out the
Rain, which falls there very often, and in great abundance. About the Houses
are Planted Orange Trees, which bear twice a year. There is also a Maidan, or
great Marketplace, which is very well supplied with all sorts of Provision for
the Table, to be had at a very cheap Rate.

The Villages that belong to this County, are Kisma, Pumen or Fumen, Tallum,
Scheft, Dilum, and Massula.

This County has several Rivers, which descending from the Hills are very well
stored with Fish, which yield the King a good Revenue, by granting Licenses to
such as take them: They discharge their Waters (...) the chiefest Persichan,
half a League Westward from the City Rescht. More Westward, Chestecan; a little
League farther Westerly, Pischeru and Lissar, over which lie several high
Bridges; and at last follows the Stream Tzomus.

The County Kesker.
The Territory Kesker borders Eastward, with Rescht; Northerly, with the Caspian
Sea; and in the West, with Lissar.

In this County are three and twenty Towns and Villages; the first and chiefest
is Kesker, which gives Denomination to the whole Country; the rest are
Schacherruth, Curab, Enseli, Dulab, Schab; and more Northerly Ruesseru,
Mianschaker, Sengerbasara, How, Choseckkadehene, Lenkeran, and Kisikgatz; and
between the Mountains, Kuawer, Marancu, Deschtewend, Subel, Drich, Malule,
Busler, Dubilcha, Tifebihi, and Talischeran.

The City Curab.
Curab, vulgarly called also Kesker, is situated like Rescht in a Wood, two
Leagues from the Caspian Shore, yet has great Respect and Privileges, as
being the Birthplace of Schach Sefi, the Son of Sefi Myrsa, whose Queen fell
in Labor as he went his Progress that way.

This County of Kesker has store of fertilizing Streams, the chiefest whereof
are Feslei and Nasseru; and boasts also a great Lake called Enseli, abounding
with Fish.

The Country of Kilan in the South is full of Woods, and juts with two
Promontories into the Sea, one Eastward from Mazanderan and Ferabath, and the
other Westward from the Province of Astara.

In the Province of Lissar, Westward from the Stream Nasseru, run fourteen
Rivulets, the chiefest whereof are Dinatsar, three Leagues from the Stream
Nasseru, Schiberu, Chalesera, Alarus and Nabarrus; which last runs in the
Province Lissar, by the Village Sengerhasara. More Westerly are many other
Rivers, the eminentest whereof in the Counties of Howelemur, Nokeran, und
Astara, are Lome, Conab, and Beskeschan, over which lie great Bridges.

In the Province Astara the Stream Choskedehene disembogues into the Sea, near
a River of the same Denomination: Choskedehene signifies properly A Dry Mouth,
because the Sea in that place is so shallow, that no Fish can get over the
Sands into the River.

Decription of Astara,
In the Territory of Astam lies the Town Astara, which though it be the
Residence of the Chan, yet it has no Walls.

Westward beyond Astara lies the Mountain Schindan, before made mention of, and
upon it a Village called Schach Sahadan.

Borders of the County of Langercunan,
The County of Langercunan borders in the East, with the Sea; in the West, with
Astara, and in the North at Maschischan. This County has a narrow Passage
toward the side of Astara, because at the foot of the woody Mountains, which
reach down to the Shore, it is bordered by a deep Morass, through which only
runs a narrow Cawsey; at the farther end whereof a River called Serdane glides
from the Mountains; beyond which is the Village Lenkeran, washed by a Brook
named Warasaruth. This County and Village has the Denomination of
Anchor-Ground and Haven, notwithstanding there is only a little Inlet, where
the Land runs into the Sea with two Horns like a Half Moon; one of them lying
before Lenkeran, is covered with Woods, and the other before Kisilagats, with
Canes. None but small Boats can go into the same, by reason of the shallow
Water, and is also very dangerous to Anchor in, the Wind blowing hard from the
North-East, wherefore the Boats are generally haled ashore. The Curtzibachi or
Governor, has this Harbor and adjacent Villages for a part of his Revenue;
notwithstanding others say it belongs to Ardebil.

Through this Country, from the Village Lenkeran to Kisilagats, four
indifferent deep Brooks, under several Bridges, r^n into the Sea.

In the County Kisilagats, about half a League from the Shore, lie three or
four Isles, in the Sea, viz. Saru, so called from the redness of the Soil,
Alibaluch, and Kellechol; all which, as also the main Shore, are covered with
Reeds.

The unwall'd Town Kisilagats, signifying Red Mold, lies two Miles North-West
into the Country, on a Plain near a Brook called Willeschi: It was formerly
bought by Sulsagar, Chan of Ardebil, and after his Decease Inherited by his Son
Hossein Sultan, who had possession of it in the Year 1635.

The Kilan Mountains extend from hence North-Westerly, and lessening, stretch
to the Desert of Mocan.

At the foot of these Mountains lie several Villages, the chiefest whereof are
Buladi, Matzule, Buster, and Thalischecran; near which lies that Plain which
(according to Olearius) must needs be the same which Strabo makes mention of,
as lying near the Caspian Gate, and which is called by him in the Greek Tongue,
(...), that is, A Pasture for Horses; but he seems very much to transcend the
grounds of truth, when he affirms, that above fifty thousand Horses could Graze
here.

Not far from hence, in a Hilly Country, lie the Counties Cuawer, Marancu,
Deschtewend, and others; and in the neighboring Mountains, the Village Dubil,
otherwise called Chatifekekis; which Village those People that inhabited it in
the time of Schach Abbas, were for their lewd manner of living, their
promiscuous Sensualities, Rapes and Incests committed one amongst another,
rooted out by the said King, and the Village re-peopled with new Inhabitants.

Nature of the Soil.
The rich Country of Kilan has a fat clayie Soil, and in some places where it
is low, deep Morasses. Moreover, between the Mountains and the Caspian Sea is a
smooth Plain, moistened by many little Brooks and Streams, which fall out of the
Mountains into the Sea: It was formerly a troublesome Way to travel; but Schach
Abbas caused a Cawsey to be made through all Kilan, from Astarabath to Astara,
by which means it is both safe and convenient to travel either on Foot, by
Horse, or with Camels.

Productions of the Country.
The most peculiar Products of this Country, are Silk, exceeding large Grapes,
Tobacco, Oranges, Pomegranates, Figs, and Calabashes.

The Stock of the Vines about Astara, grow generally to the thickness of a
Man's Body; the Calabashes are guided up by Poles, like our Scarlet Beans, for
if they lie on the Ground, they are apt to rot.

Wild Beasts.
The Mountains which look upon the Caspian Sea, are overgrown with Woods,
wherewith indeed the whole Country of Kilan is environed; and they abound with
wild Beasts, as Hogs, Deer, Goats with Horns of an exceeding length, but not so
crooked as those of Europe, besides Beasts of prey, as Tigers, Leopards, Wolves
and Bears; the first of which are so numerous, that they are brought ten or
twenty at a time to be sold, and taught to follow the Chase, in regard of their
swift running, and withal made so tame, that the Huntsmen carry them on their
Horses; and most Gentlemen keep them as we in England do Mastives, for the
security of their Houses.

The Rivers abound with all sorts of Fish; Fish.
so that Kilan has not only sufficient for her own Provision and Store, but
enough to furnish both her Neighbors, and Strangers at remoter distance.

Constitution of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants of this Country are of two sorts, viz. the Talians, who for
the most part possess the Mountains; and the Kilaneans, who inhabit the Plains.

The Kilaneans, by reason of the Climate they live in, are generally of a more
sallow Complexion than the Persians, being a surly and selfconceited People,
especially those that dwell between Mazanderan, and Kesker, who relying on the
Strength of their Country, often bid defiance to the Kings of Persia.

Their Apparel.
The Habit of these People in general, is much shorter than of other Persians,
occasioned by the wetness of the Place wherein they live, only herein they
differ, that the Kilaneans wear Caps of course Linen, and the Talians of black
Sheepskins. The Talian Women being of a better composed Countenance than the
other, wear not so many Head-clothes as their Neighbors. Virgins braid their
Hair in many Locks, which hang down about their Shoulders, some above forty,
but Women have only eight or twelve. They wear in stead of Shoes, wooden
Sandals, which are fastened on by a Button between their great Toes, yet they
trip very nimbly with them, even in the most plashy Ways; And the Men go
barefoot, which is the cause that they generally have such broad Feet.

Their Language.
The Language of this Country, as the People, is twofold: The Kilanean and the
usual Persian differ only in some few Letters; but the Talian has so little
resemblance with it, that they scare understand each other: for proof whereof
we give this Instance; Speck in the Talian Language signifies a Dog; in the the
Persian they call it Seck, and the Gilans say Seggi. But in Mazanderan they
speak the common Persian Tongue. There is no Province in Persia, wherein the
Women have so much Respect, and do so little Work, as Kilan, where they employ
themselves only in points of Huswifery, as Spinning, Weaving, making
Dubarsita, or Syrrups (which they sell in great quantities to Houses of public
Entertainment;) for in other Places they Till the Ground and Sow Rice; and
whilst the Man Ploughs the Ground, the Woman in her best Apparel brings the
Seed into the Field in Baskets, which he takes and scatters abroad; she Weeds,
whilst he Waters the Land, and as he Reaps the Corn, she binds it up in
Sheaves, which being brought home by him, she Threshes, Sifts, and Sells: And
here we are to observe, that every man's particular Ground lies behind, or about
his Dwelling.

This Country, by reason of its strong Situation, seems almost invincible,
being surrounded by a continued Ledge of Rocky Mountains, through which there
are but four Passages; the first whereof runs Northward by the Desert of Mocan,
through the Province of Lengercunan; the second South-West, through Mazanderan,
Ferabath, and by Astarabath through Chorazan. These Ways or Passages are (as
Oleareus supposes) the Portae Caspiae, or Caspian Gates, mentioned by Strabo,
Pliny, Solinus, Ptolomy, and others of the Ancients; and they might so be
called, because they led out of Persia to the Caspian Sea, and are indeed so
narrow, that through some of them two Horses or Camels cannot go abreast, and
in others scarce one, as particularly appears by the Description of Pyle Kubar.

Within this Province is reckoned the City Derbend near the Caspian Sea, where
there is also a narrow Passage (being the Iron Gate before mentioned) out of
Tartary into Persia. Camels go with ease along this Way to Gilan, but Men that
ride that way (excepting some desperate People) are forced to lead their Horses
over the Mountains; wherefore a few Men placed at these Entrances, may keep a
great Army out of the Country. And that the Way over the Mountains might be
kept secure, a great Wall was built from that City fifty Leagues in length down
to the Caspian Sea, and only one Gate through it; and this in part is
manifested by the Name Derbend, for Der signifies a Gate, and Bend a Line.
Moreover (as we hinted before,) whoever takes notice of this City, and the
Country about it, will certainly conclude, that Derbend is the strongest and
safest Door to those that will travel by Land through Persia; and that if the
same be secured, it is impossible for any on that side to come thither: And
they are no less safe by Sea, in regard no Ships can approach the Shore, by
reason of the many Sands and shallow Water; the Cossacks only now and then
with their small Vessels pilfer along the Seacoast.

Their Religion.
Most of the Inhabitants are either downright Mahumetans, or of the Sect of
Hanifa, and keep Aaly's Feast on the twenty fifth of January.

Their Government.
This Kilan was heretofore under the Heptarchy of seven petty Kings, yet all
having, or at least assuming to themselves an arbitrary Power, and as they
gained an opportunity, took advantage of each other; and yet some of them
continued in Power, till Schach Abbas, a little before his Death, subdued the
same.

The Plains of Mocan, or Mogan.
Description of the Plains of Mocan.
NOrthward from Kilan, near the Sea, lies a Champain Country, watered by
several narrow, but deep Rivulets, the chiefest whereof are Uskeru and Butaru,
which have Bridges over them toward the Sea. The whole Tract: of Land ere you
come to the Mountains, is very full of Villages, Garrisoned with the King's
Soldiers, each under a peculiar Captain, to resist: the Invasions of the Turks;
to which purpose those Villages are assigned for their Maintenance, and the
Rusticks not only pay a certain Tribute to them, but they have Lands also set
out, which they must Till for the Soldiers.

This Champain contains sixty Leagues in length, and twenty in breadth,
bordering in the South at Kilan, and in the West verging the Province and
Mountains of Betziruan.

On this Plain (which the Turks call Mindualuck, that is, A thousand Chimneys,
and the Persians, Mogan or Mocan) dwell several sorts of People, which in the
Reign of Hossein making an Insurrection under one Jesid, being vanquished, were
condemned thither, and not permitted to live in any other Towns or Villages;
they are by one general Name called Sumeck Rajeti, According to our Law-Term,
they hold in Villenage.
that is, The Kings Villains, because from Generation to Generation they are
the King's Slaves, and have small Allowances, according to that most inferior
Qualification.

Their chief Support is gained by keeping of Cattle, which they drive in the
Summer to the Mountains, where they ^^nd good Pasturage and wholesome Air; but in
the Winter they return to the Plains.

Their Children go stark naked in Summer, but the aged People wear Cotton
Coats. They are taken to be a kind of Salvages, divided into several Tribes.

The Habitations on this Plain, are little Cottages, and very mean, according
to the Nature of the Persians, by the Tartars called Olack, built of Straw and
Bushes, and within furnished with as bad Implements.

Five Leagues from the Entrance upon the Plain, from the South toward the
North, stands a Chapel, wherein lies buried Bairam Tecle Obasi, who in the
time of Schach Abbas, when the Turks, under the Command of the Bashaw Tzacal
Ogli fell into Persia, was a famous Robber, and having under his Command a
great company of the like Shifters, turned his Praedatory Practice upon the
Enemy; for which the King not only pardoned his former Crimes, but made him
General of an Army of twelve thousand Men, with which he did the Enemy more
mischief, than the King with all the rest of his Persian Forces, and withal
raised him to the Dignity of a Prince, and gave him many Villages hereabouts.

On this Plain breed also a sort of wild Beasts, not seen any where else in
Persia, which keep together in great Herds, and are by the Turks called
Tzeiran, and by the Persians, Ahu; they are very swist-footed, and shaped like
a Roe-Buck.

In most places of Mocan grows abundance of Liquorice, to the thickness of a
Man's Arm; the Juice boiled out of the same is much better than our English, or
that which grows in Germany.

Ten Leagues up into the Plain from the River Cur, flows a Brook called Baharu,
where many Vulgarly called Turtles.
Tortoises are found, which lay their Eggs on the high Banks, and in the Fields
in Holes made in the Sand against the Hills, but always toward the South, that
so they may be the sooner hatched by the heat of the Sun.

Stream Aras.
Through Mogan or Mocan runs a River, now called Aras, and by the Ancients,
Araxis; but not the Araxis in Persia, by the Inhabitants called Cur, and by
some miscalled Beademir. The Ancients have perhaps given the Stream Araxis that
Denomination from the Greek word (...), that is. To break off, or Rent asunder,
because by the violence of its Course it often takes away pieces of the Land,
leaving the Banks steep and jutting. It springs from the Mountain Ararat in
A^menia, and carries the Water of many Streams along with it, the chiefest
whereof are Carasu, Senki, Kerni, and Arpa, and at last sinks into the Ground
near Carasu; afterward appearing again, not far from Ordabath, falls with
great noise and violence, which may be heard into the Province of Mocan, for
Mocan, in respect of Armenia and Schirwan, lies very low; through Mocan it runs
very slow toward the Caspian Sea, and unites about a quarter of a League
beyond the Village Tzawat, six Leagues from the Sea, in 39 Degrees and 40
Minutes Northern Latitude, with the Stream Cyrus, now called Cur, which comes
out of the North from Georgia or Gurstan.

Both these Rivers are very large, each being a hundred and forty Paces broad;
the Water thereof smooth, deep, and brown-colour'd, runs between two high Banks.

The conjoined Streams of Aras and Cur, are by the Inhabitants called Causchan.

The Village Tzawat
The Village Tzawat has received that Denomination from the Arabic word
Tzawas, which signifies a Passage or Through-fare, because at the same place
there also lies a Bridge cross the River, over which none are permitted to come
into Persia without a Pass. Every Spring, in March, when the Water rises, they
have an Art to remove this Bridge, left it should be broken, for then the River
overflows its Banks and the adjacent Plain above a League; so that none can
travel during that time.

The Province of Betziruan.
Description of Betziruan.
ON the West side of the Plains of Mocan, lies a Country and Mountain called
Betziruan, which is watered by a winding River, so that those which travel
through this Country to Ardebil, are forced to cross the same.

Amongst several others, there is one Village, called Schechmuras, where the
Front of the Houses are built of Stone, and the Back-parts cut into the
Mountain, but covered over with Canes, Straw, and the like.

On the top of the Mountain rises a clear and sweet Spring, which passing
between the Rocks, breeds abundance of Craw-Fish.

Not far from hence are other Mountains of two Leagues long, and behind them a
Village called Disle, in which the Indians that come to Trade at Schamachie
built a Caravansera, Anno 1639.

Between these Mountains in diverse place grow abundance of Fig Trees.

Five Leagues from Disle lies the Caravansera Aggis, built very large.

In this Way the Travelers never suffer their Horses or Camels to eat, by
reason of the poisonous Quality of the Grass, of which some that have tasted
died soon after.

Somewhat farther lies the Village Tzanlu, near a pleasant Hill surrounded with
Gardens and Orchards.

Beyond Tzanlu lies Tzizetlu, a Mountain three Leagues over. By the foot of it
glides the River Carusu, which coming out of the Kilanean Mountains, falls into
the Aras: It also runs by the Village Samiam, under a Stone Bridge with six
Arches Half a League from which, and two little Leagues from the City Ardebil,
is the Hamlet Tzabedar.

Little Fuel is to be had hereabouts, wherefore the Inhabitants burn Cows,
Horses, and Camels Dung, in stead thereof, having first dried the same
sufficiently in the Sun.

Having in this our Relation hitherto often made mention of the Caspian Sea, it
will not be amiss to give a short Description of it.

The Caspian Sea.
The several Denominations of the Caspian Sea.
THe Caspian Sea or Lake, has several Denominations from the diverse adjacent
Villages and Countries, viz. The Russians call the same Chualenca or Gualenscoi
More; the Moors, Bohar Corsun, that is, Enclosed Sea, (which Name they also
give to the Arabian Gulf;) the Persians, Culsum, a Name agreeing with the
Red Sea; the Latins, both ancient and modern, following the Greeks, Mare
Caspium and Hyrcanum, as others from the City Bacuje in Schirwan, Mare de Bacu;
also Kilan, Giorgia, Terkestan, Corasum, and Cunsar.

Its length and breadth.
The length of the Caspian Sea is by most Writers accounted fifteen days Voyage,
and the breadth eight, in Boats with Oars, without the help of the Wind. The
length from the Mouth or Entrance of the Sea from Astrachan to Ferabath, is
accounted eight Degrees, or a hundred and twenty German Miles, and the breadth
from the Province Churesin to the Circassian Mountain, six Degrees, or ninety
Leagues.

This Sea neither Ebbs nor Flows as others, though Curtius seem to affirm the
contrary; for true it is, that the Water rises sometimes, not only on the
Shore, but also runs over the Country, especially on the West side, occasioned
by map of Caspian Sea Paskeart vande CASPISE ZEE.
the Wind, which blowing from the Sea, drives up the Water upon the contrary
Coast: for it has been observed, that in calm Weather it keeps at a certain
height. In the middle it is so deep that it cannot be plumm'd with a fifty or
sixty Fathom Line. Hundreds of Rivers discharge their Waters into the same; for
between Rescht and Schamachie, being distant about twenty days Journey from
each other, it receives of great and small Streams, above fourscore; the
chiefest of them are the Volga, anciently called Rha; the Araxis or Aras,
united with the Cyrus or Cur, Kisilosein, Bastro, Acsai, and Coisu; from the
North comes the Jaik; from the South and East, the Jems, Nios, Oxus, and
Orxantes, by Curtius called Tanais. It may seem a Wonder, that this Sea, which
receives the Water of so many Rivers, should have no apparent place for
Discharge of the same; and therefore some have affirmed, that it percolates
into the main Ocean through invisible Pipes or Channels, Olearius says he was
informed by the Persians, that there is a great Mouth between Tabristan and
Mazanderan, not far from Ferabath, into which this Sea falling, sinks away
under the Mountains; but we insist not thereon. The Water near the Shore is
sweet, by reason of the many fresh Streams, which (as we said) fall into it,
but in the middle is very salt, and (according to Petreus) as black as Ink; but
Olearius affirms the contrary to this last Point from ocular experience;
neither is there any Island replete with Towns and Villages, only Ensil near
Ferabath, affording good Pasturage for Cattle, has some few Huts for Herdsmen,
Nor are any great Serpents caught in this Sea, as Curtius, nor red Fish, as
Pedro Bizarro relates from Ambrosius Contarenus, being without a Head, yet an
Ell long; out of whose boiled Fat the Inhabitants extrad Oil, and make Salve
for Camels; but the People hereabouts want not the forementioned Oil, for they
have great plenty of Nefta, being another sort of liquid Matter, which they
burn in Lamps, and make use of on other like occasions.

The great Fish Naca.
There is a great Fish called Naca taken in this Sea, having a short Head and
Belly, wide Mouth, and round Tail, three or four Yards thick. This Fish does
great mischief to Fishermen, for it will hang with its Head under Water, and
overset a Boat with its Tail, if not opportunely prevented.

The White-Fish.
No less dangerous is the White-Fish, of which so many breed here, that the
Fishermen dare not go into above four Fathom Water; which Pomponius Mela seems
to have observed, when he says in his Geography, This Sea is more dangerous
than any other, by reason of the many Monsters that breed therein. It has been
reported, that in Kilan, over against the Mountain Sahebelan, where they breed
most, they are taken with Hooks, fastened to thick Lines, and Baited with Flesh.

Diverse other sorts of Fish.
Nor does it only breed Monsters, for (contrary to the Opinion of Contareno and
Bizarro) it produces several sorts of excellent Fish, as Salmon, Sturgeon,
Carps an Ell long, a sort of Herrings, great Breams called Chascham, Scwit or
Schivit, and a sort of Barbels a Yard and a half long, but others less, which
are tough, and not fit to be eaten.

The Inhabitants there catch another sort of Salmon-Trouts, which they dry in
the Smoke, and Dress after this manner, viz. They lay the smoked Fish, wrapped
in a Linen or Cotton Cloth, upon a hot Hearth, and then cover it with Ashes
till it be enough, whereby it gains a most delicate taste.

This abundance of Fish breeding in the Sea, causes the King of Persia to Farm
out the Fishing thereof toward the Mouth of the fresh Rivers, which brings him
yearly considerable Sums of Money. This Fishing Farm begins in September, and
lasts to the end of March; during which time the Rivers are shut up, to prevent
Intruders, that have no right to Fish there, but all the rest of the year not
only the Rivers, but the Sea it self lies free and open to all Persons.

This Sea in the Summer the Persians, Tartars, and Russians Navigate in slight
and miserable Vessels, with which they dare not Sail but only before the Wind,
nor venture from the sight of the Shore.

There are but few Harbors, and those neither good nor safe; the place between
the Island Tzenzeni and the main Land, is counted one of the securest, and
therefore the Persians always Anchor there in the Night: they also used to Ride
with their Vessels near Bacu, Lenkeran, and Ferabath, according as the Wind
favors them: But the best in all that Sea, is toward the East on the Tartars
side, and is called Chuaresm and Minkischlack, but by some named Manguslave.

This Sea (according to Herodotus, Ptolomy, and Aristotle) is distinct: from
all other, being wholly enclosed within the Land, so that it may justly be
called a Mediterranean; from whence appear the Errors of Dionysius the
Alexandrian, Pomponius Mela, Strabo, Pliny, Solinus, Basilius Magnus, and
others, who would make it to mix with the Scythian or Tartarick Sea; or else a
Bay of the Northern Ocean, and not totally surrounded by the Land.

The Province of Mazanderan.
Borders of the Province of Mazanderan
THe Province of Mazanderan or Mazanderon, conterminates in the West with Gilan
or Kilan; the East Borders upon Estarabat; the South touches Erack, Media, and
a part of Gilan; and the North verges with the Bacu, or Caspian Sea: Its length
is accounted to be thirty Leagues, and Compriseth twenty five Cities, the
Metropolis of which bears the same Denomination with the Province; but Della
Valla and Olearius name it Ferhabad, and aver, that formerly it was called
Tahona.

Description of Ferhabad.
The City Ferhabad which lies about two thousand Paces from the Caspian Sea, is
in a great Plain, and (as Della Valla witnesses) in a few years after the
first Building, grew to the bigness of Rome or Constantinople, but was not
enclosed with Walls; Nor have the chief Cities in this Country any such
Enclosures.

The Teggine Rude, that is, The Swist-River, runs through the middle of the
City, over which there is but one Bridge, but that neatly built, in that place
where commonly the greatest concourse or People is; in other parts, a good
distance from the Bridge, they Ferry over in slat-bottom'd Boats, made of one
great Tree.

This Place, by reason of its nearness to the Caspian Sea, and convenience of
the beforementioned River, is accounted a Seaport Town, because the Ships Sail
up to the aforenam'd Bridge, where they drop their Anchors; and though the
Vessels are not very big, yet all that drive this Trade, viz. to the City
Gilan, Esterabad, Bacu, Demircapt, and to Astracan in Muscovia, lade and unlade
here. King Abbas not long since called it Ferhabad, that is, The City of
perfect Joy, which is an Arabic word, compounded of Fer, which signifies Joy,
and Habad, that is, Finished. Two Reasons induced the King to build this City,
the one was a desire he had to beautify his Kingdom, and extend the Limits
thereof (for he built diverse Cities in several other places;) the other was his
kindness to this particular Region; partly because it was the Birthplace of
his Mother, and partly because it was the strongest part of his Dominions: for
it lies on one side surrounded with the unnavigable part of the Caspian Sea,
and on the other with inaccessible Mountains, through which none can come but
by narrow and craggy Paths; besides all which, this Country lay remotest from
the Enemy, especially from the Turks. The Houses in the beginning were not
above a Story high, and covered only with Canes, to keep out the Weather: The
Walls consist of a certain Stuff very common in this Country, which being
mixed with Straw is called Calghil, that is. Straw and Earth; to which a
quantity of Sand being added, and beaten like Mortar, makes a most strong and
durable Cement. But the King's Palace is built of Sun-dry'd Brick, which in the
time of a great Fire proving a safeguard to it self and all within, caused the
King to command all the Houses to be built of the like Materials.

The City Eskerf.
Eastward from thence lies a City called Eskerf, about two Leagues from the same
Sea, at the end of a large Plain, near the foot of a Mountain, which environs
the same on the South side.

This City was also built by Abbas, at the same time with Ferhabad: It has
many Gardens, and a great Bazar, or Street full of Shops, besides diverse other
meaner Houses, standing without order among shady Groves in a delightful Plain,
which is full of Inhabitants, sent thither by the King; and is much frequented,
especially when the Court Resides there, which is the greatest part of the
Summer; for in Winter Ferhabad was the Royal Chamber: and this the King did to
draw Inhabitants thither, and cause a Trade; and likewise because it was well
seated for Hunting, and other Recreations. The Houses are built under high
Trees, and so shaded with the Boughs, that they are scarce to be seen, insomuch
that one may doubt whether Eskerf be a City erected in a Wood, or a Grove
inhabited like a City. In the middle of the Gardens behind the Houses, stand
Chambers, or rather, Galleries, (because they are only covered on the top)
which being about a Man's height above the Ground, are ascended to by Steps,
and serve both for Eating and Sleeping Rooms in Summer, by reason of their
coolness, and are in the Country Language called Balachane, that is, A high
House: And this is so common, and the Inhabitants so used to repose in open
Rooms, that they would incur great inconvenience by a more close retiredness.
The Streets are broad, extending far in a straight Line; before the Houses are
Channels, to receive and carry away the Water, which else, by reason of their
even lying, would make them very dirty: In one of which stands a Royal
Building, the chiefest Gate whereof opens into a long and spacious Street. Upon
one side of this Palace may be seen a square Court, crossing which you come to
a Garden Door, into which none but Grandees are permitted to enter. This Garden
lies behind the Palace at the foot of a Hill, beset with Trees, and adorned
with Banquetting-houses built on the same by King Abbas. The Garden being one
large Square, has in the middle a Dewanchane, or Terrace-Walk; twice as long
as broad, open toward the North, with an Ascent of two or three Steps, but
behind, and on the other side, closed up with a Wall, wherein are diverse large
Windows. Through this runs a crystal Stream, brought from an adjacent Spring,
opposite to the Diwanchane. The Floor of this Diwanchane is commonly covered
with Tapistry at the time of Audience, when any Persons of Quality kneel on the
same before the King.

Peopling of Mazanderan
The Province of Mazanderan is inhabited by several sorts of People, which are
of diverse Tribes and Beliefs, sent thither by King Abbas after the building of
Ferhabad and Eskerf, particularly Georgians, who in some sort Professed
Christianity; Mahumetans, Armenians, and Medes, together with some of his own
Subjects.; where the King gave every one Land to Till and maintain his Family,
and encouraged them to follow such Employments as they had been accustomed to
in their own Country: and to that purpose accommodated them to their several
Qualifications. The Mahumetans are the smallest number, and the Christians
(being for the most part Georgians and Armenians) the biggest, who had all
leave to build as many Houses or Churches as they pleased, and are tolerated to
enjoy their own Religion quietly.

Their Apparel.
All these new Inhabitants of this Country wear long Breeches and short Coats,
not reaching down to their Knees, with an upper Garment made fast about their
Middle with a Girdle; they wear no Turbants, only a little Cap, in the Persian
Tongue called Cork, made of Leather, and Lined with Cloth, sharp on the top,
and broad at the bottom; which were invented by King Abbas. These kind of Caps
are very common, and worn within Doors in stead of Turbants by Persons of
Quality, but when they go abroad they put on their Turbants, yet their Servants
carry these after their Masters.

Their Language and Government.
The Language which is spoken in this Province, is the vulgar Persian.

The supreme Command of the whole Province belongs to a Viceroy or Lieutenant,
who bears the Title of Chan, and keeps his Court in Ferhabad. But in former
times this Province was Governed by a peculiar King, which paid Tribute to the
Sophy; but he rebelling, Xa Abas sent his General thither to reduce him.

This Province is surrounded with great Woods, cut through by several Brooks,
and enclosed with Mountains overgrown with Trees, insomuch that Della Valla
affirms, that this Country bore so great a resemblance with those of Europe,
that he saw not the like in all those Parts through which he traveled.

Nature of the Soil.
The Soil is very fruitful, and used to lie Fallow, through the neglect and
idleness of the Inhabitants: The Earth being fat and Morassy, is encompassed by
the Caspian Sea and River Teggine Rude.

Temperature of the Air.
The temperature of the Air is much like that at Rome, viz. in the Winter moist,
and subject to tempestuous Weather: moreover, they feel the same Heat or Cold
there, which is no great wonder, because both the forementioned Places lie
almost in one and the same Northern Latitude, having great, and almost
continual Winter Rains.

At the entrance on the South out of the Territory of Arack, into that of
Mazanderan; lies a very narrow Valley at the foot of several Mountains, which
after three Leagues Journey grows somewhat wider, and is washed by a little
Brook. This Plain, though well cultivated, produces nothing but Rice; and the
like do most places in this whole Province, being indeed most fit for that
Grain, by reason of the abundance of Water and moistness of the Soil (for Rice
requires moisture,) or else that it is the chiefest, if not only Grain of the
Inhabitants, for they use no other Bread, not setting any esteem upon Wheat or
Rye, neither use much Milk, Whit-meat, or Butter, because they think them
unwholsom; but of Rice, which they boil sometimes one way, and sometimes
another, mingled with Flesh or Fruit, they make several savory Dishes, which
they call Pilao's, according to their several Palats. This Pilao is convenient
for Travelers, because it may be made ready in a short time, and keeps good a
great while, and withal is a wholesome and palatable Food.

Nature of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants are of a sallow Complexion, occasioned by the Heats of the
Climate, and constant eating of Rice, and their Hair and Eyebrows very black.
The Women are very handsome Body'd, and have good Features, which they grace
with a courteous Behavior, and affability in Discourse; and this is the more
pleasing, because (according to their Custom, in which they differ very much
from other Mahumetans) they never cover their Faces, nor shun the Company of
Men. Both Men and Women are hospitable, treating Strangers in their Houses with
the highest Civility imaginable, not expecting any Return, yet refuse not any
thing Presented to them; for there are no Inns or Caravansera's to give public
Entertainment, but every House (as we said, is free to receive Strangers;
wherefore we may justly say, that there is no Country where the Inhabitants
are more hospitable and civil; so that Hircania (which the Ancients reported to
be full of Tigers and other wild Beasts,) if Mazanderan be comprised in the
same, is one of the most civilized Territories that can be found in all Asia,
and the Inhabitants thereof have a suitable commendation.

Of the Soil.
The Land between the City Ferhabad and Eskerf is even and plain, on which grow
wild Artichokes, Parsnips, and the like.

Towns and Villages.
You may see here also many Towns and Villages, as you travel from Arack
Southward to Ferhabad, particularly a Village called Mynikelle. Four Leagues
from thence lies another call d Giru; the Road between both which in the Winter
is very bad arid deep, by reason of the continual wetness of the Ground. A days
Journey farther you come to Tellara Pescet, a large Hamlet, having on one fide
many dispersed Villages, and on the other, a Hilly Country. Beyond these
appears a great Wood, through which is a broad Way shadowed by high Trees. This
Road is very plashy, because many little Brooks run in it, which in the Winter
makes it so deep and rotten, that the Camels, though they have long Legs, often
sink up to the Knees. Four Leagues from this Village lies a strong, large, and
populous Place, called Saru, where the King has a magnificent Palace, and
thereby has gained the repute of a City, though consisting chiefly of a sort of
Thatched Houses, except a few scattered Dwellings that are Tyl'd: It is called
Saru, which signifies Yellow, from the abundance of Oranges, and other
yellowish Fruits that grow about the same. Beyond Saru lie several great
Plains, which in former Ages were overgrown with Woods, but since that being
cleared and Manured, they are become very fertile, and the Ways, which then
were very deep are now (the Ground lying open to the Sun) become very hard, and
some places of late made into Paved Cawseys. These Plains are also inhabited by
several People, most of them Christians, sent thither from diverse Countries An.
1620. to make several Plantations, especially from Armenia and Georgia.

The Way from Saru has all along the sides, Houses raised only of Boughs and
Mud, viz. of the Trees which were cut down in the same place by the
Inhabitants, to make the Country fit for Cultivation.

This Province is divided from the South to the North by, the River Teggine
Rude, which taking original out of the Mountains more Southward of the
Rice-Valley, runs through it, as also the City Ferhabad; two thousand Paces
from which it discharges its Waters into the Caspian Sea, having in the Way
received so many Brooks, Streams, and Rivulets, that from the City Saru it is
Navigable with flat-bottom'd Boats, made on purpose of the Bodies of great
Trees to Row with Oars: Some of them can carry ten or twelve Men, or Goods of
the like Burden. The Townsmen of Ferhabad often go out a Fishing for their
Pleasure into the Caspian Sea with such Boats, and make use of them in the City
to go from one place to another.

The Brook Cinon.
About a League from Ferhabad glides the Erook Cinon, which also sends its Water
into the Caspian Sea, and is somewhat broader than the Teggine Rude.

The Country Lahetzan
The County Lahetzan, where the best Silk is to be had, campriseth the Towns
Lenkeru, Cutzesbar, and Amelekende.

The Country of Chusistan.
Situation of Chusistan, with us several Denominations.
CHusistan, that is, The Country of Chus, lies between Fars or Persia, and the
Stream Ditzel, and was anciently by Mercator, and since by Olearius, called
Susiana, and (as the same Olearius believes) comprised Elam, from whence came
the Elamites. Cluverius will have Chusistan to be the ancient Assyria, and
Susiana the Country at this Day called Elaran, in which he partly agrees with
Olearius.

Bounds of Susiana.
Susiana (as Ptolomy says) conterminates in the North wi^h Assyria, in the
West with Babylon, in the East has Properly so called.
Persia, and in the South Borders at part of the Persian Gulf.

Susiana comprised anciently Meltilene, Elimais, Cabamene, Characene, Cissia,
Chaltapitis, and the fertile Country of Dera.

The eminentest Rivers which watered Susiana, Rivers.
were Moseus and Oroates, by Ptolomy named Rhunates; by Ammianus, Vatrochites
and Euleus; by the Prophet Daniel, Ulai; both which had such exceeding clear
Water, that the Kings would have no other to drink.

The Inhabitants of Susiana were Elamites and Cossites. Inhabitants.


Chief Cities.
The chiefest City was anciently called Susa, mentioned by Daniel, in the place
where he speaks of the destruction of Persia, and foretells the beginning of
the Grecian Monarchy: It is now named Desu; not far from which was the Royal
Palace Susan, lying at the Stream Ulai, by Pliny called Uleus, where
Ahassuerus, who Reigned over a hundred and twenty seven Provinces, made the
great Feast to all his Princes, mentioned in sacred Writ.

The other populous and Trading Cities are Alewas, Ramehormus, Schabur, Asker
and Arhan. The Inhabitants, who have the Mountains to the Northward of them,
are forced by the violent heat to retire amongst them during the Summer.

Carmania or Kermon, otherwise Kirman.
The several Names.
THis ancient Country, by Ptolomy called Carmania, is at this day named Kirman,
and by Niger, Kerman, from its Metropolis: According to Cluverius, it comprised
anciently these Territories, viz. Modomastice, Parepaphitis, Cabadine, and
Chantonice; but at this day only Kirman, Goadel, and Ormus. It is inhabited by
the ancient People Isaticheans, Zuthians, Gadanopidrans, Camelobocians, By what
People inhabited.
Sozotes, Agdenites, Rhudians, Arians, Charadreans, Pasargades, and Armozens.
The ancient Cities were Carmania, Samydace, Alexandria, and Armuze. It is
watered by one River named Samydace, has the Mountain Semiramis, and the
Wilderness Reobarle.

Kermon or Carmania, is divided into two Parts; the one Great Carmania,
Division.
which conterminates with the Sea, and is by the Persians called Erach Ajan;
the other, which lies farther into the Country, and was anciently named Wild
Carmania, has now the Denomination of Dulcinde, or (as Corsal says) Rasigut.

Erack Ajan compriseth yet two Kingdoms, viz. Macran and Guadel.

Besides these two Carmania's, this Country comprehends Mogostan, and the
Kingdom of Ormus.

Wild Carmania borders (according to Ptolomy) in the North, upon Parthia; the
West verges Persia; the South looks upon Great Carmania; and in the East it
lies terminated by Aria.

The old Wild Carmania compriseth the well known Kingdoms of Lara and Oessa,
commonly called The Kingdom of Monbareca or Mombareck, from the Name of the
Governor, besides the Countries of Mogosthan.

The Countries which lie to the Northward from the Tigris and Euphrates, at the
side of Persia, were formerly possessed by one Mombareck, Son to a mighty
Arabian, which Texeira places hard by Bagdad or Babylon, where there are many
good Cities, as Magdon, Oexa, and Ooreca, surrounded with rich Land, yet lying
waste for fear of the Turks, who have many Garrisons in this Mombareck's
Country, to guard those which pay him Tribute.

The greater Carmania borders in the North upon Wild Carmania, in the East
faces Gedrosia, the West looks upon a part of Persia and a part of the Persian
Gulf, and the South is limited by the Indian Sea.

The River Bagrada, so called by Ptolomy, and placed in Wild Carmania, is now
named Bintmir, or (as others) Budmir; by Niger, Biserti; and in the Arabic, as
Thevet affirms, Biquelmick.

This Country, Davity tells, was possessed by Zizaerian Arabians that formerly
dwelt in Bassora. Wild Carmania, as Maginus writes, has not one City; nor
indeed does Ptolomy mention any therein.

Great Carmania boasts the River Bassiri, and the Cape Jasquette or Jasques,
about twenty five or twenty six Leagues from Ormus, near the Persian Gulf,
opposite to Arabia Felix: Ortelius says Ptolomy called it The Cape of Ormus. Up
into the Country lie the Towns Sirgian, Tesirco, Serent, and Kirman or Kirmon,
the chief City of the Region.

According to Olearius, Kirman is a great Country, and lying between Farsi and
Sagistan, extending Northerly to the Sea and the Isle of Ormus.

Beyond Kirman, Northerly, lies a great Desert; but Southward, toward the Sea,
Kirman has much tilled Land, and many fine Towns, the Names whereof are
Bersir, Bermasir, Bem, Chabis, Tzirefft, and Gamron, which lying near the Sea,
is often called Bender or Bander Gamron, that is, The Haven of Camron, for
Bender in the Persian Tongue signifies a Haven.

This Town of Gamron, or Bender Gamron, by Della Valle called Cambru, lies in
27 Degrees of Northern Latitude, West-South-West about three Leagues from the
Isle of Ormus, being formerly a little Village, inhabited by Fishermen, who
came thither for its convenient Situation near the Persian Gulf. But since the
conquering of the famous Isle of Ormus, and driving the Portuguese from thence,
Gamron being frequented by the English, Hollanders, and Moors Vessels, grew to
a handsome Town, and is enlarged daily by the Merchants and Travelers which
come thither in November, (for then the heat of the Weather is over), either
from the Court at Ispahan, or other adjacent Cities. The Houses are built
(having the Foundation three or four Foot deep in the Sand) of Freestone,
Manner of b^^lding their Houses.
joined together after this manner: They take Clay, chopped Straw, and
Horse-dung, beaten together with salt Water, and making Cakes thereof, dry the
same in the Sun; then they lay Brambles or Straw on the Ground to cover them,
over which again they lay Cakes, and so a Layer of Btambles and a Layer of
Cakes, till it rises to the height of a Man, and then set fire on the Heap,
which, when extinguished, they mingle and beat together with salt Water, and
daubing the Materials therewith, make a good Mortar, which grows as hard as
Flint; upon this Foundation they raise their Walls of square pieces of Clay
dried in the Sun, after the manner of our Bricks, and then laid in moist Clay
in stead of Mortar: they likewise make square Pillars of the same Clay after
the same manner, for Supporters of the inner Roofs; and that the Rain may not
soke through the Walls, they daube them all over with the beforementioned hard
Plaster, which makes them seem to be built all of Stone: With this Mortar also
they make handsome Arches: Their Rooms of Office are even with the Ground, and
for want of Stone, unpav'd: Over these are their Lodgings, open round about for
coolness. The Streets are very crooked, narrow and dirty. The chiefest Houses,
as those of the Sultans, the English and Hollanders Storehouses, stand on the
Shore, against which the Sea oftentimes beats with great violence; yet they are
very convenient to lade and unlade Goods. The Ships Ride about a Cannon shot
from the Land, in five or six Fathom Water. There are also many little Huts of
Boughs and Date-tree Leaves, which are much used here; and because there are no
hard Stones hereabouts, and the Timber extraordinary scarce; many stately
Houses have been pulled down on the Isle, and the Materials thereof carried
away to build Houses on the Main.

On the East side of the Country stands a Fort, built after the ancient manner
with Towers. Upon the Shore also, about a Gunshot from the Water, is another
Fort, built of Freestone, surrounded with a dry Trench, a low Vaumure, and on
the West side a Stone Redoubt, of sufficient Strength against any sudden Onset.

Description of the Village Cambru.
The great Village Cambru (according to Della Valle) stands upon the Seashore
in 27 Degrees of Northern Latitude. The Streets are generally very narrow, and
the Bazars on Shops but indifferently furnished with Wares. The Walls of the
Houses are of Lime or Clay, and may rather be called Barns than Houses, being
nothing but large and enclosed places, covered with a Roof for a shelter in bad
Weather, and to keep off the heat of the Sun, which in these Countries is very
powerful.

Here is a general Toleration of Religion: for besides the Mahumetans there are
abundance of Jews, Banians from India, and many other People of diverse Beliefs.

The Fort Cambru.
There is a Fortress in a low Tract of Land near the Sea; and not far from it
the Fort of Cambru, which being square, is encompassed with a double Wall; the
first has no Redoubts nor Flankers, but the outmost has some Sconces and
Curteyns, sufficient to bear Musket Shot: The inner Wall is somewhat higher,
and has several little round Turrets, built at certain distances one from
another; between each of which lies a great Stone, which in time of need may be
thrown down on the Enemy: Over the Gate appears a square place like a Gallery
full of Port-holes, through which the Soldiers with Muskets defend the Passage
to the Gate: Outermost is abroad and deep Moat, fortified with Half-moons and
Breast-works, but so weak, that they may be battered down with a small
Field-piece.

On the Shore of Cambru lie abundance of Sea-Cockles, by which the Coast may
easily be known.

The Ferry from Cambru to Ormus is not above a days Sailing, in Vessels as big
as Sloops, by the Persians called Cuibet.

The Portuguese in former times had another Fort near the Shore, which the
Persians after their Conquest pulled down; but they built the forementioned
Fort in stead thereof farther up in the Country, and afterward in the Year
1623. in January, they raised another on the Shore, in the same place where
that belonging to the Portuguese stood, finding that so far up into the
Country unable to defend the Ships and Haven, which is much frequented from
several Places in Persia, India and Arabia. There is also a Governor of the
Town, and another of the Fort, and a Judge called Cadhi.

Once a year commonly there happens an Earthquake in Cambru, which often
overturns several Houses.

In the Way from Schiras to the Haven of Cambru, whither the English come
yearly with the Caravan to ship their Silks, are the following Places, viz. the
Borough of Passa, the Plain of Gigangli, the Village Haian Havask, the
Caravansera of Mamui, the City Passa, Tambustan or Temerista, the barren place
between the Mountains Seciah, that is, The three Pits, because of certain Pits
there, and beyond that the Village Zirevan; some Leagues from which the Way
parts into two, the one runs to the City Darabghierd, and the other to Dechair,
a Village, a days Journey beyond this parting of the Road. The many Dates and
other Trees which grow in Darebghierd, make it seem a very pleasant Place,
which extending a great way, has abundance of Inhabitants. There is nothing
remarkable in the same but a Brook, which running through the Market makes a
standing Pool in the middle: However, it is very eminent for its Antiquity and
Name, which it has preserved to this day, viz. from the ancient Persian King
Darius, who built it, and called it Darab, according to the Name which this
Place bears, viz. Darabghierd, or Darabkera, that is, Darius's City.

Beyond Darabghierd we see the Villages Dechair, and beyond that the Wilderness
of Moghokiel.

Next you come to a Mosque of an Imamsade's Tomb, who was called Meir Abas, Son
to Iman Giafer Sadick, a Man highly esteemed amongst the Persians; yet the
Mosque is quite ruined, notwithstanding it is near a Village: About it are
pleasant Gardens, with all sorts of Fruit Trees, watered by a little Brook: At
the entrance is a Court, where several People superstitiously desire to be
buried. In the middle of this Court stands a great Palm Tree, by whose Foot
runs another Brook, replenished with all sorts of Fish for the Service of the
Court. Meir Aba 's Tomb.
On one side of the Mosque is Meir Abas's Tomb, covered with slight Turkish
Linen. Here Della Valle says he found a bound Book, and also some Leaves of an
old Book with certain Medals, which were brought from Kierrila, and the famous
Hossein's Tomb, on which were Imprinted in Arabic Letters the name of GOD, and
some other pious words, as Elhemdu lillah, that is, God be praised.

Beyond this Tomb you come between narrow Mountains, which formerly served for
the Boundaries between the two Provinces of Persia and Lar, when Lar was a
peculiar Dukedom, and not subject to the Persians.

Somewhat farther you come to the Village Furg; and beyond it to several Heaps
of Rubbish, being the Ruins of an ancient Structure, by the Vulgar called The
Mountain of the King of Behmen, who (as they report) Reigned a considerable
time in Persia, before Darius was conquered by Alexander the Great.

Next you approach the Village Tascui, and Seid Geuder in the County of Tarom;
the salt Water of Absicur, the Village Pelengon, and the Tenghi Cebarrud, or
Narrow Gate; beyond which a Brook glides gently into a Moat; near which
Travelers commonly resting themselves, cut their Names and Verses on the
Rocks, which shadow this Brook from the heat of the Sun all the day.

Hence you go to Pise or Pisce, a little Village in the Country of Gurhe, not
far distant.

Next appears the Town Curihazirgon and Serzehirevevon, the Mountain of Ginan
and Country of Issur, where the Way again parts into two, one running by the
Village Abidunghur, to the City Mina, and the other to Cambru.

In the Road to Cambru lies the Village called Ciah Ciacor, the common
Resting Place for Travelers; beyond which is a Row of Houses named Pailulon,
or Pailuli Dagheli, that is, At the foot of the Lulen full of Leaves: for by
these Houses grow abundance of Trees, by the Inhabitants called Kuli Dagheli,
as if they would say, Trees full of Boughs: for out of the great Branches grow
many lesser down to the Ground, which taking Root, produce new Trees; which
being very common in India, are by the Portuguese named Arbores de Raiz, that
is, The Rooting Trees.

Lastly, you come to the Fort and City Combru, at present by the Persians
called Abassi.

The nature of the Inhabitants of Wild and Great Carmania.
The Inhabitants of Wild Carmania are most of them Thieves and Robbers; but in
Great Carmania the Women work all sorts of Shapes on Cloth of Tissue or Silk of
diverse colors, as also on Curtains, Hangings, Cushions, and the like.

In this Province are made also excellent Saddles, Bridles, Spurs, and all
manner of Weapons for War. The Inhabitants drink a kind of Beer in stead of
Wine, and make use of the Arabian Abe.

The Inhabitants in the Wilderness Reobarle, which lies in this Province, live
by Pilfering, and are great Sorcerers like the Arabians: Their Turbans are
long, but narrower than those of the other Persians, with a great Lappet behind.

Herb Daru Kermon.
Amongst many other sovereign Herbs growing here, there is one exceeding good
against Worms, called Daru Kerman, or Daramnack Kermony, which is to be
understood two several ways, viz. for a Medicine for Worms, or for a Medicine
from Kermon: for Kermon is a compound word, signifying not only This Province,
but A Worm; and Daru or Daramnack is a Physical Herb.

The chiefest Commodities with which the Inhabitants Trade, are Rose Water,
Wormwood, or Daru Kermon, and the Stone Surmah.

Commodities of the Country.
The Carpets made here are by the Persians called Caluchey; by the Portuguese,
Alcatifas; and commonly by other Europeans, from their Example, corruptly
Alcatifs; which are made in three several Places in Persia, viz. the richest,
finest, and dearest, are made in Izad, a City in Hierack, where some are sold
for a thousand Ducats; the second sort are those of Kerman, and the third from
Carason.

There is also a black and glittering Stone found in this Country, which looks
as if it were strewn with File-dust or Sand, and is called Surmah; of which
there are two sorts, one is found in Kerman, as also in Carason, which is of
greatest value, and the other Moches, because it comes from Mochi, or Mecha.
The Arabians, Indians, and Persians, use this Stone much against the Distemper
of the Eyes, for the cure of which it is very prevalent, being prepared with
other things. It is good to preserve Beauty, insomuch that both Men and Women
wiping their Eyes with the Stone wetted, account themselves much younger and
fairer.

Gedrosia or Circan, Cache, Guadel, and Macran.
The several Names of Gedrosia.
THis Country, by the Ancients called Gedrosia, is at this day (according to
Castaldus) named Circan, and by Olearius and Melam, taken to be the Kingdom of
Tarsus, of which the Psalmist speaks. Niger thinks it is comprised in Carmania.
Maffeus calls the Gedrosians Nautaques, which are the same the Portuguese call
Motages. Cluverius will have Gedrosia to comprehend Kesimur and Guzaratte, and
anciently the two Provinces of Paradene and Parisene, and several People, as
the Orbites, Parsires, Musarnes, and Rhamniers. The chiefest Towns were Parsis
the Metropolis, Chief Towns
Arbis and Cuni.

Ptolomy borders Gedrosia in the North, Borders.
at Drangiana or Cagisan, and Arachosia, or the Country of Cabul; Carmania
bounds the West; the East borders upon India, or the Kingdom of Cambaya; and
the South fronts the Indian Sea; and includes the City Guadel, with the Lands
belonging thereto, and the Towns Calamare and Partinis, beyond the Mouth of the
River Ilment, sometimes called Arc; near which the Motages and Nautaques
reside.

The County of Mecheran.
In the same Tract in the Province of Kirman, lies another County Eastward,
called Mecheran, otherwise Macran, and by Texeira, Macron, who has given it
the Name of a Kingdom, with the Denomination of Kyche or Chike, by the
Portuguese called Cache, between the Dominion of Guadel and the Abindes of
Indostan, and betwixt the Countries of Persia and Send or India, and to the
Eastward of the Kingdom of Sistan.

The known Towns of Mecheran are Their, Kitz, and Chalack. The Metropolis is by
some named Mecheran. The Inhabitants of Erack seldom come into this Province.

There is also a City, by some called Cobinam, where very excellent
Looking-glasses, or Mirrors of Steel are made.

The River which waters this Country is now called Barbarum, and formerly
Arabis.

Commodities of Cache.
The Kingdom of Cache produces plenty of Hemp and Flax, of which the Inhabitants
make Linen Cloth, and affords Oil of Gegelin, and other sorts in great
abundance. There are likewise many Horses called Cachis, from the Name of the
Country, which are as good as the Persian or Arabian. Guadel has its peculiar
Xeque or Viceroy, and Macran a particular Prince, but Cobinam is under the
Jurisdiction of the Sophy.

The Province of Moghostan.
Bounds of Moghostan.
THe Province of Moghostan, which signifies Date-Tree Wood, because that Tree
grows all over the Country, conterminates on one side with the Dukedom of Lar,
and extends from thence East and South of the places which verge with the
Persian Gulf.

There is another Moghostan, anciently so called for the reason before
mentioned, but quite differing from this, by Diodorus Siculus mentioned to lie
in Arabia Felix, not far from the Arabian Gulf.

The Village Ciuciululion.
The first place in this Province, as you travel out of the Country of Lar, is
Ciuciululion, consisting of about forty Houses, built a good distance from each
other, in a Wood of Dates, Olive, and other Trees, which bear no eatable
Fruits, but only Leaves, from whence this Village has received its Name.

Five Leagues from Ciuciululion, passing toward the Metropolis Mina, is a very
mean Hamlet called Dazrack.

Near the Sea lies Benderi du Ser, a small Town, that is, A Haven with two
Mouths. Not far from which is the Shore of Scechierri or Sechierri.

The Haven of Combru is about two days Journey from Mina, and was formerly so
called by the Portuguese; but the Persian King Abbas taking it from them, gave
it the Name of Abassi, from his own Name.

The Metropolis Mina.
The Metropolis of Moghostan, called Mina, which is two days Journey from
Ciuciululion, and twelve with Camels from Lar, lies in 26 Degrees and 35
Minutes Northern Latitude, and has two Fortresses on the East side, enclosed
within a Wall which runs directly through the Town, and at a certain distance
having some slight Towers; the biggest has two great Gates, one respecting
the North, and the other the South, and almost quite surrounded with Water.

In the City Mina are two Baths, near neighbors to each other, the first is
very large, and formerly had several Shops and Houses about it, which were most
of them ruined Anno 1632. the other being much less, is built upon a Hill on
the East side of the great one, and being washed by a little Brook, is
inhabited by the Beigh and his Guard, which keep Watch all the Night, and call
aloud at certain hours, according to a Custom amongst the Eastern People.

Not far from Mina lies Binder Ibrahim, that is, The Haven of Ibrahim.

Cuhesteck is a Town lying on the Coast of Mina near Ormus, where the Air is so
unwholsom, that most Strangers coming thither, are afflicted with the Disease
of the Country in so violent a manner, that few escape.

The Houses in Mina are made of the plash'd Boughs of Date-Trees.

In this Province grow abundance of Trees, Trees.
by the Arabians called Nebo, and by the Persians, Conar, which bear a small
Fruit with a Stone in the middle like our Cherries; the dried Leaves thereof
rubbed to Powder and put in Water, not only turn the same white, but make it
Lather like Soap, which most People use when they Bathe themselves.

Here also grows a Tree called Amba, brought from India.

In Moghostan and other Places in Persia, Beasts.
breeds a strange sort of Beast, in color and shape like a Tiger, but has a
Head and Snout like a Hog; it makes a great screeking in the Night, and desires
to prey upon the dead Bodies of Men, which it endeavors to scrape out of the
Graves; wherefore Della Valla believes it is the same Beast which the Latins
and Greeks call Hyena, or a Mungrel Wolf.

The supreme Governor of Moghostan is styled Sceheriari, and being subject to
the Chan of Schiras, keeps not his Court in the Metropolis Mina, but in a
neighboring Village, where one Schach Sefi Reigned Anno 1630.

Lorestan.
BEsides the Provinces before mentioned, those of Nimruz, Sichar, and Lorestan,
are reckoned Members of the Crown of Persia, though we only know the Names of
the two former; but Lorestan some call Luristan, and Paulus Venetus only Lor,
which perhaps is the Name of its Metropolis; for Stan is a vulgar word in
Persia for Land or Country. John the Persian places Lorestan ninety Leagues
from Casbin, and makes Cormana to be the Residence of the King of Persia; but
Texeira, who calls, it Cormatu and Cormavat, affirms, that it is only a strong
Place in this Province, the Kings of which paid, as a yearly Tribute, fifty
thousand Ducats.

The Province of Chorazan.
THe Province of Chorazan or Carason, by Olearius taken to be the ancient
Bactriana, contrary to Davity, who makes Bactriana a part of Zagatey or Usbeck.

Carason (according to Davity) compriseth the ancient Country of Margiana,
bordering upon the River Gehun, by some styled Geichon, and by others, Oxus,
which (according to Ptolomy) conterminates in the North with Margiana. Chorazan
(says Davity) comprises also a great part of Aria; and Texeira places Kerman
or Carmania between Persia and Carason; and Ptolomy borders Carmania in the
West with Persia, and in the East at Ery. Cluverius nevertheless takes Margiana
for Elsabat, which is accounted a part of Tartary and Zagatey. Castaldus calls
the ancient Margiana, Jezelbas, or Jesilbax, that is, Green Head, the general
Name given by the Tartars to Zagatey, who formerly possessed this Country, and
was first taken from them by Ismael Seff, but afterward being lost, was by
Schach Abbas re-taken, and ever since kept.

Herbert divides Chorazan into three great Territories, viz. Hery, Farihan,,
and Tocharistan, anciently called Aria, Paropamisa, and Tocharia.

Chorazan (according to Olearius) conterminates in the East with Mazanderan,
and is divided into many lesser Counties, amongst which Hery is the chiefest.

Chorazan, taken for the ancient Margiana, borders in the East upon Bactriana,
m the West faces Hircania or Starabat, the South verges with a part of Aria,
and the North looks upon a part of Tartary or Scythia, viz. from the Mouth of
the River Oxus, to a part thereof near Bactriana.

The City Mesched.
This Country comprehends many large Cities, the chiefest whereof is Mesched,
otherwise Maxad, and by the Persians called Thus. This City standing on a Hill
near the River Habin, is environed with Walls, and strengthened with Moats,
Towers, and other Fortifications, insomuch that Texeira affirms there are three
hundred Towers, a Musket Shot from each other, and that with the Gardens and
Banquetting-houses the City is accounted to be six Leagues in circumference,
and inhabited by a hundred thousand People.

In this City may be seen a stately Tomb of one of the twelve Persian Imams, or
great Saints, of the Family of Aaly, called Imam Risa, or Eman Reza, that is,
Holy Son of Aaly, and is no way inferior in beauty and costliness to that of
Schach Sefi at Ardebil.

John the Persian places Mesched, which he calls Maxet, sixty Leagues from
Hery; adding moreover, that there is a Tower eighteen Foot high, consisting
wholly of massy Gold, Arched on the top with Precious Stone; on whose Pinnacle
(if you will believe him) is fixed a Diamond about the bigness of a Chestnut,
which glittering in the Night, may be seen a League off.

The City Herat.
Not far from Mesched lies the City of Nisabur, but not to be compared with
Herat, which is the second best and biggest, whither Schickhard supposes the
ten Tribes of Israel were led into Captivity, whence they never returned.
Texeira affirms it built by Alexander the Great; but Davity supposes it to be
the City Aratha of Ptolomy. Those that travel from Ispahan to Candahar, must
come through this Place.

The other Towns in this Province are Thun, Tabeskileki, Thabes, Messinanalle,
all great Cities; as also Sebsewar, Turschis, Cain, Puschentz, Badkis, Meru,
Merwerud, Tzurtzan, Fariab, Aschurcan, Belch, Barman, Semcan, Thalecan, and
Susen, all populous, and Cities of great Trade. Merwerud, by some called
Marwoh, was built by Alexander near the River Jehun or Oxus, though Davity will
have it to be the Antioche of Ptolomy in Margiana, first called Alexandria; the
rest are by Davity called Tubas, Cahem, Tirbeth, and Chirazza.

The River Oxos or Jehun, which runs between the Province Turkestan and Usbeck,
and that on the other side, called Maurenahar, makes the Country exceeding
fruitful, especially near the City Herat, where the best Manna is gathered.

This whole Country abounds with Assa Foetida, in the Persian Tongue called
Inghze, Production of the Country.
which is little esteemed there; sa also Surmah.

The Land about Thun abounds with Mulberry-Trees, and consequently produces
much Silk; and about Cahem Saffron grows in great quantities.

In this Province are a sort of Cats, which for their handsome color and shape
are sent through all Persia; they resemble our Tabby or Cyprus Cats.

There are also Sheep of several colors, some with gray or black, others with
white Hair or Wool, curled at the ends, which is oftentimes three Inches long
or more, yet some have Wool above an Inch long, and others so short, that it
but just curls round; some of them have long, gray, and shining Wool, white at
the ends, which curling behind; appears at adistance like Strings of Pearl.

The Natives of Chorazan are Whites, and very valiant, but not civilis'd.
Nature of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants of most Cities make several Stuffs, and drive a great Trade
with the Indians, Muscovites, Tartars, and others. In Heart dwell many Indian
Merchants, who Traffic in Carpets made after the Turkish manner, Silks, Manna,
Inghze, or Assa Foetida, Saffron, Surmah, Precious Stones, and other things.

The Government.
Chorazan is partly the Subjection of the Usbecks or Tartars of Zagatey, who
seeing the King of Persia Engaged with the Turks, made themselves Masters of
most Places thereabouts; notwithstanding they have been driven out of many
parts of this Province by Schach Abbas.

The few Christians which are here, are Melchites of the Greek Church, and use
their Liturgy.

Herbert places the Mountain Albors or Elburs in this Country, but Olearius in
the Province of Schirwan, on which the ancient Persians were said to have built
their Temple for their ever-burning Fire.

The Province of Siston.
Situation and Description of Siston.
THe Country called Siston or Sistam, lies South-East from Chorazan, toward
the Sea or Gulf of Persia, having Persia on one side, and the Kingdom of Macran
near India on the other.

Siston, extending thirty Leagues in length, comprehends fifteen Towns, of
which the Metropolis bears the same Denomination with the Country, and lying
(according to Hues) in 105 Degrees and 30 Minutes Longitude, and 28 Degrees and
40 Minutes Northern Latitude, is inhabited by five thousand People.

This Country is Morassy and unwholsom, though Mountainous, and the People
hardy, and much inclined to the Wars, being within the Jurisdiction of
Chorazan, under the Subjection of the Sophy.

Aria or Ery.
The several Names and Bounds of Aria.
ARia or Ery, by Pinetus, Billius, and Olearius, taken for Turkestan; Mercator
calls it Sernere, but Giravar and Herbert, Hery; though others, as Niger,
Minadoi, and Texeira affirm, that it has retained its ancient Name, or at
least that of Hery or Ery. It lies Bounded (according to Ptolomy) with
Paroparmisade in the East, Parthia and Wild Carmania in the West, Drangiane by
Sagistam in the South, and Margiana and a part of Bactriana in the North; and
(as Strabo writes) it extends to a certain part of Persia and Media, and to the
Northern Sogdia.

The chief Towns.
The prime City of this Province, called Ery, anciently Aria, and by the
Persians, Sargultsar, i. e. The City of Roses, boasts that it can show six or
seven thousand Houses. The other Towns are Sazuar or Sapzoar, Cauran, perhaps
the Chadurine of Ptolomy, Bachachi; beyond which lies Caffa and Jarsadman, the
Lake of Burgian and the River Aria.

Temperature of the Air, and Fertility of the Soil.
The Air in this Province is very hot, and would be much hotter, if not
refreshed by the Northern cool Breezes. The Country is encompassed with Woods
and Mountains, and in many places very fertile in the bearing of several sorts
of Grain and Fruits, especial Vines, the Wine whereof well Cask'd, will (as
they say) keep almost a hundred years. About Ery grow likewise abundance of
Roses; and, in the City, Silk is so plentiful, that it may be bought at a
reasonable Rate, three or four thousand Camels loads being vended in a day.
Moreover, there is store of Rhubarb and Musk sold by the Inhabitants, who are
Mahumetans.

Dagestan or Tagestan.
Situation of Tagestan.
THe Country of Dagestan (as Ptolomy, Dionysius the Alexandrian, and Strabo
write) was a part of the Province of Albania, comprehended between Iberia and
the Caspian Sea; though Cluverius and Golnitius would have Albania, lying
betwixt Iberia and the Caspian Sea, to be the Eastern part of Georgia. Some
join this Country to Persia, as a part thereof; notwithstanding Ptolomy has
separated them. Others affirm, that Dagestan was formerly called Susiana; and
Golnitius, that it was old Susiana, and now Elaran; but Olearius avers, that it
is Chusistan. It lies divided from Cincassia by the River Bustro, and Southward
a quarter of a League from Derbend, by a small Brook from Properly so called.
Persia, and extends Northerly with Mountains along the Caspian Sea to the City
Terki. Tagestan signifies A Mountainous Country: for Tagh in the Country and
Turkish Language is a Mountain, and Stan in the Persian a Country: Moreover,
the Inhabitants call themselves Tagestan Tartars, that is, Highland, or
Mountain Tartars; but the Persians name them Lesgi, for they dwell between the
Mountains twenty and thirty Leagues Westward from the Caspian Sea.

Tagestan is divided into several Lordiships, Division.
viz. Osmin, by others Ismin, Boinack, etc. each having a chief Town of the
same Denomination, in which the Governor has his Residence. Olearius is of
opinion, that a part of this Country was anciently possessed by the Amazones,
which (as Curtius affirms) dwelt betwixt the Caspian Sea and Mount Caucasus.

The Metropolis.
The Metropolis of Tagestan, called Saru, lies partly upon, and partly between
the Mountains, which are Rocky, and at a distance appear as if they were
covered with Mussle-shells, for there is scarce any piece, to the bigness of a
Man's Hand, but what has five or more Shells sticking upon it. The Stones of
the Rock are as hard as a Pebble. Beyond these craggy Mountains are good
Pastures for Cattle. Behind Tarcu lies the Castle Suchur. In the City, which
has no Walls, are about a thousand Houses, built after the Persian manner,
though somewhat sleighter. Out of the Rocks spring several Brooks, which with a
pleasant murmuring noise glide down the Mountains through the City.

The Tagestans of Tarcu, and those of Boinack, that dwell toward the North,
are called Caitack. Westward beyond Tarcu is another sort named Cumuck and
Casucumuck, who are under the Jurisdiction of peculiar Lords. The Tarcuan
Tartars are not less in number than those of the Province of Boinack. The
Prince of Tarcu, styled Surchow Chan, boasted himself to be Extracted from the
Family of the Kings of Persia, with whom he always held an amicable Alliance,
and when the Tagestans made War upon each other, he received Aid from Persia.

The Natives maintain themselves by breeding of Cattle, which the Women take
care of, whilst their Husbands Ride abroad to steal whatever comes to hand,
not sparing Men, Women, or Children; for they account it no Sin to sell their
nearest Relations, Brothers or Sisters, to the Turks. Those that dwell near the
Rivers live by Fishing, especially by catching of Sturgeon, which they take
with strong Harping-Irons, and the Pole to which the Line is fastened fixed in
the Ground.

The Diet of the Grandees or Chans, is commonly Mutton cut into small Slices,
Their man of Eating and Drinking.
and roasted on a wooden Spit; as also Sturgeon cut in little Pieces, which
being boiled with Salt, they eat it with Butter and Vinegar. They use no
Knives, but pull their Meat in pieces with their Fingers. When any one of them
lays down a Bone, he that sits next to him taking it up, picks it much cleaner,
and sometimes it is taken up by three or four after the same manner. Their
Drinking-Cups are long Cows Horns, out of which they Drink a Liquor made of
Barley, and called Brega, which in color is like Mead. They are very
boisterous in their Cups. They spread their Tables on the Ground after the
Persian manner. All their Vessels consist in wooden Bowls and Troughs.

The Nature and Customs of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants are of an Olivaster Complexion, strong Limbed, and hard
Favored, with long black Hair. The Men go Clothed in long Coats made of
ordinary Cloth, over which they wear a Cloak of Furr: On their Heads they wear
black Cloth Caps: Their Shoes are made of Sheep or Horse-skins, cut out of a
whole Piece, and sowed together on the top of the Foot, and upon one side. They
go commonly Armed with a Partizan, Shield, and Helmet, and sometimes Bows,
Arrows, and Slings. Both Virgins and Married Women go bare faced, and braid
their Hair into forty several Locks, which hang dangling over their Shoulders.

The Tartars of Tarcu are wild and valiant, but the Women are very courteous;
they are all Mahumetans, and suffer themselves to be Circumcised yet are great
Zealots, and some of the Tartar Women are privately inclined to the Christian
Religion.

The Inhabitants of the Village Andre have amongst other Nuptial Ceremonies
these following, viz. Every Guest brings an Arrow with him, which he shoots
either into the upper part of the Wall, or the Roof of the House, where they
stick till they rot or fall down of themselves: what the signification hereof
is none knows. They are a valiant and undaunted People, caring neither for the
King of Persia nor the Great Duke of Muscovia, but boast themselves Tagestans,
and consequently subject to none but God: which their audaciousness depends
chiefly on the inaccessible Mountains, whither they retire when any stronger
Enemy falls into their Country. The Merchants that travel through their
Dominions are forced to pay great Customs, and yet if they are not strong
enough to defend themselves, are sure to be Robbed; and therefore they always
go with the Caravans in great Companies.

This Country is under the Subjection of several Princes, Government.
by one general Name called Myrsa; but many Cities are Governed by a peculiar
Lord; yet they have a supreme Commander named Schemchi, and by others Schafcal,
who is as a King, and chosen by the throwing of an Apple, viz. at the Election
all the Myrsa's or Princes meet together, and standing in a Ring, their Priest
throws a Gilded Apple amongst them, and whoever he hits therewith is
immediately chosen Schemchal, who though he has great Honor and Respect, yet
he finds but litte Faith and Obedience from them, and therefore cannot be said
to Govern with arbitrary Power: He keeps his Court in a Village named Andre,
situate on a Hill near the River Coisu: His Habit is a Silk Coat of green
Darai, and over it a black Furr Mantle: and when he Rides out he is commonly
Armed with a Scimiter, Bow and Arrows.

Beyond Tarcu lies a wild and brambly Country.

Five Leagues from Tarcu lies the Stream Coisu, which abounding with Fish,
takes its original from Mount Caucasus, and runs very swift, the Water muddy,
of a reasonable breadth, and generally eighteen or twenty Foot deep, which
Olearius supposes to be the Albanus of the Ancients, which (according to Pliny)
falls into the River Cassia. In this Water breeds abundance of Sturgeon, and
another sort of Fish not much unlike it.

Two Leagues and a half from Coisu runs a Brook named Acsai, which is not above
twenty five Yards broad. Some take this Acsai to be only a Branch of Coisu,
which unites with the same again not far from the Caspian Sea. If any Strangers
are desirous to Ferry over this River with their Goods, they are forced either
to pay a great Sum of Money to the Inhabitants, or else they take away their
Goods.

Beyond Acsai is a barren Heath seven Leagues long, Rivers.
half a days Journey beyond which runs the River Bustro, which is also one of
the chiefest, and almost as deep as the Coisu; the Water thereof is muddy, but
runs not so swift as the forementioned; it serves for a Boundary between
Circassia and Tagestan: Northward about two Leagues from the Caspian Shore it
divides it self into two Branches, one of which (now called Temenki, but
formerly, and by some to this day, Terk) is about thirty Yards broad, and has
given the City by which it glides, the Denomination of Terki, which is the last
Town in those Parts under the Czar of Muscovy; the other, beyond this, and of
the same bigness, bears the Name of Kisilar, because it carries along in its
Sand a kind of Gold-dust; and lying somewhat higher than the former, is
commonly dried up in the Summer: The place of its disemboguing is about eight
Leagues beyond the City Terki.

All these Brooks come Out betwixt the North and the West, and the Kisilar is
the last in these Parts; but fifty six Leagues farther is the Volga, which
springs in the North. Olearius (according to Ptolomy) will have the Acsai to be
the Caesius, the Bustro to be the Gerras, the Timeki or Terk to be the Alonia,
and the Kisilar to be the Adonta: for between the River Albanus or Coisu and
the Volga or Rha, no other Rivers are to be found.

The Kingdom of Amadam.
THe Kingdom of Amadan or Hamadan, is by Texeira called Amedon, as also the
chief City thereof, which lying between Casbin and Curdistan, extends thirty
Leagues, and boasts fifteen Towns, the Inhabitants whereof are all Merchants.

Della Valle tells us, that the City of Amadan lies in the Way which leads from
Bagdad or Babylon to Ispahan, and is large and populous, and much frequented by
Strangers, though the Buildings are very mean, rather like those in an ordinary
Village; yet behind these Houses are fair Gardens full of Fruit Trees, so also
are the Streets, Markets, and other public Places, which are also well
furnished with all manner of Provision at reasonable Rates: All the Streets
where the Shops are (by them called Bazars) are Arched and Pillar'd like
Piazza's. It is exceeding cold here, for you not only see Ice in the Streets,
but it often Freezes any liquid thing in the Chambers though there is a
constant Fire kept.

This City is the Residence of a Chan, who has many Towns and Villages under
his Jurisdiction, as also a Daroga or Deputy.

Thus much of every Province of the Kingdom of Persia in particular; next we
will give you an Account of what concerns Persia and all the Provinces in
general, and also of such Remarks of some Provinces in particular, as shall be
requisite to be spoken of, viz. of the Air, Property of the Soil, Plants,
Beasts, Customs, Food, Liquors, Language, Learning, Funerals, Arms, Religions,
Government, and what else is necessary to be described.

Temperature of the Air.
THe Air of these Countries is for the most part very healthful and temperate,
with very little Rain, especially toward the South, and in some places (as in
Gamaron near the Seacoast) not once in three years.

By reason of the vast Extent of Persia, viz. from the twenty fifth Degree of
the Equinoctial Line, to the thirty seventh Degree Northward, and likewise for
the rough rocky Mountains of Taurus, which run through the middle of the
Country, and spread out with several Arms, the Air is not every where alike
tempered, but different in many Provinces. Such as dwell Southward from the
Mountains feel the Heat exceedingly in the Summer, but those to the Northward
have the Seasons more temperate; wherefore the Persian Kings used formerly at
Set-times in the Year, for their Pleasure and Health sake, to remove their
Courts to such Provinces, where they judged the Weather would best agree with
them: for in the Summer they kept their Courts at Ecbatane, now called Thus,
where because of the Mountains in the South-West, it is very cool, and in the
Winter at Susa, now Susistan; which City lies next to the Northern Mountains,
on which the Sunbeams reflecting, make the same a warm and delightful Place,
as appears by the Name, for Susa in the Persian Tongue signifies a Lilly. In
September and March they removed to Persepolis and Babylon.

The Kings of Persia to this day make use of this convenience of the Air, for
Schach Abbas in the Winter resided in the Province of Mazanderan at Ferabath;
Schach Sefi (according to the Custom of the Persian Kings) often going on
Progress, sometimes kept his Court in Tabris, otherwhile in Ardebil or Casbin:
But the present Seat of the Kings being in Ispahan, is no inconvenient Place
either in Winter or Summer, because it is situate on a Plain three Leagues from
the Mountains, and enjoys commonly a very temperate Air.

All Strangers in their traveling through Persia are sensible of this
alteration of the Air in several places, not without great prejudice to their
Health, being forced by reason of the excessive Heat to travel in the Night,
and rest in the Day, especially between the Mountains, where the Passage goes
Southward. But in all parts of Persia it is very cold in Winter, and sometimes
traveling Eastward with a Northerly Wind it is so exceeding cold, that the
Travelers lighting from their Horses in the Morning, are so benumbed that they
can hardly stand.

Della Valle says, that the Heat in Persia is not very great, yet the Beams of
the Sun in the Plains are much hotter than in Italy. The Inhabitants in the
Summer go Clothed in a thin Suit of Callico, in which they walk and do all
their Business. Neither is the Cold troublesome to them, partly because it is
not very great, notwithstanding it Snows much there, and partly because it
lasts but January and February.

Several Distempers in Persia.
By reason of this difference in the Air, there are several Places in Persia
less healthful than others, and the Inhabitants subject to all manner of
Distempers, and especially in Schirman and Kilan, where Fevers and Agues much
afflict them. The Air at Tabris is accounted the most healthful in all Persia,
for the Inhabitants thereof are never sensible of any such Diseases; nay, they
affirm, that if any so troubled come thither, they immediately recover; from
whence (as the Inhabitants say) the City Tabris or Tebris, after the Kilan
pronunciation, has received its Name; for a Fever is by them called Teb, and
Ris signifies To pour out. But besides Agues and Fevers there are many other
Distempers which rage amongst them, as the Bloody Flux and Plague, though not
so often and vehement as in Europe; also Morbus Gallicus, by the Inhabitants
called Schemetcaschi, that is, The Casehanian Pox, because it is most there.

In Kilan the Dropsy is very common, yet few are troubled with the Stone, and
none with the Gout, which is a matter of admiration.

The Persians live long.
The Persians generally attain to a great Age, many of them living above a
hundred years; and at that time when Olearius was in Persia, the Governor was
above a hundred and forty years old. They commonly suffice themselves with a
little, and not too high Food, and live for the most part very temperate.

The Soil.
Nature of the Soil.
AS to what concerns the Soil in this great circumference of Land, it is of a
different Nature: for in some places it is exceeding fruitful, by reason of the
many Rivers which water the same, especially on the side toward the Caspian
Sea; the rest is subject to great Drought, and has many Wildernesses and
craggy Mountains. But to speak in general, most of these Provinces have plenty
of several sorts of Grain, and excellent Fruits, as well of those that grow
naturally them, as transplanted from Europe and elsewhere.

The Soil in Persia, specially so called, is very dry and stony, and therefore
requires much Manuring to fatten it, by which, and the Water conveyed in Pipes,
the Fields are fertiliz'd, and produce several sorts of Corn and Fruit in great
abundance.

About the Village Becktahab, a League from Ispahan, the Land is barren and
white, which Della Valle ascribes to the Salt with which it is mixed.

The Champain, except that of Kilan, Olearius reports to be mixed with red
Gravel, and overgrown with Brambles and Thorns, which the Inhabitants, wanting
Wood, use for Fuel. But in the low Grounds, where the most Villages are built,
it is green and fertile, for the Inhabitants convey the Brooks, which are not
above four or five Foot broad, and spring out of the Mountains, about and
through all their Lands and Gardens, which they water therewith: for (as we
said before) there is little Rain falls in Persia. Their Fields are generally
ten or twelve Rods in the square, which being surrounded with Water, and
enclosed with Banks about a Foot high, they (stopping their Sluices, drown the
same when they please, and can let the Water out of one Trench into another;
nay, oftentimes when occasion requires, they let their Lands lie under Water in
the Night, and in the daytime drain it off again to be dried by the Heat of
the Sun. Every Chile of Land affords ten Truss of Hay.

Plants.
Plants and Grain.
THe Grain which the Persians commonly Sow, are for the most part Rice, some
Wheat, Barley, Rye, and Oats, though of no great esteem; they have also French
Wheat, Tares, and Pease, which are of two sorts; the best they call Nagud, and
the worst Culul; and likewise whole Fields of Ricinus, by the Arabians called
Kicaion, Santjone, Alcaroa, and Kerva; by the Persians, Cuntzut; by the
Italians, Gira Sole; and with us, The Sun-Flower; which in those Countries
continues many years, but with us dies every Winter. Out of the Seed they press
a sweet and delicate Oil called Schirbache, which the Persians pour on certain
Meats: The Rusticks eat the Seed whole, mixed with Currants in stead of
Sweetmeats.

Cotton, by the Persians called Pambeh; by the Indians, Algodon; Cotton abounds
in Persia.
and by the Arabians in Egypt, Gotne Mesegiar, is Planted in most Provinces in
great abundance, and grows on a Sprig of a Yard long, having Leaves like those
of the Vine, but much bigger: On the top of the Stalk grows a Cod about the
bigness of a great Walnut, which when ripe, opens in three or four places,
through which the Cotton appearing, is gathered, and much thereof made into
Cloth, and the rest sold in Bags. There are several Villages which do nothing
else but plant and sell Cotton, which most of all grows in Armenia, Iran,
Nachzuan, Carabach, Adirbeitzan, and Chorazan.

In Kilan, because there grows no Cotton, they Sow much Line-seed, which they
Spin into Thread and make Linen thereof.

The Plant Gontscheh.
There is also a sort of Grass, in the Country Language called Gontscheh, which
being Sow'n, grows a Yard and a half high, and having Leaves like Clover, bears
blue Flowers, and being twice Mowed in eight Weeks, grows up again six years
one after another without new Manuring; but in the seventh Year the Land must
be turned up and Sowed afresh. This requires also as much Moisture as that of
Rice or Wheat. Of this Grain they make Hay for Great Men's Horses, as their best
Food; but in some places where it is warm and moist, especially in Muscur near
the Caspian Sea, where there is no want of Grass either in Summer or Winter,
they have no occasion to make such Hay.

Here also are whole Fields of Faenum Graecum, Fenugreek.
or Fenugreek, in the Persian Tongue called Schembebile: It is excellent Fodder
for Oxen, Cows, and Buffalo's, which are fatned therewith. The Persians say,
that if Butter lose its taste, and become rank, being melted with the Seed of
this Plant, and a piece or two of Onion put therein, it recovers its former
relish.

By reason of the Heat in Persia, where it is more Summer than Winter, and in
the Summer much constant and Sun-shiny Weather, there are many excellent Garden
Fruits, not only for the Kitchen, but to delight the Palate, as also all
manner of Herbs which we have in Europe, and among others, great and delicate
Colliflowers.

In the Province of Tarum grow Onyons of three pound weight.

Several sorts of Melons.
The Persians esteeming Melons, Plant them in great abundance, and being very
delicate, eat them before Meals. There are several sorts of Melons, viz. Summer
and Winter; the first called Kermeck (from Kerm, that is, Warm,) are the
sweetest, and ripen in July; the Harvest Melons, called Charbusei Pasi, are
ripe in September, and weighing from thirty to fifty pound, not only keep good
all Winter, but the whole Year, if hung up between green Canes or Reeds, where
they are well preserved till they have new ones, and are not known from them
but by the softness of the Rind. After the same manner they keep Grapes and
other Fruits a whole year, so that they have them fresh as if from the Trees in
the midst of Winter. There is yet another sort of Melons called Schammame,
about the bigness of an Orange, with red, yellow, and green Spots, between
which the Rind glitters exceedingly; and though they smell very sweet, yet
taste unpleasantly, and therefore they are only carried in the Hand for their
curious color and smell, which has given it the Arabian. Name of Schammame.
There is also a sort called Tochmesksems, being half Persian and half Arabian,
and signifies Grain, or Seed of the Sun, which is of an excellent scent and
taste. There are likewise Water-Melons named Hinduduane, from their original
out of India; as also many sorts of Calabashes, among which one called Cabach
is bigger than a Man's Head, with a long Neck and round Knob on the top: The
outermost Rind of the ripe ones areas hard as the Bark of a Tree, and tough as
Leather: The Pulp dried, affords nothing but the Seed, which taken out, they
use the Shells in stead of Bowls or Cups, to put Water or Drink in.

The Fruit Badinstan.
There is another sort of Fruit, not known to us in Europe, called Badinstan, in
bigness, form, and manner of growing, like our lesser Melons; the Fruit is
commonly gray, except at the end of the Stalk, where it is of a Violet color;
the Seed is round and long, and by reason of the bitterness not eaten raw, but
being boiled or fried with Butter, is a pleasant Dish.

Many Vines grow also in Persia, and in all the Provinces thereof, which bear
large and sweet Grapes, of which Texeira says the Inhabitants make excellent
Wine, in the Turkish Language called Xarao or Charab: But the Mahumetans are
forbidden either to make or drink it. The Persians of the Lees of this Wine
compose a Syrrup, The Persian Composition Duschab.
by them called Duschab, after this manner, viz. They boil the Lees a sixth
part away, till it comes to a thick Oil, which being mixed with Water and
Vinegar, makes an excellent Liquor; and sometimes they boil their Duschab so
thick, that it may be cut with a Knife, which Travelers commonly carrying with
them, and putting the same in Water to dissolve, Drink. Moreover, the Persians
often put this Duschab in their Wine, especially those of Kileck, because their
Wine there is not so sweet as that in the Southern Provinces.

At Tabris they make an excellent Dish of Duschab, and call it Helwa, after
this manner, viz. They take bruised Almonds, Wheat Flower, and Kernels of great
Walnuts, all which being put into long Bags with the Duschab, is pounded
together, and dried till it become so hard that they must chop it in pieces. Of
this Mixture they also make a sort of long Puddings, which they call Sutzuch.

Here are are several sorts of Grapes, but the sweetest and best are at Sciras
and Tabris, where they are called Tabersel, which though they may be found in
several other Places, yet not in so great abundance; they are long, without
Kernels, and keep good a whole Winter. Keseki is another sort of Grapes,
yellow, and exceeding sweet, growing most in Tarum, Tabris, and Ordebath, but
attended with this evil Quality, that whoever eats of them too freely, is sure
to be tormented with the Bloody Flux.

The Currants Kismisch.
There are also Currants without Stones called Kischmisch, which are long, green,
and bigger than those brought into Europe, and grow chiefly about the Village
Bawanat near Herat; those both new gathered and dried give an excellent taste
to the Pilao and other Meats, wherewith they may be mixed. Besides these there
are two sorts more which are not in Europe, the one called Hallage, which bears
Grapes an Inch and a half long, and an Inch thick, brown of color, and having
a hard Pulp, without much Juice or Kernels; these may be kept fresh and good
till the ensuing Year produces others. The second sort is named Encur Aali
Deresi, the Bunches whereof are extraordinary big, and half a Yard long, each
Grape as big as our Pear-plumb, brown of color, very juicy, but of short
continuance, therefore are eaten as they are pulled from the Trees; they grow
in no place but Iran, between Ordebath and Chodaferum: why they are called
Encur Aali Deresi the Persians give us this Account, viz. That some Ages since
in the Winter, their great Saint Aali coming to the forementioned place, met
with a Vine-Planter, whom he asked for some Grapes; but he telling him the
impossibility thereof at that time of the year, was commanded by Aaly to go
into the next Vineyard, where he should find enough; the Man giving credit to
those words of Aaly, went immediately thither, and saw the Vines hang sull of
the best and biggest Grapes that ever his Eyes beheld; from whence (as they
say) the Grapes before mentioned grew and were called Encur Aaly Deresi, that
is, The Grapes in Aaly's narrow Valley.

Fruit Trees and Fruit of several kinds.
Persia has also all manner of Fruit Trees which grow in Europe, besides many
other of their own, among which a kind of Pear at Ordebath called Melletzo, in
color and outward shape like a Cittron, sweet of smell, and very juicy.

Granates, Almonds, Dates, and Figs, grow also in several places, especially in
the Kilanean Wilderness and Mountains. The wild Granates are all sour, but the
Kernels of them dried (in the Persian Tongue called Nardan, from Nar a
Pomegranate) are carried to be sold in remote Provinces, where they use them to
color their Meat black, and make it tartish, by laying them to soke in Water,
and squeezing the Juice through a Cloth. Many also boil the Juice out of them
when green, and pour the Liquor over Rice, to give it a sharp relish.

There are also whole Gardens of white and red Mulberry-trees, the Leaves
whereof serve to feed the Silkworms; they are Planted so close, that a Man
cannot go betwixt them; neither do they suffer them to grow above five Foot and
a half high, that they may the better reach to lop all the Boughs.

There grows a sort of Shell-fruit called Mask, which is green, and about the
bigness of a Pescod, but not so flat.

About Ispahan may be seen a little Tree named Bidmisk, that is Willow-Musk,
from its resemblance with the Willow, and smell of Musk; it has in stead of
Leaves or Flowers, a kind of Cod of pale green Threads, out of which is pressed
a very cooling Liquor, being an excellent Medicine against any Burning.

There is likewise the Tziaccacuei, or Fistick-Tree, both Male and Female,
which differ little in shape, but the Males only bear Fruit, being Berries,
like those of a Laurel, which grow at the ends of the Leaves five or six
together. In these Berries breed little Flies.

Beasts.
Beasts breeding in this Country.
THe Beasts for Food or Burden are generally Sheep, Goats, Beeves, Buffalo's,
Camels, Horses, Mules, and Asses. The Sheep are kept in great Flocks as in
Europe, for Mutton is their daily Food, but different from ours in taste,
shape, and bigness, being for the most part bigger than ours, with high crooked
Noses, long hanging Ears like Spaniels, with Tails of ten, twenty, and thirty
Pound weight, which are nothing but Fat, yet their Bodies lean enough; though
their Tails have exactly the same Joints as our Sheep, yet the Fat grows so
thick about them, that they are much larger in circumference, which makes them
that they cannot run fast or skip. The same kind of Sheep are amongst the
Tartars on the West and North side of the Caspian Sea.

There are also whole Herds of Goats, whose Flesh is eaten, and their Tallow
(of which one has often twenty five Pound weight) made into Candles: Their
Skins being Tanned, are sent into Poland, Muscovy, and all over Europe.

There breed likewise many Buffalo's, especially in the Northern part near the
Caspian Sea, in Serab, near Ardebil, Ervan, and Scherul, where some Husbandmen
have five or six hundred of them: They thrive best in moist places, and their
Milk is said to be very cooling. The Kilanean Buffalo's, like those in India,
have a fat Bunch in their Necks near their Shoulders.

The Persian Cows will not suffer themselves to be Milk'd, except their Calves
be near them, so that when the Calf dies (for they never kill any) they stuff
their Skins full of Straw, and strowing Salt thereon, bring the same to the
Cow, which they Milk whilst she licks off the Salt, for else she would never
give down her Milk.

They have little regard for Hogs, and seldom or never eat of them; therefore
the Armenian Christans which living amongst them have Dwellings apart, as in
Tzulfa and the Suburb of Ispahan, keep only a few. But Crusius affirms, that
they eat Swines-flesh by permission of their Prophet Aaly and Schach Ismael.

Those Swine which breed here are most of them speckled.

The Inhabitants keep many Camels of several kinds; for some of them have two
Bunches, Camels of several sorts.
and those we name Dromedaries, and the Persians Bughur, and those with one
Bunch, Schuttur; of which last they have four sorts, and being of several
Natures, are valued accordingly; the best sort are by them called Ner, which
are generated by a Bughur and a Schutter; those which seldom breed, being
called Maje, are very strong, and at certain times are able to carry a thousand
weight, but that is only when they are hot after Generation, which lasts
commonly forty days, and is for the most part in Winter; during which time they
eat little, foam at the Mouth, and are very fierce and angry, and therefore the
Owners are forced to Muzzle them with an Iron Muzzle called Agrab. These Ners
are generally sold for a hundred Crowns apiece; but if they chance to couple
with the Female, then they lose their Strength, and grow lazy and disobedient,
choosing rather to stay at home, wherefore the Turks call them Jurda Caidem,
which signifies Those that think of their Stable, and may be bought for thirty
or forty Crowns. The third sort, called Lohk, though they are also sensible and
hot for Procreation, yet they are not so good as the Bughurs; neither do they
foam at the Mouth as the Ner, but in stead thereof they blow forth a red
Bladder out of their Throats, and swallow the same in again, hold out their
Heads and gruntle, being neither so hardy nor so strong as the Ner; they are
sold for sixty Crowns. The Persians from these two Beasts call a stout or
va^iant Man Ner, and a Coward Lohk. The fourth and strongest sort they style
Schutturi baad, and the Turks, Jeldowesi, that is, A Wind-Camel, which is
smaller, and much swifter than the other, being able to outrun a Horse. The
Sophy and his Chans or Viceroys, keep several Teams of these lesser Camels,
which are employed either to fetch in Ambassadors, at which time they are
caparison'd with Crimson Silks, and Bells, and other Ornaments about their
Necks and before their Breasts, and have rich Embroidered Saddles; or else they
are used as we our Posthorses, and carry Goods from Place to Place like
Pack-Horses; and moreover they use them in their Wars, for if a Party chance to
be defeated, they with more speed convey away their Baggage; but some of them
Trot so hard, and as it were, Jumping, that no Man would be able to endure it
long. One Man is able to manage seven or more, for he makes them fast one
behind another, and either rides upon, or walks before the foremost. It is very
convenient traveling in Persia by the help of these Camels, for by them
Merchants have their Goods carried at reasonable Rates; and if any Persons are
not minded to travel alone, The Camels Diet.
they go for their better security with the Cavila or Caravans. A Camel is for
the most part fed with Nettles, Thistles, and other Weeds. On the Thistles
oftentimes breed poisonous Snails, in the Country Language called Mohere, by
which if a Camel be stung in the Nose, he dies soon after; therefore when the
Persians are angry with them, they wish the Mohere to sting them in the Nose.
They also mix Chaff and Barley together, and make Dough thereof in form like a
long Loaf about three Pound weight, which they give them to eat: Sometimes they
mix the Seed of the Cotton-Tree, which is about the bigness of a Pease, with
it, which makes it very sweet, and with which a Camel being well fed, will
travel two days without Drinking, which is a great Providence in Nature,
because in the Wildernesses and Sandy Deserts, through which they often travel,
there is no Water to be found. The Camels of Persia are (according to Della
Valle) fed with Barley Meal mixed with Straw, and made into Balls: for if they
eat Grass, it debilitates them both for Travel and Service: They are very
willing to take up their Loads, for striking them only on the Knees with a
Switch, they immediately kneel-down, and lying with their Bellies on the
Ground, suffer themselves to be laden. They go much faster, They are pleased
with Music.
and carry their Burdens with delight (as Mr. Sandis affirms) when their
Drivers Whistle or Sing to them, or make them any other Music; wherefore the
Owners of them tie two Bells above the Knee of one of their fore Legs, and a
Collar of small ones about their Necks. Mr. Purchase relates, That the Arabians
for the forementioned Reason, never travel without a Drum and Drummer through
the Deserts. The same is justified by Leo Africanus, who adds, That when
Travelers have tired their Camels, they need not beat them (which they regard
not) to make them go forward, but only Sing or Whistle a pleasant Tune, which
so animates and refreshes them, that they go faster than a Man is able to run,
to the end of their Journey.

These Beasts have a strong Memory, Are revengeful.
are vindicative, and do not easily forget an Injury done to them, wherefore
the Persians commonly say, That a revengeful Man has a Camels Spleen. But that
there should be an Antipathy betwixt a Camel and a Horse (as Xenophon writes)
is a mistake, because it is very common in Persia, in one Caravan to have
Camels, Horses, and Asses, which are often put in one Stable together, without
offering the least hurt to one another.

The she Camels carry their Young twelve Months, and do not Generate backward,
as some will have it, though it be true, that when they stand in the Stable
they Urine backwards, which perhaps has been the occasion of that mistake; for
they Couple like other Beasts, only the Female falls on her Belly.

Now in regard a Camel is a Beast that may be kept at a small charge, they are
seldom killed in Persia, except they are stung by a Mohere, or fall down tired
on the Road (as it often happens in deep Ways) and then they kill and eat them.

Very good Breeds of Horses.
Persia is also stored with plenty of good Horses, most of them having very
handsome Heads, Ears, Crest and Legs. In ancient time the Province of Media was
famous for breeding of excellent Horses, which were called Nisean Horses, from
a City of that Name; and (as Strabo tells us) the Kings of Persia used no
other. But though at this day the Median Horses, especially those in Erscheck
near Ardebil, are good, yet the Arabian far exceed them, and are now used by
the Kings, because they have very handsome Heads, Crest, Breast, and Feet, are
long Winded, and have all the good Qualities else that Nature can bestow on a
Horse. Next these the Turkish Horses are in great esteem, especially those that
are bred in Turcomania, of which there are many in Persia.

The King has several peculiar Places for the breeding of Horses, especially
at Erscheck, Schirwan, Carabach, and Mocan, where the best Pasturage is. They
generally use them to Ride on, but in Muscur they also draw in Carts, for
Wagons with four Wheels they use none. And because they are great lovers of
Horses and Riding, and their chiefest Force consists in their Cavalry,
therefore they breed them with great care. But in stead of Straw they Litter
them with their own Dung, dried in the Sun, and strewn a Foot thick under
them, on which the Horses lie as soft as on Cotton; and if any of it become
wet, it is taken from the rest and dried: They cover them also with a Hair
Cloth Lined with Wool.

The Persians have been Masters of these excellent Horses since the Death of
the Sultan Borisir, whom the King of Persia caused to be put to death, after
his coming from Carmania into Persia, with many beautiful Horses, to the number
of ten thousand, of all which he made himself Master, and from them the
Persians have had such excellent Breeds, that the Turks are inferior to them.

They bring up and diet their Horses for the Race; and those that are
swift-footed they style Badpay, that is, Wind-footed; they also color the
Tails, Mayns, and Bellies of their white and dapple Horses, red or yellow. They
are very curious in their Furniture, and therefore Persons of Quality Embroider
their Sadles, Bridles, and Cloths with Gold and Silver, which is an ancient
Pride of the Persians ever since the Reign of Xerxes. These Horses, though
employed night and day in a Battle, can endure thirty hours without Meat.

There are also a sort of Stags, by the Turks called Tzeirra, and by the
Persians Ahu, of a sad color, have great Horns, and being very swift-footed,
are to be seen in no place but the Province of Mocan, and by Schamachie,
Carabach, and Mearaga.

The Inhabitants likewise keep many Mules, especially to Ride on, being used by
great Lords, nay, by the Kings themselves to travel on, they are valued at as
dear a Rate as the Horses, and those that are any thing handsome are sold for a
hundred Crowns. Moreover some have reported, that there are wild Mules found in
several places in Persia, but being very rare, they are only sent as Presents
to the King and Chans; and as Asia breeds more Asses than any other Place in
the World, so Persia exceeds any of the Eastern Countries.

The several sorts of People.
IN Persia are diverse sorts of Inhabitants, viz. First Strangers of several
Nations, which come thither to Traffic, amongst which the Indians are the
most; as also Banians, who come thither out of the Province of Guzaratte. There
are likewise several sorts of Christians, Assyrians, Nestorians, and Maronites;
but the greatest number are Georgians and Armenians, who drive a very great
Trade, and by reason of their Wealth, monopolize as it were most of the
Commodities into their own hands, especially the Silk in the Countries near the
Turks, and dwell in great numbers in the Suburb Zulfa in Ispahan, where several
People out of Europe have their Residences, as English, Hollanders, Portuguese,
and others, to Trade.

The Natives of Persia are of two sorts, viz. Persian Mahumetans, and Gauren,
that is, Unbelievers, notwithstanding they name themselves Behdun, Description
of the Gaures.
that is, People of a true Faith; Olearius calls them Kebbers, and others the
true Offspring of those ancient Persians that lived in the time of Alexander
the Great; they are by their Wars with several Princes reduced to a small
handful of People, which live only in three or four Towns in Persia, and among
others in Ispahan, where they reside (as Olearius says) in one of the four
Suburbs called Kebrahath, or (as Della Valle has it) in Gauroston, for
Gauroston signifies The Country or Residence of the Gaures; which Place
(according to Della Valle) is very well built, the Streets straight and broad,
and much better than those in the Suburb Ciolfa; but the Houses are not above
one Story high, without Ornaments, according to the State of the Persians that
dwell in them: for the Gaures are a poor People i^ outward appearance, driving
no Trade, and Till only so much Land as will maintain their Families: They are
strong Limbed like the modern Persians, but shave not their Cheeks and Chins
after their manner, but suffer their Beards to grow like the Turks: moreover,
they wear long Hair on their Heads like the ancient Persians (as Herodotus
describes them) in former times. The Men go all after one fashion in their
Habits; their Caps are round, like those of the present Persians, commonly
quite white, without any other colors. The Women are also Clothed after one
manner, but their Apparel has greater resemblance with the Arabian or
Chaldean, than the Persian: On their Heads they wear a handsome long Veyl of a
green color, which hangs down to their Wastes before, and touches the Ground
behind; they always walk unvey'ld in the Streets, for a distinction from the
Mahumetan Persian Women. They are very simple, and speak a peculiar Language,
differing from the modern Persian, and use different Characters, which they
Carve on the Doors of their Houses. They worship, and keep to this day, the
Orimasda, or ever-burning Fire, after the same manner as the ancient Priests
did, in the time of Cyrus and Darius. They never go to Wars without the
consecrated Wagons, adorned with Gold, wherein the Fire was kept burning on
Silver Altars. They also Pray three times a day, viz. Morning, Noon, and
Evening, and Believe in one only God, Creator of all things, who is invisible
and omnipotent; wherefore the Mahumetans have unjustly given them the Name of
Gauren, or Idolaters. It has been written by several, that they worship the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, for lesser Angels, or rather, as they say
them-themselves, by the Names of Angels. They curse Mahomet, and take him and
all his Followers for Unbelievers. They abhor, and are afraid of Frogs,
Tortoises, Lobsters, Crabs, and the like. They neither bury, nor burn their
Dead, but keep them above Ground in a certain Walled place, where setting them
upright with their Eyes open as if living, they prop them up with Forks, and so
leave them till dropping down they dissolve by putrefaction.

The Agemi.
Della Valle makes the Mahumetans in Persia of two sorts; the one are those
properly cay'd Agemi, or Agiami, Extracted from Agem or Agiam, which has the
same signification with the word Pars or Fars, though the Learned use the Name
Agiami, to express in general, and without distinction, all Inhabitants of this
Kingdom, of what Province soever: for the Name Persi belongs properly to those
in the Province of Persia. The Quizilbasci.
The second sort of Mahumetans are the Quizilbasci, or Nobility and Gentry, in
high esteem in Persia, who being Extracted from the Turks, made themselves
Masters of the Country, and assumed the absolute Government thereof till
Ismael Sefi's time, the first Raiser of the present Royal Family. They are
called Kisilbasch, that is, Red-Heads; which Name was first given them by the
Turks in derision; but of late they delight therein, and are proud to be so
called, pretending that a great Mystery of their Religion is expressed thereby.
The word Kisilbasch is by Eurorean Writers spelled several ways, but the right
Name (according to Olearius) is Kisilbasch, being a Turkish word, compounded
from Kisil, that is, Red, and also signifies Gold, and Basch, that is, A Head,
and applied to them by reason of the several sorts of red Caps they wear.

According to Jovius and Bizarro, the first Inventer of these Caps amongst the
Persians, was one Techellis, a Disciple of Harduellis, otherwise called Eider;
but Minadoi and Olearius think otherwise: for they say, when the Persians upon
the advice of Sofi or Sefi, the Promoter of their Sect, fell from the Turkish
Religion, and began to honor Aaly beyond Mahomet and his Followers, Omar,
Osman, and Abubeker, they would have the twelve Successors of Aaly (as shall be
declared at large in their Religion) to be accounted and worshipped as Imams or
Saints: As a testimony whereof, the religious Orders were, according to a Law
made at that time, to wear Caps with twelve Plaits or Folds, sharp on the top,
and broad at bottom: But because the Turks after this fell up on the Persians
several times, and killed the Priests, who were accounted the chief
Incendiaries, they began upon this Division to leave off their Caps, that so
they might not be known: Ismael Sefi prepares an Army against the Turks.
But when Schach Ismael Sefi prepared to set out an Army against the Turks, who
had already penetrated far into Persia, he sent from Kilan, whither he retired,
to the eminentest Provinces and Towns, to acquaint them with the intolerable
Oppression the Country and their Religion would lie under, in case the Turks
should become their Masters; therefore he desired the Natives to join with him
to beat out the Enemy, with a Promise, that if he should re-gain the Kingdom,
he would make all those Persons that so assisted him, a general
Infranchisement, without paying any manner of Tribute, which so pleased the
Persians, that in a short time they raised an Army of three hundred thousand
Men, and made their first Attempt upon the City Ardebil, from whence they drove
the Turks Garrison without any resistance; after which the several Provinces
entered into a Contract with the King, that they would venture their Lives and
Fortunes in defense of him and their Religion: The first red Caps.
In testimony whereof the King ordered the forementioned plaited Caps, which
were to signify the twelve Imams, or Aaly's Successors, to be made and
distributed amongst the Soldiers; but there being not so much red Cloth in
Ardebil, a Shoemaker made the first twelve of red Leather, and presented them
to the King, who save them to his prime Commanders: After which time, every
Soldier in King Ismael's Army wore a red Cap, which the Turks seeing, called
them Kisilbasch, or Red-Heads. These Caps are by them called Tash or Tagh, that
is, A Crown, and therefore the Persians are well pleased with the Name
Kisilbasch, because it signifies Red, or rather Gold-Heads. The yet remaining
Successors of Aaly also wear these Caps, which being commonly tied about with
Ribbons are called Taky. Della Valle affirms, that these red Bonnets of Ismael
Sefi, are worn under the Turbants, and have a pretty long Tassel on the top,
which sticks half way out of the Turbant, and also twelve narrow Plaits or
Folds, in commemoration of the twelve Successors of Aaly. But at this day, not
all the Persians, but only those that are Successors of the forementioned
Order, and of the Family of Aaly and Sefi, wear such Caps; neither do the
Persians without distinction, suffer themselves to be called Kisilbasch, but
only the Successors of Aaly as, and also the Kings Guards, therefore when they
say, Quizilbasci, its signification.
Let us go to Quizilbasci, it is as much as to say, Let us go to Persia for when
those that are experienced in the Persian Tongue speak of a Quizilbasci, they
do not mean thereby a common Persian, but a Soldier. There are also two sorts
of Quizilbasci, some of them are Heirs or Successors of the first, whose State
and Quality lasts as long as their Families; others are from time to time by
them promoted to that Dignity: for all Slaves, from what Nation soever, that
come into Persia, and List themselves in the Army, as the Janisaries among the
Turks, are made Quizilbascies, and consequently Freeholders and Gentlemen of
the Country, as also all their Successors. Moreover, when the King will show
any particular Favor to a Stranger, he makes him a Quizilbasci, by putting the
red Cap on his Head.

The number of the Quizillbasci.
The Quizilbascies consist of thirty two Tribes, perhaps because in the
beginning they derived from thirty two sorts of People, by whose assistance
Ismael Sefi made himself Master of the Realm. Sixteen of these Families are
called Right-handed, and the other sixteen Left Handed Men, because the first
sixteen are always seen on the Kings right, and the other sixteen on his left
Side, as well in Marches and other Cavalcades, as in the Divan or
Council-house, or the Kings Court.

Distinguished into Tribes.
John the Persian says the Tribes of the Quizilbascies are as so many Noble
Houses or Families, as Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls. But this Della Valle
contradicts, affirming, that they are not Families, but Tribes, distinguished
by peculiar Names or Titles, which they either made choice of themselves, or
were given to them by King Ismael in the beginning, for their heroic Exploits.
Moreover, the great number of the Quizilbascies is a sufficient testimony of
the Tribes: Likewise those of one Tribe have no Relation to those of another,
but only bear the same Name. Add hereunto the great difference in the
Qualities of the People in one Tribe, for some of them are Chans, Sultans, and
Beigs, which may stand in competition with our Lords; others, nay the greatest
number, are poor People, in so mean Condition, that they are forced to serve
for Grooms and Servants; yet nevertheless they bear the same Title with the
Sultan or Chan of the same Tribe.

There are also a People called Reajet or Tat, that is, Subjects, which are, as
among us, Reaja or Tat, what it signifies.
accounted the vulgar or meanest of the Commonalty; for the Name Tat is given
to Mechanics: Yet nevertheless, if we make a farther enquiry into the Name
Tat, we shall find it to be more Noble than that of Quizilbasci, because Tat is
the Name of those Extracted from the real and ancient Loins of the Persians,
and therefore the King gives it not only to People of mean Condition, but also
to the richest and most powerful, nay, to the Myrsa and Princes of the Blood;
and lastly, to all those, who out of fear, or for other Reasons have laid down
Arms, or resigning public Offices have deserted the Court.

Complexion, Nature, and Shape of the Inhabitants.
Nature of the Persians.
THe Persians are naturally endu'd with Prudence and Understanding, quick
Witted, and Learned, wherefore there are many excellent Poets amongst them;
they highly esteem Moral Philosophy, are not inclined to any disdainful
Behavior, but are affable and courteous, not only to one another, but
especially to Strangers, to whom (as we said before) they are also very
hospitable; and in their Discourses use many complemental Expressions. When
they invite any one to their House, they commonly say, Honor my House with your
Presence; I offer my self to you; Their Complements.
I prostrate my self at your Feet, and the like; for they are very full of such
obliging Expressions. Della Valle affirms the contrary, and that their Meetings
consist in Eating and Drinking without speaking, all their Ceremonies being
only these words of course, You are welcome; How do you? There is your
appointed place; which they repeat many times. Olearius says, that it is no
shame among them in the Persian Tongue, to say Drug Micui, or in the Turkish,
Galan Dierfen,, that is, You Lie, or Galantzi, You are a Liar, but in ancient
Times they were of another Nature, as Herodotus affirms. They are very faithful
one to another, especially if they are sworn Friends, for it is common among
them to swear Fidelity and Friendship one to another as long as they live,
which is performed after the following manner: They swear Friendship to one
another.
The great Families or Tribes generally meet once a year, when they Feast and
make Merry; and if any one have a peculiar kindness for another, then he says,
Come let us be sworn Brothers; and this is commonly performed between two: And
because these Brothers must have a Father, they choose one whom they think fit,
and taking him by the Lappet of his Coat, say, We make you our Babba, or
Father, which he dare not refuse. These going to the Califf (who has every
ones Family Registered) kiss his Hand in token of their Friendship; and being
set down in a Register for that purpose, they lay themselves down one behind
another on their Bellies, first the Father, and next the Brothers; whereupon
the Califf gives each of them three light Blows with a Stick on their Backs,
and at the first says, Alla, that is, God; at the second, Mahumet; and at the
third, Aaly; which done, they kissing the Staff, Sign and conclude the
Agreement of Brotherly Friendship, which they really keep, and are more
faithful to one another than Brothers, affirming, that they shall sooner meet
in Paradise than real Brothers.

An annual Feast of fraternal Society.
They also keep an annual Feast of fraternal Society on the twenty fifth day of
November, in commemoration of Mahomet's declaring his Son Aly Heir and
Successor in the Califfdom on that day; when also not only many Enemies are
reconciled one with another, but diverse, from the Example of their Lawgiver
Mahomet, adopt Strangers, which they do by putting them naked between their
bare Bodies and Shirt, and so pulling them out at the bottom thereof. This
Friendship they acccount so inviolable, that they repute other Crimes in
respect of the breach thereof but as Peccadillo's, and therefore in ordinary
Discourse say proverbially, Mei buchur munbur bussusan oteschei, Ender Chihesen
Sakini, But chane basch merdum Asari, that is, Drink Wine, Set the Pulpit and
Church on Fire, Burn an Abdalla's Coat, Be seen in an Idols Temple, (all which
are abominable, and forbidden Sins) But wrong not your Friend.

Their Reconciliation after Difference.
If any thing chance to happen which causes a Contention among the Brotherhood,
they are forced to reconcile it at the next general Meeting the following year;
for then the Offended goes to the Offenders Door, and stands in a mournful
Posture, with his Head and Hands hanging down, till the Offender has invited
him three several times into his House, from whence they go together to the
Assembly, which judges who is most to be blamed of them, and condemns the
Offender to make a Feast; and upon this Reconciliation they are Registered a
second time.

The Nature and Disposition of the People.
They are grateful to those that give them any thing, but revengeful to those
that do them a Prejudice; they are valiant, and consequently good Soldiers, and
often hazard their Lives in apparent danger. They seem to be modest and
bashful, being never seen to make Water standing, but squatting down, and
immediately after washing their Hands to which purpose at all their Feasts
stand Pots of Water in private places, or if there be a Brook near them, they
run thither; wherefore the Turks call them Cher Schahei, that is, The Kings
Asses, because the Asses, whenever they go cross a Stream, always Urine in the
same. The Turks on the contrary are by the Persians called Secksunni, or Dogs,
because they Urine against the Wall, which commonly the Soldiers and vulgar
Turks do, yet the better sort sit down like the Persians. No Persian or Turk
eases himself with his Face or Back toward the South, because Mahomet lies
buried in the South.

The right Hand is by the Persians, as amongst us, accounted the chiefest and
highest place of Honor; but on the contrary, the Turks esteem the left most
worthy. They never pull off their Caps or Turbants, unless when they go to
Pray, or appear before the King or other great Lords; for their usual way of
Salutation, is to bow, and to lay their Hands on their Breasts. They account it
a great piece of rudeness to ask any Person of Quality his Name or Condition,
or in his Presence to enquire after it. They are lean, and very strong Limm'd,
of a dark brown, or sallow Complexion, and in general are Hawk-nos'd, as it is
said that great Persian King Cyrus was. The Men shave the Hair off their Heads,
which is very, black, every eight days, but the Seids wear long Hair, as they
say Mahomet did: they all have long Mustacho's, and the longer they are, the
more pride they take in them for such as wear Mustacho's that hang downwards,
are accounted great Zealots but such as turn up their Beards, they say are
presumptuous, as if they were minded to Engage with Heaven.

There are also a sort of People in Persia which never cut the Hair upon their
upper Lip, The Persians take great care of their Hair, and why.
but letting it grow over their Mouths, are called Suffi or Sefi; and this they
do, because (as they say) Aly wore his Beard after that manner, and the reason
thereof they give in the following Story, viz. That when Mahomet was commanded
by God up to Heaven, Aly went after him, and knocking at Heaven Gate, they
would not at first permit him to come in, but saying that he was Schir Chadda,
that is, Gods Favorite, he was let in, and saw the Angels Entertain Mahomet
with a celestial Liquor, of which a Cup being also brought full to him, he
drunk, and therefore he thought it would be a great Sin to diminish the least
Hair which had been drenched in so heavenly a Liquor. Moreover, the Persians
have a great aversion to red Hair, neither do they delight in fair, but are
great admirers of Cole-black Hair; wherefore many color their Hair, which they
do after this manner: They take the Herb with the Seed, by them called Wesme,
and brought from Babylon (which Olearius supposes to be one and the same with
Securidaca, an Eastern Plant not known among us,) adding Gauls, a little Soap
and Orpement amongst them, and boiling it in Water, dip their Hair therein,
washing it off again with Lie mixed with unslak'd Lime. They also gather the
Water which in the Spring comes from the pruned Vines, and wet their Mustacho's
therewith, as also the Women their Hair, for they affirm that it makes their
Hair grow long and black.

They Paint their Hands.
The Persians, as also the Turks, color their Hands red and yellow, though some
do only their Fingers and Nails; and this kind of coloring is at all their
Nuptials set upon the Table amongst other Dishes before the Guests, to use when
they please. It is also affirmed, that they Paint their dead Bodies, specially
those of Virgins, with the dried Leaves of Chinne or Alcanna, that they may
appear beautiful in their Grave to their two Angels or Confessors. Some, to
make the Color look brown, rub their Hands with the Leaves, or green Rinds of
Walnuts, which keeps fresh on their Hands above forty days, notwithstanding
they warn them every day.

In their Walking they waddle from side to side like Geese, especiallv the
Women; and there is not one Persian that has a steady or handsome Gate, which
Oleariues supposes to proceed from their manner of sitting on the Floor like
Tailors, with their Legs under them; but this is not probable, for then all the
Eastern People which use to sit after the same manner, would be subject to the
like Impediment.

Of their Venery.
The Persians much inclined to Wantonness.
The Persians exceed most Countries in Wantoness and venerial Exercises: for
besides their great number of Wines, they are very much inclined to variety of
Women, and in all their Cities, except Ardebil, are kept public
Brothel-houses, under the Protection of the Magistrates: for which Privilege
the Cabeh, or Strumpets, pay great Tribute.

The present Persians never keep any great Feasts; nay, the King himself at
Court seldom Entertains foreign Ambassadors; yet diverse Ladies of Pleasure
always attend there, which are expert in Dancing, Singing, and the like. But in
Ardebil, it being a Consecrated Place, none of their Debaucheries are
permitted, by special Order from Schach Abbas.

A Master of a Feast always Presents his Guests with several sorts of Liquor,
and then such Women efpecially as they best like; whereupon those that please
retire into a private Chamber fitted for that purpose; from whence after most
inward Embraces, they come forth without the least bashfulness, the Man to his
Place, and the Woman falls to Dancing.

This Custom of providing Women at a great Feast is very ancient amongst the
Persians: for long since when the Persian Ambassadors were highly Entertained
by Anuntas, King of Macedonia, they also desired to have Women, saying. It is a
Custom amongst us Persians, when we make great Feasts, to bring in such, to the
heightning md completing our Pleasures; as is at large described by Herodotus.

King Sefi kept several of these Women for his Recreation; and Curtius tells
us, that Darius carried three hundred and sixty Concubines along with him in
his Progresses and Travels, which were all Clothed in Royal Attire.

Are guilty of Sodomy.
But that which is worse, they are extremely addicted to the horrid Sin of
Sodomy, which Herodotus affirms they learned from the Greeks; but that seems an
unjust Imputation, because the Persians were guilty of the same before they had
any Converse with the Greeks.

Della Valle tells us, that at Cambru there are many Mahumetan Youths, which
from their Girdles upward, are Clothed like Men, and from their Wastes
downward, like Women, and go up and down, the Streets inviting to this
Abomination. But it is no wonder they give themselves over to this kind of Sin,
since their Prophet Mahomet did not a little encourage them therein: Nay, they
are instructed, that all carnal Delights whatsoever will be the greatest and
chiefest Enjoyment in the other World by which means this Religion is the more
followed.

Their Apparel.
Their Habits.
AMongst the Persians the Men let their Garments hang loose about their lower
Parts, so that at a distance they show like Women; which Fashion Diodorus tells
us they took from the Virago Semiramis, who went accordingly Habited.

According to Della Valle, the Persians Clothes differ much in fashion from the
Turks, as being narrower, sleighter, and cut and slashed: The under Garment
next the Shirt, by reason of its shortness not seen, is generally of very fine
Indian Cotton, stained with colored Imagery. Their upper Summer Garment is
long, strait-body'd, and hangs loose over their Bellies, having long and
plaited Sleeves, and from the Girdle downward made wider like a Bell, and Lined
with Cotton. This Coat is commonly made of fine colored Indian Linen, others
of Cotton or Silk, which when new, having a Gloss like Satin, is called
Cotoni. Their upper Garment in Winter is a short Coat, which being worn by
Troopers, just covers the Horses Back; the common People wear somewhat longer,
yet not so long as to hang below their Knees: These Coats are for the most part
made of Cloth, and sometimes, though very seldom, of Silk and Cloth of Tissue,
and Lined with Furr, which the Persians have in great abundance, and adorned
with Silk Buttons and Loops, of a different color from the Cloth. Not only
the Soldiers, but also the common People, have two sorts of these upper Coats.
The Men wear a great Turbant in the Persian Tongue called Mendil, made of
Cotton or Silk Ribbons or Sashes wound one over another, and some intermixed
with Golden Thread, sixteen or eighteen Yards long. Della Valle says, that the
Turbants are made of spotted Cotton, and very seldom all white. Persons of
Quality most commonly wear them stitched with Silver and Gold; but the meaner
sort make them of such Stuffs as please their Fancy. These Turbants being
always very large, cover the Caps that are worn under them. There is no
distinction of Persons by their Turbants, as amongst the Turks, but the
Christians may wear the same fashioned Clothes and Turbants as the other
Persians, except the red Cap which they call Tat, that is, A Crown, which is a
peculiar Badge of the Nobility, and sometimes (as we said before) of the
Soldiery. The Successors of Aaly, their greatest Prophet next Mahomet, wear
Caps with high Crowns: In the Winter against the Cold they wear a long Cap
under their Turbants, Lined with Furr, the end whereof appears out of the top
of the Turbant, and being wide at bottom, they pull the same quite over their
Forehead and Ears, to keep off the Weather. Priests, especially the Hasis, wear
for the most part white ones, of which color also is their other Apparel; some
of them wear a Lappet about half a Yard long down behind their Turbants. The
Seids, which are such as boast themselves to be Extracted from Mahomet, and
consequently his Successors, wear the forementioned Lappet of green Cloth. The
several Habits of Men.
Some Persians, especially great Lords, wear Caps, covered without and Lined
with a finer sort of Sheepskins, and turned up with the same; the Wool
whereof being as soft as Silk, is about a Fingers length. These Caps are as
highly esteemed there as our Beavers are here. Noblemen wear a fort of Turbants
with high Plumes, adorned with Precious Stones and Pearls; and by these a
Nobleman may be distinguished from other Persons: for the Nobility only are
permitted to wear a Coronet with twelve Points, which was brought up by the
first Sophy. The Stuff of these is brought out of India, and are stronger, and
of a better color than those of Persia. But a Molla or Priest that wears the
forementioned Silk Sashes, must lay it by him out of Reverence to God, when he
Prays before the Mahere. Under these Sashes they wear their Handkerchiffs,
Knives, Purses, Inkhorns, and Table-Books. Over their Coats the King and other
eminent Persons wear a Curdu, or short Jump, which comes down to their Hips,
but Faced down before with Sable. When they go abroad, or Ride, they commonly
hang another Coat over the same, made of Silk, and wrought with Gold, and is
therefore called Jacub Cahni, from a King of the same Name which first used it.
Their Breeches, made of Cotton, and very narrow, reach down to their Ancles,
and are tied on the top with a String, over which hangs their Shirt, which is
commonly Stripped Red, and Laced on the Breast or Sides with yellow Laces. The
Men's Stockings, made of fine Cloth, are ill shaped, and hang unhandsomly about
their Legs; some are of green Cloth, which the Turks cannot endure, because it
is a scandal to their Religion; for they say that Mahomet wore a green Cap,
which Color the Persians in disdain wear on their Feet. Moreover all their
Clothes are of several Colors; but above all, the Carnation is in greatest
esteem amongst them, and is called Al Amongst other dark Colors, they have of
late years gotten a French, or sad Green, which they call Nefti, from an Oil of
the same Name. Their Shoes called Kef, end in a sharp Point, and have such low
Quarters, that they can slip their Feet in and out without any trouble, as if
they were Slippers, though with high Heels, and plated underneath with Iron.
When they go into their Halls, or other Apartments, they leave their Shoes at
the Door like the Turks, by which means there areas many Shoes commonly
standing before the Court or Council Chamber, as in a Shoemakers Shop, and a
Man appointed for that purpose to take charge of them, who gives to every one
his own.

Della Valle tells us, that the Persians gird themselves almost under their
Bellies with two Girdles, one upon another; the longest is made of certain
thick Silk-Stuff, which being pretty broad and very long, they wind three or
four times about their Bodies; some of them are streaked and wrought with Gold;
others curiously flowered, and some plain. Some Girdles also are double, and
made of two sorts of Silk, without any Ornaments, except that the one side is
of one color, and the other of another. The upper Girdle, which they wear
above the great one, is shorter, narrower, and of one color, and is either
made of Silk, Camels Hair, or Cotton, yet not less esteemed than those of Silk,
because they are often richer, and sometimes dearer.

The Habits of Women.
The Habits of the ordinary Women are very mean, but the rich wear Cloth and
Silk wrought with Gold; they are clear, and of a more becoming shape than the
Turkish Women. Those that are Married or Betrothed, are permitted to wear a
Girdle and a Plume of Feathers, which is also a distinction of Nobility.



Habits of the Women.
The Women's Garments are much thinner than the Men's, and hang loose about their
Bodies, having underneath Shifts and Drawers down to the Ancles like the Men.
Their Stockings are commonly either Crimson or green Velvet, Cloth of Tissue,
or other rich Stuffs. They have no peculiar Head-Tires, but are dressed after
the same fashion as the Ladies of Bagdat or Babylon. Their Hair hangs down in
Tresses, both behind and in Locks, and curls before. About their Heads they
wear two or three Strings of Pearl, but none about their Necks, and let them
hang below their Cheeks. Young Maids also wear a Diamond Ring in their right
Nostril, several Gold Rings on their Fingers, and broad Silver Armlets.

The Men, according to a Law made by Mahomet, may only wear Silver Rings.

Women of Quality go after the Eastern manner in the Streets with a long white
Vail over their Faces, which hangs down to the Ground, and have only a little
Slit therein, through which they look. And this Fashion they took up, not so
much out of Modesty, as some suppose, or the Jealousy of their Husbands, or by
reason of any Law amongst the Mahumetans, but rather from their proud Humor,
judging very few worthy to look them in the Face: for before Mahomet's time,
the Women of Arabia and Mesopotamia went always with covered Faces. And to this
purpose Peter Bizarro, in his ancient History of Persia, makes mention of King.
Tyridates's Queen, who coming with her Husband into Italy, was Veiled with
Cloth of Tissue. And the modern Custom confirms this Opinion, because a great
Lady, in the Presence of a Nobleman, King or Prince, uncovers her Face, in
testimony of the great Honor, and high Esteem she has for him; but no Woman
will show her Face either to her Equal or Inferior: And on the contrary, the
Women of inferior Rank expose their Faces to open view both at home and abroad.

If the Clothes of Noble Persons be never so little soiled or spotted, they
immediately leave them off; but the poorer sort wash theirs every Week.

Foot-boys or Pages wear no Liveries there, because it is not the Fashion, but
are Clothed in various colored Stuffs, unsuitable one to another, though one
Man's Servants.

Their Economy or Housekeeping.
Their Hourse-keeping, very mean.
THe Persians Housekeeping is generally very mean, and the Utensils belonging
to their Larder, Kitchen and Cellar, if they have not many Wives, require no
great Charge.

Besides Rice, their chiefest Food is Flesh, which is to be had every where in
great abundance, except at Ispahan, because that is a very populous Place.

Bizarro avers them to be great Gluttons, but it seems to be without cause.

Justin and Athenaeus say the Persians eat little Flesh, but have store of
Confections, which Alexander ab Alexandro also affirms.

Olearius tells us, that the Persians keep but one set Meal a day, besides
which they eat a little Bread, Butter, Cheese, and Fruit.

Pilao their chief Dish.
The chiefest Dish, and always brought first to the Table, is boiled Rice, by
them called Plau, or Pilao, with Mutton. After that they bring roasted Fowl,
Fish, Spinnage, and white Cabbage (for brown they esteem not,) to the Table.

Ispahan has little fresh, but plenty of salt Fish, because of its great
distance from the Sea, and the Brook which runs about Ispahan, having no manner
of relation to the Caspian Sea. There are likewise abundance of Fowls, of all
which they eat, Their Dyer.
except Turkeys, whereof a Georgian Merchant in the time of Schach Abas brought
some from Venice to Ispahan, and sold them for Sixteen Crowns apiece. Though
they use Rice in stead of Bread, yet they have Rouls, or Loaves made of Wheat;
one sort thereof called Comasch, is three Fingers thick, and a Yard long: the
Lawash are round Cakes of an Inch thick: the Peasekean are also a Yard long,
baked in the Tenurs, or House-Ovens, and being five Inches broad, have their
name from thence. The Senged are hollow; the Jucha are thin, like Parchment or
Wafers, about a Yard long, and as broad, which being used first as Napkins to
wipe their greasy Fingers on, (for they take the Rice out of the Dish with
their Finger with which they also pull their Meat asunder, seldom using either
Knives or Forks) they pull the same to pieces, and rouling Rice or Pieces of
Flesh into them, eat them up with a great Appetite. They sup their Broaths, or
Pottages with wooden Spoons, made after an Oval fashion with a small Handle,
but a quarter of a yard long, like short Ladles.

The Grandees going to Dinner, spread a Sofra on the Floor, Their manner of
eating.
that is a painted Cloth as big as the whole Room: They use no Napkins, but
every one according to the Country fashion, makes use of his Handkerchief
tuckt at his Girdle, being very large, made of painted Linen, and either
wrought with Silver or Gold. Noblemen, though they have good Kitchins to cook
their Meat in, yet oftentimes they will have it dressed where they please, not so
much out of curiosity, as suspicion of being poisoned.

Their Drink.
The meaner sort of People for the most part drink Water, sometimes mixed with
Duschab, and a little Verjuice to make it good Beverage; and though Wine by
very cheap, yet many abstain from it, because it is forbidden in the Mohammedan
Law. Moreover, the Hatzi which have been at Mecha and Medina by Mabumets Tomb,
are also debarred from Wine all their lives.

Nevertheless many of the Courtiers drink Wine freely, and are of opinion that
the Sin committed by the drinking thereof, may be pardoned by the same means as
their other Sins; neither are they concerned the next morning at their being
over-taken. The Cups out of which they drink are wooden Skiffs, or little
Dishes. They never force any to drink; and though, according to our Custom,
they give the Cup round, yet those that are unwilling may pass it by, without
any breach of Drinking-Law.

A Prohibition against the drinking of Wine.
Anno 1620. King Abbas falling into a great Fit of Sickness at Ferhabad,
occasioned by a Potation of too much Wine, he caused an Edict to be published
with the sound of Trumpet; wherein all the Mahumetans in Ispahan were forbid to
drink Wine, yet the Armenians, Georgians, Franks, and other Christians may
Carouse as much Wine as they please, provided they neither sell nor give any to
the Mahumetans, upon pain of death.

This Law was with great strictness observed publicly by all the Mahumetans,
not only in Ispahan, but through all the Kings Dominions, insomuch that some
for violation thereof were put to death. This seemed to be too severe a Law for
the Mahumetans, especially the Courtiers, wherefore they addressed themselves
to the Aga Chizi, the Kings greatest Favorite, and other great Lords at the
Kings Court, to implore the King to Repeal it, with promise that they would
raise him a great Sum of Money; but all proved in vain, for the King continued
firm in his Resolution.

Della Valle, who at that time was at Ispahan in Persia, tells us, that he had
more Visitants, especially of the Grandees, than usual, because the King had
not only given him a Toleration for drinking Wine himself, but to distribute
to those Mahumetans that Visited and made Addresses to him, provided he
suffered them not to use any such excess; as to be seen inebriated in the
Street repairing home.

Moreover, the King himself drank Wine privately, yet very little, that so he
might not be an ill Example to his Subjects; to which he pretended that his
Distemper forced him, according to the directions of his Physicians, who
prescribed him to drink only what might be conducible to his better Health.

The Inhabitants in the Province of Persia, of which Sciras is the Metropolis,
drink Wine publicly; and the rather, because being far from the Court they are
become as it were Lawless: But in the other Provinces the Laws are so observed,
that it is dangerous to mention Wine.

In all the Country about Ardebil are no Vines, partly by reason of the Cold,
and partly because the Sceichavends, that is, Scheicks Successors, would not
plant any there, because it was a sacred Place, where Scheich Sofi set up a New
Sect, which next to Mahomets at Mecha, and that of Aly and Hussein, is most
followed.

Kitchen Furniture.
In their Kitchins they use Pots or Kettles of Clay, and some of Copper
Furnaces, Tin'd over. Their Dishes are also of Copper most curiously wrought,
and being Tinned over, feem to be of Silver; besides which, they use abundance
of China Dishes and other Vessels: but in the Villages they have Earthen Ware.

In all the Towns of the Kingdom are abundance of Cooks Shops, Abundance of
Cooks Shops.
wherein they sell Meat ready dressed; which is so common, that Persons of great
Quality (though they have Cooks in their Houses) when desirous of Varieties of
Meat well dressed, they send to those Shops for them.

Those tyfeats which they baste with their Butter, at first seem very ill
tasled to a Palate not accustomed thereto, but afterward obtain a more pleasing
Relish.

They also have a Bak' d-meat called Perian, and another called Carik, dressed
after the Indian manner.

There are also preserved Cucumbers, which are very palatable; and in the midst
of Summer cooling.

They have likewise a dainty Dish, called Peluda; made up of Ameldonk or
Amelcores, in the manner of a Tart; either made white like Snow, or else they
color them with Saffron. The Tart cut in pieces, is put into a China-Dish, and
Rosewater and Sugar poured over it, and a great piece of Ice laid by it; which
melting in the Rose Water with the Sugar, makes a delicious and cool Liquor;
into which are put Almonds, and the Herb Purslan cut into small pieces; which
give it a very pleasing Relish: This Liquor put into the same Dish with the
pieces of Tart, is both Meat and Drink, and a choice Delicate in the midst of
Summer.

They also highly esteem the Herb Dragon; and whenever they cover the Table,
they eat a great quantity thereof, with Salt and Bread which they usually chaw
before Dinner to provoke their Appetite, and after to help Digestion; of which,
most of the Common People make their Meals, eating only some Bread dipped in
Sechien; a Liquor made of Vinegar and Sugar, and carried about the Streets to
be sold in Tubs; which is not only pleasing to the Palate, but also comfortable
to the Stomach.

In the Southern Countries, especially Westward, about Ormus; they use many
Herbs in their Drinks; as also Brandy, and other hot Liquors, amongst which,
one called Jarkin; which is in great esteem in the Island of Java, and all the
Southern Provinces of the Eastern Countries, they use also much Sale, and
though between Ispahan and Ferhabad, there is a large Plain that yields great
quantityes, the Soil being full of Salt, yet they use another sort; contemning
this, though good, by reason of it is great plenty.

Before and after Meals, the Persians both in Winter and Summer, have warm
Water to wash their hands, which they wipe with their Handkerchiefs. After
Supper, They paint their Skins.
they commonly present their Guests with dried Leaves of Hanna or Alkanna to
color their Hands; and this Ceremony is as much to the satisfaction of the
Eastern Countrey-people, as a Ball, with Dancing or Music after a Banquet.
Some discolor their skins all over in this manner when they please, viz. they
lay the Alkanna tempered in water on their Hands, or that part of the Body
which they intend to color, and bind it on with a String, that it may not
fall off; this the Women do (for the most part) after Supper, before they go to
Bed, that so the Color lying on all Night, may make the better Impression in
the Morning; the Paste being dry falls off, and leaves an Orange-tincture on
the Skin; but if over-dawb'd, it makes them Red, or Black.

Amfion or Opium, Thee, Coffee, and Tobacco.
MOst Persians use Amfion or Opium, that is, Juice or Oil of Poppy; by them
called Offiuhn and Tiriak, (as the Berry Chas Cehask) and by the Turks only,
Maslac; which they making up in little Pills like Pease swallow: Those that use
themselves to it, may take a quarter of an Ounce or more at a time: Some take
it every other, or third day, only to set them into an intoxicating Ecstasy,
where they please themselves with strange Imaginations. They are gathered in
several Places of Persia, especially about Ispahan, after this manner: The
white Poppy being cut produces a milky Juice, which having stood a while, and
becoming black, is taken and made fit to be used. The Druggists and
Apothecaries make great advantage thereof. But Opium is not only used much in
Persia. but also in Turkey, and India. It is also said, that some Women when
their Husbands and they cannot agree, contrive their dispatch with a Dose of
Opium. Coknar a sort of Drink, and the use thereof.
From the Husk or Shell the Persians also extract a Juice, which they call
Coknar, much drunk by the Soldiers, especially in the time of Schach Abbas,
when they were forbidden to drink Wine; for it revives the Spirits for the
present, but is nothing so wholesome; for soon after their Bodies are so
debilitated that they are unfit for Service; wherefore Schach Abbas prohibited
upon pain of Death, either to make or fell this Liquor: Moreover all Vessels
with this Liquor wherever they were found, were broken no, and stav'd
immediately before their Doors. But after all this, and the before mentioned
first Law made by King Abbas, he preferring an Inconvenience before a Mischief,
permitted the People to drink Wine again as formerly, in stead of Cocknar.

Take much Tobacco.
They are great Takers of Tobacco, insomuch that People of all sorts and Degrees
Smoke it in their Temples and other public Places: They have it from Bagdad or
Babylon, and Curdistan, but so ill prepar^d, that they desire our European
Tobacco, which they call Inglis Tambacu, because the English bring the greatest
quantities thither: They take it not as we do, but suck it through two Pipes
joined together; but first they take a Glass Bottle or Indian Nut, or a Cabach,
which is a kind of Shell, that holds about a Pint, into which they put more or
less (sometimes sweet) Water, leaving sufficient room for Smoke; then they put
the two Pipes through the Mouth of the Bottle; the one contains the Tobacco in
one Bowl, and through the other goes the Smoke; the end of one Pipe stands as
far from the bottom, as the end of the other is from the Water, viz. about a
Thumbs breadth.

The Persians generally with their Tobacco drink Coffee, made from the Arabian
Caowa, or Persian Cahwee, which they dry and pulverize, and after decoct, as we
now use, and have learned from them, of which we shall enlarge when we come to
Arabia, the Place where it grows.

They use also Tee or Tea, being very common, and sold in public Houses, by
them called Chat tai Chane, that is, Houses of Catayan Tzai, or Thee, of which
likewise in its proper place.

Of their Marriages.
Use Poligamy.
PErsons of Quality in this Country are seldom satisfied with one Wife, and
of old had many, which they may turn off when they please; which (as Strabo
relates) was anciently for the Childrens sake; for the Kings gave Annually,
Presents to those that had most Children: But at this day they affect not this
Multiplicity, having not so many Wives as formerly; yet they make no more of
Wedlock than a Play of Fast and Loose, turning them off when they please, and
are still for Variety; and this Liberty they take the rather, because Mahomet
in his Alcoran allows Polygamy. Rich Merchants who Trade in diverse Places in
the Country, make a great Convenience of it; having at their Countrey-houses,
and where else they Trade, not only Furniture, but a Wife; so that where e're
they come, they are still at Home.

They Marry their nearest Relations, but not so incestuously as of old they
were wont to do; for in ancient times (as Brissonius affirms out of several
Writers) they commonly married their own Mothers, Sisters, or Daughters; but at
this day none may marry so near in Blood. Moreover, it is accounted a horrid
Sin, for any man to defile his Sister; which was not customary in Persia before
Cambyses time; but grew very common after his marrying of his own Sister, which
he loved exceedingly.

Their manner of Courtship.
When a young man intends to marry, and has an Affection for any Maid, then he
informs himself by a second and third Person, of her Condition and Quality; for
neither he, nor his Parents may see her: It she be to his mind, he sends two
of his nearest Kindred, which were at his Circumcision, to the Maids Father, to
acquaint him with his Love: To which, showing some feigned unwillingness to
part with his Daughter; after short Enquiry, if liking the Match; he begins to
treat about the Portion, which is not to be paid by the Brides Friends, but by
the Bridegroom, or his Friends; for in Persia, as in all other
Eastern-Countreys, they buy their Wives not making either Dowry or Jointure,
neither receiving Portions, but purchasing them at a Price, which is paid two
several ways: for either the Bridegroom sends it to the Brides Fathers House a
little before the Wedding, consisting in Pendants, Jewels, Armlets, or the
like, which is a Reward to the Parents (who may either keep or give it again to
their Daughter) for their careful breeding up of the Bride; or else he makes
over a certain Sum of Money, or a quantity of Silk-Stuffs, which she is obliged
to return, if at any time they should part; to which purpose Writings are Drawn
and Signed by a Cadi or Molla: After this Conclusion the Bride and Bridegroom
choose each of them a Trustee, who, if in a City, go to the Casi or Spiritual
Judge, but if in a Village, to the Molla or Priest, empowered by the Casi, and
in the Bride and Bridegrooms Name (who appear not in Person, nor go to the
Church to be Married) desire that they may be united, which the Casi (after
being well assured of the Consent of the Parties) performs in the Name of God,
Mahomet, and Aaly; and this is generally done by the forementioned three
Persons in a private place, either in a Chamber or in the Fields.

Every one is free to Marry at any time in the year, except in the Month of
Ramesan, or their Lent, and the ten days Mourning and Abstinence called Ashur.

Their Celebrating of Matrimony.
When the Wedding is to be celebrated, the Bridegroom sends the Bride the day
before a pair of Pendants, Armlets, and other Ornaments, according to his
Capacity, and some Provisions. After Dinner, which generally is pretty late in
the Evening, the Bride, set on a Horse, Camel, or Mule, with a red Silk Hood
hanging down into her Lap, and accompanied with all her Friends, Relations, and
several sorts of Music, is conducted to the Bridegrooms House, where with some
Women she is put into a peculiar Apartment, and the Men into another, and Meat
set before them, which when they have eaten, the Bride is soon after carried
into the Bedchamber, and the Bridegroom being brought to her, there first at
once enjoys both her Sight and Company, having never seen her before, and if he
find her to have been vitiated, he may freely cut off her Nose and Ears, and
turn her out of his Chamber; but if he find her a Virgin, he signifies his Joy
to her old Nurse and to his Friends: Then they Feast three days one after
another. They also use Dancing, which is in Couples, but the Men by themselves
in one Room, and the Women in another; the Music never go into the Women's
Chamber, but stand and Play at their Door. In the Evening the Leaves of
Alcanna, with which they color their Hands, are laid on a Cotton Handkerchief,
with two Spoonfuls of Alcanna; both which they take home with them: After which
the Guests make Presents to the new Married Couple, every one according to
their Capacities.

After the Wedding is over, and that the Newmarry'd Couple dwell in the Brides
Fathers house, the new Wife may not be seen with her Face uncovered before her
Father-in-Law, nor speak with him; but if occasion require, she is to express
her mind by Signs.

Another way to get women
Besides their Marrying, they have another way to acquire a Companion to their
Bed, viz. To hire them with a Sum of Money for a certain time; and is practiced
chiefly by those that travel from Place to Place, and by such as are not
willing to be seen in the public Stews.

A third way is by buying in the Market, slaves, with whom they may do what
they please. These are commonly taken by the Tagestan Tartars, from the
Christians in Georgia, and sold to the Persians. Nor is this Privilege all
allowed only to Men, for Women especially of Quality may as often change their
Husbands as they please. One relates that two Ladies meeting upon a Visit, The
one asked the other, How long she had lived with her Husband? The other
replied, two Months; how, two Months! so long! can any Woman content her self
with one Man, almost threescore nights?

To help a woman in Labor.
When the Women are in labor, and cannot be suddenly delivered; then the
Relations and Neighbors run to the Schools, and give the Molla money, to spare
and forgive all those Scholars that have offended, and are condemned to be
whipped; which they believe to be a great means to further her speedy Delivery:
And for the same purpose, they think it very effectual to creep three or four
times under a Camels belly.

If at any time, though without Cause, a Man suspect his Wife, they pass it not
by, but take speedy and sharp Revenge; as appears by the following Relation.

Some years since, in the Province of Lenkeran, dwelt a Person named Jakut
Tirkenam, who was the Kings Bow-bearer; his Wife being reported to be of a
loose behavior; at last Schach Abbas himself heard thereof, who ordered Notice
to be given to the forementioned Tirkenam, either to reform his House, or else
to keep out of the King's Presence: Whereupon, he fearing to lose his Place,
being of great Profit and Honor, made a real and through Reformation, by killing
not only his Wife, but four Children; and all that related to her, to the
number of twelve Persons; which though it seem barbarous to us, yet it
preserved his Reputation and Employment, with the King, his Master.

The Men likewise have the Power which they often execute, that if they catch
any committing Adultery with their Wives, they may either immediately kill
both, or else bedivorc'd; and this last is very common.

Children very obedient.
The Children are very obedient to their Parents; when a Father of Quality gives
Audience in his own House; his Sons stay without, to conduct those that go out
or in. These are not at the present brought up, as in ancient times; viz.
Locked up with the Women, without sight of their Fathers; for (according to
Strabo) they might not before the fourth, or (as Herodotus) not before the
fifth, and (as Valerius Maximus says) not before the seventh year, be brought
to the presence of their Fathers: But so soon as they can write and read, they
put them to Trades, or to Study; for few amongst the Persians, though of the
meanest Condition, but are taught to read and write.

The Metzids or Temples, used for Schools.
The Metzids or Temples, also serve, as amongst us, for Schools; so that in all
Cities are as many Schools as Streets, every School being to maintain a Metzid:
In each School also is one Prime Molla, or Schoolmaster, and a Calif, which is
an Usher or Assistant; who sits in the middle, and the Scholars round about by
the Walls; so soon as they know their Letters and can spell, they learn to read
in the Alcoran, out of which they first have certain Chapters given them, and
next the whole Alcoran: After they are perfect in the Alcoran, they read Schih
Saadis Culustan, or The Valley of Roses, and his Buston, or Orchard; and
lastly, the Hafis, which is also Poesy like the Bustan; These three last, are
said to write the best and smoothest Style of all the Persian Authors, because
they were born in Schiras or the ancient Persepolis, where the purest Persian
was spoken.

When they write, they lay their Paper on their Knees, and for any
Transgression they are in stead of a Rod or Ferula, beaten with a Cane, on the
Soales of their Feet, and sometimes on the Palms of their Hands.

Funerals.
Their Funerals.
WHen any one dies they keep not the Corpse above three hours, unless it be in
the Night, but immediately bury it, having been first washed (if a person of
Quality) with Rosewater, either in his own Dwellings, or in a peculiar House
named Mordeschur Chane, built for that purpose, near a Churchyard; whether the
Corpse is brought dressed up in his best Wearing-Cloaths, with several singing
before it: Then they put a white Sheet on the Corpse, and wrap the same up in a
Cotton Shroud, so laying it on the Bier, carry it to the Grave; before which,
first they set the Body down, where the Molla or Priest reads somewhat out of
the Alcoran, and lifting up the head of the Corpse, holds it a little while in
his hand, and then lays it down again; after this they place the Body on one
side in the Grave without a Coffin, and turn it on the right side, with the
Face toward the West; because they say the Day of Judgment will first appear
in the West. Then the Priest holding some Earth over the dead Body, reads
another Chapter; then throws it on the Corpse, and reads anorher Chapter, and so
goes home with the rest of the Company. If the Deceased be of Noble Extract,
then they keep Funeral Feasts (but without Wine) on certain Days, viz. three
days after the Funeral: If it be of a Rich man the Feast is renewed on the
seventh, and on the fortyth day after, on which they distribute Alms, amongst
the Poor; which they do also on the Feasts Naurus, Gurban, and Ramesan.

The reason of their Ceremonies.
These Ceremonies are used, because they believe that the two Angels, Nekir and
Munkir, descend into the Grave; and that then the Soul reentering the Body, and
making the upper part alive, the Corpse sit upright: Whereupon the Angels
examine them how they have lived whilst in the World, and at last ask In whom
they have believed; to which the Corpse must answer, In God the Father of
Heaven; Who is your Prophet? Mahomet; Who your Imam? Aaly: If these Answers
suit with the Questions, and the Dead give a good Account of his Actions; then
the Angels promise him Salvation, and Ascension up to Heaven; they are followed
by the Soul, which also leaves the Body again; but this Examination is used
only to Persons of full age, but not to young Children. Their mourning Habits
(as Olearius describes the Funeral of a Nobleman at Schamachie) is after this
manner:

The order of a great Funeral.
First, they marched with six Ensigns upon long Staves. 2. Four Horses were led
one behind another, the first carried Bows and Arrows, and the rest, some of
the Deceased's Apparel. 3. A Servant riding upon a Mule, carried his Lord's
Mendil or Turbant in his hand. 4. Followed two with Nachals or Caps
representing Turrets on their Heads, adorned with Plumes. 5. Then followed
eight Dishes of Sweetmeats, and in the middle a Sugar Loaf covered with blue
Paper, each having carried before them three burning Torches. 6. More marched
beating on Kettledrums, and others that beat upon Copper-basons. 7. Then
followed many with white Turbants that were Suffihans. 8. Then came two Rows
of Singers, who behaving themselves after an Antic manner, sung the La Ilach
Illa Allach, Muhamed Resul Allah; that is, There is no other than the only
God, and Mahomet his Prophet; and likewise the Alla Ekker, another Versicle. 9.
Diverse Servants went bare with their right Arm, and left Shoulder, and having
wounded themselves on their Arm and Forehead, made the blood run down. 10.
Three Trees full of red Apples were carried, and also three Locks of Hair of
the Deceased's Wive's, who had cut or pulled off the same in Sign of Mourning;
and likewise several green and red Pieces of Paper. 11. The Body it self was
carried by eight Persons; upon the Coffin lay a Silk-coat lined with Bucharian
Sheepskins. 12. Behind the Corpse a Boy sitting on a high stool carried by nine
Persons, reads aloud in the Alcoran, which many other Persians rehearsed.

In this manner the Corpse is carried to a certain place in the City; and from
thence removed to Babylon, and there set amongst their Saints; concerning
which, Della Valle makes a Relation much to the same purpose.

Persons of Quality, and the King's Servants are not buried without peculiar
Orders from His Majesty, who often commands the Corpse to be carried to one or
other Eminent Metzid, which sometimes is twenty or thirty days Journey from the
Place where the Party died.

Not buried in their Churchyards or Metzids.
The dead Bodies are not buried in the Metzid, but in the Courts or Yards about
them. When any Corpse is to be interred in a remote place, then they imbowel
them.

Astronomy.
The study Astronomy.
A Stronomy, or the Knowledge of the Course of the Heavens, was anciently, and
to this day is highly esteemed amongst the Persians, and those which study that
Art they call Minatzim, who receive a certain annual Pension from the King and
Chans; though not so much for the observing the Course and Influence of the
Stars, as for prognosticating from their Motions concerning future Events: And
this makes Astrology so common, Astrology highly esteemed of them.
that the meanest Soldiers in their Army, for the most part, know the Course of
the Stars, and also when the Planets are either in Conjunction or Opposition,
Trine, Quadrate, or Sextile Station each to other. The King himself always
carries one or two Astrologers with him, and undertakes nothing without their
Advice or Consent. Amongst these sort of People are many who are of very Noble,
nay Royal Extract, called Mirza, or Princes; and these are the true Nobility of
Persia, though for diverse weighty Reasons, kept under in a mean Condition, and
therefore they study this among other Arts, and are very learned in respect of
other Eastern people, yet far short of our Europeans.

The Minatzims constantly carry an Astrolabe about them, that upon all
occasions they may erect a Scheme. In their teaching of Astrology they use no
Globe, neither have they any, but only the Astrolabe: They exceedingly admire
the Europeans for their Skill in this Art. When Olearius showed them a
Celestial Sphere of eight Inches in Diameter; they observing the Characters,
named the Stars in the Arabic Tongue. It is said, that in ancient times, a
very large and excellent Felick (for so they call a Sphere) was preserved in
Persia with great care, but spoiled by the Turks in the Wars; and this is
supposed to be the Globe which the Persian King Sapor made of Crystal, within
which a man might lit upright with ease.

Their Account of time.
The Persians have two sorts of Years, viz. A Solar and a Lunar: The Solar Year,
which they call Naurus or Neurus, being according to the ancient Custom of the
Persians, begin on the same Day, Hour, and Minute, when the Sun enters into
Aries, or the Equinoctial Point, which is with us upon the eleventh Day of
March; by them called Neurus, that is, New-years-day.

As soon as the Minatzims or Astronomers have observed the Sun to enter into
that Point they proclaim the New-year; which is celebrated with the discharge
of all the Cannons, beating of Drums, and Shouts, and joyful Acclamations of
the People, from which time begins the giving of New Years Gifts, which the
King receives not only from the Nobility, but from the Mechanics and
Tradesmen.

Texeira tells us, that the Persians call the twentieth of March, Neuruz, that
is, New-years-day; because they then begin the Account of their Year, which
they make to contain three hundred sixty five Days, six Hours, 48 Minutes, and
53 Seconds; adding a Day to each fourth or fifth Year, since the time of Sultan
Gelaleddin.

As the Solar, so the Lunar Year differs not considerably from ours in Europe
of the Moons unequal Changes.

Their different Years.
The Persians reckon their Year two ways; the first is, that if Jezdagird or
Yeztzird, Son to Shahriar the last Persian King after the Incursion of the
Arabians into Persia. And this Account according to Uleg Beig commenced on a
Tuesday, whereon he began his Reign.

Albumazar affirms that the Persians reckoned their Year to comprehend three
thousand six hundred thirty four Days; which is ten Years, and ninety four days
after the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet from Mecha; but others do not begin it
till after his Death.

The Account of their Years
The beginning of Jezdagird's Reign was in the eleventh Year of the Hegira, on
the two and twentieth of the first Month Rabbi, being the sixteenth of our
June, Anno 632.

The other Account they call Gelasee, from the Name of Sultan Gelaleddin Meleck
Sa Alb-Arselan, Emperor of Persia, Chorazan and Mesopotamia, who commanded
eight of the wisest Astronomers to rectify the Persian Year;. This happened in
the four hundred and forty eighth Year of Jezdagird, and on the eighteenth day
of the Month Fararardin, or (according to our Account) on the fourteenth of
March, Anno 1079.

This Year is called Senathi Gelali, that is, The Year of Majesty, or Neuruz
Elsultani, that is, The Year of the Emperors, because it begins almost at their
Lent-Eve. Moreover, we may easily compute how many years they have of
Jesdagird, by abstracting six hundred thirty two of our years; and of Gelasee,
by abstracting a thousand and seventy nine. In their Histories they make use of
the first Account; but because they observe the Day and Year of Lent-Eve, by
reason of certain Ceremonies, which they there are obliged to perform,
therefore they now use that of Gelasee.

The Year is by the Persians divided into twelve Months, and (according to
Ulug Beig) were formerly in the Persian Tongue called Fervardin, Ardabahesht,
Chordad, Tir, Mordad, Ram, Sharivar, Abru, Adar, Di, Behman, and Esfandermod.

Their Almanacks, and the Names of Their Days.
The Persians in former Ages had their own Tahkwin or Almanacks, and each Day of
every Month bore its peculiar Name from their Kings or Heroes, viz. Ourmuzd,
Behman, Ardahesht, Scharivar, Esfandarmod, Chordad, Mordad, Dibadhur, Azur,
Aban, Chaur, Mah, Tir, Jius, Dibameher, Meher, Surush, Resh, Fervardin,
Beheram, Ram, Bad, Dibadin, Din, Erd, Ashtad, Osman, Ramiyad, Marasfend, and
Aniran, besides five additional Days, which were called Ahnud, Ashnud,
Esfenmez, Vahespt, and Heshunesh.

Lucky and unlucky Days
Each Day of the Month which is called by the same Name with the Month, is
accounted a Holy Day, viz. the nineteenth of Fervardin, the third of
Ardabahesht, the sixth of Chordad, the thirteenth of Tir, the seventh of
Mordad, the sixteenth of Meher, the tenth of Aban, the ninth of Adar, the
second of Beherem, and the fifth of Esfandormod; But the eighteenth of Di, and
the fifteenth and three and twentieth of each Month, is kept as a Holy Day, as
signifying the Name of GOD, like Ourmuzd.

The beginning of Fervardin is generally called Neuruz; but the sixth day is
properly Neuruz. The sixteenth of Mehermah is the common Meherjan. They say
that GOD created the World in six days, which they call Cahenbarha.

The beginning of their Months.
The beginning of the first Month is the eleventh of Di; the beginning of the
second, the eleventh of Esfandarmod; the beginning of the third, the twenty
sixth of Ardabahesht; the beginning of the fourth, the twenty sixth of Chordad;
the beginning of the fifth, the sixteenth of Scharivar; and the beginning of
the sixth, the one and thirtieth of Aban. Such Names they also give to the
Years; for the first four Years are named Ourmuzd, and the following, Behman,
etc.

But this Almanac and Account being Jesdagirds, are quite laid aside, for the
Persians at this day make use altogether of the Arabian Calendar.

The Names of the Months in Arabic,
The Names of the Months in the Arabic, and used by the Persians, are Muharam,
Safar, Rabbi the first, Rabbi the second, Giamao the first, Giamao the second,
Rageb, Sohaban, Rhamadam, Scevel, Dulcaida, and Dalbagieh.

How they reckon their Week.
The Weekdays they reckon from our Saturday, from whence it happens, that the
seventh being their Sabbath, falls on Friday, in which they differ both from
the Jews and Christians. The Names of the Days are Schembe, Saturday;
Seckschembe, Sunday, Duschembe, Monday; Seschembe, Tuesday Tscharschembe,
Wednesday; Penschembe, Thursday, Adine or Tzumeh, Friday. And because the
Persians go only to Church on their Friday, they also call it Tzumeh, that is
The Day of Meeting.

Of all these the Tscharschembe, or Wednesday, is accounted the most
unfortunate. The last Wednesday of the Month Safar, or January, all
Mahumetans, especially the Persians, account the most fatal day of the whole
year, so that they will not go out of doors, nor permit any Person to visit
them, and are most nicely circumspect in all things, and suspicious least some
Disaster should befall them. Moreover, the whole Month of Safar being esteemed
unfortunate, no one will venture to begin a Journey, or undertake any Business
of consequence.

They also put great confidence in the Planetary Hours, and ascribe the twelve
Hours to the twelve celestial Signs, viz. the first Hour on Sunday to Aries,
and so of the rest.

The Persians highly esteem Books of Astrology, which they received from the
Chaldeans, Are great admirers of Astrology.
who were famous in that Art, and are so addicted thereto, that a Minatzim may
persuade them to undertake or forbear any thing, either out of hopes of future
good, or fear of evil.

The Hakims generally spend their time in reading Books of Physic and
Astrology. Amongst these there are some, Their Fortune Tellers.
that by casting Lots will foretell future Events; of which fort many have
Booths on the Maidan or great Marker-place in Ispahan, and are of two
Qualities, viz. Remals and Falkirs. The Remals use six or seven Dice, strung on
two Copper Wyres, and by the Casts thereof they Predict. The Falkirs go another
way to work, for they have thirty or forty Chips of an Inch square lying before
them, and written on the undermost side; on one of these they lay Money, and
propose such Questions as the Inquisitor desires to be resolved of; whereupon
the Fortuneteller takes up the Chip with the Money, and reads the words that
are written under it; this done, he takes up a great Book, all the Leaves
whereof are full of horrid Shapes, as Dragons, and all manner of Beasts and
Animals painted, and muttering to himself, looks with an affrighted Countenance
on the People; at last he turns over many Leaves to a certain Picture in the
Book, and comparing the forementioned Writing on the Chip therewith, resolves
the proposed Question.

Their Ephemeris.
They commonly in the beginning of the Year publish a Table of the Days, in the
Greek Tongue called Ephimerides, and in the Persian, Tacuin or Tackwin, which
are not, as ours, made for many years; and though they be written, yet are they
so numerous, that there is no Person but carries one of them in his Bosom, that
he may be ready on all occasions, to know whether it be a good or bad Hour
wherein they begin any Business of Consequence: for these Almanacks contain not
only the Course of the Heavens, Signs and Planets, but also many other
Observations, in which they are very curious.

Of their Poesy.
Poesy is here also highly esteemed, for in most places are many Shaers or
Poets (for Shaer in the Persian Tongue signifies a Poet, as Casiechuan an
Orator) which compose Verses in Writing, but extempore, which they recite
publicly in the Maidan or Marketplace, or in Houses of Entertainment, for a
small Reward, and are often invited to great Feasts by Persons of Quality, to
make their Entertainment more solemn by the rehearsal of their Poetical
Fancies. Della Valle affirms, that they have some knowledge in Poetry,
Morality, and Oratory, yet it is but superficial, consisting only in words,
for they are very shallow of Invention, which is the most noble part, and like
the Soul of the whole Body.

The King, as also the Chans, have each their own Poets, which do not make
themselves common in the Streets, but keep in their Houses, and make new Verses
to delight their Lords, and if they chance to hit on a Subject pleasing to
them, they are rewarded with great Presents.

The difference of their Poets
These Poets differ from other People in their Habit, for like the Philosophers
they wear white under-Coats, open before, with broad and wide Sleeves, and a
Bag by their Girdle, in which they carry their Paper and Inkhorn: Their Cloaks
are without Sleeves, their Stockings short, and their Breeches run down
sloaping to their Feet: In the Winter they wear Coats which reach down to their
Ancles; but they never wear Turbants, only Caps. Those that stand in the
Maidans or Markets, tie a painted Cloth about their Bodies, which hang over
their right Shoulder and under their left Arm, in which manner they read their
Poetry; but these are not all to be supposed excellent, for some scarce deserve
the Name of Rhimers; these may be seen venting their Froth in public Houses
and in the Marketplaces, to the illiterate Vulgar. But there are many
excellent Copies of the ancient Persian Poets, as well in the Turkish as
Persian Language; for as they esteem both Tongues alike, so they read the Turks
Poetry with as much pleasure as the Persian. The best Poets amongst them are
distinguished by these Names, viz, Saadi, Hasis, Firdausi, Fussuli, Chagani,
Eheli, Schems, Nawai, Schahidi, Deheki, Nessimi. Their Verses close almost
after the German manner, Their method in Versifying.
having regard to like sounding words at the end of each Verse, but mind not
the number of Feet. Some Verses are only a few words, which being transposed
into several places, make the Verses diverse; and to this purpose they often use
such words as have a double signification; some end with the ending word of the
former Line, as thus:

Tzire, tzire, tzirag Janitze,
Adamira demag Janitze?
Tzire, tzire, tzirag Osteri bud?
Adamira demag Cheri bud.
Some begin with the ending word, and end with the beginning word of the former
Line, as in the following Verses:

Kalem be dest Debira beh hasar derem,
Derem be dest neajed Meker nauk kalem.
Here the second Verse begins with the word wherewith the first ended, and the
last ends with the same with which the first begins; so that we may conclude,
though they have a high conceit of themselves, yer we can discover nothing by
this, but that they are very mean Poets.

Lawyers and Physicians.
Few Lawyers here.
THere are few Lawyers amongst the Persians, because they have only a few
written Laws, and those taken out of the Alcoran, the Explanation and Practice
whereof is wholly reserved to the Casi and Diwanbech.

How they practice Physic.
In matter of Physic they follow the Directions of Avicenna, and use for the
most part the Prescriptions of Galen. They also apply many things outwardly to
their Patients, but without reason, as those that have inflamed their Blood by
drinking too much of hot Liquors, they endeavor to cure by laying a great piece
of Ice on their Bodies, being of opinion, that the readiest Cure for all
Diseases, is by contrary Applications.

If a Child or Woman falls sick, a Physician is not suffered to come to them,
but only a Nurse, who sends to the Doctor, and informs him of the state and
condition of the Disease, who without more a do immediately prescribes
Medicines, which are taken by the Patient with exceeding care.

They call all Physicians Hikim, that is. Wise, because of their Skill and
Knowledge.

A Cure for the Headache.
About Casbin (as Olearius tells us) stands a large Tree, under which (they say)
an old Saint lies buried, to which they make address for cure of the
Toothache, or other Aches or Pains; the manner how as follows:

The Persons affected coming to the Tree, drive a Nail into it, having first
touched the grieved part therewith; then killing it, they make Offerings, and
give Alms to the Poor.

Their Paper differs not much from ours, being for the most part made of
Cotton, Their Paper Ink, and Pens
but sometimes of Silk, and polished with a Pumice Stone or smooth Shell, which
makes it very free from Knots or Hairs, and as smooth as Glass.

Their Ink they make of Granate-shells, mixed with Gauls; Copperas, and Powder
of baked Rice; but the best they have comes ready made out of India, in hard
pieces of a Fingers length, which are melted with Gum, and put into their
Inkhorns with sleazed Silk.

Their Pens are not made of Quills like ours, but of Canes, which being brown,
are somewhat thicker than ours; they are brought from Sciras and the Arabian
Gulf, near which they grow in great abundance.

The Persians are very ignorant in the Art and Rules of Painting; They are but
ru^e Painters.
for though their Pictures are set off with variety of good Colors, yet they
wrant the excellency which ours have, as being neither Shadowed nor Drawn to
the Life.

Their Language.
THe Persians have a proper Language, yet in many things agreeing with the
Arabic, and divided into three Dialects, called Xirazy, Rostazy, and Harmazy;
the first is the Court Language of Sciras; the second is used by the Gentry,
but not so eloquent as the former; and the third is the vulgar, being of a
harsh and unpleasant sound, and chiefly spoken in the Kingdom of Ormus. But
besides this general Language, each Province has a peculiar Speech, though
most of them covet to speak the Turkish besides their own, but especially those
that inhabit the Provinces heretofore possessed by the Turks, viz. Schirwan,
Adirbeitzan, Erack, Bagdat, and Eruan; in which Places most Children are taught
the Turkish Language, but especially those that reside in Ispahan, and frequent
the Court, and therefore they slight their native Tongue; and the reason hereof
may be, because the Militia consists in Quizilbascies, most of which are
natural Turks and the King's Slaves, though intermixed with several Nations,
which speak that Language, so that not only the Officers, but also the King
himself, who spends most of his time amongst them, is obliged to speak that
Language, if he intends to be understood by, and convese with them; by which
means it is common through all the Court: But the Persian Tongue is used in all
their Books and Writings, as also in all Obligations and Edicts published by
the King, and in all Matters of consequence and State Businesses.

As the Turkish Language is esteemed by the Persians, so is the Sclavonian by
the Turks, and the Persian by the Indians; nay, it is at this day common
through all the East, especially in the Mogull's Country, and from thence to
China.

The modern vulgar Tongue used by the Persians, is a confused Mixture, started
up since Mahomet's time, from the several Nations which have harras'd and
inhabited these Countries.

Those of the Province of Fars, or Persia proper, of which Sciras is the
Metropolis, speak the best and purest Persian.

The similitude of the Persian Language with the Teutonick.
There are many words in the Persian Tongue which resemble, and are so like the
Teutonick, that they seem to be the same, as for Example, Brader is Brother;
Dochter, Daughter; Berber, Barber; Leb, Lip; Starch, Stares; Nahm, Name; Nau,
New; Beheter, Better; and Der, Door; from whence many late Writers, as
Boxhornius and others, supposed that the Persian Tongue has great affinity
with the old Teutonick,; for the Persians and Germans (as the said Boxhornius
affirms out of ancient Writers) both are extracted from the Scythians,
therefore it must necessarily follow, that the Language of these People must
have some affinity, besides the manner of pronunciation which differs but
little.

The Persian Tongue has also many words agreeing widi the Latin, viz.

Pader is Pater Father. Mader is Matter Mother. Musch is Mus A Mouse. Dend is
Dens A Tooth. Calem is Calamus A Pen. Ne is Ne No. Jug is Jugum A Yoke. Tu is
Tu You or Thou. Du is Duo Two. No is Novem Nine De is December Ten Pare is Pars
Part. Call is Calvus Bald.
Herodotus writes that all the Persian Names end with S. but we find no such
thing now of late.

The Greeks, according to the Testimony of Brissonius, The difficulty to learn
the Persian Tongue.
accounted the Persian Tongue very hard to learn; but we suppose that the
difficulty, if there be any, is in pronouncing the Letters, which are for the
most part gutturals; but as John Gravius and Olearius witness, there is not one
of all the Eastern Tongues which require fewer Rules than the Persian, by
reason of it is few Anomala: but the want of the Vowels makes great difficulty
in the reading of their Books, for many Words with one and the same Consonants,
only with several Vowels, signify several things; viz. Ghyl, signifies
smooth, Ghul, a Rose, Keschten, to turn about, Kischten, to sow, Koschten, to
kill.

One Word in the Persian Tongue, has oftentimes several significations, from
whence many conclude that it is Lingua nuda, a barren Speech: As for Example
from the word Chane, which properly signifies a House, there are many other
words are derived and compounded, viz. Barchane, a Stable for Horses, Carchane,
a Workhouse or Storehouse, Treschane, an Armory, Tabchane, a Great-hall,
Diwanchane, a House of Justice: Moreover this word is used in many other
things: As in the business of eating, etc. for they use to say to eat, to
drink, to have, to carry away, to receive, to understand, and to express many
other things; for they say, to eat Wine, eat Heat and Cold, eat Money, eat
Wounds, eat beating with a Stick; besides many other strange kind of
Expressions.

Use the Arabic in stead of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, the Persians understand not, but in stead thereof
they use Arabic as their most learned Tongue, which is as common amongst them
as Latin with us, and diverse Books are written therein.

Their Alphabet.
As to what concerns the Alphabet of the Persians, they had anciently their own
Letters and Characters; but after the Arabians had made themselves Masters of
Persia, they were not only laid aside, but upon their Califs Command all the
Writings of that sort were burnt, for they judged that so long as the Persians
kept the Books which contained the Laws and Religions of their Idols, they
would never be brought to be good Mahumetans, so that the Arabians established
their Letters and manner of Writing, which the Persians affected so much, that
they totally neglected their own, insomuch, that there is at this day not one
amongst them that understands their own ancient Letters.

All those that ever intend to speak the Persian Tongue, must first be well
experienced in the Arabic; for the Persians not only use Arabic words apart,
but also join them to their Names; of which John Gravius, Lodowick de Dieu,
Reyer and many others, treat more at large in their Persian Grammars.

They study Philosophy.
Notwithstanding there are not so many in Persia as in Europe, which learn the
Liberal Arts and Sciences, yet they highly esteem those that study therein,
which they corruptly call Filosuf. The Persian Philosophers in Matters of
Philosophy and other Sciences, highly esteem the Christian Books, especially
such as treat of Morality, natural Philosophy, and Religion: They also hold
Disputations with great Confidence concerning the Mystery of their Religion,
with People that are or another Opinion, quite contrary to the Turks, who out
of stubborness will not admit any to speak thereof.

Their Universicies.
For the Instruction of their Knowledge, there are several Universities or
Schools in the Cities, which they call Madresia or Madressa, and the Scholars
Mederis; the Chiefest whereof are at Ispahan, Schiras, Ardebil, Mesched,
Tebris, Casbijn, Com, Jest, and Schamachie; to all which the Sedder or Governor
must allow a sufficient Maintenance, which he receives from such Countries as
are free from Tribute, and other Taxes to the King; as Cochtzeh by Erwan,
Utzatznik, near Carabach; Tabachmelick, lying between Georgia and Carabach; and
also Agdasch and Kermeru.

What they study.
The Learning in which they instruct them, is, Geometry, Surveying, Poesy,
Astrology, moral and Natural Philosophy, Physic and Law: They have all
Aristotle's Works translated into Arabic, and call him Danja piala, that is,
The Cup of the World; for as we may use the Cup to refresh our selves, so we
may likewise to inebriation; so according to their opinion, we may use and
misuse Philosophy; for they say, that strong Liquor and Philosophy make good
Orators, but excess of both makes wise men Fools.

They teach their Youth Arithmetic so soon as they can write and read; the
Common People use the Indian Figures, but the Learned, the Arabian. Their
Poesy and Orations are comprised in short Lessons, and are studied both
together, because their Histories and Disputations are mixed with Verses, and
other Eloquent Expressions. Their chief Book is (as we said before) Culustan,
that is, Rose-Valley, made by the famous Poet Schich Saadi, Their chief Books.
and some Years since Translated into the German Tongue by Olearius; it
consists not only in pleasant Prose, but delightful Verses; and therefore
every Persian has this Book in his House; nay, some there are which carry it
in their memory, and are therefore accounted very learned; this they repeat at
all Feasts and other Merry-meetings.

Delight in reading Histories.
Moreover, they delight much in reading of Histories, especially those of Aly's
Life and Death; as also of Hossein, Aly's Son, which are written in a lofty
Style. They have likewise several other Books, as Chronicles, as well of their
own Kings Reigns and Wars, as other eminent Transactions; and these are termed
Mirchond, Emveri, Tzami, Walehi, Nussegri, and the like; amongst which, the
chiefest is Mirchond, who in an excellent Style has written a Persian
Chronicle in Four Volumes, which are there sold for two hundred Crowns; but we
cannot credit the Persians much in their Histories, and Matters of Religion,
because they often mix fabulous Invention with real Truths.

The number of Books that treat of Philosophy are but small in these Countries,
and those few are in the Hands of the most learned Persons who keep them as a
great Treasure: The Books that are generally sold there, are either Romances or
Verses treating of their Law, besides which, they have no Books worth
mentioning.

Arms.
THe Persian Horsemen are armed with Bows, The Housemens Arms.
Arrows, and a bending Sword like a Scymetar; their main strength consists in
the Cavalry, and though their Horses are small and lean, yet they are strong
and swift: The Hilt of their Swords is only a cross Bar, yet sufficient to
defend the Hand, and for the most part set forth with inchased work; the
Scabberds are either of red or black Leather, and plated after the same manner
as the Hilt; their Belts are narrow and plain, without any other Ornament or
Color than the skins naturally bear; their Bowe-men are called Curtschi, and
their Musquettiers Tufenktschi, for they have Muskets and also Pistols, which
they say Schach Abbas first brought in use among them: They also have some
great Guns, which they use more in their Fortifications and Sieges, than in a
Field Battle: Yet Anno 1604. Schach Abbas had one hundred and fifty Cannons
when he beat off Vlutzali Bassa from Cigale.

They use many Stratagems
In former times the Persians always engaged their Enemies on Horseback, but
since the use of Muskets was brought amongst them, they have made a Body of
Foot, which in these last Wars has done them great Service. Moreover they are
very subtle in contriving Plots and Stratagems to circumvent their Enemies.

At the Siege of Iruan, Anno 1633. the Persians had a sort of Poison in little
Glasses which they shot with Darts into their Enemies Forts, by which means
they so infected the Air, that it swelled the Inhabitants Arms and Legs to an
extraordinary thickness, and by that means made them unable to resist. Their
defensive Arms are Brest-plates, Shields, Coats of Mail, and Helmets.

The Soldiers of Persia made up of three Bodies.
The Soldiers of Persia are made up of three sorts: The first sort are
Turkomans, which are like Hirelings, and have Ziefs, that is, Pensions, which
the Sons inherit from their Fathers, and are bound to furnish the King with a
certain number of Horse as often as occasion shall require: The second sort is
that which Leunclaivus and Soranzo call Corrises or Coridsches; but in the
Turks Language might more properly be called Curchins or Georgians, which
receive no pay, but have only their Diet, Horses, Apparel, Arms, Tents, and
all other Necessaries. The third sort are Friends and Allies, viz. Armenians,
and other Georgians who are Enemies to the Turks.

Four Degrees in their Militia.
In Persia are four Orders or Degrees in their Militia; the first are
Musketeers, or they that use Firearms, not many years since brought in by
King Abbas, through the persuasions of Sir Anthony Sherley, one of our three
famous Sherleys, so much celebrated in former times.

All the Musketeers are Natives and Inhabitants of the Cities, Musquettiers.
Towns, and Villages, though more dwell in the Villages than the Towns or
Cities, and they are accounted Tat or ignoble, and may not wear the Tag, but
the common Turbant.

Formerly they continually fought on Foot, yet marched on Horseback like our
Dragoons. All the Captains of these and other Companies are by a Turkish Name
called Juzbassi; that is, The Head of a Hundred; for Juz is a Hundred, and
Bassi the Head, notwithstanding they often have above two hundred, and
sometimes under one hundred in their Companies.

Those that dwell in several Provinces or Places, meeting at a general
Rendezvous, march together to the Army, either with the Chans of the Province,
or else alone, especially those that have no Chans.

Those of Mazanderan are accounted the best Musquettiers, but there are more
beside them whose number are always kept, and paid by the King, and are said to
be twenty thousand.

The second Order is that of the Vassals, Vaassls.
or the Kings Servants, which are nobler than the Musquettiers, and are all
Christians by Extract, bought in their Infancy, or presented by several People,
as Circassians, Georgians, Armenians, and the like: The Georgians who are the
most numerous, are from Christians become Mahumetans, they fight all on
Horseback, and use several Weapons, as Spears, Bows and Arrows, Muskets,
Iron Clubs, crooked Swords, Daggers, and Battel-Axes.

The Kings Vassals are permitted to wear the Tag, and use the same on certain
occasions, they have a peculiar Commander, and are to the number of fifteen
thousand; viz. Those that belong to the King and are in his pay, for the Chans
and Grandees keep many others in their own Service: Besides which there are
fifteen thousand more which are no Soldiers, and officiate in several places at
Court, or follow several employments, to which they are brought up from their
Infancy.

Martial Law is also new, having been first established by King Abbas, from the
Example of the Turks.

Chisilbassi or Red Caps.
The third Order consists in Chisilbassi, that is, Red Caps, and is more noble
than that of the Vassal; these also fight on Horseback, carrying such Arms as
they like best; in former times they used only Bows and Arrows, Shields and
Swords, for they despised Guns as base Arms for a Gentleman to use; but since
the Year 1620. they have all carried Firearms, beside their old Weapons:
Moreover some, especially Knights, keep their first Arms, which are less
troublesome to carry than the other: They are free, and need not serve longer
than they please or are paid; nay, they may change their Masters if they can
make any advantage thereby to themselves, they may leave the Kings Service and
go to a Chan or Sultan, or from the one to the other, as it is very common.

The Corci,
The fourth martial Order of the Persians being the most noble, is that of the
Corci, called from the word Corma, which in the Turkish Language signifies to
keep, who are in a manner like to our Lifeguards, because their office is to
guard the King at Court, and all other Places.

All the Chizilbassi which neither serve the Chans nor Sultans, or any other
people but the King himself, and are in his pay, are called Corci; the number
whereof, amounts to twelve thousand; they use the same Arms as the other
Chizilbassi; and fight on Horseback; they have peculiar Commanders called
Corcibassi; that is, Heads of the Corci: In these four Martial Orders the
King's whole Militia consists, there being but few besides them.

Moreover, there are likewise the Jasakci, The Jasakci what Service they do.
or Precursors, to clear the way for the Army, and detain all those they meet
with, that they may not come too near the King's Wives: In Sign of their Office
every one wears an ordinary Arrow stuck through their Turbants, but their
Captains one of Gold.

The Lasauls, what they are
There are also others, as Lasauls, which are like Sentinels, and have only a
Club or Staff in their hands; but these are rather Officers in the King's
Court, than Soldiers.

The Titles of their Commanders.
The supreme General is called Sardar; a Commander of ten or twelve thousand
Bowe-men, Curtzschibacht; a Colonel over a thousand, Minbaschi; a Captain over
a hundred, Jusbaschi; a Decurion that commands ten, Ohubaschi; which if they
have behaved themselves valiantly, and performed any notable Exploit, they are
without any respect of their Birth or Quality bountifully rewarded, and
promoted to greater Dignity.

Valor not Extract the cause of Preferment.
Areb Chan, a Duke of Schirwan, in the Reign of Schach Sefi, was but a
Rustick's Son in Serab, where he was first a Marshal, but after behaving
himself valiantly in the Wars, cutting off several Turkish Commanders Heads
with his own Hands, he was made Chan of the forementioned Province: Others have
been promoted to the same Dignity from Heardsinea, Grooms, or the King's
Slaves; but those that do not encounter valiantly with their Enemies, or lose
an opportunity of engaging with them, or without any great reason fly from
them, they not only lose their lives, but are first scorned and derided by all
men, being forced to go through the whole Army in Woman's Apparel a whole day;
for (as Herodotus affirms) nothing is accounted more vile amongst the Persians
than to be esteemed a greater Coward than a Woman.

The Enemies to Persia.
The King has powerful Enemies both on his right and left Hand, which
oftentimes engage with him, viz. the Tartars of Zagatay, or the Usbecan Tartars
in and upon the Borders of Chorasan, who many times invading him with ten or
twenty thousand Men, pillage all the Country: But the Turks are his greatest
Enemies about Bagdat or Babylon and Iruan, near which places many bloody
Battles have been fought; the great Mogul also makes frequent War upon them for
Candahar and Herat.

Boterus tells us, that the Sofi troubles himself but little with the Mogul;
because between both Realms (as betwixt Spain and France) are very narrow
Passages, and the Situation of the Borders very Rocky and troublesome; by which
means the conveying of Provisions that way, and the keeping of Forces there is
very inconvenient.

The Forces in pay.
It is said, that King Abbas Anno 1620. kept constantly one hundred thousand
Horse in Pay, of which about thirty thousand guarded the Cities on the
Frontiers, from whence they never stirred to any Engagement, only when it was
judged fit, then they are removed from one Quarter to another. Besides this
numerous Army which receives Pay, are also many Volunteers, persons of Quality,
of which, some keep fifty, nay a hundred Men in their Service, which receive
annual Revenues, and carrying Arms, are reckoned amongst the Militia, as
likewise Sutlers, Merchants, Handicrafts, Cammel-drivers and Commissaries,
which all bear Arms; besides their Wives which are no less in number than the
Men, according to the ancient Custom of the People of Asia, which (as Xenophon
affirms) carry their Families with them to the Wars; so that the King's Army
consisting as well of other men as Soldiers, amounts to between two and three
hundred thousand Men.

The City Ispahan with the Villages belonging to the same, is able in a short
time to raise sixty thousand Men besides the standing Forces.

The Soldiers marching in the Army observe a good Order, and make little noise,
Their order in marching.
using neither Drums, Trumpets, nor any other Musical or Warlike Instruments;
none daring to take any thing but what they pay for where ever they are
Quartered, by which means the Countrey-People receive great benefits by the
Army's marching through their Towns or Villages, and the Merchants or
Handicrafts without any suspicion of being wronged of their Goods, let the
Soldiers have such things as they want, Sutlers travel with Fruit, Sweetmeats,
and Snow in the midst of Summer, to such places where they expect the Army to
come. For their better accommodation the Inhabitants of those Countries in
hopes of gain store up great quantities of all manner of Provision against the
time that they expect the Army to come thither, where they dispose of them at
their own Rates, which is not ordinary. The Pay which a Trooper receives, Their
pay.
amounts yearly to five Tomans, each Toman is sixteen Crowns, with which he may
maintain himself very handsomely there; the Officers pay is either more or less
according to their places.

Olearius tells us that the yearly pay of a private Soldier, viz. of a Curtschi
or Bow-man, is three hundred Crowns, with which he must maintain himself and
his Horse, and that of a Tufenktschi is two hundred.

The pay allowed certain persons of Quality exceeds all the rest, and extends
to two or three hundred Tomans a year; these also maintain whole Companies at
their own Charge; notwithstanding these Grandees are listed but as private
Soldiers in the King's Book.

All the Persian Soldiers which receive the Kings pay, are obliged to be ready
upon his Command, and if need require, immediately to go to such places as they
are called to.

No orderly Discipline in Battles.
The Persians observe no order of Marshalling their Forces in Field Battles, the
King only placing the Chans over the Sultans, and other Commanders according
to the number of men which they have under them. The Office of a Captain is
only to guard the place where he is appointed. The Soldiers are not drawn out
in good Order but confusedly mixed together, and it often happens that the
Musquettiers, Bow-men, Pikemen are all intermingled after a confused manner.

March close near an Enemy.
They, for the most part, make a running fight, and turn about so soon as they
have discharged upon their Enemy, like our Men, who retreat so soon as they
have fired to make way for others. Moreover, when they draw near the Enemy, or
they come to a place where they apprehend any danger they keep close together
in one Body.

Their Bag and Baggage with their Wives, follow them at a good distance, Their
Train and Baggage.
riding on Camels if they go to meet the Enemy, but at their return they ride
before, and the stoutest men between them and the Enemy; their Encamping
themselves is also in a confused manner and without Order, taking up as much
room as they can, which though it be for their ease, yet many times proves
dangerous: By this means the Ordu, that is, The Camp like a City.
the Army or Camp is like one of the greatest Cities in Persia, and stored with
all manner of Provision like a Market.

They cut off the Hair of their slain Enemies, and carry the same about with
them, according to the Custom of the Country, as a certain testimony of their
Victory and Valor.

Rewards of valiant Men.
Such Commanders as behaved themselves valiantly, are Presented with Suits of
Cloth of Tissue, as a requital for their good and faithful Service; which as
soon as they have received, they immediately put on, and give that which they
put off to the Bearer.

Their Tents.
They use certain little Huts, Tents or Pavilions in the Fields, which are
called Scervanli, from the Province of Scervan where they are made: They are
for the most: part covered with a strong Stuff, and wrought like a Quilt, which
is very substantial against the Cold and Rain, as also against excessive Heat;
they are round on the top like a Canopy, and oval in form at the bottom. There
are likewise other smaller places of repose called Saivan, or covered Places,
which serve only as Tilts, to keep off the Weather and the Sun.

Their Coin.
Their several sorts of Money.
THe current Money in Persia is Silver and Copper. The Silver Coyns are an Abas
or Abascy, Garem Abas or Chodabende, Schahi, Bisti, Laryns or Lari, Piasters,
and their Copper Coin, called Pull or Casbechi.

An Abascy is about a Crown in value, though not above a quarter of an Ounce in
weight. These Abascies have their Denomination from Schach Abbas, who caused
them to be Coined, as also the half Abas; and the Chodabendes, because Schach
Chodabende was the first maker of them.

The Schahis make each a quarter of an Abas, and two Bisties and a half, being
the least Silver Coin, one Abascy.

The Laryns or Lari, are two pieces of Silver of a certain weight, bowed
together in two parts, and stamped at the end with the Governor of Lar's Arms,
and has its Name from the City or Dominion, or from the Princes of Lar, when
they were absolute, and not subject to the Kings of Persia. And because the
value of this Coin consists only in the weight and goodness of the Silver, it
passes currantly through all the Eastern Countries, and not only allowed by
the Chans and Princes of Lar, who first Coined it, but by all the Princes of
Asia: for the Turks, Persians, Mogulls, and others, Coin the same with their
proper Names. But after the uniting of the Dukedom of Lar with the Persian
Realm, this Coin has much declined, as Olcarius affirms. In former times they
had another Coin called Lari, which was of bended Silver Plate, beaten out, and
stamped in the middle. Some account five Laryns to make a Spanish Ryal; and one
Laryn passes amongst the Hollanders on the Island of Ceilon, for twelve of
their Stivers.

In Persia, as also in all other Countries, passes a Coin called Piaster, each
piece whereof is valued at a Crown.

Their Copper Money is in general called Pull, and in particular Casbechi, of
which forty make an Abascy.

Each great City has its peculiar Copper Coin, which goes in no other Place,
and no longer than one year, because the Stamp is altered every year. The Coin
of one City is marked with a Deer, and of another with a Goat, Satyr, Fish,
Serpent, or whatever they fancy. Moreover, against their new Year, which
happens in February, the old Casbechies are either called in, or cried down,
after which two are not worth one, and are forced to be brought to the Mint
again, where they are beaten out and stamped anew. A Pound of Copper is sold
here for one Abas, of which they make sixty Casbechies.

They have also Xerafs, or Xerafies, or Xerafins, of Gold, which make eight
Laryns; and likewise Deniers, which are about one Spanish Ducat and a half
apiece. But Texeira does not clear this Point, because in one place he says,
that a Million of Gold Deniers makes almost twelve Millions of Spanish Ducats,
and in another place, that fifteen hundred Deniers are near upon two thousand
Spanish Ducats; and in another place, that fifty thousand Deniers are about
seventy thousand Spanish Ducats. But a Xerafin is by the Hollanders, on the
Island Ceylon, accounted to be four Shillings.

Others affirm, that the Coyns in Persia are Besorchs, Pays, Soudy, Chay,
Mamoudy, Laryn, and Tomams. Ten Besorchs make a Pays, which is Copper, and made
like a Dutch Doit; four Pays a Chay, or Four-pence-halfpeny English; twenty
Pays a Mamoudy, or Nine-pence English; twenty five Pays a Laryn, five Laryns a
Crown, and a hundred Mamoudies a Tomam, which is sixteen Crowns.

How they value Commodities.
Rich Commodities are valued by Tomans or Tumains, each Toman reckoned at fifty
Abascies; and notwithstanding this sort of Money, which amounts to so much, is
not stamped, yet they reckon them by the number, as the Russians do their
Rubbles, and we here by Pounds Sterling: A Toman is six Rixdollers, or Three
Pound twelve Shillings English.

Anno 1644. according to the Kings Command, no Person whatsoever durst carry or
convey any Ryals, Ducats, or new Money, to Hindostan, on pain of extreme
Punishments, because the old Money was much lighter, and of worse Metal than
the new.

Their Weights and Measures.
AS for their Weights and Measures, they are of two sorts, the one is the
King's, and the other that of Tebris; the King's Weight or Measure is double to
that of Tebris, though the last be much more used. First there is a Weight
called Patman, which according to the Measure of Tebris, weighs complete nine
Venetian Pounds. This Patman is divided into nine Cehareck, or four Quarters,
the Quarters into Siahs, the Siahs into Mithicali. But Manchia is a Weight
about ten Pound and a half.

Texeira also makes mention of a Weight called Man or Men (perhaps one and the
same with Patman,) which the Portuguese in the East Indies call Mano; but the
value and weight thereof is distinct, according to the several Countries, and
is by Zacharia, King of Chorazan, who made a great Book of the Weights and
Measures of Persia, called Mim. Davity will have this Mano to be the Batman
which Vincent Della Alexandri makes mention of in his Relation of Persia, and
that ten of them make forty Venetian Pounds, each Pound being twelve Ounces, so
that one Batman should make four such Pounds. Others will have three sorts of
Man, viz. a Man which contains seven Pound Dutch, a Man Cha of twelve Pound,
and a Man Sarat of thirty Pound.

Olearius tells us, that they weigh their Goods all with Batmans, which
according to the several Places are different: A Batman of Tebris contains six
Pound; a Schach's, or King's Batman, which is most used in Kilan, is twelve
Pound; a Schamachies, or Carabachs Batman, is sixteen Pound.

Howi they reckon the distances of Places.
The distance of Places from one to another through all the parts of Persia, is
reckoned by Miles, which they call Ferseng, derived from the old Name
Parasanga, of which Herodotus, Xenophon, and others make mention. The length of
a Furlong is (according to Della Valle) about one Spanish, or four Italian
Miles; as also in the time of Herodotus, who affirms, that a Parasanga
comprised thirty Furlongs, of which (according to Strabo's Account) eight make
an Italian Mile.

In the Turkish Language, which is spoken through the whole Country, the Miles
are called Agag, that is, Trees.

Their Trade.
What Merchants Trade into Persia, with the Commodities they carry thither, and
what they bring back in Return.
THe English, Netherlanders, and Portuguese, Trade through the whole Country of
Persia, only the Portuguese, though having the same Trade, are not permitted
to come to Ormus, Gamron, Lareca, Cismy, etc. At Bander-Gamron the
Netherlanders have their Factories, as also in Lar and Ispahan. The Persian
Trade being very considerable to the Holland East India Company, does not a
little add to their Gain from the Indian Commodities: for the Trade which the
said Company drives from the Island Ceylon, and the Coast of Malabar, to
Persia, is not only for the utterance of their Pepper, Cinnamon, Cardamom, and
other Commodities, which are Transported to Persia, and turn to a good Account;
but chiefly for the ready Money which they carry from Persia to Ceylon; for
they Import yearly unto Persia about eight hundred thousand Pound weight of
Cardamom, seventy thousand of Japan Wood, and between twenty and thirty
thousand of Cinnamon.

The Hollanders used also from Taiowan to send Chinese Commodities to Persia,
as Pepper, Sugar Candy, Japan Camphire, Porcelane, Preserved Ginger, China
Roots, China Anniseeds, Tee, etc. They also carried thither Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mace, round and long Pepper, Cinnamon from Ceylon, Gum, Wax, Benjamin, Sandal,
Ebony, and Aguil Wood; Copper, Cubebs, Cauna, and most of the Indian
Commodities, but especially Cloves, Tin, and Sugar.

The Merchandise which the Netherlanders bring in Return from Persia to
Batavia, consists in Pearls, which are purchased in Barain and Congo, red Skins
dressed, red Earth from Ormus, packed up in Bales, several Jewels composed of
Diamonds and Rubies, Emeraulds, Rings, Rose Water, and other Commodities, but
especially Silk, which is most plentiful in the Northern Provinces of Persia,
and also their so much esteemed Persian Carpets. But they are not the only
Traders there, for the Banians, Moors, and other Eastern People, supply their
Markets with the like Merchandise.

For the promoting of Trade in Ispahan, the Hollanders are forced every year to
make great Presents to the King and his Courtiers, who believe that they are
obliged thereto, if they receive but a Grant to buy thirty or forty Cara's, or
such inconsiderable quantities of Silk, from peculiar Persons (for else they
are bound to Deal only with the King for their Silk) which they Transport
without paying any Custom.

The Portuguese having a Factory on the Island of Barain, receive half the
Custom there, as also diverse Sums of Money of all Moorish Vessels, and Arabian
Pearl-Ketchers, extending their Trade into the Persian Bay near Bassora, Congo,
Bander-Gamron, Cabo de Jaques, and several other Places.

From Persia are likewise Transported to India, abundance of Tukoises, which
are to be had there at reasonable Rates.

What the Persian Metchants carry out, and whither.
The Persian Merchants carry also great store of Wine in Flasks and Cases, to
Mogostan and Ormus, whither they Travel in like manner with great Cafiles or
Caravans from the particular Provinces, to Trade with the Christians and other
People there resident. The Merchandise which they carry thither, are Gold,
Silver, Silk, Silk-Stuffs, Brocades, Carpets, Horses, Allom, Tutty, Rhubarb,
Rose Water, and the like; which they barter for Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper,
Cardamom, Ginger, Nutmegs, Mace, Sugar, Tin, Sandal and Japan Wood, Chinese
Porcelane, Musk, Amber, Aloes, Precious Stones, Pearls, Indigo, Wax, and the
like.

The Inhabitants and Foreigners may travel whither they please, and Trade to
all Places, paying only the Custom, and some small Imposts to the Crown.

But this is of special remark, that by virtue of an Agreement made between the
Turks and Persians, they drive an unmolested Trade both in or out of the
Country, as well in times of War as Peace; the Caravans traveling from place
to place without any disturbance, to the great advantage of both Countries.

Their Artificers, Manufactures, and several Employments.
THe Employments which the Persians follow, besides Tilling, Husbandry, and
Planting all sorts of Fruits, which they sell to advantage, are several
Manufactures and Arts, but none turn to a greater Account than that of Writing,
Writing the most advantageous Employment, and Silk-Stuffs the next.
they being utterly ignorant in the Art of Printing. The next is the making of
Silk-Stuffs; for which purpose eminent Citizens keep Workhouses, in the
Persian Tongue called Carchane, where many Persons are employed, which brings
them in great Profit yearly: But Cito Indino, which is very fine Callico,
spotted with diverse Colors, is brought thither out of India.

Most of the Artificers are Weavers, Artificers
Dyers, or Painters, who Trading in Cotton and Silk, make curious Stuffs, mixed
with Gold of the same; but their Pieces reach not above eight or nine Yards, a
fit Pattern for a Persian Habit. The Jescht and Cashan Workmen being the most
artificial, know how to work all sorts of Shapes in Silk-Stuffs, but especially
their Characters, so exactly, that the best Writers cannot make their Letters
better with a Pen. These Stuffs, besides those that are made up into wearing
Clothes, are with Cotton and raw Silk, Transported to other Countries.

Vast quantities of Silk gathered yearly.
It is generally accounted, that in Persia there are every year gathered ten
thousand Zoom, or twenty thousand Bales of Silk (for a Zoom is two Bales,) each
Bale weighing two hundred and sixteen Pound. Of these twenty thousand Bales the
Province of Kilan alone produces in a fruitful year eight thousand; Schirwan
and Chorazan, each three thousand; Mazanderan and Carabach, each two thousand,
besides what Georgia, which is also rich in Silk, and other Places yield; of
all which not above a thousand Bales are kept to be wrought in Persia, the
remainder being sent to India, Turkey, and Italy; and by us and the Hollanders
fetched from thence in Exchange for Copper, Tin, and Cloth; which last is
highly esteemed by the Persians, who are ignorant in the use of Wool and
making of Cloth) insomuch that a Yard of ordinary Cloth at Ispahan, will fetch
eight, nine, or ten Dollars.

A free and open Trade in Prrsia.
The most and richest Traders in Persia, are Armenian Christians, who, like our
Chapmen, carry their Wares from Place to Place; for Persia is an open Country
for all Nations to vend their Wares in.

In Cashan are three sorts of Silk-Stuffs; the first that of which they make
their Girdles; the second is called Mileck, on some of which are wrought diverse
Persian Motto's, as also the Figures of Men, Women, Beasts and Plants, all set
off with choice variety of Colors; the third sort is called Zerbaf or
Mileckzerbaf, which differ little from the former, only that the first is all
of Silk, and the others are wrought with Gold and Silver, and only worn by
Ladies, or used to make rich Furniture for their Chambers.

The King's Revenues.
The King's yearly Revenues.
THe yearly Revenues of the Kings of Persia, are said to amount to twenty
Millions of our Money: for not only the Towns and Provinces pay great
Tributes, but also the Customs, Taxes, and Presents, amount to a considerable
Sum. The rich Province of Candahar alone, when it is under the Jurisdiction of
Persia, pays in Tributes and other Taxes, about two Millions and a half of
Gold: Iran and Babylon pay not much less; and according to the Contents of the
Dester or Exchequer-Register, the Suburbs and Villages about Ispahan, pay
yearly forty thousand Dollars.

Customs taken off in Trade from Port to Port, and of what paid.
Schach Thamas was the first King that took off the Customs formerly paid for
the Transporting of Commodities from one Place to another, being Farmed for
above a hundred thousand Tomans yearly, each Toman being sixteen Crowns; but
afterward he commanded them only to pay the bare Fees of what Goods were
Exported or Imported; so that most of his Revenues came from the Lands, Woods,
Vineyards, and Fruits, of which he had a seventh part of the Product. They also
paid for their Cattle, viz. for forty Sheep, fifteen Bisties yearly; and for
each Cow, ten. Besides which, the Christians paid from Five to Eight in the
Hundred, according to the goodness of the Lands possessed, and Trade which they
drove. The Customs which are paid in Traveling, for the securing of the Roads,
are very inconsiderable. Some report, that the River Senderuth in Ispahan
raises yearly near sixteen thousand Dollars. The Armenian Christians, of which
there are many thousands in the Country, pay two Dollars apiece. The annual
Presents of the Chans and others, amount also to vast Sums of Money; for none
(according to an ancient Custom) may appear before the King without a Present;
The value of the yearly Presents.
besides which the Magistrates and Governors expect their Gifts. The Georgians
also pay great Tributes to the Persian King; for Vincent ab Alexandro affirms,
that one of those Princes pays yearly twenty thousand Escues or Crowns. Not
only on the Borders, but also up into the Country in the chiesest Cities, and
in many places where there are Bridges and great Throughfares, both Strangers
and Inhabitants, are forced to pay Toll for Silk and other Merchandises: Toll
paid of most Goods.
besides which, for each Bale of Silk made in the Country, the King receives
ten Dollars; for each Mule that is sold, one Abas; for an Ass, half an Abas;
for an Ox, a quarter of a Dollar; and for a Sheep, one Casbechie. The
Pearl-Fishing of Barain brings him in twenty five hundred or three thousand
Tomans yearly. The Caravansera's, which are inhabited by Merchants, pay
annually fifty thousand Dollars: In Ispahan are twenty four, which pay three
hundred Tomans. The King also receives twenty five thousand Dollars per annum
from the Farm of Fishing in Rivers, and from the Nefta springs four thousand.
The Baths and Houses of Entertainment pay a Tun of Gold; and all Gardens, forty
Yards long and thirty broad, nine Abas apiece.

The State of the Prince.
By these great Revenues the Wealth of this Kingdom sufficiently appears; and
the State of the Prince, from his Golden Table and Dishes, of which Schach
Abbas had so many, that (as has been said) the making of them only cost nine
hundred thousand Ducats. Olearius judges they might weigh thirty six hundred
Pound. And this Magnificence was not new, for Xenophon affirms, that the
ancient Kings of Persia judged their greatest Glory to consist in their
abundance of Golden Vessels.

Their Buildings.
The form of Noblemens Houses.
THe Houses of Noblemen are for the most part large, containing many Apartments,
fitted for several uses; each Room is built alone in a handsome form, and
separate from the rest, so that you need not go out of one into another, as is
usual here, but directly to that where you are designed. The Houses (according
to the Eastern manner) have no Windows toward the Street, are flat Roof'd, and
have very little Doors of one entire piece of Marble, unpolished, and of an
unhandsom shape, for all the Asian People take but little care to beautify
their Houses on the outside. The Rooms of Entertainment are generally open
before like Galleries, and look either into Gardens, or other spacious Walks.
At the farther end of the Hall, opposite to the Entrance, is an Apartment
covered on the top with glazed Tyles; so also is the Floor and Walls, but the
last not above four Foot high, that those that sit on the Ground may lean
against them with their Backs. After the same manner the Kitchen Walls and
Floor are also Paved; in the Floor are several round Holes, into which putting
Fire, they either stew or bake Meat, or keep it hot. The Fire being under the
Floor like a Stove, you can neither perceive Smoke nor Flame, because the Smoke
has a peculiar place to go out at. Under these round Holes are little Springs,
which spouting up, the Water is received in Troughs, and serves to wash their
Meat with, as also for other occasions, after which it runs away through
private Drayns.

The Houses are but indifferently Furnished, having neither Chests of Drawers,
Their Furniture.
Cabinets, Tables, Chairs, Stools, or other Lumber, as is usual amongst us, but
only Carpets, Cushions, Mats, Quilts, and the like, to sleep and sit upon. The
Floors of the Lodging Rooms are covered with very fine Carpets, on which they
sit and walk without their Shoes, eitheir when they talk one with another, or
eat together, and also sleep on them. In these Chambers no Dogs are suffered to
enter; and to keep them clean, they have always a Tuftan or empty Platter
standing by them, into which they throw all their Bones, Shells, and the like.
These Tuftans are much used at Meals, being set betwixt every two Persons.

Caravansera's what they are.
There are likewise two kind of Buildings in Persia, called Caravansera's, which
are erected at the King's Charge, the first up and down in the Highways, for
the accommodation of Travelers, and the others in the Towns, for Merchants
Goods: Those which are in the Country are common Inns, and built like
Cloisters, viz. with a spacious Court in the middle, and many Chambers round
about. As to what concerns the Place it self, any one may dwell therein a whole
year and not pay any thing for his Lodging. Those which are in the Towns, and
serve for Storehouses, have many large Rooms, on the Doors whereof hang great
Padlocks. In these the Merchants keep their several Goods for very small Rent,
which is bestowed upon Locks. In these Rooms are nothing but the bare Walls. He
that comes first thither makes choice of as many empty Chambers as he has
occasion for, and for as long time as he intends to stay.

Their Summer-houses.
In the Villages, especially between Eskerf and Ferhabad, in the Province of
Mazanderan, are diverse Summer-houses built against the heat of the Sun, which
are called Balachane, consisting of high Poles, covered both on the tops and
sides only with Mats made of thin Reeds, which they use like Curtains, rolling
them up, or letting them down, according as they find it for their convenience.
They go not up to these Balachanes by Steps, but on a piece of Timber, which
lies sloaping, and at easy distances has several Notches to set their Feet on
in stead of Stairs.

Houses like Beehives.
The Roofs of the Houses in the Villages Aranzague and Polesofium, are round on
the top like a Bee-hive, after the manner of the Arabian Huts and Tents.

Their manner of making Fires.
In Ispahan and other places, where there is but little Wood, and likewise
through all Curdistan, necessity has taught the Inhabitants a means to keep
themselves warm in Winter in their Houses, viz. they make a Hole in the Earth,
which they call Tenur or Tennor, whereinto they put burning Coals; over it they
set a kind of Table with a broad Carpet upon it, about which setting
themselves, they cover half their Bodies with the Carpet, and also sleep about
it in the Night: It warms a Room very considerably with a few Coals; and for
conveying away the Smoke, Pipes are laid under Ground from the Tenur to the
Garden or base Court. The Fuel which they burn is according to the nature of
what the Country affords, either Wood and Shrubs, or else Cows and Camels Dung.

Amongst the Nobility in the Diwanchane, or places of Audience, are used long
Wax-Candles, which weigh about three pound apiece, and serve three or four
Evenings, the remaining Ends being used in other places that are not so much
frequented.

Their Candles and other Lights.
They also burn Tallow in Candlesticks, made of Silver or other Metal like
Lamps; under which is placed a Basin or Platter, to receive that which drops
down, that it may not fall on the Carpets.

They also use round Iron Fire-pans, in which they burn old Rags dipped in
Grease, which kindling instantly, give a greater light than our Links or
Torches. These Pans they commonly carry about on Sticks, which serve them in
stead of Flambeaux; they sometimes set them on Poles in the open Air before the
Diwanchane; nor may they be carried in the Night before any other than Persons
of the greatest Quality. Lastly, it is a sure sign that the King, or at least
his Haram, is near the place where three such Fire-pots are set out.

Of their Traveling.
How the Persians travel.
THe Persians travel after this following manner, viz. By reason of the time
that is spent in lading the Camels, they cannot not go far the first Night, but
when they are once laden and upon their Journey, they unlade no where till they
come to the place where they design to Lodge. They journey for the most part in
the night, and in the day rest in cool and shady places: for they certainly
believe, that if any one should begin a Journey in the day, especially in the
midst of Summer, he would undoubtedly lose his Life, or at least fall into a
great Fit of Sickness.

The King and Noblemen travel after this manner, viz. The Haram and Women go
before with all the Camels and Carriages, The Attendance of the Haram.
attended by a great Train of Servants, who are well Armed; the Overseer of the
Women, or Captain of the Haram also accompanies them on Horseback well Armed,
and is most commonly an Eunuch; so also do the rest of the Officers.

They only use Oxen and Cows for Carriage in some places.
The Rusticks in Adirbeitzan, and about Ardebil, neither use Mules nor Horses
for the carrying of their Goods, but only Oxen and Cows, which are for the
most part black or spotted, and less than ours; neither do they put Saddles
upon them, but cover their whole Bodies with a course Linen Cloth, quilted
with Wool or the like, and that is all their Furniture.

Their Religion.
The diverse Sects.
THe King of Persia's Subjects are either Mahumetans, Xiahies, otherwise called
Scheichs, or Schiati, or Sofians, which make up the greatest number, or Heathen
Fire-worshippers, or Gaures, who are but few in respect of the others, besides
Banians, Jews, Armenian Christians, Nestorians, Manichees, Franck-Armenians,
and others.

Muselman, what it signifies.
The Xiahies or Schiati, are those which follow Mahomet's adopted Son Aaly: for
all the Sects of the Moors, which some say are seventy eight, are reduced to
two, viz. that of the Sunis or Sonni, comprehending the Arabians, Turks, and
all those that follow the Alcoran, and that of Schach Sefi, received in many
Countries out of Persia.

The Persians as well as the Turks call themselves Muselmans, from the Arabic
word Salama, which signifies Releasing or Freeing, and was first imposed or
assumed, because when Mahomet first set afoot his Doctrine, all those were put
to Death that would not declare their Belief in the following words: La Ilah
Illa Alah, Muhammed Resul, Allah, that is, There is no other but one only God,
and Mahomet his Prophet. Upon this Declaration the Remonstrants were released,
and called Muselman; but now they call the Children as soon as they are
Circumcised, Their Circumcision.
Muselman: Their Youths they Circumcise in the seventh, eighth and ninth year,
at which time they inebriate them with sweet Liquors, that they may not feel
the pain: They not only Circumcise the Males, but also use a Ceremony
signifying the Circumcision of Females; but the Turks only cause their
Daughters to lift up their Hands and speak some certain words.

Wherein the Turks and Persians differ or agree.
In this Matter and the Alcoran the Persians agree with the Turks, but differ in
several others, as 1. Their Expositions and Explanations of the Alcoran are not
the same. 2. Their Imams or Saints are different. 3. Their Ecclesiastic
Ceremonies and Customs are several. 4. The Miracles wrought by their Saints are
repugnant to each other.

The Persians also differ from the Arabians and Turks in many other things: for
the Persians affirm, that God is the cause of all Good, and the Devil of all
Wickedness; which the Turks deny, saying, That then we should have two Gods,
one good and the other bad. The Persians believe that God is immortal, but that
the Soul of Man, as well as of other things, is mortal: On the contrary the
Turks hold, That the Glory of the Law is a Work of God, and that all God's
Works are without beginning or end, as likewise the Godhead. The Persians
affirm, That the Souls of the Good in the other World do not behold God in
Essence, because he is a Spirit, but only see his Glory, Mercy, Goodness, and
the like, which are his Attributes: But the Turks say, That the Souls of the
Blessed see God as he really is. The Persians also say, That when Mahomet
received the Law from Heaven which he was to publish to the World, his Soul
only was by the Angel Gabriel carried to God: But the Turks and Arabians say,
that not only his Soul but his Body also appeared before God. The Persians
reckon the Sons of Aaly and Fatime, and their twelve Nephews, the most eminent
of all Prophets, except Mahomet: The Turks allow them Prophets, but deny that
they exceed others. The Persians judge it sufficient to worship God three times
a day, viz. in the Morning at the rising of the Sun, which they call Sob; at
Noon, which they name Dor; and in the Evening when the Sun sets, by them styled
Magarib: But the Turks Pray five times a day, viz. in the three forementioned
times of the Persians; and beside these, a little before the Sun sets, which
time they call Hacer, and likewise when they go to Bed. The Persians chiefest
Prayer is the Fatah and Alhemdo Lilla, which Translated is to this effect:
Praise be to God, the Lord of Creatures, A Persian Prayer.
and the King of Judgment: We honor thee; on thee our Aid we call: Lead us in
the right way, in the right way of those whom thou have done good unto, but not
in the way of those against whom thou art incensed, nor in the way of such as
go astray. Amen. Moreover, all the Chapters in the Alcoran begin with these
words: Bismilla Rahman Rahin, that is, In the Name of God, Gracious and
Merciful. So likewise in all their Actions they have the word Bismilla in their
Mouths: No Linen Draper will measure out an Ell of Callico, nor a Shoemaker
set Stitch in a Shoe, but first he repeats the word Bismilla, and sometimes
also Benam Oukinamesch Herestzanehaft, that is, In the Name of him who is the
Protector of Souls.

They are very zealous.
They are very zealous in their Devotions, for they continually either call down
their Eyes, or look up to Heaven according as the Prayer directs; some pray and
cry in their Houses with such earnestness, and so long, that being out of
breath they often fall down on the ground, as in a Swoon, their speech ending
with the word Hacka, that is God, which they repeat fifty or sixty times over:
Some also use in their Prayers a String of small Beads which they call Moher
Tesbih, and distinguished in three places with those of a larger size.

Their Sermons.
After their Prayers on a Holy Day in their Temples, a Chattib goes into the
Pulpit, and reads some Lectures with their Explanations out of the Alcoran.
They call our Bible a decayed and unregarded piece of Work, Their Opinion of
the Bible.
alleging that the Text was corrupted by the Jews and Greeks, and that God
sent them the Alcoran in stead thereof.

Concerning the Creation of the World, Adam, and other sacred Relations or
Histories; Of the Creation.
as also of the Day of Judgment, and everlasting life; the Persians hold many
ridiculous opinions different from the Turks.

They dedicate their Children to their Saints
The Persians have also a Custom to devote their Children whilst yet unborn to
be Servants to some of their Saints, as a Token of which, after the Birth they
bore a hole through the Ear of it, from whence some bear the Names of
Mahumetculi, Imamculi, Aalyculi; that is, Mahomet's, Imam's, or Aaly's Slave;
but this only happens when they have few Children left alive, having buried
several.

As the Sofians despise the Doctrine of Abubeker, Omar, Odsman, and Hanifa, and
follow that Tzafersadak; so likewise in the Church-Ceremonies and other Customs
they seem to exceed them, or at least in their own conceit, whereof we will
instance one or two Particulars.

Persians and Turks different Ceremonies in preparing themselves to prayer.
When the Persians prepare themselves to prayer, first they wash themselves, but
not like the Turks, for they making bare their Arms above the Elbows, first
wash their Hands which they stroke twice down from their Elbows to their
Fingers, and with their right Hand only wash themselves twice over the Face,
whereas the Turks rub their Face with both hands, and stroke their Arm three
times upwards and three times downwards, and also wash their Mouths and Nose.

The Persians with their wet hands stroke twice over their Heads, from their
Necks to their Foreheads, and afterward cross their feet to their Ancles.

The Turks pick their Ears with their foremost Finger, and rub round them with
their Thumbs, then scratch the Nape of their Neck over their Heads to their
Throats, these Ceremonies are performed at Home before their going to Church.

The Persians oftentimes in their Praying hold before their Foreheads a made
Stone consisting of a greyish Earth, dug up near Cufa, where Hossein is
imagined to have been buried with Aaly his Father, from whence the Stone have
great Power; It Is eight square, about four Inches over, in the middle thereof
in a Circle, are written the Names of the forementioned twelve Imams, with that
of Fatima Aaly's principal Wife, of whom the Imams sprang.

These Stones are made by the Arabians, who bring them to sell amongst the
Persians. But the Turks esteem them not, entering in the Mosque, they begin the
Prayer of Aaly Ekber: The Persians let their Hands hang downwards, and cast
their Eyes on the Ground; but the Turks keep their hands on their breasts:
Moreover the Persians lay their Hands on both Ears and turn their Faces to
Kible, that is, the South, because Mecha and Medina are opposite to Adirbeitzan
and Ardebil, lying toward the South, which when the Persians respect they
begin their Ahlhemdo Lilla, and holding their Hands on their Knees, Their
Prayers.
stand bent and pray the Subhanna Rebbi, etc. repeat the Alla Ekber; then
kneeling on the ground they strike their Heads on the forementioned Stone, and
say the Subhanna Rebbi again, after which they hold up their Hands, this done
they repeat their last Prayer kneeling, then rising up they turn to the right
side, saying to themselves Ssalom alecum Ssalom alecum; with which words they
salute the Guardian that has stood by them and defended them from the Devil
that he should not disturb them in their Devotion, as if he were present.

Whence this difference proceeds.
This difference in Religion between the Turks and Persians, is said to proceed
from this Cause, viz. Mahomet on his Deathbed made his Brother and adopted Son
Aaly (for he was espoused to Fatima Daughter to his first Wife Cadie) to be his
Successor, (as the Persians affirm) not only in the Dominion of Spiritual, but
worldly Affairs; giving him the Title of Calif.

But the Arabians say, that Abubeker, Omar, and Odsman, being great amd mighty
Lords, and in high esteem with Mahomet, took the Government upon them
alternately after his Death, alleging that he had so commanded them; which
Aaly and his Friends judged not only untrue, but unjust; and therefore opposed
them, but at length was forced by reason of his inconsiderable strength to
submit to Abubeker, Omar, and Odsman's Proposals; nay, to be contented to see
himself bereaved of his whole Inheritance. But Abubeker not long after dying,
Omar succeeded, who being killed by his Slave, a Persian, made room for Odsman,
who was also slain by a Soldier belonging to Aaly, who on the same day that
Odsman dyed, was made Calif.

After a Reign of four years and two hundred sixty two days, Aaly was killed as
he was going to Morning Prayer, by Abdurahman, Son to Melgjem, and his Body
buried at Tuhafa or Cufa, in a Castle. On the same day his Son Hossein was made
Calif, but he resigned his Dominion to one Muavias, and died in the sixth year
and fifth day of his Reign; they say that his Wife by the Instigation of
Muavias poisoned him: But Della Valle tells us that Hossein was by his
Antagonists (which are bannish'd by the Persians as Vagabonds) set upon in the
Highway, and killed with his whole Retinue of seventy or eighty men, viz. In a
place in wild Arabia, called Kierbula, where his Tomb is yet to be seen, and
highly honored and visited by many Mahumetans which come thither from Remote
Countries, who account him a Martyr and a great Saint, nay, the true Imam, and
the Sophy of Persia, himself boasts that he was lineally descended from him.
Moreover, many to honor themselves assume the name of Hossein-culi, that is,
Hossein's Slaves.

The Original of Scheich Sofi
In this posture Affairs continued till the year 1343. at which time a learned
man called Sofi or Scheich Sofi, started up in the City of Ardebil; who boasted
that he was the Successor of Aaly, as being extracted from Musai Casim, one of
the twelve Sons of Hossein.

This Sofi gave many Testimonies of great Holiness and prudence, and therefore
caused himself to be named Schich or Scheich, lived a reserved Life seeming to
despise the World and the glory thereof; went clothed in a Sheep-skin, and never
would put on a Garment of Silk, but only of Wool, from whence some suppose,
because Suf in the Arabic Tongue signifies Wool, he received that Denomination
of Sofi.

This Schich Sofi began to teach in public, that the Succession in the place
of Calif belonged rightly to Aaly: as being Mahomet's adopted Son, and
accordingly his true Heir; and that Abubeker, Omar, His Doctrine and Opinion.
and Odsman had unjustly deprived Aaly and his whole Family of that Honor, to
the great dishonor of Mahomet himself, which had exceedingly enraged God, and
made him to awake Sofi, and endue him with ability to regain Aaly's Right,
which had so long been trampled under foot: And as a Sign that Aaly was a true
Prophet, Sofi related many Miracles wrought by him, which the Turks had kept in
obscurity.

In the next place he declared that Aaly made an exact Explanation of the
Alcoran, which he left to his Successor Tzaferfadack in Manuscript.

The Persians being a People much inclined to Novelties, easily embraced Sofi's
Doctrine, especially certain Mahumetan Slaves, who thereby obtained their
Freedom, by which he got so great an Esteem, They are generally embraced and
received.
that they all turned to Scheich Sofi, as their Redeemer and Protector: By this
means he soon persuaded them to his Opinion, and thereby increased the Number
of his Followers. Whereupon he commanded his Doctrine and Ceremonies, to be
observed in the Mosques, which being somewhat contrary to the Turks, they began
to rage exceedingly against him, and persecute the Persians with Fire and
Sword; who nevertheless, promoted Alay, and added to their Articles of Faith,
these Words, Aaly Welli Alla. There is no other but the only God, Mahomet his
Prophet, and Aaly his Successor and General: Nay, they stick not to say that
though Aaly be not the Godhead himself, yet he was as one of the Almighty's
Brothers: That the Alcoran which God designed to give to Aaly, was by a Mistake
delivered to Mahomet, in which Saying they prefer him before Mahomet, and the
Clark standing on the top of the Mosque, at the time when he calls the People
thither, speaks aloud to this effect: Cursed be Abubeker, Omar, and Odsman, God
be merciful to Aaly. They also have a deriding Proverb, viz. Kiriseck der
deheni Abubeker, Omar, Hanife bat; That is, A Dogs T -- in Abubeker 's Teeth;
which to the Turks seems so great an abomination, that it makes them exceeding
inveterate against the Persians.

Another ground of difference.
Della Valle tells us that the greatest differences between the Persians and
other Mahumetans proceeded from this occasion, viz. When Mahomet in his last
Expedition with his Army between Medina and Mecha, riding upon a Camel before
all his Followers, taking Aaly by the Hand, commanded him to get up behind him;
saying to his People, Those that have had me for their Veli, shall also have
Aaly my adopted Son. The word Veli in the Arabic has two significations, and
may be taken either for the Chief or Head of a Church or for a Friend or
Favorite Aaly and his Successors believed the first signification, and ever
since maintained that Mahomet by this Saying chose Aaly to succeed him, as well
in the Government of Spiritual as Temporal Affairs, and that by the Power of
this Declaration, Aaly and his Successors ought for ever to be the Governors of
Mahomet's Race; but after Mahomet's Death a Will was brought forth, wherein
Abubeker Mahomet's Father-in-Law (for Mahomets last Wife Aisne, was Abubeker's
Daughter) was named Heir and Califa, or spiritual and worldly Successor; which
Will was made by the Practice of Aisne, or as the Persians say, forged by her;
but the Turks and Arabians say that Mahomet himself changed his opinion,
because Aaly was too young and unexperienced; whereas Abubeker was aged, and a
man of prudence and good conduct; so that they conclude that Mahomet by the
forementioned discourse never intended to make Aaly his Heir or Successor, but
only to make known to him that they should show the like respect arid honor to
Aaly, as they had done to him; And in truth they do little less, for they
reverence Aaly as a great Saint, and account him the chief Head of their
Religion; nay, for the true Calif or Successor of Mahomet, though not the first
immediately after him, as the Persians relate, but the fourth in order, viz.
after Abubeker, Omar and Odsman.

A great Feast in Honor of Aaly.
The Persians celebrate yearly that Day of the Month, on which Mahomet chose
his adopted Son Aaly to be his Successor, as a great Feast, and call it the
Sheep roasted.

Now in regard the Persians promote Aaly to that Dignity, and ascribe divine
Virtues and Powers to him, they judged it fit that his Successors (which were
undoubtedly inspired with the like Graces) ought to have more Honor showed them
than other Common People, and therefore they visit their Tombs, and pray at
them with great devotion, and make rich Offerings to them. They also give Aaly
the Name of Mortoza, which is a name of Holiness, or at least has some such
signification.

Moreover, His Offspring
the Persians say that Aaly had the mark of Mahomet's Seal-Ring on his back. He
had two Sons called Hassan and Hossein, from whom sprang Seinel Abedin. Mahumet
Bagur, Tzafer Saduck, Musai Casum, Risa, Mahumet Taggi, Alli Naggi, Hossein
Askerri, and Mehedi; which ly all buried, viz. Hassan, Seinel Abedin, Mahumet
Bagur, Mahumet Taggi, Alii Naggi, in Medina; Tzafer Saduk in Babylon; Maer
Hossein, Musai Casum, and Hossein Askerri in Kelbula or Cufa, But Mahedi they
say never died, but went into a Cave near Cufa, before which he left his Shoes,
which when they shall be turned with the Heels toward the Hole as already they
are half way, he will put them on again, and coming forth convert the people to
the Alcoran. The Persians call all these twelve, Imams, that is, Maintainers of
their Religion, and are at this day with Schich Sofi accounted Holy-men, and
offerings made at their Shrines especially by those that travel to Mecha and
Medina.

They also keep several Feasts in honor of these Saints but especially Aaly and
Hossein, Their Saints.
which the Turks do but laugh at; but on the contrary reverence Abubeker, Omar,
and Odsman: Nor is Hanifa the Explainer of the Alcoran in less esteem among
them, but by the Persians accounted a Seducer and false Expositor, adding that
he was Tzafer Saduks Boy, and held up the Water with which the Saints washed
themselves; that he went into Turkey, and with the forementioned Water gave
sight to many blind people, and other Miracles that made him so highly esteemed
amongst them.

Hanifa dig'd up and his Tomb destroyed.
When Schach Tamas conquered Babylon, he caused this Hanifa who lay buried there
in a stately Tomb, to be dug up, and turned the Masar or Chapel into a
Stable, and of the Grave it self he made a Jakes.

The Persian Legends.
The Persians believe many strange Fables mentioned by their Writers; viz. That
Aaly's Horse Duldul, proceeded from a Stone: That the Angel Gabriel bringing
him his Two-edged Sword Dhulfacar, he performed great Miracles with the same;
that he killed a Seven-headed Dragon, and drunk with the Angels in Heaven: That
Sultan Mahmed Chodabende hunting near Cufa, dug a Chest out of a Hill, on
which was written: Herein lies Adam, Noah, and Aaly buried; and at the same
time he built the City Netzef, and made Aaly's Tomb there, with other such like
stuff. But besides this, they ascribe something of a divine Power to Aaly, and
to that purpose relate many of his Miracles; viz. that being in his Infancy in
the Village Sahedam in Kilan, he went to Scheich Sahad, a holy man, and
observing the people to weed the tilled Lands, he commanded the Weeds to wither
of themselves, which accordingly they did: Scheich Sahad observing it, said,
Not so my Son, for though you know this Art, yet you must not practice the
same, lest you should make the People lazy and unwilling to work. Sofi who
judged this Reason very rational, entered into his Service, and staying seven
years with him learned much Wisdom; and from thence the Village was
enfranchised with great privileges, and so remains to this day.

This Sect greatly spread.
According to Texeira, this Sect or Doctrine spread it self a vast way in the
time of Sultan Xeque Juneyd, who lived in the Reign of King Joonxa. Son to Cara
Issuf, which Juneyd being daily visited by many Persons, Joonxa began to
suspect him, and commanded him not to admit so much company: Hereupon Juneyd
left Ardebil, and went to Ozun Acembeck, otherwise called Usum-Cassan, Lord of
Diarbeck or Mesopotamia, who gave him his Sister Cadijacatum to Wife, who was
after Mother of Xeque Ayder. Juneyd thus grown Eminent overran many Countries
with his Army; and in all the places where he came he made those he took
Prisoners embrace his Religion.

After this Scach Haider Son to Juneyd, married Hasan Beig Usun, who bare him a
Son, and called him Ismael who was Sir-nam'd Sofi, because he promised to live
a holy Life, and being come to be absolute Master of Persia, he established
this Sect of Aaly, and commanded all his new Subjects to follow it.

Sofy's are as much as Clergymen.
The Clergy (as we may so call them) are termed Sofy's, living poorly, and
receiving daily Alms from the King's Court; they dwell altogether under one
Superior called Basci-Sofi, with great appearance of Humility; so that they are
highly esteemed not only by the Common People, but by the King, because they
are the Successors of Schach Ismael Sofi, whom Schach Abbas accounted the Head
of their Sect, which he manifested in his Prayers, for having named God, then
Mahomet and Aaly, he adds, Sofi Sciah Imam Dinum, that is, Sciah Sofi the
High Priest of my Law.

They live at the King's Allowance.
At all times there are two or three hundred of these Sofy's with the King where
so e're he goes. Every Evening they have several Dishes of Meat brought them
out of the King's Kitchen, which they eat either in public in the first Court,
or some other place appointed for that purpose, whither many of the Nobility
repair to see them at Supper.

There are some Zealots which fall down at the feet of these Sofy's confessing
their Sins, They confess their Sins.
and imploring Absolution for the same; whereupon he gives the Penitent several
blows on the back with a small Cane, by means whereof they believe their Sins
to be pardoned how great so ever they are. This kind of Absolution is in the
Persian Tongue called Astaraet.

There are also amongst them several Sects, Other Sects.
viz. Camaraths and Mutazelis, which allow of nothing but what they can make
out by Natural Reason, like our Scepticks. There are also Mahadelis, or
according to Ananias, Molochadis, which denying the divine Power, affirm that
all things are governed by the Stars, especially the Planets: The two chiefest
Teachers after Sofi, and in high esteem amongst the Persians, were Xeque Aydar,
and Imam Harust; these the Turks, and all other Mahumetans in Barbary, and
other Parts of Africa, and also in Tartary, abhor more than all others: being
transported with much fury against the whole Nation, so that they think they do
God and Mahomet greater Service in killing one Persian, than a hundred
Christians; nor do the Persians less resent the Turks upon the same account,
holding them a hundred times more pernicious and less Believers than the
Christians.

The Parties that follow the Persians, are spread over all Armenia, Assyria,
Diarbeck, Hierack, The Followers of the Persians.
Persia, Corassan, Hircania, Carmania, Sagistan, and a Part of India.

It is very common in Persia to see the Metzids without a Roof, yet
notwithstanding they are very large; nay, some that were built by King Abbas at
Ispahan, are yet uncovered.

Their Highpriests.
They have also a High Priest called Mustaed Dini, that is, the Head of the Law;
who is like the Mufti of the Turks, and has his Seat in the Metropolis Ispahan.

In the lesser Towns are others named also Mustaed Dini, but they are inferior
to the first, Their inferior Priests.
yet he has not power to elect them, because they are only chosen by the
Grand Sophy; under these Mustaed Dini are the Califs, who perform daily Service
in their Temples.

Two other Sects and their Opinions.
In several Provinces of Perfia, especially in that of Lar, are two other Sects;
the first was introduced above two hundred years since; by one Magmud of
Babylon, and these have the most Disciples, which are called Ehl el Tabquid,
that is, Men of Truth. These affirm that there is no other God but the four
Elements, which they conclude out of the Name Allah, that is, God, in the
Arabic; as also from the four Parts of the World.

They hold also that there is no rational Soul, nor another life after this,
but that each Creature is a mixture of the Elements, of which likewise Man is
composed during his life, after which the Soul who kept he Elements together
being fled, they return to their first Principles.

They mock at all things that have either been written or said by the Prophets,
Saints, or ancient Lawgivers; alleging that they were either ignorant in the
Truth, or else would not reveal it to them.

Paradise and Hell they affirm is in this World, for he that has once enjoyed
the Nature of Man, returns again into the World after Death; either in the
shape of a Beast, Plant, happy or unhappy man, great and powerful, or poor and
despicable, according to his Merits, and this is all the Reward or Punishment
of a good or bad life.

What Books Novices may read.
The Followers of this Sect have many Books which they will not permit people
differing from their opinion to read. If it happens that any one of their own
Sect which is not fully instructed therein, or another desirous to embrace
their Religion requests to see the Books, they first give him an Oath of
Secrecy, which they call the little Oath; and then give him such of them as
contain the lesser Mysteries, upon perusal whereof, if he continues in his
Resolution, then they give him another Juramentum magnum, a greater Oath, which
impowers him freely to receive all their Books for his better Satisfaction and
Instruction in the more mysterious parts of their Tenants.

They bear great respect and kindness to each other, dealing with the greatest
Amity imaginable, and show extraordinary obedience to their Governors or
Chiefs, in the Persian Tongue called Pir, that is, old men, whom they also
furnish with all things necessary for their Subsistence.

The greatest part of the Inhabitants of a Village built near the way to
Sciras, hold many of their opinions; so also do the Provinces of Arak and
Persia proper.

Another Sect and the Tenets of it is Disciples.
The other Sect has not so many Upholders, and is called Tarick Zena Deca, that
is, the way of the Covetous; they deny the transmigration of Souls, and believe
that God is in all places, and performs all things, from whence they conclude
that whatever appears to the eye, is God.

These resemble either the Saduces or Manichees.
Della Valle thinks that this Sect may be a Relict of the Saduces, because they
are of the same opinion concerning Transmigration, or else are Manichees, for
Manes, as Suidas relates had his Original from the Indian Brachmans, and was
flead alive by Behram King of Persia, and therefore this Sect is sometimes
called Manei Zendick, that is Manes the covetous.

Reverence old Trees.
The Persians show peculiar Reverence to old and great Trees, out of a
superstitious belief that they are the Residence of happy Souls, and therefore
call a Tree Pir, that is, old man, from the signification which that word has
in the Persian, Language; wherefore when they call a Place or Tree Pir, they
mean thereby the Soul of a happy Person residing therein.

The Seyds have great Privileges.
Amongst the Persians are also many Mahumetans called Said, which in the Arabic
signifies Lord, which name is only given to those in Persia, who boast
themselves to be descended from Mahomet's and Aaly's Family, and accordingly to
their Successors; wherefore they have great Privileges, and are honored by
several Titles: The Turks call those of Mahomet's Extract Emirs, and the
Arabians, Scherifs: The Persians nevertheless distinguish the Successors and
Relations of Scheich Sofi from all others of Mahomet's Relations, and honor
them by a peculiar name of Scheichavend, that is, the Line of Scheich, being,
as the say, two thousand in number, and most of them resident in Ardebil,
because that City was the Habitation and Birthplace of Scheich Sofi.

The Seyds in Persia shave their Hair two Fingers breadth above their Ears,
Their Habit.
but let it grow long on their Crowns and in their Necks; they wear a white
Habit, and a kind of Pumps, as also a peculiar sort of Mendils or Turbants.

They may not marry out of their Families, nor drink Wine, yet are free to go
to Feasts where in stead of Wine they drink Water.

The Seyds which dwell in the Cities are generally rich People, for they
possess whole Villages, and are free from all manner of Taxes, which makes them
not a little proud. There are another Sort that pretend themselves Seyds, that
go from Town to Town showing their Marks, and living on the Alms of People, but
these are commonly Deceivers and are called Cherseyds, that is, Cherseyds what
they are.
Holy Asses; some carry Hair in a round silver Box, alleging that it was cut
from Mahomet's Head, which through a little hole they show to the People: This
Hair is sold at a great Rate, and laid on their Books when they read or pray.

At Kisma in Kilan, was one of these Deceivers, who with a piece of Crystal
held in the Sun, would fire Cotton or Paper, and persuaded the People that he
was of Mahomet's Race, and had made a Contract with the Heavens.

There are also a Sort of these who boast their original from Aaly, and are
here as the Dervises among the Turks, which are such as live retired lives like
Recluses.

There are others called Abdalles, Abdalles what they are and their Habits.
resembling Monks, wearing course Coats stitched like quilts, and girt about
them with a Copper Serpent, which, when they are made Abdalles, is given them
by their Masters as a Testimony of their Learning and Wisdom. At Ardebil they
are received into this Order by the Sofi-Chans; at Ispahan and Meschet, by the
Sofi-Baschi, or Chief of the Sofy's. These Abdalles are frequently seen in the
Markets and other places, where calling the people together, they preach of the
Miracles wrought by their Saints, Aaly and others, railing against Abubeker,
Omar, Odsman, and Hanifa, the Saints of the Usbekes or Tartars; wherefore these
Abdalles dare not approach the Turk's Borders.

These are for the most part, a vile debauched thieving and sodomitical People,
yet there are several little Chapels built for them near the Metzids or
Temples, wherein they reside; in Ardebil they are the most numerous.

A general Tolleration.
All Strangers of what Religion soever, have according to ancient Custom in
Persia, Liberty of Conscience, being permitted to live after their own Manner,
and after the Laws of their several Princes.

Admit discourse of Religion.
The Persians also speak with great freedom concerning the Mysteries of their
Belief to strangers, and are also very curious in matters of Religion,
willingly spending their time to discourse thereof; nay harken with patience to
such as argue against their Religion, which is quite contrary to the nature of
the Turks.

They hold Christ our Savior in great Reverence, and call him Isael Messih,
that is Holy Messiah; thus much of Scheich Sofy's Doctrine.

The Heathen Persians are called Mayucy, Heathen Persians.
or Maurigy, and Gaoryasdy, of which the last Name is very common; the Pagans
of Zuratte and Cambaya, by a general Name called Banjan, have among other
superstition Customs, that of worshipping Cows, which the Persians call Gao,
and he that keeps them Gaopon, and call and these kind of Idolaters Gaor.

They also call them by another Name, Zarduxt, that is, Friend of Fire, though
Zar in the general Language signifies Silver, and the Fire is called Attex:
These People worship the Sun and Fire, which last they have kept above three
thousand years on a Mountain called Albors Cuyh, or Atez, Quedah, that is, The
Residence for Fire, lying a days Journey from Yazd. These Idolaters are very
numerous, and the more, because all the Kingdoms in Persia were such before the
Arabians coming thither.

How they dispose of aged People.
They also have a Custom not to suffer aged People to die a natural Death, but
to carry them to the beforementioned Mountain, where they set them in a kind of
Cage, in which they can but just stand upright, and leave them there without
any other Subsistence than what the Air will afford them, till they die; and
because there blows a continual Wind, and the Air being very thin, the Bodies
keep entire a long time. But if any one dies young, they take the Corpse and tie
it on an Ass in a sitting posture, setting on his Head a Pot full of Cream, in
the Persian Tongue called Mast, with which they wash his Face and Eyes, and
then drive the Ass with a Whip cross a Field, where generally the Ravens coming
about the Corpse, pick out the Eyes, whilst the Followers narrowly watch which
Eye is first picked out: for if it happen to be the right, they judge that the
Deceased's Soul is happy, but if the left, that it is in a state of perdition.

Great numbers of Jews in Persia.
There are likewise above nine or ten thousand Families of Jews in Persia, who
have a general Toleration, as also many Christian Armenians and Nestorians,
brought in by King Cozroe, when he was conquered by the Emperor Heraclius, whom
he supposed to vex by being of that Opinion, destroying at the same time all
the Roman Catholic Churches throughout his whole Dominions: for the Persians
once embraced the Catholic Religion, first Preached there by St. Thomas,
Chistianity Preached in there by St. Thomas.
till such time as their King Sapor put to death seventeen thousand of them
with the most exquisite Tortures imaginable: Whereupon Constantine the Great
sent Letters to persuade him to be favorable to them, wherein when he could not
prevail, he proclaimed War against him. But when Christianity was by these
Persecutions in a manner extinguished, it was restored again in the time of
Maruthe, Bishop of Mesopotamia, and Abdias Aclatus, Bish. of Persia; and though
many opposed it, yet about the Year 411. the Churches were rebuilt as before;
but since that, by the Mahumetans again utterly extirpated.

There are also Melchites in Persia, Melchrites and their Opinions.
who have spread themselves quite to the Country of Chorazan. These People are
infected with the ancient Opinion of the Greek Church, condemned in the Council
of Florence: which Doctrine, is also followed by the Georgians, Mengrelians,
and Circassians, who are more in number than all the Christians of the East,
and yield Obedience to the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria,
and Jerusalem.

The Opinion of the Manichees concerning two Gods, Manichees.
viz. one good and one bad (of which the bad Governs all things on Earth
without contradiction of the good) reigns still in Persia, and likewise in many
other Countries of the East.

Besides all these Religions there is also that of the Franck-Armenians, so
called, because they are of the Opinion of the Latin Church, who by the
Eastern People are called Francks, as also all other European People, except
the Greeks.

One Bartholomew Petit, a Dominican, Dominicans.
was Anno 1330 sent by Pope John the Twelfth, to Convert the Armenians, and was
the first Archbishop Naxivan, lying in Parsamenia or Adherjon; from which
Petit the Inhabitants of this Country received the Roman Catholic Religion,
which they preserve to this day, and are called Franck-Armenians; of whom there
are several thousands under the Obedience of the Arch bishop of Naxivan.

These Franck-Armenians reside in the Towns of Naxivan, Abbaran, Abbragon,
Calva, Saltach, Hascassent, Carsan, Xabunis, Giahug, Caragus, Chensug, and
Artach, where there are many Cloisters of the beforementioned Order of St.
Dominick.

Their Festivals.
Their Festivals.
THe Persians keep several Festivals, and amongst others, one in commemoration
of Aaly, celebrated every year with great Ceremony, especially at Ispahan, on
the twenty fourth of the Month Ramadan; on which day they make two
Processions, whereat are present, not only many Persons of Quality, but also
the King himself. The Procession therein.
In the Head of this Procession are lead two Horses richly caparison'd after
the manner of the Country; on the Saddles lie Bows, Arrows, Shields, and
Swords, and on the Pummels thereof hand two Turbants, and which things
represent the Arms of the Deceased Aaly; then come several Men carrying huge
Pennons or Flags; next follows the Bier, covered with black Velvet, under which
lie all manner of offensive and defensive Armor, as also Plumes and other such
like Ornaments; about this go diverse sorts of Musical Instruments and Singers;
Persons of Quality follow on Horseback, but the vulgar sort on foot: Those that
accompany this Procession take a turn about the Maidan, stopping a while before
the Gate of King's Palace, and also before that of the great Mosque, where,
after having poured forth their Prayers, every one returns to his own
Habitation. The Vizier of Ispahan and the King's Treasurer also appear on the
Maidan, one on one side, and the other on the other, accompanied by many
Horsemen, which keep off the throng of People, and likewise prevent Quarrels.

The Festival of Roses.
The Festival of Roses is kept when Roses blossom, and continues as long as that
Season lasts. At this Feast they have peculiar Dances after their barbarous
Music, not only in the Evening, but at Midinight and Noonday, in public
places and Coffee-houses; the Servants whereof being all expert in their
manner, Dance from Street to Street with great delight, and use several
postures like our Morris-Dancers, followed with great Acclamations of the
People, with lighted Torches, Lanterns, and Basins full of Lamps, which they
carry on their Heads, and strewing Roses in all places as they pass, for which
every one that meets them, gives them a small piece of Money. In other places,
especially out of the City, the Men and Women flock together, Frolicking and
making Garlands of Roses; so that this Feast seems to have some resemblance
with that of the Goddess Flora.

All the Mahumetans, according to an ancient Custom, make many Offerings on the
tenth of the twelfth or last Month Difilhatze, killing two or three Lambs in
each of their Houses, where they eat one part thereof, and give the other part
to the Poor.

Customs in Persia differing from the Turks.
But they have another Custom in Persia much differing from that used among
Turks and Arabians: for in all eminent Towns and Places where the King resides,
whether in a City or in the Camp, they Offer a Camel with great Ceremony,
because (they say) Abraham in stead of his Son (who they believe was Ismael and
not Isaac) Offered a Camel and not a Ram, as the Scripture makes mention; but
the Turks affirm that it was a Ram and not a Camel, and therefore mock at the
Persians Offering of Camels, though perhaps they agree in that of Ismael. They
Offer their Camels after the following manner: Three days before the Biram they
lead the Camel prepared for Offering about and through all places of the City;
The manner of their Camel-Offerings.
and being hung full of Garlands, and covered with Flowers and Herbs, is
attended by several Men playing on Pipes and beating on Drums, which are
followed by a Molla or Preacher, who Sings their Creed and several Hymns,
whilst the Spectators endeavor as the Camel passes by to pluck off some of the
Hair, which if they obtain, they judge themselves born in a happy hour, and
preserve the same as a holy Rellick; wherefore if those who are appointed to
clear the Way did not prevent them, the poor Beast would undoubtedly be torn in
pieces, before it could possibly be brought to the place of Offering, or at
least come thither with a naked Skin: After having thus led the Camel about
three days, all the Nobility, together with King, go on the fourth or Biram
day, richly Habited to the Muffale, that is, The House of Prayer, which every
City has a little distance from it, set a part on purpose for this Offering:
whither the Camel being brought, one of the chiefest amongst the Company, being
Porter to the Kings Haram, or some other noted Person, takes a Spear and runs
it into the Camels right side, being laid bound on the Ground; whereupon
several fall on promiscuously with Battel-Axes, Clubs Knives and Swords,
cutting the Beast into a thousand pieces. What remains of this Camels Flesh is
boiled some part of it fresh, and the rest salted and kept, which they looking
upon as Consecrated, preserve with great care, as being an infallible Cure
against all Distempers, and therefore never eat thereof but when sick, only
the Head is, according to the Custom of the Country, sent to the King's Court.

This Biram Day is proclaimed at the rising of the Sun with Trumpets, Drums,
and other Instruments, as also by the discharging of great Guns.

The great Feast Asciur.
On the first day of the new Moon, which happens in the latter end of December
or in the beginning of January, or if the Moon appears first in the night, on
the succeeding day they begin to keep the high Feast Asciur, in commemoration
of Hossein, which lasts ten days, during which the Persians manifest, their
sorrow for his unhappy Death the manner whereof has been already related: They
Habit themselves like People overwhelmed with Grief and Despair, neither
shaving the Hair nor bathing themselves, not only abstaining from what their
Law forbids, but also from all kind of Pleasures. Many poor People digging a
deep Hole in the most populous Street, go into it, where standing up to the
Chin, they cover their Heads with an Earthen Vessel full of Holes; in which
manner they stand a whole day, whilst another poor Man sitting near, begs Alms
of those that pass by. Others, as an extraordinary sign of sorrow, anoint their
Bodies with a black shining Color, which makes their Skin like Jet; some paint
their Bodies red, thereby to represent the innocent Blood and cruel Derth of
Hossein, and Sing several Elegies in a doleful Tone, in which they relate the
Circumstances of his Death. One of the Molla's or Priests, especially of those
that boast their Extract from Mahomet, stands every day at Noon in the Maidan
or other open place, upon a high Stool, with a green Turbant, where he makes a
Sermon, declaring the noble Acts and Holiness of Hossein, and the Circumstances
of his Death. The like Sermons are Preached in their Metzids or Temples.

Another Feast and Procession.
On the tenth of the Month Muharrem, which they call The Murdering Day, and is
our eighth of January, they go in Procession through all the Streets in
Ispahan, as on the day of Aasly's Death: for they wear the same Clothes, and
have the other things belonging to that Ceremony, as Pennons, Ensigns, and
Horses richly caparison'd and laden with Armor and Turbants: Moreover, they
have a Camel which tarries a Basket, wherein are two or three Children, which
represent the Children of Hossein that were carried to Prison: These are
followed by Biers covered with Velvet, on the top whereof stands a Persian Tag
or Turbant.

In these Processions the Men for the most part go Armed, and oftentimes Fight
one with another, thereby to represent the Confusion and Hurry in which Hossein
was Martyred, certainly believing, that whosoever is killed in this Bussle,
goes directly to Paradise; nay, they affirm, that during these Days of Asciur
the Gates of Paradise stand always wide open, and the Mahumetans which die in
that time, go directly thither without stop or stay. Lastly, all the Ceremonies
for Hossein's Martyrdom, are one and the same with those of Aaly's, though the
first are kept with greater State and Magnificence. The night before the last
day the Effigies of Abubeker, Osman and Omar, and some other contrary Parties,
are burnt publicly in the Maidan or Marketplace.

On the twenty fifth of November the Persians keep a Feast of the Brotherhood,
as is already mentioned.

The Feast Abrisan.
On the fifth of July they keep a Feast, by them called Ab Pascian, or rather
Abrizan, that is, Sprinkling of Water, for Ab in the Persian Tongue signifies
Water, and Risan to Sprinkle; on which day the King and all his Nobles Clothe
themselves in short Vests after the Mazanderan manner, and wear little Caps in
stead of Turbants; in which Dress they repair to a Brook or some other pleasant
watery place, where taking up the Water in little Cups, they pour the same over
one another Bodies; but at last they grow so zealous, that throwing away the
Cups, they endeavor to force each other into the Water with such eagerness,
that this Day never passes without the loss of many Persons.

This Feast is kept in Ispahan near the River Senderuth, at the same place
where it flows under the great Bridge in the Street called Tziaharbah.

Rui Gonzales Clavio tells us, that this Feast is kept in Ispahan on the Bridge
of Senderuth, whither resort all the Townsmen and People from the ad^acent
places, where they do as we have before related.

From whence this Feast has its original, we do not certainly know, neither do
the Persians themselves, as we suppose: Some ascribe the rise thereof to the
Christians, in commemoration of John the Baptist; and this Opinion they
strengthen with this Reason, viz. That the Christians, and almost all People of
Asia, keep the same, though not upon one day; or (as others say) in memory of
the three Kings, and because our Savior was Baptized at the River Jordan by
John the Baptist. The Armenians call this Day Cackciuciran, that is,
Cross-water-day, for they place a Cross in the Water on that Day, from whence
this Festival Day has received its Denomination.

The Chinese, Japanners, and many other of the neighboring People, keep such a
kind of Feast as this, which they call Tuonu.

The Feast Istend.
The Persians also observe a Feast called Istend, so styled from an Herb of the
same Name, which shoots first out of the Ground in the Winter Season, at the
appearance of which this Feast begins, and consists only in the abundance of
lighted Candles and Torches, which they burn all the day and the following
night in their Shops, as a sign of their joy that the Winter (which about that
time ends in those hot Countries) is so near expiring. This Feast is kept on
that day when the Sun passes by the twenty fifth Degree of Aries, which
generally happens to be on the fifteenth of February.

The Feast of Freedom.
On the fifteenth of the Month Schabahan, the Persians keep a great Feast
called Scebiberat, that is, The Night of Freedom, or Choice, on which they do
nothing but Pray, give Alms to the Poor, and the like pious Actions, which they
do in commemoration of the Souls of their deceased Friends.

Their Policy in Government, Economy, and Splendour of the Court.
The Government absolutely Monarchical.
THe Government of this Country is by absolute Monarchy, for the King being the
Chief, has all things in his own power, to do whatsoever he pleases, being
able to make or break Laws without any contradiction, nay, to take away any
ones Estate or Life, though he be the greatest Lord in the Country; in short,
his Will is a Law in all things to his People.

The Kings Title.
The general Title of the King is Sophy, derived from the Arabic word Suff,
which signifies Woolly, because the last Kings have instituted an Order to wear
Woollen, and not Cotton or Linen Turbants, as the Turks do; or else because
Sophy signifies Wise, or Experienced, according to the Greeks.

Olearius tells us, that Writers call the last Persian Kings Sophy, because the
Promoter of their Sect was called Schach Sefi, from whom it is become a Title
of Honor, as Defender of the Faith to his Majesty of Great Britain, Most
Christian to the French, and Catholic to the King of Spain.

King Ismael also caused himself to be named Schach Sade, that is, The Son of
Schach, as a token of his Extract from Schach Sefi, who was so highly esteemed
amongst them.

Some say that this Name Sophy signifies a Man, which renouncing the World,
endeavors only to serve God; so that Xeque Ismael bore the Title of Sophy,
because he appeared to be the greatest Promoter of his Sect. And sometime
before him, Halilah being advanced to great Dignity, was for the same reason
called Sophy. But since Schach Ismael none of his Successors have used that
Title; and though there are a great number of Sophies through all Persia, yet
we must know they are all Ecclesiastics.

The right Name which the Persians give to their King, is Schach or Sa, after
the Italian pronunciation, which signifies King; or Patxa, which others write
Padischa, that is, The supreme Schach, or King of Kings: They also call him
Sahib, that is, Lord, or Governor. Some also affirm, that the Kings are
likewise named Choda or Chodohon, which in the Persian Tongue signifies God;
but that is only a mistake, for Choda or Chodabende as the Surname of
Schach-Abbas's Father; the natural signification of the word is one that is
obliged to God.

At the Persian Court are many which bear the Title of King, as Chan and Sultan
have the significations of King, the one in the Turkish, and the other in the
Persian Tongue, which proceeds from hence, because the chief Princes of Persia,
to make themselves the more eminent, will have Subjects that are styled Kings,
though in truth they are but Viceroys.

Mirza, its signification.
Mizza or Mirza, is in the Arabic properly a Title of Honor, and signifies
Prince, or more peculiarly, A Prince of the Blood, according to which
signification the eldest Son, who is Heir apparent to the Crown, bears no other
Name, being generally called Sultan Mirza, i.e. Prince of the Realm.

Persons of Quality generally bear two Names, besides a third, which is a Title
of Honor, which last is commonly put behind, as Assa Chan Beid, that is, Isa,
or Jesus Chan Lord, which is quite contrary to the Christians, who always place
their Title before their Name.

How the Turks style the Persian Kings.
The Turkish Emperor in his Letters to the King of Persia does not style him
Schach, but Schach Ogli, that is, A holy Man's, or Prophets Son.

The King to be distinguished from other Persons wears a red Turbant, differing
in fashion from others, with twelve Ribbons, instituted by Schach Ismael, in
commemoration of the twelve Sons of Aaly, from whom he boasted his Extract.
This Turbant, which some call Tage or Tache, is as much with them as a Crown
with us. Minadoi tells us, that the first Calif or Mustaed Dini, puts the said
Turbant on the King's Head at his Coronation, or taking upon him the
Government. The King also wears his Turbant after another manner than other
People, for that which they wear before, he wears behind, which none in all
Persia dares do but himself, upon pain of Death.

The Kingdom descends by Inheritance.
This Kingdom is Hereditary, and the King's eldest Son always succeeds him in
the Throne. So long as there be any Heirs of the lawful Wife, they Inherit, but
for want of such, those that are begotten on the Chassees or Concubines, and
for defect of such, it devolves upon the deceased King's nearest Relations.
These, as also those that boast themselves to be derived from the old Sefi, are
called Schach Elwend, or Schachavends, that is, Successor of Schach, and have
great Privileges in the Country, yet for the most part live very sparingly.

The Houses in which the King's Children are born, they make priviledg'd
places, and if it be from the Court, and in any remote place, the House is
immediately enclosed with a Wall.

The Kings Arms.
In ancient times the Kings of Persia bore a Crescent proper for their Coat of
Arms, as the Greeks the Sun; but now it is quite contrary, for the Persians
bear a Sun, and the Turks which possess Greece, a Half Moon. But Schach Sefi
bore in his Great Seal, which was about the bigness of a Half-Crown, nothing
but this Inscription, I Schach Sefi am a zealous Servant of the only God, and
about the edges was Engraven, Aaly, they may say of you what they please, I am
always your Friend; who before this Seal does not account himself Dust and
Earth, though he be an Angel, may he be turned to Dust and Ashes.

His Coronation.
The Coronation is celebrated in Ispahan, though formerly at Cafa or Cufa, near
Bagdad, but removed from thence by reason of the too near neighborhood of the
Turks; the manner of it is as follows: On a Table an Ell high they lay as
many rich Carpets as there have been Kings of that Dignity since the beginning
of Schach Ismael Sefi; upon these they set their new King, to whom the chief
Chans carry the Crown, which he kisses three times in the Name of GOD, Mahomet,
and Aaly, and then rubbing his Forehead with the same, his Chamberlain, whom
they call Lele, sets it upon his Head, at which they all cry, God save the
King, God grant him to Reign from one to a thousand years; then kissing his
Feet they bring him great Presents, and spend the day in Mirth and Jollity.
Minadoy tells us, that the chief Calif sets the Turbant or Tage on the King's
Head at his entering into the Throne; but they take no Oaths, nor have any
Restrictions laid upon them.

Their Burying-place.
The Kings, and those of the Royal Family are generally buried at Ardebil, and
lie interred round about Schach Sefi's Tomb.

When the King appears at any public Meeting, he is generally accompanied,
besides twelve Courtiers, with the Seder, Minatzim, and Hakim. The Hakim is his
Physician, and tells him what Meat is wholesome, and what unwholsom. The Minatzim
is his Astrologer, who acquaints him with all the good and bad Hours wherein he
is to undertake any great Design, and is herein credited like an Oracle, the
King undertaking nothing without his Advice.

The Seder is the chief of the Clergy, and is as the Muffi amongst the Turks,
elected by the King and Casi, being generally a Learned Man, well skilled in
the Alcoran, and must be ready to give his Opinion on all such things as are
demanded of him, because according to his Judgment they pass Sentence. Some
Decrees are also Passed by the Seder himself, who Sealing them with his own
Signet, sends the same to die King, who writes under him, This is the Opinion
of the Seder, which We confirm; under which he puts his Great Seal.

The Causes of Citizens are Judged by other Lawyers, who are called Orf, and
are under the chief Judge Diwanbeki, who is no less experienced in the
Mahumetan Tenants than the Seder.

Their Juridical Courts.
The Days on which they keep their Courts of Judicature are Mondays and
Thursdays, on which they meet at Ispahan near the King's Palace, in a public
arched place, where they hear and determine Causes, and if any thing chance to
come before them, which they judge to be of too great consequence for them to
decide, then they order it to be heard before the King.

The Punishments of Offenders.
All Offenders or Criminals are punished with extreme severity, the manner
whereof is several, and many times invented by the Judges, according to the
nature of the Crimes; but the most asual are to cut off their Noses, Hands, and
Feet, ripping up of the Belly, flaying alive, and hanging up by the Heels;
which last is performed after this manner: They make two Holes in the
Malefactors Legs behind the Ancle, between the Bone and the great Tendon,
through which they put a Rope, whereby they hang them on a Tree so high, that
their Heads do just touch the Ground; in which manner, if the Malefactor be
condemned to die, they let him hang two or three days, till after an
intolerable number of Pains he gives up the Ghost; or if he die not in that
manner, then they shorten his time by ripping open his Belly. Others for
smaller Offenses are hanged up an hour or two with their Head downwards. He
that Ravisheth a Woman, and is convicted by her Swearing three times, or
commits Sodomy, has his Genitals cut off.

Usury forbidden.
Their Laws forbid the putting of Money out to Use, which nevertheless they do
privately; but if any one be accused and found guilty thereof, he is accounted
worse than a Jew, and not permitted to come in company with any Persons of
note. In Ardebil dwelt one, who lending Money by the Month at a Dollar and a
half per Cent. had his Teeth knocked out with a Hammer. Such Persons as
practice this, are called Suchur, which signifies Usurer. But at they permit
the Mortgaging of Lands for a Sum of Money, which the Lender repays himself by
the Rent, without receiving any other Interest.

Schach Abbas and Schach Sefi used strange and horrid ways to punish Criminals;
some they caused to be made fast betwixt two Boards, and then Sawed in two in
the middle.

A Persian Ambassador being on a time sent to the King of Spain, and treating
his Servants ill in his Journey thither, and they complaining of it, the King,
at his Return into Persia, with his own Hands cut off his Nose and Ears, and a
piece of Flesh out of his Arms, which he forced him in his Presence to eat.

It is also a very common Punishment at Ispahan, to throw down Malefactors from
the Steeple built on the Mosque Haron Viliaier, and afterward to burn them. To
this Death Women which have committed any heinous Crimes are condemned.

When any Person of Quality that is in the King's Service has committed a
Crime which he supposes may hazard the loss of his Life, he goes with a naked
Sword hung about his Neck before his Majesty's Privy-Chamber, to beg pardon for
his Offense.

Robbers and Highway-men are set in the Ground up to the Middle, and the upper
part of their Bodies enclosed with great Posts six Foot high, and so starved to
death.

Good traveling in Persia.
But because Persia is inhabited in most places, it is very secure traveling,
insomuch that the whole Country is free from Thieves. If any be robbed in his
Journey, though it be by his own Servants, the Villages near which the Fact is
committed, or the Magistrates thereof, upon the Complaint of the Person robbed,
either pay the value, or restore to him the like Goods taken from him. There is
also Guards for the security of the Roads, which are called Rabdari, to whom
Travelers give small Sums of Money.

Strangers enjoy their own Laws.
As all the strange people in Persia enjoy the Liberty of Conscience, so they
also judge and determine Causes amongst themselves according to the Laws of
their native Countries; as well in Matters of Life and Death, as Debts, and the
like, insomuch that the King's Courts of Judicature have nothing to do with
them, which Custom is at this day so common, that not only the People, but
also every person of Quality that is a Stranger in Persia; as Agents, and
Ambassadors from Foreign Princes, etc. enjoy the same Privilege unquestioned,
as if they were at Home.

The several Officers of the Court.
At the Court are diverse Officers which have each a Title according to their
employments, and follow one another in their several Degrees.

Eahtemad-Dowlet is the Chancellor, whose business it is to look after the
Revenue of the Realm, and to increase the same; from whence he bears his Title,
and is like a Viceroy, and not only public, but also all manner of private
Business does pass through his Hands.

A Curtzibaschi is a Commander over ten or twelve thousand Bowe-men, which
being first raised by Schach Ismael, dwell in several Parts of the Country as
a Free-people, and upon any occasion march to a known Rendezvous, where the
said General meets and commands them.

Meheter is a Gentleman Usher, who is constantly with the King in his Chamber
or at any public Meeting, and in the Seraglio; and therefore is often
permitted to speak with more freedom than the Chancellor.

Wakeunis, is a Privy Councellor and Secretary, who writes the King's Letters
and Edicts, and also keeps an Account of the Revenues of the Crown; to which
purpose he has eleven Clarks or Under-Secretaries allowed him.

Every Precinct or Ward of a City has a peculiar Governor or Magistrate, whom
they call Aksacal, that is, Grey-beard, though never so young, which amongst
other Affairs take care of the King's Guests that are lodged in any Caravansera
standing within their Liberty, that they want nothing they are desirous to have.

Assas is a Constable of the Watch, but has greater Power, for he is not only
authorized to take or apprehend any suspicious Persons, but also to punish
them; nay, take away their Lives according to Martial Law; provided, the
Offender be taken in the Fact.

The Diwanbeki though a Supreme Judge, and often sitting on the Bench with the
Seder and Casi, is forced, when the King punishes any person of Quality with
Death, to perform the Office of Executioner himself.

The Culargasi bears Command over the Culams, that is, Slaves or Servants who
have sold themselves to be the King's Servants, who performing the Office of
Soldiers, are eight thousand in Number, and like the Curtzi are Quartered in
the Country at the King's charge.

Eischicagasi-Baschi is the chief Marshal or Commander of forty Eischicagasi,
who though they dwell in several Parts of the Country, wait by turns, five at
a time, and generally stand at those Doors through which you must go into the
presence of the King, from whence they are called Door-keepers. When any
strange Ambassadors have Audience before the King, then the Eischicaga-Baschi
having a Dekemek or Staff, leads them up by the Arm.

The Jesaul Sohebet or Master of the Ceremonies, places all Strangers that are
invited to eat at the King's Table, in their proper Places, wherefore he always
attends with a Staff in his Hand before the Palace Gate to receive and
complement such strange Guests.

The Nasir is the Steward whom they also call Kereckjerack, who provides all
manner of Necessaries for the Court. The Tuschmal or Purveyor takes care for
all sorts of Provisions, and commands the Kitchen.

Mohurdar is the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.

The Dawattar is the Secretary, who always carries a little Ball like our
Printing Balls, with which, when occasion requires he wets the Seal with Ink,
which the King constantly wears about his Neck to make an Impression with, from
whence he also receives his Denomination Dawat or Ink-carrier, for the Persians
Print all their seals wetted with Ink on Paper, in stead of making Impressions
in Wax.

Mohur signifies a Signet or Seal-Ring, and the word Dar, which has a general
signification of Officer, is used in a commanding sense, in stead of having; as
if you would say, Haver or Keeper of the Seal. Besides the Great Seal, the King
has a less Signet to seal his Letters withal, which he sends to his Viceroys
and Governors, and other public Writings wherewith no Person is entrusted, for
the King wears the same in his Ring, and makes an Impression with his own Hand
therewith.

The Myrachurbasschi, is the Master of the Horse; Myrischicar, the chief
Falconer; Sechhahnbaschi, the Huntsman; Jesaulcor, like our Knight Marshal
which rides before the King, and with a Cane clears the way, is under the Lord
Marshal, and has a Deputy under him called Jesaul, which are as our Marshals
Men whom he imploies on all occasions, and sometimes to apprehend Malefactors;
Suflretzi, the King's Carver; Abdar, the King's Cup Bearer, who has delivered
to him the Wine or Water for the King's drinking in a sealed Vessel, which he
publicly opens, and so presents it to the King; Chasinedar, the Treasurer;
Ambadar, the Purveyor of Corn; Jesaul Nesar, the Person that keeps the Kings
Shoes when he goes into the Hall; Mehmandar or Mehimander, he that provides
Lodgings and all other Necessaries for Foreign Ambassadors, and not only
waits upon them, but also acquaints the King with their business, he being the
first that has any knowledge thereof given him, nay, all Affairs of what
consequence soever must pass through his Hands, though the Agents were sent
from other Princes to treat of nothing else but Matters of State, which makes
the Mehimander to be in great Esteem and Reputation.

The King also ordains another peculiar Mehimander, to take care and provide
for such Ambassadors as he esteems more than ordinary; the other Officers are
of meaner degree, viz. the Isauly, are a People who as Messengers, wait at
Court, and are sent abroad on all occasions.

The Kischiktzibaschi, is Captain of the Guard, as the Tzabedar is Master of
the Ordnance, and the Tzartzi chief Herald at Arms, who proclaims all the
King's Edicts.

The Tzelaudarbaschi, is Captain of the King's Horse-Guard, and Master of the
Stirrup. The Mostofi, is the principal Secretary of State, who is permitted to
keep several Clarks. The Seraidar or Surveyor of the Works, who keeps in repair
pair the King's Palaces. The Clitar serves as Porter; the Muschrift is the
Clark of the Kitchen; the Cannati, is the Confectioner; the Sbherbedar, buies
all the King's Sweetmeats; the Omatzdar, being an Archer, teaches His
Majesty's Pages and other Courtiers to shoot at Marks; the Bildars are
Pyoneers, which keep constantly at the Court, and attend when the King travels,
cleaning the ways or cutting steps in rocky Ascents, which otherwise, the
Camels having round feet, are not able to climb; they also help to pitch the
Tents, and dig deep Pits in the ground for water; The Schatir are the Footmen;
the Rica carry Battel-axes, and oftentimes perform the office of Execution, and
always attend the King as his Lifeguard.

All Officers or Servants belonging to the Court, have each according to their
Qualities, great Pension or Salary, which is not paid them out of the King's
Revenue or Treasury, but from several Villages which are allotted for that
purpose.

The Allowance of the Chans.
The Chans have certain Lands and Villages thereto belonging allowed them, yet
they receive the Revenue and are as Magistrates, judging and determining all
things but Matters of Life and Death; some have certain Customs given them,
others receive for their Salary, the Taxes laid on Houses of Entertainment.

They hold durance beneplacito.
All the forementioned Officers keep their places during the King's pleasure,
who seldom discharges them but for Misdemeanor, or else to prefer them to some
greater Dignity. The most eminent Officers and Courtiers belonging to the King,
which were living Anno 1640. in the time of Schach Sofi, and had served also
his Predecessor Schach Abbas, being of a mean condition, Schach Sefi killed all
but two, viz. the one a Herdsman's Son, the other a Slave to Schach Abbas, who
were afterward by Sefi promoted to greater Dignity. Those that he put to Death
were, Eahtemad-Dowlet a Scriveners Son born in Mazanderan: The Wakenuis or
Privy-Counsellor, a Rusticks Son, born in the Village Dermen, near Casbijn;
most of them had Christian Parents, viz. Georgians, Circassians, or Armenians,
for the Persians repose greater confidence in a Chistian if he be circumciz'd,
than in one of their own Religion.

Their highest Oath.
The King is exceedingly honored in his Realm, when any one takes an Oath, they
never swear but by the King's Head, which is accounted the most sacred and
solemn of all other.

Their Complements.
In their wishing of Joy and Happiness one to another, they say not, God give
you Joy, but in the Turkish Language, Schach Mura di sun, that is, I wish that
the King may show his favor to you, and many other things they attribute to
their King, which belong to God only.

All see the King once a year.
According to an ancient Custom in Persia, and the Command of King Abbas, none
dare though a person of but an indifferent Estate, neglect to see the King, and
show him Reverence once a year.

On their Neuruz or New Years Day, the King according to an ancient Custom
receives Presents from all his chief Officers, unless the day be suspected
ominous, for then the King never comes out of his Haram or Seraglio, How the
King gives Audience to Ambassadors.
as we have before mentioned.

The King seldom grants Audience to any Ambassadors in private, but always at a
public Dinner, and in presence of all the Guests, notwithstanding their
business be never so secret. No Persian whatsoever, whether Subject or
Stranger, may appear before the King without great Presents; nay, not the
Ambassadors from strange Princes, which is a very ancient Custom, and was (as
Philostratus tell us) used in the time of the Kings of Media.

The King expects Presents
The Kings of Persia demand Presents from those that are their Homagers, who pay
no Tribute, and this Custom is kept amongst all Eastern Princes to this very
day; they publicly provide that if any Foreigners bring Presents that are not
thought fit for the Emperors Greatness, they make him remain still there, with
more of the like Petitioners, so by that means their Presents make the greater
show and appear the more glorious to the Spectators; they report further, that
if the Present seems not equivalent to the King's Greatness, there is an
addition out of the Wardrobe, silently hinting that they or whoever else,
cannot come too well provided or their next Addresses. But the reciprocal
presenting of these Princes one to another, they look upon as such a Due, that
they expect it as a Debt, and the neglect thereof has bred so much animosity
as has caused a War, and particularly between the Turks and the Persians, Anno
1618. because King Abbas had many years neglected his Presents, which amounted
to a very considerable value to the Grand Seignior. Those that bring the
Ambassador's Presents to the King, are a poor sort of people kept by the King
for that purpose: To every Present are ordered as many people to carry it as
there are pieces and several sorts of things, for every man is to carry but one
piece though never so small.

And makes great returns.
Moreover, the Persians make very great Presents especially to Strangers, who
are obliged to make a Return of a greater value, and if the Person that is
presented fail therein, he that presented him does not only cry and lament as
if he had sustained a great loss, but also demands his Gift again, or the value
thereof.

The King's Wives called Begum.
The Kings Wives are three or four besides a great number of Concubines, the
Queen is in the Persian Tongue called Begum, which is properly a Turkish Word
and signifies a Lady, but this name is by the Persians not only given to the
Queen, but also to the King's Daughters, Sisters, and Aunts.

This Queen is the chief of all his Wives, to whom the rest show obedience: The
rest have another Name besides that of Begum, viz. Maria Begum, Zeineh Begum,
etc The King's Concubines cannot attain to the Honorable Title of Begum, but
are styled Chanum. No Concubines so styled.
Chanum signifies properly amongst the Turks and Tartars, my Queen, but amongst
the Persians only an eminent Woman, wherefore the Relations and Consorts of
Noblemen bear that Denomination. But if there be more than one Chanum in the
house viz. a Consort, a Sister, a Mother, or any else they distinguish them to
avoid mistakes according to their Age, Quality, or Office, calling the Chief
the great Chanum, the others, the little Chanum, the second Chanum, etc. if
there be but one, the Husband, the Son, and all else call her my Chanum except
the Servants, who say, our Chanum, and hereby they know the Masters of the
House, but this is only customary amongst persons of great Quality.

The King's Concubines are commonly of several Foreign Nations, for the King,
especially King Abbas, Persian Women not respected.
delighted not in Women of his own Country, nor in those of his Relations,
wherefore there are but few Persian women seen at the Court, except it be some
or the Chans Daughters, or other Ladies of Honor. Most of the Kings Women are
either born in Georgia, Circassia, Muscovy, or Armenia, and many of them
Christians, but are obliged upon their coming thither to turn Mahumetans. There
are also Tartars extracted from the Family of the Usbeghi; but most of the
King's Concubines are Georgians, which are very beautiful, of good deportment,
and noble Extract in their own Country.

How the King bestows His Concubines.
The King oftentimes gives his Concubines in Marriage to some or other of his
Nobles, and with her a Portion, viz. a Camel to carry her to her Husband, if he
does not live in the City; a Chieceve, that is, a coulor'd Seat, which
according to the Custom of the Country, being set upon the Camel, she may sit
therein with great ease, as also a Chest with her Clothes and Bedding, Linen,
Plate, Jewels, and all things which she possessed in the Haram, also two
thousand Ducats, which his an inconsiderable Portion, for they are bound to
maintain her at another Rate.

In any Progress the King's Wives always travel before in the Night, to prevent
being seen by the vulgar Sort, and in his absence ride in little close Seats,
which hang on a Camels side, viz. on each side of the Camel one; which when the
Camel-drivers have fitted, they retire while the Eunuchs help in the Ladies,
Eunuchs only attend the Haram, and why.
which Custom was first instituted by Schach Abbas upon this occasion: The King
on a time marching with his Army in the Night, and overtaking a Camel that
belonged to his Haram, whose Seat hung down on one side, he called to the
Camel-driver, who not appearing, the King in a rage lighting off from his
Horse, endeavored with his shoulders to lift up the same, but finding it too
heavy, and remounting his Horse to discover what might be the Reason of it is
extraordinary weight, he saw the Lady that was therein embracing the
Camel-driver, which so enraged the King, that calling several of his Officers
about him, he immediately caused the two Malefactors to be beheaded; and since
that time, the Camel-drivers never meddle with any thing but hanging on the
empty Seats and taking them off.

The Order how the Haram travels.
If the King's Wives travel in Company with him, they always ride on Horseback
unveyl'd but strongly guarded: Moreover, the King on all such occasions always
rides in the Middle of his Haram, and spends his time in Discourse, first with
one, and then with another. And when the Women of the Haram travel alone, or in
company with the King, they always go in the following order:

A League before march a certain number of Eunuchs, who drive all those that
they meet with both by Night and Day out of the Way, that they may not meet the
Haram; nay, they have Power to clear whole Towns and Villages; and wound and
kill all such as contest and will not retire.

The Women never seen unveyl'd.
The Eastern Princes account it a great Abomination for any of their Women to be
seen by their Subjects; for not only Ladies of Quality, but also the meanest
Slaves that belong to the Court, are never seen by any strange men, but only
the King himself and his Eunuchs: After them follows a Company of Soldiers
called Jasacksi, which are like the King's Lifeguard, who prevent all Persons
of what Quality soever, from passing to the Haram.

Haram what it means.
Because the Word Haram is often mentioned, we will explain what it means: Haram
is an Arabic Word, and signifies properly amongst the Arabians, that which is
forbidden and disallowed by the Law.

The Persian-Mahumetans and those that inhabit the Eastern Countries of Asia,
understand by the Haram, the Seraglio of Concubines, and accordingly, when they
intend to say that the King or Prince is in the Women's Lodgings, they say, The
King, etc. is in the Haram; the Servants of the Haram, and so with all other
things.

The Recreation of the King's Wives
The King never travels abroad, nay, not to the Wars without his Haram. The
King's Wives recreate themselves every Wednesday in Ispahan with great freedom,
in the Street Tziaharbag, and in the Gardens thereabouts, where they are
attended by many Ladies of Honor but during their stay, all the Avenues and
Ways are guarded to keep out the men, whilst the Women sometimes spend whole
Nights in several Pastimes by Torch and Candlelight.

All places fitted for the King's Reception, and the Reason why.
The King's Gardens in all his Royal Cities, as in Ispahan, Casbin, etc. are
provided with Concubines, Slaves, and all manner of Necessaries, because the
King stays not long in one place, neither goes with much Company, for he often
travels with only two or three Horsemen, which many times ride so hard, that
they finish a Journey of thirty days in five or six; to which purpose he keeps
exceeding swift Horses at appointed Stages, where they always stand ready
saddl'd and bridled, because they are uncertain of his coming; and because his
Train cannot follow him with that speed, therefore he has a House in most of
the walled Cities of his Realm, furnished with all manner of Necessaries.

The Kings Palace a priviledg'd place.
The King's Douletchane or Palace in Ispahan, is a priviledg'd Place or
Sanctuary for all Malefactors that fly thither and touch the Ring, Hammer or
Knocker of the Gate, which is in such esteem or Veneration, that the whole
Court receive it is Name Astane from it, and as a Token thereof, when they name
this Royal Knocker, they add the Word Doulet thereto, that is, good Luck, and
say Astane Doulet, that is the Knocker of good Luck, and understand the King's
Court by the same.

Another priviledg'd place
The Alcapy is also a priviledg'd Place, where no Person, nay, not the King
himself has power to touch any Malefactor or Debtor; wherefore many flying
thither stay there till they have compounded with their Creditors.

The Familiarity of the King.
The King, as also most of the Nobility in Persia, cause most of their Meat to
be dressed in their Presence; nay prepare the same with their own Hands; nay,
more than this, he for all his greatness, sometimes makes himself very familiar
amongst his Subjects, eats as he passes along the Streets, and in the midst of
the Bazars or Exchanges; often standing still before a Cooks Shop, and sees
what Meat they dress, and sometimes goes unexpectedly into a Tradesman's House,
where sitting down, he eats with great and unimaginable freedom.

The King's Lodgings
In the Chambers or Tents in which the King sleeps, are always eight or ten Beds
made ready, so that no person knows which he intends to lie on, nay, sometimes
when he wakes in the night, he goes from one Bed to another, and so lies on
three or four in one Night, which he does to no other end but to prevent sudden
Assassination, and that by that Means he might have time to Arm himself for his
Defense.

In many of the Highways the King has diverse Houses and Gardens; the Houses
for the most part are built and furnished after one fashion, viz. small, with
many little Chambers, which have diverse Doors: The Walls and Cielings being
very smooth, are Painted and richly Gilded, yet without Order or Art.

The Kings Houses.
The King has many handsome Houses, but his chiefest Court is kept at Ispahan in
the Summer, and in the Winter in Ferhabad.

In the beginning of the Month Ramadhan, His Hunting.
which is our Lent, the King goes to Abicurrong in the Mountains to take the
fresh Air, and to Hunt, in which Sport he spends several days, attended by some
thousands of People. At the Ears of those Beasts which the King takes alive he
hangs golden Plates, on which are Engraven certain Marks, and then setting them
at Liberty again, often re-takes them; nay some have been taken who have had
the Marks of King Thamas, Ismael Sefi, and other ancient Princes.

In all the Provinces of Persia, Bull-baiting.
Bull-baiting is very common, but especially about Caxem, the Inhabitants
whereof travel up and down into several Countries to find out the strongest and
fairest Bulls, which they bring to Ispahan, where upon the Maidan or
Marketplace, naked Men Encounter with them.

Musical Instruments among the Persians.
In the Kings Palace at any Entertainment, as also at Entertainments in
Noblemens Houses, are commonly young Women, who Dance to the sound of a Diara
or little Drum; but their common Instruments are Cymbals and Citterns; yet
besides these they have another called Scig, made of Copper, round, and hollow
within, which holding in one Hand, they strike upon it with the other; but the
chiefest Instrument is a Tabor, hung round about with Bells. This Instrument is
very common in all the Eastern Countries, but especially in Persia, the
Inhabitants whereof take such delight in them, that the King never makes any
great Entertainment, but he always has several who Dance to the sound of it.

Their Dancing.
The manner of Dancing used by the Persians is not unpleasing, for they Sing and
Dance together in a King; he that leads the Dance Sings a Verse or two of some
merry Song, the rest bearing the Chorus or Burden.

The Nobles also at the Kings Court every Evening, at the sound of several
Instruments, play at a certain Game with a Hammer and Ball, not unlike our
Palmall, which every one that pleases may come and see.

The Recreation of the Nobles.
The King often invites mean Persons that are well experienced in this Game, to
play at it, which is performed after this manner, viz. The Gamesters divide
themselves into two Parties on Horseback, one at each end of the place where
the Game is to be played, and with a wooden Hammer, which they hold in the
right Hand, they strike a light wooden Ball (not with the flat Head of the
Hammer, but with the side, which is somewhat hollowed out) at the set Mark, in
which the winning of the Game consists; without any wrangling or dispute; but
the chiefest part of the Game is to follow the Ball, and strike it beyond the
Mark, before those at the other end can prevent them. Great dexterity is
required in this Game, and also exceeding swiftness, as well of he Horse as the
Rider; and this is the only way whereby the Persians learn to Ride so well.
Those that play are also dressed after a peculiar manner in Clothes of several
colors, with rich Turbants adorned with Plumes of Feathers and other Ornanents.

They have another Exercise called The Baiting of the Wolf, Wolf-baiting
but it is used by none but the inferior sort of People, viz. A Wolf being let
loose, the People, having each Man a Cloak on, encompass the Beast in great
numbers, shouting and hollowing; and if at any time the enraged Wolf falls in
amongst them, and seizes any one, the whole Crowd rescue the Person in danger,
and assail the Beast. And these two are the chiefest, and most esteemed
Exercises amongst the Persians.

The Furniture of their Tables at Meals.
All the Chans and other great Lords residing at the Kings Court, being prime
Officers of State, have their Tables spread with a large eight cornered Carpet
of Cloth-of-Gold, or embroidered Satin, with rich Fringe: The Dishes wherein
the Meat is brought to the Table are of massy Gold, as also their
Drinking-Cups, which hold about a Pint and a half. But Schach Abbas had all his
served up in Glass for a distinction from others. They deliver with every Cup a
great wooden Spoon or Ladle with a long Handle, which they use more to drink
out of, than to eat withal, neither do they make use of any other Spoons but
what are made after that manner, and of sweet smelling Wood, which having been
once used, are never brought to the Table again. They never use Forks or
Knives, but the Steward (who performs the Office of a Carver) cuts the Meat
with a great square Golden Slice, which he always carries in his Hand. How
their Meat is served up.
In the setting the Meat on the Table, the Servants bring not the Dishes
together, but standing in a row from the Kitchen, they hand them from one to
another to the Table. They commonly have but one Mess, for they set all their
Dishes at once upon the Table. Each Person also receives Wine from a Waiter, in
order according to his Quality, out of a golden Tumbler. Every one is permitted
to rise from Table without showing Reverence to any, and if their Occasions
chance to call them out of the Room, they go away without taking leave of any,
though the King himself be present. The Water with which they wash their Hands
is brought in gold en Basins. The King and other great Persons seldom drink any
Wine without Ice or Snow. The Ice which they use is made of the clearest Water
after this manner, viz. Not far from the City in a great Plain, a Bank is
raised or cast up, directly from East to West, which being about a hundred and
fifty Foot long, and very thick, is so high, that it shadows the Plain from the
Sunbeams when the Sun is at the height: At the end of this Bank are two Arms,
which extending from the South to the North, are full as high as the main Bank,
and about twenty four Foot long, and keep off the Morning and Evening Sun; so
that this Plain lies shaded all the day long: In this shady place is a Moat of
about twenty or thirty Foot deep, extending from the one Arm of the Bank to the
other: In the midst of Winter when it Freezes hardest, they Plough this Plain,
which lies open to the Northern Winds, full of small Furrows about three or
four Fingers deep, and so letting in the Water, overflow it, which in one Night
freezing to the bottom, is the next Morning before the rising of the Sun thrown
into the Moat, and Water poured upon it to make it condense the harder; and
this Practice they continue for a whole Month together, or longer, till the
Moat is filled to the top with Ice; then they cover it with Straw to prevent
the melting thereof by the heat of the Sun, and to keep it from Rain, In the
Summer this Ice being broken with Pick-axes, is carried through the City to be
sold on Horses or Mules, two or three pieces being a sufficient Burden. The
Ice being broken with a Hammer into greater or lesser pieces, is either put
into the Vessel with the Wine, or into the Cups when they drink. They also lay
pieces of Ice in their Dishes with Fruit and other Cates, which is very
pleasing to the Eye, especially if that which lies under the Ice appears
through it. The King's Dishes, Urns, and Drinking-Cups, which he uses at his
Table, are all of massy Gold. The Chans and other Nobles have their Pilao or
Rice, colored black and yellow, and made savory with Herbs, or else dulcifi'd
with Sugar, brought on their Tables also in Gold and Silver Dishes.

The Government of the peculiar Provinces.
How the Provinces are Governed.
ALl the Provinces in Persia which are remote from the King's Court, are
Governed by Chans, Sultans, Calenters, Darago's, Visiers, and Caucha's. The
King chooses the Chans (who are as much as Princes or Viceroys,) and makes them
Governors of what Provinces he pleases; but commonly he elects them who by
their valiant Exploits, Piety, or other noble Virtues, have gained the love of
their Country: wherefore many, in hopes to attain to that Honor, behave
themselves very valiantly in any Engagement, and desperately venture their
Lives for the Title of Chan. But the Children of those who are thus chosen,
Inherit not amongst the Persians; for though they are held in great Respect,
and enjoy their Father's Goods, yet they are not honored with his Title, nor
succeed him in his Office, except they are judged worthy thereof by their own
Merits. But Della Valle tells us, that the King gives the Dignity of Chan to
one of his Subjects, not only for his Life, but also permits his Children to
succeed him after his Death, and that there are Families found that have
enjoyed this Title above two hundred years.

As soon as the King has made any one a Chan, he immediately gives him Lands
and Men to support his Grandeur, which he enjoys as long as he lives; but if at
any time he chance to be suspected by the King, he is immediately turned out of
his Employment, and all his Goods seized.

Each Province has a Chan and a Calenter, who resides in the Metropolis
thereof. The Chan being the King's Viceroy, Executes the Law, does Justice to
all, and passes Sentence of Death on Criminals, without any special Order from
the Court.

The chiefest Chan is he who Governs Sciras, the Metropolis of the Province of
Persia, properly so called, who is able to bring an Army of thirty thousand Men
into the Field, the Country which he Commands being said to be bigger than
Portugal.

The Calenter is as a Collector or Treasurer of the Province, gathering all the
Revenues, and giving an Account thereof either to the King or Chans.

A Darugo or Darago, otherwise Hacom, is like a Governor or Mayor of a City,
every City having one.

A Caucha is as much as an under Sheriff.

The Equipage of Ambassadors.
The King usually sends the Chans and Sultans as Agents to foreign Princes, and
fits them out after this manner, viz. The King orders them to give great
Presents to those Princes unto whom they are sent, of which the one half is
given out of the King's Treasury, and the other part, as also all other
Necessaries, the Province which the Chan Governs is to provide, which often
causes great disturbance and confusion.

In some Provinces the Chans must maintain a certain number of Soldiers for the
King, which besides their own, must be ready for Service on all occasions; but
then the King receivs no Tribute from them.

The Chans make great Presents to the King.
The Chans commonly on New-years-day make great Presents to the King.

Some Provinces, especially where there are no Chans, but only Darago's, and
therefore no Soldiers kept, as in the Towns of Caswin, Ispahan, Cashan,
Theheran, Hamadan, Meschet, and Kirman, pay great Tributes to the King.

Della Valle affirms, that in Ispahan and several other eminent Cities, there
are no Chans, because they are Royal Cities, and the King many times keeps his
Court there.

On the Feast of Neuruz all annual Officers are chosen, especially the
Darago's, the chiefest whereof enter upon their Employments in great State,
with the sound of many Instruments.

How they reverence the Kings.
The King's Viceroys, whither Sultans or Chans, of what Degree soever, when
coming out of any remote Province to make their appearance before the King, or
when they take leave, or are to return to their own Countries, they kneel on
both Knees before the King, and kiss his Feet, and in testimony of Honor,
squeeze the same against their Foreheads, which they do three several times.
This Ceremony they perform diverse times as they walk about the King, which they
commonly do three times one after another, thereby to manifest, that those who
perform this Ceremony, make themselves Sureties against all Misfortunes
whatsoever that may befall the King.

It is also a Custom amongst them, to make a Circle with their Hands about the
Heads of those whom they would show Honor to, and wish that all future
Misfortunes, and such as have already happened unto them, may fall on themselves.
This Action is accounted by them a sign of a perfect and faithful Friendship.

Thus much of the modern State and manner of Government in Persia, now it will
be necessary to give you a short Account after what manner it was Governed in
former times.

THe King of Persia anciently styled himself The Great King, especially at that
time when they had conquered the Greeks. But Suidas tells us, that these
Monarchs were not satisfied with this Title, but assumed to themselves the
Title of The King of Kings, as appears by the Inscription on Cyrus's Tomb.

Their order of Succession.
The Sons of these Kings succeeded them, which was also observed amongst the
Parthians, when they had made themselves Masters of this Realm; and when the
Persians were afterward restored, they still maintained the same Custom. The
eldest Son, according to the Laws of Nature, Inherited before the younger, but
if he was born before his Father came to the Crown, then he that was first born
after his being King succeeded him in the Throne.

They never gave the Crown to a one-ey'd, squint-eyed, or deformed Person, as
appears by the squinting Son of Cahade or Robad, who notwithstanding he was a
valiant Man, yet for the Blemish in his Sight was disinherited. But when the
Persian Monarchy began to decay, this Custom was laid aside, and the Crown
became elective; but the Nobility, who had Voices therein, still reserved it
for those who were of Royal Extract.

Natural Sons succeeded not their Fathers in the Throne, so long as there
remained any that were legitimate; yet notwithstanding the illegitimate Darius
was chosen before Isogee, lawful Son to Artaxerxes.

When the King at any time went out of his Dominions, he was obliged to
nominate a Deputy to Govern during his absence.

Ceremonies at Installing the King.
The Kings were by the Priests of their Country with great Ceremony Inaugurated
after this manner, viz. They were led into a Temple of a warlike Goddess, where
they pulled off their Clothes, and put on those which Cyrus used to wear when
he was but a private Person; which done they are a few Figs, chewed a little
Turpentine, and drank a draught of sower Milk.

They incircled the Heads of these new Kings with a Crown or Mitre, and a
Cydaris, which was made of Purple, and tied with a blue Ribbon mixed with white.

King Sapor instead of a Crown wore a Cap made like a Rams Head, beset with
Precious Stones. They also wore a Tiara or Turbant, like those which the
Magistrates of the several Provinces wore, but with this distinction, that
those of the Kings stood upright, and the other bended behind.

The Honor of putting the Crown on the Kings Head belonged to a peculiar Person
called Surene, who was the second Nobleman in the Kingdom.

The Habit or Robes of the King.
The Kings of Persia also wore a long Vest, hanging below their Ancles, which
was embroidered with several Representations of Birds, Beasts, and the like,
and beset with Gold and Precious Jems. They likewise wore a Coat with Sleeves,
called Candis, differing from those of the other Persians, both in color
(being Purple) and value: moreover, the Subjects durst not approach any Man
without hiding their Hands in their Sleeves, but the Kings held them out. The
Kings Habit, as Xenophon says, was also half purple and half white, which none
else might wear. They likewise wore long Hair, Pendants, a Girdle, and long
Stockings like the other Persians.

They were honored like Gods, for those that approached them, bowed not only
their Heads and Bodies, but fell flat on their Faces, with their Hands upon
their Backs; in which posture they lay as long as they supposed him to be in
sight; which was also performed by Strangers, who were not permitted to see the
King, unless they promised to worship him after the Persian manner, for
otherwise they were forced to let him know their Business by Proxy, or else in
Writing; which when he perused, he returned his Answer without being seen.

Those that Saluted the King, wished him Everlasting Life and perpetual
Government; but he seldom appeared to his People, who were not permitted to set
a Foot into the Royal Palace without his Majesty's leave; but his Noblemen
waited without at the Door to receive his Commands. His Throne was of massy
Gold, which none durst touch; and if at any time the King went abroad, they
strewn the Streets and Ways which he was to pass with Flowers; and every where
burnt Perfumes. They likewise kept the Kings Birthday every year with making
of Offerings, and other great testimonies of joy, and whence died, the whole
Kingdom Mourned for five days together; during which time all Courts of
Judicature were shut up.

Their C^urts very un^^^tai^, but magnificent.
These great Princes had no settled place of Residence, but spent the Winter in
Babylon, the Lent at Susa, and the Summer at Ecbataue; besides which they had
several other Royal Palaces, as at Pasargades and Persepolis; but when the
Parthians were Masters of Persia, Chusistan was the chief Seat of the Realm.
Their Royal Palaces were very stately and magnificent, having many great
Officers attendant, insomuch that Apuleius called them The Houses of Gold.

They would never eat of any other Bread but what was brought out of the
Province of Aeolia; Their Di^^.
and of all things the Kingdom afforded the First Fruits were sent to the King;
also their Salt Armoniack was brought to them out of Egypt. They drank of the
Wine Chaliboonien, brought from Assyria, and no other Water but what was taken
out of the Stream Choaspes, which glides by Susa.

The Inhabitants of those Places through which they traveled always
Entertained them at a Banquet, on which they spent above twenty or thirty
Talents. They generally Dined alone, but sometimes their Wives and Children
were permitted to sit with them at their Table, as also the Kings Mother and
Brothers. If the King invited any to eat with him, they sat with a Curtain
drawn between them in such a manner, that the King could see them and not be
seen again.

King Cyrus (as Xenophon observed) placed those in whom he reposed greatest
confidence, on his left, and others on his right side, because (they say) the
left side lies more open to those that design to do Mischief than the right.

But these Entertainments were without freedom, because the Guests were forced
to cat with bowing Heads, and cast-down Eyes.

The Kings never appeared on foot to the People, but always came out of the
Palaces either in a Coach, or else on Horseback.

Their care in visiting their Provinces.
They were wont to visit their several Provinces, or else to send faithful
Lieutenants to such Places where they could not go themselves, to give order to
all Husbandmen to let no Ground lie waste, that the Merchants should promote
their Traffic, and Handicraftsmen be diligent in following their Employments,
that so they might be the better able to pay them their Tribute.

They also kept several Noblemen called Megistanes, who always waited at their
Doors to receive their Commands, besides the Surene or Magistrate, who set the
Crown on the Kings Head, and several who constantly attended to receive
Ambassadors, or all such as had Business with the King, into whose Presence
they could not be permitted without them.

Great numbers of Eunuchs were also kept at the Kings Court, who attended on
the Queens and Concubines.

The Kings Secretaries.
The Kings likewise kept their Secretaries, who going into the Wars with them,
writ down all the Passages thereof, as also the Edicts or Letters Patents which
were given to the Governors, the beginning whereof were to this effect, The
King says thus. Moreover, when he writ to his Commanders, he wished them
Peace, as also they to him. His Letters were not only written in one Language,
but in the several Languages of those People whom they Governed.

There were also some, whose Office it was to tell the King the hour of the
day, and many other such like Officers, amongst whom were some called The Eyes
and Ears of the King.

Those Kings that lived lasciviously, endeavored to die without pain, by means
of a Poison which they kept only for themselves and their Mothers. This Poison
was made of the Dung of a small Indian Bird called Dicodre, a piece whereof
about the bigness of a Barley-corn being put into their Liquor, caused them to
die an easy, and also a sudden Death.

They had stately Tombs at Persepolis, Their Tombs
Pasargades, and Ecbatane, on all which were Motto's and Inscriptions Engraven.

Education of their Sons.
The Kings Sons were highly reverenced, and taught in the seventh year of their
Age to Hunt and Ride the great Horse: The eldest, who was to succeed in the
Throne, was in his fourteenth year committed to the Charge of four Tutors, who
amongst the Persians were accounted the most wise, just, sober, and valiant Men
in their Dominions; the first taught him Wisdom, and the Rules of Government;
the second admonished him to affect Truth; the third, to curb the Desires of
the Flesh; and the fourth, to fear nothing.

The Reward of approved Counsel.
If it happened that any Man undertook to give the King Advice or Counsel in
Business of great consequence, he was placed on a square Cushion of Gold, which
he was permitted to carry away with him if his Advice was approved of, but if
not, he was whipped about the Court.

One of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber waked the King every Morning, and
desired him to rise and mind the Concerns of the Kingdom, which the God
Merosomasdes had given to him.

They themselves judged and determined Causes, passed the Sentence of Death on
Criminals, whom they kept some time in Prison before they were Executed. They
never condemned any Man for one single Crime, but inquired what the general
course of his Life had been, and if they found that he had done more good than
bad Deeds, they released him, but if otherwise, he was punished.

They also chose their Judges out of the most experienced Men in the Persian
Law, who enjoyed their Places during their Lives.

What their Law prohibited.
Their Laws forbad Stealing, Burglary, to use violence to any, and to rebel
against their Princes.

Malefactors were committed to Prison with silver Shackles, and golden
Handbolts. In the lat^er time of the Persian Monarchy they had a Prison called
Lethe, into which were only put Criminals that were condemned to die.

The Punishment of Nobles.
If any of their Nobility had committed a a Crime, they de-oculated them, but
others were punished after another manner. They cut not their Heads off with an
Ax, but a Rasor. Sometimes they cut off the Head and right Hand of a
Malefactor, and nailed them on a Cross; others they burnt, flayed alive, or
stoned to death.

Such as have many Children highly rewarded.
The King gave Gifts to all those that increased their Families by many
Children, and Registered the Names of those that at any time had done them good
Service, that when time and opportunity served they might be requited; nay,
they permitted them to sit by them, kissed them, and gave them a Silk Coat,
made after the fashion of the Medes, and gave them leave to wear a Chain of
Gold about their Necks, and golden Armlets; also a golden Simiter, which is the
greatest Mark of Honor amongst the Persians, and as highly reverenced as the
Star and Garter by us; besides golden Reyns for their Horses: They also gave
them the Revenue of some Towns, and the Command of an Army; but the greatest of
all his Royal Gifts, was a golden Slipper.

The Division of the Country.
The whole Kingdom was divided into Satrapia's, Counties or Lordships, though
Writers differ in the number of them: for (as some affirm) Darius divided the
same first into 360 Lordships, over which three more principal Satrapae were
placed. Others write, that Darius had only a hundred and twelve Satrapia's or
Lordships, whose Governors were forced to give an Account of their Government
to the first three. Some also make more, and others less. But after the
Parthians had made themselves Masters of Persia, they divided the whole Realm
into twenty Satrapia's, several of them being Governed by one Person.

These Lordships were given to the Kings Sons, and the King often in his Will
gave all the Cities thereof to his youngest Son.

The Office of these Governors was to Command the Inhabitants, protect their
Goods, gather in the Revenues, and advise the King of all Transactions.

Besides these Governors of Countries there were others, who ordered
Husbandmen, Tradesmen, and other People, to be diligent in their Employments,
and not be idle; and others were Commanded to prevent the Soldiers, or any
Enemy from oppressing the Inhabitants.

In this place it will not be amiss to subjoin the several Dynasties of the
Kings of Persia, that have had the Government of this renowned Empire, wherein
by way of Entrance we will note, That when this Country was first peopled, the
several Tribes were under the Command of their own Princes, among which was
Chedorlaomer, who was overthrown by Abraham, as holy Writ mentions: By this
means their Princes were scarce known till the time of Perses, who wrested the
same from Sardanapalus, the Assyrian Monarch, and first laid the Foundation of
this great Empire, in whose Race it continued six Descents in this Order:

The first Dynastie.
Anno Mundi 3590
1. PEerses, the Conqueror of Sardanapalus, who Reigned Anno Mundi 3059.
succeeded by his Son.

2. Achaemenes, from whom his Successors were termed Achaemenides, and his
Subjects Achaemenii, as Propertius witnesses, where he writes, Non tot
Achaemeniis armantur Susa sagittis where by Achaemeniae sagittae he means
Persian Arrow; he left the Royal Seat to

3. Cambyses, by Herodotus sometimes called Darius.

4. Cyrus, the Ancestor of Darius Histaspis, as we will show anon.

5. Cambyses the Second, the Son of Cyrus.

6. Cyrus surnamed the Great, Cambyses and Mandane, the Daughter of Astyages
King of Media, who overthrew the Babylonian Monarchy, and translated it to the
Medes and Persians. Of his strange preservation from his Grandfathers cruelty.
Education amongst Rusticks, acting the King among his Playfellows, with several
other remarks, we have at large in Herodotus and Justine. His first Expedition
was against his Grandfather Astyages, whom having vanquished, he marched
against rich Craesus of Lydia, whom he overthrew, took, and made one of his
Council; then fell upon the Greeks of Ionia; afterward set upon Babylon, as we
said before; and lastly going against the S^ythians, was by Tomyris slain, as
most Histories agree; Institut. Cyr. lib. 8.
yet Xenophon gives him a peaceable departure in his Bed, with an excellent
Farewell to those about him. His Successor was his Son

7. Cambyses the Third, 3423 Herodot. lib. 3.
who overthrew the Egyptians, with their King Psamniticus, the Son of Amasis.
His deriding and wounding Apis their God, This was he that overturned the whole
Learning and Religion of the Egyptians, and opened the unviolated
Conservatories of their long preserved Princes, then becoming Mummies.
worshipped in the likeness of a Calf, and the flaying of Sisamnis, an unjust
Judge, and hanging his Skin over the Tribunal, to be a warning to his Son
Othanes (whom he put in his Place) to do better, are Passages worth the taking
notice of. His Death came by a wound in the Thigh from his own Sword falling
out of the Scabbard as he was taking Horse to go against the Magi, who had
rebelled against him. He dying without issue, the seven Counselors of State or
Magi, resolved to choose one from amongst themselves, and by that consent, and
the timely neighing of his Horse at Sunrising, the Scepter was obtained by

8. Darius Histaspis, Cyrus the fourth King of Persia. He Married Atossa,
Cyrus's Daughter, for the strengthening of his Title, recovered Babylon by the
Stratagem of Zopyrus, overran a great part of Asia, and assailed the Greeks,
who by their General Miltiades, totally routed him at the Battle of Marathon,
Herod. lib. 6. Justin. lib. 2.
registered (as Plutarch says) by almost three hundred Historians; which Loss
while he studied to repair, the Quarrel of his Sons about the Succession broke
his Heart, and the youngest Son carried it, viz.

9. Xerxes, Cyrus by his Daughter Atossa. This was that Emperor, whose Queen
was Vasthi, who made that great Feast mentioned in the Book of Hester. He went
to revenge his Fathers Quarrel upon Greece with an Army of seventeen hundred
thousand Men, Sir Wa^^er Rawlegh.
but was so terrified by several Defeats, that he returned toward his Country
over Hellespont in a Cock-Boat, This was he that pretended to put a Bridle upon
the Sea.
and at last was slain in his Bed by Artabanus his Uncle, leaving to succeed
him the Son he had by Queen Hester, named

10. Artaxerxes, surnamed Longimanus. Themistocles, who was forced by his
ungrateful Citizens, to cast himself upon such an Enemy. Though he was more
favorable to the Jews in regard of his Mother, yet such strong opposition was
made by the Faction against them, that the building of the Temple was by his
Decree prohibited. After him followed

11 Darius Nothus, Son-in-law to Longimanus, Parysitades. In his time Amyrteus
the Egyptian rebelled, and delivered his Contrymen from the Persian
Servitude. He is noted in Scripture for setting forward the building of the
Temple, Ezra 6.
which by his Father had been interrupted. By his Wife Parysitades he had two
Sons, of which the elder

12 Artaxerxes Mnemon (so called for his great Memory) succeeded. Cyrus,
surnamed the Younger, who affecting the Empire, had made War upon him, and
called in the Greeks to his aid, whose memorable Retreat back to their own
Country is described by Xenophon, a principal Commander in this Expedition.
Lib. 7. de expedit. Cyr. Justin. lib. 10.
This Mnemon is said by Plutarch to have had a hundred and sixty Sons by
Concubines; only three in Matrimony, of which Darius was Executed for
Rebellion, with fifty more of his Brethren, whom he had drawn into the
Conspiracy: This breaks the Father's Heart; his youngest Son

13. Ochus takes Place. Egypt by his Generals Mentor and Bagoas, and subdued
Assyria, Cyprus, and some part of India: But his Tyranny growing intolerable,
he was slain by Bagoas, who set up in his Throne

14. Arses, one of his Sons, otherwise Arsames,

15. Darius the Third, surnamed Codomannus, Arses, who being set upon by
Alexander the Great, and vanquished in three pitched Battles, viz. at Granwick,
Issus, and Arbela, was the last of this Race of Persian Kings.

After this the Name of the Persians was almost forgotten; how it was revived
you may read in Herodian in these words: After Darius had lost his Kingdom to
Alexander, and the Victor himself was dead also, the more potent Captains
shared Asia amongst them, till at length Arsaces, of the Parthian Nobility,
persuaded the People of the East, and amongst them the Persians, to cast off
the Grecian Yoke: To which purpose he took upon him the Title of King, and
became the Head of the Arsacidan Family of Parthia, who successively held the
Crown in this following Order.

The second Dynastie.
Anno Mundi 3718 3741
1. ARsaces, the first Parthian King of Persia.

2. Mithridates, or Arsaces the Second, invaded by Antiochus the Great, but
with little effect.

3. Pampatius.

4. Phraartes, Son of Pampatius.

5. Mithridates the Second, Brother of Phraartes. He conquered the Medes, and
very much enlarged his Dominion.

6. Phraartes the Second.

7. Artabanus, Uncle to Phraartes the Second.

8. Pacorus, Son of Artabanus.

9. Mithridates the Third, the Brother of Pacorus.

10. Horodes, Brother of Mithridates, whom he killed, and took the Crown. This
was he that fought with, and vanquished M. Crassus, the great Roman Consul, but
brought under by Ventidius, one of the Lieutenants of Mark Anthony, and at last
slain by his Son

11. Phraartes the Third, who after a long War submitted himself and Kingdom to
Augustus Caesar, restoring the Ensigns, and freeing the Captives taken at the
Defeat of Crassus. He was killed by his Son

12. Phraartes the Fourth, who succeeded him.

13. Horodes the Second, Son of Phraartes the Fourth, slain in a Tumult.

14. Vonon took his Place, but was deposed by

15. Tiridates, with whom the People being displeased for his submission to the
Roman Power, one Artabanus, a Stranger to the Blood of the Arsacidae, taking
advantage thereof, killed Tiridates, seized the Kingdom, and became the Head of
another Parthian Family, of which we find upon Record the Names of twelve Kings
as follows.

The third Dynastie.
1. ARtabanus.

2. Bardanes.

3. Goteres.

4. Vonones.

5. Vologeses.

6. Artabanus the Second.

7. Pacorus.

8. Chosroes, who lost Armenia and Mesopotamia, to the Emperor Trajan.

9. Parmaspates.

10. Vologeses the Second.

11. Vologeses the Third.

12. Artabanus the Third. This was the last King of this new Parthian Race,
from whom the Diadem was once more translated to the natural Persians by
Artaxerxes, a Nobleman, who became the Head of the next Race.

The fourth Dynastie of natural Persian Kings.
Anno Christi 228
1. ARtaxerxes, the first Raiser of the Family.

2. Sapores, who took Prisoner the Emperor Valerianus.

3. Ormisdates.

4. Vararanes the First.

5. Vararanes the Second.

6. Vararanes the Third.

7. Narses. He discomfited Galerius, and ruined his Army, but was afterward
defeated by him.

8. Misdates.

9. Sapor the Second, a great and puissant Prince, but a Persecuter, of the
Christians.

10. Artaxerxes the Second.

11. Sapor the Third.

12. Vararanes the Fourth.

13. Isdigertes, a great Favorite of the Emperor Arcadius.

14. Vararanes the Fifth.

15. Vararanes the Sixth.

16. Peroses.

17. Valens.

18. Cabades, deposed, a Friend to the Christians.

19. Lambases.

20. Cabades restored.

21. Chosroes the Great, a constant Enemy of the Romans.

22. Hormisda.

23. Chosroes the Second, a great Enemy to the Emperor Heraclius, from whom he
took Mesopotamia, Assyria, and the Holy Land, which when the Emperor recovered,
in despite he caused all the Christians to turn Nestorians.

24. Siroes the First

25. Adhesir.

26. Sarbatus.

27. Barnarius.

28. Hormisda the Second, Haumar, a Saracen Calif, who held it for a while;
These Arabians or Saracens carried it so absolutely, that the Persians were
forced to deny their Names.
but their Deputies quarrelling amongst themselves, one Tangrolipix of the
Turkish Race Founded a new Dynastie.

The fifth Dynastie, being of the Turkish Line.
Anno Ghristi 1030
1. TAngrolipix, the first Raiser of this House.

2. Axan, the Son of Tangrolipix. He dispossessed the Christians of a great
part of Asia Minor.

3. Balak, Sultan of Persia, in the beginning of the Wars in the Holy Land.

4. Cassanes, the last of this Race, being absolutely conquered by the Cham of
Tartary, An. 1202.

The sixth Dynastie, being Tartarian Kings of Persia.
Anno Christi 1260
1. THe Cham of Tartary having utterly extinguished the whole Family of the
Galif of Bagdet, in the Year 1260 made Haalon, or Vlah Kukkan, King of Persia,
and the first of that Line, and was succeeded by his Son

2. Habkakaihon, the Son of Haalon.

3. Nikador-Oglan, the Brother of Habkakaihon, a Mahumetan.

4. Argon Khon, the eldest Son of Habkakaihon.

5. Gemotakhon, Brother of Argon.

6. Badukhon, Uncle to the last.

7. Gazun, the Son of Argon Khon, Casbin his Imperial Seat.

8. Aliapta, who removed the Court to Tauris, Sultania, a City of Media.

9. Abusaid, the Son of Aliapta, Armenians got the Diadem, and began the
seventh Dynastie.

The seventh Dynastie.
Anno Christi 1472
1. Ussan Cassanes, Son of Tracheton, a poor Armenian Prince, began this
Dynastie by a Victory obtained against Zeuzes, one of the most powerful Rulers
of Persia, and having held the Crown some years, left it to his second Son

2. Jacub, who beat the Mamaluckes out of Mesopotamia and Assyria; but was at
last poisoned by his Wife.

3. Julaver, a Kinsman of Jacubs, killed by

4. Baisinger, a Prince of the Blood, that lived in Adultery with Jacub's Wife.

5. Rustan, set upon by Aider, or Schach Aider, Sophian Race, which now began
to appear in great Eminence and Power.

6. Alamat, the last King of this House, Aider, and slew him; but his Son
Ismael Sofi taking up the Quarrel, and having overcome and slain Alamat and his
Son Elwan, he was Crowned King or Shaugh of Persia, and became Head of the
present Royal Family in that Dominion.

The eighth Dynastie, being of the Sophian Race.
Anno Christi 1505
1. Ismael Sofi, the Founder of this Family, had great Wars with the Turks,
especially with Selimus the First.

2. Tamas, the Son of Ismael, overcome in some Fields by Solomon the
Magnificent, who tore from him diverse great Countries, having been part of his
Dominions.

3. Aider, the second Son of Tamas, by the Imprisonment of his Brother seized
the Kingdom, but was quickly deprived of it, and made away by his own Sister
Periancona.

4. Ismael the Second, eldest Son of Tamas, Reigned two years, at the end of
which he was murdered by the same Periancona his Sister.

5. Mahomet Chodabend being advanced to the Throne, immediately caused her to
be Beheaded. Before he was well settled, Amurath the Third took from him a great
part of Armenia, Media, and Georgia.

6. Abas, commonly called Schach Abbas, Chodabende, having murdered his elder
Brother, stepped into the Throne; and undertaking with great resolution the War
against the Turks, regained the greatest part of what his Predecessor had lost,
and withal, made a large addition of the Kingdoms of Ormus, Heri, Candahor, and
Hircania.

7. Soffye, the Nephew of Abas, by his Son Myrza., succeeded his Uncle at the
age of fifteen years; but after his coming to age, very fortunately maintained
the War against the Turks.

The Country of Georgia.
Extent of Georgia.
THis Country comprehends all that Land which the Ancients named Colchos, and
Iberia, as also a part of Armenia, and some of Albania; within whose Limits (as
Strabo tells us) is enclosed the Country inhabited by the Moschi: for Georgia
extends in length from the Eastern Shore of the Black Sea, almost to the
Caspian. Others make Georgia comprise the ancient Iberia, and the Country of
Georgia mentioned by Pliny and Mela. It has for Neighbor on the East, the
Country of Albania, now under the Jurisdiction of the Persians, and wherein
the Towns of Bacu, and Demircapi or Derbend lie; and bending from thence a
little Southerly, it touches upon the Province of Scirvan; in the West it
verges with the Black Sea; Its Bounds.
in the North, fronts the Caspian Mountains, which are Branches of Mount
Caucasus, and extend along from the Black to the Caspian Sea, and defend
Georgia from the Northern Blasts, as also from the Invasion of the Salvages; on
the South it conterminates with that part of Armenia which borders upon Media,
and somewhat lower Westerly toward Trebizonde, with a part of Cappadocia, and
is by the Circassian and Caspian Mountains divided from Muscovy.

Its several Denominations.
The right Name of this Country (according to Texeira) is Gurgistan, that is,
The Country of the Gurgians. It is also called Garia and Chartuelaba, as a
Georgian in the Country Language, Chartueli or Kartueli; which word Della
Valle affirms to signify a Christian. The Turks name them Kurchin or Gurgin or
Jurian, to which must be added the Turkish word Lar, a sign of the plural
Number, and is pronounced Jurianu-Lar. The Name of Georgia or Georgians, some
suppose they have received from St. George, whom they highly reverence, and
carry his Picture in their Standards; though Postellus affirms, from the
information of the Georgians in Constantinople, that the Name of St. George is
altogether unknown to them.

Division of the Country.
Georgia is by some divided into several Provinces, the chiefest whereof are
Imereti or Busciaciuk, Cacheti, Cardel or Carduel, Curiel, and Mengrelia.

This Country of Georgia is very fertile, Its Fertility.
and in many places produces plenty of Corn, Wine, and other Fruits. Most of
the Vines grow up by the Trees. There are likewise many Woods and Mountains,
and abundance of Mulberry-ttees for the feeding of Silkworms, which furnish
Persia with great quantities of Silk.

Wild Beasts are also here in great numbers, Wild Beasts.
and likewise Faulcons and Eagles, which they call Avigi.

Rivers and Lakes.
It is watered by the Rivers Araxes, now called Aras; Cyrus, now Cur, and the
Canak.

The Cyrus or Cur, which the Natives of the Country call Ser, the Turks Chur,
and others Elkar, takes its original with the Araxes out of Mount Taurus in
Armenia, from whence it glides down to the Plains of Georgia, where augmented
with the Waters of many Rivers, and at last united with the Araxes, disembogues
into the Caspian Sea.

There are also two very eminent Lakes; the one called Geluchalatdu, in the
North, is four days Journey in circumference, and has on its Banks the Castle
of St. Leonard; the other named Esechie, is taken for the ancient Lake
Licinitis.

The People very courteous.
The Georgians are very civil and courteous after their manner. The Nobles are
called Asnaure, which going continually Armed, always maintain War against the
Unbelievers or Mahumetans: But they are not so much inclined to Learning, as
the Greeks; neither are they so ambitious, proud, and subtle, but very meek and
honest, of an affable nature, and so easy of belief, that their greatest
misfortunes have fallen upon them from the Mahumetans through their too much
credulity.

Cootwick tells us, that the Georgians are much inclined to Drinking, and that
they will not Engage with an Enemy before they have drank their Fill. The Women
are very courteous, civil, modest, and the best featured in all Asia; both Men
and Women are tall and slender, having generally brown Hair, black full Eyes,
white and ruddy Complexions, occasioned perhaps by the abundance of Wine which
they drink.

The Language one through the whole Country.
Through the whole Country is but one sort of Language spoken, which being
peculiar and common to these People, is by them called Cardueli; it is written
with two distinct Characters or Letters, the one called Cudsuri, which is used
only in godly Books, and in their Churches; and the other Chedroli, is used in
all other Affairs.

The Alphabet of the vulgar Georgians has thirty six Letters, shaped like
those represented in the Sculp.

Figueroa tells us, that the Georgian Characters differ from the Caldean,
Hebrew, and Armenian, and that they write like the Europeans, from the left
hand to the right.

They are of the Greek Church.
The Georgians received the Christian Religion in the time of the Emperor
Constantine (who kept his Court at Constantinople,) from the Greeks, by means
of a strange Slavess, of whom they relate many great Wonders, but to this day
none of them know her Name; yet the Roman Catholics, in their Book of Martyrs,
call her Ancella. And as they received the Christian Religion from the Greeks,
so they likewise observe their Church Ceremonies and Liturgies. They perform
Divine Service in their own Language, and not in the Greek, as Minadoi and
others affirm; nor do they boast the antiquity of their Church, as the Greeks
do; and though they acknowledge the Patriarch of Constantinople, yet
nevertheless they are not subject to him, for they choose their own
Church-Rulers. They bear great reverence to Rome, St. Peter, St. Paul, and the
Pope, to whom (contrary to the Greeks) they attribute the antiquity of their
Church. They shun the company of the Armenians, and abhor their Superstition,
but affect, the Latins and Roman Catholics; and what Conquests soever the
Turks and other People have gained over them, yet they have always remained
firm in the Christian Faith; and though their Princes have very often
apostatized, and forced many after several ways to change their Opinions, yet
nevertheless the Christian Religion has gotten the upper hand, and the
Christians have regained the Dominions which they had lost, or forced their
Princes again to embrace Christianity, which they had forsaken.

Many Ways lead into Georgia, especially three, the first and shortest whereof
is through Constantinople, from whence they travel thither by Land, viz.
through Scutarie in Asia with the Caravans, who go along the Way of Trabizonde,
and finish their Journey in a Month; though it is much shorter over the Black
Sea, viz. in five or six days, more or less, according to the Season. The
second Way is through Persia, from whence they go easily with the Caravans into
the Prince Luarsab's Country. The third and last Way is through Poland cross
the Black Sea, from whence in a few days you arrive in Georgia, as we said
before.

This Country was formerly Governed by a King, Government.
whom the Persians (as Texeira affirms) called Schach of Gurgistan: for Anno
1430. Cara-Issuf falling into Gurgistan, slew Constantine in Battle, who then
was King of the Country. An. 1507. it was Governed by a King called Pancrace;
after which the King dividing his Kingdom into four parts, gave the same to his
four Sons, giving them equal Power, leaving only the Superiority to the
eldest, to whom he had given the best and biggest part; wherefore this Prince
is respected by all the other, and being of greater eminency, is honored with
the Title of Mepet-Mepe, which in the Country Language signifies The King of
Kings, the rest being contented to be called Princes of Georgia, which at this
day are six in number: for besides the four before mentioned, Extracted from
Royal Blood, there are two others, who at first were Deputies to Mepet-Mepe,
being Governors of two great parts of h^s Dominions beyond the Black Sea; but
at last rebelling against him, made themselves Masters thereof, as we shall
hereafter relate more at large.

The Province of Imereti or Basciaciuk,
THe Province of Imereti or being the Center and strongest part of the
Country, was without doubt the ancient Iberia. It is fortified with several
Mountains, especially toward the South side of Persia, wherefore the Persians
never make any Inroad that way. It borders on the West at Dadian or Mengrelia,
and at Gunel.

This Country has a City of the same Denomination, besides many other
inferior Towns.

The King's Title.
The King or Prince or King that Governs this Country, is called Ghiorghi, that
is, Georgian, and with a shorter Title of Mepet-Mepe, which they use only in
writing, but speaking they generally call him Giorghi Mepe, that is, The
Georgian King; but the Turks call the Princes as well as the Country People
thereof, Basciascive or Basciaciuk, that is, Bare, or Uncovered Head.

Formerly the Princes of Dadian and Guriel were subject to the Prince of
Basciaciuk or Imereti, and served him as Gentlemen of the Horse, one holding
his Stirrup, and the other the Bridle, when he mounted on Horseback; but being
of late grown more powerful, they have not only freed themselves from his
Authority, but made themselves his Equals; nay, by their Warring against him,
are feared, not only by him, but by other neighboring Princes.

Anno 1622. when the Prince of Dadian had obtained a Victory against the Prince
of Imereti, and done him much hurt, he forced him to send Agents into Persia,
to request Aid there, with promise to become Tributary to the Sofi, if he would
send him the Soldiers which lay in Garrison in the Towns of Teflis and Gori,
under the Command of a Georgian Nobleman called Battoni Mehrab; but Schach
Abbas received the Message with much displeasure, refusing their Presents and
Request, saying that they did it out of a private Design and treacherous
Intention; yet proffered him some Persian Soldiers; but the King disliking to
admit Strangers into his Country, refused that Offer, and Espoused one of the
Prince of Dadian's Sisters, so closing the Breach that had been made upon him.

The Province of Cacheti.
Situation of this Province
EAstward from the Province of Imereti lies Cacheti, which being a part of
Iberia, and perhaps also of Albania, was the Dominion of the youngest Brother
of the four beforementioned, called Teimuraz, who kept his Court in a City
named Zagain or Zagam, which is one of the chiefest in this Country, and next
to that, Grim or Grien.

The King and Nobles, whom they call Asnauri, take more pleasure in living in
Huts in the Country than in the City, which they account a fit place for
Handicrafts, Mechanics, and the vulgar sort of People to dwell in. All the
Georgians are wedded to this Opinion, that all those who are not Asnauries or
Noblemen, will not debase themselves to live in the City, or drive any manner
of Trade, but leave it to be performed by Strangers, as Armenians, Jews, and
many other the like People, themselves spending their time either in the Wars,
or in Tilling of their own Lands; for which reason they were by the ancient
Greeks justly called Georgi, that is, Agricultors or Husbandmen. The reason of
the Name Georgian.
For this reason also there are but few Cities in this Country, and those but
of small consequence; yet is it every where well inhabited, and full of large
Timber Houses, after the fashion of the Country, and likewise many handsome and
well built Churches.

This Country was formerly Governed by peculiar Princes, the last whereof was
called Teimuraz.

The Province of Cardel or Carduel.
The Bounds of this Province.
THe Province of Cardel or Carduel, lying Southward from Cacheti or Imereti,
borders with its South side upon Persia, a extends Westward to that of
Teimuraz, and lies near Great Armenia, of which perhaps it is a part. The
chiefest City called Teflis, lies in a very secure place, which being watered
by a small River named The Chiur, gliding from an adjacent Mountain, and
falling into the Araxes, is accounted to be the Zogocara of Ptolomy, a City of
Great Armenia; and (as Joseph Barbosa affirms) there are yet to be seen the
Tombs of the Kings who Ruled this part of Georgia, which in the beginning of
this Age had a Prince called Simon, who afterward died in Prison at
Constantinople; and afterward another named Luarzab, Heir and Nephew of Simon,
who with Teimuraz, Prince of Cacheti, was by the Persians driven out of his
Country, and carried alone to Persia, where he died without Issue. After him,
about the Year 1622. the King of Persia placed a Mahumetan, Son to a deceased
Bagred Myrza, and Nephew to the Prince of Luarzab, in this Dominion, not to
possess it as supreme Governor, but as a Deputy or Chan, as all other Chans of
Persia; the occasion whereof happened thus: How the Kings of it came to be
dispossessed.
In the War between the Turks and Persians whilst they Treated about a Peace,
and the Armies of both Parties stood each on their Defense, and disputed the
Business of the two aforesaid Georgian Princes, under whose Subjection they
were to stand (for the Turks would have them under their Jurisdiction,) the
King of Persia told the Turkish Agent, who Treated with him about Peace, That
Teimuraz and Luarzab were, and ever had been his Subjects, in testimony of
which he could command them into his Army when he pleased: Whereupon the Agent
replied. That they should be his if he could make them come: Upon which the
King sending for them, they in obedience to his Command were coming, but seeing
the Turkish Army so near, durst not declare themselves for the Persians, but
flattered the one as well as the other, excusing themselves to the Persians,
but came not into his Army, which highly incensed the King against them, and as
soon as a Peace was concluded, and the Turkish Army gone out of his Dominions,
the King of Persia growing subtly malicious, and plotting Revenge, sowed the
Seeds of Contention between Luarzab and Teimuraz, and at last wrought it to
that height, that they fell to open War one with another, notwithstanding they
were nearly related (for Teimuraz his second Wife was Sister to Luarzab) and
had undoubtedly given Battle to one another, their Armies being already drawn
into the Field, if they had not been prevented by means of some faithful
Counselors, who offering themselves to be Mediators between them in order to a
Reconciliation, discovered to them, that their Difference was occasioned by the
King of Persia, who sought nothing but their utter ruin.

Moreover, the King of Persia bred also Discontent and Difference between
Teimuraz and his Mother Ketevan Dedupali, or Queen Ketevan, who then was a
Widow: for he persuaded Teimuraz into a belief, that she was resolved to Marry
with an eminent Commander, in whom for his valor and grand policy in State
Affairs she reposed great confidence; and that she endeavored first to destroy
him, that so she might bestow the Realm on another Son, which she might have by
her second Husband; all which so incensed the innocent Teimuraz, that he caused
the forementioned Commander, who was the prime Man of the Country, to be put
to death, and took the Government from his Mother; but being young,
unexperienced and little regarded by his Nobility, he found himself involved in
great troubles: for the King of Persia still prosecuted his Design, making him
to be despised, and esteemed but a Child amongst the Nobles, who whensoe're
they came into Persia, were courteously received by the King, who also gave
them great Presents, and permitted them to use their own Religion, which highly
satisfied and pleased them; and by this means they grew Strangers to their
natural Prince. After the King had for a considerable time thus acted his part,
he marched with a great Army into Georgia and conquered the same Anno 1613. The
Persian Invades Georgia.
under pretense that Teimuraz had Married the Princess of Chaurascian, Sister
to Luarzab (who had first been promised to him) against his Consent: Wherefore
coming upon their Borders, he commanded both Teimuraz and Luarzab, to come into
his Army, to give an account of their Transactions, and bring the Bride with
them, whom he himself had so long desired, and that he might break off the
Match with Teimuraz, which had been so long before celebrated, as if that which
the Mahumetans make a common practice, were also allowed amongst the
Christians. The Georgian Princes (being betrayed by their Nobles, who freely
showed the King the Way into this Country) were exceedingly amazed, not
knowing what they should do; but Luarzab being the weakest, surrendered himself
to his Majesty, who sent him to the Province of Esterebad near the Caspian Sea,
very remote from Georgia, where the Chan of that Country kept him a long time,
though with all civility imaginable, giving him liberty to go wheresoever he
pleased, whilst the King without any opposition, or going thither himself,
sent one Rairei or Bagred Myrza to Govern his Country: And though this Bagred
Myrza was of the same Family, and Grandson to Luarzab, yet he had long before
denied the Christian Faith, and turned Mahumetan. Luarzab imprisoned and
murdered.
About the Year 1621. there Reigned one of the said Rairei's Sons, not as
absolute Prince, but Tributary to the Persian. After Luarzab had spent some
years in Esterabad, the King, that he might the better be assured of his
Person, commanded him to be sent to the Province of Fars or Persia, where he
was kept in a strong Prison not far from the City Schiras: and lastly. Anno
1621. when those of his Party had greatest hopes of his Enlargement, and the
King on a certain day had appointed to see him, it fell out contrary to all
their expectations: for the King being informed by an eminent and powerful
Georgian, a Mahumetan, and an Enemy to Luarzab (who had formerly promised to
take one of his Sisters to Wife, which he afterward refused and despised) that
he would never possess Luarzab's Country in quiet so long as he lived, because
his Subjects had a natural affection for him, and had still hopes, during his
Life, at one time or other to have him again: Whereupon the jealous Persian
pretending that he had discovered a Plot of some Georgians against his Person,
wherein Luarzab was concerned, commanded that he should be strangled with a
Bowe-string in the Castle where he was kept Prisoner. But Teimuraz being more
subtle, would no ways venture to come to the King, though commanded, but
excused himself, alleging, that he durst not come, for fear of his Majesty's
exceeding displeasure, which he was informed of, neither was it possible for
him to send his Wife, it being contrary to the Custom of the Christians, nor
would his Honor give him leave to deliver his Wife; yet to show how willing he
was to obey him, he sent his own Mother and Sister, then a young Virgin, in his
stead, and also his two little Sons, Levan and Alexander, hoping thereby to
reconcile and pacify him, but all in vain: for he would by no means be
reconciled, unless he might enjoy the Princess Chuarascian, Teimuraz's Consort;
and though he knew that his Request was unreasonable, and that which Teimuraz
neither could nor would grant, he again commanded Teimuraz to come and
surrender himself; which he refusing, the King kept his Mother, never suffering
her to return, but sent her with her Grandchildren to Schiras, to be kept there
by Imaneuli, Chan of that Place, and Son to Allackverdi, Chan. And besides
this, the King marched with his Army into Georgia, that was under the
Jurisdiction of Teimuraz, to whom all the Nobles treacherously submitted.
Whereupon the Georgian Prince seeing his destruction so near at hand, and
having no Army ready, nor time to raise one, fled with his Wife and a great
number of Christians, into the strongest part of the Province of Imereti, where
he stayed a while with the Prince of that Country; and after that going
farther, tarried with the Prince of Odisci or Dadian, whilst many of the
Nobles, tempted with vain hopes, surrendered themselves freely to the King of
Persia, denied their Religion, and took up Arms against their own natural
Prince.

The Persian quits the Country.
By this means the Persians possessed Georgia; but weighing the difficulty and
charge of maintaining their new Conquest, they not only resolved not to keep
the Country, but judged it convenient to march thence with their Army the
nearest and safest way. But though they could not keep the Country, yet they
would not lose so great a Booty of so many brave People as they had taken, and
such as perhaps were worth more to them than the Country it self: for which
reason they forced them all, both Men and Women, as well Noble as Ignoble,
great and small, with what Movables they were able to carry, to forsake their
native Country, whilst the King's Army marching behind, drove them into
Persia, where afterward they were sent into several Provinces remote from
Georgia; and by this means the Provinces of Persia proper, Kirman or Garmania,
Mazanderan at the Caspian Sea, and many more, are at this day so full of
Georgian and Circassian Inhabitants; amongst whom the Vulgar who are the
greatest number, remain Christians, yet are but meanly instructed, by reason
their Pastors are both few and ignorant; but the Nobles, and most of the
Soldiers, as also many of the common People, stirred up partly by ambition, and
partly out of covetousness, hoping that by changing their Religion they might
obtain something from the King, who was always favorable to such Apostates, and
gave them Gifts continually, to draw them to his Opinion, and partly forced
thereto by necessity, are turned Mahumetans.

With these kind of People the King's Army was so much increased, that Anno
1622. he had above thirty thousand Georgians, besides a great number of
Circassians, and some strange Armenians, some of which bore the chief Command,
as well in the Army as Civil Government of the Country, and were raised to
many of the highest Dignities, as Sultans and Chans. But besides these, a great
number of them, not only of the Vulgar, but also of the Nobility, who
resisting the Persians at their coming into Georgia, were subdued, and by force
brought from thence, and made perpetual Slaves; the number whereof was formerly
so great, that there was scarce a House in all Persia which was not full of
them.

The Georgian Women much desired by the Persian Nobility.
None of the Persian Nobility but covet to Marry with a Georgian rather than
their own Country Women, because they are generally more beautiful and well
Limbed. King Abbas himself had his Court full of them, both Men and Women, and
scarce made use of any other.

But to return to Teimuraz, Teimuraz flies to the Turks, who assist him with an
Army.
who spent some time in ranging through the Countries of other Princes, at last
he went into the Turks Dominions where staying some years, he was made Governor
of the City Cogni, and some other places of Cappadocia, being for the most part
inhabited by Greek Christians: During his abode here he studied how to revenge
himself on the Persians, and to get footing again in his own Country, and at
length in 1618. obtained a potent Army of Turks and Tartars, besides his own
Militia, which for the most part consisted in the Nobility of Georgia who had
declared themselves on his side, and many others, who had always faithfully
served and accompanied him during his Misfortunes: These Nobles also took their
Wives, Armed and Mounted on good Horses, along with them, who following the
Examples of their Husbands, performed many heroic Acts. Teimuraz thus
reinforced, marched farther into Persia than ever any of the Turks Armies had
done before, and at last came up to the City Ardebil, which being by the
Persians accounted a holy place or Sanctuary, because of the Tomb of their
prime Saint Schach Sefi, and the Royal Seat of the King, he endeavored by all
means possible to destroy, whilst the Serdar or General Hali Bassa should with
another Army of three hundred thousand Turks and Tartars, keep the Persians
employed in another part. This General had also Command, that however it
happened, he should endeavor to make himself Master of Ardebil, and afterward
settle Teimuraz Chan, and Dellu Melik again in their Dominions, and also to
Winter in some convenient place in Carabag, and re-take the Province of
Scirvan, and the Metropolis Schamachie. This Dellu Melik was a Melik or
Armenian Lord, and formerly a Christian, but apostatized, and became Substitute
to the King of Persia, against whom he rebelled: for the King having commanded
him to carry all the Armenian Christians to Ferhabad, he on the contrary
carried them to Georgia, where he united himself with Temuraz Chan, who both
submitted themselves to the Turks protection; and by this means Melik became a
great Enemy of the Persians, and had himself been in the last Fight. Mean while
two Capigies or Messengers came into the Turkish Army with great speed from the
Grand Seignior at Constantinople, to the Serdar or General, to tell him, that
he should endeavor to make as advantageous an Agreement with the Persians as he
could possible, and return with all expedition to Constantinople, because the
Europeans had invaded him in other parts; so that this great preparation of the
Turks came to nothing, to the loss of many of his Men, whilst the Persian
returned Conqueror to his Court; Teimuraz also marched back to his Country
which the Turk had given him to Govern.

The Province of Guriel.
Situation of Guriel.
Southward from Mengrelia, and beyond the Black Sea, on the Borders of
Cappadocia, Trabizonde, and Cogni, lies a Province called Guriel, which (as
Della Valle affirms) being a part of Cappadocia or Colchos, and lying more
Southerly from Imereti than Mengrelia, was Anno 1620. Governed by one of the
two last Princes called Jese, and the other Prince Governed Mengrelia.

The Province of Mengrelia, anciently Colchis.
The Borders of Mengrelia.
THe Country which the Ancients called Colchis, is at this day by the
Inhabitants named Dadian and Odisci, and by the Turks, Mengrelia: It borders in
the East, upon the River Fas or Faso, by the Inhabitants named Rione, near the
Province of Imereti or Basciaciuk; in the South looks upon Guriel; in the North
touches the Country of the Abcassians; in the West conterminates with the
Black Sea and Circassian Mountains; and in the North-East respects at some
distance Mount Caucasus. Niger and Ananias make it to border in the East, upon
Georgia; in the West, at a Bay of the Black Sea; in the North, at the Asiatick
Sarmatia; and in the South, on a part of Cappadocia and the Country of
Trebizonde, toward the side of the Black Sea, and a part of Great Armenia.
From Constantinople they can travel in less than eight days by Water into
Mengrelia, which is the best and most populous Country of all Georgia.

The Air of this Province is very moist by reason of its Situation: The Air.
for on the one side it has Mount Caucasus, out of which flow many Streams.
The Woods with which it is overgrown prevent the swift passing of the Clouds,
and the nearness of the Sea, and constant Winds which blow from the same, bring
commonly Mists and Rain.

The Inhabitants afflicted with many Diseases.
The Inhabitants are generally troubled with the Spleen, which turns to the
Dropsy, if they use not good Medicines. The Tertian and Quartan Agues are also
very common here. Ancient People commonly die of Rheums and Apoplexies; Youth
of the Jaundise and Dropsy.

The Cold is also very great here, though there is no appearance of it till the
latter end of December; from which time there likewise falls abundance of Snow,
till April.

The Country is very Morassie near the Sea, but very Hilly up into the Inland.

Rivers in this Country.
Mengrelia is also divided by several Rivers, which, like most of the great
Rivers of Asia, have their head Springs in Mount Caucasus, and disembogue into
the Black Sea. The first of them, which rises Eastward, is the Stream by the
Ancients called Fasis, and now Faso or Fas, by the Scythians (according to
Thevet) Debbassetcha, and by the Inhabitants, Rione, which (as Procopius
affirms) falls with such force and violence into the Sea, that it makes the
Water fresh for some Miles. But this is contradicted by Agricola: And Archangel
Lamberti, who has seen the same several times, says this River at first runs
very swift from its Fountain Head, but coming amongst the Plains, it is so
slow, that it is scarce discerned to move, and yet certain it is, that its Water
does not commix with the Sea.

The Stream Faso disembogues it self into the Sea through two Mouths, between
which it makes an Island, by the Ancients called Ea, wherein the Turks in the
Year 1578. built a Fort, which was since pulled down. At the same time the
Turkish Emperor Amurat took the City Teflis from the Persians, supposing it
would have been a very convenient Harbor for him to keep his Galleys in, that
from thence they might go with the more ease to conquer Persia (which then he
designed) and make himself Master of the City Colatis, the Entrance and Key
into the Country on that side; to which purpose his Galleys also went a great
way up the Stream: But the Georgians having fortified themselves at the
Entrance of the River, where it is narrowest, Entertained them so roughly, that
they forced them to return. Above the Island the Stream is above half a Mile
broad, where its Banks are also overgrown with Trees, and frequented by
Fishermen, who come thither to catch Sturgeon. Farther up into the River lie
many small Islands, of which several are Inhabited: To each House which is
built on the same belongs a small Barque, made of a hollow Tree, in which the
Women Row from place to place.

Arrianus, who by the Emperor Adrian's Command went to discover this River,
says in one of his Letters, that on the left side of the Mouth of the River he
saw the Image of the Goddess Rhea in a Temple, which in the time of the Emperor
Emperor Zenon was Dedicated to the Virgin Recas.

The next River is Sceni-Skari, that is, The Horse-River, by reason of its
swiftness.

Arrianus, and all those Geographers that follow him, place other Rivers
between the Faso and Sceni, but by mistake: for it is certain, that the Sceni
is the first Stream which falls into the Faso, but afterward receives the
Abassin and Tachut; the Abassin is the Glaucus of Strabo, and the Tachut the
Sigam of Arrian, though he places it toward Copo.

There is at this day another Tract of Land, through which this Stream flowing
receives its Denomination.

As to what concerns the River Cobo, the modern TABULA COLCHIDIS HODIE MENGRELIE

Inhabitants call the same Ciani Skari, and in the Maps Cianeus, from a People
which dwell on its Banks, and come very often to Trade in Mengrelia.

Next follows the River Enguria, anciently called Asteltes, which Arrian places
near the Cianeus: It falls with extraordinary swiftness from the Mountains
inhabited by the Sovanies, and swelling with the melted Snow that likewise
glides from them, to that height, that it cannot be crossed without a Barque.

The next in order to the Enguria, is the Rivulet Heti, which is not found in
the Maps by reason of its smalness, but is very eminent for a strange sort of
Fish which is taken therein: It discharges its Water into the Black Sea, at a
place called Gahbidas.

Another River named d'Ochums glides through a Tract of Land called Tarscen,
from which perhaps the Name Tarsura had its original, and by which it is
mentioned in the Maps.

The next is the Echalis; and after that the Stream Moquis, which borrows its
Denomination from the City and Bishopric of Moquis, through which it passes.

The last is the Stream called Coddors, anciently Corax. This divides Mengrelia
from the Abascians, as the Fasis from Guriel and Georgia.

In many places of Mengrelia are great Lakes, especially on the Plains where
the Ground sounds hollow when any one Rides over it, which is no small
testimony of the affinity between the Black and Caspian Seas; to which may be
added, that in these two Seas one sort of Fishes are found: for there is
abundance of Sturgeon in the Black as well as in the Caspian Sea.

Several sorts of Sturgeon.
At the Mouth of the Paso and Enguria, the Inhabitants catch abundance of
Sturgeon from April till August, of which they have three sorts, one of which
called Zuthi, being of a far better taste than the rest, is carried to the
Court, and dres'd for the King's Table. The second sort called Angiachia,
differs not much from the first, only it is the bigger, and the Flesh not
altogether so good. The third sort named Poronci is yet larger, and almost like
a Buffalo, but its Flesh is not comparable to the other. The Inhabitants cut
these Fish into pieces of two Hands breadth, which the Salting, dry in the Sun,
and afterward use as Rarity. Of the Rocs they make Caveare, which putting into
small Vessels, they Salt, setting it in the Sun till it condense into a Body or
thick Substance. The least Sturgeon called Zuthi, has a bigger Roe than the
rest, neither is any part of thrown away but the flat Bones which stick in the
top of the Skin, besides which it has no other except a Gristle about a Finger
thick, which extends from the Head to the Tail.

The Fishermen have certain signs whereby to know when it is best Fishing, as
by the hollowness of the Water, which from the melted Snow falling into the
same, is greedily coveted by the Sturgeon.

They also take here another sort of Fish called Suia, and by the Turks, Calcan
Baluch, which signifies a Pilcher, being exactly of that form, and covered with
little Scales, but has two Eyes on one side, the one gray and the other white.

This Fishing begins in December, and continues till April.

In some Seasons there are abundance of Herrings in this Sea, and the greater
the number of them is, the more Sturgeons they are sure to catch that year.

Anno 1642. the Sea had thrown so great a number of Herrings on the Shore
between Trebizonde and the Country of the Abcassians, that they lay above half
a yard thick upon one another, like a Bank.

There are also Oysters, which the Fishermen throw into the Sea again when they
catch them in their Nets; yet some of them have course Pearls in them, such as
Pliny writes he saw in the Bosphorus of Thracia.

The Rivers are full of Voorn, of which there are two sorts, the one called
Calmakka, is very small, and the other Aragoli, which is bigger; the first sort
are caught in the North Sea, and the other only in the Rivers; in which, and
on whose Banks are likewise Beavers, contrary to Aristotle's opinion, who
affirms, that no four-footed Beasts can live in the Sea.

Venison carried hence into Greece.
The Country abounds also with all manner of Venison, and great numbers of
Pheasants, which Bird has its Denomination from the River Fasis, about whose
Banks it breeds, as also through all Mengrelia, from whence (if Marshal may be
credited) the Argonautes carried them into Greece.

There are all manner of Birds of prey, but especially Goshawks, Birds*
which they teach in eight days time, and use for the taking of Quails, whose
Season being over, they set them at liberty to seek for their Food where they
can get it.

Eagles are likewise very common here, and are taken by the Inhabitants only
for their Wings, the Feathers whereof they fallen to their long Arrows.

Every Man in Mengrelia, though never so poor, Beasts.
keeps a Horse, for it costs them nothing. Some Noblemen have two hundred, and
the Prince himself two thousand, which are every year Trained in the Field;
they never shoe them but in the time of War.

Sheep do not thrive well in this Country, by reason of the moistness thereof,
yet their Wool is exceeding fine.

In the Mountains breeds also a certain Beast, which is half like a Goat, and
half like a Stag, and of the same bigness, with brown Hair; its Horns are like
a Goats, bending backwards. The Flesh of this Beast is very delicate, and
accounted better than that of a Stag. They also breed in Circassia.

There are likewise all sorts of wild Beasts which are in Europe, and many
white Bears, especially on the Mountain Cyrus, which seem to be peculiar to
that place, because there are none in any of the neighboring parts.

On the Borders of the Abcassians are said to breed wild Buffalo's and Wolves,
which do great mischief to the grazing Cattle, which get together in a Body,
and defend themselves with their Heels.

There are no Foxes, but a Beast called Tourra, which resembles them, but are
somewhat bigger, and has more shaggy Hair; they go together in Herds, and make
a great noise in the Night; they are very mischievous, besides their Prey
carrying away Shoes, Boots, or other Apparel, from such People as lodge in the
Fields.

This Country has great variety of Fruits.

On the Banks of the River Fasis grows sweet Wood.

In this Country is also the best Honey in the whole World, Honey.
although Strabo and some of the ancient Writers affirm that it is very
unwholsom, and causes vertiginous swimmings in the Head.

They have also another sort of white and hard Honey, like Sugar: Its color
perhaps caused Pliny to affirm, that there bred white Bees about the Pontus
Euxinus, or Black Sea; which the Inhabitants contradict, affirming, that the
Bees which make this Honey are like others, and that the whiteness thereof
proceeds from the abundance of Dew which falls in this Country, out of which
the Bees extract the Honey. This white Honey is much coveted in this Country,
but not carried to Constantinople like the other, because gathered in Winter,
when they drive no Trade, the Sea being locked up. The Inhabitants oftentimes
put their Honey into the Rind or Shells of bitter Citrullen, from whence Strabo
writes, that the Honey which is gathered on the Mountains in the time when the
Laurel blossoms, makes all those vomit that eat of the same, and therefore is
taken by them for a Vomit in Physic.

It is certainly believed, that there is plenty of Gold and Silver on that part
of Mount Caucasus which verges this Country, but the Inhabitants conceal it,
because they would not entice the Turks thither.

They get abundance of Gold near the City Arudan, in the Province formerly
subject to the Prince Artabegi. There is also Antimony.

Some have reported, that the Prince of Imereti keeps diverse Men at work in the
Mines in his Dominions, but so privately, that he caused one of his Subjects
resident in Dadian, at his Return from Constantinople, whither he had carried a
Proof of the Gold and Silver which was dug out of those Mines, to have his
Hands and Feet cut off, as a Punishment for his holding Correspondence with the
Turks.

They say there is also a Gold-Mine in the Bishopric of Cavis.

Several sorts of Mengrelians.
The Mengrelians are of several Degrees and Qualities; the first called Ginasca,
are eminent Lords; the second Ginandi, are Nobles; the third Sakkurs, are the
Rich; and the fourth named Moinalli, are the Commonalty.

The Ginasca only attend upon the Prince, and are themselves served by the
Ginandi; and these again are waited upon by the Sakkurs and Moinalli.

None can attain to a higher degree of Honor than the Family in which they were
born: for he that is born amongst the Commonalty can never rise higher, though
he be the richest Man in the whole Country.

The Moinalli, or common sort of People, do all servile Offices for the
Nobility, viz. chop their Wood, follow them on foot, carry their Baggage when
they travel, and the like, The richest of them must give a Cow, a Basket full
of Corn, Bread, Wine, and Fruits, for an acknowledgment of their Vassalage; nay
further, they must Lodge all Strangers which the Nobility send to them, and
also Entertain their Landlords whensoe're they are minded to visit them.

When a Family of the Peasants is wholly extinct, their Lords inherit their
Goods; and sometimes when all are dead except one, they sell him to the Turks;
so that their greatest Riches consists in having many Slaves.

All the Mengrelians spend their time in Tilling and Manuring their Lands, and
the rather, because they have no manner of Corn brought them from any other
Parts. Their greatest Labor after they have Sowed their Corn, is Weeding; to
which purpose the Fields are always full of Workmen, who are Entertained by
their Master with great Feasting: for after their Day-labor is finished, they
go Singing to his House, where is provided for them great store of Meat, as
also Wine; which that they may not want at that time, they generally in
Harvest-time Consecrate some Tuns of their best to St. George, with promise not
to taste it till the Feast Day of St. Peter and St. Paul, which is the time
before mentioned; but when that is come, they bring a Priest in all his Habits
into their Wine-Cellar, where reciting some Prayers, he broaches the Cask, and
sends a Pot full of the Wine to St. George's Church.

Their first Money.
Before Prince Dadian invited the Armenians to Trade in his Country, there was
no Money, but they bartered Commodities for Commodities; but this Prince, to
his great benefit and advantage, caused a Coin to be made with Arabian
Hieroglyphics, like that which passes in Persia, and is called Abassi;
notwithstanding the Inhabitants rather affect Pieces of Eight, and other
strange Coin.

They Trade with the Turks in several places, and at several Fairs, the biggest
whereof is kept in September, just before the Church of Cipourias and the other
in St. George's Church.

Trade with the Turks.
The Turks about this time coming from Constantinople, bring Carpets, Stools,
Bows, Arrows, Cloth, Iron, Copper, Wool, Cotton-Clothes, Salt, etc. for which
they carry back Honey, Flax, Yarn, Swords, Beaver Skins, Slaves, and Boxwood,
by which they gain great Sums of Money: for it is evident, that for every four
hundred Crowns-worth of Salt which they bring into this Country, they get
above five thousand of Wood.

The Lords sell their Subjects for Slaves to the Turks, and the Men their
Wives, whereof the chief Lord of the Soil always receives a third part, the
Parents of the Women another part, and the Husband the rest.

A Nobleman once having a mind to a Turkish Horse, gave his own Mother in
Exchange for him.

The Mengrelians, who account it a happiness to change their Habitations when
they please, Houses.
like the Tartars, never bestow any great cost on their Buildings,
notwithstanding they have all manner of Materials to Build withal, but
especially good white Stone. Common Houses are not divided into several
Apartments, but consist in one large Room, in which the Master, Mistress,
Servants, and all, both Men and Women, dwell together. They always keep a great
Fire in the middle of the Hall in the Winter. The Walls of their Houses are of
Wood, and the Roofs covered with Straw, which makes them very subject to take
fire. Their Halls are generally full of Smoke, and dark, having no other Light
than what comes in at the Door. They leave these Houses with great willingness,
whensoe're they are minded to remove.

In the Winter they commonly go into the Woods, where being secured from the
sharp Winds, they spend their time in Hunting. In the Summer they dwell on the
Hills, and in the Spring and Harvest they choose such places for their abode,
where they may have the benefit both of warm Weather and cold but they always
dwell a great distance from the Sea, partly for the bad Air, and partly to be
secure from the Invasion of Pirates.

Before Noblemens Houses are generally large Squares, surrounded with Moats and
Gardens, planted full of Trees; round about the Squares are built diverse Lodges
at a certain distance one from the other to prevent Fire; that which stands
next to the Entrance is called Ochus, where they receive all Strangers, the
rest serving either for Cellars, Kitchins, and Wardrobes, which being stronger
than the rest, are built in the form of a Tower. In the middle of all these
Lodges or little Houses, which stand round about the Garden enclosing the
Square, there commonly stands a Chapel, wherein they all go to Mass.

The common People are generally very poor, Habits.
wearing only a woollen Lappet about their Bodies, from their middle down to
their Knees. Persons of Quality Clothe themselves in foreign Stuffs, but wear a
Girdle covered with a Plate, at which they hang their Sword, and all other
things which are requisite to be used on a Journey, viz. a Knife, a Hone, a
Leather of three Inches broad, and half a Yard long, a Tinder-box, a little Bag
full of Salt, and another full of Pepper and other Spices, and a Wax Candle.
The Shirts which they wear are wrought with Gold at the bottom and about their
Necks, and hang out over their Knees; their upper Garment is also shorter than
their Shirts. In cold Weather they wear Furred Coats. Their Bonnets or Caps are
sharp on the top. They account the European Hats an easy and commodious Wear;
but since none in that Country could learn to make them of Wool, some have
made them of Straw, and covered them with Sear-cloth, as also with Woollen
Cloth and other Stuffs; which Hats they put on over their Bonnets or Caps in
rainy Weather, or else against the heat of the Sun.

Their homely manner of Entertainment.
By reason of the poorness of the Country they very seldom make any Feasts or
great Entertainments; yet they live plentifully, and are very free of what they
have. Amongst other Dishes they boil pounded Barley to a Dough, which they set
on a wooden Peel before their Guests, who eat the same instead of Bread. They
bring this first to the Table, and the Person appointed for that purpose runs
with it from one Man to another; which done, he gives another sort of finer
Dough to the most noble Person on a Chip, the Cook serving up the other Dishes
in the mean time. They never set Chairs nor Stools for their Guests, but they
stand round about the Table, which serves them also both for Dishes and
Trenchers. When they have any Spoon-meat they make a Hole in their Dough, into
which they put their Broths: In stead of a Table-cloth they spread a Carpet of
Leather, which is thirty Foot long, and so greasy, that the sight thereof is
enough to turn a squeamish Stomach.

As these People spend their whole Lifetime in the Field, so their greatest
delight is Hunting, in which every one recreating himself, has made a Proverb
amongst them, That a Man's Happiness in this World consists in a Horse, a good
Dog, and a Hawk. The Prince appoints set-times for Hunting, to which he invites
all his Nobles. The time which Prince Dadian generally chose to Hunt in, was
when the Deer went a Rutting, at which time going into the Thickets with his
Attendants, he ambuscado'd himself, and shot the Stags as they passed by.

Amongst other Games and Pastimes, Recreations.
they use to play with a Ball on Horseback after this manner: The Gamesters
standing in a row, the Ball is thrown up into the Air by him that stands at the
upper end, whilst others following him, endeavor with a Racket of four or five
Foot long, to strike the Ball forward; he that catches it last, throws it to
the end of the Line, and begins the Game again.

All trouble and charges of celebrating their Nuptials, consist in Presents,
Nuptials.
which the Men are bound to give to the Brides Parents.

Some years since the Prince of Odisci Courted the Princess Casciach Mepe,
Daughter to the Prince of Circassia, who demanded of him a hundred Slaves
laden with Cloth and Carpets, two hundred Head of Cows and Oxen, and a hundred
Horses.

When a young Man or Suitor goes to visit his Mistress, he is obliged to carry
some Wine and an Ox with him, with which her Parents Feast and make Merry. On
the Wedding Day, if the Bishop or Priest be not present to Betroth them, they
go into their Cellar, a place no less reverenced amongst these People than the
Temples; the Priest holding two Garlands, and first setting one on the
Bridegrooms Head, says, N.N. Be Crowned the Servant of God for the Maid N. of
God; the second he sets on the Brides, saying, The Maid of God N. N. be Crowned
for the Servant of God N. which done he takes a Glass of Wine, and proffers the
same to the Bridegroom, whilst the Clerk holds the Garlands, and after they
have drank, cuts the Thread which held their Clothes together, and so ends the
Ceremony.

When any of their Parents or Friends die, Funerals.
all those that dwell in the House lament with many distracted signs of sorrow;
the nearest Relations pull off their Clothes, and go naked from their Middle
upwards; then they divide themselves into two Parties, who make Responces one
to another, often repeating the word Ohi. This time of Mourning sometimes lasts
three years. The Bishop also celebrates Mass for the Deceased, to his great
benefit, getting many times five hundred Crowns. After Mass is finished they
all give the Bishop a Treat, and new Habits to all the Priests which attended
the Funeral: for the greatest Costs and Charges which they bestow on any thing,
is on these Solemnities. They also invite the Prince or Lord of the Country to
mourn over the Deceased, whose Dogs they place under one Pavilion, his Horses
under another, and under a third his Sword, as also other things which he used
when he was living. The Prince being naked from his Middle upwards, and
barefooted, falls on his Knees under each Pavilion, where giving himself
several blows on the Face, he cries, prays, and sighs: after which rising, he
goes to the House of the Person which invited him, where a Feast is prepared
for him, and also a Present.

Commemoration of the Dead.
The next day after Easter Day, is the Commeration of the Deceased, on which
they carry Meat to the Graves, where they set a Chest strewn on the top with
Flowers, putting also a lighted Wax-Candle thereon. The Priest having
Consecrated the M^at, they carry it to a great Tree which stands before the
Temple, where each Family eat their own. This kind of making Merry they believe
to be a very meritorious Act.

Physicians are highly approv^d here.
There is no Place in the World where Physians are better received and approved
of, and especially French and Italians, of which when they get one, they
endeavor by all means to stay him in their Country; and the reason of this may
be, because they have none of their own, but a sort of Women, who pretend
experience and knowledge in the Virtue and Preparation of some medicinal Plants
and Drugs.

They give no other Food to their Sick but stamped Barley, mixed with some
Leaves of Coriander, and a little Wine. In the greatest Fevers they cover the
Patient with Willow Leaves. They never Purge them, unless desired, and then
give them the Juice of Tithimal or Devils-Milk. They also make use of Rhubarb,
infused into some kind of Liquor proper against Fevers and Agues. Those that
have only Physic to provoke Seige, pass for able Physicians in this Country.

For Fevers they have learnt this Medicine from the Abcassians, viz. They put
the Patient into the coldest Water that can be got in all the Country, and
hold him a considerable time therein by two lusty Fellows; and this they
account an infallible Remedy.

How they go to War.
All the Mengrelians go to War, insomuch that the Prince, notwithstanding the
Country is but small, is able in a short time to raise thirty thousand Men,
but commonly every House provides one Man, but all the Nobility in general are
obliged to follow their Prince.

As these People are mightily inclined to Warring, so they carry all the best
things they have with them. They never make any Attempts in the Night, but
spend it in Mirth and Jollity. They keep no Order or Discipline in their
Battles, yet nevertheless they gain daily remarkable Conquests on the Prince of
Imereti or Basciaciuk's Subjects, and force the Prince himself to be always in
a posture of Defense, sometimes driving him to the City of Cottis, and
compelling his Subjects to secure themselves in the Mountains, whensoe're the
Dadians make an Invasion into his Country. The Dadian having of late years
endeavored to make himself Master of his Country, and to that purpose caused
his Guns to be carried thither, but having no Persons that were able to manage
a Siege, he was forced to desist.

The Women as well as the Men travel on Horseback, with a sharp Crowned Hat
made of Cloth, Lined with Sable Skins, and with Embroidered Coats. Ladies of
Honor, according to the Custom of the Country, generally follow their Princess
in rich Habits; Page also comes after with a Footstool, covered with Velvet,
and Embroidered with Silver, on which they mount and dismount their Horses.
When the Court travels it is a most pleasant Sight, to behold the several
troops of Ladies, all mounted on stately Steeds, follow the Prince.

They are very hospitable to Strangers.
The Mengrelians are for the most part very civil and hospitable to Strangers,
the greatest Lords accounting themselves obliged, if a Stranger request any
thing of them. When they salute any Person, they kneel down on the Ground. To
those that bring them good tidings they give a Spoonful of Sugar, which the
Prince with his own Hand puts into the Mouths of his Messengers.

Their Govement.
The Country of Mengrelia is at this day Governed by a supreme Prince, who is
styled Chesilpes Dadian; Chesilpes signifies King, and Dadian is the Name of
his Family: he is one of the powerfullest Princes of this Country, yet not
derived from the Kings of Georgia, but from one of his Commanders or Servants,
who took this part of the Dominion into his possession, of which he was
Eristave or Governor.

The Royal Seat of the Dominion.
The ancient Kings of Georgia kept their Seat in the City Cottis, and sent
Deputies into the several Provinces, to manage Affairs of State and Government,
the most eminent whereof was the Eristave of Odisci or Colchis, called Dadian.

One of these Kings of Georgia, which then possessed the whole Country between
the Caspian and Black Sea, to Mount Taurus and Azerum, and Northerly to Caffa
divided his Dominion amongst his Children, keeping nothing for himself but the
Territories of Basciaciuk or Imereti, Odisci, Samsche, and Guriel, which also
were Governed by his Eristaves. The Turk on the one side sensible of his
weakness, took from him the City Teflis, eight days Journey from Azerum; and on
the other side, the Persian took Taurus, and all that part of his Realm which
lies between Taurus and Gaguete. The State thus impaired, the Eristaves or
Viceroys of the other Provinces found themselves to be almost as powerful as
the King himself, and therefore let slip no opportunity to make themselves
absolute Matters of the Places which they Governed.

The occasion of the first Revolt.
Upon a Set-day, on which all the Kings Deputies sat with him at the Table, his
Cup Bearer after Dinner proffered him Drink, as also all the other Nobles in
order, according to the Custom of the Country, by virtue of which all those
that had the Cup presented to them, are obliged to make Presents to the
Cup Bearer, each according to his Quality; Next after the King the Cup was
presented to Dadian, who before he made his Present, asked Artabeg (one of
those that sat near him, and accounted the most ingenious and eminent Person at
the Court) what Present he intended to give the Cup Bearer; whereupon Artabeg
answering, A hundred Crowns, moved Dadian to make one far greater; which
Artabeg observing, promised the Cup Bearer a thousand Crowns upon the delivery
of the Cup to him. When Dadian saw himself thus deceived, not regarding the
Kings Presence, he fell upon Artabeg, and cut off his Beard; which Injury
Artabeg, respecting the King's Presence, would not at that time revenge; but
not long after, Dadian pursuing a Stag into the Governor Artabeg's Dominions,
his Subjects finding him separated from his Company, seized on him, and brought
him to their Lord, who put him into a Dungeon under Ground; in the mean while
his Followers suspected that he had broke his Neck by Riding down some steep
Rock, and accordingly bemoaned his Death; but at length having remained a
considerable time in Prison, Artabeg went to visit him, where amongst many
other Discourses, Dadian declared his intention that he had to make himself
absolute Master of his Territory, showing him also the easiness to accomplish
it: Whereupon Artabeg promised him his aid and assistance, telling him that he
had the same Design; so they both invented ways to execute their intent, and
made their Subjects to acknowledge them their Kings, who before had the same
Power, though derivative, under the Title of Eristaves. The King himself was
forced, not being willing to hazard the remaining parts of his Kingdom, to
acknowledge his Servants for his Companions, insomuch that his Successors
entered into a League with them; yet nevertheless they went to War with him.

The present King of Mengrelia.
The Chesilpes or King which now Governs Mengrelia, named Levan Dadian, is the
fifth of that Family, and Son to thc King of Munacchiar, who upon a certain
time going a Hunting, Rode with such force unawares againft another Horseman,
that his Horse tumbling backwards, broke his Rider's Neck whilst Prince Dadian
was yet very young, so that one of his Uncles, named George Lipardian, Governed
the Realm during his Minority. This young Prince Married afterward a Daughter
of the Prince of the Abcassians, of the Family of Sciarapsia, which is very
much affected by this Nation. Lipardian, though very ancient, also Married a
young Virgin, who Name was Dareggian, out of the Family of Ciladze; but this
Lady delighted more in the company of Dadian, who was equal to her in years,
than in her Husband Lipardians; of which Dadian taking notice, and resolving to
slip no opportunity to satifie both his own and her desire, took advantage of
this occasion; One of his prime Nobles called Paponia, insinuated himself into
the Queens Favor, which being noised abroad about the Country, was fo ill
resented by the King, that (according to the Custom of the Greek Church) he
Divorced her, cut off her Nose, and sent her in the Head of an Army to her
Father, and committed Paponia to Prison under the custody of the Prince of
Guriel his Nephew: After this more publicly declaring his Amors toward his
Uncle's Wife, he took her out of his House, and made all his Subjects
acknowledge her for Dalboda or Queen. In the interim, whilst Dadian kept his
Nuptial Feast with all the signs and testimonies of Joy, Lipardian in his House
performed all the Funeral Ceremonies, as if his Wife had been dead, going with
his whole Court into Mourning, and crying for forty Days together, according to
the usual Custom, each Person also sympathizing with him; he was also visited
daily by many of the Nobles, till at last being poisoned, his Wife became
absolute Queen. After this the Country had remained quiet a long time, had not
Paponia, to revenge himself of Dadian, persuaded the Prince of Guriel to
proclaim War against him, and also contrived a Plot betwixt him, the
Abcassians, and the Prince of Basciaciuk, the design of which was to kill
Dadian, and to Crown one of his Brothers, named Joseph, in his stead; to which
purpose they hired an Abcassian, who on a set-day, as Dadian was looking over a
Balcony, ran him through the Back with a Lance; which done, the Assassinate
immediately fled, and was never heard of after; but one of the Officers that
stood by when the King received the Stab, which was not mortal, being committed
to Prison, discovered the Plot; upon which Paponia was Strangled, and his Body
being cut into diverse pieces, was ramm'd into a Cannon and shot into the Air;
his Brother also was condemned to have his Eyes put out, and committed to
perpetual Imprisonment; the Prince of Guriel was likewise taken Prisoner, and
his Eyes put out, his Wife and Children taken from him, and his Territory given
to the Patriarch his Uncle, called Malachia. Moreover, Dadian afterward Warred
against the Abcassians, Dadian conquers the Abcassians.
who during these Disturbances had made Incursions into his Dominions, in
revenge of the Disgrace done to his first Wife, their Prince's Daughter; but he
in a short time reduced them, and made them pay Tribute.

Makes War upon Imerets,
Dadian having finished the Civil Wars, bent his study how to conquer Imereti,
and accordingly proclaimed War against it; and though to this day he has not
made himself absolute Master thereof, because the forementioned Prince always
secures himself in the Castle of Cottis, which could never yet be conquered;
yet he has miserably harras'd all his Territories.

Dadian an excellent Ptince
This King Dadian which now Governs this Country, is of such excellent Parts,
that had he been bred amongst a civilized People, he would undoubtedly have
been one of the greatest Princes in his time: for he abhors Gluttony and
Drunkenness, to which the Natives are much inclined, often dispensing with his
Dinner to dispatch Business; he is of an undaunted Courage, Prudent, Generous,
and a great lover of his Subjects, whom he supports and assists on all
occasions, suppressing all manner of Tyranny and Oppression: And that the Turk,
his too near Neighbor, may not have an itching desire toward his Country, he
uses this policy: When he expects Agents from Constantinople, he sends several
of his Nobles to meet them upon his Borders, and to conduct them through
Mountains, Woods, and the worst Ways they, can find, and also to Lodge them in
mean Huts, where they have nothing but a little Straw to lie on, and Cheese to
eat: When they are admitted to Audience, he receives them sitting under a Tree
on an old Carpet, in mean Clothes, with a great many Servants in pitiful Habits
standing about him: After Audience they are Lodged in a House which will scarce
keep the Weather out; where they are so ill Entertained, that the Agents
returning to Constantinople, affirm this Country to be the meanest in the
World. It Is not long since he caused one of his Noblemens Eyes to be put out
for endeavoring to extol his Subjects. He Entertains both Jews and Armenians in
his Dominions, and by that means gains a considerable Trade; he also sends for
Workmen out of all the adjacent Countries, whom he obliges to stay, by giving
them Wives and Lands. He also makes daily great Presents to the Temple and
Spiritual Persons, and wants nothing but Architects, to build magnificent
Churches.

The Panishment of Malefactors.
Of all Punishments which they inflict on Malefactors, they account the
bereaving them of their Sight the worst, which they do after this manner, viz.
They drive four Stakes into the Ground, to which they tie the Malefactor's
Hands and Feet in such a manner, that he is no way able to stir; then they take
two sharp Plates of Iron, about the bigness of a Shilling, made fast to two
Irons which have one wooden Handle, which making red hot, they put them upon
the Malefactor's Eyes, so bereaving him of his Sight with the greatest torment
imaginable, which appears sufficiently by the sad effect thereof: for the whole
Face and Breast swell, putting the Malefactor into such a condition, that it
renders him incapable of eating in three or four days after. They also cut off
their Criminals Hands with a red hot Iron, thereby to prevent the effusion of
Blood, and with a Stick take away the Marrow from the Bone, that the Flesh may
not putrify. If the Crime be small, and any one be apprehended for stealing of
a Cow, he is bound to restore fifteen times the value thereof before he can be
freed, of which the King receives one third part, the Court of Judicature
another, and the injured Person the rest. If the Offender be not certainly
known, then they lay a Cross in the bottom of a Kettle of Water, which they
hang over a Fire till it boyls, and then force the suspected Person to put his
naked Arm into the same, and pull out the Cross; which done, they put his Arm
into a Bag, and Sealing up the same, let it remain on three days, after the
expiration whereof they open it, and if no signs of scalding appear, then the
accused Person is released. When the Evidence is not clear, and the Crime but
small, they cause the Person whom they suspect, to swear by the Images of their
Saints. They also make suspicious Persons to fight one with another after this
manner, viz. They run a Tilt at each other, and he that is first wounded, is
punished as Criminal.

How they determine Difference.
The Mengrelians have no written Laws, yet what they follow are justly executed.
In Matters which are of no great difficulty, the Prince himself is the Judge,
and decides the fame either at his Table, when he is Hunting, or in any other
place where he is when it is brought before him; but Matters of consequence are
heard and determined after this manner: The Parties concerned choose each of
them an Arbitrator, to whom they refer the Controversy these also choose a
Solicitor; they often meet in the Fields under a Tree, where the Plaintiff
appearing first, makes his Demand, and then gives room to the Defendant, to
whom the Solicitor declares his mind; whereupon the Defendant also with the
same freedom gives his Relation; then the Plaintiff is called again, and the
Solicitor acquaints him with the Defendant's Answer to his Demands; and if
after this both Parties are silent, then the Judges pass Sentence.

They also maintain another Custom in their Differences, which is, never to go
directly to the Person of whom they demand any thing, but always to make use of
a Friend in such a Case.

The People formerly acknowledged the Patriarch of Antioch, but now him of
Constantinople; yet they have two Patriarchs of their own Country, whom they
call Catholics, the one from Georgia, and the other from odisci: He of Georgia
has under him the Provinces of Cardueli, Gaghetti, Baratralu, and Samsche; he
of Odisci the Territories of Odisci, Imereti, Guriel, the Abcassians, and
Suaniers.

The Wealth of their Patriarchs.
These Patriarchs have almost as great a Revenue as the Prince himself: for he
continually visits his substitute Places, and in stead of taking care to
preserve his Flock, he fleeces them by his frequent Visits: for whenever he
comes, all are obliged to make him great Presents; neither does he make any Man
a Bishop without a Reward of five or six hundred Crowns: The Grand Vizier gave
him for one days Service eighty Crowns, yet he was not satisfied; for not long
after the same Vizier lying sick, sent for him, who returned Answer, That it
was not worth his while to go to him, since he gratified him so ill at first;
yet at last, upon promise of a more noble Reward, he went to him.

Every three or four years the Patriarch carries all the Money which he has
thus gotten, to the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, verily believing, that by
these Offerings he shall purchase for himself an entrance into Heaven.

Bishoprics in this Courtrey
There were formerly twelve Bishoprics in this Country, of which there are now
but six remaining, the other six being turned into Abbacyes.

The first Bishopric called Andra, lies at the River Carax; the second,
Moquis; the third, Bedias; the fourth, Kiais, so called from the Mountain
Kiais, near which it lies; the fifth. Scalingicas, has a Cathedral, which is
Dedicated to our Savior, and is the Burying-place of the Princes of the
Country; the sixth is Scondidi, the Church whereof is Dedicated to All Saints.

The Bishoprics translated into Abbacyes, are Chiaggi, Gippurias, Copis and
Obbugi, where formerly the Princes were buried, but since carried to
Scalingicas; the fifth is Sebastoli, ruined by the Floods; the sixth, Anarghia,
was formerly called Heraclea.

The Bishops are richer than any Lords of the Country, some of them having
three or four Wives, nay more. It happened some years since, that a Bishop being
in Love with a Woman, he sold her Husband for a Slave to the Turks, that he
might with the more freedom enjoy her: And notwithstanding these
Extravagancies, yet because they keep their Fasts very strictly, they account
themselves better than the Prelates of the Roman Church. They believe that
there is no Sin, but what may be washed away by the Satisfaction of good Works,
neither do they Penance but very seldom; but when they find their Consciences
troubled for some heinous Crime which they have committed, then they make a
Present to the Church, believing that so their Sin is expiated.

ThePriests veyr ignorant.
The Abbots and Priests are no whit better than the Bishops, but generally more
ignorant: for the Priests are forced to say Mass in the Georgian Language,
because they understand not so much as their A B C. This Ignorance being common
amongst all their Clergy, has made them lose the form of the Sacraments. They
never Baptize their Children till they are three or four years old, How they
Baptize.
when carrying them into a Cellar, which is the place where this Ceremony is
performed, the Priest, clad in his Vestments, consecrates a great Vessel full
of Water, according to the direction of the Greek Liturgy, out of which he
only reads what is written in the fame, not once offering to do what it
directs or commands, which he leaves to his Clerk to perform; who then taking a
little of their Mirom, or consecrated Oil, marks the Child therewith in the
Forehead with a Cross.

If the Church-doors be locked, then they say Mass in the Churchyard. Their
Caps are of Wool, and Calabashes serve them for Oyl-pots.

They believe to have performed all the Christian Commandments, by strictly
observing the Fasts.

On Easter Day they do no Penance, nor receive the Sacrament, but go two hours
before daylight to Church, and so quickly return to Feasting.

Their greatest Festival is that of St. George, being celebrated on the
twentieth of October at the Church bearing his Name; St. George's Feast.
whither on the Feast-Eve the Prince after Sunset goes, accompanied with a
great Train, and sets his Seal on the Church-door, which finding untouched in
the Morning, he again takes off, and opening the Door, discovers an Ox, which
is certainly believed by the common People to have been put in there by St.
George miraculously, and presage from the motions thereof future Events, viz.
If the Ox defends himself against those that endeavor to touch him, then they
believe there will be Wars in the Country: If he be very dirty, it is a sign
of a fruitful year: If he has red Hair, great Sickness will rage both amongst
Men and Beasts: of all which they write to every part of the Country, as a
Matter of great consequence. There is also one Family amongst these People,
which has the privilege to kill this Ox, and distribute the several parts
thereof in this manner: The Head with the Horns they send to the Prince, who
adorns the fame with Gold and Precious Stones; afterward each Tribe or Family
in the Country has a part thereof; the rest being cut into small pieces, is
divided amongst the People, who dry the same, and keep it as an infallible
Remedy against all Distempers.

They strictly maintain their Fasts, Their Fasts.
as we said before, on the three last days whereof (for they continue seven
Weeks together, beginning on the Monday after Quinquagesima) they eat no Flesh.
On Saturdays and Sundays they eat three times a day, the rest they keep after
the manner of the Greeks, eating nothing till the Stars appear.

There is not a more superstitious People under the Sun than the Mengrelians,
Superstions.
which sufficiently appears by their Conceits which they hold of the Moon,
accounting all their Misfortunes to proceed from thence; and therefore they
abstain from all manner of Food on Mondays. He that first discovers the new
Moon, gives notice thereof to his Neighbors; whereupon he that wears a Sword,
draws it out, or else a Knife, wherewith they threaten it.

They also keep Fridays: for it is certain, that those who in the time of
Constantine embraced Christianity, also kept that day in commemoration of the
Passion of our Savior.

At the Birth of their Children they advise with their Priest, asking him what
they must do to make them Happy? who pretending to consult with their Books,
counsels them to abstain from Venison, and all things of the like nature.

Ceremony at a Funeral.
They carry not the Corpse of their Dead into the Church, but only into the
Churchyards, after which they perform Divine Service in the Church, where in,
stead of the Corpse they set up the Spade with which they made the Grave.

They adorn the Front of their Churches with the Heads of Stags and wild Bears,
which they account an Ornament very acceptable to God; and believe that it is
of great consequence to have a good Fishing Season, if their Boats be made in a
lucky time.

When they are out at Sea, and the Wind fails them, all that are in the, Vessel
blow to fetch it again; and when the Wind is good, they permit no body to Sew
any thing Aboard, or use any Needle or Thread, alleging, that the Wind with the
turning backward and forward of the Needle would be at a stay.

They commonly impute all their Misfortunes which befall them, from the Curses
of their Enemies; which to prevent, some of the Nobility cause the Images of
their Saints to becarry'd before them, that so they may clear the Air.

When they buy any thing, they always give a Present to the Seller to bless the
same; neither do they ever give the thing which they sell into the Hands of the
Buyer, but fetor lay it before him, being persuaded, that if they should do the
contrary, all things would be lost out of their House without being able to
prevent it.

When they wish for Rain to refresh their Corn, they take an Image of one of
their Saints, and set it every day in Water till it Rains, and the first which
falls they conclude to proceed from hence.

Avogastes or Avogasie.
Names and Borders.
A Vogastes, formerly the Territory of the Saono-Colchans of Ptolomy, is by some
called Vocasie, and by others Avocasie, but peculiarly Afgasie, which is a part
of Mengrelia; and from which Government only separates it, as being under a
peculiar Prince. It borders an the North and East, at Circassia, with the
Stream Faso between both, Towns.
as likewise at Mengrelia by the River De Cupa.

The Towns thereof are Pezzonde, which Niger calls Prezunde, and takes it to be
the Dioscurias of Ptolemy, as Sevastopoli for the ancient Siganeum; the other
Towns are Sothia and Matriga.

The several sorts of People about Mengrelia and Mount Caucasus.
The Inhabitants of Mount Caucasus.
MOunt Caucasus is inhabited by a wild sort of People of several Languages. The
nearest to Mengrelia are the Lesgissian Tartars, Sovanians, Abcassians, Alans,
Circassians, Ziques and Carocholians. They all boast themselves Christians,
though they have neither Faith nor Religion amongst them. The most civilized
are the Sovanians, who willingly desire to be instructed they possess a great
part of the Mountains toward the side of Odisci and Imereti, and serve the
Prince of Imereti, Viceroy to the King of Dadian. They are of a large Stature,
and well Limbed, but ill Featured; they are valiant Soldiers, good Archers, and
have the Art of making Guns and Powder; but yet they are so very slovenly, that
it would be loathsome to any nice Person to touch them. They have plenty of
Provisions, yet come every Spring to Georgia, where they enter into Service,
work in the Fields, and after Harvest return, carrying away with them Copper
Plates, Kettles, Iron, Linen Cloth, Carpets, and Salt, but with Silver they
will not meddle, and about the beginning of Winter carry Wood to Odisci, which
is much wanting there.

The Inhabitants of Mount Caucasus which dwell more Northerly, by the Turks
called Abasses or Abcassians, are well proportioned, of a good Complexion, and
strong for all laborious Employments. The Country which they inhabit is very
healthful, pleasant, and full of fruitful Hills, A fruitful Country.
and is watered by two Rivers, the one called Soutbesu and the other Subasu:
There is also a brave Harbor, named Eschissumeni. They possess great Herds of
Cattle. They never eat Fish, though they have great quantities thereof, both in
the Sea and Rivers, and utterly abhor Lobsters and Crabs, mocking their
Neighbors the Mengrelians for accounting them delicate Meat. They have no Corn,
neither do they make use of Salt. There are an innumerable company of Hawk sand
Falcons, which they teach so well in eight days, that letting them fly at the
Game, they return with the same upon the gingling of a Bell; and are from
thence lent to Constantinople, Persia, and Georgia.

Their manner of living.
Hunting and Hawking is their chiefest Business and Recreation. They inhabit
neither in Towns nor Castles, but fifteen or twenty Families together, who
erect Tents or Huts on the top of some pleasant Hill, which they fortify with
a kind of Pallisado's, that they may not be suddenly surprised and taken by
their own Natives. Some affirm, that the Woods are their places of Residence,
and that when once they setlte themselves in any one place, they never desert
the same.

They endeavor to take away and sell one another for Slaves to the Turks, who
highly esteem these Country People.

Riches and Trade.
Their Riches and Merchandise consist in all manner of Skins, Wax, Honey, and
Slaves. Their Nobles commonly sell their Vassals to the Turks, in Barter for
other Commodities.

There come yearly into the Haven of Eschissumuni several Ships from Lazi,
Trebizonde, Constantinople, and Caffa, where they stay sometimes all the
Winter. The Merchants which come in them go not ashore with their Commodities,
but sell them aboard, having beforehand given Oath or Hostages not to hurt one
another.

Amongst other Customs peculiar to these People, one is, That they neither bury
nor burn their Dead, but put the Corpse into the Body of some hollow Tree,
hanging up the Arms and Garments of the Deceased about it.

They go Clothed after the manner of the Circassians, only their Hair they
wear otherwise: Habit.
They let their Mustacho's grow, but shave their Beards: On the contrary, the
Papari let all their Beards grow.

They maintain constant Wars against the Circassians and Mengrelians, Wars.
and are good Soldiers both on Foot and on Horseback, knowing well how to
manage Firearms, as also Simiters, Bows, and Arrows.

The Alans and Zichi agree for the most part in their manner of Living, with
the Sovanians and Abcassians.

The Caracholians dwell also to the Northward of Mount Caucasus. Some call them
Caraquirquez, that is, Black Circassians; for Cara is Black in the Turkish
Language: But they are of a fair Complexion, and therefore we may rather
suppose, that this Name was given them because the Air of that Country which
they inhabit is always dark and cloudy, and full of Snow. They speak the
Ottoman Tongue, notwithstanding they dwell in the midst of so many several
forts of People, but so exceeding quick, that they can scarce be understood.

The Jesuit Archange Lamberti affirms, that these People had their original
from the Hunnes.

At the Black Sea dwell a sort of Mahumetans called Lesgi, who acknowledge no
Prince abroad, but being divided amongst themselves, are under many petty
Governors, in their Language called Myrza, or Princes, of which some have
scarce twenty Men under their Command. Moreover, they are a robust, and rude
kind of People, choosing rather to live in Villages in the Country, than in
walled Cities. They are salvage and cruel, and implacably hated by their
Neighbors, as a People that live by robbing and stealing.

The People called Lazi or Curten.
The Curten are Herdsmen.
THe People called Lazi, otherwise Curten, border upon Georgia and the Country
of Trebizonde. They inhabit the high Mountains along the Shore of the Black
Sea. They are a laborious People, bred in the Woods, and spend their whole
Lives in no other Employment but keeping of Cattle.

The Black Sea.
The several Names of this Sea.
THe Water known to us by the Name of the Black Sea (perhaps from the Example of
the Greeks, who, according to Bellonius, called the same Maurothalassa, that
is, Black Sea, or, as Niger affirms, by the Grecian Navigators, Maurum,) is by
the Inhabitants of Mengrelia, and by the Italians, called Mar Majore, that is,
The Great Sea; and by the ancient Greek and Latin Writers, is mentioned under
several Denominations: for Herodotus sometimes calls it The Cimmerian Sea, then
The North Sea, and in his fourth Book, Auxiotheaton, that is, Worth the seeing.
Plutarch in the Life of Pompey and Eumenes, and after him Ptolomy and
Jornandes, call it The Pontick Sea; Pliny, Pontus Axenus, that is, A Sea
without Harbors. But the common Name which the Latin Writers give it, is
Pontus Euxinus, which in the Greek signifies, A Sea with Harbors, and is so
called per antiphrasin, as Ammianus Marcellinus affirms; or that afterward her
Shores were provided of Harbors, Towns, and other Accommodations, whereas
before it was inaccessible and desolate, and that so this Sea from Axenus or
Harborless, became Euxenus or Receptive.

It is subject to Storms.
The Black Sea is subject to many Storms and tempestuous Weather, especially in
Winter, when the North Wind blowing cross the same, fills the Sky over this
Sea with Clouds and Darkness, whenas inother Countries it makes a serene
clearness; so that Horace justly said, Illic umbrosiae semper stant aequare
nubes, and incerta dies, that is, There always lie dark Clouds on this Sea;
from whence probably the Name of The Black Sea which is given to it proceeds.

There are no Islands in this Sea, unless some small Rocks mould be named
Isles, which lie near the Coast.

The Cossacks from Poland come into this Sea as Pirates, to meet with the
Turks, Frequented by the Cossacks.
and are absolute Masters thereof; their place of Residence is at the entrance
of the River Niger, beyond the Mouth of the Black Sea.

Aelian tells us, that there are many Tunneys caught in the Black Sea; though
Archangel Lamberti, during his stay in Mengrelia, never saw more than one of
them, which was brought as a strange Fish to the Patriarch's Table, neither did
the Fishermen of the Country know it; but Aelian may perhaps have mistaken a
Sturgeon for a Funny.

The Province of Circassia.
Who the Circassians are.
THe ancient People Zyches, (or Zyges according to Stephanus and Strabo) whom
Pliny places in the Asiatick Sarmatia, about the Lake Meotis, are at this day
(as George Interian and Scaliger affirm) called Circassi, or Circassians, but
amongst themselves Adiga, and by the Poles, Pient-Zorsti, that is, Inhabitants
of the five Mountains. Bronjof calls them Pythagoreans; Ananias, Pitorses;
Ramusco, Comans, and their Country, Comania; but Comania comprehends Colchis
or Mengrelia, Georgia, and Albania.

These Circassians are those which are called Mamelus or Mamelucks, and by the
Turks in the time of the Soudans, Zerhars.

There are two remarkable Streams, The Rivers.
the one called Pisi, which falls into the Lake Calbane; the other Sil, glides
by Cabarta. There are many other Rivulets of little note, because a Man may
wade over them.

The Country of Circassia shows it self like a Semicircle from the South-West
to the North, Bounds.
where a large Inlet is made by the Caspian Sea. It is separated from Tagestan
by the River De Bustro. Others inhabit that part of Albania which in the East
borders upon the Caspian Sea, on the South verges Mount Caucasus, in the North
is bounded by the same Bustro and the Tartarian and Astracan Heath.

George Interian tells us, that Circassia extends from the River Don, formerly
called Tanais, all along the Coast to the Cimmerian Bosphorus, now named
Vospeto, or The Mouth of St. John, and sometimes The Mouth of the Sea of the
Zabachees; from thence stretching beyond this Bay along the Coast of the Black
Sea, almost to the Cape of Bussi; on the South-East, to the River De Faso, or
(according to Baro of Heberstein) to the River Cupa or Coppa, formerly
Rhombites, where on the North they border at Avogasia, and possess the whole
Country from the River Cuya to that of Meruli.

Their whole Coast extends outward about seventy five Leagues; but they
possess above eight days Journey of the Lands lying into the Country, on that
side where they approach the Tartars.

John de Luca makes them to border in the North, upon the Nagaian Tartars; in
the East, to aspect the Cornuchi, who are also Tartars, though of another
Religion and manner of Life; in the South, the Abcassians are their Neighbors;
and in the West, high Mountains part them from Mengrelia; and this is the
largest extent of the Country, from Taman to Derbend or Demircapi, a City
lying on the Shore of the Caspian Sea, a Tract of twenty six days Journey.

This Country has troublesome Ways to come to it, viz. on the one side the
Caspian Sea, and on the other very high Mountains and deep Valleys: As the
Muscovites relate, Alexander the Great could never get into it.

Between Taman and Tameruchi. is a narrow Tract of Land with many Villages,
which are under the Jurisdiction of the Tzar of Muscovy, and some Myrza's, or
peculiar Lords of his Court, to whom he has given them, in requital of some
good Service done.

From the Mountain Varrada to Cudescio, which the Circassians possess along the
Seacoast, is a Tract of seventy five Leagues; yet, notwithstanding it is very
fruitful, is wholly destitute of Inhabitants. They reckon thirty five Leagues
from Cudescio to Abassia.

The People which dwell in these Mountains all themselves Christians, as also
those which have their Habitations in the Woods and on the Plains, and are
subject to peculiar Princes. The chiefest Places under their jurisdiction, and
the distance thereof, are these From Tomaruchi to Carbarei, is eighteen days
Journey, a populous Country, under the Jurisdiction of Schaban Ogoli. Two days
Journey more from Tomaruchi to Giana, and as many from Giana to Codichoi. From
Giana to Bolettekoi it is four days Journey; of which Country Gian Cosobey is
Lord. From hence to Bezinada, eight days Journey more. From Bezinada to
Carbatai, eight more. and from thence to Derbend, ten.

The Lords of the Country
The Princes Scaence and Temircas, Allies to the Cham of Tartary, are Masters of
this Country, The Princes Casibei and Sancascobei, Brothers, Command all the
Villages along the Seashore, which are all surrounded with Trees, complicated
together, to keep out the Tartarian Horse.

Olearius tells, that the Metropolis of the Circassians was formerly Terki; but
the great Tzar of Muscovy, having subdued them, Garrisoned all their
considerable Towns with Russians, forcing the Circassians to live in the
Villages about them, or else in peculiar Towns on this side of the River, yet
under the Jurisdiction of Myrza, How they are Governed.
or Princes of their own, who are sworn Subjects to the Tzar, to whom they pay
Tribute: And when anygreat Differences arise in the Law, they must be defended
by the Russian Weiwodes.

The City Terki, The Situation and Description of Terki.
which was formerly the Metropolis of the Circassians, is now under the
Subjection of the Grand Tzar, and being the last City of his Jurisdiction in
those Parts, lies two Miles from the Shore of the Caspian Sea, near a little
winding River called Tumenka or Tumenki, a Branch or Arm of the great Stream
Bustro: This is the only access to the City from the Sea side, because the
Shore there being a quarter of a Mile in breadth, is all morassie, and
overgrown with Canes or Reeds. The City lies in 40 Degrees and twenty three
Minutes Northern Latitude, sixty Leagues by Water, and sixty by Land from
Astracan. It extends in length two thousand Geometrical Feet, and eight hundred
in breadth, and was formerly surrounded diagram of fort the FORT.

TERCKI ent MARE CASPIUM

with a wooden Wall, having Towers or Bulwarks, fortified with diverse little
and great Brass Guns. But afterward, about the Year 1640. the, Tzar caused the
City to be new built after the modem way of Architecture, and surrounded with
Walls fifteen Foot high, and strengthened with a Bulwark of six Foot, as also
with a Moat of eleven Foot broad, and one and a half deep, besides casting up a
Fort on the Land side.

The common Garrison is two thousand Men, How Garrisoned.
under the Command of a Weywode and Colonel: for in the City are three
Pricases, or Chancellors, each having five hundred Strelitses under him;
besides, the Turkish Prince Mussal has five hundred Men attending at his
Court, who must join with the rest in cafe of necessity.

The Circassian Horses are more esteemed of than the Tartarian, for their
extraordinary swiftness.

John de Luca affirms, That there are no fairer People in the World than the
Circassians; but we approve not thereof: for although the Men have well
proportioned Bodies, yet they are swarthy, and somewhat broad Faced; their Hair
is long and black, which cutting off a Thumbs breadth from the Forehead to the
Neck, they leave a small Lock on their Crown, which hangs down into their Neck.
The Women are generally well shaped, of a pleasant Countenance, and
indifferently fair of Complexion; they let their Hair, which is also black,
hang down intwo Braids over their Cheeks, The Habits of the Circassians.
and go barefaced. The Men's Clothes are like those of the Tagestan Tartars,
only their Caps being broader, resemble those that the Jesuits wear; Their
Cloaks, which are for the most part Sheepskins, hang by a String over their
Shoulders, on that side from whence the Weather comes, for they cover only
half the Body. Their Shirts being made of Cotton, are Died red. The Women wear
black Hoods, Edged in stead of Lace with fine Cotton Cloth, which they tie
under the Chin. The Widows wear behind on their Heads two great blown-up
Bladders, covered with white Cotton, on each side one, which at a distance
shows like three Heads. In the Summer they go only in their Shifts, which are
either colored red, green, yellow, or blew, and are open down to their Navels;
they likewise wear Amber Beads, painted Shells, Stones, Tin and Copper Plates,
about their Necks, which hang down below their Breasts. The Women are very
familiar, especially with Strangers, the Parents permitting their Daughters to
be handled by any Person; and if Strangers be Lodged in their Houses, their
Daughters in the Mornings visit them, arid entertain them with amorous
Discourses; Virgins also go naked in the prefence of all Persons into the
Rivers to Bathe themselves.

Their chief Employment is keeping of Cattle and Husbandry. Their Employment.
Those of Terki, and others near the Caspian Sea, maintain themselves by
Fishing; and some of them Trade with Slaves, Stags, Oxen, Tyger-skins, and Wax,
which they plentifully find in the Woods. The Women spend their time in
embroidering of Linen, and the like.

It is accounted ill breeding amongst the Nobles, to have any knowledge in
Arithmetic, or to drive any Trade, because a Nobleman (as they say) should
never trouble himself with anything but to preserve and defend his People,
Hunt, and be a good Warrior.

Their common Tongue agrees with the other Tartars, Their Language.
but most of them speak also Russian, which is broken Sclavonian; but they have
no peculiar Alphabet, so that when they have occasion to write, they have
recourse to the Jews, who write for them in Hebrew Characters.

Their Marriages are nothing else but reciprocal Promises, made by one to
another in the presence of one single Witness, without any farther Ceremony.

How they order their Children.
The Women being generally Delivered of their Children on Beds of Straw and
Chaff made for that purpose, carry the Child to the next River, though full of
Ice, and washing it, give it the Name of the next strange Person that comes
into the House.

When a Noblemans Child comes to the age of three or four years, it is given to
one of his Servants, to be brought up and instructed after their manner.

Their manner of living.
They live for the most part upon Sturgeon and other Fish, though sometimes they
eat both tame and wild beasts: Their Bread is principally of Barley, and the
usual Drink of the common People is Water; but they make a Liquor of a sort of
Grain which they call Boeza, or (as John de Luca says) they mix their Water
with Honey and Barley, which letting stand ten days to soak, they afterward
boil, whereby it becomes pleasant to the taste, and as strong as Wine. In stead
of Cups or Glasses, the Vulgar use the Horns of wild Buffalo's, or other
Beasts; but the Nobles drink out of Golden Cups, worth from three to five
hundred Ducats; some also are of Silver, out of which they drink with great
deliberation and Ceremony, and commonly in the Name of God, and their Saints or
deceased Friends.

They commonly sleep with a Coat of Mayl under their Heads in stead of a
Pillow, and with their Arms by them. As soon as they rise they put on the
forementioned Coat of Mayl. The Men and Women lie together, but Head to Feet,
yet on one Bed, which is commonly made of Leather, and filled with Rushes and
Rose-Leaves.

John de Luca affirms, That the Houses are made of two rows of Poles stuck in
the Ground, between which they lay plash'd Boughs, which they cover with Mortar
and Straw; nor are the Princes Palaces built of better Materials, though bigger.

The Circassians often Engage with the Tartars, for there is not a year passes,
but the Tartars, as well Mogaians as others, make Incursions into their
Country, on purpose to get Slaves.

The continual Alarms in which their Enemies keep them, Their Arms.
has made them the best Horsemen in all these Parts. They use Arrows, which
they shoot forward and backward, and wear a Sword by their Sides, and a Helmet
on their Heads, which covers their Faces; they also use Lances and Javelins,
all which they handle with extraordinary dexterity.

They never make any difficulty to rob one another, Thievery encouraged.
which makes Stealing common here, for they never punish those which are taken
in the Fact; may, ancient People, and Persons of Quality never proffer any
Drink at Meals to young Folks, if they have not committed some notable Robbery.

Their Opinions in Religion.
The Circassians are of different Opinions, for some follow Mahumetanism, others
the Greek Church, but the number of the Mahumetans is far the greater: for
though the Priest who is at Derki Baptizes, yet he instructs them little in
Matters of Religion; wherefore they daily turn Turks, and retain nothing of the
Greeks, but the Custom of carrying Meat to the Graves of the Dead, and to keep
some Fasts.

In the Country of Cudosci, or Holy Places, are abundance of Rams Heads, which
be Relics of the Curbans or Offerings made there. On the Trees also hang
Bows, Arrows, and Swords, which are sighs of the Promises they made to the
Deceased, and therefore are so revereric'd, that the greatest Robbers will not
touch them.

The Circassians incline much to Paganism; and though they suffer themselves to
be Circumcised, and Believe in God, yet they have neither Scripture, Priest,
nor Temple, but at some set-times make their own Offerings, especiallyon
Elias's day.

Ceremonies at the Death of a Nobleman.
Upon the Decease of a Nobleman, both Men and Women coming into the Field, kill
a Goat at for an Offering, and hanging his Skin Upon a Pole, having first made
Merry with the Flesh, some Men stepping forth, Pray to the Skin one after
another; which done, they all depart home. The Skin remains on the Pole till
such time as they take it down to make room for another. After this they raise
a great Bed of Earth in the Fields, on which they lay the Corpse, having first
been imbowel'd; and for the space of eight days, his nearest Relations,
Friends, and Vassals, come to visit him, and bring him Presents of Silver Cups,
Bows, Arrows, and other things; then they take a great Tree, hollowing the
Body into the form of a Chest, into which they put the Corpse with the
forementioned Presents, and so carry it in great State to the Burying-place.

Some of these Circassians (as Soranzo affirms) are free, others pay Tribute to
the Precopenses or Crim Tartars; but as others assert, they neither acknowledge
the Turks nor Tartars, but are Governed by five prime Heads.

George Interian attests, Their Degrees.
that there are Nobles, Subjects, and Slaves amongst them; the Nobles being the
chiefest, have many Vassals under them, whom they Govern by an arbitrary Power,
allowing none to be above them but God; neither have they any Judges, nor any
written Laws, but make use of their own Authority in deciding of Differences.
Some affirm that they Serve the Turk, Persian, and Muscovites for Pay.

They have no Money in this Country, especially in those Places lying up into
the Land, No Money. here.
but value all things by Bokissins, which are pieces of Linen or Woollen Cloth.

They Fight on Horseback, Armed with Bows, Arrows, Swords, and Lances. There
are no Fotts in all the Country, but only a few old Towers, to which the
People repair in time of War. They Fight daily against the Tartars, who enclose
them in all parts, but are so much valianter, that a few Circassians are able
to put a considerable number of Tartars to flight, because they are much
nimbler, stronger, and generally better Armed.

Albania.
EAstward from Georgia lies Albania, so called from the River Albanus; by
Nicephorus, Zuirie; and by others, Chipiche and Zitracha; as also according to
Castaldus) Garzena, because the Inhabitants are inclined to Prognostications,
which the Hebrews call Garazenes: But the Names Dhipiche and Zatracha are given
them from two great Cities, whose Jurisdictions were very large. Cluverius
tells us, that Albania is the Eastern part of Georgia, between Iberia and the
Caspian Sea. Dagestan is also accounted a part of Albania, which borders in the
East, upon part of the Caspian Sea; in the West, at Georgia; in the North faces
a part of the Asiatick Sarmatia, near Mount Caucasus; and in the South looks
upon part of Great Armenia, toward the side of the River Gur or Chiur,
anciently Cyrm. It lies between very high, and almost inaccessible Mountains,
which soon lose the Way out of Tartary into Persia.

The Cities and chief Towns of Albania.
The Towns of this Territory (according to Niger) are Chipicher Tarracosia,
Sobai, Chobartei, and Abacuas. Ananias places also in this Country the City
Derbend, which he takes for the ancient Alexandria; but Derbend is by others
justly placed in the Province of Schirwan. Niger makes the City Scamachie,
which he supposes to be the Samunis of Ptolomy in Albania; but Olearius and
others place the same rightly also in Schirwan.

One of the fairest Cities of this Country is Zitracha, which Thevet calls
Zitrack, at present a City of great Trade.

Thevet makes the Metropolis of this Country to be Bambanach; but Boterus,
Stran or Stranu, formerly called Getara, or rather Gagara, which Niger supposes
to be the City Bachu.

Ananias places here the Country of Hanse, and Paults Jovius, Gorgora, of
which he makes the Royal City Agazapes, though Davity will rather have it to be
the Gagara or Gangara of Ptolemy, than the Stran or Bachu of Boterus.

The Air of this Country
The Air of this Country is very healthful and temperate, notwithstanding there
is a Valley near Hanse, constantly covered with thick Mists. The Country near
Armenia is partly low, and partly mountainous, and exceedingly fertiliz'd by
the Rivers Cur, and some others, producing all sorts of Fruit Trees and Plants,
which are always green, and with small trouble yield a fifty-fold increase.
Vines also thrive here; nor want there tame and wild Beasts, Scorpions and
Spiders, otherwise called Tarantula's.

Paulus Jovius tells us, that the Albaneses are a valiant People, and exceed
herein the Mengrelians; but Niger on the contrary, that they are for the most
part Herdsmen, and take no delight in Matters of War.

Anno 1492. Mahomet the Turkish Emperor marched with an Army against this
Country, from whence he returned without effecting any thing, by reason of the
Cliffs and high Mountains, over which the Horsemen were not able to pass.

About the Year 1500. Agasappas Governed Albania, or at least a part thereof,
Government.
and paid Tribute to the Sophy of Persia.

This Country (according to Thevet) is under the Jurisdiction of him who
Governs the Tartars, which perhaps is the Chan of Zagatey. The Inhabitants are
Christians, who live, like the Georgians, after the manner of the Greek Church.

The Province of Curdistan.
CUrdistan, that is, The Country of the Curdes, by Davity reckoned to be in
Great Armenia, was anciently by Ptolomy named Gordene; by Dion, Corduene; and
by others, The Country of the Cordiaques or Gordians. Della Valle supposes
this Country had no peculiar Name, but was divided amongst many People of
several Nations, and that the Carduchans deserting the Army, forced Xenophon
with his Army to return back from whence he came. They possess (according to
Purchase) the City Bitlis, and some other Villages and Mountains of the Country
of Curduene, as also the City Manuscute.

The Bounds of Curdistan.
The Curdes are a People who have their Residence in the Mountains which divide
Media from the Province of Susiana, now called Suster. It also divides Turkey
from Persia, and bordering at Aderbeitzan, has from East to West, not above
ten or twelve days Journey in breadth, but extends a vast way in length from
the North to the South: It begins between the Country of Babylon and the
Province of Chusistan, toward the side of the Caspian Sea, and extends
Northward beyond Ninive, between Armenia and Media, near the Black Sea. It is a
strong Country, and very difficult to come into, by reason of the many
Mountains which enclose the same: It might justly be called an Arm of Mount
Taurus, which parting from it, runs through Asia in this part quite into the
Caspian Sea; so that Nature seems to have delighted her self in making this
Country as a Bulwark between these two great Realms of Persia and Turkey, as it
was anciently a Boundary between that of the Romans and Parthians.

Some will have these People derived from the Chaldeans and Mesopotamians: for
we find (what they allege) many Princes of the Curdes in the Country of
Bagdad, Chaldea, Carahemid, and Diarhekir: Moreover, Chaldea is by the Turks
and Persians called Curdistan, from the People Curdes who Planted it.

The Habit of these People agrees with that of the Turks and Persians, but is
very mean. The Habit of the People.
The Women go bare-headed, and are very familiar with all manner of People.

Their Language and Living.
Their Language is peculiar and different from the Turks, Arabian, and Persian,
but has most affinity with a certain course Speech of the Persians. Many of
them live in Huts in the Country, and range up and down with their Cattle like
the Tartars; others live in Caves; but all that have any Knowledge or Breeding,
dwell in the Towns. They have no manner of Fruits, but Feed on Butter, Milk,
and Flesh. They are very quiet, and free from Pride.

The Government thereof.
The Eastern part of Curdistan, which separates Media from Susiana or Suster,
near the City Hamadan, and a Boundary of Persia, was Anno 1618. Governed by one
Hilao Chan, who besides the annual Tributes and Acknowledgements, sent his Son
Myrza Chan to the King of Persia, thereby to manifest the zeal he had to his
Majesty's Service; but because of the nearness of the Turks on the side of
Assyria, and a part of Susiana, gave some suspicion to the King, he resolved to
assure himself of the Sons Inclination, by placing him in his Father's stead;
in order to which the King sent for Hilao Chan, to come with speed to Casbin,
where he then kept his Court, there being a Report at that time, that the Turk
intended with a strong Amy to fall into the Country through the Borders of
Media: Hilao Chan not daring to disobey the King's Order (fearing to run the
same fate of many other Curdistan Lords his Neighbors, who unawares offended a
Prince that never let any Injury pass unpunished,) went with his Wife and
Children, and the rest of his Family, to the Court; where he no sooner arrived,
but the King received him very graciously, telling him that he had great need
of his Counsel on all occasions, and therefore sent for him to stay by him,
whilst his Son should Govern in his stead. When the King went from Casbin to
Sultania, he told him, that he would not give him the trouble to follow him in
his Journey in respect of his age, but ordered him to repair to Ispahan, where
he expected to find him at his coming thither.

The Nobility and primest Persons are free from this kind of Servitude. Some of
the also, exceeding the rest in Might and Power, are able to bring an Army of
ten or twelve thousand Horse into the Field.

The Powerfullest of the Nobles show not that Obedience as the Deputies and
Subjects to their supreme Governors in Europe, for theirs consists only in an
acknowledgment that they live under the protection of one of the two Lords; for
notwithstanding they acknowledge them, yet they live free.

Out of hopes of Gain the Curdes often change their Masters; and (as Cezy makes
mention in his Journal) ten thousand Curdes, Subjects to the Turk, deserting
their Country, went and desired other Lands of Schach Abbas, King of Persia,
who giving them a sufficient Maintenance, occasioned a War between the Turks
and Persians.

They have absolute Command in some parts of their Territory, as in Gozire, a
City of Mesopotamia, built on an Isle in the River Tigris, and in the Mountains
by the Inhabitants called Tor.

The Inhabitants are very valiant, and are looked upon to be able to do great
prejudice to the Turk, against whom they commonly maintain War. Their Arms are
Bows, Arrows, Shields, and Simiters.

Their Religion.
Their Religion is that of the Mahumetans, either according to the Turkish or
Persian way, as they see convenient. Moreover, they are strongly inclined to
diverse Superstitions, which are peculiar to them, and savor much of Idolatry.
Some affirm that they worship the Devil, because he should not do them or their
Cattle any hurt.

Many Chaldean Christians, of the Sect of the Nestorians or Jacobites, live in
the Dominion of the Curdes, and Serve them in the Wars.

THE EMPIRE OF THE Great Mogol AND INDIA.
Of India in general.
India, why so called.
INDIA is so called from the River Indus, and the Word East generally added to
India, because it is the most Easterly part of Asia; and hence America, or the
Newfound World, has borrowed the Name of West India in opposition to it.

Its Division, Extent, and Bounds.
Ptolomy affirms, that anciently, and to this day, India is divided into two
great parts, whereof one, which extends from the River Indus to Ganges, is by
the Persians called Indostan, that is, The Country of Indus; and by the Greek
and Latin Writers, India intra Gangem, or India within Ganges. The other part
is called Mangi, or India extra Gangem, or Without Ganges. The first
comprehends all the Countries under the Great Mogol's Jurisdiction, as also the
Kingdom of Narsinga or Bisnagar, Kannara, Orixa, the Coast of Cormandel and
Malabar, the Kingdom of Golconda, and many others. The second part without
Ganges contains the Kingdom of Bengala, Arracan, Pegu, Siam, Malacca, Cambaya,
Champa or Tzampa, Lao, Cochinchina, besides many lesser, and lastly the vast
Empire of China. Both these parts also comprehend diverse Islands, amongst which
Japan (if so it be) is the most Eastern, as also the most eminent.

This whole vast Country (according to the ancient and modern Writers)
conterminates on the West, with the River Indus, the Country of Arachosia and
Gedrosia; on the South, with the Indian Sea; on the East, with the Eastern
Shore; and on the North, with some Branches of Mount Taurus or Imaus, a part of
Taurus.

Texeira tells us, that India begins at the end of the Kingdom of Macran, The
largeness of its Circuit.
lying in 106 Degrees of Longitude, and extends to 159 from East to West, a
Degree being reckoned to be fifteen Leagues; a Tract of eight hundred Leagues
in a direct Line.

India also extends from North to South, from the Equinox to the Cape of
Malacca, almost to the 40. Degree, the utmost part of China, a Tract of about
six hundred Leagues, not reckoning the Indian Isles, some of which lie a great
way to the Southward of the Equinoctial.

The most eminent Rivers of India are the Indus and Ganges, Rivers.
which come from the Northward out of the Mountains Imaus and Caucasus, by the
Inhabitants (according to Castaldus) called Dalanguer and Nangracot, and both
(as the Inhabitants affirm) spring from one Head, though some Geographers make
the distance between them to be a hundred and eighty Leagues, and others but a
hundred and thirty, though the first seems most probable, because the Ganges
takes its course Easterly, and the Indus Westerly. Philostratus places the Head
of the River Indus in Mount Caucasus, and makes the same in some places to be a
League and a half broad, and transplanting abundance of Soil along with it,
which, like the Nile in Egypt, makes the adjacent Grounds exceeding fertile.

This River Indus (as Ananias affirms) is by those of Diu or Diul called Inder
and Crecede, and according to others, Hynd, or Idu and Diul; but the Persians
(as Texeira tells us) call the same Jud, and those that dwell thereabouts,
Send. It is at map of Mogul (Mughal, Moghul) empire MAGNI MOGOLIS IMPERIVM

the Great Mogol's Court in Persia called Pangab or Penjab, which signifies
Five Waters: for Ab signifies Water, and Pan Five, because five Rivers when
they come to those Parts unite to its augmentation, viz. the River Bhat or
Behat, which takes its original near Dabul, toward the side of Persia; the
second Chanab, comes out of the Kingdom of Caximir, fifteen days Journey from
Lahor; the third called Raw, begins near Lahor; the other two, Via and Sind or
Send, arise in remote Countries. The Send receives the Water of the other four,
and swallowing their Names in its own, they are all called The Send or Sind.
Mr. Herbert calls these five Rivers Behat, Ravy, Damiady, Gbehan, and Vuhy.
Peruschy makes mention of five peculiar Rivers, which discharge their Waters
into the Indus or Sind, namely, the Catanul, Cebcha, Ray, Chenao, and Rebeth;
which gliding from the mighty Mountains that enclose the Kingdom of Caximir,
run through the Province of Penjab, or Five Rivers, so called from them, and
discharge their Waters into the Indus near the City Bakar.

The Course of the River Indus.
The Indus or Send thus enriched with the Waters of other Rivers, takes its
course Southward through the Provinces of Attack, Backor, and Tatta, and near
the City Dull, which gives its Denomination to the same, it discharges its Water
through two Mouths into the Ocean, and not through seven, as Texeira affirms.
These Openings are in 23 Degrees and 35 Minutes Northern Latitude.

Most Maps, and many Geographers, are greatly mistaken in placing this River,
as if it fell into the Sea, near the utmost Point of the Gulf of Cambaya; but
this is a great error, and as wide from the truth as the whole Country of
Zuratte is broad: for the Indus runs not from the East to Zuratte, as it should
do if it disembogu'd at Cambaya; but the River which discharges its Water into
the Bay of Cambaya, is another called Mehi.

The River Indus has diverse Isles, especially near its Mouth, which are very
pleasant and fruitful, and one City named Varaxes.

Pliny affirms, that nineteen Rivers contribute their Waters to the Indus, the
chiefest whereof are the Hydaspes, now called Moltan (which receives four other
lesser Streams) the Catabra, the Hypasis and Acesina.

The Course of the River Ganges.
The River Ganges, now called Gangia, arises from Mount Caucasus, and bends its
course to the South through or between the Rocks of the Province of Siba, and
soon after becomes very broad; then proceeding on its course Southward, it
receives by the way the Waters of thirty Rivers, as Ananias says, or according
to Pliny, ninety, so that it swells exceedingly, and spreads above four Miles
in breadth, yet not above eight Fathom deep, and at last, after a long course,
falls through many Mouths into the Sea, the chiefest whereof and most Westerly
is Satigan or Satiguam, so called from a City of that Name built on its Banks,
a Seaport Town, where the Portuguese used to drive a great Trade; the other
being the most Easterly, is also near a famous Sea-Harbor, and is called
Chatigan, both which are under the Jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Bengala.

The Ganges at last discharges its Water through two noted Mouths into the Bay
of Bengala. These Mouths Ptolomy places in the eighteenth and nineteenth Degree
of Northern Latitude; but Barros and Linschot set them in twenty two or twenty
two Degrees and a half.

Accounted holy, and why.
Those of Bengala, as the same Linschot writes, affirm the Head of Ganges to be
in the terrestrial Paradise, and therefore account the Water thereof holy; and
for that cause the Benjans and other Indian Heathens, go thither in Pilgrimage
to bathe themselves, and to drink of it; and the Inhabitants of Bengala lying
on their Deathbeds, cause themselves to be thrown into the said River, or at
least to have their Feet dipped in.

A Pint of Water (a thing very remarkable) of the Ganges, Lighter than other
Water.
is not above half so heavy as that of any other Water in India, and is also
very wholesome, and has a good relish.

In the middle of the Ganges lie many great and small Isles, which are very
fruitful, and all of them overgrown with wild Fruit Trees; but most of them at
this day lie waste, by reason of the French Pirates from Racau; yet they have
store of wild Swine, and diverse sorts of Fowls on the same, as also Tigers,
which swim from one Island to another, and therefore it is very dangerous to
Land on any of them.

The Ganges is supposed to abound with Gold and Pearls, Its Riches.
and from its bottom are fetched all manner of Precious Stones, on some of
which are perfectly represented the shapes of Beasts, Plants, and other things.

There is another Ganges, being only two Streams joining their Waters, which
rise first Eastward of Gavel, near the Mountain Gate, in 18 or 19 Degrees of
Northern Latitude. The River which comes out of the Northermost Spring, is
called Kinsuar, as that out of the Southern, Benhora; but by their conjunction
losing their former Denominations, are called Ganga like the other. But this
River at last discharges its Waters into one of the Mouths of the Ganges,
between Angely and Picholda, in about 20 Degrees of Northern Latitude. The
Inhabitants also hold this Water in great veneration, by which means it is very
advantageous to the Mahumetan Lords of the Country through which it runs,
because they permit no Person to wash his Face in the same without paying them
a certain Sum of Money.

The River Bark rises from another Spring on the West side of Mount Gate, and
empties it self through the Gulf or Bay of Bombain, separating the Kingdom of
Zuratte or Cambaya, from that of Decan.

The Stream Aliga likewise discharges its Water on the West side of the same
Mountain, against the middle of the Isle Anchedive, in 14 Degrees of Southern
Latitude, having before separated the two Kingdoms of Decan and Canara.

The great River Nagundy gliding from Mount Gate, which is beyond Cananop and
Calicut, runs Northerly, but within sight of the Aliga changes its course
Eastward, and passes on through the Metropolis of Bisnagar and the Province of
Orixa, and afterward loses it self in the Bay of Bengala, between the
sixteenth and seventeenth Degree, where the two Towns, Guadenary and
Masulipatan, are built.

The Lake of Chiamay, lying in the North toward Tartary, is the Head of six
great Rivers, The Lake of Chiamay.
of which three uniting one with the other, make a large Stream, which cuts
through the middle of the Kingdom of Siam, as the other three fall into the Bay
of Bengala.

Many more Rivers and Lakes has India and the Mogol's Country, which in our
following Discourse shall be described in their proper places.

Floating Bridges.
Cross the Rivers near which any Highways lie, are almost no other Bridges made
than of Ships, by reason of the Waters in the rainy Seasons, which would carry
away any other that do not float.

In several places of India are Wells or Cisterns, on which the Inhabitants
bestow great Cost, being very large and spacious, raised up with Freestone,
neatly joined together, and covered on the top with an Arch; the Water is drawn
up by Oxen in little Pales or Buckets.

The Stagna's or Ponds, which are all artificial, of which there are very many
in India, may justly be accounted amongst the best of their Rarities, though
they account them for things of small consequence; they are made in low places,
and some of them very deep and broad, and a Mile or more in circumference, and
are able to furnish a populous City with Water a whole year; most of them are
enclosed within a low Stone Wall, having several Doors, and about the inside of
the Wall are many Steps leading down to the bottom, which is paved with
Freestone. These kind of Ponds are near populous Towns, for the accommodation
of the People, and built for the most part at the charge of the Public; they
are filled with Water in the rainy Seasons, being first made clean, that so the
Water may be clear; and it continues so sweet, that not only Men and Beasts
drink of it, but they also use it upon all other occasions.

The Mountains.
As to what concerns the vast Mountains in this Country, the most famous are
those of Balla-Gate, which begin in the North, and extend Southward to the Cape
of Comory, by the Inhabitants, and also by Ptolomy called Cory, a Tract of a
hundred and twenty Leagues; they begin to raise their tops near the River
Carnate, not far from the Cape and Mountain Dely, and are good Marks to those
that Sail along the Coast, and lying in twelve Degrees and a half of Northern
Latitude, divide the Kingdoms of Decan, Cuncan, Canara, and Malabar, from
Balla-Gate, the Coast of Cormandel, and Fish-Coast, of which particularly, and
their general Denominations, more hereafter.

India abounds with great and small Beasts, Beasts.
as Oxen, Cows, Goats, Sheep, Hogs, and all manner of other Cattle, the Flesh
whereof is not so well tasted as ours, by reason of the great heat of the
Country. They seldom kill any Oxen, because they use them to work. Mutton is
little esteemed, so that all sick Persons are prohibited to eat thereof; but
Pork is reckoned very wholesome Food.

The Horses here are but ordinary, the best being brought thither from Arabia
and Persia by the Portuguese, and of late from Usbeck are yearly brought twenty
or thirty thousand, as also a great number through Candahor out of Persia; some
also are transported hither by Sea from Ethiopia, Arabia, and Persia, out of
the Havens of Moca, Bassora, Bander, and Abassy.

But here are great numbers of Buffalo's, of whose Milk the Owners make little
dry and salt Cheeses, and when they do not yield that plenty, they kill and eat
them.

Here are also many Elephants, and Rhinocerots called Abadas, as also abundance
of Apes and Bats as big as Cats, which some call Flying-Cats.

In Malacca, Siam, and Bengala, are abundance of wild Goats, whose Horns are
good against Poison; the Portuguese call them Cabras de Mato, that is, Wild or
Forrest-Goats.

In India likewise are great numbers of Fowls, as Pheasants, Partridges,
Pigeons, Parrots, and Parraketo's of all sorts of colors. There are also
Camelions, diverse sorts of Serpents, and Hedghogs.

In Balagate are Rams without Horns, yet notwithstanding are so strong, that a
Youth may easily ride on them.

In many places of India up into the Country, breed abundance of Tigers,
especial in Bengala, near Mount Caucasus, and the Island of Iava, insomuch
that the Natives for fear of them dare not venture to gather such quantities of
Gum Benzoin as they would. Some say this Beast is about the bigness of an Ass;
others, that it is no bigger than a Greyhound; but Nearchus swells it to the
bigness of a Horse, affirming to have seen the Skin of one above five Foot
long; it much resembles a Cat, having a thick Head, spotted Skin, glittering
Eyes, sharp Teeth, Claws with Talons, and long Hair upon the Lips, which is so
poisonous, that if either a Man, or the Beast it self should swallow one of
them, it would certainly kill him; and the Inhabitants have observed, that it
never goes to drink in any River, but always with its Mouth before the Stream,
and never against it, that so the Water infected by its poisonous Hair may not
occasion its own death; and for the same reason it never drinks out of Lakes,
Pools, or any standing Waters; and therefore all Persons are forbidden by the
Great Mogol, to keep any of the Bristles of a dead Tiger, but on pain of death
must send them all to his Court, where by the King's Physician most poisonous
Pills are made thereof, which are given to those whom the King condemns to die
at his pleasure.

The Tygre exceeds all Beasts in ravening, for he is said to be the most
voracious and fiercest Creature in Bengala, and that he will follow a Ship from
which he receives the least injury, above thirty Leagues along the Shore, and
therefore the Inhabitants are greatly afraid of him, and call him by several
Names.

Pliny says the Tiger is a Beast of wonderful swiftness; which Bontius
contradicts, affirming that he is very flow, and therefore lurks, or rather
watches for Mankind, who are not so swift as Stags, wild Swine, and other
Beasts, which may easily escape from him by flight; wherefore he never catches
any Beast, except it be by surprise, lying sculking in a Hedge or Thicket, from
whence he leaps suddenly upon them; and if he chance to miss his prey, then he
returns growling back, and runs into the Wood, to see what he can find there;
he generally strikes his Tallons into the Necks of those Beasts he seizes, and
beats the strongest down with one stroke, and having first sucked out the
Blood, drags the remaining part into the Wood to satisfy his Hunger with the
Flesh by Meals. He keeps generally in the Woods, watered by Rivers, that when
other Beasts come to drink, he may surprise and prey upon them.

There are likewise Jackalls, in the Greek called Hyena, Camelions, and
Lizzards, besides vast numbers of Ravens, which flying into the Houses, if the
Windows be open, carry away the Meat from the Table.

The Rats of this Country are as big as sucking Pigs, which do much mischief
to the Houses, by undermining the Foundations, and eating through the Walls.
Another fort of Rats, which are lesser, and have red Hair smelling like Musk,
also molest this Country, and therefore the Inhabitants set their Chests and
Cupboards on four Pillars a good distance from the Wall, placing Tubs with
Water underneath; for else they would immediately swarm with the said Insects.
Besides these, there are other Pismires, which being a Finger long, do great
mischief to Plants.

This Country stored with Plants.
This Country is stored with all manner of Plants; and though there grows
little Wheat, yet it abounds with Rice and Barley, as also Maiz, or Indian
Corn, and abundance of Shellfruit. There are few or no Apples, Pears, Cherries,
Plums, Peaches, and fewer Grapes, except in China: But in stead of them, there
are many other Trees, Plants, and Fruits, unknown in Europe. The chiefest of
the Trees is the Coco-tree, which bears Coco-nuts, and affords many other
Commodities.

The other Plants, Fruits, and Drugs are Banana's or Pisang, Anana's, Jaca,
Mangas, Kaions, Jambes, Jambolins, Jangomas, Carambolas, Brindoins, Durions,
Papaios, Inj^mes, Areka, Betel, Cubebs, Tamarind, Myrobalanes, Ambare,
Caranda's, Mangostans, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cardamom,
Galanga, Cost, Spikenard, Aloes, Camphir, Calambak, Sandal-wood, Benzoin,
Amphion or Opium, Indico, Ambergreece, Musk, Civet, Assafoetida, China Roots,
Great Canes, and many other Plants and Fruit.

Chewing of Betel very common, with its Description.
The chewing of Betel with Areca and Chalk is very common through India, and
therefore ought to be briefly described. The Betel, or Betre, is by the
Arabians, as Avicenna testifies, called Tembur, or Tambul; by the Turks,
Japrach Industani; by those of Decan, Zuratte, and Canaria, Pan.

This Betel runs up by Poles like our Hops, and also on the Bodies of Trees:
Some, to their greater advantage, permit them to grow up by the Pepper or Areca
Trees. They constantly water their Betel, the Leaves whereof are like those of
the Lemmon-trees, but a little bigger, longer, and sharper at the end.

This Plant, according to Garcias, resembles that of the Pepper so exactly in
Twigs, Leaves, and manner of growth, that one who does not very well know it
cannot distinguish them. The Betel also produces a Fruit like that of the White
and Long Pepper, or rather like a Rats Tail, which the Malayans call Syriboa,
and is for its strange shape in greater esteem than the Betel Leaf it self.

The Description and Use of Areka.
The Fruit Areca, or Arecka, so called in general by the Indians, and by the
Portugues, with a corrupted Name, Arequero, is in Zurratte and Decan called
Suppary; on the Island of Zeilan, Paoz; in Malacka, by the Javans, Pinang; in
Cotzyn, Chacany; by the Arabians, Fausel; and by Avicenna, Filfel and Fufel; on
the Coast of Malabar, by the Vulgar, Pak; but by the Nobles, Areca. Vartoman
calls the Tree Areca, and the Fruit Coffol.

The Tree it self on which this Fruit grows shoots up with a straight Body,
having so smooth a Bark, that none can climb up without some help. The Boughs
shoot not downwards, but upwards, and also turn up at the ends, and therefore
at some distance seem Globular. The Leaves thereof grow like the Teeth of a
Comb, one by another. The Fruit grows on the undermost Boughs, ten or twelve of
them in a Cluster, at a thick long Stalk, and being covered with a rough yellow
Shell, is about the bigness of a Nutmeg, or small Acorn; and before it grows
hard, it is like a Date, full of pale red Veins, and flat at one end: Yet
nevertheless there are three several sorts of it; the first is flat on one
side, and on the other broader and bigger; the second being less, blacker, and
harder, is by the Indians called Checanum, and grows for the most part in
Cotzyn: It draws the Rheum, Its Virtues.
and makes the Mouth look of a reddish black color, like the Mulberry. The
third sort makes a man giddy, and intoxicates the Brain; though this quality is
ascribed only to the unripe Fruit, There is also a white sort, which grows in
great abundance in Zeilan. Out of the great Fruit, by the power of Fire and
Glass Instruments, the Inhabitants distill a Water, which is a most excellent
Medicine against a Flux. The Fruit grows very plentifully in Malabar, on the
Island Zeilon, and also in Zurratte, Decan, and Malacka; but the best of all,
on the Island Mombain, and in Basaim.

How they use it.
The Indians break this Fruit into four pieces, if it be pretty big, or else
into two; and roll them up in a Betel Leaf, with a little Ashes, or Chalk of
burnt Oyster-shells: for the Betel being chewed alone is bitter; therefore, to
take away that bitterness, they mix the same with Areka and a little Chalk, and
esteem the same, thus prepared, of a pleasant taste. Some also put a Juice
called Cate amongst it, which with them is an excellent Remedy against sore
Gums.

The Juice of Cate how made.
The Juice Cate is extracted out of a Tree about the bigness of an Ash, with
Leaves like those of the Tamarisk, having many Thorns, and said to blossom, but
bearing no Fruit. The Wood is very strong, hard, close, and heavy, and not
subject to rot, whether it stands in the Air or Water; wherefore the
Inhabitants call it Hacchie, that is, Semper vivens; of which, by reason of its
hardness, they make great Pestles to stamp their Rice in Wooden Mortars, six
Foot in circumference.

This Tree grows for the most part in Cambaya, especially in and about the
Towns Bacaim, Manora, and Daman, as also on the Main Land of Goa, and in many
other Places, though not in such abundance as in those forementioned, from
whence the Juice Cate is carried in great quantities to China and Malacka,
Carried much to China.
(because it is much used there with Betel:) but to Arabia and Persia in lesser
quantities, as a Drug.

The manner of extracting this Juice is thus: The Boughs of the Tree being cut
small, are decocted in Water, then stamped, and made up into Cakes with the
Meal of Nachoani (which is a small black Seed, of taste like Rye, and good to
make Bread) and the Saw-dust of a kind of black Wood, which are dried in the
Shade, that the Sun may not attract their Virtue.

Very Physical.
It is an excellent Remedy not only to preserve the Gums, and fasten the Teeth;
but also to stop a Flux, and to cure sore Eyes.

Thought to be the Lucium of the ancient Greeks and Romans.
Garcias will have this to be the Lucium of the ancient Greeks and Romans; for
the manner of extracting it is by all described to be the same with theirs, and
judged to have one and the same operation with the Cate.

This Juice has received the Name Cate from the Arabians, Persians, and other
People of Asia, because the greatest quantity thereof is used in Malacka, where
it bears the same denomination, except that the last Letter E changed into O,
makes it Cato.

Noblemen mix their Betel with Burnean Camphir, Calamback or Aloe-wood, Musk,
and Ambergreece.

The general use of Betel.
The Betel being thus prepared, is of an extraordinary pleasant taste, and by
its being perfumed causes a sweet Breath, and for that reason is constantly
chewed by the Inhabitants, as also others, according to their Estates and
Quality; though some chew their Areka with Cloves and Cardamom.

The Kings and Princes use also Pills of beaten Areka, Cate, Camphir, and
Aloe-wood, which they chew with Betel in stead of Areka.

When they, use their Betel, they first nip out the Veins in the Leaves; then
they roll up the Ashes of burnt Oyster-shells and the bruised Areka in a Betel
Leaf, which they put into their Mouths and chew. The first Moisture, being red
like Blood, they spit out, that its acrimony may not prejudice their Mouths;
the rest they swallow: and some which account it an excellent Medicine for the
clensing of the Brain, swallow the first also. The redness of the Moisture is
occasioned by the Ashes, the Juice of the Betel being of it self green. It also
makes the Lips and Teeth red, and black if too much used, which the Indians
extol as much as we white Teeth.

The Kings themselves present these Leaves by their Servants to their Nobles
and others. Those who go to travel have Silk Bags full of Betel given them:
Neither does any Friend go from the other without a Present of Betel, that
being a Farewel-Gift.

Brindones, a Fruit.
In several Parts of India grows a certain Fruit called Brindones; and by
Linschot, Brindoins; which is a little reddish on the outside, but blood-red
within, and of a very sour taste: yet many People are much pleased with it;
and the Dyers make great use of it.

The Ambare Tree.
The Ambare is a large thick Tree, with Leaves like those of the Walnut, of a
pale green, and interlac'd with many Veins. The Flowers are small and white;
the Fruit about the bigness of a Walnut, with a smoother Shell, of a strong
scent, and a firm and well-rellish'd Pulp.

The Canarians call this Tree Ambare; the Portuguese the Fruit Ambares; the
Persians, Ambereth; the Turks, Aarab: And all use the Juice thereof among their
Meat instead of Verjuyce. The ripe Fruit being also eaten with Salt and Vinegar
causes an appetite. The Indians look upon the same as an excellent Medicine
against the Rising of the Gall. The Fruit being pickled up in Salt and Vinegar,
keeps good a long time. Texeira tells us, that this Tree loses its Leaves so
soon as any Water falls on the same, and that the like of it is not in all
India.

The Amba Tree.
Another Fruit-tree by the Persians and Turks called Amba; in Canaria, Ambo; and
by others, Mangas, grows also in several parts of India.

It is a large spreading Tree, like our Oaks, having many great and crooked
Boughs. The Blossoms or Flowers are yellow, growing in clusters; and the Fruit
is for the most part bigger than a Goose Egg.

Its Fruit Medicinal.
The Mangas, or Amba, is the best Fruit that grows in India, the same Tree
producing Fruit different in Colors; for some are of a pale green, others
yellow, and a third reddish, which are of a very pleasing smell, but of a
bitter taste, and is accounted a good Medicine against the Worms.

The green Fruit is very sour, and if eaten raw hurts the Teeth; wherefore
many make a Pap thereof, which mixed with Sugar tastes like scalded
Goosberries: And thus prepared, it fortifies the Stomach, cools the
Inflammation of the Blood, Liver, and Reins.

The immoderate use of it breeds the Flux.
The ripe Fruit not only changes its green color into yellow, but also loses
its cooling quality, becoming sweeter, and more moist wherefore if any eat
thereof immoderately, he is certain to have the Bloody Flux.

Acosta tells us, That this Fruit is sometimes cut into Slices, steeped in
Wines, and so eaten. It is also preserved with Sugar, that so it may keep the
longer; and sometimes opened in the middle with a Knife, and stuffed full of
Ginger, Garlic, Mustard Seed, Salt, Oil, and Vinegar.

Before this Fruit is fully ripe it hangs from April till November upon the
Tree, according to the nature of the Soil, and situation of the Place.

The Carandas.
The Carandas is a Tree about the bigness of a Crab-tree, has the same sort of
Leaves, and abundance of Blossoms, The Fruit also resembles a Crab, which,
ripe, some eat with Salt; but generally they pickle them green in Salt and
Vinegar, and eat them to provoke an Appetite.

Nimbo, a Physical Tree, and its Virtues.
Another Tree, highly extolled for its Physical Virtue, though very scarce, is
called Nimbo; and by those of Malabar, Bepole. It grows to the bigness of an
Ash, and at a distanee seems very like it. The Boughs are full of Leaves, and
white Cinque-foil'd Flowers, with yellow Stalks smelling like Thyme. The Fruit
is like an Olive, covered with a thin Shell, and grows at the ends or
extremities of the Boughs. This Tree is much used in Physic. The Leaves are
very excellent; for being bruised, and dipped in Lemmon Juice, and laid on
Ulcerated Wounds, as well of Men as Beasts, they suddenly heal the same,
because they first draw out all the Purulent Matter, mundisie the Flesh, and
make the Skin to grow. The Juice of the Leaves is very good, taken either
alone, or with Wine, Water, or Broth, or applied outwardly upon the Navel, with
a little Ox-gall, Vinegar, or Aloes, to kill and destroy all sorts of Worms;
and therefore the Inhabitants of this Country, especially those of Malabar,
much use it. The Flowers and Fruits also do them great kindness, in curing of
Aches, Pains, Ulcers, Swellings, and Weakness of the Limbs. Out of the Fruit
they extract an Oil exceeding good against the shrinking of, or pains in, the
Sinews, if used warm, and applied by the Malabars to cure Wounds, Stitches, and
other Distempers.

The Nigunda, another Physical Tree.
Two other Trees grow in many Places of India, especially in the Province of
Malabar, and are found to be excellent Remedies against diverse Distempers. The
first is accounted the Male, and by the Canarians called Varalo Nigunda. It is
about the bigness of an Almond Tree, with Leaves green at the top, and woolly
underneath, with notches round about the edge.

The other, being the Femal, is by the Portuguese called Negundo, or Norchila;
in Malabar, Noche; in Balagate, Sambali; and commonly in Canaria, Nyergundi:
But the Arabians, Persians, and the Inhabitants of Decan, call both the Male
and Female Bache; and the Turks, Ayt.

They both grow to about the same height; or, as Garcias affirms, to the height
of a Peach-tree: but have broader and rounder Leaves, much resembling those of
the white Poplar.

The Leaves of both are in taste sharp, and bitter on the Tongue. Underneath
most of Leaves in the Morning lies a kind of white or Froth, which distills out
of them in the Night. The Blossoms of both are of a whitish Ash Color,
resembling that of the Rosmary; and the Fruit also of both is like black Pepper.

Its Virtues.
This Tree is very serviceable in the Countries where it grows, to all Diseased
People; and therefore would long ere this have been extinguished, or at least
been raised to a great value, if the cut off Sprigs did not grow again: But the
more the Boughs are cut, the better the Tree thrives. The Leaves and Flowers
being bruised together, and boiled in Water, or fried in Oil, are with great
success applied to all Sores whatsoever, and have wonderful Operations on
Bruises, Sprains, and Aches.

The Women wash and bathe their Bodies at all times with the Water wherein the
Leaves of this Tree are boiled; nay, they believe that the Juice of the Leaves,
Flowers, and Fruit cause Conception. The Daya's or Ladies also make use of this
Tree.

Jambolins, a wholesome Fruit.
In the Fields of India grows a wild Plant, shaped like a Myrtle Tree, but with
Leaves like those of a Crab-tree, or, as Paludanus says, of a Hawthorn, which
bears a Fruit exceedingly resembling a great Olive, but of a very sharp taste,
by the Inhabitants called Jambolins, which are pickled up like Olives. The Bark
of this Tree is almost like that of the Mastick, and, according to Acosta, is
not used in Physic, but boiled and eaten with Rice, because it creates a good
Appetite.

Jangomas, what it is like
The Jangomas is a Fruit in color like Rasberries, but in taste like a green
Plum, growing upon a large and prickly Tree. It comes up wild in the a Fields,
as also in the Gardens of Basaim, Chouly, and Batequala.

The best way (as Garcias has it out of the Mouths of credible Persons) of
Planting this Tree is, to sow the Seeds with the Dung of a certain Bird who
feeds on the Fruit.

Its Virtue.
Jacob Bont affirms, That this Tree is very like the Sloe-tree; wherefore the
Hollanders in Java call the Jangomas, Javan-Sloes, or Little Plums. When ripe,
they turn yellow; and the Juice of these, like that of ours, mixed with the
Water of Champacka and Roses, cures the Heat in the Throat, and is an
infallible Medicine against the Bloody Flux, Looseness, and Gripings.

Prosper Alpinus, in his Book of the Egyptian Plants, calls this Tree Paliurus,
out of whose Fruit is made a Syrrup, which is no less famous than was the Juice
of Acacia amongst the Ancients.

Amongst the chiefest and most delicious Fruits of all India, Mangostans.
is that called Mangostans, which, as Garcias tells us, is as big as an Orange,
having an Ash-colored Skin, and a Pulp like an Orange, but not sticking to the
Shell.

This Fruit grows on a small Tree, like an ordinary Apple Tree, but having
Leaves like Laurel, and yellow Flowers.

The Fruit in the Shell represents exactly the Granate, and has the same
taste, only a little bitterer. At the bottom about the Stalk it is covered
with three or four little Leaves, like a Rose; but has a Crown on the top, the
number of whose spiry points agree exactly with the Kernels within.

The Fruit which the Malabars and Portuguese call Corambola's, is in Decan
named Camariz; Corambola's, their Description.
in Canara, Camarix and Carabeli; in Malaya, Bolimba or Balimba; by the
Persians, Chamoroch; and by Linschot, Bolunbak. This Fruit is about the bigness
of a small Hens Egg, separated into four parts, of a yellowish color, and
grows on a Tree about the bigness of a Quince-tree. The Blossoms thereof
consist in five reddish-colour'd Leaves, and like those of a Caper, small, and
of no pleasing smell; but fair to the Eye, and in taste like Sorrel.

This Fruit, as Bontius affirms, lies in an oval Cod, divided by thin Skins
into four parts, which enclose the Seed. The green Fruit is sour and
attracting; but the ripe is not of that quality.

Their Use and Virtues.
They commonly pickle them in Vinegar (as many other Indian Fruits) with
Garlic, Onions, Green Ginger, and Pepper, and serve them to the Table in stead
of Capers, Olives, and other Sawces, to create a Stomach. Of the Juice thereof
they make a Syrrup, very good against the Bloody Flux, Gripings, Cramp, Burning
Fevers, and all other Distempers proceeding from the Gall; to which purpose the
Inhabitants of the Island Java preserve the same. Moreover this Syrrup, being
mixed with Honey, is taken for sore Throats.

The Canarians make of its Juice, and other Inland Medicines, an excellent
Water against Dimness, and other Distempers incident to the Eyes.

Their Midwives, which they call Dayas, use also the dried beaten Fruit, by
mixing Betel amongst the same, to force away the Secundine.

Many Precious Stones found here.
Between the Island Zeilan and the Cape of Comori, near the Island Manar, the
Natives Fish for Pearl. The Kingdoms of Decan and Golconda afford the
Inhabitants excellent Diamonds. India also produces Topazes, Berils, Rubies,
which the Arabians call Yacut, Hyacinths, Granats, Smaragds, Chrysolites,
Amethysts, Agats, Bezoarstones, and Borax. Some Places also yield Gold and
Silver, and all manner of other Metals.

The Seasons in India are much differing from ours, and one Coast from another.

Little Rain in India.
In Suratte, and through all India, there falls little or no Rain, excepting at
the Season in the Country Language called Pausecal, which lasting about three
Months, begins in June: and by reason of these constant Rains, some name these
three Months Winter: Notwithstanding, at this time, as well in India, as in
other Countries lying in 23 Degrees from the Equinoctial Line, they feel the
greatest and powerfullest Heat.

On all the Coasts of India the Rainy Seasons begin not at one time's; for it
begins first in the Southern Country from the Cape Comoryn, and runs from
thence to the Northern Parts; wherefore it begins later in Cambaya, and other
Northerly Places, than at Goa, where it appears on the eleventh of May.

Wherefore the farther the Places lie to the Northward, the longer it is before
the Rainy Season comes thither: And for the same reason the Persians, in their
Table-books and Almanacks, set the down the Rainy Seasons to begin in India on
the fifteenth of their third Month, which they call Cordad, and, according to
our Account of Time, falls out on the twenty third of May: For these Almanacks
are made suitable to the Latitude of the Northern Countries, as to Cambaya,
Surat, and many other Places where the Portuguese drive the greatest Trade.

The beginning of their Winter and Summer.
From the Kingdom of Cambaya, which is the first Westward to the Cape of
Comoryn, along the Coast of Malabar, Winter begins about the latter end of
April, and continues till August; and at the same time from this Cape to the
Coast of Cormandel it is Summer, and the contrary in the following Months,
when it is Summer every where else, for from August to April, so long as it is
Winter in the Eastern parts of India, or on the Coast of Cormandel, the
Inhabitants Westward on the Coast of Malabar enjoy plenty of Summer Weather,
whenas both these Places lie under one Climate, and in one Latitude.

Benefit of the great Rains.
Many years since it has been found by experience, that this Rain having
continued some days in India, and ceasing, and fair Weather following for many
Weeks after, it begins to Rain with greater violence than before; and therefore
without doubt this Rain is the only work of Divine Providence, because India
without these great Rains would not be inhabitable in those times, by reason of
the exceeding Heat and Drought, which is made temperate by the Rain, which also
moistens the Ground, being before parched and burnt, and not only makes these
Countries habitable, but also fruitful, causing the Ground to produce all
things in a plentiful manner, whilst the Air grows much sweeter and
pleasanter, and much healthier for all Persons.

There is also this difference in respect of the several remote Countries, viz.
the Rain being sooner, and much more in one place than the other; as in
Bagnola, and along the Coast of Cormandel, to the Island Ceilon, it begins and
ends a Month sooner than on the Coast of Malabar. In Bagnola the rainy Season
continues four Months, and sometimes it Rains eight days and Nights without
ceasing; whenas in Doly and Agra it is nothing near so vehement, nor of that
continuance, three or four days passing together without a drop of Rain, and
commonly from Sunrise till nine or ten a clock it Rains very little or not at
all. But the most remarkable difference is, that the Rain which falls in these
several places comes out of diverse parts of the World, as toward the City of
Dely it comes out of the East, in which Bengala lies, whenas there, and on the
Coast of Cormandel, it comes out of the South, and on the Coast of Malabar
always out of the West. According as the Summer Heats come earlier or later, or
are hotter or milder, so the rainy Season comes also sooner or later, falls in
more or less abundance, and continues longer or shorter. It seldom Rains at
Dely till after several days abundance of Clouds are driven Westward.

Lastly, this rainy or tempestuous Season is commonly by a corrupt Arabic word
called Mauzon Mausem.

Anciently five thousand great Cities in India.
Ancient Geographers relate, that in former Ages five thousand great Cities
flourished in India, the best of which was Nysa, in which (as the Natives
affirm) Father Liber or Bacchus was born; and to this day all the Towns and
Cities in India are very large and populous, which is no wonder, considering
the Indians, an ancient People, never went out of their native Country.

Bacchus was the first that marching with his Army into India, subdued them,
after which the Persians vanquished and possessed the Country lying between
the Indus and Ganges, till Alexander having vanquished Darius, defeated Porus
King of India; after this it enjoyed the happiness of a luxuriant Peace, every
one under his peculiar King, till they were invaded by the Portuguese; the
first whereof was Vasques de Gama, who setting Sail Anno 1497 from Spain,
discovered the Seacoasts from India; after which others of the same Nation;
and lastly, the English and Hollanders about the latter end of the last Age,
have made farther Inspections into these Countries.

Their general Name.
All the Inhabitants of India are by a general Name called Indig or Indians,
though they have several other Titles given them, according to their several
Qualities, or the diverse Countries wherein they reside.

All the Indians along the Coast of Cormandel, Division.
and other Countries thereabouts, are divided into four Tribes, viz. those of
the Brahmanes, Settrea's, Weinsja's or Benjans, and Soutra's; others add a
fifth, but themselves think it not worthy to be reckoned amongst them.

Diodorus Siculus and Strabo anciently divided these People into seven Tribes,
who all followed several Employments or Studies; and amongst these the first
were the Philosophers, which without doubt were the Brahmans or Brahmines,
concerning whom they say, that as amongst Beasts, The Brahmans highly esteemed.
the Cows, amongst Birds, the Gorouda, (which is a red Sparrow with a white
Circle about the Neck) amongst Trees, the Rawasistow is the most esteemed, so
likewise amongst Men, the Brahmans are best beloved of God, and therefore are
highly reverenced and honored by their own Natives. The Vedam or Law-Book has
not a little added to the Honor of this Tribe: for by that Law no Brahman can
be put to death, let his Crime be never so heinous; but if for some capital
Offense he has deserved to die, they only put out his Eyes: for they account
it one of the five deadly Sins that cannot be pardoned, to put a Brahman to
death; wherefore whoever kills a Brahman, must, according to the Order of the
Vedam, go in Pilgrimage twelve years, and beg Alms with the deceased Brahmans
Scull, out of which he must eat and drink whatsoever is given him, and after
expiration of that time be bountiful in giving Alms, and build a Temple in
honor of Eswara.

The Settrea's
The second Tribe in order is that of the Settrea's, consisting in the Nobility
of the Country, who are called Rays or Ragias, and are (as we say) Comites
Regis, the King's Companions or Cousins, who therefore writes in his Letters,
Raja of Raja's. In ancient times this Tribe had only two Branches, the one
called Souriwansjam, and the other Somowansjam; Souri signifies in the Country
Idiome, Samscortam, or the Sun; and Somo, the Moon.

Besides these two, there are at this day many other, though of less Dignity,
because they degraded their Pedigree, by mixing with other inferior Tribes;
wherefore those of the two Branches will not contract any Marriuges or affinity
with them.

The Noblemens duty.
The Office of these Noblemen is to defend the Country, oppose their Enemies,
take care for the maintenance of the Brahmans, see that the Laws be not
violated, and in short, to inspect the Government of the whole Realm.

The Weinsja's
The third Tribe is that of the Weinsja's, and comprehends some which are called
Comiteia's, and others Setti Weapari. They maintain themselves by Merchandising
and Broakage, which Office they are bound to perform with great fidelity, and
be contented with a reasonable Gain. Most of them live after the manner of the
Brahmans, and like them, never eat any thing which has life, when as those of
the second and fourth Tribe eat Fish and Flesh, Beef only excepted, which in
the Vedam or Law-Book is generally forbidden to all the Tribes. Moreover, this
Sect is also called Vanjans or Banans.

The Soudra's
The fourth Tribe is that of the Soudra's, and consists of the vulgar or common
sort of People, but most especially of Tradesmen and Artificers, This Tribe is
also divided into many several Branches, distinguished by peculiar Names. Of
these the Family of the Wellaca's are chief, whereof some Govern the Country,
and others live upon their Estates.

The Ambria's
Next to these follow in order the Ambria's, being for the most part Husbandmen,
the rest either Serve the Nobility, or live by their Labor.

The Palla
That Family styled Palla, is the meanest of all the Soudra's.

The Cowrea's.
The Cawrea's are a very great Branch, being styled The three hundred
Warehouses, from a Barthwuherri, who after his parting from 300 Married Women
or Wives, became a Samjasy, and gave them leave to Marry other Men, with
promise that it should not redound to the disgrace of them nor their
Successors. From these Marriages this Family sprang; into which are received
all such as have lost their Pedigree, and therefore they compare it to the Sea,
which receives the Waters of all Rivers, and yet never becomes full. Some of
this Family are Governors, but the most are such as Paint on Cotton, which is
partly used for Clothing in their own, and partly transported to foreign
Countries.

The Sitties are Chapmen or Pedlars, and some of them wanting Estates to Trade,
perform the Offices of Porters.

The Paly are either Drovers, who sell Cattle, Husbandmen, Painters, or
Soldiers, and were anciently accounted a valiant People.

The Cottewaneni, Sitties, and Illewanies, Trade in all manner of Fruit and
Jagara or brown Sugar.

The Caiclle are a despicable People, most of the Women being Strumpets, which
they account no disgrace.

The Catalja's are Smiths working both in Gold and Iron, Masons, Carpenters,
and Bricklayers.

The Carreans, Patnouwa's, Maccova's, and Callia's, are Fishermen; the first
and third Fish with great Nets, the second with small ones, and the last after
a different manner.

The Conapule are Scriveners; the Gurrea's and Bargurrea's, Herdsmen; and the
Berga's, though the last are accounted a noble Family.

The Kiddi are generally Husbandmen, but some of them Soldiers; the Camawaers
are also Farmers; the Inmadi and Montrea's are for the most part Military; and
the Berga Willala's. are Drovers.

The Family of the Corewa's have no settled Habitations, nor City to dwell in,
but range up and down the Country with their Wives and Children, sleeping in
small Huts, which they build in those places where they come, and at their
removal pull them down, and with the rest of their Goods carry them away on
Asses, which they keep for that purpose. They maintain themselves by making of
Soupen and Tatous, which are little Fans wherewith they winnow their Rice, and
Potlids to cover it when it boyls; they also fetch Salt from the Seaside on
their Asses Custom-free, because they are poor, and their Asses carry but small
Loads. The Women, who generally go with a Basket under their Arms, boasting
themselves to be Fortune Tellers, get great Sums of Money from ignorant People.

The Perrea's (who are the Men, for the Women are called Perresies) are a very
despicable People amongst these Heathens, not being accounted worthy to be
styled a Family, nor suffered to live near others, but dwell all together in a
corner of the City, and in the Country have not their Habitations in Villages,
but in Houses built at a large distance; neither are they permitted, to fetch
Water out of any Wells or Pits belonging to the Villages, but forced to dig
some near their own Houses; nor may they go through any Street or Village
wherein the Brahmans dwell, nay, are forbidden to enter the Pagode or Temple of
their Gods Wistwow and Eswara; they do all manner of Drudgery which none else
will undertake, and eat Horseflesh and the like Carrion; so that it is no wonder
why the other Tribes not only despise, but account them unclean, especially
the chief Brahmans. This Family is divided into two Parries, the one called
Perrea's, and the other Siripera's; which last are Tanners, Potters, and the
like. The Perrea's, being the first, are of better esteem than the Siripera's,
and therefore will never eat in any of their Houses; but the Siripera's are
permitted to eat in the Perrea's, where they show them reverence by lifting up
their Hands, and rising from their Seats. These, upon the decease of one of the
Comittys, Ritties, Palies, and others, are obliged for a small Reward, to shave
off their Beards and follow the Corpse, when it is carried out of the City or
Village to be burnt.

Every one of these Tribes must perform the Office which he has once
undertaken as long as he lives, without changing his Condition, and neither
expect to be promoted, or fear to be degraded.

The Family of the Pulia's also is accounted unclean, and are much despised:
for the other Tribes will not suffer them to come into their Houses, nor touch
any thing that belongs to them.

The Brahmans have their Denomination from one Brahma or Bramma, Original of
the Brahmans.
from whom they boast their Extract; and though they ascribe the original of
the other Tribes likewise to him, yet they affirm that they have gotten the
Name or Bramma because they proceed from the chiefest part of him, viz. the
Head, as the Settrea's out of the Arms, the Weinsja's out of the Thumb, and the
Soudra's out of the Feet.

The Vedam is the Book of their Law.
How and from whence this Brahman had his original, some of his Sect relate out
of their Vedam after this manner: Before the World was created, Wistnow, that
is, God, had some inclination to have a new place to recreate and delight
himself in; are and that upon the Leaf of a Tree he swam on the Water (for
according to their opinion there was nothing but God and Water before the
Creation) like a little Child, with his great Toe in his Mouth, in the form of
a Circle, in testimony that he is without beginning or end; and that God caused
a Flower (in the Country Language called Temara, and by us a Water-Llliy) to
grow out of his Navel, and not long after out of that this Bramma sprang. So
soon as he had received Life, he stood with great admiration, and considered
from whence lie was derived, which because he could not possible find out, God
declared it to him; whereupon he showed great signs of thankfulness and
obedience; wherewith Westnow was so well pleased, that he gave Bramma power to
create the World; who thereupon created the same, and gave Life to all things
in it.

Barthruerri, an Indian Writer, in his Book of the Way to Heaven, confirms
this, and says, One of great prudence and understanding created this World; and
more plainly in another place, Why has Bramma made the Mountain Merouwa? and
again in another, Bramma has made nothing in the World that is constant; by
which it appears, that this is really these Pagans opinion, viz. That this
Bramma was the first Man (as they say) that by the power which God gave him,
created the World, with all things therein. Yet nevertheless few amongst them
positively ascribed the Creation of the World to one Man, but either to God
himself or his Son; whence we may suppose, that the Brahmans judge their
forementioned Chief to be the Head of the Angels, or the Son of God. These
further affirm, that this Bramma had anciently five Heads but from the power
which had been given him growing more ambitious, he attempted to defile Eswara,
Wistnow's Consort, which when he heard, he was so enraged, that he caused her
to bring forth the Demon Beirewa, the chief of the Devils, who with his Claws
scratched off the middlemost Head of Bramma, as a punishment for his bold
attempt; so that he kept only four, Heads, with which he is represented in
their Pagode: Not long after which Bramma made many Verses in praise of Eswara,
who was so delighted therewith, that she promised to let him live in great
Honor and Repute with his four Heads, and put the fifth on her own.

The same Bramma, as the Brahmans affirm, shall in the other World serve in a
lower Degree; and that Annemonta, a faithful Servant to Wistnow, shall enjoy
his Place, all which will be inflicted on him as a punishment for his ambition.

But the Brahmans do not only ascribe the Creation of the World to this
Bramma, but also the Government thereof; God (as they say) not once taking
cognizance of it; for they allege, that as a King will not take the trouble
upon him to Govern his Realm himself, but appoint Viceroys or Lieutenants for
that purpose; so likewise God does not concern himself with the Government of
this World, but gave the Charge thereof to Bramma.

The same Brathrouherri in the forementioned Book, ascribes the limitation of
time which a Man is to live here on Earth to Bramma, saying. The longest time
which Bramma has granted Men to live, is a hundred years; and, All things
which happen to Mankind on Earth, is by the appointment of Bramma; which in his
Book of good Conversation he thus expresses, According as Bramma designs, so it
shall be: for it is with a Man as with the Bird Tzataca, who whether it Rains
much or little, he gets not above one drop thereof: His meaning is, That though
a Man strive never so much to raise his Fortune, it will be in vain: for
whatever Bramma has appointed for him, he shall attain to, and no more. The
Bird Tzataca, as the Brammans relate, drinks not of the Water which falls on
the Earth, but in rainy Weather holds open his Bill to receive the Drops, so
that whether it Rains much or little it avails not, the Bird not being able to
take above a Drop at once.

The same Author affirms in another place, that whatever Bramma has decreed
for Mankind, that will happen to him, and if any one be poor, it is by his
appointment: For (says he) he has appointed the Winds to feed the Serpents,
and the Grass for Beasts; whereby it appears, that this Bramma is the
principal, who has some others under him, to whom he commits the care of some
peculiar Places; but these are not accounted Gods, but only Geweta's, or
Angels. The most eminent of them is a Dewendre, who bears great sway, and is
chief over all the Heads of the eight Worlds: to seven whereof (they say) those
that have lived well here, go after their Decease, and are all commanded by
Dewendre, otherwise called Indre, as the supreme Governor, besides whom every
Place has a peculiar Tutelary Angel, who Commands one of the eight Worlds,
which are placed above the Earth. Next follow the forementioned eight Worlds,
lying between ours and Bramma-lokon, that is, The Residence of Bramma, the one
in the North, the other in the South; the Brahmans call them as follows, viz.
the first Indre-Lokon, where Dewendre or Indre has his Residence; the second,
Achmi-Lokon; the third, Jamma-Lokon, which is Hell, wherein the Wicked are
punished; the fourth, Niauti-Lokon; the fifth, Warronna-Lokon; the sixth,
Cubera-Lokon; the seventh, Wajouvia; and the eighth, Isangja-Lokon: But these
Worlds are not such as we inhabit, only places of happiness like the Elysian
Fields.

Besides the care which these Governors have of their peculiar Places, they
have other Concerns to look after, viz. Achmi has the Charge over the Fire;
Warrouna commands the Waters; Wajouvia, the Wind; Cubera, Riches, etc.

Some account this Bramma to be the same with Pythagoras, and accordingly the
Brahmans have some Books, which they firmly believe to be Pythagoras's own
Works, which agrees with what Jarchas (according to Philostratus) told
Apollonius Thyaneus, viz. That the Indians believed that which Pythagoras
taught them concerning the Soul, and instructed the Egyptians therein. But
Diogenes Laertius, who writ the Life of Pythagoras, makes mention in no place,
that ever he was in India, or that he had any acqu^antance with the Brahmans;
therefore it is to be supposed, that if Pythagoras has taught the Indians any
thing of his Doctrine, he did it not himself, but by his Books, that perhaps
were brought into these Countries.

The several Sects of the Brahmans.
These Brahmans differing amongst themselves, are divided into six several
Sects, viz. the Wistnowa, Sciva, Smarta, Scharwacka, Pasinda, and Tschecktea,
which have each their peculiar Followers. The Wistnowa's account Wistnow the
supreme God, and none equal to him, and from him they take their Denomination.

This Sect is again divided into two, the one called Tadwadi Wistnowa, or Madwa
Wistnowa, and the oath Ramanouja Wistnowa. Tadwadi signifies a Disputer, and
Tadwa Knowledge of God: for the Followers thereof are accounted great
Disputers, knowing how to discourse of God and all his Works, firmly
maintaining all their Arguments. The Name Madwa is derived from one Madway
Asjaria, who (as they say) was the first Promoter and Raiser of this Sect; as
also the Name of Ramnouja, from one Ramanouja Asjarr, the Promoter of the Sect
Ramanouja, Wistnowa.

The Westnowa's have each a peculiar way and manner to know one another.
Ceremonies of the Tadwadistes
The Tadwadistes mark themselves daily with a white Stroke, which from their
Forehead comes down their Nose, and with a round Circle about the bigness of a
Groat on their Temples, as also the upper part of the Arms near the Shoulder,
and on both Breasts, which they say is the work of Wistnow, and serves as a
Shield to defend them against the Devil and Jamma, the infernal Judge, that
they dare not touch nor approach them.

They make Promises to Wistnow, to acknowledge him for the only God, to whom
they owe Reverence and Obedience; neither do they think it sufficient to make
the forementioned Promise, but they must always lead a pious and virtuous Life.

They are under one supreme Head, who dwells up in the Country near the City
Pallacatta, in a Place called Combeconne: He wears not the Cord called Tsandhan
about his Neck, as the other Brahmans, neither has he a Wife, but upon his
entering into that Office he forsakes all worldly things, and commonly walks
with a Cane in his Hand.

The Ramanouja's Tenets.
The Ramanouja Wistnowa's mark themselves with a Sign in form like the Greek
Letter Ypsilon, viz. they begin from their Noses upwards to their Foreheads,
which is done with a Stuff like Whiting or Chalk. They also burn another Mark
in their Flesh under their Armpits, which some account sufficient, thinking it
needless to mark all their Limbs every day. This Sect think it enough when they
have once with an upright Heart promised their God to be his Servants, and
believe, that though they live wickedly all their days after, God will be
merciful to them for that Promise sake; that Wistnow will never forsake those
he once has received into his favor, alleging, that a Father will not kill
his Child, though it offend, that a Man cannot live without sin, and therefore
it is impossible that Wistnow should cast off those whom once he loved.

The Ramanouja's Wistnowa's must go bareheaded, with short Hair, except one
Lock on the top of their Heads, which in a Knot hangs down their Neck. The
supreme Head of this Sect, who resides in the City Causjewaram, in the Kingdom
of Carmatica, may from a peculiar Privilege, wear a Cloth about his Head, yet
not always, but only when he speaks with any body.

The Ramanouja's esteem their Sect to be better than that of the Tadwadistes,
because they are no Traders, nor frequent Houses of public Entertainments.

The second Sect of the Brahmans is called Seivia, or Ardhiha; the Followers
thereof believe one Eswara to be the supreme God, making all other Deities
inferior to him, nay, Wistnow himself. They make two or three Strokes with the
Ashes of burned Cow Dung on their Foreheads. Some also wear a certain Stone
called Lingama about their Necks, others in the Hair of their Heads, in
testimony that they put their whole confidence in Eswara, and acknowledge no
other God but him. Their Children also wear this Stone covered with Wax at a
String tied about their Arms, when they come to be eight or ten years of age.

The third Sect is called Smarta, whose Promoter was Sancra Atsjaria; the
Followers of whom account Wistnow and Eswara to be one and the same, though
they worship them in two several Shapes. They wear no outward Marks of
distinction. Amongst the common People this Sect is not much esteemed, and
therefore has not very many Followers, because their Opinion is somewhat above
the Vulgars apprehension, as to the Deity of the two forementioned Gods.

The fourth Sect is called Scharwaka; the Followers whereof, after the opinion
of the Epicureans, believe no Life after this; and whatever others allege to
demonstrate it, they deny, and will not be convinced without a peculiar
Demonstration.

The fifth Sect is called Pasenda, the Followers whereof affirm, that the
Doctrine taught amongst the Heathens is irrational and senceless, and therefore
they regard it not, but only mind their Bellies, and let all things run at
random, believing also with the Scharwaka's, that the Soul of a Man dies with
his Body: For how (say they) is it possible, that the Body of a Man, being
burnt to Ashes, should ever come to life again? But this Argument they maintain
not against the Christian Belief of the Resurrection of the Dead (of which they
have no knowledge,) but contradict the Heathens Opinion herein, who set down a
certain time, after the expiration of which all things shall be as they are
now. Annus Platonicus.
This Opinion was held by Plato and others, who make the time to be thirty six
thousand years.

The Pasenda's are by the Brahmans esteemed worse than those of the fourth
Sect, not only for this their Opinion, but also because like Beasts they make
no distinction between Father and Mother, Brother and Sister. They eat with all
Men, and sleep by any Women, alleging, that in the Person of another Woman
they lie with their own Wives, and for a good Name amongst Men they regard it
not; yet they are afraid to dispute their Opinion with the other Sects, as
fearing they should suffer Death, for the other being provoked with indignation
against their wicked and abominable manner of living, would certainly fall
upon, and kill them, as has often happened, to the ruin and destruction of many
of these Atheists.

The sixth Sect called Tschectea, neither Believe in Wistnow nor Eswara, but
acknowledge one Tschecti for the supreme God, from whom they affirm Wistnow,
Eswara, and Bramma to have had their original, and also their power; and
likewise that the World and all things in the same proceeded and had their
Being from him.

These three last Sects being by the Brahmans accounted superstitious, have but
few Followers of their wicked Opinions.

Those Brahmans who by their retired way of living are separated from the
others, are called Jaques. All other People that live so retiredly, are either
the Wanaprasta's, or Sanjasies, or Avadoutes.

The Wanaprasta's go with their Wives and Children into the Wood, where they
live on Roots and Fruits, without doing any kind of Labor.

Some are of so scrupulous a Conscience, that they will not pluck the least
Root out of the Ground, fearing to sin, and be the occasion of disturbing a
transmigrated Soul, which perhaps might be in the same.

This kind of living in the Woods is amongst them accounted a great piece of
Religion, and the Maintainers thereof looked upon as a very holy People.

The Sanjasies are a People that pretend to despise the World and all earthly
things, and are much more retired than the Wanaprasta's, and are not permitted
to Marry, to chew Betel, or eat and drink above once a day, and then not out of
Copper, but earthen Vessels: Moreover, they live on the Alms of others. They go
Clothed in Linen, colored with red Earth, and carry a long Cane in their
Hands; they may not so much as touch Gold or Silver, much less be Possessors of
any Money. They judge it unholy to stay above one Night in a place, and
therefore are continually traveling from one place to another. They are also
obliged to conquer five Enemies, viz. Cama, that is Desire; Croota, Anger;
Lopa, Covetousness; Madda, Pride, and affection for transitory things; and
lastly Mattzara, Concupiscence. In this Conquest they are to persevere all the
days of their Lives, studying spiritual things.

Those that lead this kind of Life, and are of the Family of the Brahmans, are
called Sanjasies for their excellency; but Permaansa if of the Tettrean or
Weinsjan Tribe, and Jogies of the Soudrean; whlch last take more freedom in
their manner of living than the true Sanjasies.

The Avadouta's
The Avadouta's being the third sort of Brahmans that live retiredly, not only
forsake their Wives and Children like the Sanjasies, but pretend to greater
Holiness, abstaining from many things which the Sanjasies regard not, viz. the
Avadouta's wear only a piece of Cotton Cloth before their Privities, Their
manner of living.
and some (though few) nothing at all, but go stark naked, without the least
shame; neither do they use Earthen Vessels, nor walk with a Cane or any other
kind of Staff, all which the Heathens look upon as a sign of their Perfection,
and as a testimony of their despising the World and all things therein. They
also strew Ashes over their Bodies, and when hungry, go into a House without
speaking, and beg Alms by holding out their Hands, which the Pagans immediately
understanding (for they know them by their going naked,) give them part of what
they have in the House, which they presently eat up before they stir. Some of
them will not so much as go into the Street to get Alms, but are contented to
sit down by some River or other which the Inhabitants accounted holy, and there
expect such Food, as the People that dwell thereabouts will bring them, which
indeed is done in a plentiful manner, for they furnish them with Milk, Fruit,
and other Food, because they account it a very pious Work.

Those amongst the Brahmans that live most reserved, and are earnest in
maintaining of their Law, The Boti
perform the Office of Priests, and are called Boti, being had in great honor
and reputation; they live on Alms, never Marry, despise all transitory things,
and to all outward appearance live very precisely, yet many of them commit most
abominable Crimes in secret.

In most parts of India there reside a pensive sort of People, who either
through the passion of Love, or the death of a Relation whom they highly
esteem, or some other Misfortune, forsaking their native Countries out of a
desperate humor, take great Journeys, and range about like Vagabonds, nothing
at all considering or fearing any ill that may befall them.

These kind of People, if Idolaters, are called Giogi, The Giogi.
otherwise Jogies; but if Mahumetans, Derwies, and Abbali, and Abdalla's; the
last go almost stark naked, wearing only a piece of Leather on their Backs
like a Badge, and carrying a Staff or Cane in their Hands.

Their Habitations and Study.
These Giogi have no other Dwelling-places than the Portals of the Pagodes or
Temples, or under the Shades of large Trees, or the open Sky. They chiefly
study Natural Magic, and the several Virtues of Herbs, Plants, and the like,
as also Sorcery and Conjurations, boasting thereby, and by Prayer and Fasting
to do great Wonders, and that they have strange Revelations, whenas indeed they
attain not to the knowledge of any thing by any other Art than the help of the
Devil, who appearing to them in several Shapes, deludes them; nay, they have
familiar Conversation with him, yet imagine the contrary, affirming themselves
to be only familiar with certain immortal and unknown Women, to the number of
forty, which they distinguish by their several Shapes and Names assumed by
them. They honor them as Goddesses; and not only the Indians, but also the
Moorish Kings show them great Reverence, keeping great Festivals, and making
annual Offerings to them in certain deep Pits, wherein they say they reside.
Wherefore if any of these Giogi, after long Fasting and Praying, can attain to
the presence of one of the said Women, and by that means have future things
revealed to them, they are for ever after highly esteemed amongst their Sect;
but much more if he can attain to that degree of being her Brother, or any
other step of Relation to her; but most of all, if he can attain to be her
Husband: for then he is cried up as a Saint, and said to have gotten more than
humane Nature.

Live under one Head.
These Giogi are very exact in their Prognostication, and live in common under
the Obedience of one supreme Head, but stand not in that awe of him as the
Roman Catholics of their Superior; neither is he only respected by his
Followers, but also held in great esteem by Persons of Quality, who also show
Obedience to him, kiss his Hands, and often stand by him in a melancholy
posture to hear him speak, accounting his Voice like that of an Oracle.

The Giogi go all naked, only covering their Privities with a small Lappet:
They wear their Hair very long, and let it hang carelessly over their Shoulders,
and oftentimes out of a strange superstitious humor, paint their Foreheads with
Sandal Wood, Saffron, and other colors, either yellow, white or red, but keep
the rest of their Body very neat and clean.

Another sort of Giogies.
There are likewise other Giogies, who lead a more strict Life, but are very
slovenly, first coloring their Bodies black, and afterward whiting it with a
Stone like Chalk. They also frequently strew Ashes upon themselves, to put them
in mind of their mortality: They let the Hair of their Heads and Beards grow
very long, wearing them very carelessly, and often painting them with diverse
colors, which makes them look more like Devils than Men.

These Giogi are undoubtedly the same with the ancient Gymnosophists, who lived
after the same manner.

Another baser sort.
There are also another sort of People almost like these Giogi, who also strew
Ashes on their Bodies; they are of a despised Tribe of the Indians, being
unclean, slovenly, and beastial, for they eat of all things that come before
them, without making the least scruple, nay, of those Beasts, which others
account an abomination to touch; wherefore they are by the Moors and Indians in
the Persian Language called Halalchor, that is, Eat-alls: But the Indians in
their Language name them Der, and abhor their Company and Conversation. They
are all very poor, living generally on Alms, or on what they can get by their
Labor, which they freely bestow in the most despicable and filthiest
Employments of the Commonalty; which they do, either because they therein obey
their Laws, which prescribe them such a kind of Life; or else out of necessity,
for a Maintenance.

Vertiaes, their manner of life
There are also Indians called Vertiaes, which shave their Heads. Peruschi tells
us, That the Vertiaes live together in great numbers, go clothed in White, with
bald Heads, and bare Chins; for they pluck out the Hair by the Roots, leaving
only a little Tuft on the Crown of their Heads. They live poorly upon Alms,
remain single, and drink warm Water, because they believe the Water to have a
Soul, and that they should kill that Soul which God has created, if they
should drink it cold. For the same reason they constantly carry little Brooms,
or rather Mops, in their Hands, made of Cotton Thrums, with which, as they
walk, they sweep the Ground, so to prevent accidental treading on any Animal:
Wherefore some will not sit down before they have swept the place very
carefully where they intend to rest themselves. They are under one Supreme Head
to the number of a hundred thousand, and wear a piece of Cloth of about four
fingers broad before their Mouths, with a hole on each side, through which
they put their Ears.

Their Opinions.
They say that the World has been created many hundred thousands of years, and
that God in the beginning sent twenty three Apostles, and a four and twentieth
in this third Age, which is not above two thousand years past, since which they
received written Laws, which before they had not. The Opinion of their Sect is
written in Books, with Surat Letters and Characters.

There are several other Sects, which differ very little from those
beforementioned; as the Janjema, the Giaugami, etc. and therefore we will not
here any farther particularize concerning them.

Privileges of the Brahmans
The Brahmans have four things allowed them in their Vedam or Law-book.

First, They may freely keep the Feast Jagam. And,

Secondly, They are permitted to instruct others therein; whereas the Weinsja's
and Soudra's may neither keep, nor learn the manner thereof.

Their third Privilege is to read the Vedam, and teach it to others; which is
forbidden to all else, but especially to the Family of the Weinsja's, which may
neither read it, speak any Words that are in it, nor hear them spoken by
others; nor may they look into the Jastra, by which Name all Books are
understood which treat of Religion.

Their fourth Privilege is, That they may give Alms if they please, and ask the
Charitable Benevolence of others: And though those of other Families may give
Alms, yet they are not allowed to beg.

They give many Alms.
In their Books they write much of giving Alms, highly extolling all Charitable
Acts; though they themselves seldom practice it, unless perchance among some
few of their fellow- Brahmans: And if any other Sect happen to come to their
Gates or Doors, they have nothing but the Word Po, Po, that is. Away, away;
because the Brahmans believe they should be defiled, if they should admit the
Conversation of any other Tribe.

Their Office.
The Office and Exercise of the Brahmans agrees very much with that of the
Levites amongst the Jews; yet some of them study Astronomy; others, Physic;
others are put into Offices by Princes and Governors; some teach Children to
read, write, and cipher: and all this, without receiving any Reward for their
Pains. But those that are poor, and have little to live on, may take a small
Reward from their Scholars.

The Brahmans also govern and serve in the Pagodes; and notwithstanding the
large Munificence of their Kings, and though, they swallow a third part of the
Revenue of the Country, yet by reason of their great number many of them are
very poor, and forced to beg: However, the greatest Necessity must not compel
them to learn any Trade, nor perform any servile Office, though for the King
himself: For if any Brahman should offer to do the same, he would not only be
despised by his Companions, but excommunicated. Nevertheless, they are
permitted to be employed as Secretaries, Agents, Counselors, and the like; for
which Businesses they are very fit, and few Persons else follow those
Employments.

In former Ages, in the time of King Rama-raia, the Brahmans, according to his
Command, received only one half of the Revenues of the Villages which had been
given them before by his Predecessors, the other half being received by the
Lords of the Country; but they have since retriv'd the whole Revenue into
their own Hands.

The Policy of the Brahmans to keep what they have got
Sometimes the Countries or Villages are taken from them, which to prevent, they
use this means: viz. When the King has given them a Village, they desire to
part it amongst some of their Poor; which if granted, they have a Letter of
License graven on a Copper Plate, by virtue of which they make their intended
Division: And after this, such Places are never taken from them by the King, or
any of his Successors. For, as they suppose it to be a Duty to do good to the
Brahmans, which is a Work acceptable to their Gods Wistnow and Eswara, whom
they serve; so they believe likewise, that by doing them any prejudice, they
should offend their forementioned Deities, and incur their heavy displeasure.

Ceremonies at the Birth of Children.
The Brahmans never marry out of their own Tribe; for those which do so are
accounted to be no Brahmans. And though any one, out of Zeal, or to be
accounted a Saint, be permitted to lead the same course of life as the
Brahmans; yet they cannot be made Brahmans, but must be so born.

The Brahmans account all Children unclean during the space of ten days after
their Birth (after the same manner as the Infants and Women in Childbed
amongst the Jews) none daring to touch them but those which tend them.
Moreover, the House wherein the Child is born is accounted unclean during the
forementioned time; wherefore no Stranger or Friend is permitted to go in till
ten days are expired, after which, viz. on the eleventh day, the House is made
clean, and all the Woman's Clothes, being of Cotton, are washed; all Earthen
Vessels are thrown away, and the Copper ones scowr'd.

On the twelfth day they make a Hamam, or Fire, which they account Holy, and
throwing Myrrh into it, say several Prayers, After the Fire is extinguished,
they give the Child such a Name as is usual amongst them; as Mainopa, Naraina,
Beiaewa, Damersa, Padmanaba, Ragoa, Tirrenata, Marlepa, Dewela, Tannopa, Carpa,
Wellopa, Rama, Goyenda, Warreda, Weinketi, or others of that kind. The Child
thus named, they make Holes in the Ears, wishing it also much joy and felicity.
This making Holes in the Ears is not done to hang Jewels therein, as many do;
but is done in compliance with a Promise of Obedience made to Wistnow and
Eswara, and for a Testimony that they will ever acknowledge them as their
Deities, and ever be constant in their Religion.

Notwithstanding the Children of the Brahmans are Brahmans in respect of their
Extract, yet they are not so accounted before they have gotten the Cord called
Dsanhem about their Necks. This Dsanhem is like fine Packthred, The Cord
Dsanhem to be worn by the Children of the Brahmans.
consisting of three Strings, each of nine fine Cotton Threads. None but
Brahmans make these Cords, and only with their Hands, without a Wheel, or any
other Tools. They wear the same like a Gold Chain, letting it hang on their
left Shoulder, cross their Breasts, under their right Arm. About the fifth Year
of their Age the Brahmans Children begin to wear the said Cord, though they may
forbear till they are ten Years old; and commonly those that are of a poor
Capacity stay till the tenth Year before they wear the Dsanhem, which cannot be
put on without a considerable Charge; for the forementioned Fire Homam, which
is made on a rising Ground, under a Canopy of stretch'dout Linen, must be kept
lighted four days with the Wood Rawasittow (the Tree whereof they account very
holy, and believe that it is most acceptable to their Gods) on which every
Brahman throws Rice in the Ears, also some boiled, together with Butter, the
Seed Zingele, Wheat, and Myrrh, whilst they say several Prayers, and use many
other Ceremonies. Moreover, the Parents of the Children must during the time of
four days entertain the Brahmans which attend the Ceremony, which stands the
Nobility in great Sums of Money.

The Children having received the Cord, which is done in August, on the Feast
Traswanala Poudewa, at the Full of the Moon, are called Bramasory's, which Name
they hold till they marry: Neither may they by virtue of the Vedam lie with any
Women in that time, nor chew any Betel, or eat above once a day, and then of no
other Food but what is begged, that by their Abstinence they may be the more
capable of Learning.

This Cord is highly esteemed amongst them; insomuch that if, age having worn
it out, it chances to break, a Brahman is not allowed to eat or drink before he
has another; for he that has not a Dsanhem, though he be a Brahman, is not
accounted one amongst them so long as he has no Cord: Therefore, by way of
prevention, they always yearly renew their Cords in August, on the Feast
Tsrawannala Poudewa, in the time of the Full Moon.

Their Ignorance in Astronomy and Philosophy.
The Brahmans are very ignorant in Natural Philosophy and Astronomy, not being
able to give a Reason of the Sun or Moons Eclipse, or any Conjunction of the
Stars; yet despise they the Europeans Knowledge in Astronomy, and support their
own with this ridiculous Fable.

A strange Fable.
Wistnow and Eswara called the Dewetaes and Raetsjasjaes to Council, to find
out an Elixir, of which whoever drank should never die, but become immortal.
After serious consideration, it was agreed, to throw the Mountain Merouwa into
the Sea, and there turn it round. In stead of a Cord, they took a great
Serpent, by them called Sesja.

The Dewetaes and Raetsjasjaes were ordered to draw the Mountain, in which work
while they were busy, it produced many strange Wonders; and amongst other
things, a Poison called Calecote Wisjam, which was so venomous, that it
infected all the World, which was forced to call for aid to Wistnow: When
Eswara observing that the People were in great pain by this Poison, she, out of
the affection which she bare to them, swallowed it: but it lay very heavy on
her Stomach; wherefore she received the Name of Nile Canta, that is,
Black-Head, by which she is called to this day.

After this, there appeared a most beautiful Woman, admired and coveted by all;
but at last Wistnow took her to himself for his Wife; she being called
Laetsemi, has a place in the Temple of Wistnow, wherein her Image stands.

The Immortal Liquor.
Not long after, when they had turned the Mountain round several times, there
appeared that which they had consulted about; viz. the thing which should take
away Hunger, Drought, and Faintness, and procure Immortality to such as drank
thereof. This excellent Elixir, by the Brahmans called Amortam, is a Liquor
like Milk; wherefore the Brahmans, which dare not drink Water in any House, are
allowed to drink Milk.

When Wistnow had made this discovery, resolving to refresh the faint and
wearied Dewetaes and Raetsjasjaes, he commanded them to stand before him,
giving some of the Amortam out of one Pot to the Dewetaes; It is denied to the
Raetsjasjaes.
but to the Raetsjasjaes, to whom he had not so much kindness, he gave somewhat
else out of the same Pot, which was of no value. The Sedition of Kagou and
Ketou.
But Kagou and Ketou, two Raetsjasjaes, suspecting the fallacy, went and stood
amongst the Dewetaes, by which means they got also some of the Amortam; which
the Sun and Moon seeing, informed Wistnow of. Whereupon Wistnow enraged to
think that they should drink of the Amortam, caused both their Heads to be cut
off: Yet they died not, because they had drank of this for the injury which
they had suffered, demanding why the Amortam was not given to them equally with
their Companions. Wistnow, in answer to Kagou and Ketou, commanded them
henceforth to be without Bodies; yet they should live as happy as others with
Bodies. Now by reason the Sun and Moon had made that complaint of them, they
were incensed with a perpetual hatred against them; and when ever either of
those Luminaries are Eclipsed, they affirm that Kagou and Ketou are in Battle
with them; and that the darkness proceeds from hence, because they are
swallowed up for a little while by their Adversaries, which have the shapes of
Serpents.

Marriage of the Brahmans Children.
The Brahmans marry their Children very young, especially the Rich; many about
their eighth year, and some immediately after the receiving of the Cord Dsanhem
in their fifth year: for before the receiving of this Cord, neither the
Brahmans, Settreaes, nor Weinsjaes may marry. The Maid must always be elder
than the Youth, which is strictly observed.

A Brahman takes special notice of all things that he meets with in the way
when he goes to choose a Wife for his Son; and as often as he meets any thing
which he judges ominous or unfortunate, so often he returns, and defers his
intent.

If those of the Family Weinsja meet a Serpent on the day when they go to make
their first Visit, they look upon it as an ill omen, giving over their Suit,
and will never be brought to renew their Addresses, judging that it will prove
a most unfortunate and bad Marriage.

The Maidens Fathers, to whom the Addresses for Marriage are made, commonly
desire to see the Young Man, and make inquiry into his Estate; which if they
approve, and like the Suitor, then he is permitted to go to her Friends, and to
see the Maid.

After the Consent of both Parties is obtained for the Marriage, then a time is
appointed, on a Good day, for the Friends to meet to celebrate the Ceremonies.

When the appointed time of the Marriages is come, then they kindle the Fire
Homam, made of the Wood of their consecrated Tree Rawasittow; and a Boti or
Priest repeats several Prayers. After this, the Bridegroom takes three Handfuls
of Rice, which he throws on the Brides Head, who does the same to him; which
done, the Brides Father according to his Quality adorns the Bride, and also
dressing the Bridegroom, washes his Feet.

Lastly, The Father taking his Daughter by the Hand, puts into same Water (if
he be rich) Money and Jewels, and gives it to the Bridgroom in the Name of God,
saying, I have nothing more to do with you; I here give her to you. When the
Father gives his Daughers Hand to the Bridegroom; he also gives with her a
Precious Gem called Tali, which being a Golden Head of an Idol fastened to a
String, is showed to the Spectators, and, after some Prayers, and Good Wishes,
is by the Bridgroom tied about the Brides Neck; and this confirms the Marriage.

The Marriage proclaimed.
All these Ceremonies are performed in the Brides Father's House; besides which,
the Confirmation of the Marriage (because it is a Business which concern the
Public Good; and a thing necessary to be known) is openly proclaimed, and
notified to all Persons: For before they confirm the Marriage, some days before
the celebrating thereof, they set an Arbor as a Sign before the Bride's Door,
as also four Pisang Trees, if they can get them. This Canopy is properly four
erected Poles, which being about seven Foot high, are covered on the top with
small Sticks, on which they lay green Boughs, and wind the Poles round about
with Pisang Leaves in sign of joy.

The Bride carried home in State
On the seventh day the Bride and Bridegroom go abroad, or else are carried in a
Palanquin, through the most eminent Streets of the City, with many Torches,
Cimbals, and Fireworks before them, accompanied by all their Friends: And thus
the Bride is publicly carried to her Husbands House.

The Married Children of the Brahmans are no more called Brahmasaries, but
Garhasta's, when they receive a second Cord, consisting of three Strings like
the first. Every ten years that they increase in their age, they add another
Cord to the former, and also another at the Birth of every Child: But this is
not so exactly observed by all; yet the more zealous they are in their
Paganism, the more strictly they oblige themselves to these Circumstances.

They marry not out of their own Tribe.
They never marry their Children, whether Sons or Daughters, to any but those of
their own Family; which those of other Tribes also observe, unless to those of
a higher Degree: But the Brahmans cannot be deceived thereby, because there are
none above them. Yet there are some Brahmans which marry Wives out of other
Tribes, but it is accounted so heinous a sin, that their Companions believe
they can never be admitted into Paradise.

Their Poranes or Ancient Histories also relate, That a Brahman of great
Quality, called Sandragoupeti Naraia, was very melancholy in his old age,
because his Son Barthrouherri was born of a Woman of the Soudran Family; for he
afterward had familiarity with three hundred Women.

Abhor Fornication.
They abhor Fornication, accounting it one of the five deadly sins; and,
according to their Vedam, he that so transgresses should have his Genitals cut
off, and so bleed to death: Also they permit none to marry within the Degrees
of Consanguinity: But they differ very much from the European Nations in
reckoning their Relations and Allies with whom they are not permitted to marry;
for they are allowed to marry with their first Wifes Sister, nay, they may
marry two, three, or more Sisters at once; but if two Brothers marry two
Sisters, it is accounted Fornication. They may also marry their Fathers Sisters
Daughter; but not their Fathers Brothers Daughter.

The Brahmans seldom desert their Wives, though taken in the act of Adultery;
partly, because it should not be published, and so redownd to their disgrace;
and partly out of the extraordinary affection which they bear to their Wives,
and therefore endeavor to keep all their miscarriages secret: But if it be
known, A Woman's Punishment offending in such case.
and civil People thereupon avoid coming to the House, and they, on the
contrary, out of an affection to their Wives, have a mind to enjoy them
honorably, then they makes a great Feast, to which they invite many Brahmans
and Sanjasys, on whom the Adulteress is to wait at the Table, which they look
upon as a sufficient Punishment for her Offense. But if a Woman with her own
free will consented to, or sought to commit, the forementioned Crime, then they
immure her, where she is is kept so long as she lives with a slender allowance.

Great Observers of Days and Times.
They are great Observers of Critical days, and will not undertake any Business
unless preceded by some good Day or happy Omen.

When they intend to go a Journey, they often set out before their time, if a
good Day or fortunate Hour happens: And that they may the better know these
times exactly, they have Books written after the manner of our Almanacks, which
they call Panjangam, and are of two several sorts; the one made by a
Brahaspeti, Teacher to the Dewetaes; the other by Succra, Tutor to the
Raetsjasjaes, that is, The Chief of Devils. The first instructs, That some Days
are good, and some half good; as also some Hours. According to these Panjangams
the People of this Country govern themselves, they being made new every Year,
like our Almanacks. The last are very exact; for they make Observations on
every one of the sixty Hours, whereinto, according to their Account, the Day
and Night is divided; declaring whether they are fortunate or not, and what may
be done or let alone in every Hour; for which they highly esteem this
Panjangam, supposing it infallible.

Their good and bad days.
As to what concerns the Good and Bad Days, the Amawasi, or first Day after the
last Quarter of the Moon, is good: The Padeni, or first Day after the New Moon,
before it is seen, is bad; as on the contrary, the Widdia, or Day on which the
Moon first appears, is good: The fourth Day, and the Lecadesi, or ninth Day
after the New Moon, are both bad; as also the eleventh, their Fast Day, if it
happens on a Wednesday; but good, if on another day. And thus they reckon their
Good and Bad Days throughout the whole Year, going from the Full to the New
Moon. Moreover, they judge of the Hours and Minutes by the Accidents that
happen to them, and narrowly observe the same.

They all account it a good Omen when the Bird Garrouda (which is a reddish
Hawk, with a white Circle about his Neck) or the Bird Pala, fly from their
right to their left side, or before them as they walk: But the contrary in
other Birds; for if they fly before them cross the way, from the left hand to
the right, it is a good sign; and a bad one, if from the right to the left. If
any be touched by Jackdaw (of which there are many here in this Country)
flying, it is a very bad Omen; and they certainly believe, that either the
Party which is to touched, or some of his Relations will infallibly die within
six Weeks. To Sneeze as they travel is accounted very ill, insomuch that if it
happen in any House, they will surely turn back. Many other things of that
nature they observe from all Adventures they meet with, from whence they
commonly conclude a good or bad event of the Business which they have in hand.

When their Years begin.
Their Years begin with the new Moon in April, and is divided into twelve Moons
or Months, viz.

Tseitram, April. Weinjacam, May. Jeistam, June. Ajadam, July. Srawanam,
August. Badrapadam, September. Aswyam, October. Carticam, November. Margisaram,
December. Poujam, January. Magam, February. Paelgouwam, March.
But because the Account of Time should not expire (for the twelve Moons do not
agree with the twelve Months of the Sun or Sun-years,) therefore they have
after the expiration of three years, one year of thirteen Moons, which they
insert, as we intercalate in our February one day every fourth year, and for
that reason call the same Bissextile.

The Division of the Week.
The Weeks are likewise divided into seven Days, which in the same Scortam
Language are called

Suria-waram, Sunday. Jendra-waram, Monday. Angaraka-waram, Tuesday,
Butta-waram, Wednesday. Brahaspati-waram, Thursday. Succra-waram, Friday.
Senni-waram, Saturday.
As the Latins, and almost all other Christians, name the Days from the
Planets, so do likewise these People: for Suria signifies the Sun, Jendra the
Moon, etc. though in the vulgar Language of the Country they call Sunday
Adita-waram, and Monday Soma-waram.

How they compute their Time.
As the Greeks in their Account of Time reckoned by Olympiads, which was a
Circle of four years, so these People have a Circle of sixty, by which they
compute their Time, and coming to the end of the Circle, they begin again. Each
of these years has its peculiar Name, so that they never say in their annual
Accounts, it is such or such a numbered year, but call it by its Name, in which
such or such a thing happened, or is to be done.

The first of this sixty years Circle is called Prabawa Samwatseram, that is
properly, Prabawa-Year; for Samwatsaram signifies a Year, and must always be
placed behind the proper Name of the Year, which for brevity sake we will here
omit, the Indians themselves often leaving it out in their Writings, only
setting down the peculiar Name of the Year, viz. the second Year is called
Pipawa; the 3. Sukela; 4. Pramadouta; 5. Prajopatti. 6. Augiresa; 7. Tsrimocha;
8. Bhawa; 9. Jouwa. 10. Dhutou; 11. Eswara; 12. Bahoudihauja; 13. Pramadi; 14.
Wikrama; 15. Wisjou. 16. Tsidtrabhanou; 17. Tsabanou; 18. Tarana; 19. Paartowa;
20. Weiha; 21. Tserwasittou; 22. Tserwadari; 23. Wierothi; 24. Wicrouti; 25.
Carra; 26. Nandana; 27. Wiseija; 28. Tseia; 29. Maumottha, 30. Dormeki; 31.
Hewelembi; 32. Wellembi; 33. Wikari; 34. Tsarewerri. 35. Plauwa; 36.
Tshoopo-cortou; 37. Tsobacortou; 38. Crodi; 39. Wisswaswasou; 40. Parabawa; 41.
Palawanga; 42. Kileka; 43. Tsaumea; 44. Tsadarena; 45. Wirodicretou; 46.
Paridawi; 47. Paramidisia; 48. Ananda; 49. Raetaja; 50. Nala; 51. Pingala; 52.
Cali Ai; 53. Tsiddaerti; 54. Raudri; 55. Durmati; 56. Dundoubi; 57.
Ruddiro-dgari; 58. Raktaetsi; 59. Crodana; and 60. Tsaia.

How they date Letters, and the like.
In common Businesses, as Leters and the like, they use these Names of the
Years; but the King never sets down in his Letters the exact Date or Day in
which he writ them, but naming only the Month, says, After the New or Full
Moon; yet other Nobles in their Letters set down how many days it is after the
New or Full Moon. In the Heads of their Letters the Servants of Wistnow write
Stirami; those of Eswara, Onoma Masje Waiye. In Business of consequence, the
memory whereof they endeavor to preserve, they use another Account, viz. As the
Christians make the Birth of Christ their Epoch, Their chief Epoch.
the Mahumetans the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet from Mecha; so these People
begin their Account from the Death of one Salawagena.

This Salawagena was amongst them accounted a famous King, who died Anno 1582.
or eighty three (reckoning from this present Yeor 1672.) years since. They
relate that he formed Horses and Men of Earth, and giving them Breath, made use
of them in his Wars. Some suppose him to be one and the same with Bramma, who
should be brought forth into the World by the Name of Salawagena.

The Inhabitants on the Coast of Cormandel and Zuratte make the Day and Night
to contain sixty Hours, viz. thirty in the Day and thirty in the Night, and
divide the Day and Night into eight parts, which they measure by Watches, being
little Copper Cups, with a Hole at the bottom, which they set in Water after a
peculiar manner.

The Brahmans Behavior in their Chambers.
The Brahmans behave themselves in their Chambers after this manner: They
generally rise two, or at least one hour before Sunrise, and call upon the
Name of God as soon as they awake; this done, they warn their Faces, Hands, and
Feet, and then set themselves down on a Plank or Carpet, with their Faces
toward the East or North; being thus seated, they begin to Sing the History of
Gasjendre Mootsjam, and afterward, if they have time, another Anthem in praise
of God; then standing up, they wash their Hands and Mouth, nay, their whole
Body in a consecrated Stream, or other Water, as convenience will admit, and
then put on clean Clothes; when they are Dressed, they set themselves down a
second time on the place where they sat before, and cause fresh Water to be
brought them, which taking up in their Hands three several times, they throw it
into their Mouths in the Name of God; when the Sun rises, they take up Water
three times, and having said a short Prayer, throw the same on the Ground in
honor of the Sun, and then worship it, and the chief of the lower Region,
because they are the best of Gods Servants; after this they worship an Image
called Salagramma, which is of Stone, with a Hole in the middle, and make
Offerings to it of Sandal wood, sweet smelling Flowers, and the Herb Toleje,
all which they do in a praying posture; this done, they repair to a Copper
Image, which stands somewhat higher, and Offer the same things to it as to
Salagramma; on each side of this they set one, two, or more Candles, according
to their pleasure, and afterward set Meat ready dressed before it, or else
Milk and Fruit; lastly, throwing Flowers upon the Image, they walk thrice round
it from their right Hand, and as many times as they have walked round, so often
they must kneel before the Image; then they set, themselves down by it, and
sprinkle the Water Tiertum on their Heads, and put some of it into their
Mouths with a little of the Herb Toleje, and also into their Ears, yet no
other but what has been already Offered, and black their Foreheads with
Angaram, that is the Coals of the Offered Benjamin: This coloring their
Foreheads with Angaram serves, as they say, as a Buckler against Sin; the
Toleje which they put in their Ears, against the uncleanness which might defile
them by touching any dead thing; neither (as they believe) can the Devil
approach any that wear it: The Water Tiertum, they say, cleanses them from all
their sins which they have committed from their very Childhood. When the
Brahmans have thus washed and marked themselves, they sprinkle a little Tiertum
toward those that are near them, and burn some Myrrh. These Ceremonies
performed, they go again to their Idol, strew Flowers upon him, or else Toleje,
setting Meat that is dressed for them before it; for they are not allowed to
eat any Meat but what has first been placed before the Idol: After Dinner they
cleanse themselves again: Toward the Evening before the Sun set, they wash and
mark their Bodies as before, and also say their Japon, that is naming God
twenty four several times, and throw Water upon the Ground in honor of the Sun
as in the Morning.

In this manner the Brahmans are by their Law obliged to behave themselves,
though many of them give themselves more liberty. Those which do not perform
all these ceremonies, in stead of their Heads wash their Bodies, and in stead
of their Bodies, their Hands and Feet; but are by no means to neglect the
repeating of Gods Name twenty four times, nor the Tiertum; yet if only one
Person in a House performs the forementioned Ceremonies, it is sufficient, and
looked upon as if every individual Person had performed the Service.

The ridiculous Tale of Gasjendre Mootsjam.
The History of Gasjendre Mootsjam, which the Brahmans Sing in the Morning, does
briefly declare, that the Heads of the Elephants are preserved: for Gasjen
signifies an Elephant, Indre a Head, and Mootsjam Preserved, or Preservation;
of which they tell this ridiculous Fable, viz.

In the Sea (which they call The Milky Sea) is a Mountain called Tricoweta
Parwatam, very high, and ten thousand Leagues broad, with three Spires, the
first of Gold, the second of Silver, and the third of Iron, each adorned with
all manner of Precious Stones; a Deweta called Indre Doumena (who with a
Chariot traveled through the Heavens, and all the World, as swift as the
Wind) coming upon this Mountain to a Lake, Bathed himself with his Wives, when
at the same instant there passed by a Mouswara (who are accounted a holier
People than the Deweta's,) of whom the Deweta taking no notice, so highly
incensed the Mouswara, that he passionately said, You shall become an Elephant,
and instead of your Wives You shall converse with the Elephants; whereupon the
Deweta, terrified with this Saying, not only showed him Reverence, but begged
his pardon for his neglect; yet nevertheless he was transformed on the Mountain
into an Elephant, and had ten Lack-Coti of Females, (each Lack is a hundred
thousand, and every Coti a hundred Lack) with whom he lived a long time without
fear of Lions, Tigers, or other ravenous Beasts; nevertheless it happened that a
Crocodile took fast hold of the Deweta's Foot as he was drinking out of the
Lake in the shape of in Elephant, yet after much pulling he got loose again;
but was afterward seized by the same Crocodile as he came to drink a second
time, and held so fast, that the Deweta spent two thousand years in striving
with the Crocodile, whose power being in his own Element, the Water, still
increased, whilst that of the Elephant decreased; but when the Deweta was
almost quite tired out, Witsnow passing by on Garrouda, came to him, and gave
him his Weapon called Jeckeram, which was richly set with Precious Stones;
wherewith striking, he broke the Crocodile's Head, and immediately fell down
and showed Reverence to Wistnow, who seeing of him weary, touched him, and
thereby restored him to his former strength and shape.

A vain Conceit of the Brahmans.
The Brahmans affirm also, that God himself spoke to them, saying, Those which
read these your Histories daily, shall have forgiveness of their sins; for
which words and promise of God, they read the History of Gasjendre Mootsjam
every Morning.

The Brahmans and other Indians never Let-blood when they fall sick, though the
abundance of Blood be the occasion thereof; but they make their Patients Fast
several days, not permitting them to eat the least bit of any thing.

They Pray over the Dead
When any one lies a dying, a Brahman reads several Prayers by the Bed side, for
which he receives Alms from the sick Persons Relations, whilst the dying Man
calls upon the Name of God till his Speech fail; but if the sick Person dies
with the Name of God in his Mouth, not breathing afterward, he is certainly
supposed to go immediately to Heaven: for God, according to their Vedam or
Law-Book, promises to be with those in their greatest extremity, that call upon
his Name.

If a Person that lies a dying has not lost his Reason, he asks his Wife if
she will accompany him after his Death; she, according to the Custom of the
Country, is obliged not to refuse: for the Women when they enter into the
state of Matrimony, promise to their Husbands in the presence of a Brahman, and
before the Fire Homam, that they will never forsake them. They also believe
that a Woman cannot live after her Husband without great sin, except she has
Children, for whose sake she may be spared and if she seem to be afraid to leap
into the Fire, she cannot beforc'd; for no honest Woman that loves her Husband
will refuse it, their Vedam affirming it the duty and part of an honest Woman,
to delight in all things that her Husband delights in, and not to despise that,
though it be bad, which pleases her Husband; and to this purpose, to work the
more upon their easy Beliefs, they tell us this fabulous Story, viz.

One Draupeti, who in her lifetime was a very religious Woman, was withal
affectionately loving to her Husband, being never displeased at him, although
he had spent his whole Estate, and so weakened his Body, that he was no longer
able to visit his Strumpets, yet his inclinations were still such, that he
declared he could not live, unless he might see his Mistresses: whereupon
Draupeti out of extraordinary affection, taking him one Night on her Shoulders,
carried him to his Concubines; but going along in the Dark, she unawares ran
against a Stake, on which a holy Man named Galowa sat, and hit him with such
force, that she overturned and hurt him; whereupon he cried, He that did me
this Injury, let him die before the Sun rises; which Draupeti hearing, and
pitying her Husband, said, Then let not the Sun rise; and so it happened, the Sun
not rising for several years after: Hereupon the People prayed to Indre and
Deweta, to permit the Sun to rise; but they either could or would: not grant
their Request: Then they addressed themselves to Bramma, who with the Deweta's
went to the forementioned Woman, saying, What will you have, and we will
satisfy you, that the Sun may rise; whereto she replied, The Sun may rise, but
I desire my Husband; which last word Husband she repeated five times; whereupon
they answered, This shall be done in the other Life; then she immediately died,
and the Sun arose the next day as before.

Liverty given to Women.
A Woman may Dress her self when her Husband is from home, or be merry during
his absence; but she must die with her Husband, or presently after; and in
confirmation of this some Brahmans maintain, that the Women ought to hold their
Husbands in so great esteem, that they must be the first thing in their
thoughts, and spend their whole time in studying how to oblige them, telling
them, that though they spend their time without one thought of God, yet it is
no sin, especially if they will die with them.

A Brahman's Funeral.
When a Brahman is dead, and his Body brought to the place where it is to be
burnt, they wash their Hands, and lay each a little Rice on the Deceased's
Mouth; which done, they wash their Hands a second time; then a Beteani (which
is a Perrea, one of those which beat on small Drums when a Corpse is to be
burned) goes thrice about the Body, which is laid on a Pyle of Wood, and
afterward makes an Oration to the People after his manner, speaking earnestly
in the Name of the Deceased, alleging, that he Governs over all, young and
old, rich and poor; and that those which do good in their lifetime, shall be
requited after their Death; and those that do ill, shall meet with the same.
But all the Bodies of the Brahmans are not burnt, but some are buried. Likewise
the Bodies of the Wistnowa's and Smarta's are always burnt; but those of the
Seivia's and Sanjasies are buried. The two first give this Reason for the
burning of their Bodies, viz. because the Fire purifies the Souls from sin, for
those that have served Wistnow never so faithfully, are not wholly free from
sin, and therefore must on necessity be purified by Fire.

The Defunct, whether those which are to be buried or burnt, are in some places
clad in rich Apparel, as if living, and sitting in a Sedan, and so carried to
the place of Interment, the Sedan being open before, that the Corpse may be
seen; behind follow several Persons carrying Vessels of Oil, which are to be
thrown into the Fire with the Body.

A Woman may not Marry after her Husbands Death.
A Woman is not permitted to Marry after her Husbands Death, but the Man may;
neither will any Marry her, because she would be accounted Dishonest to have
had two Husbands.

These severe and strict Laws prove very prejudicial to young Widows, who being
cautious to preserve their Reputation by continuing single, do privately
prostitute themselves to People of another Religion, or to any else; others on
the contrary abhorring so wicked a Life suffer themselves to be burnt with
their Husbands dead Body, which is done after this manner:

How she is burnt with his Corpse.
As soon as the Breath is departed out of the Man's Body, if his Wife has
resolved to follow him at his death, they immediately make ready all
Necessaries thereto belonging: for then the Woman cannot go back from her word,
of recall her promise: if she be a Brahmans Wife, she is carried to the Funeral
Pyle in a handsome Sedan under a Canopy, accompanied by all her Friends, who
encourage and extol her resolution, present her with Betel, and delight her
Ears with the noise of Cymbals and Drums. The Settrea's and Soudra's mix their
Betel which they give to the Woman with a certain Powder, which takes away all
apprehensions of fear, and makes them courageous and bold; but this is never
done by the Brahmans, they being not permited to force, persuade, or use any
means to a Woman, to gain her consent to be burned. If she be of the Family of
the Settrea's or Soudra's, then she carries a Lemmon in one Hand, and a
Looking-glass in the other; but if of the Brahmans or Weinsja's Tribe, only a
few red Flowers, such as they strew in the Pagodes on their Idols, and have
already been Offered to them. Coming to the place where her Husband is to be
burned, she first go's to a Pool of Water to wash her self, giving away her
Jewels, if she has any; after which a Brahman says a Prayer; this done, and
the Woman having put on a yellow Garment, she goes with great joy to the place
from whence she is to leap into the Fire, which is made of glowing Coals in a
deep Pit; and that she may not be terrified with the sight of the Fire, they
put Mats quite round to prevent her looking into it.

At the side of the Pit is a little rising Ascent made, on which she sits down
against the Mats, and takes leave of her Relations and Friends, who still
encourage her Undertaking. Lastly, having thus taken her leave, she throws a
Pilang or Pestle, with which she used to stamp Rice, a small Ricepot, and the
like Kitchen Utensils, over the Mat into the Fire, poures also a Pot of Oil
over her Head and Body; whereupon the mat being taken away, she suddenly leaps
with the Pot of Oil into the Fire; round about which stand diverse People with
great pieces of Wood in their Hands, which they throw upon her as soon as she
is in the Fire, and cover her therewith above a Man's height.

Thus the Women of the Settrean, Weinsja's and Soudrean Tribes come to their
ends; but those of the Brahmans endure far greater pain, viz. they leap not
into the Fire, but are laid on a Pyle of Wood by their dead Husbands, as if
they were to sleep by them; then they lay over them a great heap, leaving only
their Heads bare, on which they pour Oil, and other such combustible stuff.

It is a great wonder, how the Women can be persuaded to this horrible Death,
and brought to make a promise thereof; but this is effected by the Delusions of
the Brahmans, who not only instance several Women for an Example, which have
done the same, but also make them believe, that they do their Husbands an
extraordinary kindness therein, freeing them from torments in the other World:
Neither are the Women a little persuaded to it by their Husbands, because they
live in derision and scorn of all People if they refuse: for they are not
permitted to wear long Hair, but forced to shave it off; nor to eat Betel, wear
Jewels, or Marry a second time; in short, she is subject to all manner of
sorrows, and displeasures of of all People; so that Women of any courage do
seldom refuse, and the rather, because they are bereaved of all their Honor and
Dignity, and their Goods taken from them; so that the Women lose all when their
Husbands die, and if they live after them, they can expect nothing but sorrow
and trouble.

Not allowed amongst the Mahumetans
This Burning is not allowed in those Countries which are under the Mahumetans,
unless the Governor of the Country gives consent thereto, who first examines
the Person whether she be willing; which if he find, then he gives permission.
Neither is this Custom at all observed except amongst People of great Quality,
who are more exact in preserving their Honor than other People: for Noblemens
Wives account it a great testimony of their love and fidelity to their
Husbands, to be burnt with their dead Bodies.

Others are carried on Horseback about the Towns in State, with a Lemmon in one
Hand, and a Looking-glass in the other, in which they look as they ride, and in
a mournful tone sing certain Elegies, whilst many other Men and Women follow
them on foot; over her Head they carry an Umbrella, after the Custom of the
Country; and before her walk several beating on Drums: In all their Passage
they show a pleasant and undaunted Countenance, not shedding one Tear,
expressing more sorrow for the death of their Husbands than their own, and
seeming more joyful to go to him in the other World, than sorry to leave this.
But some choose to be burnt alive with him after this manner:

Some buried alive.
The Preparations for the burning and burying of Women after their Husbands
Death are one and the same, the difference only consisting in he Burning it
self. After the Woman has washed her self, she steps amongst the noise of
Pipes, Drums, Cornets, and the like, to the Grave in which her Husband lies
buried, where setting her self down on a Bank of Earth, she embraces her dead
Husband; which done, they begin to fill the Vault or Grave, throwing the Earth
in; when the Earth begins to come up to her Chin, two of the attendant Officers
hang a Cloth before the Mouth of the Grave, and give her a Cup full of Poison,
which immediately changes her Countenance, and suddenly after they break her
Neck.

Their Alms and other. Works done for the benefit of the Deceased.
The Heathens also believe that they are able to perform many works, which may
extend to the benefit of the Deceased, and to that purpose they give Alms to
those that request it of them, make Tampandals or Cisterns of Water near the
Highways, where Travelers may always have cold or warm Water, and sometimes
Canje, which is Water boiled with Rice and Beans, gratis; which in all Cases is
very beneficial to the living, and a very necessary Business in these
Countries; for by this means Travelers which are become faint through the
exceeding heat of the Sun, are revived and refreshed. They also build Temples
or Pagodes on the Graves of their deceased Friends, though they never worship
any Images in the same, because they account those peaces unclean; and though
there are Images in some of them, yet they are not set up to be worshipped as
other Idols, but only to represent the Person that lies buried there. They
also make Wells and Ponds of Water in the behalf of the Dead, which are common
for all People.

Outward signs of their Mourning.
Their outward signs of Sorrow and Mourning are these: When the eldest Person of
a Family dies, all the Friends and Relations shave off their Beards, and chew
no Betel in ten days, neither do they cat above once a day: But if a younger
Person dies, then those that are older, though his near Relations, never mourn:
Wherefore the Men mourn not for their Wives, because they are always younger
than themselves.

Their manner of Mourning.
But the Soudra's mourn as well for young as old; and not only shave off their
Beards, but also the Hair of their Heads, leaving only one Lock on the Crown,
about which they tie a Cloth, not wearing their usual Cap in three days. They
also abstain from Betel, though not so long as the Brahmans, but only three or
four days. Upon the decease of a Child the Soudra's shave not off the Hair of
their Heads, but only eat no Betel for three days.

When any one dies in a Noblemans House, all the Slaves must shave off their
Beards, in sign of mourning. If a Husbandman dies out of the Family Walala or
Ambria, then twelve several sorts of People come and show Reverence to the
Dead: viz. 1. The Brahmans which serve the Pagodes. 2. The Bateani or Perrea's,
which beat the Drums at Funerals. 3. The Pannejawa's, which play on long
Cymbals. 4. The Smiths. 5. The Joyners. 6. The Goldsmiths. 7. The Laundrers. 8.
The Barbers. 9. The Poumale Andi, which carry Flowers to the Dead. 10. The
Canacapule or Secretaries. 11. The Salewadi. 12. The Caicullen or Dauncers,
whose Wives are common Strumpets, as has been mentioned before.

This Order in former times was very strictly observed but is of late not much
regarded; for the Brahmans, Canacapule, and Andi, are grown to such a degree of
Greatness, that they never go to show Reverence, as do the other nine.

Every one that comes receives, as a Reward, a Cloth which they tie about their
Heads, letting it hang down on their Backs; at the receipt whereof they fall
with their Faces on the ground, near a place where Nili, or unthresh'd Rice, is
given out for Alms.

Description of their Funerals.
Before we conclude the manner of these Indian Funerals, it ought not to be
omitted what Peter Delia Valle says concerning them; viz. That they keep not
their dead Bodies above twenty four Hours in the House, but burn them with the
following Ceremonies.

The Corpse is laid naked on a Pile of Wood, made like a Bed, with the Face
toward the nearest Water; then they cover the Private Parts of the Corpse with
a piece of Wood taken from the Pile, rub the Hands and Feet of the Defunct with
Oil, and put a Cole into his Mouth. All things thus being ready, they kindle
the said Cole, and then the Pile of Wood, first under the Deceased's Head,
sprinkling Water round about the Pile, still laying up the Fire again as it
falls down, and letting the Ashes of the Body remain in the same Place, and
sometimes also the Bones, though but half burnt: The Relations and Friends of
the Deceased in the mean time fill the Air with their Lamentations.

The Bodies of Noblemen, and those that are rich, are burnt with sweet smelling
Wood, as Sandal, Aguilla, Brava, and the like but those of mean Persons with
ordinary Wood. Children under two years of age are not burnt, but buried.

The various Diet of their several Sects.
The Settreaes and Soudraes eat Fish, Flesh, and whatever else is set before
them, except Beef, from which all the four Chief Tribes, viz. Brahmans,
Soudraes, Setteraes, and Weinsjaes abstain, insomuch that they would rather
starve than kill a Cow, or eat of the Flesh.

The Boti, as also the Weinsjaes or Benjans, will not eat of any thing that
ever had Life, and much less kill any Creature, believing they should commit a
great sin if they should so do. They also abstain from Herbs that are of a
reddish tincture, reason of their resemblance in color with Blood; for to shed
Blood they account one of the greatest sins that can be committed.

They kill no living Creatures, but buy them to set at liberty.
They often buy Birds, and other Creatures that are kept in Cages, with
considerable Sums of Money; as also those that are taken by Huntsmen, whether
Moors or Christians, for no other end but to preserve them from death, and give
them liberty. From this Custom, which is very common amongst them, happened once
a pleasant Quarrel, viz. A Christian, A pleasant, quarrel between a Christian
and an Indian.
clad after the Indian fashion, bought some Birds to eat of a Bird-catcher, who
by his Garb taking him to be an Indian, opened his Cage, as soon as he had
received his Money, and let them fly; whereupon the Christian contesting,
would have the Birds delivered to him, or his Money; and in short, the
Bird-catcher, though he lost his Birds, was forced to repay the Christian his
Money in the presence of all the Spectators, to their no little laughter.

There is great deceit in this kind of dealing; For many poor People, of a
contrary opinion, to make an advantage, take any live Bird, and bringing the
same to sell amongst these Indians, cry like madmen, I will kill it instantly,
I will wring of its Neck: Whereupon the innocent Indians immediately come
running, and buy it above its worth, only to release it from death.

To this purpose they have Cages in many places to keep lame or hurt Birds, and
also for fourfooted Beasts, which with great care are cured and fed at the
Public Charge.

Cages for Birds, like Hospitals.
Not very far from Cambava are, according to Della Valle, diverse such Cages;
viz. one for wounded and sick Birds, another for sick or lame Beasts, as Goats,
Rams, and Sheep; and another for great Cattle, as Cowes and Calves, of which
there were a great number, some with broken Legs, others sick, old, and ^an,
which were put in there to be fatned and cured.

Amongst these forementioned Beasts was also a poor Mahumetan, who for a
Robbery which he had committed had both his Hands cut off; but was by these
Indians put in amongst the Beasts to be cured and fed.

Perusci also makes mention, out of Emanuel Pinner's Letter, of such Places for
Birds, in these words, There are several Hospitals for Birds in Cambaya, but
none for Men or Women, whom they suffer to perish without any relief. In their
own Cities they suffer no Indian to kill any manner of Beast: Wherefore strange
Merchants run a great hazard in killing a Sheep, or any other Beast, privately
in their Houses to eat; for if it should happen any way to be discovered, it
would undoubtedly cost them their Lives.

The great esteem they have for Cows.
Amongst all Beasts, Cows are the most highly esteemed; for they tip their Horns
with Gold, and beset them with Precious Stones: Nay, they hold them in such
Veneration, that when the Indians Trading with Christians, or any other People,
are provoked to swear, their only Oath is, By the death of a Cow; viz. He that
swears, having a Cow by him, and a Knife in his Hand. says, that if he does not
speak the truth, and the business be otherwise than he affirms, he wishes that
the Knife which he has in his hand may kill the Cow.

A strange Marriage of Bulls and Cows.
These Heathens have another ridiculous and unheard of Custom about this Beast,
especially in Surat; viz. they marry Bulls and Cows together publicly, with
many Ceremonies, after this manner. The Beasts having a Rope tied about their
Necks, are led to a River, where the Priest washes their Heads. Then the
Priest standing on the Shore, makes strange Signs to them with his Hands,
whilst the Owners of the Beasts making a Fire of dried Cow Dung, set themselves
round about it: Whereupon the Priest also drawing near the Fire, throws in
Sandal-wood, Benjamin, and Aloes. Then going to the Water again, the Beasts are
brought before him, and held so as that their forelegs may stand on the Shore,
and the hindermost in the Water; whilst the Priest taking off the old Ropes
that a were about their Necks, puts on new. This done, they hold the Beasts
Mouths close together, while the Priest marks them with a yellow Stroke in the
Forehead.

Mean while the Priest reads many strange Prayers out of a Book; which done, he
throws several Perfumes into a Copper Pan full of glowing Coals, with which he
smokes the new-married Beasts under their Heads, Bellies, and Tails; then he
goes again praying about the Fire, and at last perfumes the Tails of both,
which are held together.

If by chance the Beasts, during this Ceremony, happen to urine, the Women
strive one with another to catch it, some with Pots, others with their Hands,
and drink it; for they esteem this Water holy, and good for a barren Womb.

After this Marriage and Ceremonies are performed, the Beasts are led home
again, accompanied with a great number of Men, Women, and Children, who make a
Feast. Texeira tells us, That a Benjan Merchant spent 12000 Ducats at the
Marriage of his Cow with a Bull of his Neighbors.

Moreover, at some Seasons they have a Custom to feed their Cows with
unthresh'd Rice; which done, they wash their Dung in a Sieve, and dry those
Corns which are undigested, and remain in the Sieve; which Corns being
afterward consecrated by the Priest, are accounted holy, and being made into
Cakes, and baked, are given to sick People for a wonderful Medicine.

Why the Indians have Cows in great esteem.
The Indians show this great reverence to a Cow for three special Reasons. The
first is, Because they believe, that the Souls of the Pious, which have lived
justly, and such as God will not punish in this World, are transmigrated into
these Beasts. Secondly, Because, with the Mahumetans, they believe, That the
Foundation of the World is supported only on the Horns of these Beasts, by
them called Behemoth, which name they have taken out of Job; and that when the
Cow moves any faster than ordinary, it occasions Earthquakes. Thirdly, When
Mahadeu, being on a time highly incensed by reason of the many sins which the
People had committed, had resolved to destroy the World, a Cow appeasing him,
obtained Pardon for all their sins, and delivered the World from utter ruin.

Moreover, this their abstaining from Flesh, and from killing of Beasts, the
Indians seem to have sucked out of Pythagoras's Doctrine, if it was not
customary amongst them before; for Pythagoras, after the same manner, and by
reason he believed the Transmigration of Souls, forbade also his Scholars to
eat Flesh.

The Brahmans forbid the eating of Flesh, and why.
The Brahmans also maintain, That the eating of Flesh is not to be allowed,
because it cannot be done without forcing the Soul from the Body, which they
account a horrid sin. And as it is accounted a sin to kill a Man or Woman,
because thereby is occasioned a separation of Soul and Body; for the same
reason, say they, it is sin to kill any Beast, since by the death thereof the
Soul is separated from the Body, and necessitated to pass to another, whereby
its condition is not made better, but worse; for the Soul which formerly
resided in a Cow, might chance to be transmigrated into the Body of some
despised Beast or Plant: For the Brahmans believe, That not only the Souls of
Men transmigrate into Beasts, but also into Trees and Herbs; and that Humane
Creatures, Beasts, Trees, and Plants, have all one and the same Soul, and
differ only in the outward appearance of the Body.

The Sendra's and Settrea's condemned by the Brahmans
And for this reason the Brahmans condemn the Soudra's and Settrea's, declaring
them guilty of unpardonable sins, because both these Tribes kill all manner of
Beasts for their Food, except only Cows, from which they all abstain.

But the Settrea's, on the contrary, affirm, That they do better than the
Brahmans, who disturb many Souls, by plucking diverse Herbs out of the Ground to
feed one Person; when as they, by killing a Beast, disturb only one, to feed
many People. But the Brahmans answer, That they by the pulling of many Herbs
out of the Ground, do not sin so much as the Settrea's by killing of one Goat;
because the Souls which reside in Herbs are in the meanest condition, and by
their transmigation remove into nobler Bodies, as Men or Beasts. Nevertheless,
they pretend that they would, if it were possible, live without Food, so to
prevent the disturbing of any Soul. Yet few amongst them are so exact, but
freely eat of the Fruits, Herbs, Roots, and Plants which the Earth produces,
judging they may do it without offense: But they will never eat of any thing
that had life, choosing rather to die of Hunger.

The Brahmans are very moderate in their Diet, and have no peculiar Dainties;
nor do they use to drink Wine, or any other strong Liquor; but their common
Drink is clear Water, without any kind of mixture: yet sometimes, with great
delight, they drink a Draught of Milk at Meals, with which to supply them most
People of Note keep Cows.

Their usual Food is Rice, Plants, and Herbs, according to the Season of the
Year. They extremely abhor Drunkenness and account it one of their five Mortal
Sins.

Those amongst them who perform the meanest Offices, and do the greatest Lahor,
have the most freedom allowed them in their Diet, because they require the most
Sustenance, which makes many of them not scruple to drink Wine.

The Brahmans, out of a high esteem or self-conceit of themselves, will in no
wise be persuaded to eat or drink any thing in a House inhabited by one of
another Tribe, but only Teyer, that is, thick Milk; because they account that
to be a sort of Amortam, or Nectar of the Gods: Nay, a Brahman will not eat in
another Brahman's House that is of a different Sect; and if a Byahman be
Married to a Woman of another Family, she is not allowed to eat with, nor to
see him eat; but if a Man out of love to his Wife, permit her to eat with him,
and other Brahmans are informed thereof, they will not only resent it very
ill, but shun the House of such a Person, and account him unworthy of their
Society.

The pride of the Pandite or Boten.
These Idolaters are very proud, for those of any Quality will, if possible,
avoid to eat with any of a meaner Degree. There are some amongst the Brahmans
called Pandite and Boten, who being highly esteemed, will not eat in the House
of a Brahman, Sinai, Naike, or any other Nobleman, because they eat Fish. These
Sinai or Naike are vulgarly called Mazarens, and are of less esteem than the
other, eat freely with a Pandite or Boti, and account it a great favor, and so
with the other. Some are so vainly curious, that they will not eat in a place
where another of a contrary Sect or Tribe has Dined or Supped before the Floor
is rubbed over with Ox-dung, which they believe cleanses it.

The Indians never eat with any of another Religion, nor will they drink out of
one Cup with them, but shun their company; and, endeavor by all means possible
to avoid touching of them, fearing to be defiled thereby; nay, an Indian of
great Quality will not only refuse to eat with another of a lower Degree, out
will not be touched by him, and if he should accidentally, he would immediately
cleanse his Body, by rubbing it with Herbs.

The common People show great reverence and obedience to their Nobility: for
meeting them in the Street, they not only give them the Way, but run from one
side of the Street to the other like mad Men, for fear of touching them; nay,
the Noblemen, if they did otherwise, would beat them into better manners.

In regard no Indian will drink with another of a different Opinion out of one
and the same Cup, for fear of being defiled, therefore when they are in the
Field, and have but one Cup, with which they are forced to make shift, they
have found out a means not to defile one another by drinking together, viz.
they touch not the Cup with their Lips, but holding it with one Hand a pretty
distance from their Mouths, pouring the Liquor therein very dexterously, not
spilling a drop.

The Fast-days of the Brahmans.
The Brahmans are also very strict in keeping certain appointed Fast-days, viz.
they Fast the eleventh day after the full Moon; and again eleven days after a
new Moon, when they eat no kind of Food, not so much as Betel, for the space of
twenty four hours, but spend that time in Reading and Praying.

In November the Brahmans of the Sect Seivia, as also the Soudra's, who are of
the same Opinion with the Brahmans, and in some Observances as religious as
they, Fast every Monday, and abstain from all manner of Food till the Stars
arise.

They are generally not allowed, during their time of Fasting, to undertake any
manner of Business, though of never so small a Concern. Some of them Fast
eight, others fifteen, twenty, and thirty days, contenting themselves with very
little Sustenance, and a draught of Water.

Perushi relates, that a certain penitent Person by long Fasting lost his left
Eye, which flew out of his Head.

The Fast Dauli.
They have also a Fast of nine days called Dauli or Davili, during which whole
time the Sammi, otherwise called The Giogi, or Spiritual Party, utterly abstain
from Meat and Drink, sitting all that time on one place in a Pagode, fearing if
they should stir, to provoke an appetite; notwithstanding they do this freely,
and without any Obligation.

Commonly in the last Evening of the Fast, a great number of Singers go with
the noise of little Bells and other Instruments to the Pagods, just as if they
were going to a Funeral, where finding the afroesaid Giogi sitting on Carpets
on the Ground, they place themselves round them in a Circle, and having spent a
considerable time in Singing and jingling their Bells, one of the Sammi gives
each of them out of a Dish two or three Kernels of Pomegranate with several
little pieces of Quinces; after this he plucks several Ears of Corn, which is
planted near the place where they sit, whilst the Singers fill the Air with
their Voices, and the jingling noise of their Bells and other Instruments.

The Sammi relate, that this Corn which they cut was Sow'n with their own Hands
in the beginning of their Fasting, and that they had every day since watered
and blessed the same with all their usual Ceremonies.

On the last Evening of their Fast they begin gain to eat a little, so to bring
their Stomachs by degrees to its usual appetite, fearing that if they should
eat too much at first, they might prejudice their Healths, and endanger their
Lives.

We might justly suspect, the truth of this their long Fasting, did not very
credible Eyewitnesses confirm the same.

All the Month of December, the Brahmans eat a Pap made of Rice, Sugar, and
some Fruit mixed together.

The Diet of the Indians.
As to what concerns the Meat and Drink of the Indians, it is several, according
to the Situation of the Country, but most Indians use boiled Rice in stead of
Bread. The Coco-tree is the chief and only thing of their subsistence: for it
affords Fruit, Oil, Milk, Honey, Vinegar, and Wine. The greatest Delicacy
amongst the common People, is Rice boiled with green Ginger, and mixed with a
little Pepper and Butter. Their ordinary Food is of wheaten Flowr, but of a
certain course Grain, though well tasted, which they make up into great round
and thick Cakes, and bake them on thin Iron Plates, which they carry with them
from one place to another when they travel; they spread a little Butter on
these Cakes, and so eat them.

They have also a certain Dish called Massack, or Matsack, which is made of two
parts Water, and one of Brandy, some Eggs, beaten Cinnamon, Sugar, and Bread,
which is boiled like a Posset.

Baril is a Broth which the Indians make of the Juice or Milk of Coco-nuts and
Butter, with all manner of Spices, and amongst others, Cardamom, Ginger, Herbs,
Fruit, and several other Ingredients. The Christians, especially the
Portuguese, add to the same the Flesh of Hens and Chickens chopped in small
pieces, which they lay upon the Rice, that is boiled only with Water and Salt.

They also boil the Root Curcuma with their Meat and almost throughout all
India they boil no Meat without a little Bundle of Cammels Hay, in Greek called
Schoenanthos, to give it a savory taste, and to fortify the Stomach, as also a
quantity of Calamus Aromaticus, or Nard, in the Malaian Tongue called Diringo.

The Indians in many places have also a delicate Dish, or rather Sauce, to
procure an Appetite, which is called Achor or Astjar, and is used there after
the same manner as here our Gurkins, Olives, and Capers; it is likewise brought
from thence into Europe, where many People eat it with much delight, it being
made of Cucumbers, Mangos or long Pepper, Garlic, green Ginger Roots, and the
young juicy Sprigs of Canes, which are laid in Pickle with Vinegar, Pepper and
other Spices. The Bunches of green Pepper are also laid in Pickle, and brought
to the Table either with roast or boiled Meat as likewise the Roots of green
Ginger and Galanse, besides the Fruit Manga, Carambolas, Astjae, Billinbing,
Curcuma; likewise Gurkins, Melons, and Pumpions in stead of Capers and Olives,
which in Zurratte and other places, are also in great abundance.

Some Indians also eat that kind of Apple, called in Latin Pomum Amoris, and
Pomum Aureum, and by the Portuguese, Pomod' Oro, which is a sort of Mandragora,
or Mandrake cold in the third degree; though some put Achay, or Brasilian
Pepper, in the Malaian Tongue called Lada Chili, that is, Pepper from Chili,
which is very hot, to temper the extraordinary Cold thereof, and pouring Oil
and Vinegar over them, eat the same with roasted Flesh or Fish. Some accustom
themselves to chew Achay just as some People chew Tobacco. These golden Apples
are sometimes Preserved with Sugar; but the Chinese on the Island Java,
roasting them in Ashes, eat them with Pepper and Vinegar. The Fruits Carambolas
are also for the same purpose laid in Pickle.

Their several sorts of Liquor.
The Drink which is commonly drunk by the Vulgar, is Water; but People of note,
especially Moors, mix Cinnamon Juice and Sugar with their Water, which being a
pleasant Liquor, is called Scherbet.

In many places they drink in stead of Wine, a Liquor which is tapt out of the
Palm Tree, into a Pot which hangs at it a whole Night. The Portuguese call this
Wine Vinho de Palma, that is, Palm-wine; the Indians in Cambaya, Tari or Terri;
others, Sura and Toddy; and the Amboynans, Towack. This Liquor is of a white
color, and somewhat thick, and of a tart, yet pleasant taste, intoxicating the
Brain like Wine, if drank to excess, but if moderately, it is accounted an
excellent Medicine against the Dropsy. They generally tap this Liquor out of
the Tree after Sunset, letting their Vessels hang to the same till Sunrising,
for then it keeps sweet and pleasant all the day after: for that which is tapt
in the daytime is not so delightful to the Palate, but is flat and eager;
which is occasioned by the heat of the Sun, and is good for nothing but to make
Vinegar, for which it is used by the Indians.

Of this Liquor Tara or Terri, which of it self drops out of the Trees, they
make another sort of Wine, by the Indians called Uraca, which is the only Wine
of all India, and being of a white color, is very hot and strong, which the
Indians nevertheless drink like Water.

The Portuguese temper this Wine, by putting stoned Raisins into the Vessel,
which they do not stop close, but leave the Bung-hole open, least by reason of
the extraordinary heat and strength the Fat should fly asunder, because it
ferments like boiling Water. Every day for a fortnight together they stir this
Liquor, after which it becomes of a deep Red, and is of a sweetish taste. They
also drink abundance of the fresh Juice, which is enclosed within the Coco-nuts.

Another sort of Liquor called Zaguer, brought from Banda and the Molucko
Isles, which drops out of a Tree not unlike the Coco. But this Liquor is very
unwholsom to drink, especially for Strangers, for it not only occasions a
great Looseness, but also a kind of dead Palsy, called by the Indians, Beribery.

They have likewise a very strong Liquor like Brandy, called Arack, made of the
Moisture that is enclosed in the Coco-nuts, and also of that which drops out of
the Tree it self, which they burn with Rice.

The Chinese, to make the most of their Rice, adulterate the same, by putting
into it a sort of poisonous Weed, which drives upon the Sea, whereby the Arack
receives a corroding Heat, very prejudicial to the Lungs, and causing
Consumption, vomiting of Blood, and other deadly Distempers, especially to all
Strangers that drink thereof.

The Hollanders in many places have a Liquor which they make of Spring Water,
Javansagar, Tamarinds, and Lemmons, which they put all together in a Vessel
hoop'd with Iron Hoops, and stopping it very close, let it stand twenty four
hours in the Sun, whereby throwing the Dross and Filth upwards, it becomes a
most excellent Liquor, almost like March Beer.

Moreover, in most places of India a certain Liquor is made called Palipuntz,
which by some is made after this manner, viz. they take half Brandy and half
Water, into which they put Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Sugar, and Line Juice.

This Liquor, by the English called Punch, is very hurtful to European Bodies,
if drank excessively, for it occasions Looseness.

Some also drink a Brewage made only of clear Water and brown Sugar, which if
drunk in hot Weather is very unwholesome, but is much tempered, if a Draught of
the Liquor Palipuntz be taken after it.

Moreover, they distill a kind of Brandy out of Dates, Sugar, and Palm-wine.

Persons of Quality in the Mogol's Country drink Chirassan Wine, for they have
no Wine of their own, there being no Vines planted in all India.

They take strong Tobacco. and chew Betel.
Most of the Indians take very strong Tobacco, but after a peculiar manner,
agreeing most with the Persians.

All Indians likewise, as well Moors as Pagans, constantly chew the Betel Leaf
with Areca and a little Chalk, or Ashes of burnt Oyster-shells.

Have good skill in Herbs
The Pagan Indians, especially those of Zuratte and the Coast of Cormandel, have
extraordinary understanding in the nature of Herbs, knowing how to distinguish
the good from the bad: for as these People, according to the Pythagorean
manner, do not eat of any thing that has Life, but only Roots and Herbs, so
they know by daily experience how to distinguish the eatable Herbs from the
medicinal or venomous.

The Indians never use any Table-cloths, but in stead thereof lay a great Leaf
of the Tree Mauz, which also serves them for Dishes and Trenchers; neither do
they use Spoons, but wholly make use of their Hands and Fingers.

They commonly wear Jewels and Pendants in both Ears, especially all the
Idolaters, who also highly esteem all Strangers or Christians that wear them.

Their Apparel.
The Apparel of the Indians is for the most part of Cotton or Callico, either
fine or course, according to every ones Quality: for Linen they wear none,
because India produces no Flax. These Clothes are put on over their bare Skins,
and from the Middle upwards serve at once for Vest and Shirt, being very narrow
at top, wide at bottom, and reaching down to their Knees. From the Middle
downwards they wear a pair of Drawers of the same Stuff, which reaching below
their Legs, touches their Feet.

All the Indian Women, who for the most part are swarthy, and have long Legs,
but short Bodies, go barefoot both at home and abroad. Women of Quality have
commonly great Umbrella's carried over their Heads to keep off the Sun.

As to what concerns the Men, some go barefoot; others that are of higher
Degree, either wear Slippers or Sandals; but in most places they go barefoot:
Their Sandals are very easy, because of the extraordinary Heat of the
Country. They wear likewise, according to the Custom of their Predecessors,
very long Hair, quite contrary to the manner of the Mahumetans, who shave it
all off, as also the lower part of their Beards. On their Heads they wear a
fine Turbant, flat on the top, and almost square. The whitest People generally
wear a Turbant whipped with diverse colored Ribbons upon a white Ground, and
sometimes also Gold. Their Girdles are of white Cotton; but the richer sort
have silken ones, stitched with Gold. They ride on Horseback with a Simitar by
their Sides, a Shield about their Necks, and a little broad Dagger sticking at
their Girdle.

They anoint their Bodies.
The Indians, both Men and Women, anoint their Bodies against the heat of the
Sun, as also to make their Joints nimble and pliable. This Ointment is made by
the Women of all the sorts of Sandal Wood pulveris'd, the Leaves of Chanpock,
the Flowers Mogori, of each a handful, Camphire, so much as will give it a
scent; all these Ingredients being ground like Colors, are mixed with Oil of
Coco-nuts or Roses, which is brought thither from Persia, and made thick like
Paste; and though these People look very strangely with this Ointment, as if
colored with Saffron, yet the smell thereof is very pleasant. For the same
purpose also they make another Ointment of the Flowers of a certain Tree, which
is not very high, and has Leaves like a Peach-Tree; both Leaves and Flowers
are by the Indians called Sampaga, otherwise Champacka and Champe, which are of
great esteem amongst them: for the Indians, especially the Moors, are
extraordinary lovers of sweet and pleasant Smells, and chiefly those of
Flowers; wherefore there are scarce any Women that walk along the Streets, but
wear those or the like Flowers in their Hair, to render them the more
acceptable to their Husbands or Suitors.

Through all India are likewise highly esteemed the Leaves of a Tree, by the
Arabians called Alcanna, of which we have spoken before at large.

Moreover in the hot Seasons Persons of Quality, whether lying on their Floors
or sitting, have several Servants stand by them, who continually fan them with
Leather Fans, with which they not only cool them, but also keep off the Flies,
whilst they cause their Barbers to rub their Backs, Shoulders, and other parts
of their Bodies, so to cause the motion of the Blood.

Places of Recreation.
Their places of Recreation consist in Woods and Orchards, in which grow many
pleasant Fruit Trees, as also in their Gardens; wherein, amongst other Plants,
grow small Vines, which bear extraordinary sweet and delicious Grapes, which
they eat green or dried: for Wine they make none, because most People by their
Law dare not drink any. There are also many Pomegranate-trees, besides diverse
other excellent Flowers. In the middle of their Gardens are livers Springs or
Fountains, which are considerably raised above the Ground. From these Springs
the Water is conveyed through narrow open Channels (for they know not the use
of Leaden Pipes) to all parts of the Garden in the droughty Season of the Year.
Moreover, there are round Cisterns to Bathe in, raised up and paved with
Freestone, and covered with fine Plaster.

The Furniture of their Houses very mean.
In their Houses they have neither Stools, Tables, Beds, or Bedsteads: for all
their Ornaments consist in the Floors, which are made very even of fine Earth
or Plaster, on which they lay rich Carpets, as well in their Houses as in
their Tents, laying a worse Cloth underneath to preserve the other: On these
they sit both when they eat and drink, after the Eastern manner, with their
Legs across under them, and without their Sandals, which are left off partly
for neatness, and partly to keep their Feet cool. They also sleep in the Night
on these Carpets, or else on a hard Quilt or Hammock, called Cot; but wherever
they lay themselves to sleep, they stretch themselves out to their full length,
and for the most part lie on their Backs, without either Pillow or Bolster
under their Heads. The common People sleep on the Floor in the dry Season of
the Year, covering themselves from Head to Foot with a white Cotton Cloth, so
that they appear like dead Bodies laid out. The Hammocks or Cots hang by two
Ropes a little above the Floor, which being made fast at four corners, are by
the Servants moved to and again to rock them asleep.

They go always Armed.
The Indian Pagans, as well as Mahumetans, go always Armed, whether walking in
the City, or way traveling, with a Sword, Shield, Bow and Arrows; nay,
perform all manner of Offices, though in their own Houses, thus Armed, never
leaving their Armor off but when they go to sleep.

How Persons of Quality live.
Persons of Quality live after a noble manner, and when they are either in a
Coach or on Horseback, cause a Taffaty Flag to be carried before them. The
privilege of the Inhabitants here is very great in this point: for not only
great Persons, but also every private Man, of what Country or Religion soever,
may live at as high a rate as he pleases, and imitate the King in his Fashions
if he fancy, them, and his Estate be able to maintain it. Every one that is
able keeps a great number of Servants, wherefore most of them live like Lords;
which they may easily maintain, partly because the King, notwithstanding he
sees his Subjects richly Clothed, and that they live with a great Retinue like
Princes which have great Revenues, yet he lets them live in quiet, and
undisturbed, never taking any thing from them, though it justly belongs to him,
because the Indians are naturally inclined thereto: for by reason of the
abundance of mean People and cheapness of Provisions they may live nobly for a
small matter, allowing a Servant not above three Ropia's a Month (each Ropias
being 2 s. 6 d. Sterling.) to buy him Provisions and Clothes with. There are
likewise an innumerable company of Slaves, which cost little or nothing the
keeping: for they wear nothing but a white Cotton Coat, which is very cheap,
and eat little else but Rice and Fish, a very common Food in this Country, so
that with small charge they can keep a great Family, and the rather, because
the Commodities and Goods which are made by the Inhabitants are many, and the
increase of their Land, by reason of its extraordinary fruitfulness, almost
incredible.

The Women good Dancers.
The Women are very expert in Dancing to the sound of diverse Bells, and other
such like Instruments, on which the Men play.

In Zuratte and diverse other places in India, are several Women-Dancers, who
are hired to Dance for Money, having Rings about their Legs, Strings of Pearl
about their Necks, and many other rich Ornaments. Some also wear Breast-plates
of Leather, almost round like a Shield, beset with Precious Stones, and the
like, which glitter exceedingly in the Sun.

The Chans and other Nobles cause the forementioned Dancers to Dance before
them after Meals, either to their own Voices, or to the sound of a Cymbal and
Tumbeck, which is a kind of Tabor, and two small Drums.

These People go stark naked from one City to another, nay, through the whole
Country, and sometimes to the Borders of other Countries, and maintain
themselves only by Dancing and Singing. They wear gilded Rings on their
Fingers. Toes, and in their Noses, and each of them five gilded Copper Rings,
and two red Silk Armlets, with Gold Buttons below their Elbows on their Arms.
After the same manner they adorn their Legs also.

These Women, besides their Dancing, prostitute themselves to all those who
desire them.

Their Games and Pastimes.
The Indians, especially the Mogolleans, spend much of their time in Hawking,
and for that purpose keep several sorts of great and small Hawks. Their Dogs
with which they Hunt are (as Terry tells us) like our Greyhounds, though much
smaller; but Peruschi affirms, that they have no Hunting Dogs, but make
Leopards and Tigers tame, and teach them to Hunt, and at one Leap to seize and
kill the Game: They also carry Guns with them when they go a Hunting, and kill
their Game with a single Bullet, for smaller Shot they have none. They are very
expert in Shooting with a Bow and Arrow; their Bows are made of Buffalo's
Horns, and their Arrows of Canes, with which they shoot Birds flying, and
Beasts as they run at full speed.

The wild Fowl which keep in the Water they catch after a subtle manner, viz. a
Man going into he Water with an artificial Bird of the same kind which he
designs to take, imitates its Voice, whilst he swims under Water in such a
manner, that the artificial Bird being on the Crown of his Head, appears just
above the Water, by which means coming near the Birds, he pulls them down by
the Legs, and takes as many of them as he pleases.

As to what concerns their Pastime within their Houses, they have Cards, though
differing from ours in the Pictures, and in the number; they also are expert in
playing at Draughts. They delight very much in the company of Quacks, Juglers,
and the like, the Quacks carrying poisonous Serpents in Baskets, and suffering
themselves to be bitten or stung by them at their pleasures; the stung part
swelling, they immediately cure the same with Oil and certain Powders which
they lay thereupon, afterward proffering to sell the same Medicaments to the
Spectators. Juglers.
Their Juglers also are very dexterous in their Art, and do strange things by
the sleight of Hand, viz. they set Dishes or wide open Baskets on the Ground,
three or four one above another, which seem to be all empty as they set them
down, but in the taking them up one after another there seems to be living
Birds in them, either Turtle-doves or others, which they seemingly cover again
with the same Dishes, turning them backwards and forwards, as if they took them
away, the Birds being afterward no more to be seen, the Spectators not being
able to discern either how they are brought thither, or taken away.

The manner of the Great Mogol's Hunting.
The Great Mogol often goes a Hunting with a thousand, sometimes two thousand
Men.

About Agra and Dely, along the Stream Gemna, as far as the Mountains, as also
on each side of the Highway, which runs to Lahor, is a large quantity of
untilled Land; some parts are woody, others overgrown with Grass of a Man's
height. In all these places are many Game-keepers, who go from place to place,
to prevent Hunting or Hawking there, except for Partridges, Quails, and Hares,
which the Indians catch in Gins or Snares; so that there are abundance of wild
Beasts in all places. When these Keepers of the Game know that the King or
Mogol is in the Field a Hunting, and near their Station they acquaint the chief
Master Huntsman with the quality of the Beast which is Hunted, and where there
are most of them; whereupon all the Avenues to that place are guarded, that
Travelers may not go through that place, but pass by on one side or other.
They Hunt several Beasts, as Gazelles, What Beasts they chiefly Hunt.
Nilgaux, or gray Oxen, Lions, Cranes, and others. They Hunt Gazelles with tame
Leopards after this manner: When they discover a Herd of Gazelles (for they
commonly graze five or six in a company) they unchain the Leopard, that lay
Chained in a little Wagon where they are kept; he being let loose, does not
immediately run at them, but goes creeping along to hide himself, till the
Gazelles passing by, he leaps with incredible swiftness upon them, and seizing
one of them, strangles the same, satisfying himself by only sucking the Blood,
and tearing out the Heart and Liver; but if he misses his prey, which often
happens, then he stands still, very well knowing it to be in vain to run after
them, because they are much swifter than himself: When the Game is ended, the
Keeper approaches by Degrees, strokes the Leopard, and throwing the Flesh to
him, blinds his Eyes, putting on his Chain, and so conveys him into the Wagon
again.

The catching of the Nilgaux, or gray Oxen, which are a kind of Buffalo's, is
of no great difficulty: for they surround them with a strong Net, which they
close by degrees, and having brought them into a narrow compass, the King, with
his Omrahs and Husbandmen stepping in, kill them as they please, either by
throwing Darts at them, or with Bullets, Arrows, and Swords, and in such great
numbers, that the King sends whole Quarters thereof for Presents to his Omrahs.

In their catching of Cranes it is very pleasant, to see how these Fowls defend
themselves against the Birds of prey, whom sometimes they kill, but very often
get from them, because the Hawks or Falcons are not so nimble as they in
turning and winding.

The manner of Hunting the Lion by the Great Mogol.
But of all their Hunting, that of the Lion is not only the most Royal (for
none but the King and Princes may perform the same without special permission)
but also the most dangerous, and is performed after this manner, viz. When the
King is in the Field, and the Keepers thereof have discovered the place where
the Lion keeps, they tie an Ass to a Tree near the same; the Lion coming out
and devouring the Ass, goes afterward unmolested to seek for some other prey,
either of Oxen, Sheep, or whatsoever he can light on; then going to drink, he
comes back to his old place, and there rests till the next day; when coming
forth again, he finds another Ass in the same place, tied there by the Keepers;
having fed him thus for several days together, at last, the day before the King
is to come to Hunt, they tie another Ass in the same place, having first given
it abundance of Opium, that the Flesh thereof may make the Lion sleep the
better; then calling in all the Rusticks thereabouts, they enclose the Lion
within strong Nets made for that purpose, bringing the same by degrees to a
small circumference, as they do in catching the Nilgaux; this done, and all
things in readiness, the King mounts on an Elephant, Armed with Iron Plates, in
company of the chief Master Huntsman and some Omrahs, all likewise mounted on
Elephants, several Gourzeberdars, and many other Huntsmen on foot, Armed with
Half-pikes and Muskets; in which manner approaching the Net, they fire at the
Lion, who when he feels himself wounded, comes directly, according to the
custom, to one of the Elephants, but finds himself entangled in the Net, where
the King shoots at him so long till he has killed him. But some Lions have
often been known to leap over the Net, to the destruction of many People. The
Indians account it a good Omen when the King kills a Lion, and a very bad one
when he misses him, believing the whole State to be in danger if he does not
destroy him. They also use great Ceremony at the end of this Hunting: for the
dead Lion is brought before the King in presence of all the Omrahs, who after
they have exactly viewed and measured it, give an account thereof to the
Secretary to Register the same, viz. That such a King, at such a time, killed a
Lion of such a bigness, and such colored Hair, and having Teeth and Claws of
such a length, and all other Circumstances whatever.

In India they use no Torches or Links, as we do here, but Copper Fire-pans,
almost like those which in several Paintings are seen held by infernal Furies.
In these Pans they feed the Fire with Pitch, and the like, which makes a great
Flame. A Servant commonly carries this Fire-pan in a Copper Case, with a very
long and narrow Neck in stead of a Handle, by which he holds the same, and
still feeds the Flame With fresh Matter.

The Indians manner of Writing.
Most Indians, especially the Malabars, use in stead of Paper, to write on the
long Leaves of the Coco-tree, on which they neatly cut their Letters with an
Iron Instrument.

Their Language.
As to what concerns the Language of the Indians, it only differs in general
from the Moors and Mahumetans, but they have also several different Dialects
amongst themselves. Amongst all their Languages, there is none which spreads it
self more than the Malayan (as shall be declared more at large,) and therefore
it will not be amiss in this place to render into English some of their
chiefest words.

A brief Vocabulary of the Malayan Tongue*
PAckoe, To put on. Kaelwaer, To put off. Backasse, To worship. Minjaot, To
answer. Batturon cabauwa, To carry away. Carratam pangal, To keep off. Tarimam,
To persuade. Bangala tana, Tilling. Oran gouno, Husbandmen. Sampe, To come on.
Turan cababa, To go off. Bandagar, To hear. Backaraga, To work. Karat, To cut
off. Laing, Others. Bigitou, Also. Disoruna, There. Cassian, Poor or Bashful.
Balacan, Behind. Lambaet, Too late. Arry galap, Too soon. Abis, All out. Liat,
To look on. Pande, To Trade. Banan mara, O my. Thouca, Oh his. Taua dara, Earth
or Sand. Piggy darat, To go ashore. Malan, The Evening. Samonga, Altogether.
Savou, An Anchor. Cassion amat, Poverty. Jabo soau, To anchor. Tarra kaelwaer,
To draw off. Candati packanita, As your self. Taugan, An Arm. Oupan, Carrion to
fish with. Sendiri, All one. Kaelwatr darot, To Let-bloo^. Badamme, To agree.
Bamanarou onutom, To adventure. Bapassou, To Arrest. Yangan, to leave off.
Rawa, To bring. Nanty, Both. Backara mangala, To burn. Icat, To bind. Zieron,
To pour upon. Boat adar, To prepare. Petschaya, To borrow. Bocaet bae, To
amend. Battan Doelou, To feign. Semoeny, To hide, or Keep. Tida bishouca, To
Cough. Zouda balanga, To bestow. Baassap, To smoke. Trayzion, To bathe.
Peyrzia, To break. Bayar, To pay. Moullay, To begin. Mauncka, To desire. Bodoy,
To cheat. Tanam, To bury. Batjagay, To inspect. Tackana, To bewitch. Barmayn,
Foolish. Papodan, To defend. Giget, To bite. Mangorou, To command. Bataver, To
prosper. Mintacan, To pray. Claawaer darat, To bleed. Betachinta, To endeavor.
Goumartaer, To quake. Tavar, To promise. Manaroo, To keep. Bouta, Blind. Lebar,
Broad. Kyaey agum, A civil Man. Dalangh, Within. Lonaer, Without. Iddo, Blue.
Attas, Above. Dibava, Below. Bayck, Better. Payit, Bitter. Rotty, Bread. Oran
pande thicor, A Barber. Oran pande rotty, A Baker. Cave cau yan, A Bridegroom.
Macanan minum A Wedding. Tampat tidoran, A Bedstead. Davon, A Leaf. Backara,
Beans. Pouroot, The Belly. Casingan bumata, A Bladder. Pantat, The Buttocks.
Cacky, The Legs. Janget, A Beard. Zousou, The Breast. Addy, A Brother. Outang,
Wood. Jambatan, A Bridge. Gouno, A Mountain. Binatan, A Beast. Bongham, A
Flower. Cabon, An Orchard. Pana, A Bough. Paen, A Tree. Kackaer, To burn. Sarou
matta, Spectacles. Campa, an Ax. Cambyn, A Book. Ampon, To have compassion.
Minnon, Drinking. Totop, Covering. Bamoula, Prevailing. Balambat, Lasting.
Manare, Dancing. Gymoor, Drying. Minpyn, Dreaming. Britacot, Threatening. Calam,
Dark. Matte, To kill. Bagy, To distribute. Thinta, To suppose. Bamatty, Dead.
Touly, Deaf. Batzinta, Melancholy. Gommo, Thick. Cayn tabbael, Course Cloth.
Lanaa There. Santanga, One half. Harry, A Day. Farry Saryan, Daily. Cayn caryn,
Dry Cloth. Ponvonry, A Thief. Cryn, Thirsty. Lipat, Double. Cassian caly,
Miserable. Gymat, Virtue. Nipis, Thin. Mahael, Dear. Tyris, A Drop. Chamar,
Dirt. Nigay citgil, A Village. Oran beta, A Servant. Ana parampuam, A Daughter.
Settam, The Devil. Dury, Thorns. Oran maboor A Drunkard. Pintou, A Gate or
Door. Mabo, To be Drunk. Papan, A Board or Plank. Decat, Hard by.
Soutratoieist, Damask. Oran itou, That Man. Bemeyna, To provoke. Boathassaer,
Honor. Abbis, Rending. Olu balam, Noble. Calmary dolu, Two days since. Larien
remapa, Somewhere. Dulu, First. Bode baye, Honorable. Sackuly iny, Once. Sompa,
An Oath. Barancali, Any ways. Bigittou, Alone. Tilloor, Eggs. Oran, Honest.
Ity, Ducks. Tongo, To demand. Soutra viloudu, Flannel. Couranga, Salt. Song, A
Fountain. Boaboa, Fruit. Sapirin Boat, A Fruit-dish. Bongra pala, Mace. Alys,
Fine. Pathia, Broken, Baeyk, Good. Bedil, Guns. Basaer, Great. Sadang, Enough.
Dilima, A Pomegranate. Engatkan, To think. Jaman, Opinion. Calmary, Yesterday.
Bottou assa, Hewed Stone. Pigy, To go. Bry, To give. Baampeer, To approach.
Sagar, To cure. Icat pingan, To gird. Bataot, To believe. Icot, To conduct.
Gonsar, To be angry. Soucka, To please. Botta mon, The Conscience. Thangan, To
gape. Mintan, To accommodate. Bangon, To think. Badamme, To Salute. Ibou, A
Grandfather. Bainga, To Grace. Soucka moidanga, Satisfaction. Kekeer,
Courteous. Bayck, Healthful. Olubalan, Greatness. Momoulay, Constant.
Petzayaya, Faithful. Aran, Fortunate. Mambrybeta, Conversation. Boula, Whole.
Maangus, Burnt. Pangan, Roasted. Birou, Green. Couny, Yellow. Pande mass, A
Goldsmith. Dastar, A Girdle. Tidoron, A Curtain. Daghy messing, Salt-fish.
Dios, God. Ganton, A Gibbet. Gounou, Mountains. Minta, Prayer. Lavan, A Ghost.
Bouan, Hunting. Mouda, Young. Tauwan, A Year. Anna dare, Young Women. Wissy,
Iron. Bylly, To buy. Massa, To boil. Bellaygaer, To chastise. Gatrou, To
Scratch. Datan, To come. Nayn, To climb. Chium, To kiss. Pingakit, Sick.
Tempan, Decrepid. Panda, Short. Daganang, Merchandise. Bayng pande, Artificial.
Crot, Crooked. Dingin, Cold. Raydtza, The King. Bina radya, The Queen.
Jordapoo, A Cook. Pande Boat poyegan, A Tailor. Bele, A Chamber. Oranbadagan, A
Merchant. Prigy, A Water-pit. Rompot, Herbs. Anack, A Calf. Cabyret, A Capon.
Cayou manis, Cinnamon. Tombaka, Copper. Cotchyn, A Cat. Gouret, A Castle.
Banthon, A Cushion. Capor, Chalk. Damaran, A Candlestick. Kede, A Shop.
Antimon, Cucumbers. Batou, A Precious Stone. Piramata, A Diamond. Bitsgara, A
Contract. Catan, A Crab. Nior, Coco-nuts. Anna codda, A Captain. Anack,
Children. Dabondaer, A Button. Bassaman, Company. Massa, Gold. Toulang, A
Fish-bone. Bapelo, To embrace. Cauyn, The Morning. Bavva, To fetch. Marouca, To
hate. Batour, A Cough. Dengaer, Hoping. Namanga, To command. Caras, Hard. Caras
amat, To provide. Tyngy, High. Daghyn caras, Hard Flesh. Barappe, How much. Ada
siny, He is here. Lapaer, Hunger. Sapanga, Half. Saratus, A hundred. Knyn, A
Lord. Bayou, A Shirt. Capalla, The Head. Tangan, The Hand. Bantal, A Pillow.
Rouma, A House. Bacatan, Private. Angy plando, A Greyhound. Anghyn, A Dog.
Delavataua, Hell. Dilanghyn, Heaven. Leheer, The Neck. Oura, The Brains.
Rambot, The Hair of the Head. Pomokol, A Hammer. Bayon, Wood. Belegyn ganton, A
Hangman. Mado, A Hedge. Bakanat, To know. Datan, To come. Giget, To gnaw. Pario
tamback, A Kettle. Damaer, A Conduit. Dapor, A Kitchen. Satou nesserani, A
Christian. Pytti, A Chest. Gadon, Corn. Kamaran, A Lamp. Sarat can, To Load.
Saling, To Lodge. Meyngam, To Lend. Tetaua, To Laugh. Pacol gantan, Idle or
Lazy. Idop, Level. Dengher, To hearken. Braycan, To deliver. Tingalcan, To let
alone. Ringan, Light. Jahat, Ugly. Calaparan, Dainty: Tzerade, Loose. Pangan,
Long. Sadekit, Small. Tanga, A Ladder. Cayn, Cloth. Tabee, Long Pepper. Baden,
The Body. Debeer, The Lips. Pande bryckat, To master. Oucor, To measure.
Toucaer, To want. Bollee, To be able. Bassongot, To grumble. Casse, To affect
or love. Lapas can, Meek. Kita, Me. Ponga, Mine. Conraas, Lean. Baeyck, Brave.
Tangan, A Sleeve. Isso, To morrow. Saptateauwe, Perhaps. Lagi, More. Couran,
Less. Bayntan, Many. Lala, Wary. Sondara, Friendship. Gila, Foolish. Pisou, A
Knife. Pande pisou, A Cutler. Pagera, A Bricklayer. Harta, Coin. Pande harta, A
Coyner. Canda parampuan, A Mare. Ticos, A Mouse. Sousou, Milk. Anadara, A Maid.
Molot, A Mouth. Lacky, A Man. Bonlan, A Month. Sobott, a Companion or Friend.
Cota, A Wall. Passaer, A Fair or Market. Tampa macanan, A Meal. Pande
bellagaet, A Master. Oran, A Humane Creature. Pande bounon, A Murderer. Ticaer,
To faint. Boulan, The Moon. Toudong, A Cap. Tiang, A Mast. Tingary, Noon. Maa,
A Mother. Sasaue, Mustard. Moampeer, To approach. Pocolpocou, A Nail. Namania,
A Name. Batou, To sneese. Pangilmacan, To invite. Ambil, To take. Macan zoere,
To eat in the Afternoon. Boat Hambaer, To make a Courtesy. Basso, To wet.
Icat, To put after. Leliat iahat, Revengeful. Zerrede, Industrious. Sacaran,
Now. Tida, No. Tida baran, No where. Sacarandolu, Henceforward. Tydalagy,
Never. Tida sappa, No body. Tandaporot, The Navel. Malam, The Night. Iarom,
Near. Anackneene, A Niece. Tzouzou, A Nephew. Chancke, Cloves or Spices. Pala,
Nutmegs. Bara, The North. Tacot, To be ashamed. Ihan loupa, To remember.
Caulwaer pinghan, To ungird. Battata capalla, To behead. Beryta doulou, To
instruct. Bangou, To rise. Backatan, To declare. Nayn, To go up. Tondo can, To
be subject. Moutacan, To evacuate. Larycan, To outrun. Byatas, To pass over.
Coulezly, To surround. Diatas diang, To remain. Borca totop, To discover.
Salingkan, To discharge. Batamo, To meet. Sacit, Unwholesom. Tuora, Ancient.
Docana, Not virtuous. Yni tyda tau, Ignorant. Tyda banga, Shortly. Carn apa,
For his sake. Minta dolu, To leave. Bygito in, Also. Tyda songo, Uncertain.
Tida banar, Impossible. Tide samma, Uneven. Mata, An Eye. Talingan, An Ear.
Mingan, Oil. Dapor, An Oven. Daghy lambo, Beef. Taryman, A Receiver. Cartas
sapzy, An Obligation. Dolu, An Original. Carna anscho, Occasion. Timor, East
and by North. Caulaver, Plucking. Boat boncosan, Packing. Tauer, To set a
Price. Lapis, To Print. Chanschyn, To Urine. Rassa, To taste. Tanam, To plant.
Boat dina, To use. Ayarcan, To plague. Commataer, Torturing. Souda caya, To
prosper. Couda, A Horse. Cartas, Paper. Boncousan, A Pack. Lada, Pepper.
Tapian, A Pot. Pintou, A Gate. Prighy, To point. Gady, To pawn. Mancoo,
Purslane. Nory, A Parrot. Mallim, A Pilot. Boulo marulis, Pens. Bonat moulagan,
To trouble. Ado louca, To wound. Ghahatt, Anger. Papas can, An Acquittance.
Cartas bieguidit, Bad play. Bilan quera, To run. Bytsiara, To advise. Ora
caian, Riches. Baialan, Travel. Caian, Rich. Barentyn, Rest. Mansiuri, Robbing.
Houcum, To Reign. Panganio, To Row. Mera, Red. Pangil, To call. Baas, Rice.
Balacca, The Back. Simbiri, Without. Glam, To strike. Tasiam, Sharp. Masam,
Sower. Sakyt, Sick. Sakytan, Sickness. Barancalla, Sometimes. Nypis, Narrow.
Tolar, A Serpent. Bant, A Shoulder. Passyt, Sand. Parlent, An Arch. Bran,
Valiant. Massaaan, Boiling. Miniehi, Singing. Pingan, A Dish, or Platter. Ecot,
A Tail. Lari, To shun or avoid. Macanan, Spittle. Negri, A City. Cuntsican, To
whistle. Basiudi, To play. Molam, In the Evening. Tombo, Pounding. Maganti, A
Cobweb. Baiki, Sending. Connyt, Saffron. Pandecan, Striking on an Anvil. Pande
bissi, A Smith. Totan, To be indebted. Becatta, Saying. Jemma, Sunday. Tydon,
Sleeping. Timor, Sweet. Tompa, To spill. Tsiusi, Pure or clean. Gapit,
Snuffers. Calmari, Since yesterday. Pande contsi, A Lock-maker. Gyla, Folly.
Brossu, A stink. Ini brossu, To stink. Baiparas, Fair. Sappangan, A Piece.
Mansuiri, To stick. Caiu, A Stick. Antra, To play. Paian, The Sight. Coran,
Small. Barat, Heavy. Sadab, To taste. Pangali, A Spade. Caersia baiki, To
furnish. Sompa, To swear. Tsiarri, To tear. Battu, A Stone. Jurtilis, A
Secretary. Tidor, To sleep. Fellimo, A Sheet. Andrior, To melt. Becatta, To
speak. Terran, To shine. Prande rebor, A Musician. Boatsiamar, To defile.
Romal, A Napkin. Suruan, Sending. Matti, Dying. Barnan, Swimming. Cappal, A
Ship. Oran tua paran, A Mariner. Antrante, To spin. Itam, Black. Gallam, To
stop. Campon manaro, To save. Dosa, Sin. Pucol, To beat. Jalan, The Street.
Marri, Tearing. Tiaermin, A Looking-glass. Malon, Disgracing. Manys, Sweet.
Addeparapas, A Sister. Doduer, To look. Baon, The Shoulders. Dyem, To be
silent. Upon, Fair. Matary, Salt. Peca, Silver. Tehylacca, Sin. Corni,
Business, or Affairs. Negle, Steel. Bantatan, Dying. Pienning, A Dish.
Goethieng, A pair of Scissers. Calvenetten, To pin. Padang, A Sword. Salwacke,
A Shield. Pockul, To stand. Byte secate, I am sick. Cras, Strong. Domba, A
Sheep. Prau, A Boat. Dia, She. Gergafien, To saw. Lear de caesia, To look in a
Glass.
The Speech the same, but the Character different.
According to Della Valle all the Provinces in India have one and the same
Language, though peculiar Letters; for notwithstanding that the Language or
Speech is understood in diverse Countries, yet the Characters are different.

The Learned sort, or Brahmans, have a Language and Letters by Kircher called
Nagher, which being accounted Sacred, is only known to their Tribe or Family,
and used amongst them as Latin amongst the Learned in Europe.

Their Characters are fair and large, taking up much room: They also differ
much from the Letters used by the Benjan Merchants in Surat.

According to Mr. Edward Terry, the Vulgar Tongue of the Country of Indostan
has great Affinity with the Persian and Arabian Tongues; but is pleasanter and
easier to pronounce. It is a very fluent Language, expressing many things in
few words. They write and read like us, viz. from the Left to the Right Hand.

The Court-Language is wholly Persian.
In India, and the Countries under the Mogol's Jurisdiction, the Persian Tongue
is more common Indian, being generally spoken by the Nobility at Court, and
used in all Public Businesses and Writings; which cannot seem strange to any,
considering the Mogollean Princes have their Extract from Tartary and
Samarcand, whence the Persian Tongue was first brought.

The Vulgar Mahumetans, Peruschi tells us, speak the Turkish Tongue, but not so
eloquently as the natural born Turks. Learned Persons, and Mahumetan Priests,
speak the Arabic, in which the Alcoran and other Books are written.

The Malayan Tongue much used.
But no Language extends further, and is of greater use, than the Malayan, so
called from the City Malacka, from whence it has its Original. It is spoken in
all the Isles lying in the Straights of Sunda, and through the adjacent
Country; but especially used by Merchants.

Linschot tells us, That many People of diverse Nations, which came to build the
City, and settle in Malacka, made this peculiar Language of all the other
Indian Tongues, consisting of the most pleasing Words, and neatest manner and
way of speaking, of all other the Neighboring People; which makes this Language
to be the best and most eloquent of all India, and also the most useful, and
easiest to learn: For there is not one Merchant which comes from the
neighboring Countries to Trade here, but learns this Tongue.

The Netherland East India Company have lately printed a Dictionary of the
Common Discourse in that Tongue, as also the New Testament, and other Books, in
the same Language. Moreover, the Holland Ministers, in their several Factories
in India, teach in the Malayan Tongue, not only in their Churches, but Schools
also.

The Creation of the World in Ten Bodily Appearances of Wistnow, or Mahadeu.
The Creation of the World.
THe Creation of the World (as we have already mentioned) the Brahmans ascribe
to one Bramma, by the Power given him from Wistnow, or Mahadeu: But these
People rest not in the making of one; for they form diverse imaginary Worlds,
which in the form of an Egg drive on the Water, which being without the
Principal World, is God himself, as shall be declared hereafter more at large.

Some have not stuck to affirm. That Bramma made fourteen Worlds, agreeing with
the Parts of Humane Bodies; viz. the first, and uppermost Celestial World, out
of the Brain; the second, out of the Eyes; the third, out of the Mouth; the
fourth, out of the Left Ear; the fifth, out of the Roof of the Mouth; the
sixth, out of the Heart; the seventh, out of the Belly; the eighth, out of the
Privities; the ninth, out of the Left Thigh; the tenth, out of the Knees; the
eleventh, out of the Legs; the twelfth, out of the Toes of the Right Foot; the
thirteenth, out of the Toes of the Left Foot; and the fourteenth, out of the
Air round about him. Out of these Worlds he also created Man, according to the
qualities of Humane Bodies: viz. Out of the first he created Men with Prudence
and Understanding; out of the second, with Conduct in Transitory things; out of
the third, good Orators; out of the fourth, subtle and crafty People; out of
the fifth, Gluttons and debauched Persons; out of the sixth, Noble and Famous
Men; out of the seventh, Slovens and Ill-natured: out of the eighth, Lascivious
and Venerial Humorists; out of the ninth, Handicrafts and Husbandmen; out of
the tenth, Gardeners and Rusticks; out of the eleventh, poor Laborers; out of
the twelfth, Murderers, Robbers, and Thieves; out of the thirteenth, Oppressors
of the Poor; and out of the fourteenth, People endued with all manner of
excellent qualities.

In this manner they describe the great Bramma, Creator of so many People and
Worlds; which they believe so firmly in every particular, that they represent
his Image in all their Pagodes or Temples, with a Circle on every of the
forementioned Parts, in stead of a World.

The World (as we said before) they affirm to drive on the Waters in the form
of an Egg, which incloses Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

In this Egg they also know how to find the fourteen Parts of the World. Under
the Earth they place Patalam, that is, The Infernal Pit; above it, the Surgam,
that is, Heaven, or Brammar-Lokon; and above that, Kailosom, Lilaweicontam, and
Weicontam; in which three last Places, they say, God himself resides. The
Earth, or Globe of the World which we inhabit, they call Boulocon.

This Boulocon, say they, comprehends seven Worlds more, each separated from
the other by a Sea. The World seated at the Center, they say, is surrounded
with a Sea of clear, sweet Water; the next to it, with a Sea of Milk, on which
they make the Mountain Tricoweta stand, which is 10000 Leagues high and as many
broad; the third, with a Sea of Butter; the fourth, with a Sea of Tayer, or
Cream; the fifth, with a Sea of Wine; the sixth, with a Sea of Syrrup; the
seventh, with a Sea of Salt Water, which is our World; all which have their
Names from those Seas which surround them.

According to others, there are seven Seas in this our World alone, viz. one of
Water, one of Milk, one of Cream, one of Butter, one of Salt, one of Sugar, and
one of Wine.

Matsjas of Matx autaer, d'eerste.


Kaurams of Kourmas autaer, de tweede.


In the Watery Sea they place five Paradises; in the Milky Sea, the Spiritual
Priests which are called Jogues; in the third, by them named The Glory of
Divenderen, those which are inclined to Bodily Pleasures; in the fourth, which
is The Glory of Brama, the Happy and Fortunate; in the fifth, which is The
Glory of Wistnow, the Unfortunate; in the sixth, called The Glory of Kailasan,
the Poor; and in the seventh, called The Glory of Vajacandam, the Rich.

The Mountain Merowa.
In this World they place the Mountain Merowa, which they affirm higher than the
eight forementioned Worlds which are above Boulocon, and extends a vast way
downwards below Patalam, or The Infernal Pit; and that the Sun, Moon, and Stars
move about it; and that those which shall taste of the Fruits which grow
thereon, will never be hungry, dry, nor grow old.

On this Mountain come no Humane Creatures, except the Deweta's, which are the
Sons of Diti Wife to Cassiopa.

And notwithstanding they ascribe the Beginning and Creation of the World to
Bramma, yet they seem to make the World in a manner perpetual, ascribing to it
four Ages: The four Ages of the World.
The first they call Critaigom, or Cortesuigke; the second, Tretasuigke, or
Treitagom; the third, Duaparugam, or Duapersuigke; the fourth, Caligom, or
Calisuigke. The three first are already expired; but the last is still in being.

The first Age (say they) continued 17 Lak and 28000 Years (each Lak they
reckon to be 100000 Years;) the second 12000 Lak and 96000 Years; the third, 8
Lak and 64000 Years; the fourth Age which is yet running, will last 4 Lak, or
432000 Years, of which, according to their Annual Accounts, are already
expired, to this present Year 1671, 4772 Years: So that the World, according to
their Calculation, will scarce ever have an end; for they certainly affirm,
That a thousand times turning of the Four Ages Cotesuigke, Tretasuigke,
Dwapur^gam, Callisuigke, is but only one day in the Account of Bramma who,
they say, is to live a hundred Years of such Days, and that fifty thereof are
already past, and the one and fiftieth running on.

They believe a general Conflagration of the World.
After the expiration of this time, they believe the World shall be consumed by
Fire; after which, the surface of the Earth will be covered with Water, and the
Rain fall in such abundance, as if it were powered out of the Trunk of an
Elephant; and not long after, Bramma will die.

In these four Ages great Miracles and Wonders have, as they affirm, been
performed by four of their Idols, of which they make mention in their Writings
called The Ten Altars.

The ten Appearances of Wistnow.
And, as they affirm, their Supreme God Wistnow, or Mahadeu, performed these
Miracles in this lowermost World in ten peculiar Bodily Shapes, which is also
mentioned by Barthrouherri, in his Book of Conversation, where he says,
Wistnow has taken the trouble upon him of being reborn ten times; and that
these Births were in the manner following.

First, Wistnow was born, and appeared as a Matja or Fish.

Secondly, As a Gourma or Tortoise.

Thirdly, Like a Warraha, or Hog.

Fourthly, Like a Narafimha, half Man, half Lion.

Fifthly, By the name of Wamana, a little Brammasary.

Sixthly, By the name of Paresje Rama, a Settrean.

Seventhly, By the name of Deserratha Rama An Ajot-ja.

Eighthly, By the name of Cristna, Brother to Bella Rama a Settrean. Amongst
all the ten Appearances this is accounted the most eminent; for when Wistnow
came into the World by the name of Cristna, he was accompanied with his whole
Godhead, and left the Heavens empty; when as in the other Appearances he came
only with a part of his Godhead, like a Spark which flies from a Great Coal of
Fire.

Ninthly, By the name of Boudha.

And tenthly, In the shape of Kelki, or a Horse.

Kircher relates, from the Information of Henry Roth a Jesuit, long conversant
in these Parts, That the Heathen Indians which live about Ganges acknowledge in
some measure a Trinity, They acknowledge in some measure a Trinity.
and affirm, that the second Person has already appeared nine times in the
Flesh, and is to appear once more. The Persons of the Trinity are by them named
Brahma, Bexno, and Mahex, which are all one and the same in Nature, though
distingush'd by several Names; as Acher, that is, Immovable; Paramanand* or
Supreme Lord; Ons, or Being; and many such like.

Moreover, that which Mahadeu performed in the World in each of the
formention'd Bodily Shapes, some relate more at large; and being written in
their Vedam, or Law-book, is to this effect.

Matsjas or Matx Altar, the First.
The charge of Bramma.
BRamma, who is represented sitting on a Water-Lilly, with four Heads, and as
many Arms, and resides in the Air, has the charge of the Vedam or Law-Book,
which the Giant Sancasoor, otherwise called Bhensasar, taking from him, dived
with them into the Sea; whereupon, Bramma complained to Mahadeu, or Wistnow,
and desired his Assistance; who granting his Request, descended into the Sea in
the shape of a Fish, and swam through the Ocean, to find out the Giant
Sancasoor, whom he slew, and brought back the Book of the Law to Bramma;
wherewith Matx Altar, which had lasted 2500 Years, ended.

Caurams or Courmas Altar, the Second.
The Riches of the Sea.
THe Sea with its Surging Billows swelling up to the Clouds, burst forth in
these Words; viz. Who is so powerful as I, and possesses as many Riches as lie
hid in my glased Halls? the Moon has her habitation there: The Water of
Everlasting Life, which being drunk makes all Men happy, is hid therein: There
is Hierawanhsti the Elephant with seven Trunks, the seven-headed Horse
Exmognogora or Sepmogroot, and whole Fields of Corral, etc.

This highly incensed Mahadeu, who commanded the Deytes, a Family of the
Giants, and the four-headed God Bramma, to go to the River Siamboerwetty, and
the Golden Mountain Meerparwat, or Merouwa, 40000 Leagues high, and lying in
the Center of the World, near the foremetion'd River, and to throw the same
into the Sea; and further, that they should cause therein such violent
emotions, as should force it to throw up and disgorge that Wealth which was the
occasion of its Pride: Whereupon Mahadeu himself assisted on Bramma's side, and
the Deytes or Giants on the other, so moved the Sea by shaking this Mountain,
that first it threw up the Money called Lecseny; secondly, the invaluable Jewel
Consenchmany, or a Carbuncle which in the night gives as great a Light as the
Moon: Thirdly, the Tree Paersatich: Fourthly, her Silver Pot with the Water
Sora: Fifthly, the Physician Dannewanter: Sixthly, Indema, or the Moon:
Sevently, the white Cow of Superfluity, Camdoga: Eighthly, the Water of
Everlasting Life, called Ammaril: Ninthly, the Elephant with seven Trunks,
called Hierawanesti: Tenthly, the beautiful dancing Maid Remba: Eleventhly, the
seven-headed Horse Exmognogora: Twelfthly, the Bow Dennock: Thirteenthly, the
Horn Sank: And lastly, the Poison Sahar. The Sea having by this great motion
vomited up all these things, became very calm.

Whereupon Mahadeu commanded the Mountain Meerparwat to be carried again to its
place, and left the Serpent Signage, or Soesja, to perform the same. Then
giving the conquered Treasures to several Countries and People, he returned to
Heaven. Thus Kaurams Altar ended, having lasted in the first Age 2500 Years.

Waras, or Warrahas Altar, the third.
WHen in the First Age the World was wholly spoiled, and no Belief amongst Men,
the Serpent Signage, or Seesja, with a hundred Heads (who supported the World)
fainted through the weight of the Peoples sins; insomuch that not being able to
bear the same up any longer, he went from it, and thereby turning the whole
World topsie-turvey, at last thrust it into a bottomless Sea, where all the
Creatures were drowned.

Thereupon Bramma the four-headed God implored Wistnow to fetch the World out
of the bottomless Water, and place it on the dry Land again. Mahadeu's strange
shape in his third appearance.
Mahadeu consenting to his Request, descended in the following Shape; viz. He
had a Head like a Hog, with two mighty Tusks, bigger than those of an Elephant;
a Body like a Man, with four Arms and Hands, in one of which he held the great
and terrible Sword Godda, and on the first Finger of the other Hand a Ring; in
the third the beforementioned great Horn which they call Sank; and in the
fourth, the Book Kittaep.

In this manner Mahadeu descended, first no bigger than a Dwarf; but grew ere
long to that horrible bigness, before he came quite down, that had the Earth
been above the Waters, and he stood upon it, he would undoubtedly have touched
the Heavens with his Head.

In this horrid Shape he dived into the Deep, where he killed the Monstrous
Giant Hirnacks, or Hirnacas, which colored the whole Sea as red as Blood; and
Mahadeu made him his Footstool to tread on, and striking his Tusks into the
World, pulled up the same out of the Waters; and calling the Tortoise and
thousand-headed Serpent Signage to him, he placed the Tortoise above the
Waters, and upon the Tortoise the Serpent Signage, and above him the World.
This done, he ascended again into Heaven; and with one word Bramma created new
Men.

The Brahmans, and other Tribes of the Indians, seem highly to esteem this
Appearance of Wistnow in the shape of a Man, with four Arms, and a Hogs Head;
for in the City Trimottam, about Zinzi, is a Pagode or Temple called Adi
Warraha, in which a Hogs head stands to public view, which the Brahmans affirm
grew out of the Ground, and worship as the Image of Wistnow, in commemoration
of his Birth in that shape.

Above Wistnow or Mahadeu sits the fair dancing Maid Remba, with her Legs
across under her.

The Giant Hirnacs representation.
The Giant Hirnacs, lying under Mahadeu's Feet, is represented in the shape of a
horrible Demon, with two Horns on his Haed, mighty great Ears, and bristly Hair
on his Forehead and the Crown of his Head. Cross his left Shoulder hangs a
Black String; his Body, from Head to Foot, full of bloody Spots: His Fingers
are like those of a Man; but his Toes are rather Claws.

Thus ended Waras Altar, having lasted 2700 Years in the First Age.

Narsings Altar, the Fourth.
WHen in the First Age the Giant Hirrenkessep had by great Penance and
Religious Exercises moved Bramma the four-headed God to appear unto him, and
had obtained his Request, he asked him what he desired: whereto Hirrenkessep
replied, Hirenkessep's Request to Bramma.
Most powerful Bramma, make me by your Favors a Monarch, and mighty Prince on
Earth; and thereby grant that I may never be killed either by Heaven, Earth,
Water, Sun, Moon, Planets, Clouds, Wind, Hail, Snow, Rain, Thunder, Lightning,
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Men, Devils, Serpents, Adders, Poison, Swords, Arrows,
nor by any other Weapons, neither without my House nor within it, by Day nor by
Night. All which Bramma promising him, the Giant Hirrenkessep raised himself,
and left off imploring Bramma any longer; but marching into the Field,
conquered many Towns and Countries, and by Degrees subdued the whole World:
Which done, he published an Edict, His Edict.
whereby he commanded all Men, on pain of death, to worship no Deity but him
only; and that all those which should be found to do the contrary, should die
without mercy.

This having lasted for some Years, many of his Subjects, and especially the
Brahmans, began to murmur, and say, What will accrue to us at last by
worshipping of this Hirrenkessep? who though he be the Absolute Governor of the
Earth, yet he is not of Heaven: Therefore let us turn from him to Mahadeu, who
can take us up to Heaven. Wherefore they Waras of Warrahas autaer, de derde.
Narsings autaer, de vierde.
Wamans autaer, de vyfde
imploring Mahadeu to be released from their slavish Life and tyrannical
Governor, he promised them that Hirrenkessep's Wife, called Naeksea, should
bear a Son that should release them; and accordingly, though long after, she
was Delivered of a Son, whom they called Brellade; who when he was grown old,
would not worship his Father, which so enraged him, that he caused him to erect
an Iron Column, and to make the same red hot, with intention to tie his Son to
it alive. Brellade coming to the place of Execution, his Father said, Now let
us see who can release you from this danger, and out of my hands? Whereupon
Brellade imploring Mahadeu, was heard by him, and the Iron Column rent asunder
with such force, that the whole Earth shook, and produced a strange Monster,
which neither resembled a Devil, Fish, Bird, Serpent, Dragon, or any other
Creature that ever had been seen: It blew forth four Flames at its Nostrils,
and vomited out of its Mouth a terrible black Smoke, which so terrified the
Spectators, that they knew not where to hide themselves; the Giant Hirrencassep
himself grew pale for fear, and trembled. Mahadeu having assumed this third
Shape, remembered what Bramma had promised Hirrenkessep, wherefore that he might
not break his Promise, he took the Giant with him into the Earth, and conveyed
him under the Threshold of his House, where staying till the Evening, as soon
as the Sun was set, he with his great Talons tore the Giant in such a manner,
that his black Blood sprung from all Parts of his Body, pulled out his
Entrails, and hung them about his Neck, so that he was punished and killed
without the breach of Bramma's Promise: for he was not slain by any of those
means which he had begged not to be hurt or killed by. Soon after Brellade was
commanded by Mahadeu to enter on the Throne in his Father's stead, who Reigned
many years very piously, and kept his Mother Naeksea by him during his Life.

Mahadeu having performed all this in three days, ascended up to Heaven again;
and so ended the fourth Altar in the first Age Cortesingke, after a Reign of
seventeen hundred twenty eight thousand years, in which happened all the
forementioned Wonders. And notwithstanding the time of these Miracles does not
amount to more in all than seventy seven hundred years and three days, yet it
is to be understood, that the seventeen hundred and twenty thousand years, and
three hundred and sixty two days, were expired before, between, and after the
Miracles.

Vanam's Altar, the Fifth, begins with the second Age Tretrsingke.
MAhadeu, in the first Age, had placed a Ragia Inder in Heaven, to Govern the
happy Souls, as a Reward for his pious Life and continual Offerings, which
whilst he lived on Earth he made every day in honor of Mahadeu, with promise
mo^^over, that he should enjoy that place till some body else should exceed
him: for he had made a hundred Siasjas, which are costly Offerings, in honor of
Mahadeu; and besides all that, forsook his Estate, Wife and Children, nay, his
own Life, and spent all his time in Fasting and Praying.

Moreover, in this second Age was born a Bell Ragia, who growing up to a Youth,
betook himself to the reading of holy Books, and amongst many other things
read, that a King was placed in Heaven to Govern the happy Souls, till such
time as some one should exceed him, as abovesaid. Since which this Ragia, being
a powerful King, to exceed Ragia Inder in Piety, spent whole days in searching
and reading of holy Books; nor had he any sooner ended one Siasja or Offering,
but he immediately prepared another, insomuch that the ninety ninth Siasja or
Offering was burning in honor of Mahadeu.

Ragia Inder fearing that he should be conquered in Piety, begged Mahadeu to
prevent Bell Ragia, that he might not exceed him in his constant Devotion;
whereupon Mahadeu answered, Be of good cheer, Ragia Inder, I will never permit
any one to pluck you out of your Throne; and immediately after descending in
the shape of a black Dwarf, and taking upon him the Name of Vanam, he in that
manner went to Bell Ragia's Court, before the Gates whereof the Priests and
Brahmans were continually reading of holy Books, and explaining them; for which
they received a Reward according to their merits from the King, who to some
gave Jewels and Precious Stones, to others Money, and the like. Amongst these
learned People Vanam betaking himself, read with wonderful exactness and
distinction, and explained the most mysterious places so well, that he was
admired by all that were present, especially by Bell Ragia; who causing him to
be brought before him, asked him if he was the Person that read with such
wonderful exactness? Vanam replying Yes, was answered by Bell Ragia in this
manner: I have long studied and read the words of God, and have heard many a
Learned Brahman, but never any equal to you; pray tell me who you are, and of
what Family. To which Vanam replied, I am a poor distressed Brahman, and come
to beg Alms of you for Mahadeu 's sake. Then Bell Ragia bid him ask what he
would, and it should be granted him. Whereupon Vanam desired that he would give
him so much free Land as he could stride over at three Paces. This is but
little (replied Bell Ragia) you had better have asked a a pleasant Dwelling
with a great Tract of Land, and Springs of Water belonging to it, some rich
Jewels, or large Sums of Money, which might afford you a Maintenance as long as
you live. But Vanam persisting in his former Request, and Bell Ragia agreeing
to it, Confirm this to me, said Vanam; which Bell Ragia did, by taking a golden
Cruise filled with fresh Water, and pouring the same over both Vanam's Hands
(which from that time to this day has been used amongst the Heathens, to
confirm any thing of great consequence;) this being done, Vanam made one step
from Bell Ragia, and took the second step from the Earth into the Clouds; which
when Bell Ragia saw, it so amazed him, that he cried out, This cannot be done
without Divine Assistance, the Hand of God is in this Business. Then Vanam
asked where he should take the third step? Bell Ragia replied, I know no other
place (for you have already stradled over Heaven and Earth, which I command)
but my Heart and Body, on which you freely step: Whereupon Vaman stepping with
wonderful swiftness and strength on Bell Ragia's Breast, forced him into the
infernal Pit called Patalseegh or Patalam, where Nagelook, or horrid Serpents
like Men reside, over which Vanam made him Prince or Ragia, and changed his
Name from Bell Ragia into that of Worron. Bell Ragia's Wife being much troubled
hereat, asked Mahadeu why he had dealt so by her Husband? and if that were the
Reward for all his pious Actions? To which Mahadeu answered, Be of good cheer,
Woman, you shall be brought to your Husband, to live with him in the place
where he is; which he had no sooner said, but he conveyed her to Worron, whom
(as a Reward for his many great Offerings) he made Prince of the Pit of
Darkness; and in token of Honor, debased himself so low, as to be his Porter
for nine days in his dark Realm. At last Mahadeu ascending again to Heaven,
ended the first Altar in the second Age, though the fifth in order, after the
expiration of a thousand years.

Prasseram's, or Paresje Rama's Altar, the Sixth.
IN the beginning of Prasserams, or the second Altar of this Age, Braman and
Braminin, a Married Couple, dwelling near the Stream Bewa, lived a long time
very piously; but the Woman being barren, had neither Son nor Daughter, which
made them both very melancholy, because it is a great reproach amongst the
Benjans to be barren: But that they might not be despised nor scorned, they
resolved to go from thence, and went into a solitary and thirsty Wilderness,
that there they might worship Mahadeu out of sight of all People, and implore
him to open her Womb; after long ranging through diverse Wildernesses, they at
last came into a Wood, near an ancient consecrated Pagode, shadowed by a great
Tree, under which they lying down together to rest, the Woman said to her
Husband, Let us call upon Mahadeu here in this place, that he may open my Womb,
and make me fruitful; then both kneeling down on the Ground, they Prayed with
great zeal; but not being heard, the Woman said to her Husband, Perhaps Mahadeu
is not pleased, that we should worship him with so much ease in so cool a
place, and therefore would be better pleased if we should first chastise our
Bodies, and so humble our selves; come therefore and let us forsake this shady
and delightful place, and in the daytime expose our Bodies to the heat of the
Sun, and in the night to the cold Winds, Rain, and all other hardships for his
sake, that he may hear our Prayer, and make me fruitful. After having a long
time been thus earnest in their Prayers, they still, as before, had no
audience; whereupon the Woman said to her Husband, I have no mind to live
longer, but had rather die (if it would please God) than live under this
reproach. To which her Husband replied, Let us try the last means, and continue
so long Fasting and Praying till we end this miserable Life by hunger and
hardship, or else be heard. Whereupon they both betook themselves to Fasting
and Prayer more than ever they had done before, and after they had spent nine
days without eating or drinking, Mahadeu appeared to them in the likeness of a
little beautiful Child, and asked them what they requested of Heaven in this
their humble Posture? whereupon they replied, Our Prayers are to Mahadeu, only
for a fruitful Womb, and that I (said she) may bear as fair, a Son as your
self: Mahadeu answered, Why do you ask for Children to trouble you more in this
miserable Life? had you not better have begged for Gold, Silver, or other
Riches, to make your days happy, in stead of spending them in sorrow and
trouble. The Woman replying, said, No Treasures or Pleasures of this Life can
bring such joy, as a Son of that perfection with your self. Mahadeu hereupon
replied, Your Desires shall be fulfilled; and as you have Prayed three times
one after another, so shall you have three Sons one after another; which said,
he vanished, and both the Brahman and his Wife being consumed and wasted by
long Fasting, died, and the Ghost of the Woman was sent into the Body of the
new born Reneka, and that of the Braman into the Body of a new born Brahman,
called Siamdichemi, who coming to age, were Married together. This Reneka,
Consort to Siamdichemi, had a Sister who was Married to a powerful Ragia,
called Sistraersim, with a thousand mighty Arms. Siamdichemi and Reneka going
both to a great Wood lying near the River Ganges, there built a Straw Hut,
where they resolved to lead a religious Life, and feed on nothing but the
Fruits of the Field and Trees; thus spending their time in Praying without
cessation, they obtained from Mahadeu power to raise the Dead to life again.
Not long after, Reneka (according to Mahadeu's Promise) was impregnated, and
bore a beautiful Son, which she called Prasseram, whom they instructed in all
pious Exercises, and brought him up very religiously, insomuch that by the
twelfth year of his age he understood the mysterious meaning of all those
things which his Father read to him, and could readily explain them. His Mother
had also by her pious Life obtained a Cloth which held Water, which she daily
fetched in the same out of the River Ganges; but on a time going thither as she
was wont, she espied the mighty Ragia Sistraersim, with his Consort her Sister,
and the whole Court, riding a Hunting; Reneka stepping on one side, asked one
of the Servants who it was that Hunted with so great a Train? whereupon the
Servant replied, It is the mighty Ragia Sistraersim, with his Queen; who not
taking any notice of her, caused her to go mournfully to the Ganges, and there
to pour forth these sorrowful Complaints: O how happy is my Sister! and to what
a high pitch has Fortune raised her above me! she is a Queen, and I
disconsolate Brahman 's Wife; she is stored with Riches and Honor, I with
Poverty and Sorrow; O how unequal are these transitory things distributed! with
how much more delight does the one spend his days beyond the other? After these
Complaints ended, she went to take up her Cloth full of Water as she used to
do, to carry it to her Hut, but it suddenly ran through, and would not hold as
it had done formerly, which made her very sorrowful, insomuch that she feared
to go home, and stayed till almost Sunsetting. When Siamdichemi, who extremely
longed for her, looking out at the Door, saw her stand in a mournful posture
whereupon he asked her whether she had brought any Water? she with a sorrowful
Countenance said No, relating what had happened, he angrily replied, Well I am
assured, that you have spoken something in scorn and derision of my pious Life,
Prasserams of Paresje Rams autaer, de zeste.
and therefore immediately commanded his Son Prasseram to cleave her Head
asunder with an Ax; but he being moved with compassion, would not obey, till
his Father a second time, more enraged than before, commanding him, he durst
not disobey, but cutting her between the Neck and Shoulder, she dropped down dead
on the Ground, whilst the Father extolled his Sons Obedience; and his
Affections grew to that height toward him, that he said, Prasseram, my Son,
demand of me what thou think fit, for I have power to give it thee.
Prasseram replying, said, Sir, pray do me the favor to raise my Mother from
Death, and that will be a sufficient Reward for me. On which his Father taking
up consecrated Water, sprinkled the dead Body therewith, and having said some
Prayers, Reneka began again to breathe and stir, and soon after rising up, said
to her Husband, Have I ever deserved so great a punishment, that my Son should
be forced to become the Murderer of her, who next to God had given him Life?
Have not I ever been careful to do you Service to the utmost of my power? Have
I not night and day spent my Sighs, Groans, and Prayers to Mahadeu, and
willingly undergone all the Pennances that can extend to Piety? Have I ever
defiled your Bed, or committed Adultery? or does my considering with my self
the difference betwixt mine and my Sisters Fortunes deserve so cruel a Death?
All which Questions Siamdichemi considering, cursed his so rash and sudden act,
commanded Anger to depart from him, and go to its desolate Habitation, or else
he would not only banish it out of his own, but all other Men's thoughts;
whereupon Envy immediately forsook him, and Love and Unity entering in its
place, he took Reneka again to be his Wife. Moreover, Prasseram being so far
learned in their Religion and the Mysteries thereof, though he was but twelve
years old, that his Father was not able to teach him any more, he upon his
Father's Command, went to Ragia Inder, King of the happy Souls in the Realm of
Happiness, that he might be better instructed by him. No sooner was Prasseram
departed from his Father, but setting himself down on the Ground, he laid his
Legs across under him, with a steadfast resolution to sit in that posture twelve
years, and spend all that time in Praying to Mahadeu. Mean while Reneka served
her Husband with her utmost endeavors, and the Love between them grew to that
height, that next to Mahadeu, there was nothing which she affected more than
Siamdichemi; when at last the mighty Ragia Sistraersim going a Hunting with his
whole Retinue, which made a small Army, and ranged through several Hills,
Dales, Woods, and Mountains, came at last to the River Ganges, and knowing the
Wood where his Wives Sister and her Husband dwelt, resolved to visit him with
his whole Train, commanding all his People to pack up their traveling Apparel,
and other things, and Lodge with him at Siamdichemi's Habitation: Immediately
after all things were made ready, they entered into the pious Siamdichemi's Hut,
and found him in a deep sleep, insomuch that he waked not with all their noise,
as beating of Drums, sounding of Horns, and barking of Dogs; but his Wife
taking warm Water, washed the Crown of his Head therewith, and so waked him.
Ragia Sistraersim having saluted Siamdichemi, told him, that he had heard much
of his religious Life, which had brought him thither, with intention to lie
there that Night with all his Followers, and to Sup with him. Siamdichemi was
not a little troubled hereat, not knowing how to feed so many thousand People;
but remembering that Ragia Inder kept the white Cow Camdoga, and that those
which have the same in their House should want for nothing, he therefore
earnestly implored Inder to lend him the same for a small time, that these
People might see what it was to be pious, and that the Religious never want for
any thing. Inder granting his Request, immediately sent the white Cow, with
Orders to run directly through the Woods to Samdichemi's poor Hut, where
coming, she was by him received, and tied by a small Cord. The time to eat,
being come, Siamdichemi desired Ragia Sistraersim, that he would be pleased,
with his Retinue, to seat himself, whilst he fetched them Meat, asking also
what they would please to have? desiring each Person to tell him what they
loved best, for he could furnish them with any thing. Ragia Sistraersim being
only come to see his poor manner of living, and to despise it (for he thought
it impossible that he and his Followers could be all Entertained there,) stood
seemingly amazed, and merrily asked his Brother-in-law to Present him with some
Jewels and Precious Stones? who answered, All what you desire, Brother, you
shall have, and immediately gave him such Jewels as he had never seen before.
Next he asked for Clothes, not only for himself, but for all his Attendants,
which he likewise fetched out of his Hut, and all things else which he
requested, besides a great Sum of Money to each of his Servants; which the
Ragia observing, stayed with him that Night, and the succeeding Day. When it
was time to eat, they wanted neither Meat nor Drink, but whatsoever they
desired was brought them. After the same manner they were Entertained the third
day. The mighty Ragia Sistraersim could not admire sufficiently from whence all
the Riches, Clothes, Meat and Drink was brought: for that which Siamdichemi had
already expended, amounted to a very great Sum of Money, his House or Hut not
being able to contain a third part of the Goods, which he had distributed
amongst them; wherefore the Ragia supposed that the Hut stood over a deep Pit,
out of which all things were brought, and to discover it he sent Spies, who
looking through a Creviss, saw the forementioned Cow, which vomited all these
things out of her Mouth; which they told Ragia; who taking his leave the next
day, and being asked by Sistraersim if he had received satisfaction in his
Entertainment, and if he desired ought else? Ragia replied, Nothing but the
white Cow which is in your Hut; which exceedingly troubled him, and being
amazed, answered, That she was none of his own, and therefore he could not give
her away: How! (said Sistraersim) Do you now refuse to give me this Cow, whenas
you have given me so many excellent things before? To which Siamdichemi
replied, The other was in my power, but this is not. To which Sistraersim
answered, Do you not know my might and power, that though you refuse me the
Cow, I can immediately take her away by force? and immediately calling his Men
together, commanded the stoutest to take away the Cow from Siamdichemi, who
seeing her thus pulled away, cried aloud, Whether do you go? how shall I
pacify Ragia Inder? do not suffer your self to be thus carried away for a
spoil, but take revenge at once of yours and my Enemies. The Cow hearing these
words, and being provoked thereby, immediately became thrice as big as she was
before, and began to trample and to push down many of them, insomuch that
several thousands were killed, either by her Horns, or else trodden to death
under her Feet; after which she immediately fled to the Habitation of Ragia
Inder. Sistraersim seeing such a destruction made amongst his Followers, and
the Cow out of his power flown into the Sky, believed that his Brother-in-law
had privately uttered some conjuring words, which made the Cow do him so much
mischief, therefore being highly incensed, said to his Attendants, Come, let us
all go back to the cursed Hut of Siamdichemi, for I will not depart hence, till
I have revenged my self by his Death: Accordingly they with all their force
fell upon his Hut, and as a Reward for all his kindness in Entertaining him and
his Retinue for three days together, and giving him so many rich Presents, most
cruelly and ungratefully beat out his Brains. The unfortunate Reneka seeing her
beloved Husband thus inhumanely murdered, fetched the Corpse into her Hut,
where laying the same in her Lap, she resolved not to live long after him, but
setting fire on the Hut, burnt her self, and mixed her Ashes with those of her
Husbands. Mean while the Cow coming near Ragia Inder's Habitation, met with
Prasseram, who asking her from whence she came, was told, That upon Ragia
Inder's Command she had been at his Father's House; and also related what had
happened there, viz. how ill Sistraersim had rewarded his Father for his
extraordinary kindness, and how treacherously he was murdered: Whereupon
Prasseram answered, Let me die, if I do not revenge this one and twenty times
over, and destroy all the Ketteries; now the Ketteries were a very wicked
People, destroying more pious Brahmans than ever the Giants and Deities had
done. Wherefore Mahadeu having long before resolved to root out the Ketteries,
he gave the greater strength to Prasseram, whereby he obtained Victory over
them. Prasseram hereupon descending in great rage with his Persy, Bows and
Arrows in his Hands, amongst the Company of Ragia Sistraersim, defeated him and
all his Guards; from thence going to all parts of the World, he slew all the
Ketteries he could meet with, which struck such a terror into the rest, that
they forsook and denied their own Families and Sects; yet nevertheless
Prasseram could not find them all out, for in a few years after, a great number
of them getting together, rebelled again, and forced him a second time to War
against them, whenas he supposed he had before slain them all; but as Weeds
will still spring up, so likewise this cursed Tribe was increased by those who
had before denied their Names, or hid themselves, and thus forced Prasseram to
revenge himself twenty two several times, till at last he left not one of them
alive. Moreover Mahadeu remembering that he had asked Prasseram's Parents three
several times what they desired, and they craved nothing but such a fair Child
as he himself then appeared to them, therefore he resolved to give them two
such Sons more as this Prasseram was: wherefore he commanded the four-headed
Bramma to send the Souls of Siamdichemi and Reneka into the Bodies of the Ragia
Disserat and his Consort Consila, who were slain amongst the Ketteries; for
Mahadeu had promised to promote their Family. Bramma hereupon looking into the
Books of Secrets, and though he found the time of these People come to a
period, yet to oblige Mahadeu, he fulfilled his Command, and accordingly sent
the Soul of Siamdichemi into Ragia Disserat, and that of Reneka into Consila;
out of which Couple Ram was afterward born, who when he was come to age,
Married a Sita; but as the Bride and Bridegroom, according to the Custom of the
Benjans, were Riding about the City, Prasseram met them, and asking the
Spectators from what Family the Bridegroom proceeded, was answered, That his
Name was Ram, and that he was of the Tribe of the Ketteries: Whereat Prasseram
being mightily enraged, said, Are there yet more remaining of this Vermin? I
will instantly destroy him, as I have done his Predecessors; and immediately
drawing his Bow to shoot Ram as he rode upon an Elephant, Ram seeing him aim
at him, also drew his Bow, and coming near one another, let fly their Arrows,
which meeting together in the Air, all Prasseram's Power went into Ram's Arrow,
who by that means was bereaved of all his Strength, insomuch that he was
afterward no more than an ordinary Brahman.

Thus with Prasseram's Power also ended his Altar, after a Reign of a thousand
years, after which Ram's Altar immediately commenced.

Ram's or Ram Kata's, otherwise Dajeratha Rama's Altar, the Seventh.
AFter the ending of Prasseram's Altar, Mahadeu continued the sole Numen, and
supreme Governor of Heaven and Earth; and amongst others, one Rawan had
continually called upon him for three hundred years together, and Offered him
daily a hundred Camomile Flowers. Mahadeu desirous to try the fidelity of
Rawan, privately took away one of the Flowers which were prepared for the
Offering, and then asked him why he brought a less Offering than before? Rawan
ignorant of this Deceit, told over his Flowers, and found but ninety nine,
which made him so impatient, that he attempted to pull out one of his Eyes to
make up the number; but Mahadeu preventing him by holding his Hand, said, I
have sufficient proofs of your integrity, ask therefore of me what you think
fit, and I will grant it. Rawan rejoiced hereat, and begged that jointly with
him he might Govern the whole World, and Command over all the People upon the
Earth; which though granted, he still persever'd in his Prayers, and continued
his Oblations; which Mahadeu taking notice of, asked him why he still kept his
old Custom, since his Request was granted? Because (replied Rawan) I may by
your favor obtain ten Heads, and twenty Arms: All which Mahadeu granting, Rawan
went and settled himself in the Country of Lanka, now called Ceilon. After he
had Reigned some thousands of years, he grew very insolent and proud, insomuch
that he would not acknowledge Mahadeu for his Benefactor, though he had so
often worshipped him before; nay, he commanded his Subjects not to worship
Mahadeu any longer, but himself, pretending that he could protect them better:
His Subjects obeyed him twenty five years, but at last returned to their old
wont, and Rams of Ram Katas anders Dajerratha Ramas autaer, de zevende.
called upon Mahadeu, complaining that Rawan had forced them to neglect their
Devotion to him their God, and compelled them to worship him; yet nevertheless
their Hearts inclined toward him, as being the original of all things:
Therefore they implored him, that he would please to take off this Rawan, that
they might worship and serve him as before. Mean while these People kept a
Fast, abstaining from all manner of Sustenance for the space of three days.

There was at the same time in the Country of Assouthan, a Ragia or King
called Dasserat, who had three Wives, one of which named Consila bore him a
fair Son, which by the Brahmans was called Wissote Ram, who grew up in
extraordinary Wisdom and Knowledge. The second Wife Keggy bore a Son named
Barrat; the third named Sonnettry, bare two Sons, the one called Lekkerman, and
the other Setteroukan.

Ram was by the Brahman Wismawerter instructed in all Arts and Sciences, in
which he made so great a progress, that after many extraordinary Achievements,
he went up to Heaven, and left his Authority to Hanneman, a great Ape, who had
been his Assistant on Earth, to whom he promised, that he should be immortal
that consecrated a Pagode in honor of him; and that he would always protect his
Servants on Earth.

This concluded the whole work of Ram's Altar, and also the Tretangke, or
second Age, which had lasted one Million two hundred sixty nine thousand years,
of which Ram had Reigned two thousand years.

For the good Services done by the Apes to Ram in his time, they are held in
great veneration by the Indians; and in the Kingdoms of Pegu, Ceilon, and other
Places, they set up several Figures of Apes in their Pagodes; and this is
affirmed by Linschot, who says, That in former Ages there was no greater, nor
more precious a Relick in all India, than an Apes Tooth, which being tipped with
Gold, and beset with Precious Stones, was kept in a Pagode on the Mountain Piko
d' Adam on the Island Ceilon; to which place the Indians went in Pilgrimage
from all places thereabouts, nay, some came thither out of several Countries
lying four or five hundred Leagues from thence.

The Portuguese coming to this Island about the Year 1555. to assist the lawful
King, who was deposed by a Rebel, they went up the forementioned Mountain,
where ruining the Pagode, they found nothing else but a small Cabinet full of
Precious Stones, and the Apes Tooth, all which they carrry'd to Goa, which when
the Kings of Ceilon, Bengala, Bisnagar, and others heard, they sent Agents to
the Portuguese Viceroy at Goa, to request the restoration of the Tooth,
proffering as a Ransom for the same (besides many Presents) a Sum of seven
thousand Ducats of Gold, which upon the persuasion of the Archbishop was
refused by the Portuguese, who burnt the Tooth, and threw the Ashes into the
Sea.

Kistnas, or Cristnas, or Krexno, the eighth Altar.
IN the beginning of the third Age Duapersingke, a Ragia called Cans, otherwise
Campsa, of the Family Brommerakkes, who are a degree above the Deytes, in the
City Mottara, lying about twenty or twenty five Miles beyond Agra, the Court
and Metropolis of the Great Mogol, near the River Siemmena or Jemni. This Ragia
having a young Sister called Denki, otherwise Deweki, whose time being,
according to the Custom of the Country, near at hand to be Married, he sent
through all the City, to find a young Man that might deserve her; but what care
and diligence soever he used, he could meet with none whom she could fancy,
wherefore he sent some Persons on the same Errand to the next City Goggel or
Gokalam, lying three Miles from Agra on the opposite side of the Stream
Siemmena. The Agents at their return brought word that they had sound a pious
Brahman called Wassendeu or Wassoudewa, whom they judged might very well
deserve her. The Ragia Kans, upon their recommendation sending for him, gave
him his Sister in Marriage; and when she had attained to the twelfth year of
her age, and the Brahman to the nineteenth or twentieth, the Chan, according to
Custom, showed them to all his Subjects; after which he commanded Denki, and a
certain Brahman called Naret, experienced in the Art of Astrology, or rather
Cheiromancy, and lately come into that Country, to come before him, requiring
the said Brahman to look in Denkies Hand, and to tell him whether she should be
fortunate or unfortunate, rich or poor, have few or many Children, be short or
long lived, live joyfully or sorrowfully, what degree of Honor she should
attain to, and in short, what would happen to her, strictly charging him to
declare the plain truth, without flattery or dissimulation. The Brahman looking
into her Hand upon the Kings Command, and having viewed the same, bespake him
after this manner: My Lord and King, according as the Lines appear here, she
will be the Mother of seven Children, viz. six Sons and one Daughter, the last
whereof will bereave you of your Life and Crown, and Reign in your stead. This
Prognostication of being destroyed by his own Blood, made the King exceeding
sorrowful, insomuch that he commanded Denki to depart out of his Presence, as
not worthy to see his Face; nay, he gave order to lock her and her Husband up
in the Castle, and to set strong Guards about the same, and commanded all the
Midwives, that as soon as ever Denki was Delivered of a Child, it should
immediately be brought to him; which was accordingly performed: for no sooner
was the unhappy Denki Delivered, but the Infant was instantly carried to her
Brother, who forthwith killed it: Thus he did six several times, viz. to five
Sons and one Daughter; and when Denki had Conceived the seventh time, and Kans
informed thereof, he caused a stricter Guard to be kept upon her than before,
locking her up in a Chamber with seven Iron Doors, and setting a hundred
Soldiers to guard them, strictly charging them, that as soon as they heard the
Child cry, they should give him notice thereof, that he might dispose of it as
he had done of the rest. In the Month Sawanne, or Srawanam, which is our
August, on the Day Aerhem, being the eighth of the dark Moon, the time of her
Delivery approaching, she was exceedingly troubled, to think that this her last
Child, of which she expected to be Delivered, should be so cruelly murdered as
all the former had been: Sitting thus melancholy, she was on a sudden, without
pain, about Midnight delivered of a most beautiful Son, whose Face was
resplendent like the Moon in the Full, insomuch that he enlightened the whole
Room. At this Denki rejoiced exceedingly, and wondered not a little at her
beautiful Son; but very much lamented to think what hard fortune was decreed
him: But Mahadeu, who had inspired this Child with his Divine Power, gave him
also Speech, so that he comforted his sorrowful Mother with these Words, viz.
That she should rest satisfied, and he would find means to escape his Uncles
bloody Hands, and also deliver her from her Imprisonment. And turning to his
Father, he said, Come swathe me up, and carry me to Goggel, on the opposite
Shore of the Stream Siemmena, into the House of the Brahman Nen, whose Wife
Jessouda is just delivered of a Daughter; change me for her, and leaving me
there, bring the other Infant hither, and all things will be well. But the
Father replying, said, How is it possible for me to carry you out of this close
Prison, where not so much as the Wind can find any passage out or in? How then
shall I be able to get through these Iron Gates, and great number of Sentinels?
Trouble not your self (said Kisna, for that was the Name given the Infant by
his Father) about effecting what I have desired; for the Doors will fly open,
and the Watchmen all fall asleep, so that none shall discover you. Which the
Infant had no sooner said, but the Locks and Bolts flew open, and Wassendeu
taking the Child in his Arms, walked by the Watches, without being seen by any
of them: But coming to the River Siemmena, opposite to the City Goggel, he was
much troubled to see the Water extraordinary high, and run down with great
violence; till Kisna commanding the River to open a way in the midst for his
Father, the Water immediately divided it self, and stood firm on each side,
like Walls, until they were past over. Being come to the House of the holy
Brahman Nen, the Door whereof opened of it self, Wassendeu entered boldly with
his Son, and found the Brahman Nen with his Wife in a sound sleep; and they not
hearing him, he changed Kisna his Son for the newborn Maid, with whom he
returned to the Prison, the Stream Siemmena opening a Path for him, as before.
When he was come to the Gates, he found them open, and the Watch still asleep;
but no sooner was he entered one Gate, but the same shut after him, and so
likewise all the seven. Being come into the Prison, he delivered the Child to
his Wife; but the Watch awaking, and quickly hearing it cry, they entered the
Chamber where these two unfortunate Lovers were locked up, and taking the Child
from them, carried it to Ragia Cans, who seeing that it was a Maid, said, What
did this foolish Brahman Narret Prognosticate? He was mad, and did not know the
truth of the business. Cans nevertheless, for fear she might hereafter bereave
him of his Life, resolved to murder her; but taking the Infant by its Legs,
intending to strike it against the Wall, it slipped out of his Hands, and
starting up, said, O most inhumane Blood-hound! What do you seek to murder me
for? I am not the right Party; but he that shall bereave you of Life, Crown,
and Realm, and revenge the death of his Brothers and Sister so inhumanely
butchered by you, is alive and well in the City Goggel. Which said, the Child
flew into the Air, where Mahadeu transformed it into Lightning, which was never
seen before that time.

The Ragia Cans exceedingly amazed hereat, and calling all his Council, asked
what this Wonder might portend. They all told him, that some great Event would
suddenly follow; yet none knew certainly what the issue thereof would be, which
made him sorrowful and perplexed in mind. Mean while being informed, That in
Goggel was a most beautiful Youth, kept by the Pious Brahman Nen, he feared
that he might be the Revenger of the Infants death which he had murdered, as
the Maid had told him; therefore he seriously considered how this Youth might
also be destroyed, which by force he durst not attempt, fearing that all his
Subjects would oppose him, and the rather, because of the Piety of the Brahman:
But at last he invented the following means: viz. He called his eldest Sister
Poetena, saying; Poetena, if at once you love me, your own Life, and will
preserve my Realm and Crown, then do me this kindness; viz. Take Presents with
you, and go to the House of the Pious Brahman Nen, whose Wife has lately been
delivered of a Son, whom I desire you by some means or other to let suck out of
your Breast, which you must first anoint with the most powerful Poison that
can be had, that by that means when the Child comes to suck you it may be
killed. Which she promising to do, was sent with many rich Presents to Goggel,
where so soon as she was arrived she went to the House of Nen, whose Wife she
wished much Joy with her young Son, giving her great Presents, thereby to be
the less mistrusted, and cover her false design; and desired to have the Child
lie in her Lap, which being given her, and she looking upon it, said, Indeed
the Reports which go of this Youth in Mottera are no ways false; for I never
saw a more beautiful Babe in my whole life: I do not repent my trouble of
coming hither. Thus Poetena flattering the Babe, sometimes kissed it, and
danced it up and down, the better to hide her wicked intent. At last opening
her poisonous Bosom, she laid the Infant Kisna to the same, hoping that it
would there breathe its last; but the Child strengthened by, Mahadeu's Power
against all Poisons, taking the Nipple into its Mouth, not only sucked away
all her Milk, but the Blood out of her Veins, and also her Soul; and by that
means immediately growing cold and stiff, she fell down dead: Which when King
Cans heard, he grew exceeding sorrowful, practicing diverse ways to destroy the
Infant Kisna, but all in vain; for, growing up in years, he for a time became a
Herdsman, and under that form wrought many strange Miracles, too tedious to
insert: And, amongst others, when the last Hour of his Altar was come, he went
out of Dowarca, and taking up a handful of Dirt, threw the same over the City,
by which means all the Golden Roofs, Streets, and stately Structures, became
nothing but Hay, Clay, Wood, and Stones. Imediately after which, Kisna
deserting the World, ascended to Heaven, so ending his Altar, which had lasted
only a hundred Years, in the third Age called Duapersing, containing 864000
Years.

The Brahmans affirm, That though all the Seas were Ink, and the whole Earth
Paper, and all the Inhabitants thereof did nothing but write Night and Day for
the space of a hundred thousand Years, yet it was impossible for them to
describe all the Wonders which Kisna wrought on Earth in the time of his
hundred Years Reign: And they believe, That all those which write the History
of Kisna, read the same, or hear it read, shall merit very much: Nay, that all
those who read it with devotion, shall enter into Kissna of Krissna of Krexno
d'achtste autaer.
Bhodes of Bouddhas autaer, de negende
Kallenkyns autaer, de tiende
Heaven, and not be transmigrated into another Body, but live for ever.

This Kisna, or Krexno, is represented with four Arms, whereof one of the Left
is held up, pointing with the Forefinger to the Cow Camdoga; one of the Right
Arms, holding a Periwincle in the Hand, extends downwards; the other two Hands
seem to stop the holes of a Fife held to the Mouth of the Image: The Feet also
seem as if treading the Measures of a Dance. The Head is covered with a Golden
Crown, with several Points raised and beset with Pearls and Precious Stones.
The Garments it has on are made after the Indian Fashion, very wide and large.
About the Neck and Shoulders hangs a long red Scarf. On each side stand two
Images of Women, in rich Habits, each in a different posture worshipping him.

Bhodes or Boudhas Altar, the Ninth.
BHodes, or Boudhas, has neither Father nor Mother, and is to most invisible;
but those few who have seen him affirm, That he has four Arms, with which he
is represented by the Indians, with his Legs across under him, sitting on a
Flower resembling the Water-Lilly, of which he holds two by the Stalks in two
of his Hands, his other two being held on his Breast in a praying posture. His
Head is covered with a Crown of five Points, which at the ends, and round
about, are beset with Pearls. On each side of him stand the Images of two
Youths, with joined Hands, seeming to worship him.

This Boudha does naught else but, with cast down Eyes, pray Night and Day,
without cessation, to Mahadeu: In which posture having sat 26430 Years,
without doing any Miracles, or troubling himself with transitory things, he
will end his Altar, and begin that of Callenkyn, the tenth or last.

In this Altar, according to the Indians Calculation, we live now, and that in
this present Year 1672, 4773 Years are already expired of the same; so that
there are yet 21080 Years to come of it.

Callenkyns Altar, the Tenth.
CAllenkyn, otherwise called Kelly, is white Horse, which stands in Heaven on
three Feet, or, according to the representation of the Indians, on four,
holding up the foremost Right Foot. It is richly set forth with Saddle, Bridle,
and other Caparisons. Before it stands a King in rich Apparel, with a Crown on
his Head, and a long String of Pearls about his Neck, hanging below his Belly.
In the beginning of this Altar the Benjans will live very piously, and
accordingly be very prosperous; but after the expiration of some Years they say
they will grow wicked, and practice naught but Villainy.

This shall continue till 405570 Years are expired, when the Sins of the Sages
increasing, Callenkyn will set down his Right Foot to punish their sins, and
therewith press the Earth so hard, that the Serpent Seesja shall not be able to
bear it: and the Tortois which supports the World, feeling this unusual Burden,
shall fall into the Deep, and so rid himself of his Load; and by that means all
the wicked Inhabitants of the World will be destroyed. And thus, after
expiration of the forementioned time, the tenth Altar, and last Age shall end,
and the first (being Matx Altar) begin again.

Religion.
AS to what concerns the Religion in these Parts, the Natives are of two sorts,
viz. Pagans, and Mahumetans.

A general Toleration in India.
In India is a general Toleration, each man being free to change his Religion,
and use what form he pleases, without fear of the Great Mogol's Magistrates,
which are Mahumetans.

That which we will here declare of the Indians Religion, is drawn from the
Vedam, or Book of their Law, Their Vedam, what it contains.
which comprehends both their Credenda, and Agenda; what they are to believe,
and what Ceremonies they are to perform. This Book being written in Rhyme in
the Samscortam Tongue, is divided into four Parts: The first called Roggowedam;
the second, Issourewedam; the third, Samawedam; and the fourth, Adderawanawedam.

The first part treats of the Original of things; as also of Angels and Souls;
of the Reward for good, and Punishment of bad Angels; of Generation and
Corruption; what Sin is; how it can be forgiven; who can do it, and wherefore.

The second gives account of the Governors to whom they ascribe the Dominion of
all things.

The third instructs them in Morality, persuades them to be virtuous, and to
abhor all manner of Vice.

The fourth describes the Ceremonies which are to be used in their Pagodes,
Offerings, and Feasts. But this Part has a long time since been lost, by which
means the Brahmans have lost much of their Power and Respect, which perhaps was
not long before the Birth of our Savior; for it is apparent, that the Vedam at
that time was very much altered, it sufficiently appearing therein, that the
Writers thereof were not altogether Strangers to the knowledge of our Savior,
notwithstanding they kept the same secret, according to the Custom and Manner
of the Heathens.

The Brahmans judge themselves bound and obliged to observe the Vedam, without
any contradiction or exception, when any Text is taken out of the same: But
about the sense it self (which is to be observed) there arise many differences
amongst them; for some explain it after one manner, and others after another;
though for the clearing or deciding of these Disputations, they have made a
Jestra, which is a Comment or Explanation thereof.

Moreover, the Indians on the Coasts of Cormandel, and several other places in
India, acknowledge not only one God, but also one only supreme Deity, though
perhaps in several places they differ in the Name: for the Wistnowa's,
otherwise Benjans, account Wistnow, by some called Mahadeu, for the supreme;
but the Seivia's make Eswara the chief, which they call by many other Names,
and also make him to be of two different Sects; yet nevertheless they adore him
not, but make choice of other lesser Deities, which they worship.

The Brahmans opinion of God.
The Brahmans judge generally of God, as of a Man, and that that which is
pleasing and acceptable to Men, should likewise be so to God; likewise that all
things which recreate Men, delight God also; wherefore the Wistnowa's allow
their prime God Wistnow a most beautiful Woman, called Laetsemi, which was
thrown up out of the Sea, when it was disturbed by the Mountain Merowa, as is
before related. The Seivia's or Brahmans who account Eswara for the supreme
God, allow him another Wife, whom they call Parvati, Isweri, or Parma Isweri,
and also by many other Names.

The extent of Garrouda and Annemonta.
Amongst the chief of their lesser Deities, which are erected in the great
Temple built by the Wistnowa's in honor of Wistnow, stand the Images of
Garrouda and Annemonta, who are both accounted very faithful Servants to
Wistnow, being ready on all occasions to perform his pleasure: Their Extract
they relate fictitiously, viz. that of Garrouda sprung out of an Egg after a
pullulation of five hundred years, with other ridiculous Circumstances; and the
other of Annemonta, who was in the form of an Ape, to be preternatural without
Coition of his Parent-Apes. This Annemonta, which (as the Brahmans affirm)
properly signifies the Wind, was ever since his Birth a faithful Servant to
Wistnow, when he frequented the Earth under the Name of Ramma, wherefore he
has a place set apart for his particular Service in Wistnow's Temple or
Pagode; and as Garrouda serves Wistnow in Heaven, so Annemonta executes his
Commands on Earth, which he also will desert at last, and ascend up to Heaven.

The Kings of India, Cambaya and Bengala, all observe the Moorish or Mahumetan
Religion, because the Moors which are brought Slaves into India, have by
degrees made themselves Masters, and subduing many of the Pagans, have forced
them to embrace their Religion.

Della Valle tells us, that the Indians have many Gods, which they worship as
their Protectors, and consecrate Pagodes to them. These their Deities were
formerly Kings of the Country, or famous Heroes, who for their heroic
Exploits were very highly reverenced amongst them, honoring them as the Greeks
and Romans did Jupiter and Mars.

Mahumetanism professed in some places.
These divine Heroes are not all one and the same, but very different: for those
on the main Land of India, which is under the Great Mogol's Jurisdiction, are
quite contrary to those in the Kingdom of Coutzyn, and in the Countries lying
near the Sea, as also others in Pegu, Siam, China, and Japan. This is to be
concluded from the several Names, that differ exceedingly, which possibly may
arise from the several Languages used in the various Countries where they are
worshipped; yet nevertheless these Demigods are but the same, as he who
anciently by the Egyptians was worshipped by the Name of Osyris, was by the
Greeks reverenced under the Name of Bacchus.

Their high esteem of Ramna.
The number of these ancient Heroes amongst the Indians is almost infinite;
amongst others one named Crusen, is highly esteemed by them; but the chiefest
of all is Ramo, or Ram, or Ramna, which Name is in such veneration amongst
them, that they use the same in their Salutations, and in stead of bidding one
another Farewell at their departure, they say Ramo, Ramo.

This Idol is very eminent amongst the Japanners, and known by several Names,
as Sotoqui, Siacka, Amida, and Saka; amongst the Chinese, by that of Sekia or
Saka; amongst the Tungkindans, by that of Tecka. What this Ramo did during his
stay on Earth, we have already related.

They have Household Gods.
Besides Ram, and many other Gods, they make another every New-years-day of some
Creature or other, every one selecting that which proved successful to him on
the first day of the new Year. They also carefully preserve that thing which
they have elected for their Idol in their House, and worship it as the Romans
their Dii Penates, or domestic Gods, committing all their Concerns to their
discretion.

About the latter part of the year they repair to the River Ganges, to throw
their old Idols into it, that they may choose new ones, as they had done the
year before.

Idosl giving answer like Oracles.
In many places of India are also Idols, which by the delusion and instigation
of the Devil are like Oracles, resolving Questions after the same manner as in
the time of the Greeks and Romans. They make their Demands, and speak to them
after this manner, viz. the Implorer having said several Prayers, puts a
Flower, or any such like thing into the Hands or Bosom of the Idol, which they
desire either to throw to the right Hand, if their Business shall be
successful, but if not, to the left; whereupon (as they say) the Idol
immediately casts the Flower to the one or other side, according to the
intended good or bad success of the Business; but if the Idol chance to keep
the Flower some time before he throws it away, then they desire him not to
delay, and judge also, that the longer he keeps it, the more difficult it will
be to accomplish their Designs.

They worship the Sun.
The Brahmans also worship the Sun when it rises and sets, building Pagodes in
honor of it, wherein they show Reverence to its Image. Good Angels they call
Dewetaes; and evil Spirits, Raetsjasjaes, which they believe were begotten by a
Man, viz. the Brahman Cassiopa, who was Father to both his Wives, the one
called Deti, Mother of the Dewetaes, and the other Aditi, or Caddrowawiuneta,
Mother of the Raetsjasjaes. Moreover, the Cassiopa before mentioned, some
suppose to be Adam, and Aditi to be Eve: for they maintain that Cassiopa was
the first Brahman, who had a Son by Bramma: And (as we have already mentioned)
they do not make God to be the Creator of Mankind, but one Bramma, whom they
affirm to have created nine in the beginning, and out of these nine, and those
which he begot by his Wife Saraswati, the whole Generation of Mankind proceeded.

Their belief and opinion of the immortality of the Soul.
All the Brahmans, except some few of them) firmly believe the Immortality of
the Soul, but are of diverse opinions concerning its original: for some suppose
that the Soul had no beginning, but was comprehended in God and his Being; but
according to others, it lay asleep before the Creation of the World. Others
again maintain, that the Soul was not without beginning, but that God created
it a little before he made the World, and sent it into the Bodies of Men and
Beasts, as a punishment for their sins, each according to his deserts, so that
the Bodies wherein the Soul resides, is as a Prison to it.

Outward zeal in Religion they judge very necessary, as appears by their
following the Commandments written by Bramma, wherein consisted (according to
his testimony) the Service of Wistnow and Eswara, who require as well the
outward Worship as inward Devotion, and to that purpose they have these
Commandments, viz.

The Commandments imposed by the Brahman.
I. A Man must not be proud, but wholly give his Thoughts and Soul to God.

II. He must remain God's Servant.

III. He must always be a great Friend to God.

IV. He must think on his Might and Omnipotence.

Those which concern their outward Worship are these:

I. A Man must always be ready to hear any Discourse of God.

II. He must often call on his Name, and speak of his Glory.

III. He must make use of, and perform his Laws according to the Explanation of
the Brahmans.

IV. Their Images they must adorn and beautify with Ornaments.

V. Lastly, they must worship their Images.

The Brahmans affirm, that those who for a certain time faithfully perform and
obey the forementioned Commandments, shall attain to great knowledge, nay, to
that perfection, that they shall never need more to observe the outward
Ceremonies, but do God great Service by only thinking on him, and thereby
merit Heaven.

As to what concerns their outward Worship, they first (according to the
Contents of these Rules) build Temples in honor of Wistnow and Eswara, which
are not only bigger than those erected for lesser Deities, but have also
indifferent high Steeples, which the other have not. And because the Disciples
of Wistnow and Eswara are scattered through the whole Country, therefore there
is a Pagode in every Town, dedicated to these two Deities.

The several Pagodes of Wistnow and Eswara in the Realm of Carnatica.
In the Realm of Carnatica, the most noted Pagodes are these following, which
are all dedicated to Wistnow and Eswara.

In Madure, the Pagode Jockenata, which is very large and magnificent. In
Trisinapoli, the Pagode Sriringam. In Wistow Canje, the Pagode Warderason. In
Trivelour, the Pagode Wireragna. In Seva Canje, the Pagode Ecaubranata, in
honor of Eswara, for Prettevi, or the Earth. In Triwanacawere, the Pagode
Jembounateswara, consecrated to Eswara, for Apou, or the Water. In Trinamula,
the Pagode Aranajaleswara, in honor of Eswara, for Tseejem, or the Fire. In
Calist, the Pagode Calist Eswara, in honor of Eswara, for Waijou, or the Wind.
In Settamberam, the Pagode Settamberam Eswara, in honor of the same, for
Acasjem, or the Air. In Tripeti, the Pagode Winket Eswara, besides more in
several places of India.
Strange things related by the Brahmans of their Pagodes.
To make these Pagodes esteemed and reverenced, the Brahmans relate strange
things of them, (which make such an impression upon the Minds of the ignorant
People, that they are thereby moved to bestow rich Gifts thereon toward their
Maintenance) viz. either in honor and praise of the Idol which is erected in
the Pagode, or else some wonderful or remarkable thing which either has, or is
to happen there.

At Jembrenata they affirm, that a Fruit called Nerou Pandou, should appear
constantly every day at Noon at the Feet or the Idol.

That at Sirateni, about the forementioned time, there grows daily a Flower out
of a Stone lying in a Trough full of Water before the Idol Eswara.

In Great Canje they say happens yearly on a Festival Day, a great Wonder in
the Pagode Camaetsema, Consort to Eswara. On this Day they bring a great
quantity of Fruit into the Pagode, in which also they place a Child near a deep
Pit running a great way under Ground. In the Evening they lock and seal up the
Door of the Pagode, leaving only a Child with a Garland of Flowers about his
Neck in the same, which about Midnight is with all the Fruits that are in the
Temple fetched away from the Pit, and brought again in the Morning, with a new
Garland about its Neck.

The Pagode at Trisinapoli is become famous by means of an Image, standing in
the same, which is said to have worshipped Bramma in Person as we have already
related at large.

Though the Pagodes of Wistnow and Eswara are of a considerable bigness, being
much larger than those of the lesser Numens, yet are they not comparable to the
Churches of Europe, being very low and flat; yet some of them have high
Steeples, as amongst others the Pagode near Tegnepatram, commonly called The
White Pagode.

In many places the Pagodes are built in the Fields, and are without Windows or
Holes, so that no Light comes into them but through the Doors, so that they are
generally very dark; they are commonly divided into three Walks, the first
being a Vault resting on Stone Columns, into which any one may come, it being
always open: In it are several Statues of Elephants, Oxen, Horses, etc. which
are used in the Service of the Idol, who is often drawn upon them through the
Streets of the Cities. The second having a strong Gate, is open only in the
daytime; but the Brahmans, who inhabit the same, suffer none to come in
thither, which is generally furnished with Images of horrid Shapes as Men with
many Heads and Arms. In the third Isle, which is locked up with a strong Door,
stand the Images of Wistnow and Eswara.

They represent their God Wistnow or Mahadeu (according to Della Valle) in the
likeness of a small Stone Column, which grows less and less from the bottom
upwards. The Name Mahadeu amongst the Indians signifies properly Great God,
whose Virtues they highly extol, believing him to be very wonderful, adding
moreover, that whilst he lived on Earth, he daily grew bigger and bigger, nay,
that his Image still grows greater as it stands in their Temples.

They also represent Mahadeu in another Shape, of Crystal, and make Offerings
at his Fet, which consist in Milk, Oil, Rice, and the like. They also represent
him like a Man, but having sixteen Arms on each side.

Round about the Pagodes is a large enclosed Plain full of smaller Buildings,
serving for their lesser Deities.

In the Pagode of Wistnow, Laetsemi, Consort to Wistnow, has a Chapel; as
also Garrouda and Annemonta, both faithful Servants of Wistnow. The Image
Garronda is represented like a Man, with Wings; that of Annemonta or Hanneman,
with a Face like an Ape.

On the forementioned Plains stand Cisterns, in which grows the Herb Toleje,
which with its use is mentioned before. They never go on these Plains about the
Pagodes, but always with their right Side toward the Temple.

The Brahmans account their Pagodes to be the Houses and Residences of their
Gods, and therefore enter into them with great Reverence. Part of the Customs
for Goods sold and bought, are bestowed on them; as also part of the Sandal
Wood, Benjamin, and long Pepper, and likewise of all Moneys that are Coined.
They also go in Pilgrimage to the Pagodes, and upon certain Feast-days make
great Presents and Offerings to them.

The Pagode Winket Eswara in the City Tripeti, has yearly three Feafts; one in
September, at which time great numbers of People flock thither from all parts
of the Country, especially the Soudra's, who commonly carry many Presents with
them. The second is in December, when the Brahmans repair thither with
Presents; and the third not long after.

By means of the great concourse to this Pagode it has great advantages,
amounting to a vast: Revenue, which arises wholly from the Presents brought
thither, none of the Heathens going with empty Hands, but discharging their
Promises and Vows there, which they make for the obtaining of Health, or
accomplishing any Business.

The manner of worshipping Wistnow and Eswara.
They seldom have any public Meetings in their Pagodes, nor any set-day for
Worship, but frequenly carry die Image of Wistnow and Eswara on their Shoulders
through the Streets of the City, viz. they carry Eswara's about every Month on
the Amawasi, or first day; and on the ninth day after the new Moon, that of
Wistnow. They are carried after this manner: The Image is placed on a wooden
Horse, with his fore Feet raised, and his hinder Legs standing on a Plank, and
so carried on the Shoulders of several Men; before the Horse they bear lighted
Torches, and Umbrella's over its Head; near the Horse stands one who constantly
fans the Image, to keep the Flies from it; and when they have done, they return
it to the old place in the Pagode again, where some appointed for that purpose,
Dance before the Image, whilst others Sing Anthems in praise of the Idol,
playing on Cymbals, and beating on Drums.

It is also a Custom in this Country, to devote young Virgins to the Pagodes,
after which they are bound never to Marry, but spend their Lives only in
Dancing before their Gods, to whom (as they say) it is so acceptable, that they
shall merit Heaven by it.

Each Person also according to his Sect, by virtue of their eighth Commandment
of internal Religion, studies to do honor to his Idol, bestowing on it all
manner of Service which he supposes to be best pleasing to it.

The Wistnowa's strew their Images erected in honor of Wistnow, with Flowers,
put rich Clothes on it, adorned with Diamonds, Rubies, and other Precious
Stones, thereby to make him appear glorious In the Eyes of all Men. But their
God Eswara, they affirm, delights in something else, viz. to be washed
constantly with sweet Waters, which his Worshippers are no way negligent in
performing, but continually wash the aforesaid Deity with all sorts of perfumed
Waters.

They also carry these Images every year on their Festival days through the
most eminent Streets of their Cities, in a Wagon as high and large as an
ordinary House; those which draw it are Fishermen, and the like mean People,
accompanied by a a great number of diverse Tribes, which is a Custom observed
through the whole Country. The Image of Wistnow every year on the tenth of
January in the afternoon, they carry out of the City into the Fields on a
wooden Horse, where they let loose a Ram, which they endeavor to kill as he
runs; as also a Fox, which they strive to destroy with their Clubs, but he
commonly escapes them. Toward the Evening they carry the Image home again
through the Streets, accompanied with abundance of People carrying lighted
Torches, and at last set it in the old place. The following day they show honor
to the God Eswara, by carrying of his Image into the Fields after the same
manner, as also on the twelfth, though not on Horseback, but only on Men's
Shoulders.

Della Valle tells us, that the greatest part of the Service which the Indians
perform to their Gods, consists only in Singing, Dancing, playing on Musical
Instruments, serving them with Meat, Bathing, Washing, Perfuming them, and the
like. Few of them spend their time in Praying or Reading, which as some
believe, are only to bring them to the perfect knowledge of God, to which when
they have attained, the Books become altogether useless. Some Priests Dance
stark naked, before their Idol, excepting a Cloth about their Middle, to cover
their Privities, whilst others play on Cymbals, and beat on Drums, and others
with naked Swords Fence in the Air.

The Feast Gawri Dewi.
On the eighth of January all the Married Women of the Brahmans keep a Feast
called Gawri Dewi, and by the Seiva's, Maha Secti, in honor of Parvati, to
obtain long Life for their Husbands, and that they may never be Widows. This
Feast lasts ten days, and is kept after this manner; viz. The Women make an
Image of Meal, Rice, and a sort of red Grain, for Parvati, which they strew and
adorn with all manner of Flowers, and placing it in a Sedan, carry it on the
tenth day out of the City, accompanied with a great Train of People, who
casting the Image into a Pool of Water, return home.

The Feast Tsewartre.
On the eighth of February the Seiva's and Smarta's, but not the Wistnowa's,
keep a Feast called Tseweratre, on which they fast a whole day and a night; but
the Soudra's spend the night in Dancing, so to keep themselves from sleeping.
This Feast is kept in commemoration of what Eswara did when the Callecote
Wissiam, or venomous Poison before mentioned was found in the World.

Another great Feast.
On the fourteenth day after the new Moon in August, not only the Brahmans, but
also the Soudra's, both Men and Women, keep a Feast commonly called Ananta
Padmanaba Uratam, that they may enjoy Health in this Life, and merit Heaven
hereafter. They keep this Feast commonly near a River, or else in their Houses
or Pagodes, with many Ceremonies, and tie a red String with fourteen Knots
about their Arms, the Knots being the Marks of Ananta, Padmanaba. They keep
this Feast once every year; but those which have kept it for fourteen years
together, arc not obliged to keep it any more, but only to make a Treat for
the Brahmans; who to make this Feast esteemed amongst the People, relate
several ridiculous Fables, which we will here omit.

On the full Moon in August, the Brahmans and Wistnowa's keep the Feast
Tsrawanala Pondema; as also the Soudra's on the eighth day after the full Moon,
Other Festivals peculiar to several Sects.
a Feast called Gokoulastemi, in honor and commemoration of Wistnow, who about
that time at Midnight at the rising of the Moon, was born by the Name of
Cristna or Kisna, in Madura, and at the same instant carried to a Shepherds
House called Nanta. Some Deweta's (as they affirm,) as also some of their
Saints, certainly knowing that he should be born at that time, expected him
Fasting; and because the Night wherein he was born was no convenient time to
keep the Feast, they and be merry, many Clothing themselves in rich Apparel,
and entertaining one another with thickened Milk, Coco-nuts, and all other
Fruits that were to be had amongst the Shepherds and Herdsmen. On the Feast Day
the Streets of the Towns where it is kept, are strewn with green Herbs.

Many other Feasts, too tedious to relate, are kept by the Brahmans, Soudra's,
and other Tribes or Sects, in honor of their supreme Deities, Wistnow and
Eswara; besides which they also keep several in honor of their Deities, as
amongst others, the Feast Pongol, in honor of the Sun, on the ninth of January;
which day the Brahmans hold to be Sancramanam, which signifies a Good day. This
Feast is kept after the following manner; viz. They boil Rice with Milk or
Water in the open Air, that the Sun may shine upon it; they put not the Rice
into the Milk or Water before it boyls, which they so order, that it is just
Noon when it is put in; when boiling up it begins to run over, they cry aloud,
Pongol, Pongol, Pongol, Pongol. The reason why they boil the Rice in Milk, is
because it comes from the Cow Amortam. The Water wherein it is boiled is not
thrown away, as at other times, but left standing so long till the Rice has
soaked it up. Rice thus boiled is accounted very wholesome for the Body, and is
kept as long as possibly can be.

Some keep this Feast every Sunday, because it is the Day of the Sun, which
they call Suriawanam, or Sunday. Some say it is kept on the forementioned time,
because the Sun then begin to take its course toward the South; or) as others
say) because then the Raetsjasja Belli comes on the Earth, to take an Account
of things: for when he (say they) was thrown into the lower World, he had leave
to come once ayear to see what happened therein. On this Feast Day also they
drive their Cows and Buffalo's into the Fields, with Garlands and many other
Ornaments about their Necks.

They worship several Deities.
The Brahmans show Reverence to others which they account lesser Gods, and build
Pagodes in honor of them, and amongst others worship Garrouda, Annemonta,
Vigneswara, and Vierrepadra; of a all which they chiefly respect Vigneswara,
Son of Eswara, whose Image most Indians keeping in their Houses, worship it for
their domestic God. They also worship and make Offerings to Dewendre, and
other Princes of the lower Region, as Achni, Wayouvia, Warrouvo, Isan-ja, and
several others, but erect no Temple to them; viz. They Offer Jagam to Indre,
that thereby they may obtain plenty of Meat, Clothes, and Women. Achni they
reverence, to procure Fame and Honor; Warrouva, that they may have strength and
power of Body. From Cubera they implore Riches. And from Isan-ja they crave
Power and Dominion.

The Brahmans affirm, that their worshipping of the inferior Deities is only
advantageous to them in this World; but by the Service performed to their
supreme Gods they merit Heaven; they therefore account it no sin to worship the
lesser Deities, provided they adore them not with that zeal as they do their
supreme, which if they should, they would be guilty of mortal sin.

Some affirm, that there are no Pagodes built in honor of Bramma, neither is he
worshipped, notwithstanding he has so great a Command amongst them; the
reasons thereof the say is this, viz. That anciently a Saint commanded that
they should erect no Temples of Bramma; but others suppose this to be only a
pretense of the Brahmans; that they themselves may be better and more esteemed
of amongst the People, and have some advantage from them: Yet Della Valle tells
us, that there is a Pagode built in honor of Bramma, in a Village called Agra,
not far from the City Cambaya, wherein are erected diverse white Marble Images,
and in the midst of the Pagode the Image of Bramma naked, with many Arms, three
Faces, and a long picked Beard, but roughly Carved; at his Feet stand two other
Images of his Children, the one called Savetri, and the other Garetri; and in
another corner of the Temple, on the left Hand of Bramma, stand two Images
more, being the Representations of two of Bramma's Disciples, one called
Cheskuer, and the other Ciavan.

The Indians are very zealous in serving their Idols, daily perfuming, washing,
and setting Meat before them.

They Offer to the D^vils
According to a Custom used anciently by most People, they also worship and make
Offerings to evil Spirits, of which the chiefest in esteem are Ganga and
Gournatha. The Image of Ganga has one Head and four Arms; in one of the left
Hands it holds a Cup, and in one of the right a Trident. In most parts of the
Country are Pagodes built in honor of this Demon, but none for Gournatha,
though he is above Ganga, and the Son of Eswara, notwithstanding the Wistnowa's
account him a Demon; yet nevertheless, though it be not customary, there is a
Pagode built in honor of him at Carmellon, a Place not far from Paliacatta; but
in the Fields they erect several Images in honor of him, but commonly they
worship him under a Tree, where they pretend to have seen him.

The Soudra's keep a yearly Feast in commemoration of Ganga, though at no
set-time: The Rice which they Offer to his Image, is boiled either in or near
the Pagode in the forenoon: In the afternoon the Idol is put into a high
Chariot, and conducted through the Streets of the City, where both Rich and
Poor with folded Hands fell down before the chariot; against the coming of
which several Goats being brought thither to be killed for Offerings, have
their Heads cut off by the Servants belonging to the Pagodes, who keep the
Heads for their own share. Many Goats are killed after this manner at this
time, for all those that can by any means purchase a Goat, bring him thither to
be killed: Some also bring three or four, with the Flesh whereof they make
merry at night. The Chariot wherein the Idol is placed is followed by another,
on which stands a Gibbet with two Iron Hooks, whereon such as have made any
Promises in sickness or adversity to Ganga, suffer themselves to be hooked in
at their Backs, and drawn up into the Air, where they Fence with a naked Sword
which they hold in their Hands, or else fire off a Gun, and charge the same
again; and not only the Men suffer themselves to bo tortured so, but also the
Women, professing that they feel no pain thereby; yet for fear, those through
whose Bodies the Iron Hooks are driven should cry, and thereby strike a terror
to others, the Spectators make a mighty noise, so to drown the cry of them that
are tortured. It happened nevertheless on a time, that a Slavess belonging to the
Governor of Paliacatta, being persuaded that she should feel no pain, suffered
her self to be hooked in her Back, and so drawn up, but confessed afterward
that she was much deceived, being sufficiently made sensible of the contrary,
and therefore would never be persuaded to be served so again. Some out of a
superstitious zeal to this Ganga, suffer themselves to have Holes made through
their sides, and a small Cord drawn backwards and forwards through them, not
without great pain; which nevertheless they regard not, but look cheerfully,
and Dance all the time. Others that dwell farther up in the Country, likewise
superstitiously throw themselves before the Chariot, suffering it to run over
their Bodies, and break them to pieces.

In ancient times, as these Heathens make mention, they offered yearly a Man to
Ganga, but they say he has of late been satisfied with a Buffalo; but no such
bloody Offerings are made to Wistnow or Eswara: and though this kind of
diabolical Worship be very common amongst the Soudra's, yet it is not allowed by
the Brahmans.

The Brahmans belief concerning the transmigration of the Soul.
The Brahmans believe, that each Man has had a Life before this present, and
that that which he meets withal in this, whither good or bad, is either a
reward or punishment for his works in the former, so likewise they maintain,
that no Man meets with any reward for his good works in this Life, but is to
undergo the punishments inflicted upon him for his sins in his former Life, and
that those which do good in this Life, shall meet with a reward proportionable
in that to come. And notwithstanding few see any probability by their good
works to attain to, or merit Wemcontam, that is, Heaven, or a place of
everlasting happiness, because that is only appointed for the faithfullest
Servants of Wistnow and Eswara, and find themselves destitute of these
Perfections required thereto, yet they speak much of the forgiveness of sins,
and in order thereunto have invented several means whereby they allege the
remission or forgiveness of sins may be obtained; nay, some of them are so
superstitiously zealous, that they undertake to do more than their Vedam
requires of them, merely out of an ambition to live a more perfect Life, in
hopes that thereby they may obtain an extraordinary place in Heaven, and
therefore many undergo great hardships, torture and punish themselves diverse
ways; some wearing Iron Collars about their Necks of twenty four pound weight,
in form of a Grate four Foot square. Others have Iron Chains made fast about
their Legs at one end, carrying the other on their Shoulders. Some also go on
wooden Clogs full of Iron Pins, which are so sharp, that it is a wonder how
they can go upon them. Many others there are, who chain themselves by the Legs
to a Tree, resolving there to end their Lives. Some also lock themselves up in
little square Houses, or rather Cages, built on two Images of the Idol Mahadeu,
with intentions never to come out of them, notwithstanding they endure great
hardship, partly by the heat and smoke of the many Lamps which they burn
therein, and partly for the inconvenience of the Rooms, which are so little,
that they can but just sit in them, with their Legs across under them on the
Floor. Others hang a considerable time on a cross piece of Timber, by an Iron
Hook driven into their Sides, notwithstanding the pain and effusion of Blood,
whilst with a Shield and Sword which they hold in their Hands, they Fence in
the Air, and Sing Songs in honor of their God. Others wound and kill themselves
before the Idols. There are likewise some, who being desirous to go to
Paradise, leap into the River Ganges, across which they swim several times, in
hopes to be devoured by the Crocodiles. All those People that torture
themselves after this manner, are called Fakyrs, or begging Monks, of which
some that go stark naked, neither set nor lay themselves down to sleep at no
time, but when they will rest themselves or sleep, they tie a Rope to a House
or Tree, with a piece of Wood at one end, on which only leaning with their Arms
and Head, they sleep.

Places accounted holy, and visited by the Brahmans Followers.
Besides these means, the Brahmans have invented several others for remission of
their sins, and to purify themselves, viz. to visit such holy Places as are
highly esteemed amongst them, the chiefest and holiest whereof are six, viz.
Ayot-ja, Matura, Casi, Canje, Awentecapouri, and Dwaraweti.

Many things they relate of these Places, viz. That all those which die in the
Casi, shall immediately ascend to Heaven, whether Man or Beast, but those that
die in any other of the forementioned Places, shall go to Bramma, and there
having stayed a considerable time, shall return into the World again, to be
transmigrated into one or other Body; but if they have lived out their time,
and have died twice, then they shall go directly to Heaven, and not return
again into this World.

They affirm, that it is sufficient for the Vulgar to die only in the holy
Places, from whence they undoubtedly go to Heaven.

These Places have each their Limits, but are not of an equal bigness: for that
of Casi is but a Mile; that of Ayot-ja, twelve Leagues; and notwithstanding
they account it a happiness to die in one of them, yet none are allowed, out of
a longing desire of Salvation, to bereave themselves of life there, except at
Preyaga, of which more hereafter. As to what concerns these Places in
particular, they are described after this manner:

Ayot-ja, lying twelve Leagues Northward from Casi, was the Birthplace of
Wistnow under the Name of Ram.

In Matura near Agra, the Great Mogol's Court, Wistnow came into the World by
the Name of Cristna.

Casi, otherwise called Waranasi, lying in Bengala near the Kiver Ganges,
twelve Leagues from Ayot-ja, and twelve from Preyaga, is situate twelve Leagues
higher up the Ganges then Casi, and nearer to the City Agra, where three
Branches of the Ganges uniting, are accounted so holy, that the Heathens
believe those which die in this Water to be certainly purged from their sins;
and therefore this Place is very famous amongst them, which indeed is no
wonder, because (as they say) all those which die there are happy.

The City Canje, or Cansjewaram, a great and well known City in the Kingdom of
Carnatica, has many Pagodes, and is therefore accounted very holy.

Awentecapouri, or Awenteutica, is a City lying Northward from Agra.

Dwaraka or Dwaraweti, formerly lay near Zurratte, but is said to have been
washed away by the Sea. In this Place they relate that Cristna died, and that
his Body when (according to the Custom of the Country) it was going to be
burnt, was also washed away by the Sea, and driven to Sjangernata or
Prousotamai, a Place near Bengala; wherefore they account the Pagode
Sjangernata to be very holy.

The visiting of these holy Places extends not only to the forgiveness of
sins, but they also ascribe so great a power thereto, that by the naming of
them only they believe they shall obtain pardon; wherefore Persons of Quality
that are religious read over the Names of them every Morning; therefore those
that cannot go to Casi and other holy Places, content themselves only with the
bare naming of them.

They hold that the keeping of their Feasts, and washing their Bodies with salt
Water, also merits remission of sins; also they go in Pilgrimage to the Pagode
Rammeswara, by the Malabars called Rammanatakovil, partly for the great
Sanctity of the Place, and partly because the Seawater that flows by this
Pagode, is always clear, and fit to wash in.

The like opinion they have of the Ganges, and therefore the Inhabitants of
Bengala which dwell about it, have a Custom to bring all dying Persons thither,
and put one half of their Bodies into it to wash away their sins. But all
Persons are not permitted to wash themselves therein without paying Tribute to
those Kings through whose Countries the River runs.

The Brahmans derive the Sanctity of this River from Heaven, and confirm their
Fancy with many ridiculous Fables, yet they firmly believe the same, because
their Vedam or Law-book does confirm it.

All the forementioned ways the Heathens practice to obtain remission of their
sins; and if any chance not to have endeavored the same, yet they believe, that
their Friends or Relations which survive may do something for their benefit
after Death; particularly, they carry and throw the Bones of the Deceased into
the holy River Ganges, which they firmly believe will turn much to the
Deceased's advantage, who for every year that their Bones lie in the said
River, they shall enjoy a thousand years of pleasure in Dewendre.

Thirty Leagues Southward from Casi lies a City called Goya, where it is said,
that God setting his Foot on a great Stone, left the print thereof behind him,
which is yet to be seen. Round about this City is a Fort for the preservation
of the forementioned Relick.

Those that go in Pilgrimage to Preyaga, commonly spend a whole month there,
and wash themselves daily before the Sun rises in the River Ganges; after the
expiration of which they go from thence to Casi, where also they spend a
considerable time, they come again to Gaga, where making a Paste of fine Flour,
they lay several pieces thereof on the forementioned Stone, naming at the
laying down of each piece one of their deceased Friends, who (as their Vedam or
Law-book affirms) are delivered out of Jamma Locon, or Hell, and conveyed to
the place of Dewendre.

They maintain that the Wicked shall meet with more or less punishment after
this Life, according to their deserts, and that some after Death are punished
in this World, and others in some other place.

They also believe, that the Souls of some when they die, transmigrate into
other Bodies. Amongst those whose Souls are transmigrated into the Bodies of
Beasts, they account those which enter into a Cow the most happy, because of
all Beasts that is most acceptable to their God.

Some they believe are for their sins, condemned to be evil Spirits, flying up
and down in the Air, till the time of their punishment be expired.

Those that are not punished in the World, are tortured in Jamma, or Hell,
though some are released after the expiration of many years, and coming again
into this World, enter into one or other Body; yet some never return from
thence, but are for ever punished there, viz. those that are put into the Antam
Tappes, that is, The Pit of Darkness, out of which none can come, but must
remain there for ever, and undergo perpetual torments, the place being full of
Thistles and Thorns, Crows with Iron Bills, devouring Dogs, stinging Worms, and
all things else to make them miserable.

Moreover they affirm, that there are five deadly Sins never to be forgiven,
viz. 1. To commit Incest with their Mother, (by the word Mother they not only
understand their natural Mother, but also their Mother-in-law, and the Wife of
their Masters or Tutors.) 2. To kill a Brahman. 3. To steal Gold. 4. To be a
Drunkard; and 5. To converse with them.

As to what concerns the condition of those that are esteemed happy after
Death, they give this Account: That some of them return again to the World,
after the expiration of a certain limited time; though others attain a
perpetual and everlasting happiness at the first; That such as are ordained to
come a second time into the World, have seven places appointed for them, viz.
Indre-Locon or Dewendre-Lokon, Agni-Locon, Niruti-Locon, Wajoiva-Locon,
Cubera-Locon, Isanja-Locon, and Wasrouna-Locon, all of them so called from the
Persons which Govern them. Those which come into these Places, enjoy so much
happiness in them, that they wish for no greater, and every one accounts his
own Place the best. But besides these seven, which are called by the general
Name of Dewendre-Locon or Surgam, there is another called Bramma-Locon, the
place where Bramma resides, and is the nearest Heaven: Those which go thither
after Death, must after the expiration of some years return again into the
World, where having stayed their appointed time, they certainly go to Heaven,
for ever to enjoy all manner of Delights and Pleasures.

Those that inhabit the Surgam they name Deweta's, which are of two sorts; some
staying there only for a time, return again into the World, after which they
enjoy all manner of Pleasures.

Other Deweta's stay for ever in the Surgam, as also the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc.
They also beget Children in the Surgam, where they affirm no sins are
committed, because God himself appearing therein, instructs them. Moreover, the
happiest that depart from hence, are those which attain to the Weicontam, which
is Heaven it self: But the Brahmans make mention of two Weicontams, a
Lila-Weicontam, that is, The Delightful Heaven, and a Singel-Weicontam, where
God himself has his Residence.

Thus far of the Religion of the Brahmans and other Heathen Idolaters.

The Religion, Customs, and Constitution of the Hassenists or Moors.
MAny years since the Mahumetan Religion was brought by the Arabians, Persians,
and Moors, into India, where it has gotten no small footing, having gained
many Proselytes, insomuch that most of the Nobility; nay, the Great Mogol
himself is a Mahumetan, as also the Kings of India, Cambaya, and Bengala; which
sprang from hence: The Moors which were brought as Slaves into India after some
time making themselves Masters of the Country, forced the Idolaters to embrace
their Religion. Yet although these Mahumetans have the Alcoran like the Turks,
and use it, yet they differ in many-things: for the Turks only worship God and
Mahomet, but the Indian Mahumetans reverence also Aaly and his Son Hassan, but
chiefly Hassan, whom they account their chiefest Mediator; yet they agree in
all outward Ceremonies of Marriage, Burying, Eating, and Praying, with the
Persians and Arabians: They also go without Shoes into their Metzids or
Temples, where, when many of them are in company, they stand in Rows with their
Faces toward the South, whilst the Molla or Priest standing before them,
fixes his Eyes on a place in the Walk which has an Inscription upon it, and
shakes both his Arms up and down like a Bird that is going to fly, which all
die Congregation imitate in silence; after which the Priest and People falling
down on their Knees, bow their Heads down to the Ground, which some kiss, and
standing up again, perform the same five several times together; which done,
they salute God and their Prophet Hassan in these words, Ssalom Alecum; then
they Pray aloud after the Molla; after which some go away again, and others
staying in the Temple, discourse one with another about worldly Affairs, as if
on an Exchange, and also take Tobacco in the same; to which purpose many carry
a Steel, Flint, and Tinder, with Pipes and Tobacco at their Girdle. Amongst
them are commonly two or three Barbers, who carry Raisins, a Steel Mirror, and
a Copper Basin about with them, proffering their Service. Many also as soon as
their Service is done in the Temple, go immediately after to the public Stews,
maintaining nevertheless that they are faithful Servants to God and their
Prophet.

Some to be reputed zealous, Pray on the Roofs of their Houses.

No Women are permitted to go to their Temples, but are kept locked up in their
Houses, so that they neither know nor hear any thing of Religion, more than
what their Husbands acquaint them with.

They Circumcise their Children not before the eighth year, wherein they differ
also from the Persians, who do it in the seventh, eighth, and ninth years.

They Pray five times every day like the Turks, viz. first, two hours before
the Sun rises; secondly, about noon; thirdly, at four of the clock in the
afternoon; fourthly, about six; and fifthly, at nine; at all which times they
are summoned thereto by a kind of Sexton, who cries aloud from the Steeple of
their Temples. But for what reason they Pray thus often, they give this
ridiculous Tale, viz.

In the Creation God created Mahomet's Light in the shape of a Peacock; which
Light God afterward put into a great white Pearl, hanging it on a Tree,
whereby the Creator was magnified above a thousand years; after which God made
a Glass of life, and set before Mahomet's Peacock, who when he saw his curious
shape, worshipped God five times; from whence it comes to pass that the
Mahumetans Pray five times aday; but the Persians Pray only three times.

Amongst these Hassanists are also a sort of Monks, who by the Arabians are
called Derwis, and by the Persians, Abdalles; they agree with those by the
Heathen Indians called Jogues or Jogiis.

The Order of the Derwises amongst the Hassanists
These Derwises range up and down through Towns and Countries, having no settled
Residence in any place, but sleep wheresoever they go in the Metzids, their Bed
being only a Sheep-skin, which in stead of an upper Garment they wear on their
Backs. They are of several Orders, each bearing the Name of their chief Saint,
after the same manner as amongst the Persians. No Person of whom they Beg, may
turn them away without giving them something. They are for the most part
ingenious and well learned in their Books. They stand oftentimes in the
Marketplaces, where calling the People about them, they extol their own
Religion, and despise that of the Christians and Heathens. Some of them scruple
not to affirm, that by Hassan's means (so much interest they are persuaded he
has with God) the Devil may obtain mercy, but not the Christians, because they
believe not in Hassein.

Any Man may enter into this Order, as those that cannot live by their Trades
commonly do, and under that Name commit all manner of Villainies: yet some of
them voluntarily undergo very great hardships, either living like Hermits on
the tops of Mountains overgrown with Trees and Brambles, and remote from all
People, where they spend their Lives, without ever stirring from the place
where they once seat themselves, except it be to be to disburden Nature,
continually saying these or the like words, I affect You and not the World, I
do all this for Your sake, therefore look upon me, O Almighty God.

Those People that betake themselves to this kind of Living, never shave
themselves, nor pair their Nails, but let them grow like Claws; they will
rather endure hunger, than go out of their Huts; wherefore those that know
their Abodes, out of compassion will send them Food and Raiment, which must be
of the meanest, or else they will not eat it, and no more than they can eat at
once. Some take up a resolution to Fast a certain number of days, and will eat
no kind of Meat during that time, till they have in a manner quite starved
themselves. Others go stark naked, except a Cloth before their Privities, and
beg for their Food.

These People by some strange means or other, prognosticate wonderful things,
which makes the Vulgar flock about them, and hearken with great earnestness to
what they say. There are some some amongst them called Mandees, who as a
penance for their sins cut and slash their Bodies; and others wear such Chains
about their Legs, that they are scarce able to stir, going barefoot on the hot
Ground with blue Cloaks about them in Pilgrimage, to the Burying-places of
their Saints.

There are also a sort of Jogues amongst the Moors, who (according to Texeira)
are called Calendares, that travel to colder and more populous Countries,
especially through Persia and Turkestan, and therefore taking greater care of
themselves than the other Jogues, cover their Bodies with Sheepskins, and also
make Stockings and Shoes of them. They also act the parts of Juglers, carrying
a green Purse, with Flowers or the like, in their Hands, which proffering to
those they meet with, they read some Arabian or Persian Verses to them, by that
means to get some Alms.

The Diet of the Hassanists
The Hassanists eat only once a day, viz. about three a clock in the afternoon,
not sitting on Stools at high Tables like us, but the Floor, covered with a
Carpet, serves them not only for Stools, but a Table also, sitting on the same
with their Legs under them; being thus seated, especially at Feasts, a Servant
comes with a Basin and Ewer, and going from one to another, pours out the Water
for them to wash their Hands; after which the Meat is brought in Copper Dishes,
Tinned in the inside, and about three yards in circumference; they are commonly
filled with Rice, boiled with Butter, Flesh, Onions, Garlic, Pepper, Almonds,
Raisins, and the like: They often color their Rice green, yellow, brown, blue,
and red, according to the Persian way: After the Meat is set before them, they
fall to eating thereof, saying no other Prayer but this, In the Name of God,
gracious and merciful, which words stand before every Chapter in the Alcoran.
They have no Bread, there growing only a little Wheat, and no Rye in all the
Country, and therefore eat scalded Rice in stead of Bread. Their Trenchers are
Cakes baked thin, which many after they have Dined also eat, or put them up in
their Handkerchiefs.

Their common Drink is Water, which they drink not till after their Meals, when
it is brought to every one by a Servant, in a Copper Cup; they never drink
standing, but always sitting, accounting it very unwholsom to do the contrary.

After Meals they have again warm Water brought them to wash their Hands; which
done, some rise up, and go away without speaking a word, or returning thanks to
the Master of the Feast; others, especially if they are Friends or intimate
Acquaintance, stay and smoke a Pipe of Tobacco and drink a Dish of Coffee.

Though the Hassanists are temperate at Meals, yet most of them are inclined to
Drinking in private, and commonly in the Night, that they may not be
discovered; for to be Drunk is accounted an abomination amongst them.

The best Liquor which Persons of Quality drink, is Persian Wine; they also
drink Spirits, distilled out of Dates and Sugar; also Palm-Wine, called Terri
or Tori, which they drink when fresh tapt out of the Palm Trees.

These Moors or Hassanists use the same Funeral Ceremonies as the Persians,
Turks, and Arabians, viz. When a Hassanist dies, the Women that are nearest
related to the Deceased, as also the Children, make a doleful noise, pull the
Hair from their Heads, and crying out, ask, Oh! when did you die? what is the
cause of your Death? did you want any thing in your Life? and the like. The
mournful noise is augmented by the coming of the Neighbors, and continues six
hours or more, whilst others set Meat before the dead Corpse, and a Feast is
prepared for the Friends; after which the Body, if of a Man, is by three or
four Men, carried naked to the Water to be washed; which done, they cut off the
Nails both of the Hands and Feet, and shave the Hair from off the Head and
Face; but if it be of a Woman, then it is ordered after the same manner by
Women, only they do not shave the Hair from off her Head; the Corpse being
washed, they put a clean Shift upon it, as also a Suit of Clothes, and then lay
it in an open Chest, which being set on a Bier, is by four Men carried to the
Grave, whither it is followed by three or four Molla's or Priests, who Singing
or Reading all the way, are followed by the nearest Relations and Friends; the
Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, or nearest to the Molla, wringing their Hands,
cry aloud, Oh, why did you die and leave me so sorrowful, I would fain have
died for you, if our Prophet Hassan would have permitted me: Coming to the
Grave, the Body is taken out of the Chest and laid into the Grave, Clothes and
all, and covered with Stones, Mortar, Shells, Flowers, or Moss; and whilst the
Corpse is laying in the Ground, and the Grave filling, the By-stauders say
several Prayers to themselves; which done, they return all to the House of
Mourning, where the Friends staying together, keep the Molla's for some time,
to Read and Pray for the Soul of the Deceased: The day following, two hours
before Sunrising, a great number of Women go to the Grave, laden with variety
of Meats, and several Stone Cups full of Terri and Strong Water, all which
they set down by the Grave, and proffer it to the Defunct, beginning also to
cry and lament, but all in order, viz. four Women begin first, who when tired,
four more take their places, and after them four more, so continuing round till
Sunset, whilst those that are weary with lamenting, refresh themselves with
eating and drinking; after which going home, they return again in two days, and
perform the same Ceremonies; and if the Deceased were a Person of Quality, then
their Mourning lasts fourteen days. Their Mourning Habits are blue. They never
bury their Dead in the Metzids, but without the City in very low Grounds. But
Noblemen, and Persons of great Estates make stately Tombs for themselves, which
are generally of a great circumference, and surrounded with strong Walls near a
Pool of Water; within the Walls they erect small Metzids, and close by them the
Tombs, which are either built round, square, or with six or eight corners, and
covered Archwise: The remaining part of the Ground is planted with Fruit Trees
and Flowers, just as if they would make the Elysium Fields, wherein the Souls
may delight themselves; and certainly no Place in all the Mogol's Country
yields more delight than some of these Burying-places; neither do the Moors
bestow so much Charge or Art in any thing as on their Tombs. Amongst many other
stately Tombs, the most famous is at Secandra, a Village lying a small League
distant from Agra, which was begun to be built by King Achabar, who began his
Reign about the Year 1560. and was finished by his Son, who lies by him: The
Materials of it consist of Marble of diverse colors, which is so neatly joined
together, that it seems to be one entire Stone, built high in the form of a
Pyramid, having a large Metzid and pleasant Garden, surrounded with Marble
Walls adjoining to it.

The Nature and Complexion of the Hassanists.
The Hassanists are proud and arrogant despisers of other People, yet themselves
Liars, revengeful, and bloody-minded, accounting it no greater sin to kill a
Man than a Dog. They are of a sallow, or rather an olivaster Complexion, and
generally tall of Stature, few decrepid or crooked Persons being seen amongst
them. Their Hair appears for the most part black, of a dark brown, hanging lank
and flaggy; white and yellowish Hair they account a sign of Leprosy. Most of
them, except the Priests or Molla's, shave off their Beards, leaving only
Mustacho's (which they let grow very long,) as also all the Hair from their
Heads, excepting that on their Crowns, which they let grow, because thereby
they believe they shall be drawn up to Heaven by Mahomet. Mr. Edward Terry
tells us, that they keep the Hair of their Mustacho's when they grow old in its
natural color, by combing the same with Cedar Combs; but when Age has made
their Hair so gray that they cannot hide them any longer, they give over
shaving of themselves, and let their Hair grow all over their Faces.

The Habits of the Mogollans.
The Habits both of Men and Women are almost of one and the same fashion, and
made either of Cotton-Linnen or Silk, or Cloth of Tissue, each according to his
Degree and Quality. Their Coats called Cabaya, are narrow at the top, and close
about their middle, hanging down to their Knees. Their Breeches hang in diverse
Pleits down to their Feet. Their Shoes made after the fashion of the Country,
either of Leather or rich Silk, they tread down at the Heels, that they may
pull them off with the more ease when they go into their Temples or Houses, or
sit down on their Floors, which are covered with white Carpets. On their Heads
they wear Turbants after the Turkish manner, generally made of fine white or
red Callico, wrought with Silk and Gold, which they never take off when they
salute one another. About their Shoulders both noble and ignoble wear in stead
of a Cloak, a yellow, red, green, white, or other colored Cloth called
Pomerys, against the Cold or Rain. About their Middle they wear a Girdle
wrought with Gold and Silk, and over it another small white Linen one pleited.
Persons of Quality wear a short Sword or Dagger by their Sides, the Hilt and
Scabberd being of Gold, and often beset with Precious Stones; this Weapon they
call Ginda, or Kitteren. The Women commonly adorn themselves with Diamonds and
Pearls, and also wear Gold and Silver Pendants and Armlets, each according to
their Qualities.

Christians disperced all over India.
In diverse places of India are many Christians from all parts of Europe, as also
Jews, and native Heathens, converted to Christianity by the Catholics and
Protestants residing amongst them. Moreover, there are Thomists, or Followers
of St. Thomas, in the Country Language called Armenians, Abyssines, etc. each
of a peculiar Sect. In Zurratte is a Sect or Tribe of Heathens which the Moors
call Guenure; the Persians, Atexperes, Zarduxt, Kebbers, and Gauri; and the
Indians, Persi, which Name they give themselves, because they derive their
original out of Persia.

Thus much concerning India in general, we shall now give a Description of the
Mogol's Realm and Kingdom in particular, running through all the Provinces in
order, into which this whole Kingdom is divided.

The Realm of the Groat Mogol, otherwise Hindostan, or Indostan.
The Bounds of the Kingdom.
THe Kingdom of the Great Mogol, or Mogor, which for its bigness, and Power over
the Substitute Kingdoms, deserves the Name of Empire, is on the West bounded by
the River Indus, and Eastward by the Ganges; in the South it verges with one
part at the Ocean, and with the other at the Kingdom of Cuncan or Visiapour; in
the North it borders at Usbeck, the Mountains of Tibeth, and the Kingdoms of
Srinagar, Caparangue, and Radock; and lastly, in the East at the Kingdom of
Neckbal.

Edward Terry makes this Kingdom border in the East at the Kingdom of Maug, or
Mavy; in the West, at Persia; in the South, at the Ocean, the Kingdom of Decan,
and Gulf of Bengala; and in the North, at the Mountains of Caucasus and
Tartary. Texeira conterminates the same on one side only with the Indus, and
on the other with the Ganges.

According to Peruschi, the Mogols Kingdom is properly the Main Land lying
between the Indus and Ganges, just like the Holy Land between the Tigris and
Euphrates.

Others, as Bulaye, le Gouze, and Daviti, bound this Kingdom in the North at
the Country of the Great Cham of Tartary, and at Samarcan; in the South, at
the Kingdom of Visiapour, the Gulf of Bengala, the great Indian Sea, Diu, and
Damaon, both Countries lying under the Jurisdiction of the Portuguese; in the
East, at the Kingdom of Pegou, Edrabat, and Thebet; in the West, at Agemistan,
or the Empire of the Schach or King of Persia. But there can be no certain
Boundaries ascribed to this Kingdom, because of the continual losing of old,
and taking in of new Provinces.

Anno 1582. the Mogol's Dominions extended Northward to the Mountain Imaus, now
called Cumae, which separates the Mogol's from the Tartars; in the South it
bordered at Calecut, the Gulf of Bengala, and the Indian Sea along Cambaya; in
the East, at the utmost Borders of Bengala; in the West, at the Stream Indus,
and the Border of Persia.

This Country of the Mogols, comprised within these Bounds ( viz. from the
River Indus to Ganges) the Ancients called Inward India, or India within the
Ganges; otherwise Indostan, or Hindostan, that is, The Country of the Indus;
for Stan signifies Country.

The Circumference and Extent.
The Circumference of the whole Realm was at that time 900 French Miles; the
Length, from East to West, 600; and the Breadth, from North to South, 400.
Others affirm, That it is at least a thousand Cos from East to West; two Cos
being an English League, or three Miles.

Terry tells, That this Kingdom 1615. had in length, from the North-west to the
South-west, above 2000 English Miles, and from North to South about 1400,
laying the utmost South Point in twenty, and the utmost North Point in forty
three Degrees of Northern Latitude: And that the Breadth at that time, from the
North-east to the South-west, was about 1500 English Miles.

The Division.
Purchase, according to the Instructions of Mr. Hawkins, divides the Realm of
the Great Mogol into five Kingdoms, the first whereof is called Pengab, (by
Davity taken to be the Country lying near the River Hind, otherwise called
Pangab, which signifies Five Waters) the Metropolis whereof is called Lahor;
the second Bengala, its Metropolis being Sonargham; the third Malua, with its
Metropolis Vagain; the fourth Decan, whose Chief City is Barampor; the fifth
Cambay, with the City Amadavar. Boterus maintains, That the Great Mogol Governs
over forty seven Kingdoms.

According to Edward Terry, the Great Mogol, Anno 1615. had thirty seven
Provinces, anciently peculiar Kingdoms, under his Subjection, the Names
whereof, being by him copied out of the Mogol's Books of Account, are these:
Candahor, Cabul, Multan, Haiacan or Bolochi, Buckar, Tatta, Soret, Jesselmeera,
Attak, Peniab, Chismeere, Banchish, Jengapore, Delii, Bando, Malway, Gwaliar,
Ayra, Sanbat, Bakar, Chytor, Guzarat, Chandis, Berar, Narvar, Nagrakat, Siba,
Cacares, Gor, Petan, Canduana, Patna, Jesuat, Mevat, Udessa, and Prugale. A
Province is by the Inhabitants called Soubach.

The South side of the Mogol's Country, between the Bay of Cambaya and that of
Bengala, extends a vast way Southerly, in the form of a Triangle. There are
neither Gold nor Silver Mines in Hindostan.

Bengala a fertile and rich Kingdom.
The Kingdom of Bengala is exceeding fruitful, the whole Country being stored
with rich Commodities, as Silk, Cotton, Indico, and the like.

This spacious Country possesses fruitful Plains, and abundance of all sorts
of Provisions; it lying between the two great Rivers of Indus and Ganges, which
with their Branches water the whole Country like a Garden; besides many other
Rivers, which make this Country exceeding fertile.

The Tract of Land from Surat to Brampore is exceeding pleasant, and full of
Rivulets and Springs; but the way from Brampore to Agra is Mountainous, and
troublesome for the Camels to Travel; yet it is free from Robbers. The Country
affords good Wheat, Rice, and Barley, besides many other sorts of Grain, and
Bread-Corn, which may be bought, at easy Rates. Of the Wheat, which is fuller
and whiter than the European, the Inhabitants bake good and savory Bread upon
the Lid of a Pot which hangs over the Fire. The Country is beautified with
many Woods, Orchards, and Gardens: Yet nevertheless, in this vast Tract of Land
are many Places which are nothing but sulphurous and unfruitfut Mountains, and
therefore uncultivated and desolate.

From Cambay to Lahor are sandy, barren, and unfrequented Deserts; but twenty
Leagues on this side of Lahor the Ground is fruitful and fat. There are very
few Springs or Rivulets in all this way, and naught but dry Sand, which being
often raised by impetuous Winds up into the Air, blows into Travelers Eyes,
and is ready to smother them, partly by reason of these great Wildernesses,
where there is no Provisions nor Water to be had. For fear of robbing, most
People in India travel in great Companies, which the Arabians call Caravans,
and the Persians, Cafila, sometimes to the number of four or five thousand
People. Caravan in the Arabic signifies properly a Company of Travelers. Out
of the whole Caravan they choose a Guide, who, when it is time to proceed
forward on their Journey, beats three times upon a Drum; at the first beating
they put up all the Tents under which they sleep in the Night; at the second
beating they prepare their Camels and Wagons; and at the third, they set
forward. When they travel in the Night, to prevent all Persons from going
astray, they give notice by beating on Drums when they shall stand still; as
also when they meet with any Water-pits by the way, which sometimes are dug
above forty Cubits deep, out of which they draw the Water with Oxen.

Indostan supplied with Elephants and Horses from other Parts.
There are many Elephants in the Mogol's Dominions, which are used in War, and
for other occasions of the King and the Nobility; they also serve them for
Carriage, in stead of Camels, of which there are but few. And though the
Elephants do not breed here, yet they are brought hither in great numbers from
the Kingdom of Bengala and Siam, and from the Island of Zeilan. There are also
few Horses or Mules here, but what are brought from Persia and Arabia. Those
Horses that breed here, are small, and well-truss'd, like those of Norway, fit
to carry Loads, like the Asses, of which there are great numbers in the
Country. There also many Buffaloes, which are put to very hard Work: Their
Flesh is not edible; but their Milk is accounted very wholesome, especially for
sick People.

Caravanseras, or Houses of Entertainment.
In the Countries of Indostan and Surat are no Inns to entertain Travelers,
only in the greatest and chiefest Towns, and in some Villages, are uninhabited
Houses, in the Arabic called Caravansera's, that is Caravan-houses, otherwise
Serrays, or Sarraas, which are whole Streets and Wards appointed for strange
Merchants, and other Travelers, who take up what Rooms they please, and put
Locks upon them.

Each Caravansera has a Backal or Porter, who at set times every Evening locks
up the outward Gates, which are not opened till the Sun rises. This Porter also
keeps a Cooks Shop, where Travelers may either have Meat ready dressed, or
dress it themselves. When they set forward on their Journey again, and leave
the Town, they pay a Jeckas of Copper for a Beast to carry their Goods, besides
their Diet. But in the Caravanseras which are built in the Country, they need
not give any thing for their Lodging, whilst the have their Meat from the
Porter, but these words Salom alecun, Peace be with you. These Serrays, or
Caravanser as, are built by some eminent People, out of Charity, for the
accommodation of Strangers.

Idostan very rich.
Hindostan possesses great quantities of Gold and Silver, notwithstanding it
has neither Gold nor Silver Mines, but is all brought thither by Strangers,
never returning out again: For they melt down the European or Foreign Coins,
and recoin them with the Mogol's, Stamp.

Moreover, all Ships, as well Indian, as English, Portuguese, and Hollanders,
which carry Commodities yearly from Hindostan to Pegu, Tanasseri, Siam, Zeilan,
Achem, Maoassar, Maldives, and other Places, carry also much Gold and Silver
back to Hindostan; the Hollanders also carry great quantities of Silver thither
from Japan. Lastly, for all the Gold and Silver which is transported thither
from England, Holland, and Portugal, nothing comes in return thereof from
thence but Commodities, the Money being all kept in the Country.

They have no Pepper, Copper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Lead, Cloth, nor
several other Commodities, but what are brought from Japan, the Molucco
Islands, Zeilan, and Europe. Moreover Hindostan is destitute of Fruits, which
are carried thither from Samarcand, Balk, Bocara, and Persia; as Almonds,
Apples, Pears, Grapes, Raisins, which are sold all the Winter long at Dely,
though very dear. They have also from the forementioned Places several sorts of
dried Fruits, as Almonds, Pistachioes, Nuts, Plums, Apricocks, Raisins, etc.
There are also little Sea-Cockles taken near the Island of Maldivia, which in
Bengala and other places go currantly for small Money. They have also
Ambergreece from the same Island, and from Mozambick; and likewise Rhinocerots
Horns, Elephants Teeth, Ethiopian Slaves, Musk, Porcelane, Pearls, besides many
other Commodities.

The Indians manner of Sailing.
Texeira affirms, That the Mogol's Ships carry greater Burdens than those of
Europe, and may be compared to those Gallions of the Grand Signior which go
from Constantinople to Alexandria, but are built after another fashion. They
use neither the Compass nor Quadrant; but Sail from India to Persia, Bassora,
Mocha, Mozambick, Mombas, Sumatra, Macassar, and other Places, only by the
help of the North-Star, and the Rising and Setting of the Sun.

The Inhabitants of Indostan.
There are diverse sorts of People in the Great Mogol's Dominions; the Chiefest
and most numerous whereof, being the Natives, are Heathens, or Idolaters; and
next them, the Moors, otherwise called Mahumetans, from Mahomet the Instituter
of their Religion; also Mogols, or Mogolleans, from the Tartar Tribe Mogol,
from which the real Mogolleans are derived: for not all those which at this day
bear the name of Mogols, are extracted from the Tartar Mogols; but also those
are called Mogols, who, though Mahumetans, are in the Mogol's Service,
notwithstanding they are Turks, Persians, or Arabians: But there are generally
a hundred Heathens to one Mahumetan.

The Inhabitants of Indostan were anciently all Heathens, and are generally
called Hindoes, or Hindous; but by the English and Hollanders, Indostans.

They shave off all the Hair of their Heads; but the Baldness thereof is not
seen, because they always keep them covered with Tulbants, which they never
take off in saluting one another, as we do our Hats.

The Manufacture of the Country.
The Handicrafts Men of this Country, though naturally lazy, follow their
Employments very close, being either forced thereto by necessity, or otherwise;
and make Carpets, Embroideries, Cloth of Gold and Silver, and all manner of
Silk and Cotton Stuffs, and Linen, which is worn in the Country, and
transported to other Places.

The Great Mogol or King is necessitated, by reason of his many Inland and
Foreign Enemies, to keep continually a mighty Army, as well in time of Peace
as War, a considerable Body whereof are always near his Person, either of
Natives, as are the Rajas and Patans, which for several Reasons he is
necessitated to keep in his Service, as is before mentioned more at large; or
chiefly of Mogollers, as he himself is, or at least those which are taken for
such, though indeed Strangers: For the King's Court is not now, as formerly,
all of real Mogols derived from Tartary; neither are those which officiate in
Offices and Places of Honor in the Wars, all of the Tribe of the Mogols; but
are Strangers, and People of other Nations, most or them Persians, some
Arabians, others Turks, of their Children; though the Children or the third and
fourth Generation of the Mahumetans beforementioned, are not so much honored
and esteemed as the new-come Mahumetans, and are but seldom preferred to any
Degree of Honor, and therefore seem very well satisfied to be ordinary
Troopers, or Foot-Soldiers. It is sufficient in these later times for any one
to be accounted a Mogollean, though he be a Stranger, if he have but a white
Face, and be of the Mahumetan Religion, to distinguish him from the Indians,
who are brown, and Heathens; as also from the Christians of Europe, who are
called Franks, or Franguis.

The Mogol is necessitated to keep strange Soldiers, that go by the name of
Mogols, as we said before, because the chief Power of his State consists
therein but it stands him in an incredible Charge. The strange Soldiers, as
well Horse as Foot, are divided into two Parties, whereof one is continually
near him, and the other scattered up and down into all the Provinces. In the
Troops which attend the Mogol are first Omrah's, which are the highest
Officers; in the second Place, Mansehdars; in the third, Rouzindars.

The Omrahs Children inherit not their Fathers Estates.
The Omrahs, or Lords of the Mogol's Court, are not, as we might suppose, the
Sons of Omrahs, or of the House or Family of Noblemen, inheriting their Fathers
Estates and Honors, as here, and in France; for since all the Lands in the
Kingdom are the Kings, it follows, that there are neither Noblemen, nor any
other Families, that have Estates in Lands, Goods, or Offices by Inheritance:
Insomuch that the Children, or at lest the Nephews of the most powerful Omrahs,
are after their Fathers deaths reduced to great Poverty, and forced to List
themselves for Common Troopers, under the Command of other Omrahs. Indeed the
Mogol commonly leaves a small part of the Estate to the Widows, and sometimes
to the Children: But if their Father lives long, they are oftentimes promoted
by him, especially if they are wellshap'd, handsom-bodied, have white Faces,
and, not having gotten too much of the Indian Customs, pass for real Mogols:
Though of late this kind of preferring their Children has been less observed
than formerly, by reason it is become a general Custom to rise from small
Offices to great ones; and accordingly their Pay is more and more advanced.
Therefore these Omrahs are naught but Adventurers, and Strangers of all Nations
and Degrees, nay, sometimes Slaves, who going to serve at the Court, are by the
Mogol, for some or other piece of good Service, promoted to that Degree of
Honor, of which they are again bereaved at his pleasure.

Amongst these Omrahs are some called Hazary, others Dou-Hazary, and others
Penge Hecht and Deh-Hazary: The King's Eldest Son was also a Dovazdeh Hazary,
that is, A Lord or Commander over 10 or 12000 Horsemen.

The number of the Omrahs, reckoning as well those which are scattered up and
down in the several Provinces, as those which attend at Court, is very great,
and not justly to be set down: At the Court are generally from 25 to 30000.

The Office and State of an Omrah.
These Omrahs attain to the chiefest Places at the Court, and Offices in the
Army; and are accounted the Supporters of the Realm, and Splendour of the Court.
They never come into the Street but in very rich Apparel, riding either on
Elephants, Horses, or in a Palanquin, and attended by a great number of
Horsemen, which keep Guard before their Houses, besides several Footmen, who
going before, and on each side of them, make room, and by fanning them keep off
the Wasps, Flies, and Dust, with the Wings of Peacocks.

All those that are at Court, are bound, on pain of forfeiting some of their
Sallary, to appear twice a day before the King, when he sits on his Throne; or
else visit him every Morning at eleven a Clock, and every Evening at six.
Moreover they are obliged to watch once a Week in the Castle by turns, for the
space of twenty four Hours; and therefore carry their Beds, Carpets, and other
Household Stuff with them; the King providing nothing for them but meat, which
they receive with great Ceremony; viz. they bow three times with their Faces
toward his Chamber, first holding their Hands over their Heads, and next on
the Ground.

They are also obliged to attend on the King to all Places, when he goes
abroad, what Time or Weather soever it be, either in Palanquins, on Elephants,
or on Tacravans or Thrones, carried each of them on eight Men's Shoulders. Yet
nevertheless the King favors some, by reason of their peculiar Offices, their
Age or Indisposition, or to avoid too great Attendance, as he does commonly
when he goes a Hunting, or to some Banqueting House near the City, or rather
when he goes into his Mosque; for then he takes no other with him than those
that have the Guard that day.

The Mansebdars.
Mensebdars are Officers of those Troops Manseb, and have a competent Salary,
yet not comparable to that of the Omrahs, but exceeding those of inferior
Degrees; and therefore they are accounted little less than Omrahs, being in the
degree of those which are next to that Preferment; and the rather, because they
acknowledge no Superior but the King, and are in general obliged to do all
things which the Omrahs do: nay, they would be perfect Omrahs, had they but a
considerable number of Horses under their Command; but they have only six,
which wear the King's Badges, and their Salary also is generally no more than
from five to seven hundred Ropies a Month. The number of them being unlimited,
is far greater than that of the Omrahs; for at the Court are generally 2 or
300000, besides those that are up and down amongst the Army in the several
Provinces.

The Rouzindars.
The Rouzindars are also Horsemen, but in Pay only for a day, as the Word
signifies: Yet nevertheless it is often far greater than that of most of the
Mansebdars; but not in that Quality, nor yet so Honorable. The number of these
People is very great; but they perform small Offices: for most of them are
Secretaries, Clerks, and Sealers of Barattes, or Bonds.

The Common Troopers are under the Omrahs, the chiefest whereof, and those that
receive most Pay, are such as keep two Horses, which are marked with the Arms
of their Omrahs. Their Pay is not limited, but is left to the discretion and
generosity of the Omrah, who can pay them as he pleases; though, according to
the Mogol's Order, their Pay is no less than 25 Ropias a Month, or thereabouts;
and at that rate he reckons with the Omrahs.



The Mogol's Infantry.
The Salary of the Footmen is less. They are generally Musketeers, but very
unexpert; for when they discharge, they sit on the Ground, and rest their Piece
on a Stick, being always fearful of burning their great Beards and Eyes, and
lest one or other Dogen, or Evil Spirit, might make their Muskets fly to
pieces: Yet some of them have twenty Ropias, others fifteen, and some but ten.
There are, nevertheless, some Musketeers and Gunners who have great Pay,
especially the Franks or Christians, as English, French, Portuguese, and
Hollanders, who deserting the English and Dutch Service, went over to them from
Goa. Before the Mogols knew the Use of Great Guns, they gave very great Pay to
the forementioned Gunners to instruct them; nay, there are some who to this day
have 200 Ropias a Month, though the common Pay for a good Gunner is but 52.
Their Guns are of two different sorts the first great and heavy, the second
light. Some of their heaviest Guns must be drawn by 20 Pair of Oxen, besides
Elephants to help them, by turning the Wheels of the Carriages round with their
Trunks, when they come into bad Way, or go up a Hill.

When King Oranchzef, Anno 1662. Marched with his whole Army to Caximir, one of
his Northern Provinces, to spend the Summer there, he carried 70 great Copper
Guns with him, besides 2 or 300 small Fieldpieces, which were carried on
Camels Backs; and 50 or 60 little Brass Guns, mounted on handsome Carriages,
each drawn by two brave Horses, adorned with red Flags, and driven by the
Gunner.

His whole Military Strength computed.
The Militia which is kept abroad, differs no way from that which is kept by the
King; there being Omrahs, Mansebdars, Rouzindars, common Troopers, and Footmen,
in all Places: Neither is there any difference but in the number; for the
Soldiers which are kept abroad are very numerous. The Army which the Mogol is
obliged to keep constantly in Decan only, to curb the mighty King of Golconda,
and the King of Visiapour, with all their Assistants, is seldom less than about
25000 Horse The Kingdom of Cabul requires, for its usual preservation against
the Persians, Augans, Balouchs, and other People which inhabit the Mountains,
12 or 13000 Horse: the Kingdom of Caximir, above 4000; and the Kingdom of
Bengala, many more. So that the number of the Horse which are really kept
always by the King, with the Horse of the Rajas and Patans, amounting to 35 or
40000, added to those which are abroad in the Field, will be found to be about
200000. The Foot, as we said before, is of little consequence; for those which
the King keeps by him, with the Musketeers and Gunners, will scarce amount to
15000: from whence we may judge of the number which may be abroad in the
Field-Army. Wherefore the great numbers of Foot which some affirm to be in the
Mogol's Army, cannot be well apprehended, unless they take in all those Sutlers
or Tradesmen which follow the Army, which being reckoned up together with the
Soldiery, they may then account near 300000 Men in the King's Army only, and
especially when he has been long out of his Metropolis.

Pyrard affirms, That the Mogol is able in a short time to bring 300000
Elephants, 80000 Horse, and 200000 Foot, which are generally kept within five
Leagues from the Place of his Residence, into the Field.

When any come to speak with the King, either about State or other Affairs,
they are conducted by the first Watch they meet withal to the second, and so
from one to another, till they come to the Royal City, where they are presented
to those whose Office it is to receive them: But the first Watch, which
conducts them to the second, takes from the Commander of that Guard a Receipt
for their delivery, as also he from the third, and so likewise the rest: And by
this means they have certain knowledge of all Persons that pass and repass.

The Kings Militia or Army with which he in Person marched into the Field Anno
1630. to pursue the fled Duke Chaen Chan, consisted of 154500 Horse, besides
many Camels, Elephants, Mules, and other Beasts of Burden; yet nevertheless
there remained 62400 Horse in Garrison at Barampour.

According to a Custom amongst the Indians, no Person may use any other Arms
than what he has been trained up to, nor change them, though in the Wars; from
whence it happens, that there are Soldiers which fight only with the Sword,
others with Sword and Shield, some with a Lance, others with Bows and Arrows,
and others with Muskets; and so likewise every one with such Weapons as he
has been ever used to: which makes them to be very expert and undaunted in any
Engagements.

Most Troopers wear two great Tassels made of fine white Hair of certain wild
Indian Oxen, which are highly esteemed) fastened behind to the Saddle-tree, and
also two more before at the Pummel, and two on the Rains, near the Bit or Curb;
so that each Horse has six of them.

The Horsemen ride half naked; nor do the forementioned Tassels any way trouble
the Rider, but swing to and fro with the moving of the Horse, in such manner
that at a distance they seem like Wings.

The Mogol punishes all Persons that do not behave themselves valiantly, or
that deal treacherously in the Wars, after a severe manner.

Anno 1646. the third of February, two Chans, Hassan Aly, and Sahad Chan, were,
for surrendering the Fort Darund to the Usbecan Tartars, condemned to die a
miserable death, viz. to be flayed alive, to the great sorrow of the
Inhabitants.

One of the King's Eunuchs, an intimate Friend to one of these Chans, being
assured that they were necessitated, for want of Provisions and Supplies, to
surrender the Fort, delivered a Petition to obtain their Pardon from the Great
Mogol, who was so enraged thereat, that he immediately caused the Eunuch's Head
to be cut off, none being allowed to intercede for those with whom the Great
Mogol is displeased.

The Skins of the forementioned Chans, being stuffed, were hung on a high Pole
erected near the Maidan, and their Flesh thrown to the Dogs: Soon after which,
the King caused their Wives and Children to be Beheaded, and sent out Soldiers
to kill their Relations which dwelt up and down in the Country; which was
accordingly performed, and their Heads brought before the King.

The Court, Splendour, Magnificence, and Riches of the Great Mogol.
THe Ancient Seat of the Mogol Kings was at Deli; but King Ecbar removed his
Court to Agra, and (by reason of the loss of his two Sons there, built another
Magnificent Palace, and called the same Pateful, or Fatefur. Since the
Conquering of the Kingdom of Lahor, the Metropolis thereof being of the same
denomination with the Kingdom, was chose to be the Royal Seat of the Kings.
Texeira tells us, That the King spends one part of the Year in the City Lahor,
and the other in Agra, the two eminentest Cities of the Kingdom, and in the
Heart of Indostan.

Others affirm, That the City Agra is the Chief Residence of the King in the
Winter; besides which, he has several other Towns and Fortresses wherein he
resides in the Summer Season, viz. from the latter end of March till the
beginning of August, sometimes at Gasmir, sometimes at Cabul, and sometimes in
Mandoa.

The King's Houses are generally built of Marble, or white Alabaster, and the
Wall's inlaid with Gold.

The Description of the Mogols Court at Lahor.
The Court at Lahor is seated in a very delightful place, near the River
Zunnenena, being enclosed within a fair Freestone Wall, on which are mounted
several Guns. On that side which is toward the City it has a Gate or
Entrance, before which is a spacious Quadrangular Plain, on which the most
eminent Traders keep their Shops. On each side of the Gate is a huge Elephant
cut in Stone, where stand several Sentinels.

About half a Mile inwards from the Gate, you come to the Namchas, or the Court
where the King appears daily to his Subjects, which being a large Place, is
built round with Lodgings for the Amurouwen or Nobles, who stay in them till
the King comes to his Throne, when every one of them must appear before him,
standing in their several Places.

The King's Throne is first encompassed with a large Wooden Rail, within which
stand all the Servants with Wooden Clubs; and within this Rail is another of
Silver, about which stand the Kings Guards clad in red Cloth embroidered with
Gold, and Armed with Swords, Shields, and Silver Truncheons. Within this Rail
lie many rich Golden Quilts. In the midst of the Square stands the Throne,
raised about a Man's height from the Ground, and is of massy Gold, embossed with
Precious Stones, and richly enameled.

As to what concerns the Kings Attendance at Court, it is very Magnificent, and
exceeds all the other Eastern Princes. The Persons which wait upon him daily
are 12000 in number, besides 1200 Concubines, and 600 Eunuchs, which he buying
as Slaves, trains them up in all manner of Warlike Exercises, so to enable them
to serve him on any occasion.

King Chorams Cavalcade from Agra to Lahor.
Anno 1638. King Choram went from Agra to Lahor, with his whole Court, in the
following manner; viz. First came the Chancellor Afselchan, Lord of five
thousand Horse, sitting on a Cabin plated over with Silver, on a Female
Elephant. Next came Agachan, an Eunuch, Governor of Agra, sitting likewise on a
Female Elephant, and accompanied by four hundred Horse, and many Footmen, which
were followed by the three Children of the deceased Mobetchan, on Horseback,
each carrying a Sword of the Kings: Then a great number of Horse and Foot
making room, were followed by the King, sitting in a Room of massy Gold,
carried by a great Elephant, on which also, before him, sat his eldest Son
Darahecko (a Lord that commanded over thirty thousand Horse) who guided the
Elephant; and behind him his youngest Son Ammurathbax, a Mogul (Mughal, Moghul)
procession to Hof vanden grooten Mogol.
Lord over a hundred and fifty thousand Horse, who fanned the King to keep off
the Flies, each of them Armed with a Shield, Bow, and Arrow. Round about him
rode these following Nobles, and above thirty Elephants, which carried the
King's Drummers, Pipers, and other Music, viz.

Assafchan, Lord of twelve thousand Horse, on an Elephant. Matemetchan, Lord of
five thousand Horse. Assaletchan, Lord of four thousand Horse. Chalilchan, Lord
of three thousand Horse. Serrendas Bhadux, Lord of two thousand Horse. Mocker
Metchan, and Jufferchan, each of them Lord of five thousand Horse. The
Contelwael of the Army, Lord of a thousand Horse. Zabberdeischan, Lord of a
thousand Horse. Chain Waschan and Terbiatchan, each of them Lord of three
thousand Horse. The King's second Son Sultan Siousa, Lord of twenty five
thousand Horse, accompanied by the following Noblemen, ziz. Zatschan, Lord of
five thousand Horse. Ragia Siessing, Commander of seven thousand Horse.
Nosebetchan, Lord of three thousand Horse. Ragia Ammersing, Lord of five
thousand Horse. All which were to meet with these Lords following about
Candahar, viz. Noosserichan, Commander of seven thousand Horse. Chanchan and
Chamia Statchan, each Commanders of seven thousand Horse. Vasuerchan and
Zeldchan, each Commanding five thousand Horse. A Ragia, Governor of Candahar,
Commander of ten thousand Horse, besides many other Grandees, as well Ragias as
Eunuchs of great Command.
The King's Train.
Behind the King came about a hundred and fifty Elephants, with Blunderbusses
and Fieldpieces, fastened in little Towers on their Backs; then came a great
number of Soldiers, carrying several Fireworks, as also a mighty Train of
Horse and Foot, and the Eunuchs of Zackebbegem, the King's Daughter, famous for
her Beauty, sitting in a Chair, which being covered with Cloth of Gold and rich
Embroidery, was carried on the Backs of two Elephants, accompanied by four
hundred Ladies on Horseback and in Sedans, besides sixty of seventy Elephants,
which in Houses covered with Sarsanet, carried also many Ladies of Honor,

Before the King's Children came several hundreds of Horses, richly caparison'd
with golden Saddles and Bridles, beset with Diamonds; Rubies, and Saphires, the
rest with silver Saddles and Bridles; next followed sixty or seventy Elephants,
with the King's Standards and golden Caparisons; then came twenty Wayns with
four Wheels, and a hundred with two, as also fifty Palakins and Sedans, all
richly covered. The King's Baggage was laden on several hundreds of Wayns,
Camels, and Mules, besides three hundred Elephants, which carried the Tents and
Ammunition.

Upon the King's coming to Lahor, the Chancellor Asselchan dying, Issalamchan,
Lord of five thousand Horse, and Governor of Bengala, being chosen in his
stead, went on the tenth of September through Agra to Lahor. There also died
Matemetchan, General of the King's Horse, which Office he gave to the Duke of
Asselletchan.

The King not long after sent for his second Son Sultan Siousa, from Candahar
to Lahor, when he was no sooner come, but he had the Government of the great and
little Kingdoms of Bengala given him, whither he went with Hastchan, a
Commander of five thousand Horse. After his departure the King went with his
whole Army to Cabul, but without effecting any thing. At the same time the
Mogol sent an Ambassador to the Tartar with an exceeding rich Present, valued
at thirty six thousand pound; in return for which he sent an Agent with forty
or fifty lame Horses, seventy starved Camels, and a hundred Sheep, whereby it
appeared how little he regarded the Mogol.

The splendour King Choram's Court.
King Choram kept an incomparable splendid Court, his Dishes, Basins, Urns,
Kitchen Utensils, Candlesticks which ten Men were scarce able to carry, the
Poles which supported his Tents, the Palakins, the Houses on the Elephants,
Bridles and Stirrups for the Horses, Sedans and Chariots of his Concubines,
Bedsteads, and many other things, being all of Gold, and beset with Diamonds,
Rubies, Emeraulds, Pearls, and other Precious Stones.

This King also wore an Armlet of Diamonds, valued at ten Tuns of Gold; the
biggest thereof weighing above a hundred and twenty Carracks, was ground oval,
and as big as a Hens Egg; about his Neck hung four Strings of Pearl, each Pearl
being as big as a Musket Bullet. When he sat on his Throne, he used commonly
to order his Elephants, Horses, Dromedaries, Camels, and Mules, to be drawn by
him, to see if they were all fed and kept as they ought, excepting only the
Tsam-days, on which he gave audience to all Persons of what Degree soever.
Rising from the Throne, he retires to a place called Gosselchanne, where none
but his chief Nobles may appear, except those which are called by his Majesty.

The Walls of this Edifice are of white Alabaster, inlay'd with golden Flowers,
and the Floors covered with Carpets.

Near this place stands a Pond of clear Water, which runs into the same through
golden Pipes, very curiously made.

Near this Tank or Pond stands also an invaluable Throne, though low, made
after the manner of a Footstool, with four Feet.

This place also is the King's Treasury for his Jewels, which he often looks
upon there: and also sits here in Council about State Affairs; after which he
repairs to his Haram or Seraglio, where he spends his time commonly till
Evening; in seeing his Concubines Dance, and hearing them Sing, with other such
like Pastimes; then the King, to delight himself the more, causes two Elephants
to fight; after which he goes to the Gosselchane, where the Nobles must again
appear before him, and wish him a good Night; the King having first commanded
one of them with ten or twelve of his trustiest Servants, to watch at his
Chamber.

His Entertainment of Ambassadors.
The King also to Entertain foreign Ambassadors, causes Lions, Tigers, and
Bulls, to fight one against another, or with noble and valiant Men, who would
be accounted the Heroes of the Country, or else fight to gain the Mogol's
Favor.

Some years since Schach Choram, Father to the present King, at Agra caused
Battles of Beasts against Beasts, and Men against Men to be fought, which
(according to the testimony of Authors) was after this manner; viz. First they
let two Buffalo's loose at one another in the Park; next, a Lion and a Tygar,
which fiercely engaged each another. These being taken away, the Governor
Casmir called Almerdan Chan, who sat amongst the Chans, rising up, said, The
Great Mogol, Schach Schoram 's will and pleasure is, that if any valiant Heroes
are minded to give proofs of their valout, in fighting against the wild Beasts
with Shield and Sword, let them come forth; if they conquer, the Great Mogol
will show high favor to them: Whereupon three Persons coming into the List,
proffered themselves to undertake the Combat: When Almerdan Chan calling out,
said, None must fight with any other Weapon than Sword and Shield; those which
have a Dagger about them, must throw it away and fight fairly; which was no
sooner said, but a Lion was driven into the Ring, where one of the three
forementioned Persons stood ready to Encounter him; the Lion seeing his Enemy
so near, ran to him full speed; but he defended himself a considerable time,
till his Arms growing weary, the Lion laid one of his Paws on the Shield, and
the other on his Arm, thereby disabling him from using his Sword; whereupon,
seeing himself in great danger, he with his left Hand drew out his Indian
Zimber or Stilletto, stabbing the Lion so deep into the Throat with the same,
that he made him let go his hold, and then gave him so fierce a Blow with his
Simitar, that he cut him almost in two; the Lion falling to the Ground, he
pursued his Victory and and killed him, when the People shouting, cried, Thanks
be to God, he is conquered; but the Mogol smiling, said to the Conqueror, You
are a brave Soldier, you have fought valiantly; but did not I command you to
fight fairly, with Sword and Shield only? but like a Thief you have stole the
Lions Life with a Stilletto: Which said, the King commanded his Belly to be
ripped open, and carried on an Elephant about the City for an Example to others;
which was immediately performed.

Next a Tygar being let in, a strong Person entered the Lists to encounter him;
but the Tygar being too subtle and nimble, leaped suddenly upon him, first
tearing out his Throat, and afterward his whole Body.

In the third place, a little Man of mean aspect entering the Lists, ran
undauntedly like a Madman to the Tygar, and at the first Encounter cut off
both his fore Feet, which forcing him to fall, he gave him his mortal Wound:
Whereupon the King calling to him, asked him his Name; he answered, Geiby; then
the King immediately ordered one of his Servants to carry him a Cloth of Gold
Cambay, or Coat, who when he delivered it to him, said, Geiby, receive this
Coat, which the Mogol of his Bounty has sent you. He receiving the Coat with
great humility, kissed it seven times, pressing it each time upon his Eyes and
Breast, and soon after holding it up, Prayed to himself for the Mogol's
prosperity; which done, he cried aloud, God grant the Mogol to grow as great as
Tamerlane, from whom he is derived, may he live 700 years, and his Generation
continue for ever: No sooner had he uttered his Wishes, but he was conducted by
an Eunuch to the King, and coming near the place where his Majestry sat, he was
received by two Chans, and brought before him to kiss his Feet, and at his
going away the King said to him, Be praised, Geiby Chan, for your heroic
Exploit; this Name you shall keep for ever; I am your favorable Lord, and you
my Vassal.

The Mogol also keeps several tame Lions, which walk up and down peaceably like
Dogs at the Court amongst the People, never hurting any; yet they have Keepers
that always have an Eye over them.

The Mogol possesses an incredible and unvaluable Mass of Treasure, having
(according to report) in ready Money in his Treasury, seventeen Caroor, or
Caroras, each Carora being a thousand Tun of Gold, besides Jewels and other
Rearities. Purchase affirms the Revenue of his whole Realm to amount to fifty
Crous Ropias, or five thousand Lecks, that is seven Millions and a half yearly
of English Money.

The King's Revenu^s.
According to the testimony of the King's Books of Accounts, the Countries and
Realms of Candahar, Habove, Cassamier, Chasane, Bannazad, Guzeratte, Sinde,
Hatta, Ganday, Barampour, Bengala, Orixa, Odillo, Maloveagra, witht he adjacent
Places, and Delly, afford him yearly six Areb, and ninety eight Carroras, or
(according to the Account of the Country) a hundred and seventy Caroor, and
forty five Lack or Leck, or a hundred seventy four Millions and five thousand
Ropias, or nineteen Millions a hundred ninety five thousand pound Sterling.

In the Treasury at Agra, as it is supposed, is in Gold six hundred Lecks of
Eckbars Seraphins, which are ten Copias, and ten thousand more which are not
above half that value; besides all which there are thirty thousand Tols, each
worth a silver Ropie; twenty five thousand pieces of another Coin, each worth
ten Tols; and fifty thousand of another sort, each worth five Tols.

In this Treasury likewise is thirteen Crous Eckbars Ropias; fifty thousand
pieces of another Coin, each worth a hundred Tols; forty thousand pieces, each
of thirty Tols; thirty thousand, each of twenty Tols; twenty thousand more,
each of ten; and a hundred thousand, each of five; besid^s two Lecks Savoys,
and one Leck Jagrys.

This Treasury incloses also a Batman and a half in Diamonds, of which some are
rough, but the least two Carats and a half in weight; two thousand Rubies
Balais, two Batmans in Pearls, two Batmans of Rubies of all sorts, and five
Batmans of Smaragdes of all sorts, besides a great quantity of Topazes, Coral,
and the like, almost invaluable: There are also two thousand two hundred golden
Swords, beset with Precious Stones, two thousand Ponyards, full of Gold and
Precious Stones, besides an incredible number of Gold and Silver Arms, and two
thousand Batmans worth of Golden Dishes and other Vessels, and a thousand
Batmans more in other wrought Gold.

In Lahor is another very rich Treasury.

The Mogol keeps a great part of his Riches in six strong Castles, viz. in that
of Agra, Guallier, Ratomboe, Hassier, and Boughtaz. His Throne in the Royal
Metropolis Lahor is of massy Gold, Inlay'd with Precious Stones, and richly
Enammell'd. Likewise the Throne at his Court in Agra, which Schach Selim made,
is beset with Precious Stones and Pearls, worth many Millions. The Architect of
this last was one Augustine Hiriart a Frenchman.

All the Ground and Land of the whole Country is the Kings own, so that no Man
possesses a Foot of Land but through his favor.

The King gives to each of his Commanders and Grandees that are in his
Country, certain Lands, Lordships, and Revenues; for which they are obliged
(excepting only one Third, which is the Kings) to maintain a certain number of
Soldiers, as well in time of Peace as War, as also some Elephants, Horses,
Camels and Leopards.

When a Nobleman dies, all his Goods, not only what was given him by the King,
but also what he purchased himself, falls again to the Mogol, who commonly
leaves their Widows the Horses and Housholdstuff, and gives to the Children
some Place of note: for if a Father Commanded over a thousand Horse, he will
make the Son Commander over fifteen hundred, and afterward increase or
decrease his number, according to his Deserts.

The King's Treasure is not a little increased by the many Presents which are
made to him; for none, whether Stranger or Subject, may appear before him
without a Present, especially on Neuruz, or New-years-day: for then rich
Presents are sent him from all parts of his Dominions. They make their Presents
with great Ceremony and Cost, some giving ten, nay, a hundred and twenty
thousand pound Sterling worth in Jewels.

Moreover, he receives Custom from the Commodities of his Country; and causes
all Travelers to pay Toll at every Town through which they pass.

Weight, Measure, and Coin.
THe Weight in Zurratte being all of one sort, is called Mao, that is, A Hand,
with which they weigh Butter, Flesh, Sugar, Indigo, Wood, Salt, and the like,
each Mao containing forty Ceer, that is thirty pound and a half English, and a
Ceer eighteen Peyses (a sort of Copper Money like our Farthings) each Peyse
weighing three quarters of a pound Troy weight.

In Measuring they use two sorts of Else, nineteen of the biggest making about
seventeen Yards and a half. The least differ only an Inch from the Dutch Ell,
or three quarters of a Yard.

The Mogol Coins several sorts of Money in diverse places of his Dominions, viz.
Mamoedys and Ropias, both of Silver. The Mamoedys, which are Coined in Zurratte
of course Silver, are worth about an English Shilling, and go current only in
the Towns of Brochia, Cambaya, Brodera, and Zurratte. The Ropias, otherwise
Ruky, Rupias, and Copias Chagamy, make each 2 s. 2 d. they are good Silver, and
pass through all Zuratte. There are also Tols, Savoys, and Jagaries; the Tols
make each a silver Ropia, and ten Tols a golden Ropia; a Savoy is one Tol and a
half, and five Jagaries six Tols.

On the Coast of Cormandel is a Coin called Pagode, from an Idol which is
stamped on the same, and goes for 7 s. 8 d. There is likewise a Coin called
Fanos, of ordinary Gold, which are pieces like the Scales of Fish, and go for
Five-pence-halfpeny.

Their small Money being of Copper, is called Peysa, and resemble our Farthing,
but are heavier according to the common Account, ten Penny Weights; five or six
and twenty of them make a Mamoedye, and three or four and fifty, a Ropia.

Moreover, Almonds in the Shells pass for Money, thirty six of them making a
Copper Peysa, as also a sort of Cockles with a black Speck, in the Country
Language called Cauries, which are found on the Shore along the Seacoast,
eight whereof make a Peysa.

There are also Laryns, a Persian Coin, of good fine Silver, of an oval
fashion, each worth 1 s. 6 d.

Moors or Xeraphins Eckbars, so called from King Eckbar, who first Coined
them, is a golden Coin worth thirteen Ropias and a half, but are not very
common, the Nobility usually hoarding them up.

There are likewise Ducats, which are carried thither from Venice, Turkey, and
the Netherlands, each worth eight or nine Mamoedies. Spanish Ryals and
Rixdollars go commonly for five, and the Lyon-Dollars for four Mamoedies, that
is 5 s. and 3 s. 10 d.

There is also another sort of Coin called Jeckas or Jeckai.

The Money of this Country does not always bear one Price, but rises and folls
very often, according to the Exchange, in which many Benjans drive a vast Trade
to their great advantage, for they buy all the Gold and Silver upon the coming
of the English, Dutch, and other European Ships, and the Moors Vessels from
Aden and Persia, when commonly they are at the lowest, and afterward raise the
Money when any quantity is to be sent up to the places lying up in the Country.

All the Gold and Silver, both Coined and uncoin'd, which is brought thither
out of other Countries, is melted and Coined into Money, stamped with Persian
Characters, expressing the Name and Dignity of the Kings. But there is great
deceit in this Coin, wherefore in many places and corners of the Streets sit
Benjan Exchangers of Money, called Parastes, who for a small Reward looking
upon the Money, try the same with such nimbleness and exactness, that they
distinguish all the good from the bad, so that few receive any Money without
showing it to these Parastes, who are obliged, after it has been shown to
them, if there be any clipped or naught amongst it, to make it good; but this
seldom happens, because they are very exact in the telling and looking of it
over. They reckon great Sums by Crous, otherwise Carroras or Caroor, and by
Lecks, though there be no Coin of so great a value, a Carrora being a hundred
thousand Tun of Gold, or (as others affirm) a hundred Lecks, a Leck being a
hundred thousand Ropias. They reckon also with uncoin'd Gold, or other precious
things, by a certain Weight called Barman or Maun, which is fifty five pound
English.

Their manner of Traveling.
They travel on Horseback, Mules, and Camels, both Men and Women, as also in
Coaches or Chariots. The Grandees use Elephants and Palakins, which are carried
on the Shoulders of several Men, especially Noblemen and Persons of Quality,
who account it a great Disgrace to go on Foot.

In Zurratte and several other Places in India, and most part of the Mogol's
Country, they travel in a pretty sort of Chariots with two Wheels, the bottoms
whereof are square, and raised very high from the Ground above the Wheels;
there are no Seats in the same, but they sit on the Floor after the Eastern
manner, with their Legs across under them; both before and behind are Cushions
to lean against. These Chariots are very like those used by the ancient
Indians, and mentioned by Strabo; they are for the most part used in the
Plain-Countrey, to travel withal from one Town to another, and also to ride
abroad in for Recreation, they being very light and easy: When they come to a
bad Way or Hills, they take out their Oxen and the Wheels from the Chariot,
which also, if occasion require, may be taken in two pieces, and with ease
carried by two Men on the top of a Mountain or Hill, and put together again
when they are past the troublesome Way. After our manner of sitting, two would
scarce be able to sit in one of these Chariots, but after the Indian manner,
four with ease. They are drawn by Oxen in stead of Horses, two to each Chariot,
generally fastened to the Axletree, which is made like a Yoke. These Oxen are of
a curious shape and color; the best are generally white, and some speckled
black; they are very slender, and have on their Shoulders toward their Necks,
a Bunch like the Camels; they trot and gallop as fast as Horses, and are able
to travel thirty five or thirty six Miles in a day; they are guided by a Cord,
run through Holes made in their Noses, and are as easy to be commanded
therewith as Horses.

These Oxen, which are kept by Noblemen, have rich Furniture, their Bodies
being covered with Crimson Foot-Clothes, Edged with yellow Fringe, and about
their Necks silken Collars, with twelve Bells or more; some also have their
Horns tipped with Copper or Silver.

In like manner the Chariots are neatly adorned with the like crimson Cloth, or
else with Velvet.

When any Women ride in these Chariots, they shut them close round about to
keep them from being seen.

Persons of Quality, who are allowed to use Elephants, travel on them in little
Towers, which are like Bedsteads, hung round with Cloth of Gold and Silk; they
stand longways cross the Beast, and are so long, that a Man may easily lie at
his full length in them; but the breadth is such, that two can but just lie
together side by side.

They also use these kind of Towers on Elephants in the Wars, placing nine or
ten Musquetteers or Bowemen in them, according to the manner of the Country:
He that guides the Elehant sits stradling upon his Neck, and governs him not
with a Bridle, but with a sharp Iron Hook, with which he pricks his Ears,
Mouth, or any other part.

The Palakins, being like little Beds covered with Cloth, are carried by four
or six Men, with a great Cane, which reaching from one end to the other, lies
on their Shoulders: These Bearers go not on the sides, but two before and two
behind. This way of being carried is very easy and common in India, insomuch
that all Europeans, when they travel, are carried after this manner.

Their Music
The common Music of the Indians is very unpleasing, consisting only in making
of a strange noise. But they have amongst them an Instrument not altogether
unharmonious, which is made of two black varnished Globes of Wood, with Holes
through for the sound to pass through. These two Globles are fastened to both
ends of a little Board about three spans long, on which are strung several
Brass or Copper Wyres, which are supported in as many places as there are Notes
in the Tune which they intend to play. The Musician playing with his right
Hand, takes away the Supporters of the Strings with his left when he pleases to
alter the Notes, though not with his Fingers, but with certain Iron Wyres made
fast to little Rings, which he moves on the ends of his Fingers, with which
striking gently on the Strings, he makes a pleasant noise. For the more ease in
playing, the Musician hangs this Instrument about his Neck, and holds it before
him like a Lute.

The Indians also have Flutes, so big, that an Elephant carrying one on each
side, and an Indian in the middle, has a sufficient Load. They have also
Trumpets of a vast bigness.

Many of the Sea-bordering Places of India are at present under the Subjection
of the English, Hollanders, Spaniards, and Portuguese, who there possess
several Towns, Forts, and Factories, for the accommodation of Trade.

The greatest Monarch which is at present in India, is called, The Great Mogol
(and not Mogor, as Boterus and other Geographers have wrongly pronounced)
because he possesses the greatest part of India, which is the most considerable
part of Asia.

The chief Officers of the Mogol's Court.
The chief Offices and Employments at the Mogol's Court, are officiated by
Eunuchs. His first and prime Councellor, is the Vizier, or chief Chancellor of
the Realm, who Commands like a Viceroy, hearing and determining all grand
Causes that are brought before the Mogol. But though this Chancellor's Honor be
very great, yet he is in continual danger of his Life, as may appear by several
Examples, of which this is one: A certain Chancellor persuading his King not to
War against Schach Abbas, King of Persia, was flayed alive.

Next to the first Vizier is the Wasanbasi, or Treasurer, who keeps one and
twenty sworn Secretaries, who attend every forenoon with their Books before the
Corchana, or Treasury, keeping an exact Account of all things that come in or
go out of the same. The Accounts being adjusted, are Signed by the Mogol
himself, the first Vizier, Treasurer, and Diwanbeck or Judge. This Officer
being one of the powerfullest of all those that belong to the King, is commonly
clad in a long Coat of Cloth of Tissue. He is often carried in a Palakin, with
four silver Scepters and ten Standards before him, all Men showing as much
honor to him, as to the King himfelf.

The Execution of Criminals.
The third Person of Quality in order is the prime Judge, who Condemns and
Examines all Criminals, who are not Executed by a common Executioner, but by
one of the People that are present when they receive their Sentence, who
willingly perform the Office. If any Person have committed Murder, he is
delivered into the hands of his Relations, who Execute him according to the
Sentence passed upon him.

The King's Guard.
The next Person in order, is a Rassy or Ragia, who Commands twelve thousand
Slaves, who always are at or about the Court at Lahor or Agra, and are as the
King's Guard, traveling with him wheresoever he goes.

The Nassire, or King's Steward, is also in high esteem, and provides all
Necessaries and Provisions for the Court.

The Nobles that attend upon the King, are styled Omrahs, and receive a Sallary
from him, more or less, according to the number of Horse they Command.

Besides these Omrahs there are several eminent Lords, called Chans, or Ragias,
who are always near the Mogol, and wait upon him with great humility, though
not without fear, for he that is in favor one hour, often chances the next to
be in high displeasure, and danger of losing his Life.

Three Orders of Chans.
Della Valle tells us, that there are three prime Persons in the Realm, who are
next to the King; the first whereof is called Chan Chanon, that is, Chief of
Nobles, or Lord of Lords; for Chan properly signifies Lord. The second bears
the Name and Quality of Mir Miron, or Emir Emirs, which signifies also Lord of
Lords, though in a meaner sense than the former. The third is the Chani Alem,
that is, Chan, or Prince of the People.

Many of the Mogol's Commanders are Quizilbascies from Persia, who (constrained
by poverty) forsaking the King of Persia's Service, offer themselves to the
Great Mogol, where they generally come to great Preferment.

Besides these there are several other Officers and Magistrates, who hear and
determine Causes, and pronounce Sentence verbatim and not in writing: for they
having no written Laws, not only the King's word is absolute, but also his
Governors, being authorized by him.

The King sits in Person in Court.
Once a week the King sits in Person in open Court, and passes Sentence on
Criminals, and also gives Judgment in Civil Causes.

It is not the practice of the Great Mogol, to strangle his Brothers, or put
out their Eyes, when he comes to the Crown, as is usual with several of the
Eastern Princes.

Variety of punishment for Crimi^^^^
Criminals are punished several ways, some they sew up in an Ox or Asses Hide
while it is moist, that when drying it comes to shrink, it may crush them to
death. Some they condemn to go through every Street in the City with Oxes Horns
on their Heads. Some they deoculate; Poison some, and Hang others. But when
Noblemen are condemned to die, they have the privilege to fight for their
Lives with a Lion; which the King never refuses them, except they are convicted
of High Treason.

Those that murder their Fathers, are tied to the Tail of an Elephant, and
dragged along the Streets so long till they die. Others are killed by
Elephants, wild Beasts, and Serpents.

No Malefactor lies above one Night in Prison, and sometimes not at all; for if
he be apprehended in the Morning, he is immediately carried before a Judge, who
either discharges him, or passes Sentence upon him; which if it be to be whipped,
he is immediately stripped naked, receiving his punishment in the presence of the
Judge; if to die, they instantly carry him to the Bazar, or Marketplace. This
sudden way of punishing Offenders keeps the People in such awe, that they
seldom commit any Crime to deserve it.

The King's Robes given to the Omrahs
It is said that the Mogol never wears a Suit of Clothes above one day, after
which he sends the same with great Ceremony to such Omrahs as are his
Favorites, who account it a great honor to be clad in the King's Robes.

He is weighed upon his Birthday.
The Mogols Birthday is kept as a great Festival, on which he is weighed in the
Scale against some Jewels, Gold, Silver, Cloth of Tissue, Butter, Rice, Fruit,
and many other things, each of them successively being put into the Balance;
all which falls to the Mollas or Priests share. This is done in great state,
whilst several Elephants, hung with Chains, Bells, Gold and Silver Caparisons,
and Breastplates beset with Rubies and Emeraulds, are brought before him.

From the weight of the King (of which the Physicians take an exact Account)
they boast to know his Abilities.

When the Mogol is thus weighed, he throws small pieces of Silver amongst the
Spectators, as also some Gold, in the form of Flowers, Cloves, or Nutmegs, but
very thin and hollow; which done, he drinks with his Nobles.

Their way of Salutation.
The usual Salutation which the Indians show to their King, as also to one
another, is in the Persian Tongue called Teslim; in the Indian, Sumback; and by
a corrupt Name amongst the Europeans, Sombaya. The manner of Salutation is
performed with the right Hand, without taking off their Turbants, with which
they almost touch the Ground, and lifting it up again very leisurely to their
Mouths, as if they would kiss it, and so still higher and higher by degrees,
till they hold it above their Heads.

After the same manner, but with both Hands folded together, they Salute, and
show Reverence to their Gods, and other Consecrated things.

The Indian Heathens, in stead of wishing one another Health, or a good Day,
salute one another with the Name of their Idol Ram.

The Reverence they show to their Prince.
When the King's Viceroys come to the Court, or any other place where he is,
they bow down their Heads to the Ground, and touch the same with their Hands;
after which approaching him by degrees, they bow several times one after
another, till they are very near him, when they are searched by those whose
Office it is to see if they carry any Arms about them; after which they go to
touch his Feet, whilst he stands as if immovable: The greatest sign of
Friendship that he can show them, is to lay his Hand on their Shoulders.

Moreover, the rest of the Kings of India who are not his Substitutes, when
they speak of him, bow their Heads in sign of Reverence.

All the Mogol's Provinces are Governed by Sultans or Viceroys, either Moors,
Heathens, or others.

In the chiefest Towns and Seaports are three Governors or Officers of the
Kings: viz. the Omar or Nabab, who is the Governor or Lord of the City; the
Governor of the Castle; and the King's Confident, called Vakea Nevis, who
oversees the other two.

The Omar, being the Lord of the City, Commands also in the Country round
about, and takes care to receive the Customs, Excises, and other Revenues, of
which he gives an Account to the King. He bears the Title of Nabab, which
signifies My Lord, and keeps two Deputies, viz. one in the Country, called
Cavasioram, whose Office it is, with several hundred Bow-men, to keep the Ways
clear from Robbers; and the other in the City, named Cotonal or Cutwal, who
performs the Office of Provost-Marshal, seizing on all Malefactors, and
committing them to Prison; but his Power extends not without the Liberty of the
City, except by express order from the Governor.

The Omar or Nabab Treats of Peace, and Matters of Traffic on the Boundaries
and Seacoasts.

Amongst them also is a Sabandar, or Master of the Cinque Ports.

The Governor of the Castle, who seldom comes out of his Fortress, takes upon
him the Title of Omar, The King's chief Officers in Cities and Seaports.
and may refuse the Nabab entrance into the Fort, if he comes thither without
the King's Order, or with too great a Train. He also orders the People to Watch
and Ward, causes the Drums to beat and Trumpets to sound three times a day, and
as often in the night, at each time an hour and a half.

The Vakea Nevis, or Inquisitor General, takes notice of the Actions of the
Nabab, the Governor of the Castle, and other eminent Officers; inquires into
all disorders, and informs the Mogol by Letters, every eighth day, of what
happens in that time in the City where he resides.

The Mahumetan Princes never give any Lands to their Officers for Inheritance;
nor do they enjoy their Employments any longer than their Princes please.

The Mogol's Eldest Son inherits the Crown, unless for some misdemeanor, or
want of ability, he is by the Father in his Lifetime, and with the Consent of
his Council, judged undeserving thereof.

The Indians derive their right of Inheritance from the Mothers side;
notwithstanding the Men commonly have the whole Conduct of the Realm, as being
fittest to command.

Of the Name and Title of Mogol.
The reason of the Name Mogol.
THey give their King the Name of Mogol, because he is extracted out of a Tribe
or Family of the Giagatian Tartars (for there are many Tribes of Tartars which
is properly called Mogol, and belongs to the City Samarcand, in the Province
Giagata or Zagatai, otherwise Usbeck, which is the ancient Sogdiane, and in the
Persian Maps called Soghd. For this reason many of his Subjects, and especially
the Mahumetan Soldiers which are in his Service, though Native Indians, call
themselves Mogols, or Mogolleans, because they are derived out of Tartary.

Its signification.
Terry tells us, That the Name or Title of Mogol signifies Circumcised, as he
himself is, and all the Mahumetans; and from hence he is called the Great
Mogol, as being the Chief of the Circumcised. Some also call him the Emperor of
the Ganges.

The Provinces and Countries between the Bay of Cambaya and that of Bengala, as
Telengone or the Kingdom of Visiapour, Decan, Golconda, and many other
Territories, were not Governed in ancient Times by peculiar Princes, but by one
Supreme Head, or by two at the most: viz. The Southern Parts were Governed by
the King of Bisnagar; and the Northern, by the King of Sceherberder. Those that
afterward came to be the Chief Princes thereof, were formerly but mean
Officers, who took the Dominion of their Supreme Lords upon them, and dividing
the Country amongst themselves, Governed as Absolute Princes over their
several Territories, not owning any Person to be above them. Amongst all these
Princes, the Chiefest were the Kings of Decan, Golconda, and Telengone, who lay
nearest to the Mogol's Country, possessed large Territories, and were able to
bring great Armies into the Field; Adil Schiach, a King of Golconda, having an
Army of a hundred thousand Men.

The King of Persia was generally in a League with all the three, and they
often corresponded by Ambassadors and Presents, and were always in Amity one
with another; which Leagues they maintained only to be the better able to
resist the Mogol, whose Power they dreaded exceedingly.

The signification of Chan.
These three Princes were formerly called Nizam Chan, Adil Chan, and Cutb Chan;
for Chan among the Turks has the same signification with Meleck, or Malack,
which signifies King in the Arabic, after the same manner as Schach among the
Persians. And in regard these three Languages are very common amongst the
Moors, therefore they use these Words without distinction. But it seems that
the then reigning Princes have since laid aside the Names of Meleck and Chan,
and taken upon them that of Schach, that is, King, which they like best, as
being newer, and better agreeing with their Authority; wherefore they have
lately been called Nizam Schach, Cutb Schach, and Adil Schach. But at last all
these peculiar Princes and Kings, besides many other Governors in India, were
one after another reduced under the Mogol's Jurisdiction.

The Extract and Descent of the Mogol Kings.
The Great Mogol from whom descended.
THe present Great Mogol, and his Predecessors, boast their Descent from
Tamerlane, or rather from one of his Nephews or Grandchildren: But after what
manner this happened, deserves to be declared here at large.

When the Mogols, (whose greatest or most powerful part were by a peculiar Name
called Giagatynse or Zagatayse Tataas or Tartars, dwelling South-east beyond
the Mountain Imaus) had brought all the other Tartars, or Scythians (for so
they were anciently called, especially the Eastem) by the Conduct of the
General Amochtan Chan, under subjection, he having settled his Dominion, took
upon him the Title of Chingiz or Tzingiz, and was the first that had the
Surname of Great Chan, which was about the Year of our Lord 1214. This Tzingiz
Chan drawing out his Army, consisting of four hundred thousand Horse, after a
peculiar manner, viz. into Parties of eleven thousand one hundred and ten in
each Company, the one part he ordered to march toward the East, and the other
toward the West, where falling upon China, Machina, and Catay, he conquered
the powerful King of the Chorasmians, Gelalodan.

Another Expedition.
After this, Anno 1224. he made another Expedition to Catay, though with the
loss of many of his Men; three Years after which, he dying, was succeeded by
his third Son Ocotay Chan, or Octay Cahon, who by Abraham Zacuth is called The
King of the Catayans. He being settled in his Dominions by Laws, Arms, and
Conquest, also died, and was succeeded by his Son Gayung Chan, who likewise
Reigning but a short time, was with the consent of the Princes and Supreme
Governors succeeded by Mango Chan, who being Nephew to Tzingiz Chan, was chosen
Emperor. Anno 1255 he sent his Brother Hulako Chan with an Army beyond the
River Oxus to Assyria; to complete the Conquest whereof, he took Bagdad or
Babylon, and destroyed all the Inhabitants thereof in the space of seven days;
and here fell Mustasem, the thirty fifth Calif or Emperor of the Abbasidas.

After the death of Mango Chan, his youngest Brother, Coblai Chan was Crowned
in his stead.

After the expiration of four years, Prince Hulako Chan, eldest Brother to
Mango Chan, also dying, left his Son Abgai Chan to Govern the Western parts of
his Dominions, being Media and Assyria.

Next Coblai Chan, Temur Chan, Nephew to Coblai, and youngest Son to Mango
Chan, succeeded in the Throne.

All these six Chans or Princes, Governed over Cathay and China, besides a
great many other Countries.

The eleventh was Buzengir Chan, or Bugancan, the original or first Parent of
the Mogol Kings, and Father to the famous Temur Chan, by some called
Teimurlang, and Tamerlane, that is, Teimur the Decrepit or Maimed.

This Tamerlane the thirteenth in order from Chingiz Chan, who died on the
Mogol's Borders at a Place called Anzar, Anno 1403, had four Sons, viz. John
Guyr, who being the eldest, died a year before his Father, and left two Sons,
the one called Mahumed Sultan, and the other Pyr Mahumed; the last of whom
succeeded Tamerlane in the Kingdoms of Oaznehem and India, and being afterward
slain by Pyr Aly, left a Son called Abusaid.

The second Son of Tamerlane, named Hamar Xeque, being Governor of Persia, was
in his Father's time, killed in a Wood belonging to Chormatu, now called
Cormawata, in Orestan.

The third, named Mirunxa, succeeded his Father in Governing of the Countries
of Hierack, Aderbajon, and the Lands extending to Damas; he was slain by Cara
Issuf, Anno 1401. or, as others say, Anno 1407. This Mirunxa had two Sons, viz.
Homar, Lord of Bagdad, was taken by his Brother; but at last getting his
Liberty, he conquered him, and became King of Tabris or Tebris: Not long after
which he was defeated by Cara Issuf in the Year 1407. and forced to fly, first
to Corman, and afterward to Siston; from whence coming the next year with a
great Army, he was killed.

The fourth Son to Tamerlane being Myrza Xarack, always accompanying his
Father, succeeded him in the Throne.

Abusaid succeeding his Father Pyr Mahumed, Son to John Guyr, conquered Myrza
Adulla, King of Maurenahar, of whose Kingdom he became Master in the Year 1452.

After the death of Abusaid, his Son Myrza Sultan Hamed became King of
Maurenahar, and having Reigned twenty eight years, died Anno 1495.

Myrzah Babor, Nephew to Hamed, inheriting the Kingdom of Maurenahar, was
driven thence by Xaybeck Chan, King of Usbeck, in the Year 1500. and forced to
fly to Garnehem, and from thence into India, where he settled himself, and
after a Reign of thirty eight years, died An. 1532. leaving two Sons, Hamayon
Myrza and Camoran, who were both created Kings after his Death. This Myrza
Babor is by some (as Peruschi) called Baburxa, who drove the Patanes from
Indostan, of which they had made themselves Masters, and forced them to fly to
the Isles before the Bay of Bengala.

After Babor's Death Hamayon Myrza obtaining the best and richest Kingdom of
India, kept a Viceroy called Xyrcan, who mutinying, maintained War against
him, and forced him to desert his Kingdom and fly to Persia, where King Schach
Tamas, Son to Ismael, Reigning at that time, lent him twelve thousand choice
Soldiers, under the Command of Byrancam, who restored Hamayon to his Kingdom,
and slew the Rebel Xyrcan.

A Tartarian Prince settles in India, and becomes Founder of the Royal Family
there.
Della Valle writes, That a Nephew of one of the Tartarian Princes, after
Tamerlane had distributed his vast Dominions amongst his Children and
Grandchildren, traveled over the Mountain Imaus or Taurus, to seek his
Fortunes in India, at a Prince's Court who possessed a great part of the
Country, where by means of the chiefest Persons in the Kingdom, and many good
Services done for the State, he so insinuated himself, that he got firm footing
in the Country, insomuch that in process of time, and several vicissitudes,
one of his Successors attained to the Throne, and was made the Founder of the
Royal House which Reigns at present, and of which Schach Selim, who Reigned
about the Year 1620 was the Fourth.

The Successor of Hamayon Myrza was his Son Gelaladin Eckbar, or Ackbar, or
Akebar, otherwise Achabar, that is, Great, or Most powerful: Peruschi calls him
Mahomet Zelabdin. He was born in a Territory called Chaquata, which lies
Northward between the Tartars and Persians, and borders Southward upon India.

Eckbar maintaining the War against the Pathanes, or Parthians, forced them to
desert the Kingdom of Bengala, which they possessed. These are undoubtedly the
Usbeques, or Turks, who coming from Turkestan, had made themselves Masters of
India, after the Reign of Sabutayuin or Sebetekin, a Mahumetan. Many also have
maintained, though without any sufficient testimony, that Turkestan and the
ancient Parthia is one and the same. When Eckbar had conquered them, he forced
them to fly to the Isles of Bengala, from whence they afterward came to
Invade him. After this he conquered the Kingdom of Cambaya, and likewise many
more Places of Indostan; and made way also through the Countries of Narsinga,
Calicut, lying along the Seacoast, and so quite to the SCHACH SELIM
Island of Goa. There were generally many Kings attending at his Court, some of
which he had subdued by force, and others had freely surrendered themselves,
fearing else to have lost their Kingdoms. Sometimes there were twenty together,
who were very powerful, besides those who paid great Tribute, that they might
be excused from attending at Court, and others Heathens; in the last whereof
Eckbar reposed greater confidence, notwithstanding he seemed, as to outward
appearance, to be a Mahumetan. He punished his Brother, then Prince of Cabul, a
Place lying beyond Sinde, for attempting to Invade him at the same time when
the Patanes mutiny'd in Bengala; which Rebellion he soon quieted, Anno 1582. He
also conquered the Kingdom of Caximir a little before the Year 1600. and about
the same time made himself Master of the Kingdom of Decan, belonging to King
Melique; and also subdued that of Breampour. Two years after there arose a
great Difference between him and his eldest Son and Heir to the Realm, who
having taken upon him the Title of King, called his Father The Great King, and
maintained a War against him, till at last confessing his Error, he was
reconciled to him, and also received great testimonies of Affection from him.

Ecbars Death and Character.
This Eckbar died on the twenty seventh day of October, Anno 1605. in the sixty
third year of his Age: He was beloved by all his Subjects, feared by his
Nobles, and courteous to all; he deported himself with equal moderation to
Strangers and to the Natives, whether Christians, Mahumetans, or Heathens,
which obliged all Parties to him, and rendered them devoted to his Service. He
Prayed to God constantly every Morning and Evening, Noon and Midnight; abhorred
Cruelties, insomuch that by virtue of a Law made by him, none were to die,
unless Sentence had been pronounced against them three times; and easily
pardoned Criminals, if they could but make any reasonable Excuse. Mean Presents
he received with as great kindness as those of biggest value, regarding only
the good will of the Presenter. He fed sparingly, eating Flesh not above three
or four times in a year, the rest of the time his Diet being Rice, Milk, and
Preserves. He gave Audience to his Subjects and others twice a day out of a
Window. He could neither Write nor Read, yet nevertheless understood very well
all the Affairs of his Realm: for the News that his Deputies writ him from all
Places, he caused to be read to him, as also several Books. He made strict
enquiry of Strangers concerning the Power of their Princes, and manner of
Traffic. He ordered a silver Bell to be hung at a Chain of fifteen yards long,
to the end that all those who could not obtain Justice from his Officers,
should come and complain to him thereof, giving him notice of their being there
by pulling the Bell, which he no sooner heard, but immediately came forth, and
saw that they had Right done them. He had three Sons and two Daughters; the
eldest (who succeeded him in his Throne) was Scieco, to which, as a Title of
Honor, was added Gio, which in the Country Language signifies Soul; so that
Scieco-Gio signifies The Soul or Person of Scieco. The second was called
Pahari; by Jarrick, Sultan Morad; and by Peruschi, Sultan Horad, who being
delivered to some Jesuits, to be instructed by them in the Romish Religion, was
slain in the Wars of Decan. The third was called Dan, or Daniel. Texeira calls
the eldest Xequa Patxa; the second, Pary Patxa, who died of some Distemper,
Anno 1602; and the third, Sabelxa Patxa. But the eldest is by Purchase, Della
Valle, and others, generally called Selim.

Scieco Gio succeeds his Father by the Name of Schach Selim.
When Scach Selim was born, his Father named him Sceichu; for Eckbar, who till
that time had no Male issue, believed that he had obtained him from God by the
Prayers of one Schach, a Man accounted very holy and religious: But his Father
about the twelfth or thirteenth year of his Age changing his first Name,
according to the Custom of the Country, called him Schach Selim, which in the
Arabic signifies, A Peaceable King, supposing this Name to agree best with his
Temper and Disposition.

On the the eighth day after Eckbar's Death, Selim in the beginning of his
Reign, to gain the favor and good opinion of the Mahumetans, whom he had
promised to defend their Laws, caused their Temples to be cleans'd, and took
upon him the Name of Nurdin Mahumed Jahanair, or (according to Della Valle)
Nura Eddin, Muchamed Gihon Ghir, that is, The Light of the Belief of Mahomet,
and Conqueror of the World, because he publicly declared to be a Mahumetan,
notwithstanding in his heart he neither esteemed Mahomet nor his Laws, nor did
he regard any Religion; yet he kept the Name of Schach Selim, by which he was
called amongst the common People.

This Scach Selim, amongst all his Women, had one who was acknowledged as a
Queen, and being honored above all the Ladies of his Court, bore a great sway,
nothing being done in the Kingdom but by her Conduct and Power: She was a
native Indian, but of Persian Blood, viz. Daughter to a Persian, who deserting
his native Country, came into India to serve the Great Mogol (as many Persians
do,) who for the many good Services which he had done him, made him a Chan and
Viceroy of a Province.

A Persian Lady gains to be made Queen by her resolute Carriage.
This Queen was first Married to another Persian Nobleman, who was also in the
Mogol's Service, after whose Death, by some means or other, she came acquainted
with Schach Selim; who falling in love with her, desired her to go into his
Haram or Seraglio, amongst his other Concubines; which she modestly refusing,
said, That she had once been the Wife of one, who in all Places had given
proofs of his Valor, being never daunted by any of his Enemies: Moreover, that
she was the Daughter of such a Father, as accounted Honor the greatest Good;
wherefore she could never be brought to forget her self so much, as to be
guilty of any unchaste Action; neither would her Birth and Quality permit her
to be put into the King's Haram, and used as a common Slavess; but if the King
had so great an Affection for her as to make her his lawful Consort, she should
never be wanting in the Duty which she owed to the King, but at all times be
subject, and ready to obey his Commands. This her bold Answer so incensed the
King, that it wanted very little but he had forced her to Marry one of those
Persons called Halalchor, who are those that without scruple eat of all sorts
of Meat, and are the most despicable and scorned People of all India; yet
nevertheless she remained so firm and constant, that she resolved rather to die
than change her Mind. The King more and more overcome by her Beauty, at last
consulted to Marry her as his lawful Wife, and caused her to be acknowledged as
Queen, and chief of all the King's Haram, which she cleared from all those of
whom she had any suspicion, either by Marrying of them to some of the Kings
Nobles, or some other means. At the Court she made likewise great alterations,
by putting all the old Officers out of their Places, and new ones in their
stead who were her Favorites and Relations. When the King declared her Queen,
he called her Nurmahal, that is Light of the Court. She had a Brother named
Alaf Chan, who by the King's favor was grown very powerful Sultan Chosrou,
Selim's Son, Married one of her Daughters, and Sultan Scebriar, another, both
which she had by her first Husband, for she had no Children by Schach Selim.

Several Opinions concerning Selim's Issue.
Robert Covert tells us, That this Selim had five Sons, the first whereof was
called Paheschau Sehelbam, which signifies, The next Heir to the Crown, who
being blind, was kept as a Prisoner; the second was Sultan Naubrea, appointed
to succeed his Father; the third, Sultan Lawle; the fourth, Sultan Lill; and
the fifth and youngest, Sultan Caiwone.

Hawkins calls these five Sons Sultan Cusseru, Sultan Peruis, Sultan Chorem,
Sultan Shairer, and Sultan Bath.

Della Valle calls the eldest Sultan Chosrou; the second Sultan Peruis; the
third, Sultan Chorrom (to whom his Father gave the Surname of Schiah Gihon,
that is, King of the World, after his return from the War, which he had
succesfully maintained in Decan;) and the youngest Sultan Scheriar.

Chosrou rebelling against his Father, is defeated.
Sultan Chosrou, the eldest Son, a very hopeful Prince, and a great Friend to
the Christians, having been settled in a peculiar Lordship, rebelled against his
Father Schiah Selim, in the Year 1606. under pretense that the Kingdom belonged
justly to him, because King Ecbar his Grandfather had on his Deathbed given
his Realm to him, as being his Grandchild, who was then born, and had excluded
Selim his Father, and only Son to Ecbar: Wherefore he took up Arms against
him, to obtain that from his Father which his Grandfather had in his last Will
and Testament given to him. But Chosrou being defeated and overcome in the
Battle, was forced to lay down his Arms, and surrender himself up to his
Father, who with mild Words blamed him for his rashness, and asked him why he
would take this preposterous course, since the Crown on necessity would fall to
him, and that he was only the Preserver of it whilst he lived: Yet he caused
all the Commanders which had served Chosrou in this War to be put to miserable
deaths, and their Bodies to be laid in the way where Chosrou was to pass, and
trampled over them, as a Victor over his Enemies. Nor ended the business so;
for Chosrou was bereaved of his Liberty, not being permitted to converse with
the People as before, but was committed, though after an Honorable manner, to
the Custody of several Noblemen, his Father likewise causing his Eyelids to be
sewed up, that so he might bereave him of his Sight without putting out his
Eyes, and at once deprive him of the means to make any further trouble in the
Kingdom: But after the expiration of some days, Selim causing his Eyes to be
opened again, prevented Chosrou from being always blind; yet though he beheld
the Light of the Sun again, he enjoyed not his Liberty, but was kept a close
Prisoner for the space of two Years, not being allowed, according to the King's
Command, to have above one Man to wait upon him.

Mean while Nurmahal the King's Consort used her endeavors to persuade Chosrou
to marry her Daughter, before she bestowed her in Marriage to his Brother
Sultan Scheriar; for she certainly believed that Chosrou should succeed Selim
after his death. But Chosrou could never be brought to consent, either out of
love to another, or because he disliked Nurmahal's Daughter, although being a
Prisoner, he was, upon condition to marry her, promised his Liberty. But she
whom he really affected, and who loved him no less, The mutual Constancy of
Chosrou and his Lover.
obtained of his Father King Selim to serve her Lover in Prison, where she
behaved her self very nobly toward him, always persuading him to marry
Nurmahal's Daughter, telling him, she would be very well satisfied to serve him
as a Slave, provided she might but see him at liberty, and settled in a
Condition according as his Birth required: But he not minding her Persuasions,
contentedly spent his time with her in Prison two whole years; after which, his
Fathers anger being somewhat appeased, he was restored to his Liberty, though
under the charge of several Guards, the King's great Confidents. But by his
refusal to marry his Step-mothers Daughter, he incurred her hatred and
displeasure, and forced her, contrary to her first resolutions, to give her in
Marriage to his Brother Scheriar.

Of Sultan Peruis, the second Son, who had his Residence in the Kingdom of
Bengala, near the Mouth of the River Ganges, and Governed by the Title of
Viceroy, no further mention is made.

At the same time the third Son, Sultan Chorrom, rebelled against his Father,
with intention to make himself Master of the Kingdom of Surrat: Wherefore
Schiah Selim sent one of his Chief Chans, called Ajat Chan, to Agra, to convey
his Treasure from thence, before Sultan Chorrom came thither.

This Chorrom was Governor of that part of Decan which he had conquered for the
Mogol his Father; and the occasion of this Rebellion was as follows.

The occasion of Chorrom's Rebellion.
Chorrom by his own subtle Contrivance and Conduct, and by the high esteem of
his Father-in-Law Ajat Chan, and his Sister Nurmahal, had so wrought with the
King, that the Prisoner Sultan Chosrou was committed into his Custody, but with
Commands to use him well, and take special care of him: Which being effected,
Chorrom would neither go to his Territory, nor march into the Field with an
Army, though his Father requested him, unless he might carry Sultan Chosrou
along with him; under pretense, that it would not be convenient for him to
depart from the Court, and leave Chosrou, his great Enemy, there. No sooner was
Chosrou delivered up to him, but he immediately went from thence, and kept him
two Years in an honorable manner. But at last Chorrom, who had no other design
but by his Brothers death to secure himself of the Kingdom, practiced all the
time since his coming from his Father's Court, as some affirm, to poison him;
in order to which, he charged all those that waited upon, and guarded him, to
force him to eat the poisoned Meat whether he would or no, or else destroy him
after another manner; which they accordingly attempted several times, but
Chosrou having notice thereof, would not eat any of the Meat that was brought
to him by them, expressly telling them that it was poysond. The Keepers seeing
no way to perform their Masters Command by Poison, fell all upon him with drawn
Swords, and after long resistance strangled him with a Bowe-string. Some
affirm, That Sultan Chorrom killed Chosrou in public with his own Hand; but
however it happened, Chosrou died an untimely and violent death, and left a young
Son called Sultan Bulachi.

Chorrom rebels against his Father.
Schach Selim informed hereof, and exceedingly enraged against Sultan Chorrom,
sent for him to Court, to give satisfaction for the Murder which he had
committed: But Chorrom not regarding his Father's Command, raised all his
Forces to fight against him, and not only forced his own Subjects to take up
Arms, but also the Inhabitants of other Towns which were not under his
Jurisdiction, as those of Cambaya, and other Places; and having gotten an
indifferent Army, accompanied by some petty Indian Princes, he marched to Agra,
which he plundered and ruined a second time, his Soldiers committing greater
Outrages and Cruelties than before, perhaps in revenge of the loss which they
sustained in Storming of the Castle in vain, with the loss of many of their
Men, by reason of the valiant resistance of the Besieged.

Anno 1624. Chorrom being defeated, fled with some of his Men to the Dominions
of Cub Schiah, where Selim not prosecuting him any further, permitted him to
live in quiet.

He also defeated the Governor of Cambaya, and put another of his Favorites in
his stead.

Some relate the death of Ecbar, and that which happened concerning the
Inheritance of the Kingdom by his eldest Son Selim, thus.

Another Relation of Ecbar's death, and Selim's Reign.
Ecbar having subdued many Indian Princes which Governed Indostan, and taken
from them the Kingdoms of Candahor, Cabul, Cassamier, Chassenie, Benazard,
Guzuratte, Sinda or Tata, Ganhees, Barampour, Baror, Bengala, Orixa, Oda,
Malouw, Agra, Deli, and reduced them to Provincial Governments, he undertook
the conquering of Decan. Mean while Selim, whom Ecbar had made General over
another Army, to subdue Radzia, Rana, and Mardout, rebelling with all his
Forces, declared himself against the King his Father, with whom he made Peace
again a little before his death: For when Ecbar had concluded to poison one
Myrza Gazia, and had caused two Pills to be prepared, the one of which was
only for purging of himself; and the other, which was of Poison, intended to
be given to the said Prince Myrza, he mistaking in the choice of them, took
that himself which he had prepared for his Adversary. At last growing sensible
of his mistake, and lying on his Deathbed, he set his Tulbant on the Head of
Selim, and also gave him the Sword of Homayon ( Ecbar's Father, and Selim's
Grandfather) declaring him thereby his Successor. Yet nevertheless the Chiefest
of the Nobility divided themselves into Factions and Parties after his death
(which was in the sixtieth Year of his Reign) the one choosing the Side of
Sultan Corsorronne, eldest Son to Selim, under pretense that Ecbar had declared
him his Successor; but this Party not long after better considering with
themselves the danger they incurred, suddenly struck up a Peace: Yet they
forced Selim a second time to take up Arms, though with the like ill success on
their part; for their Forces were all destroyed, and Corsorronne himself taken
Prisoner, and carried to the Castle of Lahor on an Elephant, the Boughs being
lopped off the Trees on the Way as he passed, that so he might the better see
the dismembered Bodies and Heads of those that were of his Party, and laid there
on purpose to make the Tragedy appear the more terrible to him, and him the
more sensible of his Father's displeasure.

Not long after, those of the same Party, as Myrza Fetulha, Myrza Charrief (Son
to Ethamandaulet, whom Sir Thomas Roe calls Etima Doulet) Myrza Mouradin, and
Myrza Ziafferbek, contrived a Plot against King Selim, intending to surprise
him in the Mountains of Cabul, through which he was to pass, and to proclaim
Sultan Corsorronne in his stead: But they losing their opportunity, the King
soon after was informed thereof, and caused all the Conspirators to be put to
death, except Ethamandaulet, who bought his Life for two thousand Lek Ropias.
The King likewise concluded, upon advice of Myrza Ombrawe his Son, to bereave
Sultan Corsorronne of his Sight with the Juice of an Herb called Aok; but that
only put out one of his Eyes. A short time after this, Ethamandaulet, with his
Daughter Mermetzia, Widow to Cheer-affghan, were carried to Agra, to pay the
forementioned promised Sum of Money; whither being come, Mermetzia went often
to see Sultane Rockia, Mother to King Selim, at one of which Visits the King
meeting her in his Seraglio, whither Rockia had brought her with her Daughter
of five or six years of Age, he lifting up her Vail, and looking in her Face,
said, That he would be glad to be the Father of such a Daughter; and also
declared his Affection to her. Shortly after he sent a Messenger to her Father
Ethamandaulet, to request his Daughter in Marriage; to which her Father
consenting, he married her with the usual Ceremonies, and changed her Name of
Mermetzia into that of Nourziam Begem, that is, Light of the World; or, as Sir
Thomas Roe and Della Valle affirm, she was named Nurmahal, or Nourmahal, that
is, Light of the Court or Seraglio.

Sultan Chorrom also caused his Chosrou or Corsorronne (for they seem to be the
same) beforementioned.
eldest Brother, who was committed to his charge, to be murdered, judging
thereby, as he supposed, to have secured himself of the Realm; and being
impatient to stay any longer, plotted with Afaschan (whose Daughter he had
married) to rob the Mogol of his Treasure: In which Enterprise failing, he
proclaimed War against his Father, which he prosecuted to his dying day. In the
interim Nurmahal sent Sultan Scheriar her Son to Lahor, to settle him in the
Throne, and endeavored to get the Militia to side with him: But Afaschan, whose
aim was to place the Crown on Chorrom's Head, informed him of this Alteration;
whilst he, to keep the Army under his Command, advised Bolak, otherwise called
Bulachi, Son to Sultan Corsorronne, to proclaim himself King, by the assistance
of the Chiefest Officers which were of his Party in the Army, and gave the
Guards to his Sister. But Scheriar being defeated before Chorrom's coming
thither, and taken, was with Sultan Bolak, and many other Princes of the
Blood Royal, bereaved both of Sight and Life.

Mean while King Selim died, Anno 1627. being the last Pretender of the
Successors of Tamerlane; for the rest which out of ambition aspired to Govern
after him, were wholly cut off.

This Selim had no Lands in Tartary, except those which lay beyond the Mount
Gerauny.

Chorrom succeeds Selim.
After the death of Selim, Chorrom coming to the Crown, was called Schach Bedin
Mahomet, and took upon him the Title of Chagehan, or Schach Jehan, otherwise
Schach Geaan, that is, King of the World. He reposed great confidence in
Afaschan, and out of the Respect he bore him, pardoned his Sister Normahal. He
was a comely Person, pretty tall, full Faced, and of a sallow Complexion. He
was a Mahumetan, as also some of his Predecessors, though (as others say) not
rigid in maintaining the Laws which are prescribed them.

The Issue of Schach Jehan.
Schach Jehan had four Sons and two Daughters; the eldest Son was called Dara,
that is, Darius, or (according to Bernier) Darachacour; the second, Sultan
Sujas, that is, A Prudent Prince; the third, Aurengzebe, which is, The Ornament
of the Throne; and the fourth or last, Morad Backche, that is, Perfect Desire.
Others called Darachacour, Darasja, Sujas, chasausa, Aurengzebe, Orang,
Oranchzef, Moradbackcha, and Moradbeg; all which he made Viceroys, or
Governors of diverse of his best Provinces or Kingdoms, viz. Oranchzef Commanded
in Decan; Sultan Chasausa, in Bengala; Moradbeck, in Zurratte; but he always
kept Darasja by him, as being Heir apparent to the Crown, and his Successor.

Two years before, viz. Anno 1654. Schach Jehan at his return from Asmeer, fell
exceeding sick, insomuch that his Recovery was very doubtful, and a rumor that
he was dead spread through the whole Realm; from whence there arose a great
Difference between these Brothers, who all aiming at the Crown, maintained a
Civil War for five years, but at last Oranchzef after the Decease of of his
Father, who died in Prison, and also the Death of his three Brothers, made
himself Master of the Realm.

The Character of his Children.
The eldest Daughter of Schach Jehan was named Begum Saheb, that is, My Lady
Princess; and the youngest, Raichenara Begum, that is, Illustrious Princess, or
Light of Princesses; which kind of Names are very frequently given to the
Princes and Princesses of this Country, because all the Lands belonging to the
King, there are no Dukedoms, Earldoms, nor Lordships, from whence the Nobles
can derive their Names and Titles, they having nothing but Rewards for their
good Services, either in Lands or ready Money, which the Mogol gives them, and
increases, decreases, or takes away when he pleases; wherefore the Omrahs or
Omars have no other but such kind of Names as these, viz. Raz Andazekan, Safe
Chekenkan, Bark Andazekan, and Dianetchan, or Danechmendkan, or Fazelkan, which
signify Striker of Thunder, Confounder of the Rich, Vomiter of Lightning,
Faithful, Knowing, Perfect Lord, and the like.

Darasja, the eldest Son, wanted not good Parts; for he was courteous in
Conversation, subtle, very civil, and exceeding bountiful, yet so
self-conceited, that he believed himself able to do all things, and could not
imagine that any one was capable of giving him Advice. He often scoffed at
those that had given him Council; so that his best Friends durst not adventure
to discover to him the secret Intentions of his Brothers. He also on a small
occasion would rail, curse, and threaten the greatest Omrahs or Lords in his
Passion, which soon ceased. And although he was a Mahumetan, and manifested the
same in his public Devotion, yet he privately professed himself a Heathen
amongst the Heathens, and a Christian amongst Christians. He constantly kept
some Pendelt, or Heathen Teachers, by him, who received great Rewards, and
persuaded him into an Opinion contrary to the Religion of the Country. He also
hearkened some time since to the Instructions of a Jesuit called Buze, and took
great liking to his Doctrine; and yet some affirm that he was of no Religion at
all, and that that which he did was only out of curiosity, or for his
pleasure, or rather out of subtilty, to make himself beloved by the Christians,
of which he had great numbers in his Army, and especially to gain the Rajas or
Heathen Lords Tributary to this Realm, that when occasion should require, he
might get them to side with him; but let it be how it will, it did not much
tend to his advantage, as shall appear in the following Relation: for the
Pretense which Orangzef made use of to cut off his Head, was because he was
turned Caffer, which is properly an Unbeliever, or one without Religion.

Sultan Sujas, or Chasausa, was almost of the same Temper and Disposition, but
more subtle and reserved, and withal very politic in contriving of Plots; for
the management whereof he got many Friends, by making Presents to the chief
Omrahs and eminent Rajas; yet still at times of recess was so exceedingly
inclined to the Sports of Venus, that keeping many Concubines, he spent whole
Nights and Days in their company. Singing, Drinking, and Dancing with them. He
professed himself of the Persian Belief, although Schach Jehan and all his
Brothers were of the Turks Opinion; which he did for this reason, because the
most eminent Persons at the Mogol's Court, and those which have the greatest
Employments, being for the most part Persians, as also their Children, he hoped
by this means to gain their Affections to be of his Party.

Oranchzef had not that generous Spirit, nor affable Deportment as Darasja, but
seemed to be of a more profound reach, well knowing all his People, and chose
those that would certainly stick to him in time of need. He was very reserved,
subtle, and a great Dissembler, insomuch that he pretended himself a long time
to be a Fakier or Derwis, that is a poor Monk, who has denied all the Glories
of the World, and seemingly disowned any Interest in the Crown, and that he
desired to spend his days in Prayers and Devotion, whilst he was still
plotting at the Court, especially when he was made Viceroy of Decan, and
carried his whole Designs with so much secrecy, that no Person could take any
notice thereof. He also insinuated himself exceedingly into his Father Schach
Jehan's favor, who notwithstanding the great inclination he had toward
Darasja, could not hide his affection to Oranchzef; which bred such Jealousies
in Darasja, that he used often to say to his Friends, Of all my Brothers I fear
none but this Nemaz, that is, This great Dissembler.

Moradbeck, the youngest of all, was none of the most subtle, thinking on
nothing but how to recreate himself, either in Drinking, Hunting, and Arching;
yet nevertheless he had some good Parts, and accounted it a great Virtue to
keep nothing secret. He was indeed a Prince of a noble Temper, which had it
been accompanied with a little more reservedness and prudent Conduct, he would
certainly have been preferred before his Brother, and made King of Indostan, as
shall appear hereafter.

As to what concerns the Daughters, Begum Saheb being very beautiful, and of a
noble Spirit, she was exceedingly beloved by her Father, and according to
report, he admired her beyond belief, alleging for his Excuse, that (according
to the opinion of his Mollas or Priests) it was lawful for SCHAH IEHAAN
a Man to eat of the Fruit of the Tree which he had planted: He reposed so
great confidence in her, that he resolved to make her the only Guard of his
safety, and to oversee all things that were brought to his Table, so well she
knew how to please him, whom she made to do all things to the advantage of such
as she affected. She was very rich by the great Rewards and Presents which she
received for her Service in several Businesses: also very expensive, generous,
and noble. She declared her self wholly for Darasja, which was not a little to
his advantage, and strengthening of his Father's Affections toward him: for she
having a great kindness for him, informed him of all things that proceeded
between her Father and her other Brothers, which was not so much because he was
the eldest Son, and she the eldest Daughter, as the common People believed, but
because he promised to Marry her as soon as he should be King, which is
altogether unusual, and a thing almost never heard of in Hindostan, because the
Husband to a Princess, which must needs be very powerful, would always be
suspected to lay claim, or pretend to the Crown; besides which, the Kings
account their Blood so high, that according to their opinion, there can be none
found worthy of their Daughters. She was always kept locked up in the Seraglio,
by reason of her great inclination to venerial Sports, as may appear by the
following Relation, viz. She caused a beautiful and well shaped Youth, of an
indifferent Extract, to be brought to her into the Seraglio, which she could
not do so privately but that she was discovered, and the news thereof carried
to her Father Schach Jehan, who resolved to surprise her under the pretense of
a Visit. When Begum Saheb on a sudden seeing her Father unexpectedly coming
toward her, she had no time to hide her Lover but under a Bathing-tub, which
was not done so secretly, but that Schach Jehan discovered it, yet he neither
chastis'd her, nor seemed to take any notice thereof; but having sat a a
considerable time discoursing with her, he said, that to his thinking she was
not very well, and appeared to him much out of order, which must of necessity
proceed from too much Bathing her self, and in a seeming rage commanded the
Bathing-tub to be immediately set on fire, resolving in himself not to stir
from thence before the Youth and Tub were burnt to Ashes. Not long after she
procured a Persian called Nazerkan, het Father's Caneseman, or Steward of his
Court: He being a young Omrah, comely, and the most civil of all the Court, was
exceedingly beloved by all Persons, insomuch that Hestkon, Uncle to Oranchzef,
endeavored to Match him with the Princess; which was very ill resented by
Schach Jehan, who resolved, after the Secret had been disclosed to him, to kill
Nazerkan, by giving him poisoned Betel-leaves. This young Lord thinking on
nothing thing less than being poisoned, going out of the King's Presence very
merry, went into his Palakin, but died by the Way before he came home.

The Mogol's youngest Daughter Raichenara Begum, was never accounted so
beautiful nor ingenious as Begum Saheb, but delighted as much in
lasciviousness: She always sided with Oranchzef, and declared her self an Enemy
to her Sister and Darasja, which made her not to be so well beloved, nor had
she so much Interest to dispatch Businesses like her Sister; yet nevertheless
being in the Seraglio, and holding Correspondence with many Intelligencers, she
was not negligent in discovering many Secrets to Oranchzef.

Schach Jehan a little before these Troubles seeing himself charged with these
four Princes, all grown up and Married, and observing that each of them
pretended to the Crown, and carrying themselves as Enemies one to another,
sought privately to compass their Designs, was exceedingly perplexed, not
knowing what to do, and began to fear his own Person, as if he foresaw what
afterward befell him; to lock them up in Govaleor (which is a Fort where
Princes are generally secured, and invincible by reason of its situation on an
inaccessible Rock, and the abundance of fresh Water, and Provisions for the
Soldiers in Garrison) was no small Business, they being already very powerful,
and lived in the State and Splendour of Princes: Moreover, he could not in honor
send them away to any Place, without giving them Dominions according to their
Birth, and therefore timorous that they might rebel, and make themselves
absolute Princes in their respective Jurisdictions, as indeed afterward they
did; yet nevertheless, out of fear least they should destroy one another in his
Presence, which might chance to happen, if he kept them at his Court, he
resolved to send them away; The Sons sent to Govern several Provinces, only
the eldest stays at the Court.
and accordingly seat Sultan Chasousa to the Kingdom of Bengala; Oranchzef, to
Decan; Moradbeck, to Zurratte; and gave the Government of Cabul and Multan to
Darasja: The three first left the Court well satisfied with their new acquired
Dominions, where they made themselves supreme Governors, and kept the Revenues
of the Countries for the maintenance of strong Armies, under pretense to keep
their Subjects and Neighbors in quiet. But Darasja being the eldest, and Heir
to the Crown, dwelt not from the Court, which was the Design of Schach Jehan,
who always fed him up with a Promise that he should succeed him; and also
granted him to give Commissions, and had a small Throne underneath his amongst
the Omrahs, so that there seemingly were two Kings; but as two equal Powers can
scarce agree, so Schach Jehan, notwithstanding Darasja was very respective to
him, and showed him great Reverence, was still in fear of being poisoned by
him, and the more, because Darasja was jealous of Oranchzef, whom for his
excellent Parts his Father judged fitter to succeed him than any of his other
Sons.

Schach Jehan's Wife, being exceeding beautiful, was called Tage Mahalle, that
is, The Crown of the Female Sex.

But for the better explanation of this Story concerning the forementioned four
Princes, and the Mogol Schach Jehan, we must relate what happened a little before
these Troubles between Oranchzef, the King of Golconda, and his Vizier Emir
Jemla, because this will declare the Nature and Constitution of Oranchzef, who
afterward came to be the Mogol and King of India. Hereby also it will appear
after what manner Emir Jemla was employed to lay the first Foundation of
Oranchzef his Royalty.

At the time of Oranchzef's residing in Decan, the King of Golconda kept the
forementioned Emir Jemla as his Viceroy, and General of all his Forces. He
being a Persian born, and very famous in India, was of no high Extract, yet a
Man fit to undertake any Design, being a great Captain, and of a noble Spirit.
He had amassed together great Riches, not only by his careful management of
State Affairs, but by the Trade of those Ships which he sent to diverse Coasts,
as also by the Diamond Mines, which he alone Farmed under borrowed Names,
keeping always many Men at work in them, insomuch that that the whole Country
talked of him and his abundance of Diamonds, which were not reckoned but by
Bags full. He also rendered himself very famous and powerful, by keeping several
Troops of very choice Men besides the King's Army, at his own proper Charge;
and had also very good Artillery; which was managed and looked after by Franks
or Christians. In short, he was rich and potent, especially after he had found
out a means to get into the Kingdom of Carnate, and pillaged all the Heathen
Temples in that Country, that the King of Golconda beginning to grow jealous
of him, resolved to do him a great Discourtesie, and the rather, because he was
not able to bear what he heard of him, for it was reported as if he had been
too familiar with the Queen his Mother, who was very beautiful: Yet
nevertheless he made no Person privy to his Design, but waited with patience
till Emir Jemla should come to the Court, he being at that time with his Army
in Carnate. But not long after, when he was told of several other Passages that
had happened between his Mother and him, he was not able to contain his Passion,
but flew out into many threatening Invectives, which quickly came to Emir's
Ears, he having many of his Wives Relations at the Court, who informed him
thereof; and the King's Mother, who no ways hated him, was also informed
thereof, who obliged Emir with all speed to write to his Son Mahomet Emurcan,
he being then at the Court, giving him order upon sight of his Letter, under
pretense of going a Hunting, immediately to come away to him. Emurcan neglected
not to use many means; but because the King commanded him to be always near
him, and kept a continual Eye over him, he was not able to stir out of his
sight; which exceedingly troubling Emir made him take a strange Resolution,
which put the King in no small danger of losing both. Life and Crown, insomuch
that the Proverb was here verified, That he which knows not how to dissemble,
Emir Jemla's Plot against the King of Golconda.
knows not how to Govern. He therefore wrote to Oranchzef, who then was in
Daulet Abad, the Metropolis of Decan, and fifteen or sixteen days Journey from
Golconda, that the King of Golconda intended to ruin him and his Family,
notwithstanding the great Services which he had done him; wherefore he was
forced to fly to him, and beg that he would please to receive him under his
protection: Moreover, if he would take his advice, and repose confidence in
him, he would so contrive the Business, that he would at once deliver both the
King and Kingdom into his Hands; and to make the Business seem the easier, he
informed him to this effect:

You need not pick above four or five thousand Horse out of the Army, and march
speedily with them to Golconda, reporting along the Way that you are an
Ambassador, sent from Schach Jehan about extraordinary Business to Bagneguer.
The Dabir (who is the Person to whom all Agents that have any Business with the
King, make their first Addresses) is my real Friend and Creature; therefore
think of nothing but to make speed. I will so order that you shall come safe to
Bagnaguer's Gates, out of which when the King shall come, according to the
Custom, to receive his Letters, you may easily secure him and all his
Attendants, and do with him what you think fit, his House where he resides
having neither Walls not Moat about. I will be at the charge of this Expedition
my self, and allow you fifty thousand Ropias a day during the time of your
March.

The King of Golconda escapes narrowly from the hand of Oranchzef.
Oranchzef, who always watched for such an opportunity, would not let slip so
fair a one as this, but immediately set forward on his March, and came safe to
Bagnaguer, without being known or taken for any other than an Agent sent from
Schach Jehan. The King of Golconda informed of this pretended Ambassador, came
out as he was accustomed to receive him honorably in a Garden; when falling
into the hands of his Enemies, he was set upon by ten or twelve Gurgus or
Slaves, who had secured his Person, as was designed, had not an Omrah having
compassion on the King, cried, Does not your Majesty see that this is
Oranchzef? get away, otherwise you will be made Prisoner; which exceedingly
amazing the King, he stepped forward, and with full speed rode to the Fort of
Golconda, lying not above a Mile from thence; which when Oranchzef saw, he was
not much concerned thereat, because he well knew that Emir would not come with
his Army to the King's assistance, and therefore possessed himself of the Royal
Palace, and took away all things of any value which he found there; yet he sent
the King all his Women (which is a thing strictly observed throughout all
India,) and besieged him in his Castle; but because the Siege continued too
long for his Stores, of which he had brought but a few with him, and also
receiving Orders from Schach Jehan to repair to Decan, though the Castle was
just upon surrendering, he was forced to raise it. Notwithstanding he very well
knew, that Darasja and Begum had prevailed with his Father to give this Order,
for fear he should grow too powerful, yet he showed no sign of discontent, but
said that the Orders of Schach Jehan ought and should be obeyed; but he came
not back without being well paid for his Journey. He also Married his Son
Sultan Mahumed to the King's eldest Daughter, upon promise that he should make
him his Successor, giving him in the interim as Portion, the Castle and
Jurisdiction of Bamguire; and also obtained the King's consent, that all the
silver Money which should from that time be Coined in the Realm, should bear on
the one side Schach Jehan's Arms; and that Emir with all his Forces should
immediately withdraw.

The great Friendship between Oranchzef and Emir Jemla.
These two great Persons were not long together before they contrived high
Designs: for by the Way they besieged and conquered Bider, one of the chiefest
and strongest Places of Visjapour; from whence they went to Daulet Abed, where
they so tied the Knot of Friendship, that Oranchzef could not live without
seeing Emir twice a day, nor Emir without seeing Oranchzef.

This their Union began to give scope to new Plots, and was the indeed the
first Foundation of Oranchzef's Royal Dignity.

This Lord having been often sent for, went at last with great and rich
Presents to Agra, to proffer his Service to Jehan, and move him to proclaim
Wars against the Kings of Golconda and Visjapour, and also against the
Portuguese. The first Present which he made to his Father was a great Diamond,
the like whereof is not to be found, acquainting him, that the Stones of
Golconda differed very much from those that were found in the Rocks of
Candahar, which he had always supposed SCHAH ORANGZEF
to be the best, and that nothing else must be thought on, but to begin the War
on that side, and conquer all the Lands extending to Cape Comory. Schach Jehan,
whether blinded by the Diamonds which Emir had given him, or whether he thought
it time, as some believe, to keep an Army in the Field, to keep Darasja (in his
opinion grown too powerful) in awe, and the rather, because Darasja had
misused, nay, at last poisoned the Vizier Sadullacan, a Person exceedingly
beloved by Schach Jehan, and accounted the chiefest Peer of his Realm, because
he did not appear to be of his Party, but inclined to Sultan Chasausa, or
rather because he judged him so powerful, that perhaps he might either assume
or dispose of the Crown after Schach Jehan's Death, or else because he was
neither a Persian, nor extracted from Persian Blood, but an Indian. Moreover
some envious Persons reported, that he maintained several strong Parties of
well Armed Patanes, with a Design to make himself or his Son King, or at least
to defeat the Mogols, and place the Patanes (from whom he Married his Wife) on
the Throne. Emir sent with an Army against Decan
But however it was, Schach Jehan was resolved to send an Army to Decan, under
the Command of Emir. Darasja considering, that to send an Army to that side of
the Country, was to strengthen Oranchzef, opposed the same with his whole
endeavors, but could not prevail; so that when he saw Schach Jehan continue his
Resolution, he was forced to be content, yet with this Proviso, that Oranchzef
should stay in Daulet Abad as Governor of the Country only, without being at
all concerned with the Army; of which Emir being chief General, should leave
his whole Family at the Court; which Emir would not consent unto, till Schach
Jehan desiring him to give this satisfaction to Darasja, promised him, that in
a short time he would send him his Wife and Children; which satisfying him, he
immediately marched with a gallant Army to Decan, and from thence without any
delay to Visjapour, where he besieged a very strong Place called Caliane.

Schach Jehan falls desperately sick.
This conjuncture of Affairs happened in Hindostan, when Schach Jehan being near
seventy years of age, fell into a dangerous fit of Sickness, which immediately
raised an Alarm and Insurrection through all Hindostan, Darasja raising two
vast Armies in Dely and Agra, the two chief Cities of the Kingdom; Sultan
Chasausa did the same in Bengala; Oranchzef in Decan, and Moradbeck in
Zurratte, each getting those that were inclining to them to be of their Party,
every one plotting their several Designs. Darasja accidentally taking some of
their Letters, showed them to his Father, which bred much discontent. Begum
Saheb his Sister, also was not negligent, to make use of this opportunity to
incense the King against them. But Schach Jehan suspecting Darasja, and out of
fear that he might be poisoned, gave strict order to watch narrowly all things
that he should eat of. He wrote also, as it was reported, to Oranchzef
concerning it; which Darasja hearing, could not contain himself from venting
high and passionate Threats. Mean while Schach Jehan's Sickness increasing, and
a rumor of his Death spreading through the City, the whole Court was in great
disorder; the Citizens taking up Arms, kept their Shops shut up three days,
whilst the four Brothers made great Preparations every one for himself, and
not without reason; for they very well knew, that they could not expect any
mercy from one another, there being no other way but conquer or die; and that
whoever got the better would destroy all the rest, as formerly their Father had
done his Brothers.

The four Brothers take up Arms, each in his own defense.
Sultan Chasausa, who had gotten a vast accumulation of Treasure in the rich
Country of Bengala, by destroying some of the Ragias, or petty Kings, and
extorting great Sums of Money from others, came first into the Field with a
mighty Army, and proceeded on his Way by the help of the Persian Omrahs, of
whose Sect he was, to Agra, reporting all the way that his Father was dead, and
his Brother Darasja had poisoned him, and therefore he resolved to revenge his
Father's Death, and, in a word, pretended to be king. Mean while Darasja sent
Letters to him from his Father, with Orders not to come any nearer to Agra,
assuring him that his Sickness was insignificant, and that he found himself
much better than he had been. But Chausausa having Friends at the Court, who
assured him of the danger of his Father's Distemper, he took no notice of the
said Letters, but proceeded on his March, saying he very well knew that his
Father was dead, but if he did live, he was resolved to go and kiss his Feet
and receive his Commands.

Oranchzef about the same time, or immediately after, prepared to take the
Field, and march toward Decan, and from thence to Agra, when he also received
the same Inhibition, as well from his Father as his Brother Darasja, with
Threats more than usual; but he took as little notice thereof as Chasausa:
However, considering with himself that his Means and Treasure was low, and his
Forces not considerable, he politickly resolved to make a double trial of his
Fortune, in both which he succeeded beyond expectation; the one was designed to
Moradbeck, and the other to Emir Jemla. To Moradbeck he wrote a very cunning
Letter, Oranchzef's subtle Letter to Moradbeck.
wherein he testified, That he had always been his real and intimate Friend;
and that for his part, he was no ways ambitious of Sovereignty, having resolved
with himself to spend his whole Life like a Fakier; but withal affirming, That
Darasja was a Person altogether unqualifi'd for the Crown, as being a Caffer,
and an Idolater, and therefore hated of all the principal Omrahs; That Sultan
Chasausa was of the Persian Religion, and consequently an Enemy to Hindostan,
and therefore unworthy of the Crown; so that in a word, there was no body but
himself that deserved the same: for all Persons at the Court knowing his
Valor, would stand up for him; and as for his own part, if he would promise
him, that he would, when he came to be King, let him live in quiet in any
Corner of the Realm, there to worship God the remainder of his days, he was
ready to assist him with his Counsel and Friends, and also to commit his whole
Army unto his Command, to Fight against Darasja and Chasausa; in the interim he
sent him a hundred thousand Ropias, desiring him to accept the same as a Pledge
of his Friendship; and withal advised him to come immediately and secure the
Castle of Zuratte, where he knew all the chief Treasure of the Country lay.

Moradbeck, who was neither very rich nor powerful, with great joy accepted of
these Proffers made by his Brother Oranchzef, as also his Present, and showed
his Letter to all his Subjects, to induce the younger sort to take up Arms, and
the most eminent Merchants to furnish him with the greater Sums of Money, which
he earnestly desired of them, and also began to act the Part of a King, making
great Promises to all those that entered into his Service, by which means he got
a considederable Army in a short time, out of which he chose three thousand of
the best, which he sent under the Command of Chah Abas an Eunuch, yet a valiant
Man, to Besiege the Castle of Surat; whilst Oranchzef sent his eldest Son
Sultan Mahmoud, who had married the King of Golconda's Daughter, to Emir Jemla,
still employed about the Siege of Caliane, to persuade him to come to Daulet
Abed, under pretense that he had Business of grand consequence to impart to
him: But Emir doubting what it might be, excused himself, and said, That he was
certainly informed that Schach Jehan was not dead; and moreover, that since his
whole Family was at Agra, in Darasja 's Custody, he could in no wise assist
Oranchzef, nor declare himself to be for him. With which answer Sultan Mahmoud
much displeased, came back to Daulet Abad: But Oranchzef would not be thus
repulsed, but sent his second Son Sultan Mazum to Emir with Letters, who
managed his Business with so much complacency and sweetness, that it it was
impossible to deny him; and therefore Emir pressing on the Siege of Caliane,
forced the Besieged to surrender, and then Marched with the Prime of his Army,
accompanied by Sultan Mazum, to Oranchzef, who no sooner saw him, but received
him with the greatest signs of love and joy imaginable, calling him nothing but
Baba, and Babagy, that is, Father, and My Lord Father: And after having
embraced him diverse times, he stepping aside with him, said, That it would not
be just to desire him, having his Family at the Court, in Darasja' s Custody,
to undertake any thing for his favor; yet nevertheless, there was nothing so
difficult, but that some Expedient might be found out to bring it to pass. Let
me (continued he) propose a Design to you, which perhaps at first may seem
strange; but as you are in fear for your Wife and Children who are in Custody,
so it will be a means to secure their safety, if I, under a color, secure your
Person in Prison; which without doubt all the World will believe real: for who
can imagine that such a Person as you would permit your felf to be thrown into
a Gaol. Meanwhile I can make use of some of your Forces and Guns, as you shall
think fit: You may also lend me a Sum of Money, as you have often proffered me:
And then I think it will be fit to try Fortune, and that each of us play our
Parts, that so we may see and find out the best ways. If you will consent that
I carry you to the Castle of Daulet Abad, of which you shall be Master, and set
my Son Sultan Mazum, or Sultan Mahmoud, to Guard you there, the Design will
undoubtedly take the better. And I cannot imagine that Darasja can find out the
Intrigue thereof, nor with what pretense he can misuse your Wife or Children.

Emir suffers himself to be made Prisoner by Oranchzef.
Emir, whether by reason of the Friendship which he had sworn to Oranchzef, or
for the great Promises which were made him, or out of fear because he saw
Sultan Mazum with many well-arm'd Men near him, as also Sultan Mahmoud, who
looked frowningly upon him, because he came with his Brother, and not with him,
and therefore was seen, as he walked behind Emir, to lift up his Foot as if he
would have kicked him; I say, whichsoever of these, or whatever else was the
reason, Emir consented to all that Oranchzef had proposed, highly extolling his
Invention. Wherefore Oranchzef was no sooner gone, but the Master of the
Ordnance approaching, commanded Emir, in Oranchzef's Name, to follow him, and
suffer himself to be locked up in a Chamber, where he placed strong Guards upon
him, drawing thither all the Men which Oranchzef had about the House.

His Army appeased by Oranchzef.
This noise of Emir's being taken Prisoner was no sooner spread abroad, but
there began a great Mutiny. All those which Emir had brought with him, though
much amazed, resolving to release him, rode up with drawn Swords to the Guards,
to force open the Prison; which might easily have been done, Oranchzef not
having sufficient Forces at hand to resist so desperate an Undertaking. But as
this was nothing but a designed Plot, so these Insurrections were soon allayed,
by that which was publicly declared to the Chief Officers of Emir's Army, and
by the presence of Oranchzef, who with his two Sons first speaking to one, and
then to another, made them great Promises and Presents; insomuch that all
Emir's Troops, and most of those of Schach-Jehan, seeing themselves in this
confusion, and without a General, and also believing that Schach-Jehan was
dead, and the great Promises which were made them of raising their Pay, and
that they should have three Months Advance, thereby become altogether
improbable, immediately declared themselves for Oranchzef; who being thus
become Master of all Emir's Forces, Cammels, Tents, and Ammunition, went into
the Field, with a resolution to go to tho Siege of Surat, and hasten the taking
of it, (which his Brother had protracted) because his Chiefest Men were engaged
there, and found greater resistance than they expected: But Oranchzef having
Marched some days, heard that the Governor had surrendered the Place to
Moradbech; wherefore he immediately wrote Letters to his Brother, advising him
of all things that had passed between him and Emir Jemla, and also that he had
Forces, Money, and private Friends enough at the Court; and that since he
wanted nothing, he resolved to March directly toward Brampour and Agra, and
therefore that he should hasten to meet and join with him. But Morabech found
not so much Silver in the Fort of Surat as he expected, either because there
was not so much as was reported, or that the Governor had conveyed part of it
away, as most believed: Nevertheless, there was enough to pay his Soldiers,
which had entered into his Service in hopes to enrich themselves with the
Plunder of the forementioned Castle. Neither had he any great reason to boast
of the taking of this Place; for they lay before it above a Month: nor had they
then effected their design, had not the Hollanders assisted, teaching them to
spring a Mine, which overthrowing a piece of a Wall, drove the Besieged to the
utmost extremity: But this Conquest did not a little advantage his Design, the
fame thereof being spread all over the Country, That Moradbech had won Surat
by springing a Mine: Which sounded strange in the Indians Ears, who till that
time knew not the Invention. Yet notwithstanding all this Fame and good success
in the beginning, added to the continual Letters and great Promises from
Oranchzef, the Eunuch Chan Abas, a Man of great Understanding, Courage, and
really inclined to his Master's Interest, did not at all approve of Moradbech's
joining with Oranchzef, thinking it much better to keep him in suspense with
Words, and let him march to Agra, whilst they might receive certain News of
Schach Jehan's death; advising him also to Fortify Surat, which was a good
Place, and would make him Master of a great Tract of Land, and large Revenues,
and by degrees he might secure Brampour, which is a great Through-fare, and as
it were the Key to Decan. But the continual flattering Letters from Oranchzef,
added to the small Forces, Goods, and Moneys which he had, besides his Ambition
to Govern absolutely, made him, slighting all advice, march from Amadabad, and
desert Surat, and go through Woods and over Mountains, to be the sooner at the
Place of Randezvouze, where Oranchzef had staid expecting him two or three days.

Oranchzef and Moradbech join.
Great demonstrations of Joy were expressed, in high Feasting, at the meeting of
the two Armies: The Princes visiting one another, Oranchzef made thousands of
Promises to Moradbech, alleging anew, That he had no pretense at all to the
Crown, nor any other Design but to assist him against Darasja their common
Enemy, and settle him on the Throne. After this meeting, and confirming of
Friendship, the two Armies Marched together, Oranchzef still continuing his
Promises and Protestations of Kindness to his Brother, and treating him both in
Private and Public like a King; which persuaded Moradbech into a certain
belief, that Oranchzef was real in his intentions, and that his exceeding love
toward him, made him so submissive; and therefore willingly, and without
returning the like Ceremonies, he received the Services showed him by his
Brother, in stead of thinking on what had happened in Golconda, and considering,
that he who had with such great danger adventured to conquer a Kingdom, was not
inclined to live and die like a Fakier.

They march forward.
These two Armies thus united made a considerable Body, which made a great noise
at the Court, and gave cause of fear not only to Darasja, but to Schach Jehan
himself, who knew the Policy and Subtilness of Oranchzef, and the Valor of
Moradbech, and also foresaw, that a Fire once kindled was not so easily
quenched. Wherefore Schach Jean wrote diverse Letters in a courteous Style, to
this effect: That he was now better in health; That they should return each to
his Government; and that he pardoned and forgot all which had been hitherto
acted. But these Letters kept them not from coming forward. And as Schach
Jehan's Distemper was reported to be mortal, and they wanted no Intelligence;
so they always said (and perhaps believed the same) that the Letters were writ
by Darasja, that Schach Jehan was either dead or lay a dying, and that they
were resolved if he lived to kiss his Feet, and deliver him out of the Hands of
Darasja.

The Mogol raises Forces, though unwillingly.
The unfortunate Mogol, observing that his Sons regarded not his Commands, and
hearing that they hastened in the Head of their Army toward Agra, whilst he lay
sick in the custody of Darasja (a Man who designed nothing but War, and the
destruction of his Brothers) was necessitated in this extremity to leave his
Treasures at his disposal; and sending for his eldest and trustiest Officers,
whom he knew had no very great kindness for Darasja, commanded them to fight
for Darasja against the rest of his Blood, against his Children, and against
those whom they most respected: In order whereunto, he immediately sent an Army
to meet Sultan Chasausa, who was come nearest to Agra; and made ready another
to send against Oranchzef and Moradbech, who also approached the Metropolis.

Soliman Chekouh, Darasjas Son, made General against Chasausa.
Soliman Chekouh, eldest Son to Darasja, a Prince about twenty five Years old,
of a well-shap'd Body, good Conduct, Courteous, and beloved by most Persons,
especially Schach Jehan, who had already enriched him, and designed to make him
his Successor rather than Darasja, was made General of this Army against
Chasausa. Schach Jehan nevertheless, who rather desired to see Chasausa return
to Bengala, than to engage in a bloody Fight, which must undoubtedly prove very
hurtful, besides the danger of losing one of his Sons, sent an ancient Raja
called Jesseingue (one of the richest and most powerful of all Indostan, and
the ablest in his whole Realm) to accompany this young General, with private
Orders not to engage in a Battle unless forced thereto, but endeavor by all
means possible to persuade Chasausa to return and save his Forces till there
was more need to use them, viz. when Schach Jehan should be dead, and he see
Oranchzef and Moradbech approach the Court. But as this young Prince Soliman
Chekouh, full of Courage, thought on nothing, but how by some Heroic Exploit
he might make himself Famous; and Sultan Chasausa feared that Oranchzef by the
winning of a Field-Battel would first make himself Master of the Treasures and
Cities of Agra and Deli: So it was impossible for Raja Jesseingue to prevent
their engaging one with another: For the two Armies were no sooner in sight,
but they prepared to fight, He fights Chasausa's Army, and gets the Victory.
and staid not long before they saluted each other with a Volley of small Shot.
The first Onset was very fierce on both parts; but at last Soliman Chekouh
with great force and eagerness broke the Ranks of Chasausa, and forcing him to
retreat, soon after put his whole Army to flight; insomuch that if Jesseingue
and Patan Delickan (one of the Chiefest Commanders and valiantest Men, but a
private Friend to Raja, without whose advice he did nothing) had faithfully
assisted him, Chasausa's whole Army had been destroyed, and he himself in
danger of being made a Prisoner. But Raja (besides that he was commanded to the
contrary) was too subtle to lay Hands on a Prince of the Blood, and Son to the
King; so that he gave Chasausa time to retreat without losing of many People.
But because Soliman Chekouh was Master of the Feld, and had gotten some Guns,
the Report immediately went at Court, that Chasausa was utterly destroyed. This
Victory made Soliman Chekouh very famous, and lessening the esteem which the
People formerly had of Chasausa, made all the Hearts of the Persians which were
formerly inclining to him grow very cold.

The young Prince having spent some days in pursuing Chasausa, and having daily
Information from Court, understood that Oranchzef and Moradbech approached with
a great Army; and knowing also that Darasja his Father had many private
Enemies, he resolved to give over his Pursuit, and return speedily to Agra,
where Darasja might perhaps give Battle to Oranchzef and Moradbech. This was
the best course which he could have taken; for doubtless it he had come thither
time enough, Oranchzef could not have had any advantage of his Enterprise: nay,
some are of opinion, that he durst not have given Battle, by reason of his
small Party; but Darasja's bad fate would not suffer it.

Whilst all things were thus carried on the side toward Elabas (which is a
Place where the River Gemna unites with the Ganges) there was quite another
Scene acted toward the side of Agra. At the Court they feared that Oranchzef
might cross the River of Brampour, and have passed the troublesome Way between
the Mountains, and therefore sent several Troops to prevent his passing over
the Stream Eugenes, whilst the whole Army was made ready, and two of the
chiefest Nobles of the Realm were chosen to Command the same; one of them
called Casemcan, a famous Captain, and a great lover of Schach Jehan; but
having no kindness for Darasja, he went thither against his will; yet was
persuaded to undertake that Office by Schach Jehan. The other, named
Jesseingue, was a mighty Raja, and Son-in-law to that Raja Rana, who in the
time of Ecbar was as if he had been Emperor of the Rajas. Darasja before their
departure made great Presents to both, and protestation of Friendship, whilst
Schach Jehan found out a means to tell them in private, the same which he told
Jesseingue, before he went with Soliman to meet Chasausa. Moreover, they
neglected not during their March, to send time after time to Oranchzef and
Moradbeck, to persuade them to return to their own Countries, but all in vain,
neither did their Agents come back; whilst the Army marched with that speed,
that from the top of a Hill, lying not far from the River, it was seen sooner
than they expected; and by reason of the great Heat, it being in the midst of
Summer, the River was fordable, which made Casemcan and the Raja to prepare
themselves for Battle at the same instant, before they knew Oranchzef's
Intentions; for he endeavored to oppose them, although his Army was not all
come up, for he saluted them with a Volley of Shot, thereby designing only to
deter them; for he feared that they would come over the River, and not only
prevent his passing over, but also hinder him from choosing a convenient place
to Encamp his Army in, which was in great disorder, and so wearied with Travel
and Heat, that undoubtedly they might easily have been destroyed, if they had
been immediately set upon; but they were satisfied according to the Order they
had received to Guard the opposite Shore, and prevent Oranchzef from coming
over. After Oranchzef had rested his Army two or three days, and by retarding
the Enemy, had so ordered his Business, that he could get over the Stream, he
commanded his Guns which were planted along the Bank of the River, to Discharge
on the Enemy whilst his Men crossed the Water. Whereupon Casemcan and the Raja
also Discharging their Guns, and standing in a posture to oppose their Landing,
began a fierce Battle, especially where Jesseingue Commanded; but for Casemcan,
though he was always accounted a valiant Man, yet he gave no great proofs of
his Valor in this Fight; nay, some accused him of Treachery, and affirmed,
that he buried the Powder and Shot in the Night under the Ground. But however
it was, the Fight slackned not, for whilst one Party endeavored to get over the
Water, the other as much strived to oppose them: The middle of the River being
full of Rocks, proved very troublesome to Oranchzef's Party; who also found the
Banks very high and craggy in many places. At last Moradbeck cast himself into
the Water with such fierce eagerness, that the Enemy not able to oppose him, he
got over a good part of his Army, which made Casemcan retreat, and put
Jesseingue in great danger of losing his Life; for the Enemy falling so thick
upon him, and having slain most of his Ragipous that were about him, had also
undoubtedly slain him, if he had not fled speedily from thence, and left all
his Bag and Baggage to the Enemy; nor durst he go to Agra, by reason he had
lost so many of his Soldiers; for of seven or eight thousand he had not above
five or six hundred left.

The courage and passion of Jesseingue's Wife.
Great anger did Rama's Daughter express against her Husband Jesseingue, in
reference to his Flight and Defeat: for when her Servants heard that their Lord
was hard by, and had informed her what had happened in the Fight, viz. that
Jesseingue had fought with extraordinary valor, losing all his Men except four
or five hundred, and at last, not able to resist the Enemy any longer, was
forced to fly, she commanded, in stead of sending to receive him and condole
his Misfortunes, to lock up the Gates of the Castle, strictly charging not to
let in so base a Blot to her Family: adding, that he was none of her Husband,
and that she would never see him: The Son-in-law of the noble Rama could never
have so mean a Soul; that he must think, since he was entered into so noble a
Family, he ought to follow their Virtues, and, to speak in one word, either to
have conquered or died. The next moment she was in a greater Passion than
before, commanding a Pyle of Wood to be laid for her, that she might burn her
self; when to pacify her, they endeavored to persuade her that her Husband was
slain, and that it could not possibly be otherwise; then on a sudden her
Countenance changing, and her Gall rising, she broke out into thousands of
Exclamations against him. In this frantic humor she continued nine days,
before she would consent to see him; but at last her Mother comforting her,
promised, that as soon as the Raja was refreshed, he would raise an Army
against Oranchzef, and regain his lost Honor though at never so dear rate.

A violent Humor of Darasja.
Mean while Darasja informed of all that had happened at Eugenes, was so
exceedingly incensed against Casemcan, that he would certainly have cut off his
Head, had he been there present, and inveighed bitterly against Emir Jemla, as
being the first and chief occasion of all this Mischief, having furnished
Oranchzef both with Men, Money, and Artillery; therefore he resolved to Execute
his Son Mahomet Emircan, and to expose his Wife to public Sale on the Bazar
amongst the common Strumpets; and undoubtedly he had performed it, had not
Schach Jehan mildly persuaded him, that Emir Jemla could not be so weak, nor so
familiar with Oranchzef, that for his Favor he would offer up his Family; that
undoubtedly Oranchzef had trapann'd, and by his subtilty deceived him.

Oranchzef^s policy.
Mean while Oranchzef and Moradbeck were exceedingly encouraged by their first
good success in the forementioned Battle; and Oranchzef, to animate his
Soldiers the more, boasted that in Darasja's Army there were thirty thousand
Mogollans, who were at his command. Moradbeck desired nothing more than to come
to a second Battle, and therefore hastened his March; which Oranchzef delayed,
persuading him that it was convenient for the Army to refresh themselves a
while on the Banks of that pleasant River, whilst he wrote to his Friends, and
received Advice concerning Affairs at the Court, and a true Information of all
Businesses.

In the interim Schach Jehan clearly perceiving the Design of Oranchzef and
Moradbeck, and that he had no hopes of persuading them to return, he knew not
in that Exigent what to do; fain he would have prevented this Battle, on which
all depended, and to which Darasja made all imaginable Preparations; but what
could he do to oppose it? he was still very weak, and in the custody of
Darasja, in whom, as is said before, he reposed no great confidence; wherefore
he was forced to leave the management of all things to his discretion, and
surrendered to him the chief Forts and Castles in his Dominions, and likewise
commanded all his Officers to obey him. Whereupon all Persons were immediately
put into Arms, so that an Army was formed, as it was reported, of a hundred
thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Foot, and a vast Train of Artillery: Yet
notwithstanding this was the most complete and biggest Army that ever was seen
in Hindostan, and sufficient to defeat three or four such as that of Oranchzef
(who had not above thirty five or forty thousand Men in all, and those tired
and spent by their long and troublesome March, by reason of the excessive Heats)
a thing almost incredible, there was scarce one Person, but ominously presaged
Darasja's ruin, especially because none of the Omrahs had any respect or
kindness for him, and all the prime Soldiers on whom his dependence lay, were
in Soliman Chekou's Army. To venture a Battle, all his Friends, as well as
Schach Jehan, dissuaded him from. His Father also proffered himself in the
height of his Sickness, to be carried into the Field before Oranchzef, which
undoubtedly would have been a great introducement to Peace, and also very
beneficial to Schach Jehan: for certainly Oranchzef and Moradbeck would never
have dared to fight against their own Father; and though they had bin powerful
enough to have attempted, they would certainly have suffered for it, not only
because their Forces were not equal, and all the great Omrahs were so fixed for
Schach Jehan, that they would not have failed, seeing him in the Head of the
Army, to have fought very resolutely, but also because that Oranchzef and
Moradbeck's Commanders had so great an affection for this Prince, whose
Creatures most of them were, that they would have turned their Swords against
them their Generals, and persuaded the whole Army to Declare themselves for
their old Prince. Then they persuaded Darasja, since he would not hearken to
any Advice, not to march with his Army into the Field, but to stay till Soliman
Chekou came to join with him, which would be very suddenly, he being already on
his March to Agra; which also was good Counsel, because he was a Person beloved
by all, having returned victoriously, and the most loyal and brave Soldiers
being still in his Army. But Darasja would not regard any Propositions that
were offered to him, how reasonable and advantageous soever, thinking on
nothing but giving speedy Battle to Oranchzef, whom he resolved to Encounter in
Person; and certainly he did not amiss herein, in respect to his own Honor and
particular Interest, if Fortune had befriended him; but things fell not out as
he had contrived them, and very probably for these reasons:

He looked upon himself as Master of Schach Jehan, whom he knew he could sway
as he pleased: He was at that time Owner of all his Treasures and strong Holds:
Chasausa was half defeated, and his two other Brothers came with a faint and
tired Army to throw themselves into his Hands, which they could not miss if he
won the Battle: That then he should at once be absolute Master, at the end of
all his Troubles, and attain to the height of his Wishes without any ones
contradiction; when as on the contrary, if his Father should go into the Field,
all Affairs would be accommodated, and his Brothers return to their Dominions:
Moreover, that if he should stay for Soliman Chekou his Son, Schach Jehan might
plot some Design to his Disadvantage, or contrive something with Oranchzef; and
that whatever he should do to gain the Victory, the Reputation his Son had
already gotten, would give him all the Honor thereof: What would not he be
capable to undertake, swollen with so much Glory and Success, and especially
being supported as he was by the Favor and Affection of Schach Jehan, and the
greatest part of the Omrahs? What did he know whether he would keep any Respect
or Duty for his Father, and what his Ambition might prompt him to?

These Considerations made Darasja conclude to refuse all Persons Advice, and
act according to his own Humor, and thereupon immediately commanded his whole
Army to march into the Field, and went himself to take his leave of his Father,
then in the Castle of Agra, who shed a multitude of Tears, embracing him, and
thus bespeaking him; Well, Darasja, you are resolved to follow your own Will,
go, and God bless you; but remember these few words; if you lose the Battle,
take heed of ever coming into my Presence. But all this making no great
impression on him, he went away boldly, and taking Horse, rode with his Army to
block up the Passage through the River Schembel, about twelve Leagues from
Agra; where Intrenching himself, he resolutely expected his Enemy. But
Oranchzef (who being more subtle and crafty, wanted not good Spies, that
informed him of all Transactions) knowing it there to be very difficult, never
attempted to force it, but coming to Encamp himself on the other side, opposite
to Darasja's Army, was seen by them, whilst he sent to a rebellious Raja, named
Chempet, several rich Presents, and made him many Promises, if he would permit
him to march through his Country, that so he might find a place where the
River was more fordable. Chempet not only consented, but proffered to be his
Guide, to lead him cross his Country through the Woods and Mountains.
Whereupon Oranchzef raising his Camp privately in the Night, left only some
Tents standing, thereby to amuse Darasja, and marching night and day, got over
the River before he had any notice thereof; but as soon as ever he received the
news, he left his Station, and hasted to Engage his Enemy, who was said to
march with great speed toward Agra, to gain the River Gemna, and there without
trouble, and at his pleasure to use the Water, and fortifying himself, expect
Darasja's coming. This Place, formerly called Samongues, and now Fatabad, that
is, The Place of Victory, is not above three Leagues from Agra. Not long after
Darasja appearing on the Shore of the said River, Encamped with his Army
between Agra and Oranchzef, whilst Schach Jehan wrote several Letters to
Darasja, acquainting him that Soliman Chekou was not far off, and therefore it
would be prudence in him not to begin the Battle, but to draw nearer to Agra,
and choose a good place where he might fortify himself, and expect his Son's
coming. But Darasja returned him in answer, That before three days passed, he
would bring Oranchzef and Moradbeck bound Hand and Foot before him, to punish
them as he should think fit; and without any farther delay, at the same hour
drew out his Army, planted all his Guns before, and fastened them together with
Iron Chains, to prevent the Enemy's Horse from breaking in upon him; behind
these Guns he also placed many Camels, each with a Musket made fast on their
Breast, which a Man might Charge or Discharge without setting a Foot on the
Ground; behind these Camels were drawn up the greatest part of the Musketeers,
and behind them the rest of the Army, which chiefly consisted in Horse Armed
with Sword, Bows, and, a Quiver full of Arrows, as commonly the Mogols (by
which Name are understood the white People, as Mahumetans, Persians, Turks,
Arabians and Usbeques) or with a Sword and a Half-pike, like those which the
Ragipous carry. The Wings how ordered, and their strength.
Of all these forementioned sorts of Men he made three Bodies; the right Wing
whereof, being Commanded by Cali-lullahkan, consisted in thirty thousand
Mogols; the left was Commanded by Rustam-kan Dakny, a very eminent and valiant
Commander, besides Raja Chatresale and Raja Ramseingue Routle. Mean while
Oranchzef and Moradbeck on the opposite side, drew out their Army almost after
the same manner, only they privately placed in the midst of the Troops of some
Omrahs, several Fieldpieces (an Invention of Emir Jemla) with no ill effect;
they also placed here and there several Men to throw Bannes, which being a sort
of Grenades fastened to a Stick, are cast amongst the Horse, which often
frighting them, puts them into disorder, and many times do great mischief.

The Horse very expert.
All their Horse fall back and draw up with exceeding swiftness, and Discharge
six several Flights of Arrows sooner than the Muskets two Volleys: They also
keep close together in a Body under their respective Officers, especially when
they come up to Fight Hand to Hand with their Swords.

The Battle.
Being thus drawn out, the Guns began to play from both sides, (for they always
Discharge their Cannons first,) and Arrows were now seen to fly through the
Air, when on a sudden there fell a mighty Shower of Rain, that interrupted the
Combat, which began again as soon as it ceased: Darasja mounted on a stately
Elephant, commanded his Men to fall on on all sides, whilst he advanced in the
midst of a Body of Horse directly toward his Enemies Artillery, which received
him so valiantly, that abundance of Men were killed round about him; and not
only that Body which he Commanded put into disorder, but also the other Horse
that followed him; nevertheless he being seen to sit firm on his Elephant,
without offering to retreat, and courageously looking about, and making signs
with his Hands, to advance and follow him: This disorder soon ceased, and every
Man resuming his Rank, marched on with him; but he could not reach his Enemy
before he was saluted with another Volley of Cannon-shot, which caused a second
and great Disorder amongst his Men, making many of them Retreat; yet Darasja
without changing his Countenance, sat fast on his Elephant, and encouraged his
Men, giving them still signs to follow him, and to advance with all possible
speed, without any loss of time: Thus vigorously pressing forward, he forced
the Enemies Artillery, broke their Chains, entered into their Camp, and hewing
down the Camels and Infantry which stood in his way on that side, he opened a
good Passage for the Cavalry that followed him; when the Enemy's Horse facing
him, they began a fierce Combat: A shower of Arrows filled the Air from both
sides, Darasja himself letting fly several amongst them. But these Arrows do
but little Execution, most of them being broken either in the Air, or fallen on
the Ground without doing any hurt. The first flight of Arrows being made, they
fell upon one annother with their Swords, whilst Darasja sitting still on his
Elephant, encouraged his Soldiers, called and made signs to them, and at last
advanced with so much resolution and force against all that opposed him, that
he overthrew the Cavalry, and forced them to retreat and fly. Oranchzef, who
also sat on an Elephant, seeing this disorder, was exceedingly perplexed, yet
labored with all his might to defend them, though to little purpose; wherefore
he drew up the Body wherein his choicest Men were, to make a Head against
Darasja, who likewise forced them to retreat in great disorder, notwithstanding
all that Oranchzef could do to hinder it; yet nevertheless he lost neither his
Valor nor Courage, though he saw the whole Army in a confused and flying
posture, insomuch that he had not above a thousand, some say but five hundred,
that stood to defend him; he also saw that Darasja, notwithstanding the
difficulty of the Way, which was uneven and full of Holes in many places, made
as if he would rush in upon him; yet still his Courage abated not, but he kept
his Station, without the least apprehension of fear, or thought of retreating;
and calling every one of his Commanders that were about him by their several
Names, cried out Delirane Codahi, that is, Take courage, my old Friends, God
is; what hope is there in flying? know you not where our Decan is? Codahi,
Codahi, God is, God is; and that none might doubt his Valor, but see how far
his Heart was from recoiling, he instantly commanded in the presence of them
all, that Chains should be put on his Elephants Feet; which had certainly been
done, but that all those that were near him, declared their courage and
resolution to live and die with him. Mean while Darasja endeavored to break in
upon him, though he was a good distance from him, but the difficulty of the Way
much hindered him, and also the opposition he met with from the disordered
Horse, which covered all places he was to pass. This Encounter with Oranchzef
he looked upon as that which was to assure him of the Victory and decide the
Battle; and doubtless he would have overcome all the soremention'd
Difficulties, and Oranchzef with the small number which he had left, would not
have been able to resist his, till then, victorious Army; but Darasja not
knowing how to make use of his advantage, failed in the whole, of which I will
now show you the occasion, and how thereby the Scale turned to Oranchzef's
advantage.

Darasja perceiving that his left Wing was in great disorder, was informed,
that Custam-kan and Chatresale were both killed; that Ramseingue Routle having
advanced very far, had forced the Enemy, and made way through the midst of
them, but was now encompassed by them, and in great danger; all which made
Darasja desist from his Design, of making directly toward Oranchzef, and turn
to assist his left Wing, where the Fight in the beginning was very smart; but
Darasja at last got the Victory, forcing and routing all that opposed him, yet
not so, but that there still remained some to resist and stop him. Mean while
Ramseingue Routle fought with great courage and valor, wounded Moradbeck, and
came up so near to him, that he began to cut the Girts of his Elephant, so to
throw him down to the Ground; but the valor and good fortune of Moradbeck
allowed him not time enough for it: Moradbeck's valor.
for never any Man fought and defended himself more bravely than Moradbeck did
on this occasion, who though he had received several Wounds, and was pressed by
the Ragipous and Ramseingue Routle, who were routed about him, yet he was not
in the least daunted, nor retreated one step, but knew so well how to watch his
opportunity, that although besides defending himself he was forced to cover his
young Son, not above seven or eight years old, who sat by his side with his
Shield, he let fly an Arrow so luckily at Ramseingue Routle, that it struck
him dead to the Ground. Darasja soon hearing the sad news of this Disaster, was
much troubled thereat, but was somewhat comforted when he received information
that Moradbeck was in very great danger, the Ragipous fighting furiously like
Lions, to revenge their Master's Death; and though he saw that the Way on that
side was very difficult, and still found some small Bodies opposing, yet he was
resolved to rush through to rout Moradbeck; and doubtless this was the best
course he could take to repair the Neglect he was guilty of, in not doing his
Business effectually with Oranchzef; but his bad fortune kept him from it, A
notable piece of Treachery, and the effect thereof.
or one of the most subtle pieces of Treachery that ever was imagined, which
occasioned the utter loss and ruin of Darasja: for Callalullacan, who
Commanded the thirty thousand Mogols in the left Wing, which was alone able to
have routed Oranchzef's Army, stood still (whilst Darasja and his lest Wing
fought with so much courage and success) with his Arms across, as if he were
unconcerned in the Fray, and suffered not one of his Men to let fly an Arrow,
under pretense that they were designed for a Reserve, and that he had express
order not to fight but in the last Extremity: But the true cause was an old
Affront put upon him by Darasja, when he commanded him to be struck, which
still lay corroding in his Breast. But after all, this Treachery would have
done no great mischief, if this infamous Man had contented himself with this
first effect of his old Grudge, but see how far he carried his Rage and
Revenge: for he deserted his main Body, and taking only a few Men with him,
rode with all possible speed to Darasja, at the same time when he was forcing
his way up to Moradbeck, and called to him with a loud voice, saying,
Mohbareck-bad, Hazaret, Salamet, Elhamd-ulellah; Much joy to you; I rejoice to
see your Majesty in health, you have obtained the Victory; what will you do any
longer upon your Elephant? is it not enough that you have exposed your self so
long to danger? if the least of those Shots that have been made into your Dais,
had reached your Person, what would have become of us? are there Traitors
wanting in this Army? in the Name of God come down quickly, and take Horse;
what remains more to be done then, but to pursue these Run-aways? let us not
suffer them to escape our hands. If Darasja had at this instant been but so
quick of apprehension to have discovered this Cheat, and likewise to have
considered the pernicious consequence of his not appearing still upon his
Elephant in the view of his whole Army, which eyed him continually, and withal
to have caused the Head of this parasitical Traitor immediately to have been
cut off, he had undoubtedly been Master of all; but the good Prince suffering
himself to be deluded by the fair words of this treacherous Villain, hearkened
to his Advice, as if it had been sincere, and free from base Dissimulation, and
descending from his Elephant, mounted himself upon a Horse, when scarce a
quarter of an hour being past, he perceived the Treachery, and too late
repented his too easy credulity, and looking round about him, asked what was
become of Calullakan, calling him Traitor, and vowing his Death; but the
perfidious Villain being fled, it was too late to threaten him: In the mean
time the Army not perceiving Darasja on his Elephant, presently imagined
Treachery, and that he was slain, and were all struck with such a pannick fear,
that they thought on nothing but how to escape the fury of Oranchzef and save
themselves; in short, all things were in a confusion, the Army disbanded and
fled; a strange and sudden alteration! he that saw himself but just now
victorious, finds himself in few moments vanquished, abandoned, and forced to
fly for the safeguard of his Life, whilst Oranchzef by sitting but a quarter
of an hour longer upon his Elephant, had the Crown of Hindostan on his Head,
and Darasja, for coming down but little more than a minute too soon, saw
himself precipitated from the Throne, and become the most unfortunate Prince in
the World.

Thus Fortune seemed to recreate her self, to make the gain or loss of a
Battle, and the obtaining of a great Empire to depend as it were on a mere
Nothing.

These great Armies of the Indians, its certain, do often great things; but
when once terror seizes, and disorder comes amongst them, there is no
stopping of them, but they are like a great River, which breaking through its
Banks, overflows all the adjacent Countries.

Oranchzef's Behavior after the Battle.
Oranchzef encouraged by such wonderful success, was not idle in employing his
skill, subtilty, and courage, to promote his interest by all the advantages
which so favorable an occasion had put into his hand. Calullacan coming to him,
proffered him his Service, and all those whom he had kept of his Troops; for
which he made him many Promises, yet was cautious in receiving them in his own
Name, but carrying him to Moradbeck, he was received by him with stretch'd-out
Arms.

Oranchzef congratulating Moradbeck, extolled his valor, giving also the honor
of the Victory wholly to him, and gave him the Respect of a King in the
presence of Calullacan, showing himself as submissive as a Subject ought to be
to his Prince; yet in the interim was not negligent of his own Interest and
Concern, but wrote to all the Omrahs, making sure every day one or other of
them; whilst Chah-kestcan his Uncle, a great Enemy to Darasja, by reason of an
Affront which he had received from him, did the same for him on his part,
setting all People, and raising Parties against him.

In the mean time Oranchzef practiced his subtilty; for whatsoever he acted,
treated of, and promised, was not (as he pretended, professing that he designed
himself to live a Fakier) upon his own account, but for Moradbeck, by whose
Command he did all things, he being the Person designed to be King.

Darasja's sad Case.
Mean while the unfortunate Darasja went in despair to Agra, where he durst not
visit his Father, remembering the words which he spoke to him at his departure,
viz. That he should never think to see him if he lost the Battle. Yet Schach
Jehan sent secretly a trusty Eunuch to comfort him, and assure him of his
affections, and also to declare to him his trouble for his misfortune, and to
demonstrate to him, that the case was not yet desperate, considering that there
was a good Army with Soliman Chekouh his Son, and that he should go to Deli,
where he would find a thousand Horse in the Royal Stables, and that the
Governor of the Fortress had order to furnish him with Money and Elephants:
Moreover, That he should be as little absent as he could, and write often to
his Father: And lastly, That he should find out a way to chastise and punish
Oranchzef. It is said, that when the Eunuch brought this News from his Father,
Darasja was in such a sollitary and despairing humor, that he did not give the
Eunuch one word in answer, nor send any Messenger to his Father; but after
having sent several times to his Sister Begum Saheb, he went privately at
midnight, with his Wife, Daughter, and youngest Son, Sepechekouh, to Deli, in
the company of not above two or three hundred Persons. Thus leaving him a while
on his Journey to Deli, we will stay a little at Agra, to consider the
dexterity and craft wherewith Oranchzef proceeded to manage Affairs.

How Oranchzef managed his Affairs after the Battle.
He well knew that Darasja and those of his Party had yet some hopes in the
Victorious Army of Soliman Chekouh; and therefore he endeavored to bereave him
thereof, or at least to make the same useless to him. To this end he wrote
diverse Letters to the Raja Jesseingue, and to Delilcan, the Prime Commanders of
Soliman Chekouh's Army, telling them, That there was no more hopes to be built
on Darasja and his Party; That he had lost the Battle, his whole Army having
abandoned him, and submitted themselves to him; and that he being fled alone to
Deli, could not possibly escape his Hands, he having laid wait in all Places to
seize on him. As to what concerned Schach Jehan, he told them, That he was in a
desperate condition, and beyond any hopes of recovery; That they should take
great care what they did, and if they were People of understanding, and
desirous to share in his Fortune, and to be his Friends, they should seize on
Soliman Chekouh, and bring him to him.

Jesseingue found himself sufficiently perplexed in what he had to do,
exceedingly fearing Schach Jehan, and more to lay Hands on a Royal Person, well
knowing, that at one time or other some mischief might befall him even from
Oranchzef himself. Besides, he knew that Soliman Chekouh had too much Courage
to suffer himself to be taken after that manner, and that he would rather die
in defending himself. Wherefore having consulted with Delilcan his great
Friend, and after they had renewed their Oaths of Mutual Fidelity, he went
directly to the Tent of Soliman Chekouh, who with great impatience expected
him, (he having also heard the News of his Father's being defeated) and had
already sent for him several times: He then made the Prince a free discovery of
all things, showed him the Letter of Oranchzef, told him what course was best
for him to take, represented to him the danger he was in, adding, That there
was no reason he should repose any confidence in Delilcan, or in Daoudcan, or
any of the rest of his Army; but that as soon as was possible he should fly to
the Mountains of Serenaguer, which would be the best Expedient he could take:
for the Raja of that Country being in unaccessible Places, and not knowing
Oranchzef, would undoubtedly receive him with much freedom; and from thence he
might from time to time see how things would go, and always be ready to return
again when he pleased. But the young Prince immediately apprehended by this
Discourse, that henceforth there was no great confidence to be put in
Jesseingue, and that there was no safety there for his Person, because he knew
Delilcan to be of his Party; so that he saw there was a necessity of making use
of Jesseingue's Counsel: Whereupon commanding his Baggage to be packed up, he
immediately marched toward the Mountains. Some of his most affectionate
Friends, as a good number of Mansebdars, Saieds, and others, went along to
attend him; whilst the rest of the Army, altogether astonished, remained with
Jesseingue. But that which was very mean, and a base and sordid act of such
eminent Persons, was, that Jesseingue and Delilcan sent a Party after him, to
rob him of his Baggage, and also, among other things, an Elephant laden with
golden Ropias, which caused great disorder amongst those small Troops that
followed him, occasioning many to desert him, and return to the Army; and, to
complete his misfortune, the Country People also set upon his Men, pillaging
and destroying several of them. Yet nevertheless he got to the Mountains with
his Wife and Children, where the Raja of Serenaguer received him with all the
Honor and Civility he could desire, assuring him also, that he was as much in
safety as the King of that Country, and that he would protect and assist him
with all his Forces. Mean while Affairs were carried after the following manner
at Agra.

Oranchzef comes to Agra.
Three or four days after the Battle at Samonguer, Oranchzef and Moradbeck came
directly to the Gates of the City Agra, into a Garden about two Miles from the
Castle, whither Oranchzef sent a trusty Eunuch with Salutations to his Father,
and a thousand Protestations of his Affection and Submission, and that he was
exceeding sorry for what had passed, and for having been forced, by reason of
the Ambition and evil Designs of Darasja, to proceed to all these extremities;
moreover, that he rejoiced extremely to hear that he began to find himself
better, and that he was come thither for no other end than to receive his
Commands.

Schach Jehan was not wanting to express much satisfaction to the Eunuch as to
the Proceedings of Oranchzef, and received the Submissions of his Son with all
possible appearances of Joy, though he very well saw that matters had been
carried too far, and sufficiently knew the reserved and crafty humor of
Oranchzef, and his passion for the Crown, and that he was not to be trusted for
all his Words: Schach Jehan circumvented
yet nevertheless he suffered himself to be circumvented; and in stead of
playing the surest Card, by using his utmost Power, by stirring, by appearing,
by causing himself to be carried through the Town, and by assembling all his
Omrahs (for it was yet time to have done all this) he went to out-wit
Oranchzef, one that was his Crafts-master, and attempts to draw him into a
Snare, in which he will be found taken himself. He then sent an Eunuch to him,
to let him know, That he well understood the ill Conduct and incapacity of
Darasja; That he could not but call to mind the particular inclination he
always had and expressed toward him; That he could not doubt the continuance
of his Affection; and lastly, That he should come to see him, and advise with
him what was best to be done in these disorders.

The Counter-policy of Oranchzef.
Oranchzef on his part also saw, that he was not to trust too much in his
Fathers words, well knowing, that Begum Saheb, his Enemy as well as his Sister,
was night and day about him, and that it was very probable he acted nothing
without her advice: He apprehended likewise, that if he should come unto the
Fortress, he might be seized on, and ill treated; it being indeed, according to
report, so resolved on, and that several of the Tartarian Women which serve in
the Seraglio were armed to set upon him so soon as he should enter into the
Castle; yet however it was, Oranchzef would not hazard himself, though he
caused it to be rumor'd abroad, that the next day he intended to visit his
Father; but when the time was come, he sent away the People which came to wait
on him till the next day, and so prolonged the time, by putting them off from
one day to another, insomuch that he never went. Meanwhile he continued his
secret Counsels and Cabals, and sounded the minds of all the greatest Omrahs so
far, that at last, after he had well and closely laid his Design, and
politickly disposed all things for the success thereof, he sent his eldest Son
Sultan Mahmoud into the Castle, under a pretense of speaking with his Father;
who was no sooner entered, but he fell boldly upon the first Sentinel, and drove
away all that opposed him, whilst a great number of Men appointed for that
purpose, forceing their passage after him, immediately made themselves Masters
of the Walls, which exceedingly astonished Schach Jehan, he seeing himself
taken in the same Snare which he had prepared for another, imprisoned in his
own Palace, and Oranchzef Master of the Fort: It Is said that he presently sent
to try the temper of Sultan Mahmoud, and promised him by his Crown and the
Alcoran, That if he would be faithful to him, and serve him in this
Conjuncture, he would make him King; and that in order thereunto, he should
immediately come to him, and not slip this opportunity: Besides that it would
be an action that would accumulate on him the Blessings of Heaven, and an
immortal Glory, in regard it would be said for ever, That Sultan Mahmoud had
delivered Schach Jehan his Grandfather out of Prison. And certainly if Sultan
Mahmoud had been resolute enough to undertake the Work, and Schach Jehan could
have come abroad to show himself to the Town, and to take the Field, no Man
doubts but all his great Omrahs would have followed him, nor would Oranchzef
have had the boldness to fight against his own Father in Person, especially
since he must have apprehended, that all the World would have abandoned him,
and possibly Moradbech himself. And thus it appears that Schach Jehan committed
a great error, that he did not come out of the Castle after the Battle and
Darasja's Flight; though, as others affirm, he did very prudently therein. The
same Reasoners maintain, That the greatest fault which Sultan Mahmoud could
possibly commit, was, that he knew not how to make use of this occasion to
secure himself of the Crown, by the most generous Action that ever he could be
capable of, to set hi Grandfather at liberty, and thus to do himself Right and
Justice, as the Sovereign Umpire of Affairs; whereas, as things then stood, he
must one day go and die in Govaleor: But Sultan Mahmoud (whether he feared that
Schach Jehan would not keep his Word, or durst not displease his Father) would
not hearken to any Offers, nor enter into the King's Appartment, alleging,
That he had no Order from his Father to see him; but that he was by him
commanded not to return from thence without bringing him the Keys of all the
Gates of the Fortress, that so he might come with all safety and kiss his
Majesty's Feet. Two days were past before it could be resolved whether the Keys
should be delivered to him; during which, Sultan Mahmoud watched night and day
with all his Troops about him; till at length Schach Jehan, seeing all the
Guards which watched at the little Gate to disband one after another, and
perceiving no more safety on his part, delivered the same to him, with Order to
tell Oranchzef, that he should come and see him that day, if he were wise; for
he had Business of grand concern to impart to him: But Oranchzef being too
subtle to commit so great an error, instantly made his Eunuch Etharcan
Governor of the Fort, who presently locked up Schach Jehan, with his Daughter
Begum Saheb, and all his Women, causing many Gates to be stopped up, that so he
might neither speak nor write to any body, nor go out of his Appartment without
leave. Mean while Oranchzef wrote a short Letter to Schach Jehan, which before
he Sealed he showed publicly to all; in which, amongst other things, he told
him, Oranchzef's Letter to his Father.
That he knew from good hands, that notwithstanding those great Protestations
of esteem and affection he made to him, and the contempt he expressed of
Darasja, he had for all that sent two Elephants charged with Ropias of Gold to
Darasja, to enable him thereby to recommence the War; and that therefore, in
truth, it was not he that Imprisoned him, but Darasja, and that he might thank
him for it, as the cause of all these Misfortunes; and if it had not been for
him, he would have come the very first day of his arrival to him, and paid him
all the most dutiful respects he could have looked for from an humble Son: That
for the rest he begged his pardon, and a little patience; and that as soon as
he should have disenabled Darasja from executing his evil designs, he would
come himself and open the Gates to him. And indeed the same night that Darasja
left Agra, Schach Jehan sent him two Elephants laden with golden Ropias, of
which the youngest Sister Rachenara Begum gave notice to Oranchzef, and also of
the Plot laid against him with the forementioned Tartarian Women; and Oranchzef
himself had intercepted several Letters sent from his Father to Darasja. Others
maintain, that there was no such thing; and that the Letter which Oranchzef
showed in public was only to blind the People, to labor in some degree to
justify himself in so strange an Action, and to devolve the cause of it on
Schach Jehan and Darasja, as if by them he had been forced to these
Proceedings. But however it was, so soon as Schach Jehan was shut up, almost
all the Omrahs were in a manner necessitated to go and show Reverence to
Oranchzef and Moradbech; and (which is almost incredible) there was not one
that had the Courage to stir, or attempt the least in behalf of their King, and
for him that had made them what they were, and raised them from the Dust, and
perhaps from Slavery it self (which is common in this Court) to advance them
unto great Riches and Honor; yet some few there were, as Danechmendcan and
others, that took no side; but all the rest Declared for Oranchzef: Who thus
assured of Schach Jehan and all the Omrahs, took what Sums of Money he thought
fit out of the Treasury, and then having made Chabestcan his Uncle, Governor of
the Town, he left Agra, and marched with Moradbeck to pursue Darasja.

Advice given to Moradbeck
On the day that the Army was to march out of Agra, the particular Friends of
Moradbeck, but especially his Eunuch Chah Abas, who knew that excess of
Civility and Respect, is too often a sign of an Impostor, counseled him, that
since he was King, and every one treated him with the Title of Majesty, and
Oranchzef himself acknowledged him so to be, he should let him go in pursuit of
Darasja, and stay himself with his Troops about Agra and Deli: Which Counsel if
he had taken, he would certainly have perplexed Oranchzef not a little; but
'twas fatal for him to neglect this good Advice, and it was Oranchzef's good
fortune, that Moradbeck confided in his Promises, and the Oaths of Fidelity
they had sworn to one another on the Alcoran: Wherefore setting out together,
they marched on their Way to Deli; and coming to Maturas, three or four small
days Journey from Agra, Moradbeck's Friends perceiving some things, endeavored
again to persuade him that he should be wary, assuring him that Oranchzef had
no good intentions toward him, and that without all doubt he plotted mischief
against him, as they were informed by several, and therefore desired him by all
means not to go to see him that day, but to prevent the Blow as soon as
possible; but whatsoever was said to him, he believed nothing of it, being deaf
to all the good advice that was given him, and as if he had been enchanted by
the Friendship of Oranchzef, he could not refrain from going to Sup with him
that very Night. He Sups with Oranchzef.
No sooner was he come to his Tent, but Oranchzef, who expected him, had
already prepared all things, with Murcan, and three or four of his most
intimate Captains, nor was he wanting in Embracements, and in redoubling his
Courtship, Civilities, and Submissions, insomuch that he gently wiped off the
Sweat and Dust from his Face with his Handkerchief, also treating him still
with the Title of King, whilst the Supper being served up, they sat down and
discoursed of various things as they used to do, when at last a huge Bottel
being brought full of Chiras Wine, and some other Bottles of Cabul Wine,
Oranchzef, like a grave serious Man, and one that would appear a great
Mahumetan, and very regular, rose from the Table, and having with much
kindness, invited Moradbeck to be merry with Mircan and the other Officers,
withdrew as if he went to repose himself a little: Moradbeck loving a Glass of
Wine, and rellishing that which was given him, scrupled not to drink of it to
excess, insomuch that he fell asleep in the place where he sat: This being the
only thing that was wished for, some Servants of his that waited on him were
sent away, under pretense to let him sleep in quiet, and also his Sword and
Poniard were taken from him: Oranchzef roughly coming into the Chamber, waked
him with a Kick which he gave him with his Foot; and spoke to him in this
manner: Is surprised and imprisoned.
What shame and ignominy is this, that such a King should be so intemperate, as
thus to debauch himself? Take this infamous Man, this Drunkard, tie him Hand
and Foot, and throw him into that Room, to sleep out his Wine; which was no
sooner said, but it was executed; for notwithstanding all his out-crying, five
or six Persons setting upon him, bound his Hands and Feet; which was not done
so secretly, but some of his Men that were hard by hearing thereof, made a
noise, and offered to break in upon him; but Allah-Couly, one of his chief
Officers, and Master of his Artillery, who had been gained long before,
threatening, made them draw back, and immediately several Commanders rode
through the whole Army to calm this first Commotion, which might have proved
dangerous, had they not endeavored to persuade the People that Moradbeck being
overcome with Wine, railed against Oranchzef, and abused all that were there,
which had forced them, he being in that mad raging humor, to lock him up in a
Chamber apart, and that the next. Morning when he was come to himself, they
should see him abroad again.

Mean while, Presents were sent to all the Commanders in the Army, the common
Soldiers Pay was raised, and great Promises made them; and as there were none
but what long since apprehended some such thing, so it was no great wonder to
see all things quieted the next Morning. The ensuing Night the poor Prince was
shut up in a little close House, which they commonly set on Elephants to carry
Women in, and being carried to Deli, was committed to Slingar, which is a
little Fortress in the midst of the River.

His Army turned to Oranchzef.
After all things were thus appeased, and all Persons satisfied except the
Eunuch Chah Abas, who made great disturbance, Oranchzef received the whole Army
of Moradbeck into his Service, and went after Darasja, who was upon his March
toward Lahor, with an intention to fortify himself, and draw his Friends
thither; but Oranchzef followed him with that speed, that he had not time to do
any great matter, finding himself necessitated to take the Way toward Multan;
where also he could do nothing considerable, because Oranchzef, notwithstanding
the excessive Heat, marched night and day; and to encourage all to make haste,
he often advanced alone two or three Leagues before the whole Army, being often
forced to drink unwholsom Water, and be content to eat dry Bread; sometimes to
sleep under a Tree whilst he staid for his Army, in the midst of the Highway,
laying his Head on his Shield like a common Soldier; so that Darasja found
himself necessitated to to abandon Multan also, to be the farther from
Oranchzef, with whom he was not able to Encounter.

Darasja's management off Affairs cavill'd at by Statesmen.
The Statesmen of this Country have had great Disputes about this Action of
Darasja; for it is said, that if Darasja at his going from Lahor, had gone to
the Kingdom of Cabul, as he was advised, he would have found there above ten
thousand Soldiers, which were kept to guard the Country against the Augans,
Persians, and Usbeques, and Commanded by Mohabetcan, one of the most powerful
and ancientest Omrahs in Indostan, and one that had never any kindness for
Oranchzef; moreover, he would there have been on the Borders of Persia and
Usbeck; and it is certain, that wanting no Money, the whole Militia, and also
Mohabetcan, would have embraced his Party, and assisted him; besides, he might
not only have had Aid from Usbeck, but also out of Persia, as in times past
Homayon Myrza, whom the Persians settled in his Dominions, and helped him
against Zahercan, King of the Pattans, who had driven him from thence. But
Darasja was too unfortunate to take any good Advice, but in stead of following
it he went to Scindy, where he settled in his Fortress of Tatabacar, a famous
and strong Place, lying in the midst of the River Indus. Oranchzef seeing him
take that Way, did not think it convenient to follow him any farther, but sent
eight or ten thousand Men after him, under the Command of Mirbaba, his foster
Brother, and returned directly with the same speed with which he came, fearing
that one thing or other might fall out near Agra, and least some of the potent
Rajas should attempt to release Schach Jehan out of Prison, or least Soliman
Chekon, with the Raja of Serenaguer, should descend from the Hills, or Sultan
Sujas approach too near to Agra. In this his Return from Multan to Lahor, he
saw Jesseingue coming to meet him with four or five thousand of his chief
Ragipous in a very good Equipage, which sufficiently surprs'd Oranchzef, who
having left his Army behind, very well knew that this Raja was much inclined to
Schach Jehan, and therefore feared that he might have taken hold of this
opportunity, and secured him till he had released Schach Jehan, which then he
might easily have done; and indeed no Man knows, but that this Raja had some
such Design, he having marched with extraordinary speed, insomuch that
Oranchzef had no manner of information thereof, but believed him yet to be at
Deli; but what cannot Resolution, and the help of a noble Spirit do? for
Oranchzef, without seeming daunted in the least, and without changing his
Countenance, rode directly to him, and beckned to him with his Hand as far as
he could well see him, crying aloud, Salamet Bached Rajagi, Salamet Bached
Babagi, that is, Joy, Lord Raja, Joy Lord Father; and when the Raja was come
near him, he said, I have expected you with great impatiencn; the Work is done,
Darasja is lost, he is left alone; I have sent after him Mirbaba, from whom I
am certain he cannot escape; and out of extraordinary kindness toward him,
took off his Necklace of Pearl, and put the same about the Raja's Neck; and the
sooner to rid himself handsomely of him (for he wished him a thousand Miles off)
he said thus to him, Go with all speed to Lahor, and make Preparations for me
and my Army there, which is somewhat tired; for I apprehend that something or
other may else happen there: I make you Governor of that Place, and put all
things into your Hands: Moreover, I am exceedingly obliged to you for what you
have done with Soliman Chekon. Where have you left Delilcan? I shall find a
time to revenge my self upon him; Be careful of your Charge, and hasten away.
Farewell Salamet Bachet.

Darasja betaking himself to Amadabad, is Entertained by Schach Navazecan.
Mean while Darasja being arrived at Tatabacar, made a politic and generous
Eunuch Governor thereof, with a considerable Garrison of Pattans and Sayeds,
besides a great number of Musketeers, all Franks, as English, Portuguese,
French, and Dutch, who had followed him upon the great hopes he had given them;
for had his Business fallen out successfully, and he attained the Crown, he
would have made the Franks all of them Omrahs. He also left a great part of his
Treasure there; yet carrying a sufficient Stock of Gold and Silver along with
him, he marched, after having staid two days there, with two or three thousand
Men along the River Indus to Scindy, and crossed with incredible celerity all
the Countries of the Raja Catch and Zurratte, and arrived at the Gates of
Amedabad, of which Schach Navazecan, Father-in-law to Oranchzef, being
Governor, had a considerable Garrison sufficient to resist him. Yet
nevertheless, whether it was because he wanted courage (for although he was of
those ancient Princes of Machate, yet he was no great Soldier, though a Man of
a very courteous and obliging Temper) he did not oppose Darasja; but on the
contrary, received him very honorably, insomuch that Darasja was wrought no^
only to confide, and at length to communicate to him his Designs, showing him
the Letters he received from Jesseingue, and many other of his Friends, who
prepared themselves to come to him; but it proved too true what every one told
him, and his Friends confirmed by Letters, that this Schach Navazekan would
most certainly betray him.

Never was any Man more surprised than Oranchzef, when he heard that Darasja
was in Amadabat, well knowing that he wanted not Money, and that all his
Friends, and also the discontented Party, which was numerous, would not fail to
betake themselves by little and little to him; and on the other side he found
it not safe to go and find him out himself in a Place lying so far distant from
Agra and Schach Jehan, and to entangle himself with a tedious March through the
Countries of Jesseingue and others in those Parts; besides, he knew that Sultan
Chasausa was approaching with a strong Army, and was already at Elabas, and for
fear that the Raja or Serenaguer should descend from the Hills with Soliman; so
that he was sufficiently perplexed and troubled, not knowing which way to turn:
At last he concluded it best to leave Darasja quiet for a time where he was,
and go thither where his Presence and Army was most necessary, which was
toward Sultan Sujas, who had already possessed the River Ganges at Elabs.

This Sultan Sujas having Encamped in a little Village, secured a great Taleb
or Pond of Water, which is near the Highway, whilst Oranchzef came and placed
his Army on the Banks of a small Rivulet, about a League from Agra; between
which and the Village is a spacious Plain, convenient for a Battle.

Oranchzef Engages with Sultan Sujas.
Oranchzef being impatient till this War had an end, marched the next day very
early to Engage Sujas, leaving his Baggage on the other side of the River, and
fell upon the Enemy with great fury and courage.

Emir Jembla, who had been kept Prisoner at Decan, coming to Oranchzef at the
beginning of the Fight, was no longer in fear of Darasja, his Family being in
more safety, and therefore gave sufficient proofs of his strength and valor.
But Sultan Sujas being well fortified, and his Artillery advantageously
planted, it was impossible for Oranchzef to force him from his Hold; but on the
contrary, himself was necessitated to retreat, being so vigorously repulsed,
that he found himself in a great Strait, and the rather, because Sultan Sujas
would not come on the Plain, nor leave his advantageous Post, pretending only
to defend himself, foreseeing that Oranchzef could not stay there long, because
the Weather being so very hot, would compel him to return to the River, when he
intended to fall upon his Rere; which Oranchzef also foresaw, and it was the
only reason that made him press so forward; but behold another more troublesome
Accident: for at the same instant he was informed that Jesseingue (who had
seemingly joined with him) was fallen upon his Rere, and was pillaging his
Treasures and Baggage; which news exceedingly astonished him, especially when
he understood that his Army, which had heard thereof, began to fall into
disorder, and fly; yet he retained his courage and policy, and well knowing,
that to turn his Back was to hazard all, he resolved, as in the Battle with
Darasja, to bear up the best he could, and to expect with a fixed Resolution,
all Events; but in the mean time the disorder grew worse and worse in his Army.
Sujas resolving to take hold of this opportunity, pressed vigorously upon him,
and killed the Man that led Oranchzef's Elephant with an Arrow, which forced
him to guide the Beast himself till another Leader could be had: whole flights
of Arrows showered down upon him, whilst he returned many himself, when his
Elephant beginning to be frighted and go backwards, brought him into a great
strait, insomuch that one of his Feet was out of his Seat, as if he meant to
leap on the Ground; and none can tell what in that Exigent he would not have
done, if Emir Jemla, being near him (who performed, in a manner, more than
could be expected from the most generous Courage) had not called with a loud
Voice, and lifted up Hands, crying Decan kou, Decan kou, that is, Where is
Decan? whilst Oranchzef was in great danger, insomuch that it could not be
perceived which way it was possible for him to escape; but his Fortune was too
great, and therefore Sultan Sujas must be routed and put to flight like
Darasja, to save his Life; for Oranchzef was ordained to be Conqueror, and King
of India.

Sutan Sujas guilty of the same fatal Error with Darasja.
We are now to reflect upon the Battle at Samonguer, and the seeming slight
Accident which there proved the overthrow of Darasja: for the like Oversight,
or rather the like piece of Treachery destroyed Sultan Sujas, viz. Alla
Vordica, one of his chief Captains, made use of the same kind of subtilty which
Calullacan put in practice against Darasja: for seeing all Oranchzef's Army in
disorder, he ran to Sultan Sujas, and saluted him with the word Mohbarreck,
that is, wishing of Joy, and praying him with folded Hands not to expose
himself any longer to danger on his Elephant, saying, Come down in the Name of
God, get a Horseback, God has made you chief of India; let us pursue these
Villains, that Oranchzef may not escape us. Sultan Sujas, who had no more
consideration than Darasja, committed the same fatal Error: for he was no
sooner got down from his Elephant, but the whole whole Army missing of him, was
struck with terror, and suspecting Treason, supposed him either to be taken or
slain; whereupon they disbanding, fled as Darasja's Army had done, and also
forced the Sultan to fly for the safeguard of his own Life.

Jesseingue hearing this unexpected news, and perceiving it was not very safe
for him to stay there, contented himself with the Spoil he had gotten, and
speedily marched to Agra, with intention from thence to pass to his own
Country.

In the mean time the noise was already in Agra, that Oranchzef had lost the
Battle, and that Emir Jemla was taken Prisoner, whom Sultan Sujas brought along
with him; nay, Chahestcan, Governor of the Town, and Uncle to Oranchzef, seeing
Jesseingue (whose Treachery he had heard of) at the Gates, and despairing of
his Life, had taken up a Cup full of Poison to kill himself; if his Women had
not prevented him; so that it was thought, if Jesseingue had had the wit and
courage to have staid longer in Agra, threatened, made Promises, and acted
vigorously for Schach Jehan's Freedom, he might undoubtedly have released him,
and with the more ease, because all the Inhabitants of Agra certainly believed
for two days together, that Oranchzef was overcome. But Jesseingue knowing the
contrary, durst not stay long, nor attempt any thing, and therefore passing
only through the City, marched home with all possible speed.

Oranchzef returns to Agra.
Oranchzef having Intelligence from Agra, feared that Jesseingue might attempt
to release Schach Jehan, therefore not pursuing Sultan Sujas, he returned
directly with his whole Army to Agra, where he staid a considerable time, and
putting things in good order, secured himself of all. Mean while he received
Intelligence, that Sultan Sujas had not lost many Men in the Battle, because he
was not pursued; and also that he made new Leavies of Men from all the
Countries of the Rajas which are in those Quarters, on the right and left side
of the Ganges, and raised great Forces upon the Reputation he had of being very
rich and liberal, and that he fortified himself near Elabas, that eminent and
famous Passage of Ganges, which with its Fortress is the first Inlet into
Bengala: And then he considered also, that he had two Persons about him that
were very capable to serve him, viz. Sultan Mahmoud, his eldest Son, and Emir
Jemla; yet he well knew that those who have done their Prince good Service,
oftentimes grow insolent, believing all to be due to them, and that they can
never be sufficiently recompensed. He received information also, that the first
of them began to mind his own Interest, and to grow daily more proud and
arrogant than other, He grows jealous of his Son and Emir Jemla.
to secure the Castle of Agra to himself, and by this means broke off all the
Designs which Schach Jehan could have formed. And as for Emir Jemla, he very
well knew his Force, Conduct and Prudence, which made him suspect him; for he
knew him to be very wealthy, and his Fame great, and that he passed for the
first Mover in all Affairs, and the ablest Man in all India, so that he doubted
not, but that according to the Examples of Sultan Mahmoud, he could expect no
great good from him. All this would certainly have perplexed a mean Spirit: but
Oranchzef in stead of despairing, found a Remedy for all; for he knew how to
remove both with so much prudence and kindness, that neither of them could
complain of him. He sent them both against Sultan Sujas with a mighty Army, and
privately told Emir Jemla, that he had designed the Governorship of Bengala,
which was the best Place in all Hindostan, for him, during his Life, and his
Son after his Death; and that thereby he would begin to express his
Acknowledgments for the great Services he had done him; and that therefore it
belonged to him alone to defeat Sujas, which so soon as he had done, he would
make him Mirul Omrah, which is the first and most honorable Place in Hindostan,
and no less than the Prince of the Omrahs. To Sultan Mahmoud his Son he said
only these few words: Remember that you are the eldest of my Children; it is
for your self you go to Fight; you have done much, yet is 'tnothing if you
conquer not Sujas, who is our greatest and most powerful Enemy; I hope God will
assist me to be soon Master of the rest. With these words he dismissed them
both with the usual Ceremonies of bestowing upon them rich Serafs or Clothes,
some Horses and Elephants, with rich Caparisons, prevailing in the mean time
with Emir Jemla, to consent to let his only Son, Mahomet Emircan stay with
him, to be brought up in good Education; or rather, as a Pledge of his
Fidelity. In like manner he persuaded Sultan Mahmoud to leave his Wife the King
of Golconda's Daughter, in Agra; pretending that it would be too great a
trouble to him to carry her along with him in the Army.

Sultan Sujah, or Chasausa, being always very suspicious that the Raja's of the
Lower Bengala might be raised against him, and dreading nothing more than to
engage with Emir Jemla, no sooner heard these Tidings, but out of fear that he
might cut off his way to Bengala, and that Emir might cross the Ganges either
above or below Elabas, he instantly went to Benaros and Patna, from whence he
marched to Moguiere, a little City lying on the Bank of Ganges, generally
called The Key of Bengala, lying between the Mountains and Woods.

In this place he judged it convenient to Incamp and fortify himself, causing,
for his better security, a great Trench to be made from the Town and the River
to the Mountains, with a resolution to stay and expect Emir Jemla's coming, and
fight with him for the Passage: But he was exceedingly amazed when he heard,
that several of Emir's Troops which came slowly along the Ganges, were sent to
no other end than to Alarm him; that he was not there; that the Rajas of the
Mountains which lay on the right side of the River were joined with Emir Jemla
and Sultan Mahmoud, who came marching night and day through their Country,
directly toward Ragemehalle, with the main Body of the Army, intending to
intercept him; which News forced Chasausa suddenly to desert his Fortresses,
and making extraordinary haste (notwithstanding he was forced to follow those
Windings which the River Ganges makes on that side) he came some days before
Emir to Ragemehalle, where he had time to fortify himself, because Emir, when
he was informed thereof, went up along the left side of the Ganges, through bad
Ways, there to expect his Troops, with the Artillery and Baggage that were also
coming along the River. Casausa put slight by Emir Jemla.
No sooner was his whole Army come together, but he went to encounter with
Sultan Chasausa, who for five or six days time defended himself valiantly; but
seeing that Emir's Cannon battered down all his Works, which were made only of
Earth and Bushes, and could not possibly oppose him much longer in that Place,
besides that the Rainy Season approached, he fled in the night, leaving two
Pieces of Ordnance behind him, besides Ammunition and Provision, which in that
hurry he could not possibly carry away. Emir fearing Ambuscades, durst not
pursue him in the night, but staid till the next morning; when, just as if
Fortune would favor Chasausa, there fell a mighty Storm of Rain, which lasted
three days: so that Emir was not only detained at Ragemehalle during that
time, but necessitated to take up his Winter Quarters there; for these Rains
render the Ways so troublesome for above four Months, viz. July, August,
September, and October, that no Army is able to march. Thus Sultan Chasausa had
time to retire, and to choose a convenient Place of Defense, the better to
recruit both his Forces and Train of Artillery from Lower Bengale, because he
had been very friendly to the Portuguese, which for the fertility of the
Country were come to settle there, and had always been very respective to the
Catholic Priests which are in this Province for the promulgating of their
Religion, making them great Promises to enrich them all, and give them free
leave to build Temples wheresoever they pleased. And indeed they were capable
enough to serve him, there being in Bengale at least eight or nine thousand
Families of Franks, either Native Portuguese, or Mestizes, being such as are
gotten by the Portuguese on Indian Women.

Sultan Mahmoud, who for the forementioned Reasons was grown very insolent, and
perhaps at that time aspired to greater things than he ought, pretended to
command the Army absolutely, and that Emir Jemla should follow his Orders,
letting also from time to time many insolent Words fall in reference to his
Father Oranchzef, as if he were obliged to him for the Crown, and uttered
contemptible and threatening Expressions against Emir Jemla, which caused a
great coolness between them; but at last, Sultan Mahmoud being informed that
his Father was much dissatisfied with his ill Conduct, and fearing that Emir
might have Order to secure his Person, he went, accompanied with a small number
of Men, to Sultan Chasausa, to whom swearing Fidelity, he made great Promises:
But Chasausa, who looked upon it as a Plot of Oranchzef and Emir, durst not
confide in him, but kept a continual Eye over him, and gave him no considerable
Command; which so dissatisfied him, that some Months after he concluded to
leave Sultan Chasausa, and went again to Emir Jemla, who favorably receiving
him, promised to write in his behalf to Oranchzef, whom he would endeavor to
persuade to forget and pardon his Errors.

Sultan Mahmoud sent to Govaleor.
Some are of opinion, that this Escape of Sultan Mahmoud was altogether by the
contrivance of Oranchzef, who cared not much to hazard this Son to destroy
Chasausa, and was sensible that this would be a very just pretense to secure
his Person. But however it was, he showed himself much displeased with him; yet
at last he wrote him a Letter of Pardon, and commanded him also to come
speedily to Deli: But in the interim he gave Order that he should not come so
far: for no sooner had Sultan Mahmoud crossed the Ganges, but he met with a
Party appointed to seize him, who locking him up in an Embory (after the same
manner as they had done Moradbech) carried him to Govaleor.

Thus Oranchzef freeing himself from great perplexity, told his second Son,
that the Point of Reigning was so ticklish a thing, that Kings must be jealous
of their own Shadow: Therefore if he were not discreet and careful, the same
thing might happen to him as had befallen his Brother; but that whilst he kept
himself within the bounds of his Duty and Obedience, he should find him a
loving and indulgent Father: Protesting likewise, That he intended not to offer
the least violence to the Person of Schach Jehan his Father. But Oranchzef had
at this time no occasion to suspect his Son Sultan Mazum, or to be dissatisfied
with him; for never was any Slave more humble: nor did ever Oranchzef himself
appear more careless of Greatness, nor more given to Devotion, than Sultan
Mazum: Yet some knowing Persons believed, that he was not so in reality, but by
superlative Policy and Craft, like his Father, of which we may have a Proof in
time.

Whilst Matters were thus transacted in Bengala, and Sultan Chasausa opposed
Emir Jemla the best he could, Emir marching first on one side of the Ganges,
and then on the other, Oranchzef kept about Agra, marching from Place to Place,
and having put Moradbech into Govaleor, he went to Deli, where he began to act
the Part of an Absolute King, giving Order for all Affairs of the Kingdom; and
especially he plotted means to take Darasja, and get him out of Surat, for the
Reasons beforementioned: And by his great Fortune and exceeding subtilty he
soon drew him thence, in the following manner.

Oranchzef's Policy to catch Darasja
Jessomseingue, who was retired into his Country, had, with the Booty which he
had gotten in the Battle of Cadjore, raised a considerable Army, and wrote to
Darasja to hasten to Agra, promising to join his Forces with him on the Way.
Darasja, who had already gotten a great number of Men, and hoped that several
of his Friends (when they should see him join with Jessomseingue, and approach
Agra) would undoubtedly unite their Forces with his, marched speedily to
Asmeer, six or seven days Journey from Agra: But Jessomseingue kept not his
Word with him; for the Raja Jesseingue interposed to make his Peace with
Oranchzef, and fasten him to his Party, or at least to retard his Design, which
was capable to ruin him, and make all the Raja's rebel. Therefore writing to
him several Letters, he made him sensible of the great danger he underwent to
expose himself in that manner; That Oranchzef would never pardon him; That he
was a Raja himself; That he should think on sparing the Blood of the Ragipous;
That if he thought to draw the Raja's to his Party, he would find those that
would attempt to hinder his Design: In a word, That it was a Business which
concerned all the Gentry of Indostan, and would expose them to danger, if such
a Fire were suffered to kindle, which could not be extinguished at pleasure.
But if he would leave Darasja to himself, Oranchzef resolved to forget all that
was past, restore again whatever he had taken from him, and at the same time
make him Governor of Surat, which would be very advantageous to him, because
that Country lay near to his Lands, and that there he might be in safety so
long as he pleased. In short, this Raja prevailed so much, that he made
Jessomseingue return to his own Country. Mean while Oranchzef approached with
his whole Army to Asmeer, and encamped in sight of Darasja. And now what could
this poor Prince Darasja do? He fees himself abandoned, and frustrate of all
his hopes: To return with his Army safe to Amadabad, he saw was altogether
impossible, because it is above thirty five days Journey, and in the midst of
Summer, and he wanted Water; the Countries likewise through which he was to
pass belonging to the Raja's, all Friends or Allies to Jesseingue or
Jessomseingue; and that also Oranchzef's Army would certainly pursue him:
Wherefore (said he) we must die on the Spot; and therefore let us resolve,
though we are very unequal to them in Power, to give them Battle, and hazard
All. But in vain does he exhort his Soldiers; for he is not only abandoned by
them, but having Chah-Navazecan with him, in whom he reposed great Confidence,
he was by him betrayed, and all his Designs made known to Oranchzef. It is
true, that Chah Navazecan was slain in the Battle, either by Darasja's own
Hand, as many believe; or, more probably, by Oranchzef's Soldiers, who being
private Friends to Darasja, found out a means to seize upon and kill him, for
fear he might have some knowledge of a Letter they had written to Darasja, and
so discover them.

The Battle between Darasja and Oranchzef.
The Battle began in the morning about nine or ten a Clock. Darasja's Artillery
was planted on a Hill, and sufficiently heard; but most believed they shot
nothing but Powder, so great was the Treachery of his Officers. And indeed this
was properly no Fight, but a mere Plot to ruin him; for the Fight was scarce
begun, when Jesseingue finding himself near Darasja, persuaded him, that unless
he was resolved to be taken Prisoner, he should fly: So that Darasja
exceedingly amazed, was forced at the same instant to retreat in such
confusion, that he had not time to load away his Goods and Carriage, but with
great difficulty escaped with his Wife. Moreover it is certain, that if the
Raja Jesseingue had pleased, Darasja could never have escaped; but he was
always ways inclined to be favorable to the Royal Family; or rather, he was
too subtle and politic, and too sensible of future things, to hazard the
danger that might ensue for laying hands on a Prince of the Blood.

Daraja's Flight and Misery.
Thus this unfortunate Prince, abandoned by all except two thousand Men which
accompanied him, was necessitated, in the midst of Summer, without Tents, or
necessary Accommodations, to travel through all the Countries of the Raja's
which lie between Asmeer and Amadabad; whilst the Koullys, the Rusticks of this
Country, and the greatest Villains and Robbers of all India, pursuing him day
and night, killed and robbed all those which they found straggling from the
Main Body, if they lagg'd never so little behind. Yet notwithstanding, Darasja
made shift to get within a days Journey of Amadabad, hoping the next morning to
refresh himself in the Town, and endeavor once more to raise some Forces: But
all things fell out contrary to the expectation of this unfortunate Man; for
the Governor whom he had left in the Castle of Amadabad had already received
both menacing and promising Letters from Oranchzef, so that his Courage
failing, he declared for his side; wherefore he wrote to Darasja, That he
should not come any nearer, for the Gates of the City were shut, and every Man
up in Arms against him.

F. Bernier, Physician to this Prince, and attending then on him, says, When
he obliged me to follow him, having then no other Physician about him, and the
night before he received this News from the Governor of Amadabad, he did me the
Honor to make me come into the Caravansera where he was, out of fear to be set
upon that night by the Coullys; and I was (a thing incredible in Hindostan,
where all Noblemen are so exceeding jealous) so near to this Princes Consort,
that the Cords of the Canates, or little Houses (for they had not so much as a
Tent) were fastened to the Wheels of my Chariot. I relate this Circumstance by
the by, only to show the Extremity Darasja was reduced to. When the Women
heard the forementioned sad News, That they could not get into the City (which
was about the break of day) they broke forth into strange Cries and
Lamentations, and all things were in an inexpressible confusion, every one
looking upon his Neighbor, and none knowing what to do, or what would become of
them: Soon after Darasja coming forth strangely terrified, first spoke to one,
and then to another, even to the meanest NURMAHAL
Soldier: But seeing them all amazed, and ready to abandon him, what Counsel
can he take? Whether can he go? He must fly instantly, but whether he knew not:
And you may judge of the extremity he was in by this small accident I shall
here relate: viz. Of three great Oxen which drew my Chariot, one died the day
before, another in the night, and the third was not able to go; for during the
small time I was with him, we marched night and day, the Heat and Dust being
intolerable; so that, to my good Fortune, he left me behind, not being able to
get either Oxen, Horses, or Camels for me. I saw him march away with Tears in
his Eyes, accompanied with four or five hundred Cavaliers at the most, and with
two Elephants, which were said to be laden with Treasure, with intention to go
to Tatabacor, seeing he could do no better, though it seemed almost, if not
altogether impossible, in respect of the few Men which he had left, and the
vast Sandy* Deserts, for the most part without Water, which he was to cross in
the heat of Summer, which destroyed many of those that followed him, especially
several of his Women, who perished either of drought, the unwholesom Waters,
tiresom Ways, ill Food, or by the Coullys beforementioned: Yet nevertheless
with much pains he reached the Country of the Raja Catch, though it had been
happier for him to have died also in his March thither.

Darasja betrayed by the Raja Gatche.
This Raja at first gave him a very good Reception, even so far as to promise
him assistance with all his Forces, provided he would give his Daughter in
Marriage to his Son: But Jesseingue informed thereof, soon prevailed with this
Raja, as he had done with Jessomseingue; so that Darasja observing the kindness
of this Barbarian to cool on a sudden, and that consequently his Person was in
danger there, he betook himself to the pursuit of his Expedition to Tatabacar.

Whilst Darasja proceeded forward in his Journey, the War continued still in
Bengala, and much longer than was expected; Sultan Chasausa using his whole
endeavor to conquer Emir Jemla: Yet this troubled not Oranchzef so much,
because he knew it was a great way between Bengala and Agra, and being
sufficiently assured of the Fidelity and Valor of Emir Jemla; but that which
disquieted him, was to see Soliman Chekouh almost at his Gates, (for it is not
above eight days Journey from Agra to the Mountains) and being perpetually
alarmed by the Rumors which were spread, That he was coming out of the
Mountains with the Raja: And indeed it was very difficult to draw him from
thence; but he compassed his Design after this manner. He made the Raja
Jesseingue write diverse Letters to the Raja of Serenaguer, promising him very
great things if he would surrender Soliman Chekouh to him; and threatened to
proclaim War against him, if he refused to comply with his desire. But the Raja
replied, That he would rather lose his Estate than do so unworthy an action.
Whereupon Oranchzef, seeing his resolution, marched with his Army directly to
the Foot of the Mountains, where, by an infinite number of Workmen, he cut a
Passage through the Rocks: But the Raja laughed at his vain Attempt; and indeed
he had no cause to fear, though Oranchzef cut never so long, the Mountains
being inaccessible for an Army, and the Rocks able to withstand all the Powers
of the Indostans, which forced Oranchzef to return without effecting any thing.

The Siege of Tatabacar,
Mean while Darasja approaching the Fortress of Tatabacar, and being come within
two or three days Journey of the same, received Advice, That Mirbaba, after
having Besieged the Place a considerable time, had at length reduced it to the
utmost extremity, insomuch that a Pound of Rice or Flesh was sold for a Crown,
and all other Provisions accordingly: Nevertheless the Governor holding out,
made diverse Sallies, which extremely incommoded the Enemy, and expressed all
possible Prudence, Courage, and Fidelity, deriding the Proposals of Mirbaba,
and all the Menaces and Promises of Oranchzef: And when he heard that Darasja
was not far off, he redoubled his Liberalities, and knew so well to gain the
Hearts of all his Soldiers, and to encourage them to fight bravely, that there
was not one but what resolved to Sally out upon the Enemy, and to hazard all to
raise the Siege and force Darasja's Entrance: Mean while he sent Spies into
Mirbaba's Camp to assure the Soldiers that they had seen Darasja approach with
great Resolution, and considerable Forces, which struck such a fear amongst the
Soldiers, that had Darasja come at that instant, as it was expected, the
Enemies Army had on sight of him undoubtedly Disbanded, and a great part
thereof gone over to him: But he was still too unfortunate to atchieve any
thing for his own advantage; wherefore considering with himself, that it was
impossible for him to raise the Siege with such a handful of Men as he had, he
resolved to cross the River Indus, and get into Persia, which could not have
been done without great trouble, by reason of the Deserts, and want of Water
which is in those Parts; besides those Countries are Governed by Petty Rajas
and Patans, who acknowledge neither the Persian nor Mogol for their Superior.
But his Consort dissuaded him from that Resolution, for this weak Reason, viz.
That if he went into Persia, he must be contented to see his Wife and Daughter
Slaves to the King of Persia, which was a thing no ways befitting the Grandeur
of his Family; and that he ought rather to die, than undergo that Infamy.
Darasja being in this perplexity, at last remembered, that not far from thence
resided a Powerful Patan, called Gimcan, whose Life he had formerly twice
saved, when Schach Jehan had commanded he should be cast under the Feet of an
Elephant, for having rebelled diverse times against him: Therefore he resolved
to go to him, hoping that he would give him sufficient Succors to raise the
Siege of Tatabacar; for he made full account to fetch his Treasure from thence,
and going with it to Candahor, find out a means to get into the Kingdom of
Cabul: And this he thought the more feasible, because he reposed great
confidence in Mahobetcan, who being Governor of that Place, was exceedingly
beloved, and obtained his Government by Darasja's means. But his Nephew Sepe
Chekouh, though very young, observing his Resolution, threw himself down at his
Feet, and begged of him not to enter into the Country of that Patan: His Wife
and Daughter also did the same, remonstrating to him, That he was a Robber, a
Revolted Governor, and that he would infallibly betray him; That he ought not
to stand upon raising of the Siege, but rather endeavor to gain Cabul, which
would not be altogether so impossible, because it was very improbable that
Mirbaba would raise his Siege to follow him, and prevent his getting into the
forementioned Countries. But Darasja being carried headlong by the violence of
his unhappy Destiny, rejected this Counsel, and would hearken to nothing that
was proposed to him, alleging, as was true, that the March would be very
difficult and dangerous, and being confident that Gioncan would not be so base
as to betray him, after all the good Service which he had done him; wherefore
he went thither, notwithstanding all that could be said to him, and went to
prove at the price of his Life, that no trust is to be put in a wicked Man.
This Traitor believing at first, that he had numerous Troops following of him,
gave him the fairest Reception that could be, and to all appearance Entertained
him with great civility and kindness, Quartering his Soldiers here and there
amongst his Subjects, with strict Orders to treat them well, and give them what
Refreshments the Country afforded; but as soon as he found that Darasja had
not above two or three hundred Men, he quickly appeared what he really was. It
is uncertain whether he received any Letters from Oranchzef, or whether his
Avarice was not tempted by some Mules which were said to be laden with Gold,
being all that could be saved hitherto, as well from the hands of Robbers, as
from those that conveyed it: But whatsoever it was, one Morning, when all
Persons thought themselves most secure, and the wearied Soldiers took no care
but how to rest and refresh themselves, believing all to be safe, behold! this
Traitor, who had bestirred himself all Night to get Armed Men from all Parts,
fell upon Darasja and Sepe Chekou, Darasja is made Prisoner by Gioncan.
killed some of their Men who stood up to defend themselves, seized on the
Mules, and Camels, and all the Women's Jewels, and caused Darasja to be tied
fast upon an Elephant, commanding an Executioner to go behind him and cut off
his Head on the least sign given, in case he should be seen to make any
resistance, or if any one should attempt to rescue him. In this manner he was
carried to the Army at Tatabacar, and delivered to the General Mirbaba, who
caused him to be conducted in company of this vile Traitor to Lahor, and from
thence to Deli.

When Darasja was come to the Gates of Deli, Oranchzef consulted whether he
should be brought through the midst of the City, or sent directly to Govaleor.
Many were of opinion that he ought to travel guarded, to prevent any Disorder
that might happen to arise, or lest some Attempt should be made to rescue him,
which would be a great dishonor to the Royal Family. Others maintained the
contrary, viz. That it was absolutely necessary he should pass through the
Town, to astonish the World, and manifest the absolute Power of Oranchzef, and
to free the common People from their doubtings, who else might more firmly be
persuaded in their Minds that it was not he, as indeed many Omrahs were, and
also take away all hopes from those that entertained any affection for him; Is
carried in teiumph through Deli.
which Arguments prevailing, he was set upon an Elephant, with his two Nephews
on each side, and behind him Badurcan in stead of the Executioner: This was
none of those stately Elephants from Geylon or Pegu, richly caparison'd, on
which he used to Ride, but an old poor dirty Beast, with a ragged Cover, and a
pitiful Seat all open: He had then no more the Necklace of Pearls which those
Princes use to wear, nor those rich Turbants and embroidered Vestures, his
Garments being a Vest of dirty course Linen, and a Turbant of the same, with a
tattered Scarf of Cackmire over his Head like a Varlet; his Son Sepe Chekouh
was in the same Equipage. In this miserable posture he was made to enter into
the Town, and to pass through the high Streets, to the end he might be seen by
all People, and by that means fully satisfy all those, who till then very much
doubted that it was not he. Most People were exceedingly amazed at the boldness
of making him pass through the Town, and the more, because he was but ill
guarded, and exceedingly beloved by the Vulgar, who at that time exclaimed
highly against the cruelty and tyranny of Oranchzef, as one that kept his
Father in Prison, and also his own Son Sultan Mahmoud, and his Brother
Moradbeck; but not one Man had the boldness to draw his Sword, only there were
some of the Fakiers, and some poor People, who seeing that infamous Gioncan
ride by his side, began to rail and throw stones at him, and to call him
Traitor; and indeed all the tops of the Houses and Shops being thronged with
Spectators, there was nothing heard but loud Outcries and Lamentations, with
Invectives and Curses heaped upon Gioncan; in a word, both Men and Women, great
and small, so compassionate are the Indians, were ready to melt into Tears, yet
none durst attempt to rescue him. Being thus conducted through the City, he was
put into a Garden called Heider Abad.

A Consultation held, whether to put him to death, or send him to Govaleor.
Several Persons of Quality that were there present, were not wanting to tell
Oranchzef, that most of the People seeing Darasja pass by, lamented for him
very much, and cursing the Patan that had delivered him, were ready to stone
him to death, and consequently there was great fear of an Insurrection or
Disturbance. Whereupon the Council being called, they again consulted what was
best to be done, viz. Whether they should send Darasja away to to Govaleor, as
they had before concluded, or whether they should put him to death without any
farther delay. Some were of opinion, that he ought to be carried to Govaleor
with a strong Party of Horse; upon which Daneck Mendcan, though an old Enemy of
Darasja's insisted very much. But Raichenara Begum, in prosecution of her
hatred against this Brother of hers, persuaded Oranchzef immediately to destroy
him, and not run the hazard of sending him to Govaleor. In like manner all his
old Enemies, as Calullacan, Chahestcan, and especially a certain dissembling
Peruschian, who was fled out of Persia, first called Hakim Daoud, and
afterward, when created a great Omrah, Tacarmbcan. This Villain boldly
standing up in the public Assembly, cried out, That it was expedient for the
safety of the State, to put him to death immediately, and the rather, because
he was not a Musselman, or Mahumetan; that long since he was turned Caffer,
Idolater, a Man without Religion, and by that means had brought upon himself
this, which was a just punishment for his sins. But certain it is, this vile
Wretch afterward felt the smart of his unjust Imputation; for in a short time
he fell into Disgrace, being treated like an infamous Fellow, and died a
miserable Death. But Oranchzef, carried away by these Instances and Motives,
commanded that he should be put to death, and that Sepe Chekou his Nephew
should be sent to Govaleor.

The Charge of this Tragical Execution was given to a certain Slave called
Nazer, who had been bred up by Schach Jehan, and was known to have been misused
by Darasja. This Executioner, accompanied by three or four Parricides more,
went to Darasja, who was dressing some Meat for himself and his Nephew, fearing
to be poisoned if he should trust any one else to do it. As soon as he espied
Nazer, he cried to Sepe Chekou his Nephew, Behold, my Son, yonder are those
that come to kill us, laying hold at the same instant on a small Knife, which
was all the Weapon that was left him, with which he defended himself to little
purpose, whilst some of the Villains seized on Sepe Chekou, and the rest
pressing upon him, threw him down to the Ground, and held him by the Hands and
Feet till Nazer cut off his Head, Darasja murdered.
which was immediately carried to the Castle to Oranchzef, who commanding the
same to be put into a Charger of Water, called for a Handkerchief, and having
washed off the Blood, and seeing that it was the real Head of Darasja, he fell
a weeping, uttering these words: Oh unhappy! Oh unfortunate Man! Take away this
Sight from mine Eyes, and bury it in the Grave of Homayon.

In the Evening they put Darasja's Daughter into the Seraglio, though
afterward upon her Request she was sent to Schach Jehan and Begum Saheb. As
for Darasja's Wife, she ended her Days before at Lahor, poisoning her self,
when she foresaw the Extremities she was falling into with her Husband. Sepe
Chekou was sent to Govaleor; and after a few days Gioncan was sent for to
appear before Oranchzef in the Assembly, where several Presents being made to
him, he was again dismissed; but in his Way home he was rewarded according to
his Deserts, being killed in a Wood; this barbarous Man not knowing nor
considering, that though Kings do sometimes permit such Actions for their
Interest, yet they abhor the Actor, and sooner or later revenge them.

Mean while, Tatabacar surrrendred.
the Governor of Tatabacar was forced, upon an Order pressed and obtained from
Darasja, to surrender the Fort, though upon a good Composition if it had been
real; but the poor Governor coming to Lahor, was, together with the few of
those Men that accompanied him, upon the Command of the Calullacan, Governor of
that Place, cut in pieces. The reason why the Articles of Agreement were not
performed, was because it was reported that the Governor made private
Preparations to go to Soliman Chekou; to which purpose he distributed diverse
pieces of Gold amongst the Franks that came with him out of the Fort, thereby
to entice them to follow him, under a pretense to accompany him to Deli to
Oranchzef, as having a great desire to see that brave Man, who had defended
himself so valiantly.

There remained now none of Darasja's Family but Soliman Chekou, who was not
easily to be fetched from Serenaguer, if the Raja had continued in his first
Resolution; but the private Correspondence of Jesseingue, the Promises and
Threats of Oranchzef, the Death of Darasja and the other Rajas his Neighbors,
who had been gained, and made Preparations by Order from Oranchzef, and at his
Charge, at last staggered the Fidelity of this perfidious Protector, Soliman
Chekou taken and imprisoned.
and made him consent to their Demands. Soliman Chekou informed thereof, fled
through uninhabited Countries and desolate Mountains, to the greater Tibet; but
the Raja's Son closely pursuing him, caused Stones to be thrown at him, which
wounding the poor Prince, so disabled him, that he was forced to yield to his
Enemies Mercy, who carried him to Deli, where he was imprisoned in Serenaguer,
a little Fortress, the same Place wherein they formerly had put Moradbeck.

Is brought to the Court.
Oranchzef, to observe the same method as he had done in the Case of Darasja,
that none might doubt but that it was Soliman Chekou himself, he commanded him,
in the presence of all his Nobles, to be brought to the Court: At the entrance
of the Gate his Fetters were taken off from his Legs, leaving only those on
his Hands.

When this young and noble Person, being exceeding beautiful and well
proportioned, was seen to enter the Gates, many Omrahs could not withhold their
Tears. In like manner it is said, that all the Ladies of the Court which had
leave to see him come in, fell a weeping. Oranchzef himself also seeming to be
affected with his Misfortunes, began to comfort him, saying to him, That he
need not fear any thing, for no harm should come unto him, but that he should
on the contrary be well treated; and therefore (said he) be of good cheer, God
was powerful, and would be merciful; That he had taken off his Father for no
other reason, but because he turned Caffer, a Man without Religion. Whereupon
the young Prince returned him the Salam, or Thanks, with his Hands down to the
Ground, and then lifting them as well as he could up to his Head, according to
the Custom of the Country,. Moreover, he requested Oranchzef, that he would
let him drink the Poust, that he might instantly die, he being very willing to
submit to his Fate. But Oranchzef promised him publicly, that he would not
make him drink it, therefore he might rest satisfied, and not entertain any
said thoughts about it. This said, he once more repeated the Salam; and after
they had asked him several Questions in the Name of Oranchzef, concerning the
Elephant which was laden with Ropias of Gold, taken from him when he went to
Serenaguer, he was sent to Govaleor to the rest.

The Poust, what it is.
The Poust mentioned before, is nothing but Poppy steeped a Night in Water,
being that Potion which those Princes that are kept at Govaleor, whose Heads
they do not think fit to cut off, are commonly forced to drink in a Morning
fasting, which enervates and debilitates their Limbs, consumes their Inwards,
and makes them die insensibly. With this Potion Sepe Chekou, Nephew to
Moradbeck, and Soliman Chekou, were poisoned.

At to what concerns Moradbeck, he was put to death after a more cruel manner:
for Oranchzef observing, that so long as he was in Prison, the Affections of
the generality of the People were toward him, he thought it would not be safe
for himself to put him to death in private with Poust, as he had done the rest,
for fear the Vulgar should always be doubtful of his Death, and still believe
him to be in Prison, and therefore devised the following Crime to accuse him
withal.

The Children of a very rich Sahed, Moradbeck's Death.
whom Moradbeck had put to death in Amadabad, only to get his Goods when he
raised his Army, and forcibly took or borrowed all the Money from the
Merchants, made complaint thereof in the public Assembly, and demanded his
Head for the Blood of their Father, which not one of the Omrahs durst
contradict; first, because he was a Sahed, that is one of Mahomet's Relations,
to whom for that reason they showed great respect; and secondly, because they
all observed Oranchzef's Design herein, and that it was only a mere pretense
to put him to death publicly; so that the Head of him who had killed their
Father was given them without any farther Examination. And thereupon an express
Order was immediately sent to Govaleor to Behead him.

And now there remained no other Thorn in Oranchzef's Foot, but Sultan
Chasausa, who still defended himself in Bengala; yet he was at last forced to
submit to the Power and Good Fortune of Oranchzef, who sent so many Forces to
Emir Jemla, that he at last encompassed him on both sides of the Ganges, and
all the Isles which lie in the Mouth thereof, which forced Sultan Chasausa to
fly to Dake, the last City of Bengala, lying on the Seashore. And here comes
the Conclusion of this whole Tragedy: Chasausa flies for refuge to the King of
Racan.
For this Prince being destitute of Ships to put to Sea, and not knowing
whether to betake himself, sent his eldest Son Sultan Banque to the King of
Racan, or Moy, a Heathen, to know whether he would permit him to make his Court
his Place of Refuge for some time, and do him the favor, when the Mousons or
Trade-Winds should come, to furnish him with a Vessel to Mecha, that from
thence he might pass into some Parts of Turkey or Persia. The King returned
Sultan Chasausa word, That he should be very welcome to him, and have all
possible Assistance: With which Answer Sultan Banque returned to Dake, the King
having also supplied with several Galleys, (Manned with Franks, viz. Renegade
Portuguese, and other Christians, who had entered into the forementioned King's
Service, and maintained themselves by Plundering of the Lower Bengale.) In
these Galleys Sultan Chasausa Embarquing, with his whole Family, viz. his Wife,
his three Sons, and Daughters, set Sail; and arriving at their desired Port,
they were courteously received, and supplied with all things which the Country
afforded, at the King's Charge. Some Months being past, He requests a Ship to
transport him to M^cha, but is denied.
the Season for the Trade-Winds came; but he could not obtain the Ship that was
promised him, though he desired it upon no other account but for his Money; for
he wanted not as yet either Gold, Silver, or Precious Stones, but had rather
too much of them, his Riches being the occasion of his Destruction, or at least
a great Inducement thereunto: For these Barbarian Kings are destitute of all
true Nobleness, neither do they regard Fidelity or Promises, minding nothing
but their present Interest, and never considering the Inconveniences and
Mischiefs that may befall them for their Perfidiousnes. To get out of their
Hands, one must either be very Powerful, or at least have nothing that may
tempt their Avarice. And the more Sultan Chasausa implored for a Ship, the
further he was from having it; the King on the contrary beginning to grow very
cool, and complaining that he did not come to see him.

It is not known whether Sultan Chasausa looked upon it as a dishonor to
himself, and a thing below him, to go and visit a King; or whether he feared
that he might secure his Person when he should come into his Palace, and so
make himself Master of all his Treasure, and deliver him to Emir Jemla, who
promised him great Sums of Money, and many other considerable Advantages, to do
the same: However it was, he would not go thither, but sent his Son Sultan
Banque, who being come near the King's House, showed his Liberality to the
People, throwing handfuls of Ropias of Gold and Silver amongst them; and coming
before the King, he presented him with several Embroidered Coats, and wrought
Pieces of Gold, beset with Precious Stones, and excused his Father Chasausa's
not coming, by alleging he was indisposed; desiring him also to furnish him
with a Ship, and perform the Promises which he had made to him: But all this
availed not; for five or six days after, the King sent to Sultan Chausasa, to
request one of his Daughters in Marriage, which he not granting, so highly
incensed this Barbarous Prince, that he suffered Chasausa to be driven to great
Extremities, the Season for putting to Sea being now past: When, behold, he
took a strange Resolution, which may give a great Example of what Despair can
do.

His Plot against the King of Racan discovered.
Though this King of Racan was a Heathen, yet he had abundance of Mahumetans in
his Dominions, which either retired thither voluntarily, or have been brought
thither as Slaves by the Franks: These Chasausa privately gained to be of his
Party, and with two or three hundred Men which he had yet remaining, he
resolved one day to fall unexpectedly upon the Barbarian's House, and putting
all to the Sword, make himself Master of Racan: Which indeed was a very bold
Enterprise, and had more of the Desperado in it than of a Prudent Man; yet the
thing was not impossible to be done: But the day before the Stroke was to be
given, the Plot being discovered, quite overthrew Chasausa's Design, and in a
short time proved the occasion of his Ruin: For seeing there was no way to
recover himself, he attempted to fly to Pegu, a thing in a manner impossible,
by reason of the vast Mountains and Forests which he was to pass: Besides, He
is pursued and defeated.
he was immediately pursued so close, that he was overtaken the same day he
fled; when defending himself very valiantly, he killed a great number of
Indians; but they at last pressed upon him in such Multitudes, that he was
forced to quit the Battle. Sultan Banque being not so far advanced as his
Fathers defended himself also like a Lion; but after having received diverse
Wounds, with Stones which the Indians threw at him, he was taken Prisoner, and
carried away, with his two younger Brothers, Sisters, and Mother.

Uncertain what became of him.
Some say, That Sultan Chasausa himself fled, with his Wife, one Eunuch, and two
other Persons, to the top of a Mountain, where he received a Wound in his Head,
by a Stone, which struck him down; but recovering himself again, and the Eunuch
having bound up the Wound with his Turbant, they afterward escaped by the
shelter of the Woods.

Others affirm, That Sultan Chasausa was found amongst the dead, but was not
well known: And this Story is related so many several ways, that it is very
difficult to know justly what became of him. But most certain it is, that this
uncertainty of his death has been the occasion of the several Alarms which
afterward happened at Deli: For at one time it was reported, That he was arrived
at Maslipatan, to join with the Kings of Golconda and Visiapour: At another
time, That he had passed in sight of Surat with two Ships, carrying the red
Ensigns which the King of Pegu or Siam had given him: Soon after, That he was
in Persia, and that he had been seen in Schiras; and then in Candahor, ready to
enter the Kingdom of Cabul. Oranchzef himself said one day smiling, That Sultan
Chasausa was at last become an Agy, or Pilgrim; as if he would say, He was gone
to Mecha. And at this very day there are many Persons who maintain, That he was
returned from Constantinople to Persia, RAUCH^^^ARA BEGUM
from whence, as they say, he brought great Sums of Money. But F. Bernier tells
us, from the Relation of an Eunuch with whom he traveled from Bengala to
Mastipatan, That Chasausa was most certainly dead. Besides which, it is
reported, That not long after his Defeat his Sword and Canger, or Poniard, had
been found; so that it is credible, if he died not on the Place, he did not
long survive, but became the Prey of some Robbers or ravenous Beasts, with
which the Forests of these Countries abound. Chasausa's family ill treated, but
at last pardoned, yet soon after extir pated.
But whatever became of Chasausa, after this his last Design, his whole Family
was put into Prison, where they were very ill treated, but after some time
again set at liberty, and used more mildly, when the King causing Chasausa's
eldest Daughter to be brought to him, married her, the Kings Mother endeavoring
likewise to have married Sultan Banque.

Mean while the Servants of Sultan Banque, with some of the forementioned
Mahumetans, laid another Plot, not unlike the former; but the day being come,
one of the Conspirators being half drunk, began the Work too soon, and so
spoiled the whole Design. But this incensed the King so exceedingly against the
unfortunate Family of Chasausa, that he commanded the same to be quite rooted
out, sparing not so much as the Daughter he had married, though she was
supposed to be with Child. Sultan Banque and his Brothers had their Heads cut
off with blunt Axes, and the Women being locked up in several Rooms, died
miserably with Hunger.

And thus ended the War which ambition of Rule had kindled amongst these four
Brothers, after the expiration of five or six Years, viz. from Anno 1655, till
Anno 1660, or 1661, and left Oranchzef in the peaceable Possession of this
mighty Empire.

And now Ambassadors were sent to Oranchzef from several Neighboring Princes
and States, Oranchzef sick.
to congratulate his happy Victories; but having scarce Reigned two Years, he
fell sick of a violent Fever, insomuch that it was reported he was dead, and
several were contriving to release his Father Schach Jehan; which to prevent,
and to undeceive the People, he caused himself, in the height of his Distemper,
four several days to be carried into the Assembly of the Omrahs, where calling
for Pen, Ink, and Paper, he wrote to Etbarcan, and sent for the Great Seal,
which was kept by Raichenara Begum, and commonly enclosed in a small Bag,
sealed with a Seal he always wore about his Arm, fearing she had already made
use of it for her Designs: But soon after recovering, he settled all things in
good Order, preferred those that had assisted, and been faithful to him in the
Wars, especially Emir Jemla, whom, after he had vanquished Chasausa, and drove
him to the Sea side, as was before mentioned, he made Mir Ul Omrah (which in
this Realm is the highest Degree of Honor any of the Kings Favorites can arrive
at) and also Governor of Bengala; and his Son Mahomet Emircan was made Great
Bakchis, that is, General of the Horse, and the second or third Place in the
Kingdom. And not long after he sent Emir Jemla with a mighty Army to the Raja
of Achan, whom he forced to fly toward the Mountains to the Kingdom of Lassa:
Emir Jemla's death.
But Emir Jemla was no sooner returned from this Expedition, but the Bloody
Flux happening amongst his Army, he also died thereof.

Many other Remarkable Passages happened in this Empire from Anno 1661, to 1667;
of which we will only mention these sew: viz. In the Year 1664, on the fifth of
February, the Mogol's Viceroy of Surat, called Enachat Chan, was informed by
one of his Officers which lived two Leagues from the City, That a great Army
was advancing toward the Town, the General whereof called himself A Servant to
the Mogol, and pretended to March with ten thousand Men to the City Amadabad:
but it afterward appeared that this was only a Pretense, he being in truth a
great Robber, named Sawasi: Which not a little amazing the Governor, he caused
immediately the Bridges which lay cross the Moat that enclosed the City to be
pulled down, notwithstanding it was dry in most places; neither was there one
Gun planted for a Defense, which made him send to the English and Hollanders
there residing, for aid in this extremity; which seemed not a little strange to
them: for they having not above forty Men apiece in their Factories, were
forced to take each seventy or eighty Men more into their Service. The next
Morning Sawasi was advanced within a League and a half of Surat, where resting
near the Village Utena, the Governor sent Messengers to request him, That he
would not come any nearer the City, because many of the Inhabitants fled
already for fear, and that the Great Mogol would resent it very ill if he
should offer the contrary: But Sawasi not regarding this, kept the Messengers
in custody, and still drew nearer the City, in which about midnight there
happened a sudden Fire, which burnt so furiously, that it consumed a considerable
number of Houses. Surat taken by a Robber.
Sawasi's People taking this opportunity, marched into the Town without any
resistance, though they might easily have been opposed. The Governor having ten
thousand Horse of the Mogol's, went with them and his Chief Officers to the
Castle, whence he fired several Guns, but did more mischief to the Houses than
the Enemy, who minded nothing but Plunder, breaking open Windows, and Chests,
which lasted several days, till Sawasi having gotten a vast Treasure, left the
Place, saying, Long have I wished to get into Oranchzef 's Beard, which I have
now obtained: For this rich and brave City Surat is for its Beauty and
Stateliness, by the Moors called The King's, or Mogol's Beard.

The Robber taken, and committed to Prison; but escapes.
The Mogol seeing what a mighty Enemy, Robber, and Destroyer of his Country
Sawasi was, and that he could not hope to overcome him by force, he having
already an Army of a hundred thousand Men, he thought to work that by Policy
which his Power could not effect; and therefore to get him into his custody, he
made him large offers of Honors and Preferment, promising him the third Place
in his Realm; which Design taking effect according to his desires, he was no
sooner come to Court, but he was there apprehended, and committed to Prison:
But about three Months after he cunningly made his escape; and although
Oranchzef sent Agents after him, to excuse his being kept a Prisoner, and
promising upon his Royal Word that he would prefer him to a high Degree of
Honor, yet he having been once caught in the Snare, would not be taken again,
but replied, That he thanked him for his Proffers; but he had rather be his own
Master than another Man's Servant; and that at one time or other he would pay
Oranchzef for his kind Entertainment; and so went again with his Army to
Wingerla, a Place which he had taken from the Mogol.

Mean while Oranchzef keeping his Father Schach Jehan close Prisoner in the
Castle at Agra, let him want nothing of Recreation, or any thing else that he
could possibly expect in such a place, yet the good old Prince being worn out
by age, The Death of Schach Jehan.
died Anno 1665. to the great grief, as it is said, of Oranchzef, who showed
all demonstrations of sorrow which a Son could express for the loss of his
Father. At the same time he went to Agra, where Begum Saheb his Sister, Begum
Saheb received into Favor.
and formerly the chief Favorite of Darasja, caused a Mosque, wherein he was to
stay some time before he went to the Castle, to be hung with rich Tapistry; and
at the entrance into the Seraglio, she proffered him a great golden Basin,
filled with her and her Father Schach Jehan's Jewels, and received him so
splendidly and courteously, that she obtained pardon for all her former
Offenses, and participated of his Favors.

The Mogol's Ambassador abused.
Anno 1666. the Great Mogol sent an Ambassador to Schach Abbas King of Persia,
for the negotiating an Affair not very pleasing to the the said King, who
quarreled also at his styling himself in his Letters, King of all the World;
which the King of Persia resented so ill, that he caused the Mogol's
Ambassador's Beard to be pulled off, and the Presents which he had sent him to
be burnt; all which made the Ambassador resolve to go away without taking
leave. But the Persian Chancellor acquainting the King, that this was a
Business of great consequence, he dismissed the Agent with rich Presents, and
amongst others, forty brave Persian Horses, and many Pieces of Gold and Silver
Stuffs, sending also with him a Herald at Arms, to proclaim War against the
Great Mogol, who when his Agent told him the Disgrace he had sustained, he was
so exceedingly offended at him, that he caused him by an Allegoer or common
Executioner, to be driven out of the City, and the Horses which the King of
Persia had sent him, to be killed publicly, as also the Gold and Silver Stuffs
to be burnt, and speaking to the Herald which came from the King of Persia,
said thus unto him, Go tell thy Master, that I will treat him thus in his own
Realm. Whereupon raising a mighty Army, he marched to the Borders of Persia,
the King whereof came also to meet him with a puissant Army; but coming within
two days Journey of the Mogol, The King of Persia dies.
he died, and immediately his Son Schach Soliman, aged about twenty five years,
and present with the Army, being proclaimed King, sent an Agent to acquaint the
Mogol with his Father's Death, requesting him that he would not impute that to
him which had happened between him and his Father, he being no way guilty
thereof, and desiring nothing more than to live in Peace with his Neighbors.
The Great Mogol, granting his Request, made Peace with him, and so each marched
back to their own Jurisdictions.

Thus having given you an Account of the Mogols Country and India in general,
we will now give you a particular Account of all the Kingdoms and Territories
which it comprehends, and begin from the West side toward the North with
Candahar, which though it be said to be under the King of Persia's
Jurisdiction, yet it may conveniently be described here, partly for its
Neighborhood to the Mogol's Country, and partly because it anciently belonged
to the same.

Paropamisa or Candahar, Sablestan, and Balassy.
THe Country of Candahar was anciently by the Greeks (according to Cluverius
and Golnitius) called Arachosia; by Minadoi, Paropamisa; though (as Niger
writes) some call Paropamisa, Dacha; Castaldus, Ananias, Della Valle, hold
Sablestan or Sabelestan, for the ancient Paropamisa; but Della Valle will have
Candahar to be Paropamisa, or at lest a part thereof; so that the ancient
Paropamisa seems to contain two several Provinces, as Candahar and Sablestan.
Ananias places in Paropamisa, the Kingdom of Balassan, by Pol called Balassan.

Bounds of Paropamisa, and the Inhabitants.
The Territory of Paropamisa has (as Ptolomy says) in the West, Aria; in the
East, a part of India; and in the South, Arachosia.

The ancient Inhabitants of Paropamisa were the Bolites, Aristophilians,
Ambants, Parietes, and Parsiers, who were all called by one general Name
Parapomisades, or Paropamisades, from the Mountain Paropamisus, which Castaldus
calls Calichistas, and is a part of Mount Taurus, and (as Pliny says) rises to
an exceeding height.

Arrianus and Diodorus Siculus tell us, that Alexander the Great's Soldiers
called the said Mountain Caucasus, though improperly; for the real Caucasus
lies between the Euxine and Hircanian Sea.

The utmost parts of these Mountains are (according to Strabo) by the
Barbarians called Eodae and Himaon.

The Head of the River Indus.
Out of this Paropamisus the River Indus has its Spring, being by Pinetus and
Gerard Mercator, called Pamer. This is also said to be the highest part of the
Earth.

Coropius Becanus tells us, contrary to the opinion of the Fathers, that Noah's
Ark rested on this Mountain.

This Territory of Candahar, The Extent.
so called from its Metropolis, lies (according to Mr. Edward Terry) Northwest
from the Mogol's Jurisdiction, and borders Westward, upon the Kingdom of
Persia, at the Stream Abi Saba, or Abi Bust. Don John of Persia reckons the
length of it to be sixty Leagues; and some affirm the circumference thereof to
be thirty days Journey.

The chief Towns.
Ptolomy places in the ancient Paropamisa, the Towns of Nacka, Belcas, Eadras,
Canda, Aclama, and Bagsius, the Metropolis of the County of Basoia, from whence
they enter into Balassan. But the Metropolitan City of Paropamisa or Candahar,
is called Candahar or Candor, or (according to Jarrick) Candacar, from the
Province it self.

Castaldus affirms, that the ancient City Carure of Ptolomy, or Ortospane of
Strabo, is the modern City Candahar, which though it be but small, yet it is
very strongly situated, and surrounded with two Mud Walls, and a Moat ten Foot
broad between both. It stands on the Borders of Aria, now called Arat, and on
those of India, near the Highway by which the Merchants travel, when they come
from Persia and Chorazan to Sinde; as on the other side, those that come from
Lahor to Agra, and the Countries of India, travel along the same to Chorazan,
Media and Persia, the Caravans being forced to make use of this Way, either in
their going to Persia, or coming from thence to go for India.

SEGUM SAHEB


The King of Persia esteemed this Place to be of great consequence, because he
intended in the beginning of this Age, to make it the Metropolitan City for the
Trade which was formerly driven in the Red Sea, and to Ormus; to which purpose
he kept a strong Garrison in the City of Candahar, under the Command of a loyal
Person.

A Place of great Trade
In peaceable Times, the Persians, Jews, Armenians, and Benjans, drive a great
Trade in this City, especially with Indian Commodities. Moreover, there come
Merchants thither from China, and all Parts of India.

Temperature of the Air.
The Province of Candahar is naturally warm, and has no hard Winters; and
though it Freezeth there a little in the Nights in January, it Thaws again at
the rising of the Sun; the Inhabitants also keeping their Cattle abroad both
Winter and Summer, which is the reason they make no Hay: But nevertheless it is
so cold in Winter in the Mountains Bellor, that Strangers cannot travel though
them without great Fires. It is a very fertile Country, producing abundance of
Barley, Wheat, Rice, French-Beans, Pease, Negur, and Cotton, besides all sorts
of Indian and Persian Garden Fruit. Barley mixed with chopped Straw, serves in
all those Eastern Countries the Horses in stead of Oats, there growing none
here.

Candahar often changes its Lords.
The Territory of Candahor has many strong holds, viz. Calabust, on the Borders
of Persia; Samandower, lying between Calabust and Candahar, and many others.

The Country and City of Candahar, lying between Persia and the Mogol's Realm,
often changes its Lord, being one day under the Jurisdiction of the Persians,
and another under the Mogols, though at present under the first, and has in
this later Age been the occasion of a great War between the Mogols and Persians.

Ananias, from the information of a Persian called Anvadat, says that the King
of Balassy first gave this Country to the Persian, for assisting him against
the Mogollans and Tartars; yet Jarrick tells us, that the King of Candahar,
whom he calls Candazar, gave his Realm to the Great Mogol, when he was not able
to defend it any longer against Abduxan, King of Usbeck.

The King of Persia himself pretends, in a Letter written to the Chans of
Sciras, that the Province of Candahar always belonged to the Crown of Persia,
and that the Mogol had unjustly taken it from him; which is confirmed by F.
Bernier, who says, that the Mogol King Ecbar taking Candahar from the Persians
by force, kept the same during his Life.

When it became subject to the Great Mogol, and its several vicissitudes.
Anno 1618. the City of Candahar became subject to the Great Mogol: for the
Persian Governor thereof, whether out of dislike to the Persian Government, or
whether Bribed with a great Sum of Money, selling the Country and Garrisons to
the Great Mogol, entered into his Service according to the Examples of other
Persians, Chorazans, and Usbecks, who Listed themselves in the forementioned
Prince's Service. The Persian has often demanded the same again by
Ambassadors, as in the Year 1622. a little before it was re-taken by Schach
Abbas King of Persia, who marched thither some Months before with a mighty
Army, to Fight against the Great Mogol.

According to the Letter which the King sent to his Peers, the City Candahar
was not taken by violence, but the Townsmen surrendered themselves, and most of
the Inhabitants de serted the same with all their Goods, because they were
sensible that the City could not be defended against so vast an Army, there
being not above eight hundred in it.

After this Candahar fell again into the hands of Schach Jehan, not by force of
Arms, but by means of the Governor Alimerdancan, who also surrendered himself,
he having before been suspected of Treason by the King of Persia, who had sent
for him to give an Account of his Transactions.

Anno 1649. in February, the Fortress Candahar, after a Siege of forty days,
and discharging of many great Guns (which made two Breaches in the City Walls,)
was taken again by Schach Abbas the Second. The Indostans had not surrendered
the Fort so soon, had they not wanted Provisions and Gunpowder.

It is a wonder that this Fortress of Candahar, standing on the Borders of two
mighty Kingdoms, and having been so often contested for, was not better
furnished with Ammunition and Provisions; but perhaps the Mogol supposed that
his Ambassadors, whom Schach Abbas put off with Delays, would have concluded a
Peace, the Soldiers in Garrison else fighting very valiantly, insomuch that
they could not be discerned to abate any thing of their courage,
notwithstanding the forementioned want.

After the conquering of the City, a Persian Horseman or Quizilbasci, was
commanded to stand upon the Guard without the Gate, till such time as all the
Indostan Soldiers were come out of the fame, as a testimony of the Persians
Victory against the Indostans: he was Accoutred in this manner, viz. On his
Back hung a Tyger's Skin; on his Head, in stead of a Turbant, he wore a round
Copper Helmet, with a Plume of Feathers, hanging down behind on both sides of
the same; in his Hand he held a Truncheon.

On the fifth day after the Conquest, the Indostan Soldiers marched out of the
City to Cabul, lying eight days Journey from Candahar: They were, according to
the Agreement, not allowed to take any thing with them, more than what each Man
could carry on his Horse, and not without being searched, because some things
were forbidden them to meddle with. The Citizens for the most part promising to
be obedient to the King of Persia, staid in the Town.

Myrub Chan, who had conquered the Fortress Bust, was made Governor of
Candahar, and charged on pain of Death to be very careful in the preservation
of it.

After Schach Abbas had conquered the City and Fortress of Candahar, and given
order for repairing of the demolished Walls, he went with his Army back to the
City of Herat.

Some days after Myrub Chan, the new-made Governor of Candahar, sent a flying
Post to the King, to inform him, That it was certainly reported the Mogol was
coming toward Candahar with six hundred thousand Men, and that one of his Sons
was already entered into the City Cabul with ten thousand Men; which being
affirmed by several Messengers that came one after another, the King sent his
Chans back with the Army immediately to Candahar, where the Persians in good
order expected the Mogol to give him Battle: The Mogol's Army coming thither
three days after, Encamped at first about half a Mile distant from the
Persians, whilst the Trumpets sounding, the Indostans with loud shouts fell in
amongst their Troops, which consisted most in Oxen, and some ordinary Tartarian
Horses, the Persian Horses being too dear for a common Mogol Trooper to buy.
The Battle being very fierce at first, the Persians behaved themselves very
valiantly; and when their Reserve came up with them, they unawares fell upon
both Wings of the Enemy, breaking their Ranks, and killing their General (who
had behaved himself nobly, but ventured too far amongst the Persians,) and
putting them to flight, killed great numbers of them in the pursuit; yet there
were about six thousand Persian, and not above two thousand Indostans slain in
this Battle. The Indostans left all their Ammunition and Provisions to the
disposal of the Persians, whilst the Mogol having no mind to adventure any
farther, marched back with his Army. The Persian Chans leaving half their Army
before Candahar, Encamped themselves before the City, and marched back to Herat
with the other half.

Candahar Besieged.
Whilst the Persians possessed Candahar, it was twice Besieged in vain by the
Mogol Schach Jehan; the first time it escaped being taken, partly by ill
Conduct, and private Correspondence of the Persian Omrahs that were in the
Mogol's Service, and the most eminent at his Court, and partly by the Respect
they bare to their native Prince; for they all behaved themselves very ill, and
would not follow the Raja Roup, who had already planted his Standards on the
Walls toward the side of the Mountains. The second time it was happened not to
be taken by means of Oranchzef, who would not Storm that part of the Wall where
the English, French, Portuguese, and Dutch, had planted great Guns; for which
this was his reason, viz. because he would not have it to be said, that the
Fortress of Candahar should be conquered in Darasja's time, who was the first
Agitator of this Design, and at that time resident with his Father in the City
of Cabul.

Schach Jehan some years before these last Troubles, was also resolved to
Besiege Candahar a third time, had not Emir Jemla and Aly Merdaman dissuaded
him from it, and advised him to send his Forces toward Decan.

Lastly, King Oranchzef, like his Predecessors, in these later years made
Preparations to Besiege Candahar, whether because he was provoked thereto by
Letters which the King of Persia had sent to him, or for the bad Entertainment
and Disgrace which his Ambassador Tarbietcan received from him is uncertain;
but being informed of the King of Persia's Death, he retreated, alleging (as
some say) that he would not War against a Child: but this seems not very
probable, for Schach Soliman, who succeeded his Father, was then twenty five
years old.

Calabust taken by the Persian.
An. 1649. the Persians took the Fortress Calabust from the Mogol, which happened
after the following manner; viz. On the fourth of January in the Afternoon, the
Persian Army came before the Fortress, which was Garrisoned with seventeen
hundred Indostans, under the Command of an Indian Prince called Bourdelchan;
the principal Officers were Alichan of Meschet, and Asolachan from Kilan, with
twenty thousand Men, but the chief Command was given to Myrub Chan, because he
had formerly surrendered the said Place to the Mogols upon Articles of
Agreement. Mean while Schach Abbas King of Persia went from thence to his grand
Army at Candahar ten days Journey, with the Cafili or Caravan from Calabust.
Moreover, they cast up only one Battery (having no convenient place to raise
any more,) from whence they daily played their great Guns at the Walls, being
continually answered not only with great but small Shot. This continued one
and twenty days, when having made a Breach in the Wall, they Stormed three
several times, yet were beaten off with the loss of three hundred Men. On the
same day a Tzapor, or Royal Messenger, came with a Letter to the General; who
in the presence of two other Chans opening the same with great Reverence, they
read it one after another: Whereupon all the prime Commanders, as also some of
the chief Quizilbascies, being sent for, the Letter was publicly read before
them all; the Contents whereof was to this effect: Myrub, do you eat the King's
Bread and Salt, and not press on with the Soldiers under your Command?
Remember that you formerly surrendered Calabust to the Mogol: Cleanse your self
from your Crime, and look you gain me the Fortress in a few days, which if you
do not, expect to receive a Sword from me. The next night they Stormed more
fiercely than before, and Myrub Chan, whether out of fear of the threatened
Punishment, or out of Despair, pressed on daily more and more, nay, resolved to
lose all his Men rather than break up the Siege: but after a sharp Encounter
the Persians forced their way into the City, and slew above ten thousand Men,
the rest flying into the upper Castle; the Governor of which, named Bourdel
Chan, coming down alone with his Sword drawn, was espied by Myrub Chan, who
saluted him with the word Hoschammedi; but Bourdel Chan making no answer, still
advanced toward him, and laying down his Sword, fell at Myrub Chan's Feet, who
bid him rise up; then Boardel standing up, said, There lies my Sword at your
Feet; I am conquered, I am your Slave, do with me what you please only spare
my Wife and Children. Myrub Chan hereupon commanded his Men not to hurt him,
nor any that belonged to him, and stretching out his Hands, laid them under
Bourdel Chan's, and withal kissed him. Then causing the Trumpets to be sounded,
he commanded all the Indostan Soldiers that were remaining, to lay down their
Arms, and acknowledge themselves the King's Slaves, which if they refused to
do, they must expect no Quarter: But the Indostans, not regarding this
Threatening, would not lay down their Arms, and so were every Man killed.

Many of the Quizilbascies deoculated the slain Indostans, cut off their Hands,
and then flead and stuffed up the Skins: The Heads they carried on their Lances,
as Trophies of their Victory; some carried four or five stuck one above another
on long Pikes to Candahar; for amongst the Persians, he who brings home most of
his Enemies Heads, is not only accounted a brave Soldier, but also advanced to
the highest Offices.

As to what concerns the Country of Balassy, it is also (as Ananias affirms) a
part of the ancient Paropamisa.

The City of Balassan.
The Metropolis of Balassy is Balassan, a great City lying on the River Gehun,
or Gelcon. An Arabian Writer, named Abulfeda Ismael, Prince of Hamah, seems to
call this City Balassagun, and places it over the River Sihun near Cashgar: It
lay formerly on the Turks Confines, but was afterward reduced to the Tartars
Jurisdiction.

On the Banks of the forementioned River stand also Semergian and Bocan, the
Residence of the Kings of Balassy, wherefore he is called The King of Bacan.

Eastward from these Places is the Indus, near which lies the great Mountain
Bellor, and the far spreading Countries of the Mountain Pamer.

The Goverrment of Balassan.
Balassan is a Place of great Trade, many Merchants resorting thither from
China and all parts of India, and a very strong Town, fearing neither Persian
nor Tartar: It is Governed by peculiar Kings, who call themselves Dulcarneim,
or according to our pronunciation, Zulcarneim; which Name the Eastern People
gave to Alexander the Great, from whence these Kings perhaps boast their
Extract.

The Towns and People of Sablestan.
Sablestan lies Eastward bewond Chorazan. The Towns which it comprehends are
Becksabath, Meimine, Asbe, Bust, and Sarevitz. The Inhabitants thereof are a
rude, ill natured, and ignorant People, destitute of all kind of Civility.

The Kingdom of Cabul.
THe Kingdom of Cabul, The Borders.
otherwise Caboul, is the utmost Northern part of the great Mogol's Dominions:
It borders Eastward at Caximir, being separated from it only by the River
Bhat; Southward it faces Penjab; Westward, Candahar; and Northward verges upon
the Usbeck Tartars.

The Derivation of the Name.
Cabul is derived from a Syriack word which signifies Unfruitful, as indeed the
Country is very barren, cold, and subject to great Winds, except along the
Banks of the River Nilab, which rising in this Country, glides Southward, and
falls near Lahor into the Indus.

The City Cabul very large
The chief City is Cabul, of the same Denomination with the Territory, which
some, as Ananias, take to be the ancient City Arachosia or Cosen, and is as big
(according to the relation of a Persian named Aviadat) as Cairo; the other
noted Towns are Sim, the Chief of a County, Sapurgan, and Baglian. Most of the
Inhabitants are Benjans. Their Houses are low and small. They possess two
strong Castles, in one of which King Babar was born.

By reason of the abundance of Robbers spread through all the Country, they
used to spend three Months in the Journey from Cabul to Lahor, whereas now
they finish it in twenty days; for a certain King of Cabul, to prevent all
Robberies, caused very strong Houses to be built along the Highway in stead of
Inns, at a certain distance one from another, and put Soldiers to inhabit the
same; by which means many of those Places are grown very populous, and become
Towns.

This Country produces a certain Fruit, by the Druggists generally called
Mirabalones.

It has this many years been under the Mogol's Jurisdiction, and generally
maintains twelve or fifteen thousand Men in Arms, for a Defense against the
Persians, Augans, Balouchs, and other Inhabiters of the Mountains.

Between Candahar and Cabul dwell a People in the Mountains called Afgans or
Augans, which range up and down the Country without having any certain
Habitations, but live only by Robbing like the Arabians, and demand Toll from
such as travel through their Country.

The Territory of Multan.
THe Territory of Multan, The Borders.
by Texeira, Multon, borders on the North, at Candahar and Cabul; on the West,
at Persia; on the South, at Haiacan, or the Country of the Balouchs; and in
the South, on Penjab.

Daviti, Texeira, and others, place it far into the Country from Indus or
Indostan, and as it were in the heart of this great Country, making it to
border at the Kingdom of Mandou and the Country of the Hindouns; but certainly
they understand by Multan, the Kingdom of Lahor, otherwise Penjab, which lies
farther into the Country. The Metropolis thereof (according to Terry and
Ananias) bears the Name of Multan; though Texeira makes Lahor the chief City of
the Kingdom, and affirms, that the Multans dwell in the Country of Lahor.

Excellent Bows and Arrows.
This Country is famous for the many excellent Bows and Arrows which are made
in it, and are better, and much neater than any other in all India: The Bows
are made of Horn, curiously joined; the Arrows are of small Canes, both richly
colored and varnished.

The Countries of the Bullochs or Bobochs, or Kingdom of Ballochy, otherwise
Haican, or Hangi-Chan.
THe Country of the Bullochs is properly called Haiacan, The Borders.
or Hiacan, and by others, Hangican. It borders Northerly at the Province of
Multan; Eastward at the Province of Penjab and the River Indus; South-East, at
Buckor; Southward, at the Territory of Taffa; and Westward, at the Mountains
which separate Persia from India.

Some make this Country border on one side of the Pattans or Bottans.

Terry says, that this Country has no nominated City; but Davity calls the
Metropolis Buckara, which lies on the midst of an Island in the River Indus.
Others make Seckara the first City toward the side of the Kingdom of Multan.
But Buckara and Seckara seem to be one and the same City, and is by Terry made
the Metropolis of the Province of Suckor.

Next you come to the City Gorra, after having traveled three days through
great Woods; and five days farther to that of Norry, the least Town in this
Country, toward the side of the Pattans. This is perhaps that City which
Ananias, from the information of the Persian Anvadet calls Negariot.

The nature of the People
The Bullochs, who are Neighbors to the Pattans, are a very resolute, strong,
valiant, and mighty People like Agents, though mild in their Conversation, yet
stubborn, Man-eaters, Robbers, and Pirates; yet some affirm that they are a
very faithful People, and will rather lose their Lives, than suffer any as they
travel in the Caravans to have their Goods taken away by Robbers. They maintain
themselves by carrying of Goods from Place to Place on Camels and other Beasts
of Burden, of which they keep many. They also till their Lands, and worship
the Sun.

The Province of Buckar, or Buckor.
THe Province of Buckor or Buckar, The Borders.
is divided by the River Indus, to its great benefit: It borders on the North,
on the Territory of Haiacan and Astack; in the East, at Jesselmeer; in the
South, at Tatta; and in the West, at Haiacan before mentioned.

Terry calls the chief City of this Province Buckor-Suckor, lying in an Island
on the River Indus. Others call this City Buckara, or Buckero, and Suckera, and
make it to be the Metropolis of the Country of the Bullochs; and some (as we
said before) make it to be the Metropolis of Multan.

The Trade of Suckera.
At Suckera a great Trade is driven with Indian Clothes and other Commodities.
The Inhabitants are Mahumetans.

The Chan or Governor which the Mogol keeps at Buckor-Suckor, generally keeps a
great number of Soldiers in the Castle, to curb the Bullochs, who are
exceedingly addicted to Mutinying.

The Kingdom of Send or Sind, otherwise called Diu and Tatta.
The Name and Borders.
THe Kingdom of Send or Sind, so called by the English, Portuguese, and Spanish,
from its chief River Send or Sind, (anciently Indus) near which it lies, and by
Terry, from its Metropolis, Tatta, or the Country of the Abinds; and by the
Arabians, The Kingdom of Diu: Maffaeus seems to call it Dulcinde, and makes it
border in the South upon the Kingdom of Cambaya. But Terry makes it border in
the North with Buckar; in the East, upon Jesselmeer and Soret; in the South,
touches the Indian Sea; in the West, faces the Mountains lying on the Borders
of Persia, and the Mogol's Country. It is divided by the River Indus,
otherwise Sind, which in its course through this Country makes many pleasant
and delightful Isles, and at last falls into the Sea, near the City Sinde,
famous for many Handicrafts.

Tatta a Place of good Trade.
The Metropolis Tatta, is very eminent for the Trade there driven formerly by
the Portuguese. Some English Travelers called it Gutu Netgar Tutta, though
commonly by the Natives Tutta only, without addition of the other Names.

The other Towns lying on this River, are Cossompacco and Callitallowny, and
the Fortress of Seyvon beyond Tatta. This Fort prevents the passage of such as
come down the River.

The chief Harbor.
The chiefest Harbor is Lowribandel, or (according to Texeira, Singlybandel,
three days Journey from the prime City Tatta. This Haven of Lowribandel has
one Property beyond the rest, viz. the Ships that come to an Anchor in the same
are not eaten by the Worms, as in the Havens of Sovally, Chaul, Dabul, Daman,
Goa, and other Places.

This Country is rich and fruitful, and frequented by the Indians, Portuguese,
and other People for Trade.

Here are diverse sorts of fine Cotton-Linnen made, The Commodities.
which the Inhabitants call Jarrin; Turbants, Oil of Coco-nuts, and abundance
of Butter. It also affords plenty of Sugarcanes, Pitch, Rosin, Leather-works,
wrought with colored Silks, which they use for Carpets, Boxes, Cabinets, and
other curious Wood-work, Inlay'd with Mother-of-Pearl, which by the Portuguese
and others are carried from thence to India.

Tatta is one of the most eminent Provinces for Traffic of all India.

Many great Barques, by the Inhabitants called Risles and Capuses, come
fraighted with all sorts of weaved Stuffs, Sugar, Anniseeds, and other
Commodities, down the River Sind from Lahor, Multan, Agra, Dely, Nandou, Citer,
Utrad, and other Places, and putting into the Haven Lowribandel, lay the said
Commodies aboard of bigger Ships for Ormuz, where they are unladen by
Netherlanders, Portuguese, and Mahumetans.

The Inhabitants are all Mahumetans, yet by reason of the great Trade which is
driven in this Country, there are commonly People of all Religions found in
the same.

The Great Mogol Ecbar first conquered this Territory.

The Provinces of Sorit, Jesselmeer, and Attack.
SOret, The Borders.
a small, but rich Province, borders Eastward, at Zurratte; in the West, at
Tatta; in the North, at Jesselmeer; and in the South, at the Sea. The
Metropolis is called Janagor, or Ganagor.

The Territory of Jesselmer, The Limits.
or Jesselmure, verges Southward, at Soret; Eastward, at Bando; Northwards, at
Attack; and Westward, at Buckor and Tatta. The chief City bears the same
Denomination with the Country.

The County of Attack conterminates in the West, The Bounds.
with Haiacan, the River Indus only parting them; in the North it is bounded
with Penjab; and in the East, with Jenba and Mando. The Metropolitan Town bears
the Name of Attack.

The Province of Penjab or Pangab.
The Name.
THe next is the Province of Penjab or Pangab, which in the Persian Tongue
signifies Five Waters, for its Situation between five Streams, viz. the Ravy,
Behat, Obcan, Wiby, and Sinde or Sindar, all which discharge their Waters into
the Indus, and make a great Lake somewhat Southward from Lahor.

The City of Lahor.
The chief City of this Territory (according to Terry) is Lahor; but others
affirm Lahor to be the Metropolis of Multan. The City being very large and
ancient, is one of the most eminent Towns in all India, and is no way inferior
either in bigness or beauty to Agra: It lies in 35 Degrees and 50 Minutes
Northern Elevation, and has large and well paved Streets.

The Air in and about Lahor is very healthful. The Air.
There are also many remarkable Structures in the same, as the Palace, Mosques,
Hamans or Baths, Tanks or Springs, Gardens, and many other delightful Places.

It is a spacious and fruitful Territory, and the most pleasant Spot of Ground
in all India, and is that part of it which (according to Della Valle) was in
the time of Alexander the Great Governed by King Porus.

There is a Castle, which being very large, strong, and artificially built in a
delightful place, of white hard polished Stones, has twelve Gates, three
whereof respect the City, and the other nine lead into several parts of the
Country. Within this Castle is a stately Palace, into which you enter through
two Gates and two base Courts, and after you have passed through the last, you
come to two parting Ways, the one leading to the Durbar or Joreo, where the
King appears daily before the People, and the other to the Diwanchane, which is
a great Hall, wherein he spends part of the Night, viz. from eight of the Clock
till eleven, with his Omrahs.

On the Walls of this Castle are Engraven the Images of Kings, Princes, and
other Great Men, as Schach Selim, the great Mogol Ecbar's Son, sitting on a
rich Carpet, under a costly Throne, with his Son and his Brothers d' Han
Schach, or Daniel, and Schach Morat on his right Hand, and opposite to him,
Emorza Sherif, eldest Brother to Chan Asorn, With many other Persons of note.

The River Rawy, which springs out of Mount Caximir, and runs through the same
with several Rivulets, having finished a Course of three hundred Miles, along a
deep Navigable Channel, discharges its Water into the Indus near the City
Tatta, not far from Diul: It lies in 23 Degrees and 15 Minutes Northern
Latitude.

The Kingdom or Territory of Caximir.
THe Kingdom of Caximir, or (according to some) Cascimir and Cachmire, by
Mercator taken to be the ancient Arachosia or Archotis of Ptolomy, and by
Herbert, for the ancient Sogdiana, The Borders.
borders in the North, at Mount Caucasus, in the North-West, at the Province of
Banchish, the Indus only separating them; in the South-East, at Penjab; in the
West, at Cabul; and Northerly, at the Kingdom of Maurenahar.

Jarrick conterminates this Kingdom with that of Rebat. It is but a small
Country, and lies (as Texeira tells us) fifteen days Journey from Lahor, and
(according to Herbert) in 41 Degrees and 9 Minutes Northern Latitude, about
three hundred Miles from Agra.

Jarrich gives the Name of Syranacar both to the chief City of this Kingdom,
and to the Country it self, lying in 30 Degrees Northern Latitude.

About three Leagues from the City is a Lake or Pool of sweet Water, about
fifteen Miles in circumference, Navigable for great Ships, yet not above half a
League broad. In the middle of it lies a pleasant artificial Island, with a
Royal Banqueting House therein; whither (as Jarrick affirms) the King resorts,
when he intends to recreate himself in catching of wild Geese and Swans.

Through the midst of this Lake, as also through the Country, glides the
Stream Behat or Bhad, which by its trending or meeandring Bays makes many
Islands, and at last unites it self not far from Jahor with the River Indus, or
(as others say) with the Ganges; which last is somewhat improbable, because of
its distance toward the East.

Another River called Chanab, by Jarrick, Chenao, and by Terry, Nilab, having
also its original in this Country, unites it self likewise with the Indus.

The Country abounds in Rice, Wheat, and other Provisions; and also has
plenty of Grass, Woods, Gardens, and Springs. Of the Roots of their
Mulberry-trees they plant Vines.

This Country formerly lay under Water.
The ancient Histories of the Kings of Caximir make mention, that this Country
was formerly a great Lake, and that a certain ancient Man called Cacheb opened
a Passage for the Water through the Mountain of Baramoule: But this seems to be
incredible; yet not but that this Country was formerly overflowed with Water;
but to open a Passage for it through the forementioned Mountain, is a thing
altogether impossible, the Mountain being so very high and broad; rather an
Earthquake, to which this Place is very subject, opening the Earth, swallowed
up a part of the Mountain, and so opened a Passage for the Water. But however
it was dreyn'd, Its Extent and Situation.
Caximir is no more a Lake, but at present a most fertile Soil, about eighteen
Leagues long and three or four broad, interlac'd with many little Hills. It is
the farthest part of Indostan to the Northward from Lahor, and enclosed by
Mount Caucasus, the Mountains of the Kingdom of great and little Tibet, and
those of the Raja Gamon, which are its next Neighbors. The first Mountains that
enclose it, viz. those which lie nearest the Plains, are of an indifferent
height, and overgrown with Trees and Grass, which serve for Pasturage for
diverse sorts of Beasts, as Oxen, Cows, Sheep, Goats, Horses, Stags, Hares, and
a certain Beast which produces Musk; as also Bees in great abundance. But there
are (which is a strange thing in India) no Serpents, Tigers, Bears, nor Lions,
or but very rarely, to be found here. Beyond these indifferent high Mountains
rise others, which being very high, are covered all the year with Snow, and
reaching above the Clouds, and the usual foggy Damps, carry upon their tops
calm and serene Weather. These Mountains of Caximir cannot be traveled without
great difficulty with Camels, they being so very steep and craggy.

Eleven or twelve days Journey from Lahor, and five from Caximir, are the
Mountains Bember, which are high, spiry, black, and barren, and are as a mighty
Wall of that part of the World.

Great Heat in March, and the effects of it.
Between Lahor and Caximir, near Bember, it is intolerable hot in March, which
proceeds from those high Mountains that lie Northerly, and prevent or break off
all the cool Winds which come from that side, and reflecting the Sunbeams back
on the Fields, scorch and burn them; neither are there any Clouds seen, nor one
Blast of Wind stirring, insomuch that the Horses often fainting, fall down
under their Riders. Strangers that travel this way, break out full of red
Pimples, which prick like Needles, all over their Bodies; nay, many of them die
of the extreme Heat.

When you travel in March out of the Mountains of Bember into those of Caximir,
you come out of a torrid into a more temperate Climate; and that which is more
strange, Travelers find so great an alteration, as if they were transported
out of India into Europe, the Fields being overgrown with all kind of European
Plants, Grain, and Herbs, except Hyssop, Thyme, and Rosemary, the Woods full of
Elms, Ash, Chestnut, and Palm Trees, whenas there is not one Shrub to be seen in
the scorched Fields of Indostan.

Difference of Air in one Mountain.
A days Journey and a half from Bember, is a Mountain, which on both sides is
overgrown with Plants, but with this distinction, viz. on that side which
respects the South toward India, is a mixture both of Indian and European
Plants, but on the North side grow none but European, just as if the Southern
part of the Mountain did participate with the Temperature of the Air of Europe
and India, and the North side only of Europe.

In the Valleys and deep Precipices between these high Mountains lie hundreds
of Trees one above another, some withered, and others rotten with age; and also
many young ones, which are sprung out of the Roots of the rotten. There are
likewise some scorched Trees, either set on fire by Lightning, or by the motion
of the Wind in the midst of Summer, which causes them to clash one against the
other, or (as the Inhabitants say) they take fire of themselves when grown old
and dry.

The highest Mountain of all is called Pirepenjale, from which at a great
distance you discover the Country of Cachemire; and traveling over this
Mountain in March, you are sensible in less than an hours time both of Summer
and Winter; for in ascending it your are exceedingly perplexed with the
intolerable heat of the Sun; but coming to the top, you find frozen Snow,
through which you must cut your way, being often so extraordinary cold, that it
chills the Traveller.

An odd Hermit.
Anno 1664. F. Bernier traveling over this Mountain, found an ancient Recluse
on the top thereof, who had dwelt on the same ever since the Time of Schach
Selim; his Religion was not known to any; but he had the power (as the
Inhabitants affirm) to perform great Miracles, viz. to cause Thunder,
Lightning, Wind, Hail, Rain, and Snow, whenever he pleased: He appeared to
Bernier, who went to visit him in his Cave, like a Salvage with a long gray
Beard, asking Alms of him, and desired that his Pitchers, which he had set
together on a great Stone, might be filled with Water; after which he beckned
with his Hand to him and his Company, that they should not stop, but pass over
the Mountain with all the speed they could, and frowned at those who stood
still or made any noise, alleging that it would occasion great Tempests there;
and told Bernier, that Oranchzef had done well in not suffering any to make a
noise there, as also his Father Schach Jehan; but that Schach Selim scorning
his Advice, caused Drums to be beaten, and Trumpets to be sounded there;
whereupon there arose such a mighty Tempest, that he despaired of getting alive
from thence.

In or between the Mountains which belong to Cachemire, are many fertile
Plains, and amongst others, one which pays Hides and Wool for Tribute, which
the Governor sends for yearly.

The Women here are very handsome, chaste, The Women handsome.
and Laborious.

The Merchants of Cachemire go yearly from Mountain to Mountain to buy up the
Wool, of which they make a certain Stuff called Chales.

There is yet another Place very remote from Cachemire, which also pays Tribute
in Hides and Wool, and possesses very many pleasant and fruitful small Plains
and Valleys, which produce Wheat, Rice, Apples, Pears, Apricocks, Melons, and
Grapes, of which the Owners make excellent Wine.

The Inhabitants have often refused to pay Tribute, on the account of the
troublesome, and almost inaccessible Ways that lead into their Country; but
there have ever been means found to get into their Jurisdiction, to reduce them
to Obedience.

Moreover, in the Mountains which lie farther off, and not under the
Jurisdiction of Cachemire, are very pleasant Tracts of Lands, inhabited by a
white and well shaped People, who seldom come from thence.

There are some that are under no King, nor have they any Religion, only some
account it a sin to eat Fish.

Out of all these Mountains rise many Springs and Rivulets, which the
Inhabitants convey to their Rice-Fields along great Ditches, which having
filled many lesser, at last make a great navigable River for Ships of a
considerable Burden. This Stream having passed round about the Kingdom, and
through the middle of the chief City Caximir, seeks a passage out at Boramoule,
between two spiry Rocks, from whence falling with great force, it receives by
the way the Waters of many little Brooks, which also spring out of the
Mountains, and at last discharges its Waters near Attack in the River Indus.

All these Rivulets gliding from the Mountains, make the low Lands exceeding
fertile, insomuch that the whole Kingdom is like a Garden, which being all
over green, has here and there some Villages situate amongst the Trees, and is
divided into several Beds, Sow'n with Rice, Wheat, and other Grain, besides
Saffron and Hemp, interwoven with Watercourse, Channels, and some little
Lakes and Rivulets, and every where planted with European Trees and Flowers, as
Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks, Nuts, and Vines.

European Plants and Herbs here in great abundance.
In the private Gardens of this Country grow Musk-melons, Patequos or
Water-melons, Beets, Raddishes, most of our Potherbs, and some which we have
not; yet these Fruits are not so good as those in Europe, which proceeds rather
from the ignorance of Gardners than the Soil; wherefore the Mogols have not
improperly called this Country The Terrestrial Paradise; neither did the Great
Mogol Ecbar without just reasons take so much pains to get it from the lawful
Kings; and his Son Schach Selim was so much taken therewith, that he could not
possibly forsake it, often saying, That he would rather lose all his whole
Kingdom besides than Cachemire.

When Oranchzef came Anno 1664. from Deli to recreate himself in this Country
in the Month of March, all the Poets strove to exceed one another in making
Verses in praise of the same, which Oranchzef received, rewarding the Authors
of them very bountifully.

The Description of the City and Lake of Cachemire.
The chief Town of this Country bears the same Denomination with the Kingdom,
and being without Walls, is three quarters of a Mile long, and half a Mile
broad. It is situate in a barren Field, about two Leagues from the Mountains,
which seem to make a Semicircle about a Lake of sweet Water, of about four or
five Leagues in circumference. This Lake is made by running Springs and Brooks
which glide from the Mountains, and discharges its Water through a navigable
Channel, into a River which runs through the middle of the City, and has two
Bridges over it.

This Lake is also full of Islands, which resemble so many pleasant Gardens,
with delightful Walks and Arbors, and are surrounded with Poplar and other
Trees, which have Leaves about two Foot broad, and are as tall as the Masts of
Ships, with Boughs only on the top like Date-trees.

On the other side of the Lake, upon the hanging of the Mountains, are also
abundance of Banquetting-houses and Gardens, for which that place is most
convenient, because it has a delicate Air, a Prospect on the Lake, Islands,
and a City, and is full of Springs and Rivulets. The best of all the Gardens
being the Kings, is in the Persian Language called Schach-Limar, that is, The
King's Garden. Out of the Lake they go into this Garden through a Channel
between two rows of Trees planted along its Banks about five hundred Paces long.

This Channel leads to the King's Sugar-house, which is also in the midst of
the Garden, where begins another brave Moat reaching to the upper end of the
Garden.

The bottom of the forementioned Channel is paved with Freestone, and the sides
thereof raised also with the same Stone; in the middle thereof are many Springs
of Water, which being in a row fifteen Paces distant one from another, shoot up
above the other Water. Moreover, there are Receptacles of Water like Ponds, out
of which by means of several Springs the Water rises up in many small Streams,
which make diverse Figures. This Channel ends at another great
Banqueting House, not much unlike the former.

The forementioned Pleasure-houses, built almost like Cloisters, lying in the
middle of the Moat, are surrounded with Water; between the two rows of Poplar
Trees they have Galleries or Balconies built round about them, and four Doors
opposite one to another; two whereof fronting the two rows of Trees, have two
Bridges which lead cross the Water, one on each side; the other two front the
two ends of the Channel. Each Summer House consists in a great Room in the
midst of four lesser, which make the Square; the Walls of both the great and
small Rooms are richly Gilded and Painted, and full of Inscriptions in large
Persian Characters; the four Doors are very stately, of large Stones, with two
Columns fetched out of the ancient Pagan Temples which Schach Jehan caused to
be ruined. The value of these Stones is not known, nor of what species they
are, unless Marble or Porphyrie.

Most of the Houses are built of Wood two Storeys high, not for want of Stone,
there being many old ruined Deuras or Temples, but for the cheapness, by reason
of the abundance of Wood which grows on the adjacent Mountains, from whence it
may be fetched for a small matter, and carried to the City along a little River.

The Houses built along the River side have each of them a Garden, which has a
Prospect on the Water. The other Houses that do not stand near the River have
Gardens also, and many of them a little Channel, which runs into the Lake, into
which they can Row from their Houses in small Boats

At one end of the City appears a very steep Mountain, at the foot whereof are
many fair Houses with Gardens, and on the top a Mosque, with an Orchard and
Garden belonging to it; In regard whereof the Inhabitants in their Language
call this Mountain Hary Porbet, that is, Green Mountain.

Opposite to this appears another Mountain, being also crowned with a Mosque,
and likewise an ancient Structure, which seems to have been a Deura or Pagode;
but it is called Tackt Souliman, that is, The Throne of Solomon, because (as
the Mahumetans say) Solomon built it when he came to Cachemire.

A wonderful Spring.
At the Confines of this Kingdom, two or three days Journey from the City
Cachemire, a Spring near the foot of a Mountain works Wonders (as the
Mahumetans affirm) in May, when the Snow melts on the Mountains, viz. it ebbs
and flows for fifteen days together three times in a day, in the Morning, at
Noon, and at Night; after the first fifteen days its Course is not so exact,
and after a Months time it stops altogether the remaining part of the year,
except in the time of great and long Rains, when it overflows like other
Springs.

The Heathens have on the Brink of this Spring, a little Deura or Pagode, built
in honor of one of their Idols, wherefore they have called it Send Brary, as if
they would say Water of Brary, whither many People go in Pilgrimage to Bathe
themselves.

Many strange Relations they give concerning the original of this Spring; the
Mountain at whose foot it springs, extends in length from North to South, and
appears at a distance like a Plain, somewhat rising in the middle, and is about
a hundred Paces broad on the top; the North side has some Verdure, but quickly
decaying for want of the Suns influence; the other side on the West is shaded
with Trees and Brambles.

Some distance from the Highway is a pleasant Seat of the ancient Kings of
Cachemire, and at present of the Great Mogol, called Achiavela. The most
remarkable thing belonging thereunto is a Spring, whose Water runs round about
the Structure, and through all the Gardens in many little Channels. This Spring
boyls with such great force out of the Earth, that it may rather be called a
River than a Spring: The Water thereof is so exceeding cold, that one cannot
hold ones Hand in it. The Garden is very large and pleasant, having many brave
Walks, and abundance of Fruit Trees, as Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks, and
Cherries, and also many Fountains and Fish Ponds.

Not far from Achiavel is another brave Royal Garden, in which are all the
forementioned things for recreation; but it excells in having a Pond full of
Fish, which upon calling, or throwing of Bread into the same, appear above
Water; the biggest of them have been seen with golden Rings in their Noses,
with Mottoes engraven on them, which are said to have been put on by order of
the famous Nourmehalle, Queen to the Great Mogol Schach Selim.

A Description of the Mosque at Baramoulay.
About as far from the City Cachemire as Sendbrary, is a Place called
Baramoulay, where a curious Mosque is built, and in it a brave Tomb of one of
the famous Mahumetan Pires, or Saints, which daily (as the Moors relate) works
miraculous Cures upon the Sick, which resort in great numbers to the said Tomb.

Near this Mosque is a Kitchen, in which are many great Copper Kettles full of
Flesh and Rice, which perhaps is the Lodestone that draws the Poor thither,
and the Miracle which cures them.

On the other side is a Garden, about which are Chambers for the Mollahs, who
quietly spend their Lives there.

A wonderful Stone.
There is also another Wonder, viz. there is a thick round Stone, which the
strongest Man can scarce lift up from the Ground; yet nevertheless eleven Men,
by the help of the forementioned Saint, may take up the same without any
trouble, by putting each of them only one Finger thereto.

Eleven Mollas (says F. Bernier, who was present Anno 1664. at the working of
this Miracle) standing close round about the said Stone, with their long Coats
prevented the exact discerning after what manner they lifted up the same; but
all of them said that they touched it not but only with the ends of their
Fingers, and that the Stone felt as light to their appearance as a Sponge: As
for my part, who well observed them, and looked upon them with a curious Eye, I
could not perceive but that they took great pains, and made use of their Thumbs
besides their Fingers; yet I forgot not to cry with the rest of the Mollas and
other Spectators, Coramet, Coramet, that is, A Miracle, A Miracle, and at the
same time gave a Ropia to the Mollas, earnestly desiring them to let me be one
of the eleven which should next lift up the same; which at first they would not
grant, till throwing them another Ropia, and seeming really to believe the
Miracle, one of them gave me his Place, they judging amongst themselves that
ten of them would be enough, though I took no pains, to lift it up so nimbly
that I should not perceive them; but they were exceedingly deceived: for the
Stone, which I lifted not but with the end of my Finger, stirred not, till they
pushing the same on me, I was forced to put my Thumb to it also; in which
manner we lifted the Stone, though with great trouble, from the Ground; yet
when I saw they all looked angrily upon me, and being a Stranger, feared they
might have stoned me, I readily cried out with the rest, Coramet, and gave them
another Ropia.

A considerable distance from Baramoulay is a great Lake, through the midst of
which runs a River to Baramoulay: It is full of Fish, especially Eels, and
swarms with Geese, wild Ducks, and other Waterfowl, which draws the Governor
of Cachemire thither to spend the Winter.

In the midst of this Lake is a Cell, with a little Garden about it, which is
said to drive after a strange manner upon the Water.

In this Place a Recluse spends his Life without ever coming from thence.

They relate diverse Stories concerning this Hermitage, but by most it is
generally believed, that an ancient King of Cachemire, out of curiosity built
the same on great pieces of conjoined Timber.

About this Lake is also a remarkable Spring, which boiling leisurely, rises
very slowly with little Bubbles, and also casts up a certain fine Sand, which
returns back to the bottom after the same manner as it came up: In a moment
after the Water becomes still, without boiling or casting up the Sand, and then
begins a fresh as before, yet without observing exact times between. It is said
that this Wonder proceeds from a Man's speaking or standing near the same,
especially if he stamp with his Foot against the Ground.

In the Mountains is a great Lake, which is full of Ice in Summer, and
resembles a little Icy Sea; for the Winds breaking the Ice asunder, moves the
same up and down.

The Stone Sengsafed.
Next you come to a Place called Sengsafed, which signifies A White Stone, which
is very eminent, because it is overgrown with several sorts of Flowers all the
Summer; and at all times, when many People traveling that way make a great
noise, there instantly falls a great Shower of Rain. But whether this be true
or no, may be a little questioned; for when Schach Jehan went over the same
some years since, he thought he should have died there by reason of an
excessive and unusual Shower of Rain, notwithstanding he had given strict order
to make as little noise as was possible.

The same happens often on the Mountain Pire Penjale.

The Character of the Cachemirans.
The Cachemirans are accounted a beautiful People, and have as handsome Bodies as
the Europeans, having no resemblance at all with the Tartars, only they have
little Eyes like those of Cachever and great Tibet, their Neighbors. The Women
are very slender and straight Bodied, which makes most of the Strangers that
come to the Mogol's Court covet them for Wives, to have Children by them that
may be whiter than the Indians, and so pass for right Mogollans. Women of any
Quality come seldom into the Streets; but the meaner sort scruple it not.

These People are very crafty, and more subtle and ingenious than the Indians,
and no less addicted to Poesy and other Sciences than the Persians. Moreover,
they are very Lahorious, and quick of apprehension; and are good Artists in
making Sedans, Bedsteads, Cupboards, Desks, and other neat Works. They varnish
their Wood-work very curiously, and imitate the Veins of a certain Wood on any
thing what they please, by Inlaying it with Gold Wyres.

But that which is remarkable and peculiar to these People, and that which
brings a Trade and Money into their Country, is the great number of Sashes or
Chales, which they make, and also teach their Children the Art of making them.
These Chales are certain pieces of Stuffs about an Ell long, and three quarters
broad, Embroidered at both ends.

The Mogols and Indians, both Men and Women, wear them on their Heads, or throw
them over their Shoulders like a Cloak: They make them of two several sorts of
Stuffs, namely Inland Wool, which is much softer than the Spanish, and another
sort of Wool, or rather Hair called Touz, which grows on the Breasts of wild
Goats which breed in Tibet. These last are much dearer than the first, the Hair
of Beaver not exceeding it in softness; but it is very subject: to Moths and
Worms, if not beaten and air'd. They are much worn by the great Omrahs, who
give for some of them a hundred, nay, a hundred and fifty Ropias, (each Ropia
being 2 s. 2 d.) whenas those made of Inland Wool cost not above fifty.

It is said that the King of Caximir Governed formerly over all the Mountains
which extend to Tartary, and over all Indostan, quite to the Island of Ceilon.

The Histories of this Country make mention, that the Dominions of the Raja of
Gamon, Cachguer, and Serenaguer, were anciently under the Jurisdiction of this
Kingdom; the Inhabitants whereof were all Heathens, till about three hundred
years ago that the Mahumetan Religion was instituted, so that the greatest part
are now Saracens.

Caximir conquered by the Mogol.
To prevent all Invasions, the Great Mogol keeps four thousand Soldiers in
Caximir, which was formerly a Kingdom by it self, and was Governed by an
absolute King, who paid Tribute to none, till Anno 1665. that Ecbar conquered
the Country at a time when the Inhabitants were at Difference, and maintained
War one against another; for otherwise he could never have mastered it, because
Caximir is the most powerful of all the neighboring Kingdoms.

At present Caximir is Governed by a Viceroy of the Great Mogol's. The present
Governor is called Diaretcan, sent thither by Oranchzef.

Moreover, the Great Mogol Ecbar took this Country by force from the last King
Justef Chan after the following manner, viz.

When Ecbar was about to conquer the Kingdom of Maurenahar, and the King of
Caximir lying between was preparing to prevent him, he sent Alli Myrza, to tell
him, that he should immediately come to Lahor, and bring his Son with him,
where he should be well Entertained, and received with as much, kindness as
could be expected from a neighboring Prince and Friend, who would leave him in
quiet possession of his Country, and assure him of his Fidelity, but if he
resolved to hazard his Fortunes on an uncertain War, he would not only drive
him out of his Realm, but also make him his Slave, and banish his Son. The King
of Caximir affrighted with these Threatenings, surrendered himself immediately to
Ecbar. But Jacob Chan his Son, who was not able to brook this Oppression, fled,
and was immediately followed by so many Friends, that he had Strength
sufficient to drive the Indians out of his Fathers Kingdom, and caused himself
to be proclaimed King; yet he enjoyed the benefit belonging to that Title not
long; for Ecbar being exceedingly enraged at his rebelling, sent Ally Myrza and
Cassem Chan with thirty thousand Men against him, with Command to give him
Battle: But the young Prince not daring to Engage with such unequal Forces,
fled into the high Mountains of Bunkery; whither Cassem Chan pursuing him by
the guidance of some of the Natives, made himself Master of all the Mountains,
and forced Jacob Chan to fly to Serenaguer, where in a short time after he was
Besieged; and though the Place was very strong, and he had Men enough, he was
forced to surrender himself, and being bound Hand and Foot, was carried to
Indostan.

The Territories of Banchish, Jangapore, and Jenba.
Their Situation and Bounds.
THe Territory of Banchish lies Eastward, a little Southerly from Chismeer, from
whence it is separated by the River Indus; it borders Northward, upon the
People Cackares; and Southerly, at Jangapore. The chief City thereof is called
Bishur.

The Province of Jangapore lies on the Stream Caul, one of the five Rivers
which water Penjab: It has Siba on the East, Banchish on the North, Jenba on
the South, and Penjab on the West.

The Territory of Jenba, Eastward from Penjab, has Jangapore on the North,
Nagracat on the East, and Dely on the South. The Metropolis thereof is Jenba.
The Country is very mountainous.

The Kingdom of Dely.
Situation and Limits.
THe Kingdom or Province of Dely, or Delly, is by Terry called Dellee, and by
others Dely, which signifies A Heart, because it lies in the heart of the
Mogol's Dominions, and (as Terry says) between Jenba and Agra.

Maginus places this Kingdom between those of Decan, Narsinga, Orixa, and
Cambaya, and extending about the Province of Narsinga, is separated from the
Kingdom of Cambaya by great Mountains. The River Jeming running along one side
thereof, serves for a Moat, over which a Bridge with ten Arches leads into the
City.

The ancient Metropolis being also called Dely, was once a fair and large City,
and the Seat and Burying-place of the Mogol Emperors, who afterward removed
from thence to the new-built Dely. Its Glory consisted in many Tombs, in which
above twenty great Kings and Lords lie buried. The superstitious Indians flock
thither in Pilgrimage. It has plenty of all things, and was anciently the Seat
of King Porus, who near this Place was conquered by Alexander the Great, when
he came to Invade him, with Elephants and abundance of Horses.

Three Leagues from the City, on a place called Old Dely (where King Homayon,
Father to Ecbar; lies buried) stands a great Marble Pillar or Pyramid, which
having a Greek Inscription, is the greatest Remark in all the Province,
notwithstanding the Letters are almost worn out with age.

About fifty years ago Schach Jehan, Father to the present Great Mogol
Oranchzef, causing a City to be built not far from Old Dely, called it Schach
Jehan Abad, that is, The Peopling of Schach Jeham, and made the same the
Metropolis of the Realm in stead of Agra, where he said the Heat was too great
in Summer.

Jehan Abad 2 new City, how seated.
By reason of the nearness of the two forementioned Places, the Ruins of the old
City has served for the new one, and there is at present scarce any mention
made of Dely; but altogether of Jehan Abad, which is a new City, lying in a
barren Field on the Banks of the River Jemna, and built only along one side of
the Stream, there being but one Bridge over the same, which is laid cross
several Hulks: It is quite unwall'd on that side which respects the Water: The
Walls are of Stone, yet not very tenible or defensive, there being no Moats nor
any Breastworks, but round Towers after the old fashion, about a hundred Paces
distant from one another, and behind them a Mud Wall about four or five Foot
thick: The circumference of the Wall, with the Castle which is enclosed in the
same, is about two Leagues and a half; but if you include a long Suburb which
runs to Lahor, and being a Rellick of the old Dely, is inhabited, it will make
above a League in a direct Line, and a Circumference which cannot justly be
limited, because between this Suburb and the City are spacious Gardens and
Fields, without any Buildings. The Castle, within which is the Mahalle or
Seraglio, besides other Royal Apartments, is built round, orather in a
Semicircle, and looks upon the River; between which and the Walls is a large
sandy Plain, where they generally let the Elephants fight, and often Muster the
Rajas or, principal Omrahs Soldiers in the King's Presence, who beholds the
same out of his Hall Windows. The Walls of the Castle in respect of the round
Towers, built after the old fashion, are almost like those of the City, but
raised with Bricks and red Stones, which appearing like Marble, makes them much
more beautiful than those of the City, than which they are also much higher,
stronger, thicker, and more substantial against small Fieldpieces. Besides, it
is surrounded, except on the Water side, with a Moat of good Water, abounding
with Fish, raised on both sides with Freestone; yet nevertheless a Battery
planted with great Guns may easily beat it down. Round about the Moat lies a
large Garden, which in all Seasons is full of green Trees and Flowers, which
with the red Walls make a pleasant Prospect. Round about this Garden runs the
great Street, or rather a great Royal Court or Plain, on which open two of the
greatest and chiefest Gates of the Castle, leading into the most eminent
Streets of the City.

On the forementioned Plain also stand the Tents of the Rajas, who being in the
King's Service, watch every week by turns, whilst the Omrahs do the same Duty
in the Castle, the Rajas delighting more to be in the Field, than locked up in
the Fortress.

On the said Plain they also breathe the King's Horses every Morning; it serves
also for a Bazar or Marketplace, where all sorts of Merchandise are sold, and
is the Meeting Place of several Philosophers and Astronomers, as well
Mahumetans as Indians.

Here also the great Cobatcan, or Commissary of the Horse, takes a special
Account of all the Troopers Horses that enter into the King's Service, viz. if
he finds the Horses to be Turkish, that is from Turkestan, or from Tartary, and
big and able to do Service, then he marks them with a hot Iron on the Buttock
with the King's Mark, and also the Omrahs under whom they Serve; and this is no
ill Invention, to prevent the Troopers from lending their Horses one to another.

The forementioned eminent Streets, which end over against the two Gates of the
Castle, and on the Plain, are about twenty five or thirty Paces broad, and
extend in a direct Line as far as the Eye can discern, though that which comes
out against the Gate of Lahor is much longer than the other, but all the
Buildings are like one another. There are Arches on both sides of the Streets,
flat on the top, without any Rooms over the same; neither are the Walks
underneath entire, but the Arches are separated by Walls, the space between
which serves several Handicrafts and Artists for Shops to work in in the
daytime, and for Exchangers of Money to do their Business in, and Merchants to
dispose their Commodities to Sale, which at Night they lock up in Warehouses.
The Arches over these Warehouses are built under the Merchants Houses; which
appear very fair at a distance, and are very convenient, for standing very
high, they are not only out of the Dust, but stand very cool, and being in a
manner even with the flat Roof of the Arches, they walking on them, may look
into the Street, and sleep on the same for coolness in the Night. But besides
these two eminent Streets there are five others, which are not so direct nor
straight, but very like them in all things else. Many other Streets indeed
there are which run from all parts of the City, and have most of them Arches,
but because they are built for Dwelling-houses for private People, who are not
curious in the uniformity of their Buildings, they are neither so straight nor
so broad, nor so firmly built as the rest. In all the Streets stand the Houses
of the Mansebdans or petty Omrahs, Persons of Judicature, Merchants and others,
which are not meanly built. It is certain there are many which are built of
Brick or other Stones, and diverse of Clay, and covered with Straw, yet they are
nevertheless very convenient, having Gardens and Orchards belonging to them;
they are also very handsome within, for besides the good Furniture, the Straw
Roofs are supported by long, hard, and strong Canes, and the Walls Plastered
and Whitened.

Amongst these indifferent fair Houses, there are abundance of lesser, which
being built of Lome, serve for Habitations for the Troopers, and other meaner
People belonging to the Bazar and the King's Court.

By reason of these slight Houses Dely is very subject to Fire. Anno 1663.
there were above sixty thousand Thatched Roofs consumed by the Flame, which was
the greater, as being augmented by the strong Winds that blow in the Summer,
which made it so fierce, that it destroyed many Camels and Horses, there being
no time to save them, and also many of the King's Concubines, which having
never been out of the Seraglio, were so bashful, that they chose rather to be
burnt than be saved by strange Men.

By reason of these slight Houses of Lome, Dely cannot be said to be any thing
else than a company of Villages joined together, or rather a Camp with Tents,
only erected in a better order, and more convenient than usual in the Fields.

As to what concerns the Houses of the Omrahs, they stand also in most parts of
the City, especially along the Rivers, and in the Suburbs.

If a House in these warm Countries bears the Name of Handsome and Large, it is
infallibly very convenient, viz. it is seated in a place where the Wind can
come to it from all Corners, especially the Northern: it has Gardens,
Orchards, Fishponds, and Springs, large Vaults or Cellars, with great light
Holes to let the Wind in at. The Inhabitants retiring into them in the heat of
the day, stay in them till about four or five a clock; or else they have
Cascanays, which are little Houses of Straw, or sweet smelling Roots, being
very curiously made, and commonly placed in the middle of a Park, near a Pond
or Spring, that the Servants may with their Leather Jacks wet them on the out
side.

The eminent Houses stand in the midst of a large Square, and have not sloaping
but flat Roofs, on which they may sleep in the Night.

The Furniture of the Houses.
As to what concerns the inside of the principal Houses, the Floors are covered
with Cotton Quilts of four Fingers thick, with a white Linen Cloth laid over
them in the Summer, and with Carpets in the Winter. In the chief Chambers near
the Wall must also lie two or three Quilts covered with Silk, and embroidered
with Gold and Silver, for the Master of the House to sit on, or for Persons of
Quality that come to visit him: moreover, on every Quilt lies a Cushion of
Cloth of Gold; round about the Chamber against the Walls, stand also many of
these great Cushions of Flannel or flowered Satin to sit on. In the Walls,
about four or five Foot from the Floor, they make several Windows of different
fashions, even one with another, and adorned with Flower-pots and Porcelane
Dishes; but they have no Images of Men or Beasts, because their Religion
permits it not.

Most of the forementioned Houses in Dely are furnished after one and the same
manner, though more or less rich according to the Quality of the Owners, by
which means Dely is not without many fair Buildings, yet far inferior to our
European.

Notwithstanding Dely is the Seat and Court of a mighty Prince, and the Staple
for many Merchandises, yet it is not to be compared to London, Paris, or
Amsterdam, the richest and most valuable Commodities being oftener found in
Warehouses than Shops, for where there is one Shop furnished with fine Cloths,
Silk-Stuffs mixed with Gold and Silver, Turbants embroidered with Gold, Cloth of
Tissue, and other rich Commodities, there are above twenty which fell nothing
but Butter, Rice, Barley, Pease, Wheat, and other Corn, the common Food not
only of the Heathens, who never eat Flesh, but also of the vulgar Mahumetans
and Soldidrs.

Dely stored with diverse sorts of Fruit from other Parts.
In this City is a most excellent Fruit-Market, and many Confectioners Shops,
who ih the Summer sell all sorts of dried Fruit, brought thither from Persia,
Balk, Bocara, and Samarcand, as Almonds, Pistachoes, Nuts, Raisins; Plumbs,
Apricocks, and others. In the Winter there are excellent Grapes, brown and
white, which being wrapped up in Cotton, are also brought from the forementioned
Countries, as likewise Apples, two or three sorts of Pears, and rare Melons,
which lasting the whole Winter, are sold very dear.

There are no Fruits growing in this Country but Melons, which being not very
good, are sold at a small rate. Persons of Quality who take care to have the
Seed brought from Persia, and Till or Manure their Ground well, may have
excellent good Melons, yet they are very scarce, the Earth being so barren,
that after the first year they degenerate.

There is another sort of Fruit called Amba or Mangas, which for two Months in
Summer are very plentiful and cheap.

There are likewise all the year round Patecues, or Water-Melons.

Their Preserves are very ill made, being full of Dirt and Flies.

The several sorts of Provision in Dely.
Every Street affords Shops full of Bread, which by reason there are but sew
Ovens, is not well prepared; yet in the Castle is much delicate Bread sold; and
the Omrahs also make good Bread in their Houses, not sparing Milk, Eggs, and
Butter to put into it, yet it commonly tastes mealy and burnt.

In the Bazars are several Cook Shops where Meat is dressed, but after a
sluttish manner; besides, their Meat is very unwholsom, for they commonly roast
or boil a piece of a Horse or Camel, or of an Ox that died in a Ditch; so that
all Persons who will eat good Meat, must dress it in their own Houses.

In most parts of the City are Shambles, where Flesh is exposed to Sale; but
the Buyers must take special care that they buy not Mutton in stead of
Goats-flesh, because both their Beef and Mutton is very feverish, windy, and
bad to digest, though well enough tasted.

The best Victuals in this Country is a raw Buck, which is not sold in Joints
by Butchers, but alive, so that if any Person has a mind to it, he must buy a
whole Buck, which is very inconvenient, because the Flesh, though killed in the
Morning, will be tainted before Night.

They have no Capons in this Country, the Inhabitants whereof are more
compassionate to Beasts than Men, whom they bereave of their Genitals to serve
them in the Seraglio; but in the Market are abundance of Hens, which are cheap
and good; and amongst others there are a sort of little Hens with black
Feathers, which are very dainty, and therefore dear.

There are also Pigeons to be sold, but no young ones, because they account it
criminal to kill them.

There are also Pheasants, but much smaller than ours, which are taken in Nets,
and brought alive to the Market, as they do Ducks and other Fowl.

As to what concerns the Fish, there are few which love it, notwithstanding
there are some very good, especial two sorts; the one is called Hinghala, and
the other, resembling our Carps, is called Rau.

The Description of the Castle.
The Castle, of which we have before made mention, comprehends the Seraglio and
other Royal Structures; but they resemble not the European, nor need they be
like them for it is sufficient that they have the splendour and strength which
this Climate requites. There is nothing remarkable at the Entrance, except two
great Elephants of Stone, which stand on each side of the Gate; on the one sits
the Image of Jemel, the famous Raja of Chitor; on the other, that of Polta his
Brother.

These are the two Heroes, who with their Mother, more valiant than they, vexed
the Great Mogol Ecbar, and showed excellent proofs of their Valor in the Towns
which he Besieged, resolving rather to die with their Mother, than become
subject to the Mogol. By reason of this unheard of Valor, their Enemies
themselves have thought them worthy to have the two foremetion'd Statues
erected in honor of them.

Having passed through the Gate of the Castle, you come to a long broad Street,
which is divided into two by a Brook of running Watet, and has on each side a
long Divan of five or six Foot high, and four broad, with several Arches like
Gates.

On this long Divan Scriveners, Registers, and others have their several
Offices out of the Press and Crowd of the People which pass by them along the
Street, which lies lower than their Shops, on which also the Mansebdars or
petty Omrahs keep Guard in the Night.

There is a Brook running through the midst of the Seraglio, which fills other
Moats with its Water, and has its original out of a River three or four
Leagues from Dely, whence it is conveyed in a Channel cross the Plains, and
between many Rocks, which have been opened with great difficulty and hard Labor.

Coming through the other Gate of the Castle, there opens another large and
broad Street, which also has its Divans on each side with Shops. This Street
being properly a Bazar, is very commodious during the Rainy and Summer Season,
because it is covere'd with a long and broad Arch, which on the top has a fair
Cupula, through which it receives Light.

Besides these two Streets are several other lesser on the right and left side,
which lead to the Lodgings where the Omrahs watch twenty four hours once a Week
by turns. These Lodgings are very stately, the Omrahs beautifying them at their
own Costs and Charge, and are commonly the great Divans, which are opposite to
a Square, interlac'd with several Brooks of Water and Springs. During the time
that they are on the Guard, the King sends them all their Victuals ready
dressed, which they receive with great Ceremony and Reverence, repeating three
several times the Taslin or Thanks, and laying their Hands upon their Heads,
turn their Faces toward the King's Lodgings.

There are yet many more Divans and Tents erected in several places, which are
the Apartments of diverse Officers.

Moreover, there are a great number of Carcanays, which are Shops wherein
Handicraftsmen follow several Employments, as Embroiderers, Goldsmiths,
Painters, Tailors, Shoemakers, and Silkweavers, each in a peculiar Shop.

All these Tradesmen come every Morning to work in this Carcanays, and staying
there all day, return home to their Houses in the Evening, each Man living very
peaceably and quiet, none aiming to be higher than their Condition has
allotted them; for a Tailor breeds his Son a Tailor, and so the rest, and no
Person converses with any Man but those of his own Trade; which Custom is
punctually observed, not only by the Heathens, who are obliged thereto by
their Laws, but also amongst the Mahumetans, which is the occasion of many
beautiful Virgins living unmarried, when as they might Match to the raising
their Fortunes, if their Parents would permit them to Marry a Man of another
Trade or Quality which they account meaner than theirs.

After having passed all these Places before mentioned, you come to the Amacas,
which is a large Square with Piazzaes, which have no Houses over them, but are
divided by a Wall with a little Door or Gate, through which you walk out of one
part into another.

Beyond the great Gate, which is in the midst of one of the sides of this
Square, you come to a large Divan, which is all open toward the side of the
Court, and is called Nagar-canay, because it is the place where the
Trumpetters, or rather Cymbal-players are, who in their Turns play both day and
night. But this seems at first a strange sound in the Ears of Strangers who are
not used to it, there being sometimes ten or twelve of these Trumpetters, and
as many Cimbal-players, who play all together.

They have Trumpets which they call Carna, a Cubit and a half long, with an
opening at the bottom of a Foot diameter. So likewise there are Cymbals of
Copper or Iron, half a Yard wide, from whence one may judge of the noise which
they make; their sound is so harsh in the Ears of Strangers, and so loud, that
they cannot endure to hear the same; yet custom makes it pleasant, especially
in the Night, when it is heard at a distance on the tops of Houses; wherefore
those that are appointed to play, are placed on high at a distance from the
King's Lodgings.

Opposite to the great Gate of the Court, over which this Nagar-canay is kept,
is a spacious Hall, built on several high Columns, and open on three sides, all
which look toward the Court. The Pillars and Floor of this Hall are gilded and
painted. In the midst of the Wall, which separates this Hall from the Seraglio,
is a very high and broad Window, where the King sits on his Throne, with some
of his Sons by his side, and some Eunuchs standing near him, who either keep
the Flies from him with the Tails of Peacocks, or cool him with great Fans,
whilst others in other postures wait to receive his Commands: Below him stand
all the Omrahs, Rajas, and Ambassadors, with cast-down Eyes, and their Hands on
their Breasts: Below these stand the Mansebdars, or inferior Omrahs, in the
same humble postures, whilst the remaining part of the Hall or Court is filled
with diverse sorts of other People. In this place the King gives Audience to all
Persons every day about Noon; for which reason this great Hall is called Amcas,
that is, The Place of Audience.

During the forementioned Assembly, the King, to recreate himself, causes a
certain number of his best Horses to be led by before him, that so he may see
whether they are well kept, which he also does by his best Elephants, which are
washed and colored black all over, except two broad red Strokes, which running
from their Heads cross their Backs, unite near the Tail. The Elephants at that
time also are richly caparison'd with Embroidered Cloths and two Silver Bells,
which hang on each side by a thick Silver Chain, which lies cross their Backs,
and have large and curious Cow Tails, brought from Tibet, hanging about their
Necks. Moreover, two lesser Elephants are led by their sides, as if their
Slaves, and appointed to serve the bigger. These mighty great Beasts, as if
proud of being set forth in such a manner, walk very stately, and coming before
the King, the Riders of them sitting on their Shoulders, prick them into the
Skin with an Iron Hook, and speaking to them, make them bow their Knees, throw
their Noses up in the Air, and make a certain kind of noise, which the People
look upon to be a Taslin or Salute. After the Elephants they bring out several
sorts of Beasts, as the Nilgaux, or gray Oxen, a sort of Elands, Rhinocerots,
and great Buffaloes from Bengala, to fight with their great Horns against a
Lion or Tiger, tame Leopards or Panthers, with which the King goes a Hunting.
This done, they lead by the King's Greyhounds sent him from Usbeck. Lastly,
diverse Birds of prey, amongst which some are taught to seize on a Hare.

The Course of the River Jeminy,
The River Jeminy, by Pliny and Herbert called Jomanes, and by Ptolomy,
Hynamanes, taking its original out of the neighboring Mountains, runs through
and by Agra, from whence it glides with many trending Bays to Piage, where it
discharges its Water into the Ganges.

The nature of the Tree Baxama.
There grows a certain Tree called Baxama, with such a poisonous Root, that it
immediately kills those who eat thereof; but the Fruit thereof, which is called
Nirabix, or (according to Thevet) Rabuxot, expells the Poison, and cures those
that are infected by the Root; yet Thevet tells us, that the Fruit of these
Trees growing on the Island Queixom, lying in the Bay of Persia, is so
poisonous, that it immediately kills those that taste thereof: The same power
he says the Shadow of the Tree has, if any Person lie under it but a quarter
of an hour. Nevertheless the same Thevet affirms, that the same Root in other
Countries is an expeller of Poison.

The Inhabitants, as well Moors as Heathens, are valiant Soldiers, and good
Horsemen. Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, Lances, Daggers, and Steel Plates
called Checharany, two Inches broad, and round like a Dish; they carry seven or
eight of them under their left Arm, and put one of them on the fore Finger of
their right Hand, which turning several times, they throw it at their Enemy,
and if it chances to fall either on their Arm or Leg, it certainly cuts off the
same; and with this Weapon, which the most valiant of them use, they often put
their Enemies to flight.

This Country was formerly Governed by a peculiar King, and belonged not long
since to the King of Pattan, but of late has been subdued by the Great Mogol,
who in the beginning kept his Court in the Metropolis thereof.

The Inhabitants are most of them Moors or Mahumetans, the rest Heathens, who
live very miserably; for being subdued by the Moors, who bereaved them of what
they formerly possessed, they are forced to range up and down the Country from
one place to another, and are therefore called Joguez.

The Kingdom or Province of Mando or Bando.
THe Province or Kingdom of Mando, otherwise Bando, by the Inhabitants
(according to Texeira) called Mandou, and by Purchase, Mandao, borders in the
East, at Agra; in the North, at Dely; in the West, at Jesselmeer; and in the
South, at the Province of Malway.

The Description of the City Maudo.
The Metropolis, which bears one and the same Name with the Province, has six
Miles in circumference: It lies on a high Mountain, the top whereof is flat and
spacious. The Ascent to the City is very, high and steep, and troublesome to
walk up. Not far from the foot of the Mountain is a large Town called Achabar
Pore, by which glides a broad River called Narbodag. The top of the Mountain is
overgrown with shady Trees in such a manner, that it is very pleasant to
^^hold, either from the foot upwards, or from the top downwards. This woody
Mountain serves as a Recess for Lions, Tigers, and wild Elephants.

In this City the Great Mogol has a House or spacious Palace, built of square
Stone, in which he often resides. Not far from this Palace is a Cave cut in a
Rock, which is no less artificial than pleasant, by reason of its coolness.

The Country is barren, sandy, and mountainous, full of Lions, Tigers, and
wild Elephants, and produces great plenty of Costus, in the Malayan Tongue
called Pucho, and Amphion or Opium.

There is also abundance of Azur, with which the Inhabitants Trade to China,
Cambaya, and Ormuz.

It is said that the valiant Amazones Reigned in this Country; but at present
they retain nothing of their Predecessors Qualities, but only to Ride well on
Horseback, with half Boots and Spurs.

Whenever the Queen Rides abroad, she is accompanied by at least two thousand
Women on Horseback.

The Province of Malway or Malva.
THe Province of Malway or Malva, bordering in the East at Narrat, in the South
at Chilor, and in the North and West at Jesel, is very fruitful. The chief City
thereof is called Rantipore; the other Towns are Toda and Upen, which Thomas
Rohous makes to be the Metropolis.

A pretty way from the City glides the Stream Cepra, which is a Branch of the
Ganges, which is said to fall into the Bay of Cambaya.

Near this Stream lies the City Callenda, formerly the Court of the Kings of
Mando or Bando.

The Territory of Sanga or Chitor, and Vtrad.
THe Territory of Sanga or Chitor, formerly a great and ancient Kingdom,
borders in the North-East and East, at Malway; in the West, at the Mount Ranas
and Jesselmeer; and in the South at Zurratte and Chandi, half way between the
Towns Chitor and Asmeer.

The City of Chitor anciently a glorious City
The Metropolis is also called Chitor, but anciently Taxila, and was the chief
City of India, when King Porus went to Fight against Alexander the Great: It
lies in 25 Degrees Northern Latitude on the top of a high Mountain, enclosed
within a Wall of about ten Miles in circumference. Before the ruin thereof it
was a fair City, not only for its Buildings, but also its Bulwarks and Walls;
for which reason it was in the Country Language called Citor, that is, The Fan
of the World. It may compare for antiquity with any City in India; but at
present it is not above three Miles in circumference. There are yet above a
thousand ruined Temples seen in the same, several large, though decayed
Palaces, besides many stately Columns. There is only one Ascent which leads up
to the City, to which they go through four stately Gates along a Path cut in a
Rock. The chief Inhabitants at this day, are Birds and wild Beasts, which the
Benjans hold in great veneration.

By whom destroyed.
This City was formerly possessed by an ancient Prince called Ranas, whom King
Gelaladin Acbar forced in the latter end of the former Age to leave his
Kingdom, and to fly into the Mountains from him called Ranas, where he settled
in the City Odipore, to which he was forced by a long Siege, which the
Inhabitants werre not able to hold for want of Provisions. The City when
surrendered, was by the Conqueror laid waste, and so continues at this day.

Others affirm, that Badur, Sultan of Cambaya, Besieged the City, and that when
the Inhabitants saw no likelihood to preserve it any longer, they burnt all
their Gold and Silver, Precious Stones, and other things, and also themselves,
insomuch that above seventy thousand perished by the Fire, which lasted three
days together; after which Badur entered the City. Not long after, the Kingdom
of Cambaya was totally subdued by the Great Mogol.

The Province of Utrad conterminates with that of Chitor, and lies near the
City of Sinde. The chief City thereof bears the same Denomination.

Productions of the Province of Vtrad.
This Country affords Sal Gemmae, or Stone Salt, by the Inhabitants called
Geucar, a Name derived from Geu, which signifies Barley, and from Car, which
signifies Salt.

This Province also produces a certain Dreg or Gum, by Physicians in the Latin
Tongue called Assa Foetida, and in English, for its ill scent, Devils-Dung:
Avicenna and other Arabians call it Altit; the Indians, Juden; and the Benjans,
Inguh or Hing. That which grows here is the least bitter of any. The Plant
which produces it is of two sorts, the one is a high Tree, or Bush, with little
Leaves not unlike those of Rue; the other is like a Raddish, and has several
great and small Stalks, with Leaves almost like the Fig Tree. This Plant grows
best in Mountains and barren places; it is gathered in Harvest; for about die
latter end of the Summer the Gum begins to run out of it. Theophrastus,
Dioscorides, and others, take this Gum to be the Juice of a Plant which they
call Laser, or Laserpitium.

The Benjans of Zurratte use this Gum in all their Meat, and account no Dish or
Sauce to be well made without it. They also anoint all their drinking Vessels
therewith; nay, they are so used to it, that the strong scent which turns the
Stomach of others, is sweet and pleasant to them.

The Kingdom of Zurratte or Cambaya.
THe Kingdom of Cambaya has received that Denomination from the Portuguese,
who so styled it from the City of Cambaya; which being a Seaport Town, is
better known to the Portuguese than any other in this Country, by reason of
the vast Trade which they drive there. But the Inhabitants call it Gazoraste or
Zurratte; and the Persians, The Country of the Gaores, or Cow-Worshippers,
because they adore those Beasts.

Some suppose Zurratte, though improperly, to be the ancient Gedrosia, because
Gedrosia is without the Limits of India, and this Country or Kingdom within;
wherefore the King of Cambaya is called King of the first India.

The Extent and Limits of Zurratte.
This Country extends into the Sea like a Peninsula, having a great Bay on each
side; the one lying toward the South, is eighteen Leagues broad at the
entrance of the Mouth, but grows narrower and narrower, and runs up North-East
and by East above forty Leagues. It verges in the West and South at the Indian
Sea; in the North it has a broad ridge of Mountains, and beyond them the
Territories of Soret, Jesselmeer, and Bando; in the East, Chitor and Candish;
in the South, the Kingdom of Decan, with the River Gate between.

Maffaeus borders this Country in the East, upon the Kingdom of Mando, and
other Provinces belonging to the Tartars or Mogols; in the West, with the
Country of the Nautaques or Gedrosians; in the North, at the Kingdoms of
Dulcinde, Sanga, and Chitor; and in the South, at the Indian Sea and the
Province of Decan.

The Limits of this Country extended formerly much farther, viz. from the
Indian Sea to Gualor or Gualer, eight days Journey from Amadabat.

The Seacoast of this Kingdom, which is very large, extends (according to
Twist) above four and forty Leagues along the Sea; according to Maginus, a
hundred and fifty Italian Miles, viz. from Circan to the River Bat; yet
Zurratte does not extend to Circan lying beyond the Indus, which proves the
Limits of Maginus to be erroneous.

This Country is full of Towns, Villages, Hamlets, and People, and reckoned
formerly twenty thousand inhabited Places, besides many more ruined by the
Wars, and at present under other Dominions.

The Seaport Towns.
The chief Seaports are situate on both the Bays, as follows: Between Cape
Jaquete, eighteen Leagues from the River Sinde, to the City Diu, a Tract of
thirty Leagues, lie Gigat, Cortiane, Mangalor, Choras, Pattan, Patepatan,
Corimer, and Diu; between which and Cambaya being a Tract along the Sea of
thirty three Leagues, are the Towns of Madrelaba, Mocas, Talaia, Gundim, Goga,
and Cambaya. Next you come to the City Goga, lying twelve Leagues farther from
Cambaya. In these two Promontories of the City Cambaya and Jaquette is
comprehended a part of the Kingdom of Zurratte, with the mountainous Countries
of the Resbites. From the City of Cambaya to the Stream Bate, or rather to that
of Nagotava, are seventy Leagues; in which space lie the Towns Machigan, Began,
and the City Baroch, where the River Narbada has its original. Eight Leagues
farther is the Mouth of the famous Stream Japety or Tapte, on whose Banks lie
the Towns Zurratte and Reinier, or Reiner. Farther along the Coast toward the
side of Decan, are the Towns Noscary, Gandiu, by Robert Covert called Gandeve
and Balsar, all three lying about two Leagues up into the Country, the first
six, the second nine, and the last fourteen Leagues Southward from, Zurratte,
with great Havens, convenient for many Ships. Next you come to Daman, Danu,
Tatapor, Quelmain, Agacim, and Bazain. There are yet along the Coast the Towns
Maim and Nagotava, four Leagues from Chaul, which belongs to Decan; and also
the Town Bate, near a River of the same Name, in the utmost Limits of this
Kingdom.

Besides this City there is another called Sabaja, six Leagues from Gandiu and
Nawdon, three days Journey from Zurratte; between which Towns you travel two
days Journey through pleasant Fields, without any Villages.

Many other Towns there are which lie up into the Country, and amongst others
Amadabat, the Metropolitan of this Kingdom, which deserves a large Description.

The City Amadabath, or Ahmedabath.
THe Metropolis of this Kingdom of Zurratte is not the City of Cambaya, though
the Portuguese have given the whole Kingdom its Denomination from thence: But
Amadabath, or Ahmedabath, otherwise Amadavar and Hamed Ewat, that is, The City
of Homed, or Amad; for Bath in the Persian Tongue signifies a City, and Amad or
Hamed, is the Name of the King who laid the first Foundation thereof nine
hundred years ago.

Mr. Herbert tells us, That the City Amadabath is very ancient, by Ptolomy
called Amastis, and by Arrianus, Amadavastis, and that King Hamed only
enlarged the same Anno 375. after Mahomet's flight from Mecha.

Amadabath is one of the four Cities where the Mogol as a peculiar Favor keeps
his Court. It lies in the middle of the Country in a delightful Plain, on the
Bank of a small River called Saker Mati, a Branch of the Indus, in 33 Degrees
and 10 Minutes Northern Latitude, or (according to Herbert) in 23 Degrees and
18 Minutes; but according to Mandeslo, in 24 Degrees and 109 Minutes Longitude,
eighteen Leagues from Cambaya, sixty two, or as some say, forty five Leagues
from Zurratte, and sixteen from the Sea. It is surrounded with a Wall of
Freestone about six Miles in circumserence, forty Foot high and fifteen thick,
and fortified with many round Turrets: About the Wall runs a Moat about six
Paces broad, though quite decayed, and in many places dry. The Streets are
straight and broad, yet lie unpav'd, and very troublesome to walk in, by reason
of the Dust, which by means of the continual Drought is very great. The
chiefest Streets are planted on both sides with Coco, Terri, Orange, and
Tamarind-trees. The Houses, which are for the most part built of Sun-dry'd
Brick, are pretty large, but very low and flat after the Eastern manner. There
are likewise several Bazars or Exchanges, the biggest and most eminent whereof
is called Bazari Colam, that is, The great Bazar or Exchange: It is a broad,
straight, and long Street, full of Shops on both sides; in the midst thereof
stands a Stone Structure cross the Street, like a Bridge on three Arches, in a
triangular manner. Beyond this Edifice is also in the midst of the Street, a
great Well, enclosed within a square Earthen Bank; the Water in it is very
useful to the Inhabitants, who flock thither in great numbers to fetch the
same. Near the end of this Street stands a great Portal, with its Front toward
the Street between two Towers, and is the Gate of a small Borough, in the
Persian Tongue called Cut. Near this Borough at the end of the Street Maidan,
are two Galleries, one on each side, raised a little from the Ground, where the
King's Edicts or Proclamations are generally read. going from hence through a
great Gate on the right hand, you behold, at a little distance from thence on
the left side, the Viceroy or Governor's Palace or Castle, which (as others
say) lies in the midst of the City, on the Bank of the River, enclosed within a
Wall of Freestone. This Castle, which is accounted the best and strongest
Fortress, which the Mogol has in all India, except that of Cabul and Candahar,
is commonly fortified with eighteen great Guns, besides many lesser, and has a
large square inward Court, in the middle whereof stands a high Pole, on which
placing an Arrow, they shoot at it with a Bow. The King's Lodgings, which are
on the left side, at the entrance into this Square, are very low, and none of
the most beautiful. Under the Windows of these Lodgings appear several Officers
called Mansebdars, which Command each a thousand Horse; and within the Rails
under the Penthouse stand two artificial Elephants, colored according to the
Life. Opposite to the King's Lodgings are many other such like Ornaments,
according to the custom of the Country. The Martial Officers, and those which
serve in the next Places under the Mansebdars, as the Chans and others of like
Quality, keep Guard on the King's Roofs or Balconies, or in some Rooms near
them; those that are of a lower Degree, and Command only over two or three
Horses, walk up and down the Court without the Enclosures. On the other side of
the forementioned Lodgings, stands another Structure with an Enclosure opposite
thereto, but without any Ornamentals, where the King's Life-guards and other
Officers keep Guard. Out of this Court passing through a Gate, you come into
another Court, which being surrounded with Lodging-Rooms and Kitchins, is not
so neat and clean as the other. There are likewise several Caravanseraes, and
amongst others one called Terri Caravansera, or The Tailors Caravansera.

The Moors also have thirty great Metzids or Temples in this City, besides a
great many little Pagodes.

The Benjans likewise possess twelve eminent Places in the City, besides other
lesser in the Suburbs, where they meet to perform their religious Offices.

The Brahmans have also four Churches, the Armenians and Abyssines each of them
one, and the Jews a Synagogue.

At the end of the great Street Bazari Colan stands a Pagode built in honor of
Mahadeu, to which a great number of People resort daily: moreover, the Street
which leads thither is always full of People, not only those that go thither
to their Devotion, and those that return from thence, but also abundance of
poor People, who standing on both sides of the Street, beg Alms of those that
pass by. The Pagode, which is an indifferent large Building, has a long narrow
Entry almost under Ground, for it goes down with several Steps, which makes it
seem to be rather a Way leading into a Cave, than a Pagode. By reason of the
abundance of People that flock thither, and the narrowness of the Way, there is
always a great Crowd: At the Entrance hang several Bells, which the Pilgrims
gingling at their going in, make a continual noise with them. In the Pagode are
several Gioghi or Priests, which go stark naked, having only a Cloth about
their Privities; they wear long Hair, which they seldom or never Comb; they
color their Foreheads with Saffron, and strew Sand upon them, but keep the
other parts of their Body very clean; yet some of them painting themselves with
several Colors, sprinkle Ashes over the Painting.

The Descri-of a stately Pagode.
The chifest and most stately Pagode which the Benjans have in this City, was
(as Mandeslo affirms) built by a rich Merchant called Santides, of the same
Sect, who dwelt at Amadabad. The Court of this Pagode being very spacious, is
enclosed with a Wall of Freestone, along which are covered Walks, and under
them many little Chambers (in each of which stands the Image of a naked Woman)
some of white, and some of black Marble, with their Legs, according to the
fashion of the Country, across under them. In some of the Chambers are three
such Images; the middlemost whereof being large, is of white Marble, and they
other two lesser of black.

In the middle of the forementioned Court stands a Pagode, on each side of
whose Entrance are placed two great Elephants of black Marble; on one of them
sits the Image of the Founder of this Structure, the Roof whereof, as also of
some of the other Buildings, are round like a Vault. The Walls at the Entrance
are painted with several Images of Men and Beasts. Within you see nothing but
three obscure Angles at the further end, in every one of which stand three of
the forementioned Images, and before the middlemost of them a burning Lamp. A
Brahman or Priest commonly performs their religious Service after the following
manner: First he adorns the Images with Flowers and Garlands, which those that
come thither to their Devotion bring along with them for an Offering. No Man or
Woman is permitted to approach this holy Place, unless barefoot, and they are
to make their Offerings kneeling before the Rail which incloses the Images. The
Offerings consist in all manner of sweet smelling Flowers. Oil to burn in the
Lamps, and Rice and Salt, which they strew on some little Bells that hang
amongst several Lamps before the Rail; whilst the Priest lays the forementioned
Trifles before the Images, with a great Cloth over his Mouth, that no unclean
thing may come from his Breath upon the Image, he mutters many things before it
to himself, and sometimes going to the Lamps, holds his Hands a considerable
time over the Flame, and rubs them as if he washed them with Water, and
sometimes rubs them over his Face, which they affirm serves to purify them,
because they say that the Fire cleanses all things.

Both within and without the City are many pleasant Gardens and
Banquetting-houses, and in the midst of them Ponds and Wells of clear and sweet
Water, in which the Inhabitants Bathe themselves in hot Weather.

By reason of Gardens and Orchards in and about the City, it seems to Strangers
to be rather a pleasant Grove than a City. It has also very large and populous
Suburbs, and amongst others one called Begamboer.

Eastward from the City the Benjans have built an Hospital, wherein they cure
all wounded Birds, Beasts, and other Animals.

There are twenty five eminent Villages under the Jurisdiction of Amadabath,
and under them two thousand nine hundred ninety eight Hamlets, which pay
Tribute to the great Villages.

On one side of the City runs a Way which is six Leagues long, called
Bag-Schaban, to a great and pleasant Village, and being planted on both sides
with standing Trees, has many cross Ways, all which are as cool and shady as a
Wood.

A stately Tomb.
Near the City is a Tomb erected by King Rear, in honor of a Tutor whom he loved
exceedingly, in hopes to make immortal by this stately Structure, whose Walls
and Floors are all of polished Marble. There are three Gardens belonging to the
same, one of which is surrounded with four hundred Pillars of Porphyrie Stones
of the Corinthian order. Near it is a large Tank or Pond of Water, enclosed
with a Stone Wall, in which are many Windows, which yield a pleasant Prospect
on the Water.

At Sesques, not above half an hours walking from thence, are the sepulchral
Monuments of several Princes of Cambaya, erected in a Temple, which is much
frequented by the superstitious Benjans.

A Mile from the City is the Garden and Palace of Chanchonna, Son to the great
Byram, Chan of Persia.

The Country of Cambaya to Amadabat, is for the most part desolate and
uncultivated. In the Way are several Pits, each above thirty Yards deep, in
which is salt Water, though at a great distance from the Sea; it is drawn out
by Oxen.

The Country about Amadabath is nothing but a vast Wilderness, and the Ways
very dusty and troublesome for Travelers. The Highways are Hedged in on both
sides with a certain Fruitless and Leafless Plant, which shoots forth only
little long Stalks, of a deep Green, both Winter and Summer, out of which, when
broke asunder, drops a milky Juice like that of green Figs, and being very
sharp, eats into that part of the Skin on which it drops. The Fields which
border the Highways, are full of Ambe-trees, which bear a Fruit like great
Olives, and also af Tamarind-trees.

Without the City are many great Tombs of Marble, erected by the Moors, and are
much statelier than their Houses.

A League and a half from the City lies a great Village called Zirkes, or
Sirkesia, where there is a very magnificent Tomb, the whole Structure with its
Floors being all of polished Marble, and distinguished into three parts; one
whereof rests on a a hundred and forty Marble Pillars, each thirty Foot high,
curiously adorned with Festunes and Pedestals, after the Corinthian Order. This
Structure is said to be the Tomb of one Cacis, Tutor to one of the Kings of
Zurratte, to whom they ascribe great Sanctity and Wonders; and that the said
King, who with three other Kings lies buried in another Chapel, built the same
in commemoration of his Tutor. At a certain time of the year, most of the
Mahumetans come hither in Pilgrimage, firmly believing thereby to obtain pardon
for their sins. On one side of it is a large Pond.

About a Mile from the City is another fair Tomb, of an eminent Mahumetan
Merchant called Hajom Majom, who being enamored of the Beauty of his Daughter,
and threupon Ravishing her, was Beheaded by the King's Command, and buried here
with all his Family; wherefore the Inhabitants to this day call the same
Betychint, that is, The uncovered shame of your Daughter.

In the Suburb Begamboer, near a River, lies one of the King's Gardens called
Schvchbag, which being very large, is surrounded with a strong Wall; at one end
of it stands a pleasant Banqueting House, De Stadt Souratte
with several convenient Apartments in the same.

The Water of the forementioned River is conveyed round the said
Banqueting House, not far from which you come into another Garden, over a high
Stone Bridge four hundred Paces long; and though this Garden be but small, yet
it is very pleasant and high, and has also at the end against the Bridge a
brave Banqueting House. The Water in the droughty Season is drawn up but of
the Wells by Oxen, and put into two great Stone Cisterns before the
Banqueting House. This Garden, wherein commonly young Women Bathe themselves
in the forementioned Cisterns, is called Nicunabag, that is, The Garden of
Precious Stones, and is said to have been made by a beautiful and rich Lady.

There is yet another delightful Garden with a Banqueting House, which was
built by the Great Mogol Ecbar, in commemoration of his conquering the last
King of Zurratte, called Sultan Mahomed Begeran, in that very place; whereby
the Kingdom of Zurratte became subject to the Great Mogol.

Ten Leagues from Amadabath lies a little Town, full of pretty Houses, and
Pagan Temples, called Niervant.

Six Leagues from the said City also lies another Town called Mamadabad, on the
Bank of a pleasant River; on the North side of it is a fair Palace. The
Inhabitants of this Town are for the most part Weavers.

Description of Suratte.
The City Surat or Surratte, according to Davity, the Village Surastra or
Syrastra of Ptolomy, is for its neatness by the Moors called The Mogol's Beard,
and lies in about 21 Degrees and about 30 Minutes Northern Latitude, near the
River Reinier or Reunier (otherwise called Pani Hind, that is, The Water Indus,
and Tapi or Tapti, and Tyndee) two Leagues up into the Country, from the Bay
or Gulf of Cambaya. The City extending along the Banks of the forementioned
River, built square, lies open toward the Water, but enclosed on the Land-side
with Mud Walls and dry Ditches: It has three eminent Gates, which are locked
every Evening, the one leads to the Village Brion, which is a Throughfare for
those that travel to Brotcha, Cambaya, and Amadabat; the other, to Brampour;
and the third, to Nassary: It is adorned with many fair Houses with flat Roofs,
built after the Asiatick manner. There are also many stately Palaces in this
City, which for its defense has a strong Castle near the River, built after
the manner of the Romans, and surrounded with Walls of Freestone and deep
Moats, which receive their Water out of the River Reinier: It is an ancient
Structure, built by the Inhabitants long before the coming of the Portuguese
into these Countries, or (as some say) by the Romans. According to the Relation
of the Inhabitants to Mandeslo, the Turks coming thither with many Ships out of
the Red Sea, and conquering several Places, built this Fort, which has but one
Gate toward the side of a great Plain or Market, and is very strongly guarded,
none daring to come into the same, but those that are upon Duty, nor are any
Persons Listed to serve in the same, but native Indostans, the Rasbutes; though
valiant Soldiers, often mutinying against the Mogol; the Benjans and Usbecks
being accounted Enemies, and the Benjans and Cambayans never serving for
Soldiers, accounting it a great sin to shed Blood. Next to the Castle is the
Nabab, or Sultan's House, and next to that the Custom-house and the Market, to
which the Inhabitants of the neighboring Villages and Strangers bring their
Goods to sell.

The City Surratte is very populous, and inhabited partly by native Indians,
and partly by Strangers and Foreigners, for Trade.

The Indians of these Parts consist generally of Zurrattans, Cambayans,
Benjans, Brahmans, Decans, and some Rasbutes, who are all generally Idolaters
or Mahumetans; the last mentioned are the smallest number, and the Benjans are
the richest, driving the greatest Trade. All these People live very quiet one
amongst another; for the Great Mogol, though himself a Mahumetan, makes no
distinction amongst his People of several Religions, but gives them Offices
alike, both at his Court and in his Army.

Amongst the Foreigners or Strangers, the English and Hollanders drive the
greatest Trade here, besides which there are Portugueses, Arabians, Persians,
Armenians, Turks, and Jews; wherefore Suratte is accounted one of the most
eminent Cities for Trade in all India, both in respect of its Haven, and
because the convenience of carrying the Commodities through all Suratte from
Cambaya and other Places, draws the Merchants thither. The English and Dutch
Traders have many fair Houses in the City, very convenient to dwell in, and
also to stow their Goods. The People of several Nations have each of them a
Church here, and their own Teachers. Without the City the Inhabitants have many
pleasant Gardens and Banquetting-houses along the side of the River.

Chief Remarks in Suratte.
Amongst the Remarks which this City has, the chiesest is a mighty Pond with
diverse Angles, raised with Freestone in a manner like Steps, on which the
People descend to the Water; in the middle of which lies an Isle that none can
have access to but in a Boats, or by swimming. On one side of this Pond is a
pretty long, broad, and deep Channel or Moat, over which lie several Bridges,
that lead to another larger Pond, which here would be accounted a great Lake,
though there it be looked upon as a very small one. This also has many Angles,
and is walled about with Freestone, with which also the sides of the Moat are
strengthened. Between the great and lesser Ponds near the Moat stands a Tomb of
two eminent Mahumetans which killed one another. This Pond or Pool was in the
beginning of this Age made by a rich Inhabitant of this City, with the expense
of his whole Estate, insomuch that his Daughter became miserably poor, none of
the Townsmen once relieving her, though her Father had for their accommodation
and the public good, exhausted all his Treasure. The Pool is called Gopi
Telau, from the Builder, whose Name was Gopis.

Without the City, toward the Sea side, is a every pleasant Garden, which
formerly belonged to the King of Suratte: It is but little, yet full of Trees,
Plants and Herbs.

There is also a little Kiosk, or covered place, built at the end of the Garden
over a large Pool, which is no less commodious to the Inhabitants than the Pool
at Suratte.

Not far from thence stands a Mosque, also built over a Pond; before the Gates
thereof sit commonly many People on the Ground, begging Alms of those that pass
by. Within the Mosque, near the Wall, in a narrow dark Corner, stands a little
Marble Pyramid, called Pyr, that is, Old, which perhaps is the Burying-place of
one whom they worship as an ancient Saint. There is generally a great resort to
this Mosque, not only of Mahumetans, but also of Heathens or Idolaters, who
give sufficient testimonies of their superstitious and ridiculous Worship. The
Entrance is always crowded with People, especially Women; those that go into
the Mosque strew Flowers and Rice for an Offering; to which purpose there stand
many at the Door who sell the same. But the Idolaters are much more zealous
herein than the Mahumetans.

On the North side of the City is another great Pool, encompassed with a Wall
of Freestone, having eighteen Angles, each twenty five Yards broad, The Legend
of Oman Hidal Chan.
with Stone Steps to descend. In the middle stands the Tomb of the Builder
called Omar Hidal Chan, a Mahumetan, who (as the Inhabitants relate) was a
General in his Lifetime; they also tell many strange Tales of him, viz. That
he Encountered with the Devil and conquered him, but out of compassion released
him again: That he conveyed the Stones to this Building by Leopards and Tigers:
And that he threw the Mountain Morna, lying not far from Derman, with his own
Hands, from the ancient City Reinier. In this Pool they gather Rainwater,
which in the dry Seasons (for it often happens, that not a drop of Rain falls
there in a whole year) is wholsomer to be used than the Water out of the River
Reinier, which is brackish with the ebbing and flowing of the Sea.

On the North side of the City stands an Indian Wonder-tree, under whose Boughs
and Shadow may lie three or four thousand Men. Under the same Tree is a
Chapel, in which a Benjan Saint called Gemsch lies buried: Before the Door
stands an Image in a very horrid shape. Diverse Lamps burn night and day in this
Chapel, whither a great number of Idolaters repair to perform their Devotion.

About a League and a half Northward from the Mouth of the River Tapti or
Reinier, The Haven or Harbor of Sohali.
and four, (or according to Mandeslo two) Leagues from the City of Suratte, is
a Road or Harbor, by the Inhabitants called Sohali, or Swali, or Suhali, from
the neighboring Village: It extends North-East and by East, and South-West and
by West, under 21 Degrees and fifty Minutes, between the Main Continent and the
Sand-banks, which are dry at low Water, or very shallow. It is defended from
all Winds except the Southern, and a Musket Shot broad at the Mouth, where the
Ships lade and unlade, and has at high Water seven, and at low, five Fathom,
with a hard and even Ground. The Goods are from thence carried by Land, which
is very plain, in Carrs, or in Boats up the River to the City Suratte. The
English and Hollanders have several Huts along the Shore, where they first
unlade their Commodities, and afterward put them into their Storehouses. It
is impossible for any Ship to ride at an Anchor here from May to September, by
reason of the great Storms and Tempests, mixed with Thunder and Lightning;
which to avoid, the Ships go to the Cape of Comori, Cormandel, and Bengala,
till such time as the forementioned blustering Season is over, and then they
return again.

All the Country about Surratte is very plain, and the whole year round very
green and pleasant. About the Village Sohali grow many Coco, Tamarind, and
other Fruit Trees. Both within and without the City are many Gardens, full of
all sorts of Fruits, as Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Peaches, and others.

Not far from the City lies a very fruitful Grove of tall Coco-nuts, Citrons,
Oranges, Tamarinds, and other Indian Fruit Trees, and is not only able to
furnish the City with Wood, but also the adjacent Towns, nay, they whole
Province with Timber, for the building of Houses and Shipping.

Fertility of the Soil.
The Soil about the City is also very fertile, and yields abundance of Rice,
Barley, Beans, and what else is requisite for humane subsistence.

There are also many excellent Pastures, and consequently abundance of Cattle,
as Buffaloes, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, and all manner of Venison, as also many
Asses, but few Camels and Horses.

This City, under whose Jurisdiction are above four hundred Villages, is
Governed by a Sultan, who determines all Cases in Surratte and the adjacent
Villages, and receiving the Customs and Revenues, sends them to the Mogol.
Besides him there is another Officer, appointed by the Mogol to Govern the
Castle, with whom the Governor of the City has nothing to do; they live both
very magnificently, especially he of the City, the King's Standard being always
carried before him, and the Drums beating when he goes out.

The Derivation of the Name, and Situation of Cambaya.
The City of Cambaya first received that Denomination, though corruptly, from
the Portuguese; for its right Name is Cambewath, or Cambebath, that is, The
City Cambe. It lies in a pleasant Plain in the innermost Jaws of the great Gulf
of Cambaya, so called from the City, near the Shore of the River Meli, or May,
otherwise Guandari, at the place where it falls into this Bay, sixteen Leagues
Northward from the City Brotcha, or Brotsch, and (according to Linschot) fifty
three Leagues from Diu.

The compass and strength of it.
Cambaya being twice as big as Surratte, is two hours walking in circumference,
and is surrounded with a double Stone Wall, which has twelve Gates. Its
chiefest Ornament consists in its great Suburbs. The Streets are straight and
broad, and locked up every Night with a great pair of Gates. The Houses are
partly of Brick, and partly of Freestone, but all kept very moist, and
consequently cool, and would here be accounted but mean Houses, yet are
reckoned the best in the Country, being covered with Tyles, and having Gutters
to receive the Rainwater, which in the three Summer Months falls in great
abundance.

The Description.
The City is not very old, and perhaps built out of the Ruins of some other: It
has three great Marketplaces in the middle, and fifteen pleasant Gardens full
of Mangas-trees, the Fruit whereof grows so plentifully here, that they are
sent to all the adjacent Countries; besides all which there are four Pools, out
of which the Inhabitants have Water all the year.

On one side of the City is a a square Pool, raised with Marble, and several
Steps on which they descend to the Water; for besides that which is saved in
these Pools during the rainy Season, there is little else in Cambaya.

This City has no Haven of any great consequence, put only a bare Road, by
reason of the inconvenient Situation and low Shore; yet it is called a Haven,
because of the great number of Ships, which come thither from all Places. At
High Water the Ships may Anchor close before the City, but lie dry at
Low Water, which are only small Vessels, for Ships of Burden are forced to lie
a good distance from the Shore in deeper Water.

The Ebb and Flood of the Sea about Cambaya is exceeding swift, the Sea rising
in a moment, and in less than a quarter of an hour to its usual height; which
is done with such wonderful swiftness, that no Horse can outrun the same; for
it comes so furiously out of the Sea, that like a great Current it overflows a
vast Tract of Land.

Many Villages are under the Jurisdiction of this City, where all Goods which
are brought thither by Water, pay Three per cent. and Four if they come by Land.

This City was formerly the Seat of the King's of Surratte, and famous for
Transporting of Agats and other Precious Stones.

Both without and within the City are many Hospitals for sick and maimed
Beasts, as is already mentioned, which the Benjans look to, and cure with great
care; for they abominate the killing of any Beast.

About a League and a half from Cambaya, in the way to Amadabat, lies a Village
called Saima, seven Leagues and a half farther Southwards another named Mator,
and three from Cambaya, another called Sarode, which is inhabited by Rasbutes,
who Rob on the Highways and Rivers. Most of the Inhabitants are Pagans or
Idolaters, who are very careful in the preservation of their Laws; the rest are
either Moors or Mahumetans.

In the Village Cansari, lying not far from the City, stands a Pagode, which
has several Cloisters and Walks on the out side, built after a pretty kind of
fashion, as also the whole Structure, which though it be not very big, yet it
is built in a handsome method. Within this Pagode, which belongs to the Indians
called Vertias, who shave the Hair from off their Heads, stands upon a high
Altar, which is ascended by Steps, an Idol, with diverse burning Lamps hung
before him. Hither resort many People to Offer Incense before the Idol.

Not far from hence is another square Pagode, furnished with diverse Idols.

A League from Cambaya lies the Village Agra, which according to the Relation
of the Benjans was anciently the Royal Seat, and chief City of the Kingdom of
Surratte.

Descriptio of the City of Brotcha.
The City of Brotch, otherwise called Brotsch and Baroch, and by Della Valle,
Barockci and Bebrug, lies twelve Leagues Northward from Surratte, and about two
from the Sea side, near the Northern Shore of the Stream Nardabat or Nardaba,
otherwise Nerheda, which in a broad, though shallow Channel, glides by its
Walls, and coming down from beyond Decan and Mandou, discharges its Water into
the Bay of Bengala. By reason of its great distance from the Sea, it never
comes up to the City, though at high Flood.

The City, which is pretty large, lies on a Hill, and is naturally well
fortified, and by reason of its convenient Situation may be made the strongest
Fortress of all India. It is surrounded with Walls of hard Stone, in manner
like a Fort, and strengthened with Bulwarks, and has three Land-Gates, each
with a Portal, and according to the fashion of the Country is very strongly
built; besides two more along the side toward the River, out of which the
Water that is used in the City is fetched daily with Buffaloes. There also
(with leave of the Receiver of the Customs) many Boats with Wood are unladen.
On the Land they keep a strong Guard in several places, without whose leave
none may pass through them.

The Inhabitants relate, and some old Rubies testify, that Brotcha was
formerly a stately City; but at present the best Houses are fallen to ruin,
and few People of note inhabit the same: Most of them being Benjans maintain
themselves by making of Callicoes, which they sell to a good advantage.

About the City, or at the Foot of the Mountain, lie two Suburbs called Poera,
inhabited by People of several Nations, which also maintain themselves by
making and Trading with Cotton Goods; and they make the best Callico that is to
be had in all Surratte, and therefore send it to all parts of India. They also
make stripped Stuffs, half of Silk, and half of Cotton, which are much used, and
highly esteemed in India; for though it be washed never so often, it changes
not its color.

The English have a Factory in this Town, and pay Two per cent. for all their
Goods.

The Jurisdiction of this City.
The Jurisdiction of Brotcha extends over eighty four Villages, and did formerly
over three Towns, which now have each a peculiar Governor. Herbert affirms,
that it Commands over many great and remote Towns, as Medapour, lying seventeen
Leagues from it; Radgipour, or Brodera, six Leagues from thence; Jown-basser,
seven Leagues from thence; and many others, which at this day have each their
peculiar Lord, of whom the Mogol receives yearly a Million two hundred and
sixty thousand Momoedies for a Revenue. The Harbor for Ships is before the
River Nerheda in the open Sea, without a shelter against the Winds. For some
Leagues about the City, the Country is very plain and fertile, being watered
by the River Navar or Nardabath.

Northward from Brotcha lies the Stream Dilavel; and eight Leagues from the
said City, in the Way to Cambaya, you may see a great Village called
Giambierser, or Junbuglar, otherwise Jambouser.

A Tomb whereto Pilgrimages are made.
Between Brotcha and Amadabat, is the Tomb of a certain Mahumetan Saint, called
Polmedony, being highly reverenced by the Inhabitants, who out of a mad zeal go
thither in Pilgrimage, believing that they shall merit great things thereby;
and that they may seem to be the more penitent, they load themselves with Iron
Chains and Stones; by which means they imagine they shall obtain fair Children,
Health, Riches, and what else their Hearts can wish or desire.

Description of Goga.
Goga is a Town or great Village, lying about three Leagues from Cambaya, near
the Sea side, where the Gulf or Bay of Cambaya grows narrower, and appears like
a River. It is a pretty large Town, but has neither Gates nor Walls, except
toward the Sea side, where there is a Wall of Freestone, near which is the
Road and Place of Rendezvous for the Portuguese Frigates, which come as Convoys
to their Merchants Ships, and when laden, conduct them to Goa, and other of
their Factories.

About nine Leagues Westward from Goa, lie two Villages, called Pattepane and
Mangerel.

Bysantagan a City.
Bysantagan, a great City, lying in the midst of Surratte, boasts twenty
thousand Houses, large Towers and Temples, and in the middle of it a great
Pool, wherein the Inhabitants, both Men and Women, bathe themselves every day.
It is inhabited by Brahmans, and was formerly but a mean Village, but is come
to its present splendour by the fertility of the Soil about it, which drew many
People thither from other Places.

Pattan a very large City.
Pettan, a large City, six Leagues in circumference, is surrounded with a Wall,
the Houses built of Stone. In the middle of the City is a most magnificent
Mahumetan Mosque, built formerly by the Heathens on a hundred and fifty Pillars
of Marble and other Stone. Besides this there are many other fair Structures,
and without the City diverse pleasant Gardens, but most of them being decayed,
have left their ruined Heaps to testify their former splendour. On the East
side of the City stands a great Castle, surrounded with high Walls and strong
Towers, and is the Residence of the Governor. The Inhabitants are most of them
Benjans, who are exceedingly perplexed by the Coelies, being certain Robbers
that dwell in an adjacent Territory, who often force them to pay Contribution,
to the great prejudice of their Trade.

Cheytepour is a Town of Village, lying six Leagues from Pettan, and forty five
from Amadabat, built on the Banks of a pleasant Rivulet.

Messane, an open Village, lying seven Leagues and a half from Cheytepour, has
an old decayed Castle, where the Governor resides with two hundred Horse.

A little League from Amadabat is a Village called Jessempour, which has a
great Sary, or House of Entertainment for Travelers.

A League and a half farther is another great Village named Batova, with a
large Pool.

Three Miles from Batova is a Village named Canis, which lies near a River of
the same Denomination.

Fourteen Leagues from Amadabat, and nine from Brotcha, is a little Town called
Nariadet, or Niriaud, or Nieriaut, built with fair Houses and Pagan Temples.

Seven Leagues and a half from Nariadet lies the Castle Wasset, with the
Villages Sejantra and Amenogy, between both, two or three Leagues one from
another. It is an old decayed Structure, built upon a high Hill near a River,
which falls into the Bay of Cambaya. There are generally a hundred Horsemen in
Garrison, who in the King's Name receive one Ropia and a half for every Carr
which the Caffilas drive by this Place.

Brodera, a Country Town, lies between Amadabat and Brotcha, one and twenty
Leagues Eastward from the first, and thirty Westward from the last, on a sandy
Plain near a small Rivulet named Wasset. It was built by a Heathen called Rasia
Ghie, Son to Sultan Mahomed Begeran, the last King of Surratte, about a League
and a half from old Brodera then called Radiapora, which by this means was
ruined and left desolate, all the Inhabitants going to the new Brodera. This
Town or City, which is surrounded with Walls and Bulwarks of Chalk and Stone,
has five Gates, one whereof is lately stopped up for want of a Way. On the West
side is a large Suburb, inhabited by Weavers and Dyers, who are for the most
part Benjans, Ketteyans, and a few Moors. Two hundred and twenty Villages are
under the Jurisdiction of this City, seventy five whereof pay Tribute to the
Governor for the maintaining of his Soldiers, the rest are by the King given to
several of his Officers, that by some heroic Exploits or good Service have
obliged him, in requital whereof he gives them the Revenues of the
forementioned Villages to maintain them. Within the City are ten magnificent
Houses, Gardens, and Tombs, whereof one very stately, built in the midst of an
Orchard, is the Tomb of a mighty Lord and all his Family. Besides all these
there are five pleasant Gardens full of Fruit Trees, Flowers and Herbs. On the
East side, right before the Gate that leads to Brotcha, is a pretty deep Pool,
about half a Furlong broad, and flanked on one side with a Stone Wall, from
whence the Inhabitants fetch all their Water.

On the East side also, about eight Leagues from Brodera, lies a Village called
Sindickera; and five or six Leagues Westward from Brodera, are eight or ten
Village more, which are all under the Jurisdiction of Brodera; some Leagues
from which, toward the side of Amadabat, lies a Castle or Fortress on a
Mountain, surrounded with a Wall near a small Brook.

More Northerly is an old decayed Town called Surbrodra, where there is a
Custom-house. Next to that is the Village Amemoygra, where there is a Well of
excellent Water.

Daman, a large City with a Castle.
The City Daman, lying on the right hand, at the coming in of a Sea-Bay, forty
Leagues South-East from Diu, in 20 Degrees Northern Latitude. It is a great
City, situate near a River at the Sea, and fortified with a strong Castle.
Della Valle affirms, that it is not very big, but well built, and surrounded
with strong Walls like a Fortress. This City was in the Year 1559. conquered by
the Viceroy Constantine for the Crown of Portugal; Conquered by the Portuguese.
for when the Portuguese had with the consent of the Inhabitants built a Fort
near the City for the securing of their Trade, the Inhabitants endeavored
afterward to force them from thence; but the Portuguese being well fortified,
opposed them, and in a short time made themselves Masters of this Place, making
it an Example to all the Kings of India, especially the Great Mogol, who being
warned by the Fall of his Neighbors, would not permit any Europeans to build
Forts in his Dominions, nor give them a Foot of Land in possession.

The Blacks Natives of this Place Converted to Christianity, are the best
Musquetteers of all India, of which they have given sufficient testimony; for
about the Year 1644. when the Great Mogol's Son Besieged this City with ten
thousand Men, they behaved themselves so bravely, that the said Prince having
lost a great number of his Men, was forced to retreat from thence in a confused
manner.

The Portuguese possess several Isles near Daman, which pay Tribute to the King
of Salsette, wherefore he is called Choura of Daman. Southwards from which lies
a Place near the Sea called Dary; beyond which is the Bay Kielme Mahi, so
called from two Villages lying near the Sea, the one named Kielme, and the
other Mahi; and beyond them appears the City Bazaim.

The City Bazaim.
Sixty Leagues Southward from Deman, near the Island Salsette, lies the City
Bazaim, which Mercator affirms to be the Borace of Ptolomy, in nineteen Degrees
and a half Northern Latitude. By reason of the many Rivers and Brooks the Way
between Bazaim cannot be traveled in less than three days. The City being
pretty large, has a convenient Harbor. The whole Coast produces much Rice,
Pease, and other Grain, Oil, and Coco-nuts. In the beginning of this Age many
Houses were swallowed up by an Earthquake, in the room of which none have since
been built.

On the Main Continent near the Island Salsette de Bazaim, the Portuguese have
a Fort called Manora, and also a Village with many Hamlets near it.

view of Dabhol ^^ Bay end Stadt DABUL gelegen ^^de noorder breets^^^


The Rock Asserim.
The Fortress, or Rock of Asserim, lies up some Leagues farther into the
Country, up which they generally climb barefoot, that so they may take the
surer footing, it being very high, steep, and slippery, insomuch that those who
ascend the same, are in great danger of falling from the top to the bottom; or
else if they ascend on the other side, they climb up by Ropes, with which they
hoise up Cows and other things, which they want. And though this Rock lie
between many other, which may easily be ascended, yet it is so high above them,
that it seems to be a Fortress which Commands over the rest: And as this Place
is the Key to all the rest which the Portuguese possess to the Northward in
India, so it is likewise a great Eyesore to the neighboring Kings, who have
for that reason practiced diverse ways to conquer the same; which to prevent,
the Portuguese are continually upon their Guard, especially at those Places
which yield a good Prospect. On the top of the said Rock is a large Plain,
surrounded with many great Stones, which they throw down upon those that come
to invade them. Not only the Soldiers, but also the Inhabitants of the Place
watch every Night, and carry Torches made of a kind of Wood, like Canes which
last a long time, and cannot be put out by any Wind or Rain, which rather makes
them burn the better. This Place is also a Sanctuary for all Criminals, who
repairing thither for shelter are received and kept there for Soldiers, which
with their Wives and Children amounted formerly to about seven hundred. The
Portuguese conquered this Rock in the time of the Governor Francis Borrero.

The Country of Surratte.
The Country of Surratte is interlac'd by many Rivers, viz. the Nardabat which
takes its course by the City Brotcha, and divides it self into two Arms, about
four Leagues from the City toward the South near the Village Hansoot; in some
places it is one, and in others two Miles broad, and is divided by many other
Streams, which have Passages into the Sea. The Soil is for the most part
clayie, and mixed with Sand, except near the City, where it is all Sand; it
extends East North-East, and West South-West. The other Rivers are Wasset and
Bate, which last springs out of the Mountains of Gate, and falling into the
Gulf of Bambain, divides the Kingdom of Decan, and Country of Surratte or
Cambaya.

The Tapta, otherwise Tyndee also glides between the Country of Surratte and
that of the Benjans.

The River May, otherwise Mehi, or Guandari, along whose Banks the City of
Cambaya is built, is dry at low Ebb, except in three or four places, which
having always about four or five Foot of Water, are dangerous to wade through
without a good Guide, because of the strong Current that is in them. This River
ebbs and flows daily seven Fathom perpendicular. At High Water the Ships come
to an Anchor close before the City, but are left quite dry at Low Water. The
Ground being sandy, and mixed with Clay, is much better and easier for those
Vessels that lie dry upon it, than if it were hard Sand.

About a League Southward from Cambaya glides the River Mihi, whose Shore must
be traveled at the low Ebb of the Sea, and not without great danger, because
the Sea rising, flows up above five Leagues; and at low Tide you are forced to
wade through two or three deep places: if any one should venture to wade
through at the coming in of the Tide, he would undoubtedly be swallowed by the
Sea: for when the Water flows with greater strength, and higher than ordinary
(for it observes no Rule, but rises and falls more or less according to the
course of the Moon,) it carries and washes away both Horse and Man, and
oftentimes with such force, that an Elephant cannot withstand the same, nor all
his weight prevent him from being carried away; wherefore all travelers wait
for a certain time to wade through the same, viz. when the Sea is low, which is
at the new Moon, at which time they may go over it in Coaches or on Horseback
without any danger; Coaches are commonly held fast on both sides, that they may
not be overturned by the Waves* those that go on foot strip themselves naked,
and tying up their Clothes, carry them on their Shoulders: many times a whole
Caravan, with abundance of People, travel over the same, some in Coaches, some
in Wagons, some on Horseback, and others on foot, both Men and Women stark
naked, accounting it neither shameful nor immodest. The Soil between both, viz.
between the said River and the City Cambaya, is firm and hard, and is not
overflown, though plain, and not far from the Sea.

In most Places of the Kingdom is excellent Water, except in the City of
Cambaya, where there is great want of it. There are several Pools of Water in
the Towns, and some of them so big, that the Inhabitants filling them in the
Winter, have enough to serve them all the year.

In those Countries which lie near the Indian Sea, is a certain rainy Season or
Winter, viz. four Months in the year, beginning in June when the Sun enters
into the Tropic of Cancer, and ending in September: If it Rains out of the
Season, it is unusual, but betokens a fruitful year; for in the other eight
Months the Weather is so serene and clear, that there is scarce a Cloud seen
in the Sky; neither does it rain constantly during the forementioned four
Months, as in Goa, but only sometimes, especially at the beginning of the New
and Full-Moon.

The Winds blow also here six Months Northerly, and six Months Southerly.

The Weather is exceeding hot here in April, May, and June, and very
unhealthful, occasioning Fevers and other Distempers, but when it begins to
Rain, the Wind blows very strong, and tempers the excessive Heat; but in the
dry Season, it it has this inconveniency, viz. it draws up the Dust like a
Cloud, and disperses the same on Travelers, to their great annoyance.

In the rainy Season, especially in May and June, they Till their Lands, and
Sow their Corn, which being, moistened by the Rain, produces so rich and
plentiful a Harvest, and such abundance of Grain, that all the adjacent
Countries are supplied therewith: for Surratte (according to Linschot) is the
fruitfullest Spot of Land in all India.

The Country produces great quantities of Beans and Wheat, but much bigger and
whiter than ours; also Barley, Rice, Tares, and Pease, which are less than
those which grow in Europe; Linseed, and a small Seed called Thill, out of
which they press abundance of Oil. There is likewise a sort of Beans or gray
Pease, which they call Danna, growing on little Stalks along the Ground, and
serving the Horses in stead of Oats.

The Inhabitants Sow abundance of Mustard Seed and Tobacco, which is much
better than that of other Places, but they cannot prepare the same so well as
the People in the West Indies.

The Productions of the Country.
In the Gardens, which are very pleasant, and near the Towns, grow diverse sorts
of Herbs, both for the Pot and Salleting, also Raddishes, Turnips. Cucumbers,
Garlic, Onions, Beet-roots, Potatoes, and Colworts, besides eight or ten sorts
of Drugs and little Herbs, as Turbith, Galanga, Spica-nardi, Assa Foetida or
Devils-dung, Boran, and some others.

There is much Cotton, Silk, Sugar, Wax, many Fruit Trees and Plants, as
Oranges, Pomegranates, Lemmons, Limes, Citterns, Ananas, Bananas, Figs, Jackas,
Coco-nuts in great abundance, and in some peculiar Gardens Grapes, though not
in very great plenty, and therefore are dearer than other Fruits.

The Fruit Mangas is much better here than in Ormuz, but not so big, yet of a
more delicate smell, and having a small Kernel in the middle. They are
transported to many Places, especially to the Village Chirches, two Leagues
from the Metropolis Amadabat, from whence it has received its Name.

This Country has plenty of Indigo, Cassia, Mirobolans, Calamba, Opium or
Amphion, two sorts of Cummin, white and black Ginger, which being Preserved, is
sent to Persia and other Places, as also certain Leaves, by the Indians called
Tomalapatra, Tamarinds, and Palmito-trees, besides many other wild Trees not
known in Europe.

About Bazaim grows a Tree which bears the Fruit called Jangomes.

The Country near about Brotcha, which is very low, and without Mountains,
has many Gardens, planted with Palmito-trees, out of which the Natives press a
Wine in the Country Language called Terry or Tory, which is drunk by many. The
Wine which drops from the forementioned Tree in the Night, is pleasant and
wholesome, but that which drops out of the same in the daytime, being spoiled by
the Heat, is very hurtful for the Brain: It produces likewises plenty of Rice,
Wheat, Barley, all sorts of Rice, and Cotton, but not in such abundance as in
Nederbaer, and the adjacent Countries.

The Mountains of Pindaetche are fertile in the production of Corn and other
Grain, the Soil being Clay mixed with black Earth.

The Inhabitants of this Place make little Cheeses, which are very dry and Salt.

In Surratte are few Date, but many Coco-trees found.

The Trees and Fields are green all the year, but the Grass in the Summer is
scorched up by the Sun; neither is the Grass Mowed here as in Europe, but just
when they have occasion for it, and as much at a time as may serve two or three
days.

The Fields abound with a sort of Roses and Rosmary, which have no scent; nor
have they have above two sorts of Flowers more all the year, viz. the Mogeri,
which is white, and the Schampi, which is yellow, both smelling very
odoriferously, and worn by Women about their Necks, and strewn in their Beds.

The Country round about Brodera and the adjacent Villages is very fruitful,
and produces Wheat, Barley, Rice, and other Grain, as also Cotton in great
abundance.

The whole Coast of Bazaim has plenty of Rice, Pease, and other Corn, besides
Butter, Oil, and Coco-nuts.

There are many Hiacinthes in this Kingdom, as also Diamonds, Pearls, Granads,
Topas's, Cornalines, Spinellaes, and Amethists, besides Alabaster, red Marble,
Hematites, or Blood-stones, and Jaspers, which are but little regarded. The
Inhabitants make green Dishes of their Jaspers, and Plates, which resemble
those of Smerads: There are likewise Bezoar Stones, and also a Stone by the
Portuguese called Olhos de Gata, or Cats-Eyes, and Agats in great abundance, of
which they make curious Hafts of Knives at Cambaya, and many other Curiosities.

Abundance of Sealing-wax is made about the Village Amadabat, but the greatest
part in the Village of Sindickera, eight Leagues Eastward from Brodera, and in
many other Places in Surratte. It drops first out of several sorts of Trees,
not unlike the Thorn and Plumb-tree. When the Wax is raw, as it drops from the
Tree, it is of a dark-brown color, but being afterward beaten to Powder, and
melted with red, green, or black colors, according as they please, and put on
Sticks, it is sold here in Europe to Seal Letters with. They varnish many Ships
therewith, as also Tables, Cabinets, Stools, Bedsteads, and other Wood-woork,
which is the occasion that great quantities thereof are used in Surratte. The
Enamel which they use with their Silver and Gold-works, as Hafts of Knives, and
the like, they fill up with Wax within, and cover the same with Gold so neatly,
that unless a Stranger were informed thereof, he could not discover it from
massy Gold.

Near the Village More, twenty nine Leagues from the City of Surratte, is a
Spring, which casts up boiling hot Water at the foot of a Mountain, out of a
hard Rock; a piece of Meat wrapped in Callico, is boiled in a short time therein,
neither need they put Salt to it, because the Water is Salt, yet of a good
taste, as if Alants Roots had been boiled therein.

Six clays Journey from the City Cambaya, is a Mountain, which produces
Cornalines and Chalcedony; which last the Inhabitants (according to Barbosa)
call Bacayores.

A League from the City Brotcha is another rich Mine of Chalcedony and white
Agats, which are commonly carried to Cambaya, and not to Brotcha; they make
abundance of round and oval Dishes, and other small Vessels, of the same, for
an Ornament in their Chambers.

In most Places of Surratte are abundance of Oxen, Cowes, Sheep from Persia,
with large Tails, Goats, and Buffaloes, which yield good Milk and Butter, and
Flesh which tastes like Beef, though spoiled by the Heat of the Country. The
Oxen no way differ from ours, only they have a Bunch on their Shoulder.

Between the City of Amadabat and Surrate are many Goats, Stags, and wild
Swine, Geese, and other Fowl, in great abundance; the Inhabitants seldom kill
any of them, especially the Benjans. There are also many Horses, not only of
the Breed of the Country, but diverse others, which being brought out of
Tartary, Persia, and Arabia, are sold at a dear rate, because they are
accounted the best of all India; and they not only take care to provide a
Servant for every Horse, but also give them good Provender, viz. a sort of
ground and boiled Beans called Danna, and both Morning and Evening two pound of
Barley Meal, mixed with a pound and a half of Butter, and a pound of Sugar.
They also keep many Camels, Mules, Rhinocerots, Drommedaries, and Elephants,
which are kept by the Mogol and Nobility in the Woods.

There are an innumerable company of wild Beasts, as Stags, Goats, Elands, wild
Hogs, Asses, whose Flesh the Mahumetans eat in stead of Lamb, and Hares, which
all Persons are permitted to catch, except at the time when the King and his
Nobles are Hunting; for then it is forbidden on pain of Death.

Moreover, the Woods are also the Recesses for Lions, Tigers, Leopards (but
neither Bears nor Wolves,) mad Dogs, which are called Jekkalla, abundance of
Catamountains, and a Beast, which being almost like a Ferret, with a Tail like
a Squirrel, does great mischief to the Fruit, insomuch that the Husbandmen are
forced to watch adays in the Fields when their Corn is ripe, to keep them from
spoiling it.

There are likewise abundance of tame Fowls, as Hens, Cocks, Capons, Peacocks,
Geese, Ducks, and Crop-Geese, which breed near the Rivers or Pools; besides
Partridges, (which are there tame) and Pigeons. The Birds of prey are these,
Falcons, Hawks, Kites, Parrots, and other Birds not known to us in Europe.

Both within and without the City Amadabat are great numbers of Catamountains,
which breeding in the Woods, fearlesly frequent the Houses, and do great damage
to those that deal in Fruit, as Dates, Almonds, Figs, Raisins, and the like; of
which they take what they like best.

Between the City Cambaya and Amadabat, near the Village Matter, are abundance
of excellent blood-colour'd Squirrels, with curious large Tails; which breeding
on Trees, leap nimbly from one to another.

Many Bats, which are as big as Hens, and have Heads resembling those of Cats,
frequent the Woods, and are by some called Flying-Cats. Between Cambaya and
Amadabat are likewise Bats as big as Ravens.

There are also great numbers of Crows, which flying through the Windows into
the Houses, take the Meat out of the Dishes without any fear of the People that
are present: They commonly sit on the Backs of the Buffaloes, and peck off
their Hair; which is the reason that most of the forementioned Beasts in these
Parts are bald: nor have they any other way to free themselves of the said
Fowls, but to run up to their Throats into a Morass.

Rats also breed here in great abundance, and some of them are so big that no
Cats dare venture to seize on them; and oftentimes throw down Houses, by
undermining the Walls and Foundations thereof: they do likewise great mischief
to the Plants and Trees.

The Inhabitants are daily much infested with Bugs, which filling the Houses in
great swarms, sting the People.

The Rivers, especially the Indus and others, abound with all manner of
delicate Fish, viz. Carps, Bremes, Eels, Trouts, Shrimps, and many other
European Fishes, besides such as are peculiar to those Parts. In the Stream
Indus breed likewise many Crocodiles or Caimans.

Serpents, and other noxious Creatures.
About Amadabat are abundance of poisonous Serpents and Scorpions, which in all
parts of India are not alike venomous: for the Sting of a Scorpion on the
Island of Great Java, occasions great swelling, and exceeding pain; but is
easily cured, if Medicines be applied thereunto within the space of twelve
hours after; but if any one be stung by a Scorpion on the Main, he certainly
dies within the space of three hours, if he does not instantly cut the wounded
part till it bleeds, and then anointing it with Oil of Scorpions, sear it with
a red hot Iron. Moreover the oily moisture, which is extracted from the
Scorpion which has stung the Party, is also an excellent Remedy, if
immediately laid on the Wound. The Scorpions resemble in shape the Cra-fish or
Lobsters. Before they are boiled they have a little round Tail, which erecting
it self, reclines backward; at the end thereof is the Sting, which they never
draw in, or put out, like other venomous Creatures, but always have the same
ready to sting those which approach them: The Sting is very hard, sharp, and
long, like an Iron Hook. The Scorpions, and another sort of Vermin called
Millepes, from its number of Feet, breed for the most part on old decayed Walls.

There are also a sort of Scorpions with two Heads, viz. one before, and the
other behind the Tail; and it is said that they move one Head one year, and the
other another year; and are by some in Greek call'd' (...) which signifies a
thing that can go backwards or forwards.

These two-headed Serpents have occasioned great Disputes amongst the
Philosophers: for some, as Aelianus, Pliny, Lucan, Galen, Nierenbergh. and
Olearius, certainly believe that there are really such Serpents: But Andreas
Matthiolus, in his Explanation of Dioscorides, and John Faber Linceus, in his
History of Mexico, contradicts this Opinion, and looks upon it as a fabulous
Tradition, judging this mistake to proceed from hence, viz. because the
forementioned Serpents are as thick at their Tail as at their Head; so that
there can be no distinction made; moreover, that they creep as well back wards
as forwards, and have venomous Stings in their Tails as well as in their Heads.

Yet Nierenbergh relates, that an eminent Philosopher called Cortavilla, had
one of the forementioned two-headed Serpents at Madrid. Moreover Gesner, that a
two-headed Serpent was taken in the Sea near the English Shore.

This Country is also exceeding pestered with little Pismires, which are no
small annoiance to the Inhabitants, who can scarce set any Meat out of their
Hands, but in a moment several hundreds crawl upon the same; which to prevent,
they generally keep in their Houses stone Troughs full of Water, in the middle
of which laying a great Stone, they lay their Meat upon it, in a Cupboard made
for that purpose.

By reason of the many Woods and Trees that are about and near Amadabat, there
are great plenty of wild Beasts and Fowls, especially Parrots of all sorts;
some whereof are very big, and are by several Europeans called Indian Ravens;
and some being no bigger than Pigeons, are for their sweet Voices called
Cacatu: They are of a yellowish color, and have a Tuft of Feathers on their
Heads: They make their Nests under the Roofs of Houses, and are found in great
numbers in most Towns of all India. Others which are less, are red and green,
and building their Nests of long withered Grass, make them fast to the Boughs
of Trees, that so they may be freed from Vermin. These Parrots do great
mischief to all Fruits and Corn, especially Rice.

The Ancient and Modern Inhabitants of Surratte.
The ancient Inhabitants and Natives of Surratte being formerly all Heathens,
were by a general Name called Hindous, but are at present either Heathens
(distinguished by the Names of Benjans and Brahmans) Mahumetans, or Moors,
which have Settled here since this Country has been brought under the Mogols
Jurisdiction. The other Inhabitants are Persians, Tartars, Arabians, Armenians,
and many other People of Asia and Europe, except Chinese, Japanners, and Jews,
which are seldom found there.

In most Places of Surratte dwell a sort of Persians, or People derived from
the ancient Persians, which the Benjans and other Heathens call Garoisdees and
Persees, or Parsis (which last Name, according to the testimony of Bollayle le
Gouz, they give themselves;) the Moors, Guenure; the Persians, Atech Peers,
Zarduzts, Kebbers, and Gauri. They boast their Extract from Persia, and have
for several Ages before Mahomet been Governed by peculiar Kings of their own
Country, till the Wars, which commonly occasion great Revolutions in States
and Empires, reduced them at last under another Government, which happened after
the Birth of our Savior Anno 640. in the twenty ninth Year of the Reign of the
last Persian King called Jazdgerd, or Yesdegerd, otherwise Jesdagird, Son to
Xarear, who resided in the City Yesd near the old Ispahan. The Turks coming
from Turkestan, or Turkey, through the Province Naohaad into Persia, ruined all
the Country, and forced Jasdagird, (who went with an Army to meet them) with
the assistance of the Arabians (who fell into Persia at another Place) to
retreat to Corazan; where, after a Reign of twenty nine years, he deceased:
when most of the conquered Persians, which would not embrace Mahomet's
Doctrine, nor suffer themselves to be Circumcised, left their native Country,
and traveled toward India, there to enjoy Liberty of Conscience under the
Raja^, and coming to the Persian Gulf, a Fleet, consisting of seven Ships, was
ordered to carry them and their Followers (which some affirm consisted in
eighteen thousand Persons, Men, Women, and Children) as Merchants over to
India: Five of the said Fleet arriving safely at St. Johns-Land, in the Haven
of Swaly, they resolved to go to the Raja, who then resided at Nuncery, where
they declared the Occasion which forced them to come thither, and requested the
Raja, that he would please to receive them, as a People that would willingly
live under his Government, provided they might enjoy their own Religion:
whereupon they were received on paying Tribute, and taking the Oath of
Allegiance.

One of the remaining two Ships went to a Raja residing at Baryacy near
Surratte, where the People aboard her were received upon the same Conditions as
the former. But this Raja being at Wars with another Raja, was defeated, his
Country taken from him, and all the Persians, as his Abetters, destroyed by
his Enemies.

The seventh and last Vessel Sailing along the Coast, touched at Cambaya, where
the People that were in the same were received on the same Conditions as the
former. So that these People, after what manner soever spread through India,
had certainly their Extract from one of the forementioned Places, where they
lived so long, that they forgot their Original and Religion, nay, they could
not remember from whence they were Extracted, till at length, after the
expiration of many years, the Name of Persians was made known to them by those
that having remained in Persia, disclosed to them the History of their
Predecessors, instructed them in their ancient Religion, and taught them how to
serve God for the future: so that at present, wheresoever they are, they
strictly maintain their ancient Religion or Sect; and many Persians have since
Settled themselves along the Seashore, where they have lived quietly among the
Natives. But Herbert, contrary to the opinion of all Historians, tells us, that
King Jazdgerd banished them to India, because they refused to embrace the
Mahumetan Doctrine, and to be Circumcised.

The Apparel or the Persians of Surratte.
As to what concerns the Apparel of these Persians, they are Clothed after the
same fashion as the Inhabitants, except that they ware a Girdle or Sash of
Camels Hair or Sheeps Wool, which going twice about their Middle, is tied
behind with two Tassels. This Sash or Girdle is by them called Cushee, and worn
as a public testimony of their Faith, in the nature or our Baptism, or the
Circumcision of the Mahumetans, and is given them at their being initiated into
their Religion in the seventh year of their Age. When accidentally they lose
one of these Girdles or Sashes, they are not permi^ted to eat, drink, work,
speak, or stir, before they have obtained another: And these Girdles are to be
bought of their Priests. As well Women as Men are obliged to wear these Sashes
from the seventh year of their Age, or (as others affirm) from their twelfth
year, which is from the time of their being initiated. They live here like the
Natives, free and undisturbed, and drive what Trade they please. They are very
ingenious, and for the most part maintain themselves with Tilling, and buying
and selling all sorts of Fruits, tapping of Wine out of the Palm Trees; which
Wine they sell in Houses of Entertainment: for their Law debars them not from
drinking strong Liquor, so it be not the Juice of the Grape. Some also
Traffic, and are Exchangers of Money, keep Shops, and exercise all manner of
Handicrafts, except Smiths-work, for they are not allowed to quench Fire with
Water.

In point of Eating and Drinking, their Law has given them great Privilege;
Their Diet.
but to avoid displeasing of the Benjans, amongst whom they live, and the
Moors, under whose Jurisdiction they stand, they abstain from Wine, that is,
the Juice of the Grape, and Swines-flesh; but of the Palm-Wine they drink very
greedily, insomuch that it is usual among some, making up a Palm-leaf in form
of a Tunnel, to let the Palm-Wine run through the same into their Throats. They
always eat alone by themselves, judging that they are able to live pure and
undefiled; that if they should eat with any person, they would certainly be
defiled: They also drink out of several Cups; and if any Person chances
accidentally to drink out of another Cup, they wash the same three times, and
set it away for a considerable time before they use it again.

Some affirm, that their Law forbids them to eat of any thing that enjoyed
Life, except in times of War or great Necessity; for then they are permitted to
eat Mutton, Goats-flesh, Venison, Poultrey, and Fish, and all manner of Flesh,
except that of Cows, Oxen, Horses, Camels, Elephants, and the like Beasts,
which they account a deadly sin to kill; but they chiefly abstain from Cows or
Ox-flesh, affirming, that they will rather eat their Father or Mothers Flesh:
In which Point of Religion they agree with the Benjans.



Most of their Liquor is Water, because their Law forbids them to drink any
Liquor made by the Fire; but they have free leave to drink of the Juice of the
Grape, or any other Wines tapt out of Trees, but not to that excess as to
inebriate themselves; which nevertheless oftentimes happens amongst them in
private, but if it be discovered either in Men or Women, they are sorely
punished, and if they do not heartily repent (at least seemingly) and do
Penance, they are banished, and disowned by their Tribe.

As to what concerns their Fasting: after each Fast Day they eat but once for
five days after, in commemoration that God rested five days after each of his
Labors.

If they at any time eat Flesh or Fowl, they carry a piece thereof to their
Eggaree, or Temple, as an Offering, to beg pardon of their Gods, and to
testify the dissatisfaction which they have in being forced to kill his
Creatures for their Food.

The Description of the People.
The shape of their Bodies is of a middle size; their Faces are pale, and
generally fairer than ours in Europe, especially the Women, which exceed all
other Women of these Countries in beauty.

The Men wear great round Beards, long black Hair on their Heads, and are
generally hooknos'd, which makes them to be known amongst thousands of People;
yet there are some that wear short Hair, with a Lock only on the top of their
Crown.

There are few amongst them that serve other People, alleging, That if any one
dies in another Man's Service, it will be very difficult for him to go to
Heaven, as having sinned against God; wherefore those that serve, are accounted
unclean and Unbelievers.

They are for the most part a covetous and hard People, very deceitful in their
Dealings, but no way inclined to Whoring or Theft; meek and compassionate in
their Conversation. They dwell in very dark Houses, meanly furnished, in one
Street or Ward by themselves.

They have no supreme Governor amongst them.

Their several Feasts.
They have six Festival Times in a year, which by virtue of their Law they are
obliged to maintain, in commemoration of the six days wherein God created the
World, and for the Benefits which they receive every Month from God. Each of
these Feasts lasts five day.

The first of these Feasts, called Meduserum, begins on the fifteenth of ^ere,
or February, in commemoration that God made Heaven, and appointed it to be a
Place of Bliss and Happiness, for the reception of all such as fear him.

The second Feast, called Petusathan, begins on the twenty sixth of Sheruar, or
April, in commemoration that God made Hell for the Devils and bad Angels, and
to deter Men from living wickedly.

The third called Yatrum, begins on the twenty sixth of Nahar, or May, in
remembrance that God created the Sea and Earth, and made them fit for the
production of such Creatures as preserve the Life of Man.

The fourth named Medearum, begins on the sixteenth of Foz, or July, in
remembrance that God made Trees and Plants, whose Fruits serve for the
Sustenance of Mankind.

The fifth called Homespotamadum, begins on the thirteenth of Spindamud, or
August, in commemoration that God created Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes, for the
Food of Man.

The sixth called Medusan, begins on the thirteenth of Ardehert, or December,
in token of joy that God about that time created a Man and a Woman, from whom
the whole Earth was peopled.

The Original Fire-worship.
Amongst all things which they possess, nothing is of such veneration amongst
them as the Fire, on which their Belief is grounded, and which they worship;
and herein they differ from all other Sects. This worshipping of Fire has its
original from one Zertoost their Lawgiver, who, as their Tradition goes,
ascended to Heaven, and brought down a portion of Fire, which God gave him,
together with the Book of their Laws. They allege moreover, that Zertoost
ascending to Heaven, saw not God in his full glory, but that he spoke with him
over a great Fire, out of which God gave him the said portion, and also endued
him with some of his Divine Power. They say likewise, That the Fire which he
brought out of Heaven, was a living Fire, which could not be extinguished by
any means, and therefore that it had Divine Worship ascribed to it. But it is
not certainly believed amongst them, that the forementioned Fire has hitherto
been preserved; however, they are permitted to make another Fire of several
Materials, which they are to keep always burning, and to worship according to
the Commands of their Law.

Their Ceremonies of Fire-worship.
Their grand Ceremonies of Fire-worship are at present performed in Surratte, on
a Place called Nuncery, where the chief Priesthood of this Sect reside, and,
according to their relation, have kept the Fire constantly burning above two
hundred and fifty years. This Fire is by them in their Language called
Antisbehur, that is, Sacred Fire.

The worshipping of this Fire, which the Distoor or Herbood (that is the
High Priest) keeps so carefully, that he never lets the same go out, is
performed in the following manner:

As often as the Persians meet to worship the Fire, the Distoor or Herbood
tells them, That the Fire was given from God to Zertoost, as a part of his
Power and Glory; and that he had also given him a Law which taught him to
worship the same, and was confirmed by many Miracles; therefore they must
esteem it sacred and holy, and worship and reverence the same, as being a part
of God himself, and of the same Essence and likeness with him, or at least
differing little from him; that they must love all things that resemble the, as
the Sun and Moon, which were made of the same, and are two testimonies of God,
and would come to be Witnesses against them, if they neglected this their Duty,
to which they were so strictly commanded. Moreover, he admonishes them to
worship God, and beg pardon of him, if accidentally they should spill any Water
in the forementioned Element of Fire, which being so useful for Mankind, might
thereby happen to be extinguished; and not to spit in the same, or throw any
unclean thing into it to make it burn. They therefore keep always Fire in their
Houses, and will never blow out a Candle, Lamp, or any other Light, or quench
Fire with Water, though their Houses should be all in a Flame, but endeavor to
smother the same with Earth; for they account it an ill omen, and a sign of
God's anger, when the Fire in their Houses chances to go out, and they be
forced to fetch Fire out of other Houses to kindle it again.

The initiation of their Children.
As to what concerns the Initiating of their Children; so soon as a Child comes
into the World, the Daroo or Priest goes to the Parents House, and having
enquired into the Hour and Minute of the Infants Birth, he first erects a
Scheme, then consults with the Father and Mother about naming of the Child;
which as soon as they have agreed upon, the Mother, in presence of the whole
Company, gives the Child its Name, without any other Ceremony; which done, the
Mother and Father taking the Child, follow the Daroo to the Eggaree or Temple,
where the Priest takes clear Water, which he stirs in the Bark of a certain
Tree growing near Yesd in Persia, called Holma, on which it is affirmed the Sun
never makes any shadow, and at last taking up a handful of the said Water,
sprinkles the Child therewith, and prays to God that he would cleanse the Child
from his Fathers and Mothers Uncleanness: which said, he leaves the Infant with
the Parents. When the Child is attained to the seventh year of its Age, and
judged fit to be received and made a Member of their Church, the Parents carry
it to the Temple to be instructed; where the Daroo teaches the Youth several
Prayers, and instructs him in his Religion. The Child being perfect herein,
repeats all the Prayers which he has learned, over a Fire, with a Cloth tied
about his Head, which covers his Mouth and Nostrils, so to prevent the Breath
which comes out of his unclean Body from blowing upon, and thereby defiling the
holy Fire. After performance of these Prayers, the Daroo gives the Child Water
to drink, and the Rind of a Pomegranate to chew, thereby to cleanse it from its
inward uncleanness: Then they wash his Body with clean Water, and put him on a
Shuddero, or Cotton Coat, which reaches down to his Ancles, and also give him a
Girdle made of Camels Hair, by them called Cushee, which the Youth must never
leave off. After all this, the Daroo says this Prayer following: God grant that
you may be a faithful Maintainer, all your Life, of the Persian Religion, of
which your Habit is a Efficient Badge; and never believe any other Law but that
which Zertoost brought with him from Heaven. Moreover, that you may always
remain constant in the worshipping of the Fire, neither eat the Meat of others,
nor drink out of their Cups, but undefiled preserve the Ceremonies and Customs
of the Persians.

This done, the Youth passes for a real Persian, and one of their Sect.

They have five different kinds of Marriage among them, which have each their
proper Name: Their Marriages.
The first, called Shausan, is a Marriage of the Son of one Man to the Daughter
of another during their Minority, which the Parents manage among themselves,
without the knowledge of their Children. This sort of Marrying is highly
esteemed amongst them, affirming, That those who are thus Married shall
undoubtedly go directly to Paradise.

The second sort of Marrying, called Chockerson, is when a Widow Marries a
second Husband.

The third, named Codesherahassan, is when a Woman makes choice of a Man her
self.

The fourth, named Ectsan, is when a Youth or Maid dies, after having been
Betrothed, before the consummation of the Marriage: for in such Cases they have
a Custom to give another Youth or Maid in Marriage to the Deceased, because
they account Marriage to be a great means to make Men happy in the other World.
Persons of Quality commonly Marry after this manner, because with their Money
they purchase such as will undertake such a Marriage as is before mentioned.

The fifth, named Ceterson, is when a Father, having no Sons, but having a
Daughter Married who has Sons, takes one of them to be his real Son, and gives
him in Marriage as his own Child; for they esteem a Man most miserable who has
no Children to bestow in Marriage.

Their Nuptial Ceremonies.
The Ceremonies which they use at their Marriages, are these: After the Parties
who are to be Married have seen one another, they meet at midnight to conclude
the Agreement; and the Bride and Bridegroom sitting down by each other on a Bed
(for they are never Married in a Church or Temple,) there stand opposite to
them two holy Persons, the one declaring himself for the Bridegroom, and the
other for the Bride, whilst the Parents place themselves on the right and left
Hand of the Herbood, who being for both Parties, holds a Rice Corn in his Hand
as a sign and testimony of Fruitfulness, which he wishes them at their
Marriage: the holy Person that has declared himself for the Bridegroom laying
the Brides fore Finger on her Forehead, asks her if she be willing to have that
Man? to which she having replied Yes, the other holy Person asks the same of
the Bridegroom; who also answering Yes, the Bride thereupon being commanded by
the two holy Persons, gives the Bridegroom her Hand; whereupon he promises to
give her a sum of Money, and declares that he will not let her want any thing
that is fit for her, but give her all things that she shall require; she
likewise promising, that all things she possesses shall be his. After this the
Herboods or holy Men strew Rice upon them, and say several Prayers, imploring
God to bless them, and give them Sons and Daughters in great numbers, which in
time may multiply as the Rice which is sown in the Ground, and to grant that
they may live long in peace and tranquillity. Then the Brides Parents give the
Bridegroom such Goods as they are able to part with, and begin the Solemnity of
the Wedding, which lasts eight days.

Their Burying Places.
Their Burying-places are built round a good height from the Ground, pretty
broad, and paved with Freestone: In the midst of them is a deep Well, into
which drop the Bones of the Deceased, the Bodies both of Men and Women being
hung round the Wall in the open Air.

These Burying-places are of two sorts, and stand some distance from each
other; the one is appointed for those that have lived piously and honestly, and
the other for those that have lived viciously and wickedly, and those that have
committed Crimes, and were punished for them whilst they lived.

When any Person amongst them lies upon his Deathbed, they send for a Herbood
or Priest, who whispers this following Prayer in the dying Person's Ear, viz.

O Lord, thou have commanded us not to sin, yet nevertheless this Person has
sinned; thou have commanded us to do good, yet this Person has done ill, thou
have commanded us to worship thee, yet this Person has neglected it; but
nevertheless, good Lord, pardon his Crimes and offenses.

Their Funeral Solemnities.
As soon as the Breath is departed out of the Body, the Priest keeps ten Foot
distance from the same, and commands the Nicesselars, or Bearers, to carry it
away on an Iron Bier; for by virtue of their Law they may not touch any dead
Corpse with Wood, because it is a Material with which they keep in the Fire
which they worship. Moreover, those that accompany the Corpse, are forbid to
speak, because the Grave, according to their Opinion, must be a Place of Rest
and Quietness. Coming to the place where the Defunct is to be buried, the
Bearers set down the Corpse, whilst the Priests, who stand at some distance from
thence, speak the following words: When this our Brother lived, he was
conjoined of four Elements; now he is dead, let each Element take his own: the
Earth, the Earth; the Water, the Water; the Air, the Air; and the Fire, the
Fire. Next they implore Sertau and Asud (whose Offices are to wait on Lucifer)
and some other Demons, that they would prevent all evil Spirits from doing the
Deceased any harm, when he shall go to cleanse himself by their celestial Fire:
for the Soul, as they believe, remains ranging up and down the Earth three days
after; during which time Jupiter, they say, would torment the same, if it did
not fly to the sacred Fire to avoid his punishments: After this the Soul being
tried, is according to her behavior, either condemned to go to Hell, or
conveyed to Heaven. As this Opinion is firmly rooted in them, so they forget
not to meet every Morning, Noon, and Evening, during the space of three days,
to implore God to show Mercy to the Soul of the Deceased, and to pardon the
Sins which he has committed in his Lifetime. After the expiration of the
three days, when the Soul has received her sentence, then the Relations make a
great Feast on the fourth day, and so end their Mourning.

One Twist tells us, That they take the Sick from his Bed, and laying him on
the Ground, or a Bed of Sand, let him die there; and about thirty or forty days
after the Burying of the Dead, they carry the said Bed of Sand, and strew the
same on his Grave. But Herbert says, That they wrap up their deceased Bodies
in a perfumed Cloth; and that the Relations which accompany the Corpse to the
Grave, go beating themselves, yet with a profound silence, till they come
within fifty or a hundred Paces from the Place of Interment, where the Herboot
at a lesser distance from the Grave expects them, having a yellow Cloth wrapped
about his Body, and a little Tulbant on his Head. The Bearers carry the Corpse
to a little House built like an Oven, where they perform certain ancient
Ceremonies; which done, they draw the Body up to the top of a round Stone
Building, of twelve Foot high, and twenty four in Circumference, with a double
Entrance on the North-East side, consisting of two Holes, through which they
put the Bodies, viz. those that have lived well, through the one; and the
wicked, through the other.

This Structure is flat on the top, and paved with white Clay, which, when dry,
is very hard and smooth, like Plastering: In the middle there is left an open
Hole, into which fall the Bones of the Deceased, who are laid naked in two Rows
on this Structure, in the heat of the Sun, and serve for Food for the Fowls of
the Air, which in great numbers coming thither, tear and disfigure the Bodies
after a horrid manner: And the Air round about this Place is in the heat of
Summer so infected with the smell of the corrupted Carcasses, which often lie
to the number of three or four hundred on the top of the forementioned Place,
that it often occasions great Sicknesses especially in Strangers.

Twist affirms, That these Burying Places are a League or more From the Towns
or Villages to which they belong, and being built of Stone, are about three
Fathom high, with a Hole in the middle, over which the Deceased are laid for
the Fowls to devour; and their Flesh being consumed, their Bones fall through
an Iron Grate into the forementioned Hole or Pit. These kind of Grave are of
three several sorts; one for Men, another for Women, and the third for Children.

On the North side of the City Surrat, beyond the great Pool of Water before
described, and about a Bowe-shoot beyond the great Prince Garden, the Persians
have three round Stone Towers, about a Pistol-shot from each other, and about
three Fathom high, where they also dispose of their Dead. In each of these
Towers is a Door or Entrance about six Foot from the Ground, through which they
draw the dead Bodies up to the top, which are made flat, and so as that the
Corpse may lie round in three Rows, in Troughs or Chests of about half a Foot
deep.

They account the Bodies of Men to be much more unclean than those of Beasts,
and more especially the Bones of them; for they will by no means touch the
Bones of a dead Man or Woman: And if any should chance accidentally to touch
them with their Clothes, they are obliged immediately to put them off, and all
things they have on, and throw them away, as being unclean; and after having
washed their whole Bodies, to put on others, and stay within nine days, without
driving any Trade, or so much as touching their Wives or Children. Moreover,
they account all those Persons damned, whose Bones after their decease happen
to fall into the Water, and believe, That the Souls of such have committed many
heinous Sins whilst living upon Earth.

The Riches and Trade of Surrat.
The Kingdom of Surrat, though very rich, has neither Gold nor Silver Mines;
but three Plants which are exceeding profitable, viz. That of Cotton, Anil or
Indico, and Opium, so called by the Greeks; and by the Arabians, who pronounce
the P like an F, Ofion; and corruptly by the vulgar sort of People, Anfion. It
is incredible what an advantage this Kingdom reaps by each of these Plants, for
which it is resorted unto from all Places, and swallows all the Gold and Silver
which comes from the Persian Gulf and Arabia, as also as great part of the
Riches of India, and the Gold of China. All the Trade is driven in the Haven of
Surrat, from whence every Year a Ship lading is sent to Gidda, or the Straits
of Meccha.

The Commodities which the Europeans generally fetch from Surrat, are all sorts
of Cloths, and Fine Linen, with which they Trade in the Inland Countries, as
also to Persia; Indico, Quilts or Carpets, Cotton, Spica nardi, Guaiacum, dried
white Common, Assa Foetida, which comes out of the Province of Utrad, Borax,
Saltpetre, Amfion, all sorts of Drugs, preserved Mirobalans, Diamonde, Aggats,
and other Precious Stones. For all which Commodities, Surrat receives Spices,
Tin, Lead, Copper, Aguil-wood, Pepper, Camphire, from Japan and Borneo,
Brimstone, Elephants Teeth, Tortoise-shell, Benjamin, Coral, Amber, Saffron,
Chinese Silks, Ruynas, Gum-wax, Sugar, Allom, Turpentine, China-Root,
Sandal-wood, Quicksilver, Vermillion, Cloth of all Colors, though in no great
abundance, Chinese Anniseeds, etc. The chiefest Factories which the Hollanders
possess in Surrat, are the Towns of Surrat, Protchia, Brodera, and Amadabat. As
to what concerns the English, with the Progress of their Trade in these Parts,
we shall reserve the Relation thereof to a particular Place apart by it self.

The Malabarins drive a great Trade with their Vessels to Surrat, Cambaya, and
Brotchia, whither they come in December, and go from thence again about the
middle of April. The Commodities which they bring thither are, Cayro, or the
Bark of Coco-Trees, of which they make their Cordage; Copera, or the Pith of
Coco-Nuts, without the Shell, and some whole Coro-Nuts; Sigaga, or Black Sugar,
which comes most from the Maldives Islands; Areka and Betel Leaves, a sort of
Red Wood called Pang, Rozin, which they use about their Ships; as also
abundance of Rice, and other Provisions: For which they receive and carry away
in Barter, Afion or Opium, Saffron, Coral, course Cloths, as Baftas, black
Candakyns, and several others, besides Cotton, and Cotton-yarn.



The General Trade of Surratte.
The Moors of Surrat drive also a great Trade to Arabia, viz. Mecha, and the
Coast of Aden, and to several Places along the Red Sea, to which they carry
Cotton, Callicoes of all sorts, Tobacco, Allom, Camphire, Indico, Brimstone,
Benjamin, Spices, Preserves, and Mirabalons. The Commodities which they bring
from thence consist in Red Coral, Amber, Misseyt, a certain Stuff to Dye
withal, Kahoe or Coffee-berries, some Druggs, and Anfion, which is accounted
the best in all India: The rest consists in Gold and Silver Ducats.

The Ships which Sail thither from Surrat, though big enough, are very ill
built, their Guns being placed upon the Deck, without any shelter against the
Weather. They set Sail generally at a New Moon in March, and return again in
September. They might easily make their Voyage much shorter, viz. in two
Months, but that the tempestuous Winds, which in the Rainy Season rage in the
Indian Sea, are very prejudicial to Navigation. In each Ship are commonly a
thousand People, which do not all go to Trade, but the most part out of Zeal to
visit Mahomet's Tomb; for those which have been there, are ever after accounted
Hoggi's or Saints.

There likewise go yearly from Surrat, Brotchia, and Cambaya, several lesser
Vessels to Persia, laden with the same Commodities, which are carried to Arabia
and Aden; and they bring back also the same Returns, besides abundance of Gold
and Silk Stuffs, Chamlets, Cloth, Velvet, Pearls, Fruit, viz. Almonds, Raisins,
Nuts, Dates, and some Rose Water, and other Persian Commodities. The Ships set
Sail in January or February, and return in April or May.

There also go yearly Ships of about a hundred, two hundred, and three hundred
Tuns, to Achin and Quedda, laden with Anfion, Cotton, and all sorts or Clothes
made in Surrat; and bring in return Brimstone, Benjamin, Camphire, Porcelan,
Tin, Pepper, and other Spices.

Many lesser Vessels of sixty, eighty, or a hundred Tuns, Trade also to Goa,
Diu, Daman, and other Portuguese Factories, with Corn, melted Butter in Pots,
and other Provisions; for which they bring in return Course Salt from Ormus,
and a sort of Sedge or Rushes, whereof they make Paper.

The Portuguese used formerly to drive a great Trade to these Places, but at
present are bereaved of most of their Chief Factories by the Hollanders.

It cannot certainly be said what the just Revenues are which the Mogol
receives yearly from Surrat; but it is related that they amount to 150 Tuns of
Gold: The Customs of Brotchia only raise 134400 Mamoedys, or 6720 l. a Mamoedy
being reckoned at 12 d. The Customs of Brodera, 400000 Mamoedys.

The Government of Surratte.
Surrat being formerly a Kingdom of it self, was Governed by a peculiar Pagan
King, not at all subject to the Mogol: And amongst others of these Kings,
Maffeus makes mention of two; the one called Madrafa Scha, and the other (his
Son) Mamud, who Reigned Anno 1508. both of whom maintained great Wars against
the Portuguese: But when the Great Mogol, Ecbor, had driven all the Patans out
of Bengala, he also Conquered the Kingdom of Surrat, and bringing it under his
Jurisdiction, caused the same ever since to be Governed by a Viceroy, whom the
Moors generally called Sultan; or else by a Supreme Governor, sent thither by
the Great Mogol. Under him are all other Petty Governors of the peculiar Towns
and Provinces, which are obliged to give him an Account of all. The time of
enjoying their Places is at the King's will and pleasure; and therefore they
commonly make good use of their time, minding more how to enrich themselves,
than regarding the welfare of their Country; and oftentimes, especially at the
coming of a new Governor, Accusations are brought against Rich Merchants, so to
get great Sums of Money put of them, by Imprisonment, and other kinds of cruel
usage.

The State of Chan, or Supreme Governor.
The Supreme Governor lives in great State, keeping commonly four hundred Men to
wait on him, which are all fed out of his Kitchen. When he rides abroad, which
for the most part is on a well-caparison'd Elephant, he is attended by all the
Nobility, and several Horsemen, to the number of two hundred Persons, armed
with Bows, Pikes, Shields, and Swords. Before him are led several Elephants
with rich Trappings, adorned with Pennons and Flags, and accompanied with
Drummers, Trumpetters, and others: Yet nevertheless he goes but mean in
Apparel, and commonly in Black Cotton Cloth; whilst, on the contrary, his
Servants go very rich and gay.

The Chan is obliged always to keep 1200 Lescheri or Troopers for the Mogol,
and fifty Elephants, besides fifty for his own use. The Revenues with which they
are maintained, are raised from the Towns and Villages under their
Jurisdiction, as likewise the Forces with which the Chan is guarded; the City
Amadabat, eighteen substitute Towns, and a thousand Villages, being able to
raise 140000 Men. There is likewise a Tziabander, or Farmer of the Customs, in
each City.

He is Royally attended and served in his Palace, none daring offer without his
leave to speak to him. He gives public Audience once a Week, seated on a Royal
Throne, and administers Justice to all Persons that make their Complaints to
him. He is not allowed any Counselors or Judges from the King; but in
Businesses of Consequence, he calls some of his Nobles to consult with: Yet
whatever he thinks fit, is decreed; so that these Counselors signify little.

All Forfeitures, Revenues, and Customs, which amount to an incredible Sum of
Money, come into the Chan's Treasury; besides which, he receives Pay for 12000
Horse, when as he seldom keeps above 2000: So that all the Remainder is spent
in his Court. All petty Businesses (...) decided by the Cowtewaels or Sheriffs,
who generally show most favor to the Plaintiff, whether he deserve it or not.

The Punishment of Criminals.
Matters of Life and Death are determined by the Magistrates of the Towns, who
refer giving the Sentence to the Coutewaels: But if they be rich People that
are condemned, they commonly come off for a Sum of Money, which they give to
the Governor. Poor Criminals are, for petty Thefts, and other small Offenses,
whipped several days together with a great Whip called Siambak; but for grand
Faults, as Breaking open of Houses, and the like, they have their Hands and
Feet cut off, or some other severe Punishments inflicted upon them. Robbers on
the Highway, if they buy not their Lives with a great Sum of Money, are
Decollated, and their Bodies put on Stakes placed alog the Roads. Murder is
amongst them accounted an unpardonable Crime; as also Adultery, especially in
Women of Quality: And for the preventing of the last, Common Whores are freely
permitted to dwell in every City, who, with permission of the Sheriff, to whom
they pay a certain Acknowledgment, may go to any Person that sends for them, or
be visited in their own Houses; which rather tends to their Honor, than
Disgrace: for there are no Feasts accounted Complete and Noble, unless there be
present some of these Common Women to Dance and Sing before the Guests.

The Religion of the Surratteans.
As to what concerns the Religion of the Surratteans, some of them, especially
the Chiefest, are Moors or Mahumetans; the rest, Benjans, Brahmines, and other
sorts of Pagans.

There are in Surrat many Gioghi's, a People much resembling the Romish Monks,
being in severity of Life and outward Penitence inferior to none; for they go
stark naked in the coldest Weather, and sleeping on Horse-dunghils, cover their
Heads and Faces therewith, and wear very long Hair, which makes them look
frightful and deformed.

The People are very Charitable, being much inclined to the giving of Alms to
the Poor, very Pious, and sollicitous of their Salvation, though deluded by
their Teachers; some giving twenty five, others fifty Ducats at a time, and
some more. Perushi affirms. That Anno 1595. there was on one day, viz. the
eighth of January, above a Tun of Gold given in Alms. The reason of this great
Charity on that day, is upon the account of some grand Tradition mentioned in
their Law-book. Their two main Duties, next to giving of Alms, are Pilgrimage,
and doing of Penance.

Out of the City Cambaya, says Peruschi, go many Heathens in Pilgrimage to the
River Ganges in Bengala, sometimes to the number of forty or fifty thousand,
all those accounting themselves happy that have been bathed in the
forementioned Stream; and they certainly believe they shall be saved, if on
their Deathbeds they can but get some of the Water of the Ganges to drink.

Since the Benjans have a peculiar Opinion of the Creation and Original of Men,
and differ in this point from the Brahmines, notwithstanding they account them
to be their Teachers, it will not be amiss to declare the same, as it is taken
out of their Law-book called Shaster.

The Opinion of the Benjans concerning the Creation.
God seeing himself alone, he studied after what manner he might manifest to
others his Splendour and Power; for he foresaw, that his Greatness and Glory
would remain obscure, and never be known, if he did not communicate them to
Mortals. The most convenient means therefore to attain to this his desire, was
to Create the World, and all the Creatures which are in the same. And in order
hereunto, he first made the World, beginning with the four Elements, which were
to be the Foundation thereof, viz. the Earth, Air, Water, and Fire; which in
the beginning being mixed together, were separated after this manner: First he
blew on the Water with a large Sarbatane, or the like Instrument, which
thereupon bubling up, came to be a great Body in the form of an Egg, which by
degrees extending, became the light and clear shining Firmament of Heaven,
which surrounds the whole World. This separation being made, the Earth remained
mixed with a Matter like Sediment of Water, of which God afterward made a
round Ball, and called the Lower World, of which the firmest part became Earth,
and the other, being the weakest, the Sea; both which making the exact Figure
of a Globe, God placed the same in the midst of the Firmament which surrounds
the Sea and Earth.

After this, God Created a Sun and Moon, which he placed in the Firmament, to
make a distinction of the Times and Seasons. And by this means the four
Elements, which before were confusedly mixed together, were separated and
distinguished, and each confined to its proper place.

The Elements thus settled, each performed its Office: The Air filled all things
that were empty; the Fire by its Heat gave warmth to all; and the Earth and Sea
produced their several Creatures, God giving a generative Power to all to
multiply and increase, according to their several kinds. And thus the great
World being perfected, was divided into four Parts, viz. East, West, North, and
South. This World was to last four Ages, and to be inhabited by diverse sorts of
People, which were to be produced from four Men and four Women, as we will
instantly relate.

God having thus created the World and the Creatures, he proceeded to create
Man, and thereupon commanded the Earth to produce that excellent Creature out
of its Bowels: First it put forth the Head, and soon after all the other Parts;
into which God breathing Life, the Lips grew red, the Eyelids opened, and made
two sparkling Stars to appear; the other Parts of the Body began to move, and
his Senses with Wisdom, knew their Creator and worshipped him. And because this
Creature (which was made for Society) should not be alone, God gave him a Woman
for his Companion, which resembled him as well in his Sense, Reason, and
Spirit. This first Creature was called Pourus, and his Wife Parkoute; they
lived together like Man and Wife, and fed upon the Fruit of the Earth, without
killing any living Creature. These two Persons living thus together, begat four
Sous; the first whereof was called Brammon, the second Kutterey, the third
Schuddery, and the fourth Wise. These four Brothers were of different
Constitutions, the four Elements giving to each a different Temper: Brammon
having participated of the Earth, was Melancholy; Kutterey being hot of
Temper, had a Warlike Spirit; Schuddery being of a cold moist Constitution, was
of a meek Spirit; and Wise being of an angry Disposition, had a quick Wit.

Moreover, God endu'd Brammon, according to his Nature, with Wisdom, and
through him published his Laws and Commandments; for he judged his reserved
Life and serious Countenance most fit for that purpose: and therefore he gave
him a Book, wherein was set down how he would be served; and which also treated
of other things concerning Religion.

God also, according to the Constitution of Kutterey, gave him Power to rule
Kingdoms, with a Scepter to keep the People in awe, and make the Commonalty
work and labor for the Public Good: And as a sign of this Power, God gave him
a Sword in his Hand, the proper Instrument of his Victory and Dominion.

Schuddery, according to his natural Inclinations, God judged fit for Traffic,
whereby he might furnish all parts of the Earth with such things as they stood
in need of, by means of Navigation: and as a Token of what he was appointed
for, as also to mind him of his Employment, God gave him a pair of Scales, with
a Bag full of all sorts of Weights, as proper Instruments of his Calling.

Wise, according to his Disposition, God endu'd with a Genius of inventing all
manner of Mechanical Arts, giving him a Bag full of Tools and Instruments, for
the working of such things withal as his Fancy should direct.

The World being thus far completed, God gave not Pourous and Parkoutee any
Daughters, lest Works, which hitherto he had preserved from all Uncleanness,
might be defiled by the incestuous Conjunction of the Brothers with the
Sisters; wherefore God being willing to preserve the Innocence and Holiness of
their first Parents, resolved to ordain such means for the propagating.
Mankind, as might correspond with the Work of the Creation, by making four
Women for the Sons of Pourous anst Parkoutee; whereof one was sent to the East,
another to the West, a third to the North, and a fourth to the South, that
being thus separated one from the other, the Propagation of Man kind might be
the sooner completed in all Parts of the Earth.

The eldest Son of the first Man called Brammon, became Great, being highly
esteemed by his other Brothers, as well for his Age as his great Merits, but
especially for the Converse he often held with God, concerning Religion and the
manner of Worship; wherein he instructed his Brethren, reading the Book which
was given him by God, containing the Secrets and Manner of worshipping him,
with great Care and Reverence, God revealing himself to him very often in
Person.

And as God had created Man in a pleasant and delightful Place, situate in the
Belly and Navel of the Earth, where the Sun makes no Shadow at Noon, so he
resolved to send the Brothers which were come from the Center of the World, to
the Circumference thereof, to People it. Wherefore he commanded Brammon to take
the Book wherein were written the Laws of God, and travel toward the rising of
the Sun; who thereupon setting forward the next Morning, after having traveled
several Miles, found himself near an high Mountain enclosing a pleasant Valley,
which was watered by a delightful Stream; on whose Banks appeared a beautiful
Woman, who came to quench her Thirst with the Waters; she, like Brammon, was
stark naked, which their Innocence made them ignorant of. This Woman having
black Hair, was of an Olive color, her Body well shaped, of a middle Stature,
sweet Countenance, and, like him, of a melancholy Disposition. She, surpised
at the sight of Brammon, was exceedingly amazed, not being able for a
considerable time to speak a^ word, doubtful whether she had best run away, or
stay and satisfy her Curiosity with the pleasantness of so strange and unusual
an Object; whilst Brammon on his part was no less concerned, fearing if she
fled, he should lose the Presence of a Creature he so extremely admired; so
that they both remained silent, entertaining mutual Passions and Affections the
one for the other: At last, the Woman having in vain expected an Address from
Brammon, applied her self to him, demanding the reason that moved him to come
thither? who answered, That it was in obedience to the Command of Him who made
the World, and created her and him, together with all visible things, as also
that Light which afforded them the Pleasure of beholding each other. The Woman,
whom God had endu'd a with Wisdom and Understanding, replied, That the
resemblance which was between them, was an infallible sign that they were both
made by one Hand, and that the Creator who had ordained all things for their
Welfare, had certainly appointed their meeting there, that by a nearer
Obligation they might for the future be joined together; when casting her Eyes
on the Book which Brammon held in his Hand, she asked what it was? who in few
words discovering to her the Contents thereof, she requested he would sit down
by her, and instruct her in his Religion; which he willingly granted: when
judging that their Meeting was decreed by God, they consulted the Book,
resolving to unite themselves by a Matrimonial Vow: in order whereto,
performing the Ceremonies usual between Man and Wife, they lived in perfect
Unity, and so increased the World, that the Offspring of this Bramman and
Savatree (for such was the Name of the Woman) Peopled all the Eastern Parts of
the Universe.

God also commanded Kuttery, second Son of Pourus, to direct his Course
Westward, in order to the Peopling that part of the World: Who immediately
taking his Sword which God had given him as an Instrument to Conquer withal,
thought on nothing more than a Convenience to exercise Valor.

During his Journey, turning his Back every Morning toward the Rising Sun, to
his great amazement he saw the same every Evening, after having finished his
Journey, a vast way before him. Thus Traveling toward the West, he
continually looked about him, expecting some Adventure would present it self,
and wishing to meet with whole Regiments of Armed Men, or Herds of Wild Beasts;
when nothing appearing, and considering on what account God sent him thither,
full of Heroic Passion, he could not refrain thus to expostulate: For what
reason has God given me Strength, since he denies me an Opportunity to manifest
the same, and acquire Honor thereby! Howbeit he Traveled yet farther Westward,
in hopes of meeting an Adventure befitting his Quality, and resolving to expose
whatever he should meet, to the Fury of his Rage: When coming to a Mountain
whose Summit yielded a delightful Prospect over all the adjacent Country, he
perceived a wellshap'd Creature make toward him, of a Disposition and
Countenance suitable to his, wherewith he was exceedingly pleased; when coming
near together, with an intention of trying each others Valor, he perceived it
was a Woman; her Hair dishevelled hung dangling over her Shoulders, holding in
her Hands a Chucherey, which being a round sharp Weapon, has a Hole in the
middle, through which passes a Rope, whose end being held fast in the Hand,
does great Execution at a considerable distance, when thrown at an Enemy: Which
he perceiving, immediately believed her Valiant; for her enraged Countenance
was a sufficient Testimony of the earnest desire she had to Conquer and Triumph
over her Enemies. After their first Assault, Toddikastre (so the Woman was
called) using her Chucherey with great dexterity, soon made Kuttery sensible of
her high displeasure, manifesting a greater desire of conquering him with her
Arms than with her Beauty; whereby this first day of their Meeting was spent in
Blows and Wounds interchangeably given; she with her Chuchery, and he with his
Sword, scarce allowing each other respite to breathe, continuing the Combat
till the dark Night's approach forced a Cessation, when neither could boast of
any Advantage gained upon the other.

The next Morning, so soon as the Sun began to dart out his Resplendent Rays,
they renewed their Combat with fresh Courage and Eagerness, resolving to
revenge the Injuries they had received the day before: Long was the Fight, and
doubtful, when Kuttery getting some Advantage, cut her Chuchery asunder with
his Sword; but it growing dark, Toddikastre vanished from Kuttery, thereby
gaining time to supply her self with a Bow and Arrows, and gather new Force to
engage an Enemy that had endeavored to kill her.

The third Morning they renewed the Fight again, entertaining alike hopes of
ending the Battle speedily, and subduing each other; when she observing her
Enemy within reach of her Bow, approached with great Courage: Which Kuttery
perceiving, and knowing his Sword would signify little against a VVeapon that
could command at so great a distance, resolved to engage her Hand to Hand; when
each of them gave such ample Testimonies of their Valor, and so wearied
themselves, that they remained equally Conquerors and Conquered. Thus the Fight
having been maintained on equal Terms, and the Advantage not determinable, they
disputed the Victory with their Tongues, since it could not be decided by their
Weapons: For Kuttery holding Toddikastre by the Hair, and endeavoring to make
her submit, was extremely struck with admiration when she appeared to him much
more Beautiful than before, as if this Exercise had served only to increase her
Beauty, and render her more amiable; which obliged him to direct the following
Discourse to her.

Wherefore, O Wonder of all Living Creatures, as well for Valor as Beauty, has
Fury and Rage thus transported us one against the other? If I had bereaved you
of Life in this Conflict, I should have cursed my Right Hand for being the
Instrument of destroying so Incomparable a Creature; whereas if you had killed
me, you could not but have been perpetually troubled in Mind, having bereft
your self of the Pleasures, Enjoyments, and Satisfaction you may possibly have
in my Company: Why then should a Person of such Excellency seek the Ruin of
another, which obtained, would not in the least add to your Luster. Has God
given us Understanding and Courage to destroy one another, especially we that
ought to be preserved? Certainly your Valor will not be abated, when I shall
declare unto you my Condition, and divide my Strength and Power with you; nay
rather, being Friends, we shall be capacitated for the Undertaking the greatest
Enterprises whatsoever, and valiantly revenge all Injuries that shall be
offered us. Know then, That the World is yet but like a young Child, having far
greater need of being replenished with People, than bereft of them by force of
Arms. Love and Nature teach us to study our own Preservation, which may better
be accomplished by being at Union, than at Variance one with another. Let us
not therefore endeavor by forceable and unlawful Means to seek a Glory which
may prove Mortal to both; but let us rather study to settle a happy and
everlasting Peace between us.

Toddikastre having with great attention hearkened unto a Proposal grounded on
so much Reason, after a little silence replied, That notwithstanding she
plainly discovered sufficient marks of his Rage and Fury, which might provoke
her to Revenge, yet she submitted to his Argument, readily and freely
consenting to his Proposal of Peace. VVhereupon giving each other their Hands,
to confirm their new Friendship, they, of mortal Enemies, became the greatest
Friends in Nature; and resolving to live and die together, begat many Children,
producing a Race of Valiant and Heroic Spirits: And thus was the VVestern Part
of the World Peopled by these two Generous Enemies.

Shuddery the third Son of Pourous was sent Northward to Traffic as a
Merchant, taking with him his Weights and a Pair of Scales, wherewith to weigh
whatever was bought or sold. Having traveled a considerable way, wishing to
meet with an Adventure suitable to his Calling, he came at last to a Mountain
called Challa, when beginning to Rain very hard, he was necessitated to seek
for shelter in a small Cave which was in the said Mountain. The Rain ceasing,
the Sky began to clear up; but the Water having covered most of the Ways, kept
Shuddery from Traveling that day: But no sooner had the thirsty Earth drunk up
the Water, and the Sun dried up the remaining Moisture, when in order to
proceed on his Journey he leaves the Cave, and scarcely arrived at the bottom
of the Valley, but he found several Shells, which out of Curiosity opening, he
concluded by their Brightness and Beauty that they ought carefully to be
preserved, though altogether ignorant of the Value; so putting them up very
safe, he went on, and having scarce passed through the Valley, he found himself
near another Mountain, upon which appeared a Rock of Diamonds, which having been
washed by the great Rain, appeared very glorious and sparkling, causing a great
admiration in Shuddery, who judged it to have been a great Fire. Passing on,
and perceiving the supposed Fire did not spread it self, yet increased in
Luster, he was curious to be satisfied what it might be, by touching the same
with his Finger, whereby he perceived that though these glittering Diamonds
sparkled like Fire, yet they had not that Heat with them; wherefore he resolved
to expect the next Morning, to see if he could make any further Discovery of
this great Mystery: But the Day caused a far greater alteration than he
expected, which no sooner appeared, but the Light of the Diamonds vanished,
nothing remaining but a Rock of whitish Stones, of which he took as many as he
could carry, carefully observing the Place against his Return, in case he
should be better informed of the Value. Whence proceeding, he at last espied
the Nymph that was ordained for him, walking by the side of the Wood which
bordered on the Plain he was crossing: He directed his Course toward the
Object which at that distance appeared to him most pleasing and beautiful. The
Nymph was not a little surprised at the sight of him, remaining in suspense
whether to fly or stay, till Shuddery approaching near her, thus expressed
himself.

Most admirable and beautiful Creature, so nearly resembling me, I beg your
Company, not only for the likeness between us, to our mutual admiration, which
I hope may oblige you to love me, and entertain a good Opinion of one that
follows you with no bad Intent; but that I may be happy in your Conversation,
since the Similitude between us seems to challenge a more intimate Familiarity.
Visagondah (for such was her Name) expressed by her silence the pleasure she
took in Shuddery's Presence, no way distrusting her Safety; at last she
demanded of him how it came to pass that two Persons, having never seen one
another before, could so perfectly understand each others Language. To which
Shuddery replied, That God who had given their Bodies a like Shape, had also
endued them with one Tongue, thereby to assist and discover their Secrets one
to another.

Having thus showed great Testimonies of Friendship to one another, staying
some time in the Place, Shuddery related to her his Adventures; after which,
living many Years together, they begat diverse Children, which grown up became
Merchants, with whom Shuddery worked in the Diamond-Rock he had discovered,
laying up great Quantities thereof, and prizing them at a high Value, made them
so esteemed of through the whole World. And from the Issue of this Shuddery
(according to the Tradition of the Indians) the Northern Parts of the World
were Peopled.

Wise, the youngest of the four Brothers, took his Journey toward the South,
taking with him the most useful Instruments which he had invented for the
Benefit of Mankind; for God had endu'd him with far more Understanding than any
of his Brothers: He was the Inventor of all Arts, and taught his Children to
Build Houses, Towns, and Castles, to Till the Ground, and all other things
necessary to Humane Life; for which reason he was called Viskarmah, that is, A
Vertuoso, because nothing was difficult to him that could be done.

Being endu'd with this great Knowledge and Skill in Husbandry and Building,
God ordered him to Travel Southward, where in his way he passed by seven great
Lakes, leaving at each of them Marks of his Ingenuity; and having passed the
last, he found himself in a Country called Derpe, where he built a fair House
near the Lake, with many Apartments, and a flat Roof. Here he staid some time
alone to refresh himself; but he had not long enjoyed the sweetness of his
Repose, when he was disturbed by a strange Accident: The Woman which was
appointed for him, passing by a neighboring Wood near the side of the Lake,
stood still to admire the Magnificent Form of the new-built Structure, which
she approached to view more narrowly, having never before seen the like.

Wise espying her so earnestly view his Habitation, found himself struck with
admiration at the sight of so surprising a Creature, her Body being perfectly
White, and her Hair resembling the Color of Gold; wherefore he approached
nearer the Person who at a distance had wrought a very great alteration in him:
whilst she was not a little abashed to see him come so near her, and asked the
Reason of his coming to disturb her in a Place where she used always to be
alone. Whereupon Wise replying, said, God the Maker of Light, who has created
all things visible, has sent me hither to behold and admire your Beauty, which
is so excellent, that it ought not to be kept secret; for God has created you
to be seen, and to testify the wondrous Works of his Hands. And to enjoy your
presence I have traveled through many Dangers, often adventuring my Life in
the search of you; and therefore I hope my Love will meet with a suitable
Return. Lastly, he desired her to afford him the enjoyment of her Company, and
to look upon him as the only Comfort sent by God in her solitary Life. But she
resolving not to change her manner of Life, replied, That during his Absence
she could no way perceive that his Presence could be any Advantage to her; nor
at that instant, whilst he was talking with her, she could not find her self
any ways inclined to receive his Proffers.

Wise fearing to lose her Presence, being desirous of a longer enjoyment of her
Company, requested her to walk into his House, and to view the several
Apartments thereof, hoping when she had seen the wonderful Work of his Hands,
she would have a greater Respect for him: But his Civility seemed rather
troublesome to her, telling him, That if he would not let her depart freely, he
would highly incur her displeasure, and force her to vow never to see him more.
Whereupon going from him, she gave him sufficient Testimonies of her
Displeasure, and that she was not to be compelled to do any thing by force.
This reduced Wise almost into Despair, who durst not by any means prevent her
going away, but was compelled to suffer himself to be bereaved of all those
Enjoyments he was possessed of during her stay; and having spent the following
Night in condoling his Misfortune in the loss of the Person he esteemed above
his own Life, he at break of day concluded to use all possible diligence to
find her again; and crossing the neighbor Places backward and forward, he at
last came into a Valley, where he spied her picking of Flowers, and accosting
her, began as follows.

O most Beautiful Creature, much more sweet and excellent than all the Flowers
this Earth produces, the Love which I bear to you forces me a second time to
view your most incomparable Beauty, and to implore a Return of your Affections.
Oh fly not, since you have have had sufficient Testimonies of the reality of my
Affections. He seeing that these words had prevailed with her to stay, began to
discourse with her concerning the Creation of the World, and inform her of what
Parents he was extracted, and after what manner his Brothers were sent into
several Parts of the Earth: And after many other remarkable Passages, he told
her, he could not believe that God would have permitted him to Travel over
seven Seas, and undergo so many Dangers, had not his Resolutions been to
sweeten the toilsomness of his Lahors and Troubles by the happy Enjoyment of
her Company. She not delighting in his Discourse, desired him to entertain some
other things in his Thoughts; and if he could give her no greater Testimonies
of his Affection, to leave her alone, and not trouble her more with any such
Discourse: And so they parted.

Wise thus deprived of all his Enjoyments and Happiness, being extremely
perplexed in Mind, went into a solitary Place, where falling down on his Knees,
in a doleful Tone he uttered these words.

O Lord, to whom only belongs the Knowledge of my Being, thou know that in
obedience to thy Commands I have forsaken the Company of my Parents, and also
that of my Brothers, and perhaps I shall never see them more: Thou also know
that I have endured great hardship during the time of my Travels, and deserted
all Company, to range up and down the World alone: But that which most
perplexes me, is the sight of a Person, who, in stead of comforting me with her
Presence and Conversation, adds to my Grief, by denying me her Company. O Lord,
do not reward all my Troubles so ill, and destroy not all those good Parts thou
have given me, by this great Misfortune. And you blue Heavens, and green Trees,
under which I kneel, be Witnesses of my Misfortune; and therefore, O thou
Creator of all things, if thou have the least kindness for thy Creature, give
me, I beseech thee, a sign thereof, by comforting me in this unsufferable
Affliction under which thy Servant groans.

No sooner had he ended his Prayers, but a sweet Brieze of Wind came rushing
through the Leaves of the Trees, which was followed by a Voice, saying, What
are thy Demands, O Son of Pourous? To which he answered, That I may enjoy the
Woman whose Face I so lately beheld, and that we may be united by the
inseparable Bond of Matrimony, that so I may enjoy the sweetness of her Company
till the Hour of my Death. This was immediately granted him, upon condition
that he should build Pagods or Temples under the Shades of Trees, there to
serve God, and worship the Images, because God had heard his Prayer.
Immediately after Jejunogundah (for so the Woman was called) finding her self
inclined to love Wise, went and gave him Testimony of her Affections, granting
him all his Wishes; so that from that time forward living quiet in the mutual
Enjoyment of each other, they begat many Children: By which means the Southern,
as well as the other Parts of he World, came to be Peopled.

Lastly, These four Brethren, after having thus Peopled the World, resolved to
return again to the Place where they first received Life. Brammon was the first
who with his Extract, after having Planted the East, resolved to go and end the
remaining part of his Days in the Place where he was born, and there to
instruct his People in the true Worship of God, to the end there might be only
one way of Serving God throughout the whole World, which otherwise might breed
a great distraction among the People.

Kuttery, who was the second Brother, and the first who had completed his
Journey after Brammon, and performed all things he was designed for, had also
an Inclination to see his Native Country, to acquaint his Parents and Brothers
with the Blessing that God had bestowed upon him, in a Wife and so many
Children; and also to relate to them the Adventures he had met withal during
his absence.

The same Reasons moved Shuddery and Wise to Travel to their Native Country.
Moreover, God, who would not frustrate their Designs by any ill Accidents that
otherwise might have happened, suffered them all safely to meet at one Place,
after every one of them had performed those Offices which were enjoined them,
to the great Satisfaction and Joy of their Parents and themselves; and began,
like Men removed to a new Plantation, to propagate their Generations at home
also, to the end the World might be fully Peopled in all Parts, spending their
time in teaching their People several Arts. Brammon instructed them in
Religion, Kuttery in Matters of State, Shuddery in Merchandise, and Wise in
Mechanics: So that at this time the World consisted of these four sorts of
People, each Tribe living apart, according to their Office, for avoiding all
Confusions and Disorders: And thus the World was Planted in each Part, and all
thing were for a time in good Order. But their Joy did not long continue, they
having no sooner tasted the sweetness of it, than it vanished; for as Multitude
is the Mother of Confusion, and occasions much Mischief, and many Evils happen
where the People are numerous and careless, and Negligence reigns chiefly in
prosperous Times; so by the Sensuality of these four Brethren forgetting all
thoughts of their present and former Happiness, all things began to run into
miserable Confusion, because the People were too much inclined to
Voluptuousness and Ease; Brammon neglecting his Duty and Religion, and Service
of God: Kuttery became a Tyrant: Shuddery falsified his Weights and Balance,
and practiced all manner of Knavery to defraud his Brothers: Wise grew
unconscionable, employing the Benefits which arose from his Inventions in
Profuseness. Thus each of them derogating from their first Principles, grew
malicious to each other; Brammon not being able to dispense with the Insolence
of his Brother Kuttery, who on the other side refused to show Reverence to
Brammon, which he was obliged to, as being his elder Brother; moreover, he was
very cruel, and took delght in putting to death those he disliked, forced
Shuddery to pay Tribute to him, and reaped the benefit of Wyse's Lahor. These
bad Examples were the first Seeds of Wickedness, which increased to a greater
height amongst their Successors, and made a breach of the sweet Union which
reigned at that time in the first Age of the World.

Wise seeing Brammon love his Credit and Respect which was due to him,
concluded to make him yet more miserable, by instituting a new manner of
Religion in the World, viz. The Worshipping or Images, which he was commanded
by a Vision; hereupon he built Pagods under the Shades of Trees, ordaining many
new Ceremonies: But because there was no mention made of them in the Books of
Brammon, great Disputes were held for a long time to know whether they should
be received or not; but after Wise had confirmed that he had received them from
the Mouth of God, they were adjudg'd Lawful. Moreover, they inventing new and
wicked Designs daily, and thereby increasing their Sins, God was displeased
thereat, the Heavens were covered with Horror and Darkness, the Sea swelled
with Anger, as if it would unite with the Clouds to ruin the People; a great
Noise was heard in the Air, Thunder and Lightning arose from the Center of the
Earth, as if it threatened to purge the World from its Filthiness by a total
Destruction: For soon after happened a great Deluge, which swallowed up all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, whereby their Bodies were punished for their Sins,
yet their Souls were entertained in the Almighties Bosom.

In this manner, according to the Opinion of the Benjans, ended the first Age
of the World; and they further add, That God showed his Power in destroying the
Creatures he had made, which perhaps else would never have been known; yet he
Created a new World and People, which were all Clean, and deserving of his
Wisdom and Mercy: And because the first Age of the World was thus destroyed by
the wickedness of the People, he resolved by means of three more perfect
Persons than the first, called Bremaw, Wistney, and Rudderey, to make a second;
and in order thereunto, God leaving the Heavens, descended upon a great
Mountain called Meropurbattee, from the top of which he uttered these words;
Rise up Bremaw, the first of Living Creatures of the second Age: Whereupon the
Earth opening, Bremaw started up out of the Bowels thereof, and at the same
instant knew his Creator, and Worshipped him: after which, God by a second and
third Command caused Wistney and Rudderey also to arise and worship him. But as
God does nothing without serious Consideration, and appoints all things to a
certain end, so likewise he did not create these three Persons to live alone in
Idleness, but to repeople the World, and gave to Bremaw, who was the first, the
Power of making new Creatures; for (say the Benjans) as Princes do not
Officiate their Affairs but by Agents, so did it not stand with God's Greatness
to humble himself to make his own Creatures, as long as he was able to do it by
means of his Servants.

To Wistney, who was the second, he gave the Charge of taking Care to preserve
those Creatures which as he had commanded through his Mercy to be made, so it
did likewise beseem his Wisdom to see them preserved: Yet to Rudderey, who was
the third, he give Power to destroy them; for he foresaw that they would grow
wicked, and deserving of Punishment.

And as God had given the Power to these three Persons to make such wonderful
Creatures, he was also obliged to give them a means whereby they might be able
to perform their several Offices. Bremaw therefore had the Power to Create and
Produce such Creatures as he thought most fit: And to the end Wistney might be
able to preserve them, God gave him a full Power over all things which might
tend to their Preservation, making him Lord of the Sun and Moon, Clouds, Rain,
and the Dew which falls on the Earth, as also of Hills and Valleys, leaving it
to his discretion to appoint the several Seasons of the Year, and giving him
Power of bestowing Riches, Health, and Honor on whom he pleased; in a word, he
made him Master of all things which tend to the welfare and support of Humane
Creatures. And to the end Ruddery might be the only Instrument to execute
God's Justice, God gave him Power over all things which might occasion the Ruin
of Living Creatures, giving him Power to chastize Sinners with Sickness,
Poverty, War, Pestilence, and Death.

After their several Offices were prescribed to these three Persons, a certain
time was limited them to live upon the Earth: And because the Work of the
Creation, which belonged to Bremaw, was perfected in the second Age, he
deservedly at the end thereof was taken up into Heaven, to dwell with the
Almighty. Furthermore, since the other Age was to be Peopled by those which
were preserved from the General Destruction of the World, Wistney staid twice
as long on the Earth as his Brother Bremaw, because there was a longer time
required for their farther Preservation. And because the World was to be ended
by a general Ruin and Destruction, therefore Ruddery was to stay three times
longer on the Earth than Wistney, to the end that when the great day of
Judgment should come, he should destroy all Creatures, and carry their Souls
with him into a Place of Glory.

Moreover, when they had all things granted them, wanting nothing but to put in
execution those Commandments which God had laid upon them, Bremaw began
seriously to consider with himself after what manner he might behave himself
most honorably in the Employment that God had put him upon; when on a sudden
he felt a strange alteration in his Body, accompanied with a general Pain
through all his Parts, such as that with a Woman in her Travel, foretelling
some strange and wonderful Event; his Body was in an instant swelled after a
strange manner, and his Intrails grew sensibly bigger than before: At last his
Body opened in two Places, viz. on his Right and Left Side, out of which came
two Twins, the one a Male, the other a Female, both of their full growth.

Bremaw having received Strength again, instructed them in things concerning
Religion, and called the Man Manow, and the Woman Ceteroupa, who after they had
worshipped God, thanked Bremaw that brought them into the World; and having
received his Blessing; they traveled toward the East, settling on a Mountain
called Munderpurvool, to the end that those which they should beget might
spread themselves East, West, North, and South. No sooner were they come to the
forementioned Mountain, but Ceteroupa was delivered of three Sons and three
Daughters, whereof the eldest Son was called Priauretta, the second
Outanapautha, the third Scomeraut; the eldest Daughter was named Kammah, the
second Sooneretaw, and the third Sumboo. As soon as they came to Age, they were
sent to several Places, Priauretta and Kammah to the West, to a Mountain called
Segund; Otanapautha and Soonurettaw to the North, to the Mountain Ripola;
Someraut and Sumboo to the South, to the Mountain Supars; all which Countries
they made very populous. By this means Bremaw was the first Father of all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, whilst Wistney took care for all necessary things for
the preservation of humane Creatures which Bremaw had made, by affording them
all the Blessings that make Men happy in this Life, till at last Ruddery sent
Sickness, Death, and a Curse among the Children of Men, who by their wicked
Lives had justly merited God's Vengeance.

This was the manner of Government which God used for the restoring of the
World, and all humane Creatures which were to inhabit in the second Age.

Furthermore, God (according to the Relation of the Benjans) taught Men to
serve him after this manner.

When God saw that there could be no Order nor lawful Government in those
Places where his Worship and Service was not Established, he resolved to make
Laws for the preventing of Man's committing those Crimes which were the
destruction of the first Age: In order whereunto he descended upon the Mountain
Meropurbatee; to which Place he called Bremaw, to whom he appeared in his Glory
through a dark and thick Cloud, telling him, That he was necessitated to
destroy the first Age, by reason Men would not obey his Commands, which were
contained in the Book he had given to Brammon. At the same time God gave Bremaw
another Book, and commanded him to teach all things that were contained
therein. Bremaw to Execute his Office, published God's Commandments to all
People on the Earth.

The Benjans call this Book Shaster, that is, The Book of Written Words, which
contains three Treatises or Parts; the first whereof contains their Fundamental
Laws, with an Explanation of each Commandment. The second treats of the
Ceremonial Law, and teaches them the Ceremonies which are to be observed in
their Religion. The third Treatise distinguishes all Men into certain Families
or Tribes, and comprehends the Commandments of each Tribe in particular, which
is all that is contained in the Book Shaster; out of which we will here set
down the chief Heads thereof. The first Treatise, in which is described the
Fundamental Laws which Bremaw taught, contained the following eight.

1. Thou shall not kill any Creature that has Life in it, for thou art one of
the Creatures, and so is that; thou art endu'd with a Soul as that is,
therefore thou shall not take away the Life of any thing whatsoever it be,
which belongs to me. 2. Thou shall make a Contract with the five Senses; First
with thy Eyes, that they may not see any thing that is ill. Secondly, with your
Ears, that they may not hearken to any bad thing. Thirdly, with your Tongue.
not to express any ill words. Fourthly, with your Pallat, that you taste
nothing unclean, as Wine or the Flesh of living Creatures. Lastly, with your
Hands, that they may not touch any thing to defile them. 3. Thou shall exactly
observe and keep all the Days and Times appointed for Devotion, as likewise
Cleansing, with Worshipping and Praying, which thou must perform with an
upright and zealous Heart. 4. Thou shall not give any false Testimonies, or
speak Lies, by means of which thou might defraud thy Brother, and enrich thy
self by fraudulent means, when thou Tradest with him. 5. Thou shall be merciful
to the Poor according to thy Power, and assist them in their Necessities with
Meat, Wood, and other things they may stand in need of for their support. 6.
Thou shall not oppress the Poor, and serve thy self with that Power which is
given thee, to destroy thy Brother unjustly. 7. Thou shall keep certain Feasts
and Holidays without pampering thy Body, and feeding thy self with
Laciviousness, but on the contrary, spend certain Days in Fasting; and in stead
of Sleeping over much, Watch often, to be the better prepared for Praying, and
for the performance of all other Holy Offices. 8. Thou shall not take any thing
from thy Brother, whatever it be, wherewith thou art entrusted, but content thy
self with what he shall give thee for thy Reward, remembering thou have no Right
to that which belongs to another.
These eight Commandments are prescribed to all the four Tribes in general; but
besides them they have two more, which are particular to each Tribe.

First, Bramines and Schuddery, that is the Priests and Merchants, are strictly
obliged to observe their Religious Commandments, and have near Relation one to
another in Matters of Religion, as there is between those of Kuttery and Wise,
that is the Magistrates and Handicrafts. They ascribe to the Bramines, which
are the Priests, the first and second Commandments, because they place the
chief of their Religion in these two things; first to prevent the killing of
living Creatures, and next to abstain from all forbidden things, as eating of
Flesh, drinking of Wine, and the like; which the Kutteries and Benjans are also
strictly to observe.

They attribute particularly the third and fourth Commandments to Schuddery, as
being very suitable to his Office, because it may possess the People with
Devotion, and prevent those fraudulent Practices which are common among Traders.

To Kuttery they prescribe (being the Governors or Magistrates) the fifth and
sixth Commandments, because they admonish the People of Love and Compassion to
the Poor, well knowing that Oppression is a common Sin among those that are in
Power.

They prescribe to Wys, or the Handicrafts, the seventh and eighth
Commandments, because those kind of People require some Days for Recreation.
They are also forbidden to Steal, to which they have great temptations and
opportunities, when they go to work in other Persons Houses. Lastly,
notwithstanding they are obliged to obey all their Commandments in general, yet
every Tribe observes those two which are prescribed them, with more Zeal than
any of the rest.

The second Treatise of the Book given to Bremaw, contained the usual
Ceremonial Institutions to be observed on certain Occasions, viz. the often
washing of their Bodies, and anointing them with certain red Salve, the making
of Offerings and Prayers, and the manner of Marrying aad Burying:
Notwithstanding all which things are before declared at large, yet it will be
requisite to give you an account of them, as Henry Lord Translated them out of
their Book called Shaster, partly for their coherence in some things, and
disagreeing in others.

First they are expressly commanded to wash their Bodies in a River, which as
the Benjans relate, began in the second Age of the World, and ordained among
other Religious Ceremonies, to mind them that the World was destroyed once by
Water for their Sins. This Ceremony is used after the following manner: First,
they daub their Bodies all over with Mud or Dirt taken from the bottom of a
River, to express thereby the natural Pollution of Man: This done, they go to
the River with their Faces turned toward the Sun, whilst the Bramine with a
loud voice speaks these words:

O Lord, this Man is foul and unclean like the Mud of this River, but as the
Water is able to wash of this Filth, so we pray thee to cleanse him of his
Sins.

This Prayer being ended, they dive three times under Water; while they are
washing themselves, the Bramine often calls upon the Name of the River, which
is called Tappee, as also some other Streams in India, which are held in great
Veneration, because of their washing themselves therein: Among others that are
thus accounted holy, are the Rivers Ganja and Narboda. Whilst the Bramine names
these Rivers, he that washes himself throws a handful of Rice into the Priests
Lap, as an Offering which they generally make to him. After which receiving an
Absolution of all their sins, they depart.

Secondly, They make use of a certain red Salve or Ointment, with which they
daub or anoint their Foreheads, where they stick certain Grains of Corn,
signifying thereby, that God has chosen and marked them as a People peculiar
to him; but it serves only to preserve the memory of their Baptism: they anoint
themselves several times a day, as often as they wash themselves. They utter
several words, admonishing them of such things as they are commanded.

Thirdly, They are commanded to make Offerings, and say certain Prayers under
the green Trees; which Custom was Instituted by Wise, to whom God appeared
under a green Tree, as we have already related, commanding him to perform his
Devotion in such Places.

The Persians call this Tree Lul; the Indians, Kasta; the Portuguese, Arbor de
Raiz, that is, Roottree, because its Boughs shooting down into the Ground, take
Root, and grow up anew, so that one Tree often spreads it self into a great
circumference, whereby several hundreds of Men may shade themselves under them,
secure from the Heat of the Sun, and from Rain.

In one Place of this Country of Surratte, grows one of these Trees, from which
the Indians dare not pluck a Leaf, fearing that they should that Year wherein
they had so offended. The Fakiers, and other poor People, sleep under the same
in the Night. They believe that great Sorrow will attend those that offer any
Injury to this Tree, breaking the least Bough from it; under which when they
meet, each Man brings his Offerings along with him. There they anoint their
Bodies with several Ointments, and pour forth their Prayers, the number of
which they express by the ringing of a Bell; and in their Prayers they crave
Health, Riches, and good success in all their Undertakings. They often meet
here in great numbers, and keep great Feasts. They also build under these:
Trees Pagods or Temples to their Idols, to which they show great Reverence.

Fourthly, They are obliged to say several Prayers in their Temples, which
would have a greater similitude with the ordinary Worship, were they freed from
certain superstitious Ceremonies to which they are obliged. These their Prayers
chiefly consist in often calling upon the Name of God, and extolling his
glorious Works. They also go in Processions, whilst their Priests sing certain
Prayers at the ringing of Bells; and also making Offerings to their Images, and
many such like ridiculous Ceremonies.

Fifthly, They are obliged to go to remote Streams, as to the Ganga, there to
make Offerings, and to wash their Bodies; which to perform, thousands go
thither every Year, carrying with them great quantities of Precious Stones, and
other Riches, which they throw into the same. They account those Saints, who at
their Departure have their Mouths filled with the Water of this Ganga, or the
Roof of their Mouths only moistened with the same.

Sixthly, They have another sort of Worship, which consists in calling upon
their Saints, to whom they ascribe the Power of effecting and prospering all
their Undertakings: Therefore those that desire to be happy in the State of
Matrimony, call upon Hurmount; those that go about Building, Pray to Gunnes; in
Sickness they call upon Vegenaut; the Soldiers which desire to be Victors,
appeal to Bimohem; the poor and decrepit, to Syer; and those which live
happily, implore Nykasser.

Seventhly, They are obliged by virtue of the Law, to worship God as soon as
any of his Creatures appears to them after Sunrising. This Religious Ceremony
and Sign of their Devotion, they generally show to the Sun and Moon, which they
call the two Eyes of God. They also respect certain Beasts, which they account
more clean than others, as Goats and Buffalo's, to which they ascribe such
innocence and goodness, that they rub the Floors of their Chambers with the
Dung of these Beasts, fancying that thereby they are made Holy.

Lastly, It is to be observed, that the manner of Baptizing and giving of Names
to their Children, is not one and the same with the Tribe of the Bramines; as
with all the rest, who only wash their Children with Water, and afterward one
of their Relations taking a Pen, seemingly writes upon the Babes Forehead, and
says this short Prayer, Lord, do thou write good things on this Child's
Forehead; whereupon all those that are present cry, We wish this may he
effected: which done, they name the Child, and anoint its Temples with red
Salve, to the end every one may know it is received into the Church, and marked
for one of the Children of God; thus ending their Ceremony.

But the Children of the Bramines are not only washed as the others, but
anointed with Oil, whilst the Priest utters the following words: O Lord, we
present thee this Child, born of a holy Tribe, anointed with Oil, and washed
with Water. Besides, they use several other Ceremonies; after which they Pray,
that the Child may be a zealous observer of the Lives of the Bramines, and set
down exactly the Hour and Minute of the Child's Birth, and observe under what
Planet it is born, that so they may know whether it shall be happy or unhappy,
keeping the Horoscope, not showing it to any till the Day of his Marriage,
which they account the happiest Day of his Life, and then publicly declare all
the Dangers he has escaped, and those which yet threaten him.

The third Treatise of the Book which was given to Bremaw, describes after what
manner they ought to live, what difference and dictinction they must observe in
those things which are mentioned in their several Tribes.

They affirm, that there can be no better way found to Govern the World, than
that which was used in the first Age, by means of four Tribes; that is to say,
to have Bramines to Teach the Law of God to the People; Kutteries, to Govern
and keep the People in Obedience to the Law; Schudderies, or Merchants, to
Trade; and lastly, Wyses or Handicraft-men and Laborers, to supply others by
their Labors with such Necessaries as are wanting. For this reason, by virtue
of this third Treatise of the forementioned Book, they are obliged, in all
their Tribes, as much as in them lies, to uphold this ancient manner of
Governing.

The Bramines is the first Tribe, and being looked upon by the Commonalty as
Priests, are of two sorts; first there are common Bramines, which are more in
number in India than any other; secondly, particular Bramines, far lesser in
number, and are by the Benjans called Verteas; by the Moors, Scurahs. The
common sort of Bramines consist of seventy two Families or Tribes, who are
Governed by so many eminent Men, who for their great Knowledge are highly
esteemed amongst them; they call them Soothsayers of such and such and such a
Place where they reside. The chiefest of them bears the Name of
Vikalnagranauger, that is, Soothsayer of Vikalnagra, a City so called. Likewise
the next are denominated from the Places of their Abode; by which means the
seventy two Tribes are distinguished.

What concerns the Offices or Employments, of these Bramines, is already
related at large.

As to what concerns the peculiar Bramines, they are called Verteas, and are
generally Persons of the Tribe of Schuddery, or Merchants, and are a People who
out of Zeal take upon them this Religious Office. They go Habited in white
Woollen Cloth, which comes down to the Calves of their Legs, the remaining part
of their Legs being naked. They never cover their Heads, as a Testimony of
their Obedience and Reverence they show to God: nor do they shave their Heads,
but pull it out by the Roots, except a little upon the Crown of the Head. They
also pull out their Beards after the same manner. There are several sorts of
these Bramines, whereof some are called Sonkaes, which never go to the Temples,
but perform their Religious Offices by themselves. Another sort named Tappaes,
say their Prayers in the Temples. A third sort called Kurthurs, worship God in
private without any Company. The fourth sort are called Onkelaus, which admit
of no Images. The fifth sort, which is the strictest of all, bear the Name of
Pushaleaus; these have a certain Festival Day named Putcheson, which they keep
every Month for five Days together; but between each Day of these five they
observe a Time to Fast in. This Feast is generally kept in a Person of great
Quality's House, and Charitable People commonly at that time, give Money to the
Poor, that they may not kill any Beasts, or other Living Creature.

This Tribe is much stricter in many things than the other Bramines; for
Marriage, which is allowed to others, is forbidden them: and they are satisfied
with less Meat and Drink than the rest, never eating any thing, except on the
forementioned Feast Day, but what is given them, and never keep any thing for
the next Day, or for another Meal. They preserve and hold all things that have
Life in greater Veneration than the other, and never drink Water till it be
boiled, to the end the Vapor, which they account the Soul thereof, should have
time to evaporate and fly out. They keep little Sticks constantly by them to
spread abroad their own Dung, so to prevent the Worms which might possibly be
in the same, from being trod to death. They keep Hospitals for sick and lame
Fowl, which they buy for Money, and endeavor to cure them, All things are in
common amongst them. They have but a slender opinion of washing themselves in
Water, but rather delight in foul and ditty Bodies.

The second Tribe is that of the Kutteries, which derives its Name from
Kuttery, the second Son of Porous: And because God had given him Power to
Govern others, all Kings and Martial People pretend to be Extracted from them.
The place of the Book of Bremaw wherein the things concerning this Tribe was
described, was filled with certain Commandments concerning Government and
State Policy, but of little consequence. These Kutteries may be described these
several ways, viz. How they were formerly in their flourishing Estate, how they
lived after when first they began to decay, and how they live at present.

In their flourishing Estate they were Kings and Governors of the Indians, and
especially of this Country of Surratte, and were at that time called Rajas,
that is, King or Prince; of which some possessed bigger Tracts of Land than
others, according as they were more or less Powerful. These Rajas have commonly
four sorts of Persons by them of Noble Aspect and Quality; the first sort
whereof were Bramines, who by means of their Soothsayers acquainted their Kings
with such Times as were by them accounted fortunate for any Design. The second
was called Pardon, that is, A Politician, or one experienced in Matters of
State, who dispatched all the King's Edicts, and had the general Care of the
King's Business. The third was called Moldar, who performed the Office of
Gentleman Usher to the King, being continually with him and his Company. The
fourth, called Disnache, managed all Martial Affairs, and Commanded as General
over all the Militia. They say, that the Rajas were Extracted out of thirty six
illustrious Families, some derived of the Family or Tribe of Chaurah, others
out of that called Solenkees, some of Vaggela, others of Dodepuchaes, and
others from the Paramars; so that a Person of mean Extract can never attain to
any great Dignity, but only those which were Extracted from one of these thirty
six Tribes.

In this manner the Rajas lived in their flourishing Estate; as to what
concerns their Fall, according to the testimony of their Histories, a certain
holy and virtuous Woman, named Rannedvil, prognosticated on her Deathbed, viz.
That the State of the Rajas would decline under the Government of Ravisaldee,
an eminent Raja; which happened accordingly, as may appear by the following
Relation.

There was formerly, as their Histories make mention, a Raja called Side
Ravisaldee, after whose Decease his Son built a stately Tomb, in a Place called
Sythepolapore, so to express to his Successors the Affection and Reverence he
bore to his Father. When this magnificent Structure was finished with great
Labor and Charge, he consulted with the Bramines, and desired to know of them
if the stately Tomb he had built would be of any long continuance, or would be
subject to decay, as well as other worldly things, and by whom it should be
ruined? Upon which a Madewnauger, experienced in the Bramines Art, answered,
That a certain Sultan called Alaudin, King of Dely, should ruin the same, and
make great Conquest in Surratte. Side Ravisaldee, to prevent the ruin of this
Structure, sent the Bramine Madewnauger with great Sums of Money to Dely, to
this Alaudin, to obtain of him, that he would let his Fathers Bones rest, and
not destroy the Temple he had built for him. But the Bramine coming thither,
could not find any Person of that Name, in any Government or Command; but after
long search, he was informed, that a certain Wood-cutter living there had a Son
of that Name; whereupon going to this Man, who was extremely amazed to see him,
he related to him his Journey, whilst the Son of Alaudin standing behind his
Father, was preparing a Dish of Goats-flesh. The Bramine going to him, told him
of the good Fortune that should attend him, and that on a certain Day he would
come to be King of Dely, and make huge Conquests in Surratte; and that Side
Ravisaldee had sent to proffer him a great Sum of Money, requesting, that when
he should be Victor, he would be pleased to defend the Temple which he had
built as a Monument over his Fathers Grave at Sythepolapore. Alaudin made this
Answer, That it was beyond all possibility he should be so powerful, and attain
such great Fortunes, yet nevertheless, if the Heavens had ordained it, it was
not possible to prevent it, and it would be impossible for him to defend that
Temple. He also generously refused the Presents and the Money which the Bramine
proffered him; but his Father and Mother, whom his Necessity gave good Advice
to, and knew better than he what was good for them, persuaded him to receive
the Presents, partly to relieve themselves out of the present Indigency in
which they were, and make use thereof, as an Instrument to attain to those
things which were Prophesied. Alaudin hereupon liking their Advice, received
them, and gave to the Bramine a written Paper to this effect: That since the
Heavens had appointed he should fetch some Stones from this Structure, he would
only take them from one Corner, without ruining it, as well to perform that
which was foretold him, as to answer the Requests of Side Ravisaldee.

With this Money Alaudin raised a considerable number of Soldiers, and happily
succeeded in all his Enterprises, insomuch that being pressed forward by his
good success, and emboldned by the Prophecy, that he should do such valiant
Exploits, he at last attained to be King of Dely, conquered Surratte, and
perfom'd that which he had promised Side Ravisaldee; and also ruined many
Rajas, to the great prejudice of the State of the Benjans, who then began to
decline. But at last being wearied with the toil and care of War, which
continued a long time, and was very ^roublesom, because many Rajas retreated
into inaccessible Places, he appointed one Futter^on to complete his Victories.

Alaudin seeing that Fortune had raised him from nothing to the highest Degree
of Honor, he resolved to s^^re his Happiness with him who had the least
thoughts thereof, and seriously considering thereupon a whole Night, he
concluded to give the Government of all those Places which he possessed in
Surratte, to the first that should come and offer him any Presents; when, just
as if it had been appointed, Futterkon came into his Chamber to proffer him a
Glass of Wine; which Alaudin received with great joy, and immediately in the
Face of his whole Army declared Futterkon Successor of all those Dominions
which he had or should attain, and commanded all his Officers to show him the
Respect due to him as his Successor, and to obey and assist him in all things
which were necessary for the carrying on and finishing the already begun
Conquests. After which Alaudin retired to Dely, whilst Futterkon prosecuted his
Conquests of Surratte, which the other Mahumetans that succeeded him in the
Government of his Dominions completed, to the destruction of the Realm of the
Benjans.

As to what concerns their present Condition, some Rajas that were in a good
Condition, and others that retired into the middle of the Country, into Places
which could not be conquered, are yet in Being, and Rob those Caravans which
Travel by the Places of their Residence, and often Sally out to the Gates of
the most strong and populous Cities for Booty. They have many brave Soldiers
that accompany them in these Enterprises, who are by some called Rasphootes, or
Rasboten, and Rasbookes, and by others Resbuten, Raspouten, Reisbutos, and
Ragipous, which signify Kings Children; for being of the Tribe of the
Kutteries, in all probability they were derived from those Noble Persons that
were destroyed in the Conquest of Surrate. Among those that were not conquered,
and are at present living, is one Raja Surmulgee, whose Residence is at
Raspeplaw; another Raja Berumshaw, at Molere; the Raja Ramnagar, Raja
Burmulgee, and the great Raja Rannah, who have maintained many a Field-Battel
against the Great Mogols Army. There are above a hundred Rajas or Pagan Princes
sprinkled up and down in this Realm, that are not under Subjection to the Great
Mogol, nor pay any Tribute to him: some of them dwell near, others a good
distance from Dely; among them are fifteen or sixteen very rich and powerful,
but chiefly five or six; as the Raja residing in the Country of Jesselmeer, who
formerly Reigned as Emperor over the Rajas, and is said to be Extracted from
King Porous; and likewise Jesseingue, and Jessomseingue, which are raised to
that height, that if those three would but join together, they would keep the
Mogol sufficiently employed, each of them being able in an instant to bring
twenty thousand Horse into the Field, better Exercised and Armed than those of
the Mogol.

The present Great Mogol's chiefest Soldiers are Rajas, as Jesseingue,
Jessomseingue, and others, to whom he gives great Salaries, to be always
prepared with a certain number of Ragipouts, their Subjects, and maintains and
keeps them as Omrahs, that is to say, as other strange Lords and Mahumetans,
sometimes among those Forces which he always has to Guard him, and sometimes in
the Field. These Rajas are commonly obliged to perform the same Duties that the
Omrahs do, that is, to be upon the Guard, though with this distinction, they do
it not in any Garrisons like the Omrahs, but in their Tents, for they cannot
brook being locked up twenty four hours together in a Fort; nor do they ever go
into any of them, but with a great Company of resolute Men, which have sworn to
die by them on the Spot, as it sometimes happens when any Design has been played
upon them.

The Mogol is obliged for several Reasons to keep these Rajas in his Service:
First, because the Rajas People are very warlike and valiant, and there are
several of them able to bring above twenty thousand Horse into the Field.
Secondly, that he may be the better able to keep in Subjection those Rajas
which are under his Pay, and force them to pay Tribute when they refuse, or
when out of fear or otherwise they will not venture out of their Country to
come into the Field when the Mogol has occasion for them. Thirdly, to heighten
or increase their Jealousies one among the other the more, by showing greater
Favor to one than to another. Fourthly, to employ them against the Patans, or
his Enemies the Omrahs and Governors, in case any should offer to rebel
against him. Fifthly, to use them against the King of Golkonda, when he refuses
to pay Tribute; or against the King of Visiapour, when he offers to Plunder
them, or bring them under his Subjection; at which time the Mogol cannot repose
any confidence in his Omrahs, which are most of them Persians, and of another
Religion, viz. not Sounnys, but Chias, as the King of Persia, and the King of
Golkonda is. Sixthly, and chiefly, to employ them against the Persians, when
any opportunity presents, for then he cannot confide in his Omrahs, who, as we
said before, are most of them Persians, and consequently can have no
inclination to Fight against their natural King.

The Country of the Resbutes borders on the side of Persia to the Motages, on
the sides of the River Indus at the City Cambaya; also to the Kingdom of Dely,
and Southerly to the Sea.

According to Purchase, this Country lies in the Road that leads from Surratte
to Agra, and (as Maffee affirms) borders on the West at Carmania; though more
probably, as Davity has it, Gedrosia, or the Country of the Motages or
Nautaques.

The Towns of this Country are Agra, Crodi, Vamista, Argeng, and Saurou; which
last has a very strong Castle, besides the great City Sarruna; from whence it
is fourteen Leages to Sinde, the Metropolis of this Kingdom. The Inhabitants
also possess several strong Places, amongst which is Dewras.

This Country is very fruitful, and of an exceeding fat Soil, producing
abundance of all sorts of Provisions, having plenty of all things on the very
Mountains.

The Resbutes, or Subjects of these Rajas or Indian Princes, were anciently, in
the time of the Heathens, Kings of Countries, and Peers of this Realm, who
defended their Country against Invaders, maintaining a continual War; but ^ow
they live in the Mountains, maintaining Wars against the Moors, to avoid paying
Tribute.

This Tribe has spread it self very much, and is extremely inclined to Robbing
and Stealing, from whence in India they call a Robber Resbut or Rasapout. Ram
granted them the liberty of taking as many Wives as they pleased, as also other
warlike Families, that so the Soldiers might not settle their Affections in one
Place, but might be the freer to make Conquest, and propagate wheresoever they
came; for were they confined to one Woman, they might perhaps take her along
with them to their conquered Places, and settling there, be unwilling to depart
thence.

The Resbutes are a rustic, deceitful, ill-natured, but yet a strong, valiant,
and undaunted People, fearing no Dangers, though threatened with Death; whereas
other Indian Heathens are mean spirited and timorous, carrying their Arms in
their Mouths, and esteem Railing before Fighting.

They are very famous for Robbing and Stealing; for they Plunder the Caravans,
and murder all Travelers they meet with, if they make the least Resistance.

They have several little Harbors for small Barques, with which they Pyrate
along the Coast.

They go naked from their Navel upwards, and wear Turbants, which differ in
fashion from the Mogols.

Their chiefest and only care, from the eldest to the youngest, is how to
handle a Sword well.

The Rajas, or Kings of the Ragipous, give their Subjects Lands for their
Subsistence, on condition they shallal ways be ready to Fight when called to
it; so that they might properly be styled a sort of Nobles, if the Rajas gave
them Lands for them and their Children. They drink Amfion in great abundance,
which they use from their Infancy; and when at any time they go to meet their
Enemies, they take a double Portion: for Amfion emboldning, or rather
inebriating, makes them fearless of any Danger; so that they maintain a Battle
like so many ravenous Beasts, never retreating, but die resolutely at the Feet
of their Raja. They want nothing but good Discipline to make them good
Soldiers, for Strength and Valor they have enough. It is very pleasant to see
them intoxicated with the forementioned Amfion, how they embrace and bid each
other farewell, like Men making account of nothing but Death: For among so many
Sects of Hindouns or Heathens subject to the Mogol, there is only one Tribe of
Soldiers or Fighting People called Resbutees, of whom the Great Mogol, for
their Valor, and some other Reasons, is necessitated, though a Mahumetan, and
consequently a Heathen, to entertain a great number in his Service, treating
them like other Omrahs, and making use of them in his Army as if they were
Mahumetans; nay, they are promoted to the greatest Offices, and highest
Employments under the Great Mogol, as also under the King of Visiapour and
Golkonda. Their Arms are Half-pikes, Swords or Simiters, and Shields; which
being large and hollow, are fashioned like a Bee-hive, and serve them to feed
their Horses and Camels out of. Most of the Rajas use Horses which are swift of
foot, handsome, and strong, and are always rid unshod.

The Resbutes eat all manner of Meat, except Beef and the Flesh of Buffalo's;
which Beasts they hold in great Veneration. They drink Palm-Wine and Brandy,
but not out of a Vessel out of which any other Tribes have drank before. They
are all of them Heathens, and would never permit any Mahumetans to mix amongst
them.

The Women resolutely leap into those Fires in which their Husbands were
consumed.

The third Tribe or Family, which is that of the Schudderies, derives its Name
from Schuddery, the third Son of Pourous and Parkoutee, who was designed for
Trade; for all Traders are comprehended under that Name and Tribe.

That which the Book given to Bremaw expressed concerning this Tribe, consisted
only in a few Commandments, instructing them how to live Honorably in their
Emyloyments, to be Just as well in Words as Deeds, and not to practice any
Deceit or Fraud in their Trades, either in Buying or Selling.

Amongst this Tribe are those which by the Portuguese, according to Texeira,
are called Beneans, though he affirms their right Name to be Vaneans; but their
common Name is Benjans.

Some ascribe a peculiar Country to the Benjans, and border the same on one
side of the Kingdom of Brampous, from which it is separated by the River Tynde,
and on the other at the Country Surratte.

The Towns of this Country are Daytaote near Surratte, and a Days Journey from
Naubonne; Netherbey and Saylote, five Leagues from Netherkey.

The Country yields all sorts of Grain and Fruit in great abundance, especially
Lemmons, Sugarcanes, and Cotton.

Under the Name of Benjans are comprehended all those that are Merchants and
Broakers; for there is nothing bought but by the Mediation and Approbation of
those which are called Benjans, which in the Language of the Brahmines
signifies An Innocent and Just People; for they cannot endure that a Wasp or
Fly, or any other living Creature, should be hurt, enduring patiently to be
beaten without resistance. They manifest themselves to be a very Just and Pious
People; for which reason, and because they are well acquainted with the
Country, the English and Dutch Merchants employ them as Broakers, to Buy and
Sell for them. They range all over Asia in great numbers to Traffic, but
reside chiefly in Surratte. Moreover, they Buy and Sell after a strange and
peculiar manner, quite different from any other People; for the Benjan or
Broaker that treats with the Seller, making a Price of the Goods, appears with
a little Board full of Figures, which is tied about his Waste, and laying it on
his Knee, points to the number of Guilders which the Buyer is willing to give;
after which the Seller in like manner expresses his Mind, by pointing to the
Number which he will have for his Commodity.

Thus they Buy and Sell without speaking a word, according to the Commandments
of their Law.

The fourth Tribe or Family, which is that of the Wyses, has its Denomination
from Wise, the fourth Son of Pourous and Parkoutee, who was sent to invent all
Arts and Handicrafts; wherefore all Artists and Mechanics are comprehended
under this Tribe: The Commandments relating to them, and contained in the Book
delivered to Bremaw, tend chiefly to instruct them how to behave themselves
justly and honestly in their Employments.

The Name Wise signifies A Hireling, or one that is used like a Servant,
because these People work for those that have occasion for them, as Wise did,
and all those that derived from him.

This Tribe consists of two sorts of People; for some like the Benjans, abstain
from Flesh and Wine, or use them very sparingly: The others are the Heathens of
Visceraun, which they call Defiled, or Unclean Pagans, because they allow
themselves the liberty of eating Flesh, Fish, and other Creatures that had
Life. These are generally the Rusticks, and meanest sort of People, which are
Coulees. And as the most zealous of these Heathens have the greatest
resemblance in Points of their Religion with the Kutteries, so do they likewise
agree in the number of their Tribes, which are thirty six, equal to the Trades
among them.

In all Mechanical Operations they use as few Tools as is possible, performing
every thing they do in a contrary manner to that of the Europeans and
Christians.

This is in short the Contents of the third Treatise of the Book of Bremaw,
concerning the four Tribes or Families, according as they live to this day.

This Book, which contained the Grounds of their Religion, and Rules of
Government, being first given to Bremaw, and by him delivered to the Brahmines,
who published the same among the People, by teaching them the Precepts of
Religion, and Rules of Life which each Tribe were to observe; in order to
which, those who had Power to Govern, kept their People in subjection, causing
every one duly to perform his Office; the Priests or Brahmines instructed the
People in their Religions, the Merchants drove the Trade, and the Handicrafts
followed each their several Callings, to the great satisfaction of all those
that made use of them.

Affairs being thus managed in the second Age, all things went very well;
Religion was strictly observed and honored, Prayers were directed to God, and
the three Persons, Bremaw, Wistney, and Ruddery; the Banks of Rivers were
frequently visited, and the daily and usual Cleansing never neglected.

But after the World increased, the Inhabitants thereof grew wicked, and
degenerated from their first Principles; the Brahmines became Dissemblers; the
Kutteries or Governors grew proud and ambitious, oppressing their Subjects, and
abusing their Authority; the Merchants dealt fraudulently; the Handicrafts grew
idle, and set too high a Price upon their Lahor.

The World thus degenerating, God was extremely incensed thereat, and descended
on the Mountain Merapurbatee, where he acquainted Bremaw how heinous the Sins
of Mankind were, that he might admonish them to turn from their wicked Ways,
and warn them of the approaching Judgments which their Offenses had justly
merited.

The World hearkened a while to his Admonitions; but soon after slighted them,
and returned to the commission of their former Crimes, which obliged Bremaw to
entreat God for them: but God being unwilling to be reconciled to them, took
him away, his limited time being expired, that so he might not be a Witness of
those dreadful Judgments that soon after were to fall upon the Children of Men.

Then God acquainted Wistney with his Resolution to destroy all humane
Creatures: wherefore Wistney interceded for them; but God not harkening to him,
commanded Ruddery, who was appointed to punish all Offenders, to raise a great
Wind out of the Earth to destroy the People, and blow them away like Dust from
the Ground.

Ruddery hereupon provoked the Winds which were imprisoned in the Bowels of the
Earth, causing them to break forth with great violence, insomuch that they
shook the Foundations of the Earth; the Day grew as dark as the Night, the
Hills and Mountains were turned topsie-turvy, and the River Ganges removed out
of its place; so that this terrible Storm destroyed all Mankind, except a few
Persons, whom God permitted Wistney to preserve, for the propagating and
re-peopling the World in the third Age, the second being ended in this dismal
manner.

When Ruddery had asswag'd the rage and fury of the Winds, all things were
still and quiet, yet in a deplorable Condition, to see the World thus deprived
of its Inhabitants, and utterly ruined; some were bruised against the Rocks,
others lay heaped one upon another in the Fields; which the Almighty seeing,
was troubled at it, and Ruddery also very much grieved to have been the
Instrument of so great a Destruction.

Now since these great Misfortunes and Punishments proceeded from the bad
Conduct of the Kings, and those who Governed, God utterly destroyed the Tribe
of the Kutteries. Those that were saved by the Prayers of Wistney, consisted in
a small number, and were only of the three other Tribes. But because the four
sorts of Tribes were so perfectly necessary for the Governing of the World,
insomuch that it could not be without them, and God had wholly destroyed the
Family of the Kutteries, therefore he resolved to renew the same by a Prince,
and ordained that the Kings for the future should be Extracted out of the
Family of the Brahmines, the chiefest whereof that were then living having been
preserved by Wistney, were called Ducerat.

The first Child which was born after this universal Destruction, was ordained
to be the Race of Kings and Princes; who being zealously brought up, managed
both the Affairs of State and Religion, Governing the People with great Wisdom
and Piety, according to their several Tribes; performed many heroic Acts, and
was a Protector of all Brahmines and other Spiritual Persons. His Name was Ram,
and by his Just and Pious Life attained to that Dignity, that his Name is to
this day exceedingly honored amongst them; for in their usual Salutations they
with a loud Voice cry Ram, Ram, that is, I wish you Health and all Happiness.

It Is certain many Just and Pious Kings Reigned after him, but as all things do
daily degenerate, so in process of Time receding farther and farther from their
original Purity, they grew proud and ambitious, insomuch that they acted daily
contrary to the Commandments comprehended in the Book of Bremaw.

These heinous Enormities did once more so highly incense the Almighty, that he
gave Power to Ruddery to open the Earth, that it might swallow them up alive,
except a few of each of the four Tribes, which he preserved to re-people the
World anew with. And in this manner ended the third Age of the World.

Soon after God commanded that the World should be re-planted by those that
were preserved, which was one Kysteney or Kistna, who was a famous King, Wise
and Religious, and one of the most comely Persons of the former Age. He
propagated Religion with great Zeal, insomuch that during his Life there was
great Reformation amongst the People, and very hopeful beginnings of Piety and
Honesty.

When by Kysteney's coming Wistney's time was expired, God (as they relate)
took him up to Heaven, there being no further need of his, Service here below,
because there would be no other World after this fourth Age; which, now in
being, will (according to the Opinion of the Brahmines) last much longer than
any of the former; and that after its ruin, Ruddery will be taken up to Heaven
likewise.

They call these four Ages by four several Names, viz. the first Kurtain, the
second Dnauper, the third Tetrajos, and the fourth Kolee.

The manner of destroying this last Age will, as the Brahmines relate, be much
more terrible than any of the former, to wit, by Fire: at what time Ruddery
will gather all his Powers together, as absolutely necessary for the execution
of so grand a Destruction. The Moon will shine red, the Beams of the Sun will
be like the Flames of burning Brimstone; Thunder and Lightning will make a
dreadful noise; the Sea will change into all manner of Colors, and Fire and
Smoke will cover the surface of the Earth; the four Elements, of which the
Heavens were first made, will maintain War against one another, and the World
being thereby utterly destroyed, will resolve into its first Primordia.

The World will be destroyed by Fire, as they suppose, for this reason, That it
must be extinguished by that which gave it beginning; and because it consists
of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, therefore it must be destroyed by these four
Elements; for the former Ages (on which this Opinion is grounded) were
destroyed, the first by Water, the second by Wind, and the third by Earth;
therefore the fourth and last must be consumed by Fire.

This being finished, Ruddery shall carry all humane Souls up to Heaven, there
to rest in the Bosom of the Almighty; but all Bodies will decay: for they deny
the Resurrection of the Body, affirming, That Heaven is too pure a Place for
such gross and unclean Bodies.

The Kingdom or Territory of Chandish or Sanda.
THe Kingdom or Territory of Chandish, otherwise called Sanda, is by Robert
Covert called The Land of Heathens, or Country of the Great Can of Canouwe,
formerly the Overseer of the Great Mogol's Highways.

Jarrick calls this Country, or a great part of it, The Kingdom of Brampour, or
Brampore, or Barampour, from its Metropolis. It borders in the West, on the
Kingdom of Surratte; in the South, at Dekan, having the Dukedom of Parthapsha
between; in the North, at the Provinces Chitor and Malway; and in the East, at
Berar. A certain English Writer borders the same on the one side, upon the
Kingdom of the Benjans, from which it is separated by the Tynde or Tasy; and on
the other side, upon the Country of Bulloits, having the great Stream Andre
between; and is supposed to lie in 28 Degrees Northern Latitude.

Terry affirms this Kingdom to be a mighty and populous Country, and the South
part of the Mogol's Dominions: It is divided in the middle by the River Tynde
or Tasy, which makes the Country conveniently pleasant and fruitful about those
Places through which it flows, though for the most part it is a barren,
unwholsom, sandy, and dry Tract of Land: the Metropolis thereof is called
Brampore, or Barampour; by Herbert and Jarrick, Breampour, and lies in 28
Degrees and 3 Minutes Northern Latitude, 220 Miles Eastward from Surratte, 420
from Asmeer, and 100 from Agra. Herbert holds the same to be the ancient City
Baramatis of Ptolomy, and signifies Brachmans Pous, or The City of the
Brachmans, because it was formerly, and is still to this day, an University of
the Brahmines, Jogues, or Gymnosophists. The City lies low in a healthful and
spacious Plain; it has many Streets, but very narrow; their Houses are
indifferent handsome, though low. Purchase renders the same to be a very fair
City, much bigger than London, and the most famous and richest which the Mogol
possesses. On the North-East side of the City is a large strong Castle or Fort,
on the Banks of the Stream Tapy.

This City was formerly the Metropolis and Residence of the King of Dekan, who
was in process of time driven from thence.

Not far from thence is a Garden or Chan Channa, in which are many delightful
Springs and Fountains. The City is for the most part inhabited by Benjans.
Before the Town, in the River Tapa stands an Elephant, most curiously Carved of
Marble, which the Benjans worship.

Anno 1600. the Great Mogol Ekbar, after having conquered the Kingdom of Dekan,
made himself Master of this City Brampour, which was then desolate and deserted
by King Miram, who was fled to the Fort Sir; which for its Situation and
Strength is the most considerable of all the Country, and impregnable: for it
lies on the top of a high Mountain, and is three Leagues in circumference,
surrounded with three Walls, which are so made, that the one may conveniently
defend the other: for though Ekbar besieged King Miram with a hundred thousand
Men, yet he could not conquer the same by Force, but only by Policy and
Treachery.

In this Castle were anciently kept, according to the Custom of the Country,
seven Kings with their Families and Retinues, which never came from thence,
except that King of the Country which was nearest related to him, died without
a Male-Issue. Within it is a Fountain of fresh Water.

The other Towns of this Country are Saddise, lying near the River Tynde, nine
Leagues from the City Netherbey, and two Days Journey from Brampour; the next
is Caddor, fifteen Leagues from Brampour, on the side of the Bulloits Country:
then follows Sawbon, fourteen Leagues from Caddor; Kanowe, a great City, three
days Journey from Caddor; fourteen Leagues farther flows the great River
Andere, which runs to Bengala, where the utmost Limits of the Heathens
terminate; and crossing this River you go out of the Heathens Country into that
of the Bulloits.

Five Leagues Journey from Agra is a Castle called Hoffer, the most eminent,
and the strongest of all the Province of Chandish; it is built on the top of a
high and steep Mountain, incredibly fortified by Nature, and able to contain
forty thousand Horse: in the middle of it are Springs which water the Mountain,
and make the Earth so fruitful in the production of Grass, Herbs, and Corn,
that there is no want either of Provisions or other Necessaries: it is also
Planted round about with very fine Brass Guns, which were brought thither by
the last King of Surratte. But the Water which springs out of this Mountain is
very unwholsom to drink, and causes Worms to grow in the Legs; which was the
only Instrument whereby Ekbar conquered this Place.

The Inhabitants of Brampour are very affable and courteous, occasioned perhaps
by their converting commonly with many of the Nobility, by whose Example the
Vulgar are very much civilized. Every Person may Hunt freely, without any
interruption; and those that will not go on foot, may be furnished with a Horse
at a very low Rate.

The Inhabitants of Kanowe drive a great Trade in Clothes, Swords, Muskets,
and a certain Fruit to Dye withal; and those of Brampour in Cloth of Gold and
Silver, Silks, and Woollen Cloth.

The Country is sufficiently fortified against an Enemy; for Anno 1609. the
King of Kanowe came with an Army of fifty thousand Elephants, thirty thousand
Horse, ten thousand Camels, and three thousand Dromedaries, to attack the same.
It is at this day Governed by a Substitute of the Great Mogol's.

The Inhabitants are Heathens, and worship the Sun as their Supreme God: They
eat not the Flesh of any living Creature, according to the manner of the
Pythagoreans. They adore all Creatures as Gods, and worship that Beast they
meet with first in the Morning for their God all that Day.

Anno 1600. the City of Brampour, with the whole Kingdom, and Fort of Sye, was
conquered by the Great Mogol Ekbar: for at the coming of Ekbar with his Army,
after having conquered the Kingdom of Dekan, King Miram deserted die City of
Brampour, and fled with all the Inhabitants and their Goods to the Fort Sye, so
that Ekbar got nothing but the empty City, and therefore went from thence to
Sye with an Army of 200000 Men. The Fortress was plentifully stored for many
Years with Wood, Corn, and other Provisions, for sixty thousand Men, and was
fortified with three thousand Pieces of Ordnance. In the Fort was, besides King
Miram, and the seven other Heroic Princes; which though of the Mahumetan
Religion, yet Extracted Portuguese; who having the sole Conduct of this War,
fortified the Fort with no less Care than Art; so that the Mogol's Labor,
though he had besieged the Fort with two hundred thousand, was all in vain; for
the Besieged, by the convenient Situation of the Fort, their continual
discharging of great Guns, and prudent management of Affairs, they prevented
him from taking the same by Storm. When Ekbar saw that it was impossible to
Conquer the Fort by Force, he resolved to try what he could do by Policy;
wherefore he endeavored to attain his Ends by Money and Presents, and desired
to enter into Conference with King Miram, swearing by his Head, the greatest
Oath imaginable, that immediately after he had spoken wi^h him, he should
return in safety to the Fort again. Miram being doubtful what might be the
Event of this Business, entered into Counsel with his Officers about it; where
the Abyffinian Commanders, and seven other Princes, judged it altogether
inconvenient for him to go out of the Castle: but others, who were enticed
thereto by Bribery, seemed to be quite of another Opinion; whose Advice he
following, went out of the Fort, having upon him a Garment in fashion of a
Cloak, which reached down to his Knees, as a testimony of his Submission:
Coming to the Great Mogol, whom he found sitting like an Image, yet with a
smiling Countenance, he bid him welcome three times; upon which Miram
approaching nearer to him, bowed down his Head, when one of the Mogol's Princes
taking hold of him, threw him on the Ground; to which rude Affront 'twas judged
Ekbar consented, notwithstanding he seemingly reprehended him for his rashness,
and mildly persuaded Miram to send Letters to the Watches which Guarded the
outward Walls: After which Miram required liberty to return to the Castle; but
Ekbar not regarding, his Oath, would not permit him to go back again. The
Abyssinian Governor was no sooner informed of what had passed, but he sent his
Son with a Letter to the Mogol; in which he taxed him with Injustice, for
detaining Miram contrary to his Oath, advising him to to let him return
peaceably according to his Promise. The Mogol hereby understanding, that the
whole management of Affairs were left to the Discretion of this Abyssinian,
thought if he could but corrupt him, the Place might be easily subdued;
wherefore he asked the Son, If his Father would not come thither, in case King
Miram should command him? To which the Youth boldly replied, That his Father
was no such Person as he took him for, neither would he leave his Castle to
come and Consult with him; that he must in vain expect to obtain the Fort with
his Father's Consent; and if he would not release Miram, yet there should not
long want a Successor. Which confident Answer so incensed Ekbar, that he caused
the young Man immediately to be Stabbed: which when his Father had notice of,
he presently sent the Mogol word, That he would beg of the Gods never to behold
the Face of such a perfidious Prince; and afterward taking his Sash in his
Hand, he went amongst the Soldiers, and thus bespake them: Oh Brothers, the
Winter approaches, which will drive the Mogol from the Siege, and, to avoid
their utter Ruin, force them all to retire home: None but God shall ever he
able to Conquer this Place, unless the Inhabitants thereof will surrender the
same; therefore resolve valiantly to defend the same. Having ended this Speech,
he went and Strangled himself immediately. After his Decease the Inhabitants
defending the Place for some time, kept the Mogol continually employed; who,
after he had used all possible means in vain, having no great Guns at hand
wherewith to batter down the Walls, at last resolved to try if he could
purchase the Inhabitants to a Surrender by great Sums of Money; which to
accomplish, he sent to the Governors very considerable Presents of Gold and
Silver; whereby he did so cool and abate their Courage, that none of the seven
Successors of the Realm durst assume the Government; for they perceiving the
Generals to be fearful, and their Courage no longer to exert it self, could
foresee and expect nothing but the sudden loss of the Place; and accordingly it
so fell out: for after a few Days the Fort was surrendered, and with it the
whole Kingdom was subjected to the Mogol, who got peaceable possession thereof,
with an invaluable Treasure. He received all the Inhabitants favorably, except
the imprisoned King and the seven successive Princes, whom he dispersed into
several Provinces, allowing King Miram three thousand, and each of the other
two thousand Ducats per Annum for their Maintenance.

The Province of Berar and Narvar.
THis Country of Berar lies on the South side of the Kingdom of Chand^^, and
Borders on Surratte and the Mountains of Rana. The Metropolis bears the Name of
Shapore. The Province of Narvar is moistened by a great River, which discharges
its Water into the Ganges. The Chief City is called Gehud.

The Province of Gwaliar or Gualier.
THe Province of Gwaliar or Gualior, otherwise Gualier, has a City which bears
the same Name.

The Mogol has a vast heap of Treasure, which he keeps in this Country in a
very strong Castle, Garrisoned by a Company of well Disciplined Soldiers, who
also Guard such of the King's Prisoners as are Persons of Quality.

The Kingdom of Agra or Indostan.
THe Kingdom or Province of Agra is so called from Agra, the Royal Metropolis
of the Great Mogol's whole Kingdom, besides Dely and Lahor. Others call it
Indostan, or Indoustan, which signifies The Country of Indus: for Stan in the
Country Language is A Country or Province, and Indus is the Name of the River
Indus, which moistens the Country. It borders on one side upon the Stream
Paddor, which separates it from the Henderons, and conterminates on the other
side with the River Tamliko or Tamlou, which is a Boundary between this and the
Country Inhabited by the Bulloits.

The Metropolis bears the same Name with the Province of Agra, and lies in 28
Degrees and 7 Minutes North Latitude, on the Banks of the River Jemini, which
glides by its Walls, and disembogues near the City Andakoda, into the River
Ganges, two days Journey from Agra.

According to Herbert, this City was formerly called Nagra, and anciently
Dionysia, and was built by Bacchus; but this seems incredulous, because within
this hundred years the City Ratipor was far more beautiful, and bigger than
that of Agra, which is believed to have had its Denomination from the River
Arrany, which (as Arrian affirms) falls into the Ganges. It was built by King
Ekbar after his Conquest of Surratte, and for its pleasant Situation made
choice of for the Mogol's Court and chief Place of Residence. It lies almost
Triangular, or (as Herbert says) Semi-Circular, surrounded with a strong Walk
of Freestone, and a Moat of a hundred Paces broad. The Circumference of the
City is reckoned to be twelve German Miles. The Streets, which are very
straight, are dirty, and three Leagues and a half long.

In the Northern part of the City, not far from the River, lies, the great and
famous Royal Castle, or Residence of the Kings, which is the most beautiful and
glorious Piece of Work in all Asia. It appears outwardly like a City,
containing five hundred and twenty Paces in circumference. The Structure is for
the most part built of Freestone, with many Galleries and Piazzaes, very
stately, after the manner of the Country.

At the Entrance of this Castle stands the Royal Court of Judicature, in the
Persian Tongue called Diwanchane; before which is a large square Maidan or
Plain, planted about with Trees; under which Persons of Quality in hot Weather
walk to cool themselves. In the middle of the Plain stands a Pole, having a
Bird on the top of it, at which they shoot with Bows and Arrows.

Opposite to this Court stands a large square Building called Karchanay Schah,
that is, The King's Treasure-house, with eight Arched Vaults, in which are kept
the greatest part of the Mogol's Treasure. Two of these Cellers are reported to
be full of Gold, and two of Silver; in the seventh are kept Pearls, Gems, and
other such like Rarities; and in the eighth are contained all such Presents as
are sent from foreign Princes by Ambassadors.

Behind this Treasury stands another large square Palace, with a very
delightful Garden, and is called Hara Michan, that is, The King's Women's
Lodgings; for in it are kept twelve hundred of the King's Concubines, which are
guarded and waited upon by six hundred Eunuchs.

Others describe this Court thus: It is three or four Leagues in circumference,
surrounded with strong Walls of red Stone, and broad Moats with Draw-Bridges;
it has four Gates, one on the North, which is very strong; the second on the
West side, is called Citsery, near the Bezar or Market. Within this Gate is the
King's Court of Judicature, where he decides all Differences; and behind that
is the King's Hall, the Seat of the Viceroys. Within this Gate is also a
Street built full of Houses, and about a Mile long. The third Gate, called
Achabaerbederiwage, that is, The Gate of King Achbaer, lies on the South side,
and and leads to the King's Derbaer, the Royal Throne, or inner Court; before
which is a small Court, surrounded with Golden Rails, and covered on the top
with Carpets, to keep off the heat of the Sun; beyond it is a Gallery, in which
stands the King's Throne, adorned with Gold, Diamonds and Pearls, and all sorts
of Precious Stones. No Person is permitted to approach this Place without being
called, except the King's Sons (which standing near him, cool him by continual
fanning of him with Fans, in the Country Language called Pankhamh) and the
Chief Secretary.

Within the forementioned Court none are suffered to enter but Ommirades or
Omrahs, which are Dukes and great Lords.

Opposite to this Place hang golden Bells, which are rung by those that have
sustained any prejudice, and are thereupon admitted to speak to the King, to
make their Complaints to him, but not without great danger, if their Cause be
not just.

In this Place the King appears every Afternoon, between three and four a
Clock, besides thousands of other People, which take their Places according to
their Qualities, and with the King stay there till the Evening, hearing all
foreign Letters, which are read by the Setretary, and determining all other
Businesses. Hither are also brought his Horses and Elephants, which are tried
by some of his Servants appointed for that purpose. Within this third Gate is
likewise a Seraglio, covered with a golden Roof.

The fourth Gate called Eersame, leads to a River, along whose Banks stands a
beautiful Palace, where the King Salutes the Rising-Sun every Morning, whilst
the most eminent Persons of his Court standing on a rising Ground, show him
Reverence, and the Hadys or Commanders of Horse, with other People, remain in
the outward Court, not daring to come any farther, unless they are called. From
hence also he beholds the Fighting with Elephants, Lions, Buffalo's, and other
wild Beasts, which is performed every Day at Noon, except on Sundays.

In the inner Hall of the Royal Court come no People but the King's Eunuchs or
Bed-chambermen, which are called Godia.

In the inner part of the Castle are two Towers, one on the Seraglio, and the
other is built on the Treasury.

Within the Suburbs are many Courts, belonging to the Chans and other great
Lords, very artificially built, and adorned with many beautiful Works; the
Cielings are richly Painted with Gold and Silver, and other Colors; the Walls
are hung with Tapistry, and the Floor covered with rich Carpets.

In the midst of these Courts are for the most part square, or six-angled
Springs, about which they Dine, and in hot Weather Bathe themselves.

In the Western part of the City, near the Metzid Nassar, stands a high Tower,
raised of Camels Heads and Mortar. The ordinary Citizens Houses are but mean,
yet built in good order. There are eight great Streets with Shops, besides many
lesser; and also four large Arched Streets, each about half a Mile long, where
all manner of Trades and Handicraftsmen keep their Shops, especially those that
Deal in Silks and Cotton; Gold and Silver-Smiths, Shoemakers, Tailors, Coopers,
Blacksmiths, and all other Trades, live each in a peculiar Corner. For
traveling Merchants and others, there are eighty Serrais or Karavanseraes,
which are large square Courts, enclosed with high Stone Walls, at each end
whereof stands a Watchtower, out of which they go into the several Galleries,
wherein are Lodging-Rooms, each of them having Doors to lock, and also
Chimneys; there are commonly two or three Rooms one over another. Under these
Chambers are great Arched Stables for Horses, Asses, Oxen, and Camels; and in
the midst of the Yard stands a Spring with running Water, or a Vault with
standing Water; they were built by the great Mogol Ekbar, after he had
conquered the Kingdom of Surratte, and is said to have cost him two Millions
and a half of Ropias, a Ropia being valued at 2 s. Sterling.

There are likewise four hundred Hamans or Baths, which are daily visited by
several Persons, who pay each a Sektzai for their Entrance.

Severity large, besides many lesser Metzids or Temples, are also no small
Ornament to this City, especially six, which are the chief; in one of which
lies Interred the Body of a Saint called Scandar, the Successor of Hussein Alys
Son. This Temple possesses great Riches and Privileges, it being an Allakapi,
or Privileged Place: for whosoever flies thither, though he has committed the
greatest Crime imaginable, nay, though he had attempted to kill the King
himself, he is free from all Punishments as long as he can stay there: if he
has Money, there is Meat brought him by the Derwish, who is a person which at
Set-times cries the Illa lailah illa allah, etc. from the Temple Steeple, to
gather Alms.

Not far from the Netherland East India Companies Factory which they have in
this City, stands a Me^zid called Jakod; near which lies buried a Giant called
Baxi Schah, of whom the Moors tell many incredible stories: the Grave is 36
soot long, and eight broad: on each Corner stands a great Column hung full of
little Flags, on which in Indostan Characters stands written the Life of this
mighty Hero; and in each Pillar is a Hole, in which Lamps burn Night and Day,
to the Honor of Baxi Schah.

This Baxi Schah is by the Mahumetans honored almost as high as God; for they
go thither to pay their Devotions, and believe, that by Praying to him they
shall immediately receive Absolution for all their Sins: they also swear by his
Name.

With the Mogol's permission the Benjans have also many Pagods in this City.

There are four Custom-houses built in four several places of this City, where
Merchants Enter and pay Custom for their Goods, and the tenth Penny of all
things they carry out of the City with them.

This City is inhabited by diverse Nations, but the chiefest and most eminent
are the Hassanists, Tar^ars, Benjans, Armenians, Turks, Jews, and Persians,
besides several Europeans. There are also Portuguese, and Augustine Monks.

Agra is a very populous City, and can on occasion bring two hundred and fifty
thousand Men into the Field. In it is great store of Saltpeter and Indigo to
be had, which the English and Hollanders carry from thence in great quantities.
Not only within, but also round about the City, are very delightful Gardens,
some whereof belong to the Mogol, who oftentimes goes to walk and Dine in them,
whilst a considerable number of Women Dance naked before him.

The Jurisdiction of Agra from all Parts, extends twelve Days Journey through a
Plain and fertile Country, which contains forty great and small Towns, and
three thousand five hundred Villages. Without the City is a House wherein are
kept all sorts of wild Beasts, as Elephants, Tigers, Lions, Buffalo's, and wild
Bulls, which the Mogol keeps to sport withal, either by letting them fight one
against another, or encounter with such Men as will be accounted the most
valiant of the Country, or with such as are constrained upon forfeiture of the
Mogol's Favor to engage with them.

About the Year 1620. the City of Agra was by the Sultan Chorrom, Selim's Son,
ruined and plundered a second time with far greater cruelty of the Soldiers
than formerly, perhaps in revenge for the Loss which they sustained before the
Castle, which they Storming in vain, lost many Men, who were slain by the
Besieged.

Between Agra and Lahor is a Walk planted with Trees four hundred English Miles
in length, and is by Travelers, who refresh themselves under the cool shading
Trees, accounted one of the most delightful Places in the whole World, there
being several brave Houses for Entertainment built along the Highway.

A League and a half from Agra, on the Way from Lahor, is a Place called
Tzekander, where the Great Mogol Ekbar erected a great Burying-place for
himself and his Successors; to which his Son Jangheer contributed very largely:
and though there had been above twenty four Millions of Ropias bestowed on the
same, yet it was not near finished in the Year 1626. The whole Structure is of
hewn Stone, divided into four large Squares, each three hundred Paces: at the
Corners of each stands a little Tower of colored Marble. It lies in the midst
of a very fine Garden, surrounded with a Wall of red Stone, within which is a
Turret, from which you see into a little, but exceeding delightful Garden.

The City Fettipore, or Fatipor, by Jarrick called Fateful or Pateful, by
Cowert, Fetterbat, and by Herbert, Fettipour, was anciently called Tzikkerim,
or Sykary, and lies twelve Kours, or four Leagues from Agra.

This City was upon the following occasion built by the Great Mogol Ekbar, viz.
At his Return from Asmer, whether he went to visit the Tomb of Mandy, he
visited St. Derwis, or a poor Monk called Seid Selim, that is, Seid Selim, who
accounted himself highly honored, that God had employed him to tell Ekbar, that
in a short time he should be the Father of three beautiful Children; and indeed
Ekbar to acknowledge the Kindness, would have his eldest Son called Selim, the
second Chan Morad, or Amurath, and the third The Haen Schach, or Daniel: nay,
this Prophecy was so acceptable to Ekbar, that he caused a fair Mosque to be
built there, and enclosed both that and the ancient City Tzikerim or Sykary,
with a high Wall, and from that time caused it to be called Fettipore, that is,
A Place of Delight: nay, his Affections were so strongly inclined to this City,
that he built a Palace there, and also a Bazar or Exchange, the fairest in all
the Eastern Parts, resolving farther to make it the Metropolis of the whole
Kingdom, for which it stood very convenient, being seated on the Bank of a
River; yet the unwholsomness of the Air forced him to leave the same: since
which time it is become a ruined and desolate Place.

Robert Cower affirms, that this City is much bigger than London, and is
adorned with a Temple very artificially built, though much decayed.

The whole Tract of Land between this City and Agra, is always thronged with
People like a Market.

The City Bian is four Leagues from Fatipor; beyond which are the Towns Ladana,
Mosabadan, and Bandason; next lie Asmeer or Esmeer, where the Great Mogol Ekbar
had a large House or Stable, in which he commonly kept six hundred Elephants,
and a thousand Horses.

The City Asmeer lies in 35 Degrees and 15 Minutes Northern Latitude, on a high
and inaccessible Mountain, twenty five Leagues from Agra. The greatest part of
the City lies at the foot of the Mountain, well built, but ill fortified;
notwithstanding the Wall is of good Stone. A Prophet, one of Mahomet's
Disciples, lies buried there in a stately Tomb, to which belong three pleasant
Yards, paved with Freestone, polished after the Persian manner.

Not far from hence is Godach, formerly the Residence of an eminent and very
valiant Rasbout.

Some place the City Fatipor in the Province of Bando.

At every half Leagues distance between Agra and Asmeer, stands a Pillar or
Column, resembling those which the Romans used to erect at the distance of a
thousand Paces. At the end of every twenty five Mile there is an Inn or Place
of Entertainment for Men and Horse, where certain Women constantly give their
attendance, and get ready such Victuals for every one as they desire; for
which, and their Horse-meat, they pay Three pence.

There are also fair Houses at every ten Miles distance, which were built by
the Great Mogol Ekbar for the convenience of his Women, when he took a Journey
to Asmeer to visit the Tomb of Mandy, Mahomet's Disciple.

The whole Country being watered by the Stream of Jemna, abounds with Corn,
Lemmons, Oranges, Cherries, Pears, Apples, Plums, and other Fruit; amongst
which are Grapes, which being preserved, are as big as Damas Pruins. There also
grows abundance of Anil, or Indico, and store of Cotton. Saltpetre is likewise
very plentiful here; and all sorts of Poultry, Falcons, Pheasants, Partridges,
Hearns, and Wild-ducks. Here are also great store of Goats, Cows, and Hogs; and
Fish in such abundance, that Eighteen pence will purchase enough to feed three
hundred Men.

In Agra are generally kept four Markets, where besides Provisions, diverse
other Goods are sold. From Persia and China are Transported hither considerable
Quantities of Gold and Silver Cloths, which though slighter, are yet dearer
than those of Europe.

In this City, as also in Lahor, the Inhabitants drive a great Trade in Anil,
or Indico; and at Bandason there is vast quantities of Course Wool, Cotton,
Lances, Bows, Javelins, Swords, and other Arms. In Lahor are commonly kept two
Markets: The Inhabitants drive also a great Trade to Foreign Parts.

When the King resides at Agra, no Stranger is permitted to stay there above
twenty four Hours, unless they give him an account of their Business, and of
what Quality and Country they are; but none are permitted to see him without a
Present.

In this City the Netherlanders keep a Factory for their East India Company,
who maintain four or five Persons, which formerly made a great advantage on
Scarlet Cloth, great and small Looking-glasses, and other Merchandises; and
also by buying of Indico, which grows about Agra, but especially at Bianes, two
days Journey from thence, whither traveling twice a Year, they have built a
Lodge or Storehouse there, where they buy in all those Stuffs or Cloths which
come from Jelapour and Laknau, about six or eight days Journey from Agra. But
at this time it is said the Gain is nothing so considerable; whether it be
because the Armenians drive that Trade themselves; or because Agra lies so far
from Suratte, that one Accident or other does generally befall their Caravans,
which are constrained to travel by the City Amadabad, through the Raja's
Country, to avoid the bad Ways and Mountains which lie on the side of Govaleor
and Brampour, which is the shortest way.

The Country of Bulloits.
THE Bulloits, which by Robert Covert are called Pythagoreans, border on one
side at the River Andere, which seperates them from the Country of Kanawe or
Brampour, otherwise Chandisch and Surratte; and on the other side, at the River
Tamlao or Tamliko, which is the Boundary between them and the Kingdom of Agra.
The Towns of this Country are Gorra, Sandaye, Erasmie, Zingrene, Barrandon,
Tranado, Zajoberdee, and Haud.

Gorra lies a days Journey from the River Andere, and is about two Leagues in
Circumference. Two of the King's Sons formerly maintained a long War about this
City, till They Will King of Ostlohm obtained the Victory; and after a seven year
peaceable possession thereof, he was also conquered by the Great Mogol, the
sixth of Tamerlain's Successors, who made himself absolute Master of all this
Country.

Two days Journey from Gorra is the City Sandaye; beyond which, about twenty
two Leagues further, lies Erasmie; and seven Leagues further, Zingrene, eight
Leagues from which is the City of Barrandon. After six days Journey from hence,
through a thick Wood, you come to the City Tranado; eight Leagues beyond which
is Zajoberdee* and nine Leagues further, Haudee, which has a Castle built on a
Rock, and fortified with many Guns. A days Journey from thence flows the River
Tamliko, which falls into the Indus at the Place where it separates the
Indostans from the Bulloits.

In this Country, near the City Zajoberdee, is great plenty of Corn; and about
Zingrene, great abundance of Oats and Beasts: But especially near Sandaye,
where the Fruit called Mangas, and Sugarcanes, grow in such abundance, that
they give them to their Horses in stead of Hay. Sheep are here in incredible
numbers, whose Wool being like the Spanish, is by the Inhabitants used to make
Cloth. The Woods abound with Elephants, Lions Tigers, Apes, and other Beasts.
There are Inns in most Places where Horses, Camels, and other Beasts are set
up, and fed, at the Expense of the Public, without any Charge to the
Traveller. In the City of Gorra are kept four Public Schools.

The Bulloits were formerly a deceitful and cruel People: At this day they
retain that barbarous Custom of burning the Women alive after their Husbands
decease; but if any Woman refuse thus brutishly to sacrifice her self, they
then cause her Hair to be cut off, and clothe her in Black; and she is ever
after accounted so ignominious and dishonorable, that not the meanest Person
will vouchsafe to assist or visit her.

In Sandaye is great store of Wool and Cotton, with abundance of Swords,
Lances, and o her Weapons. Many Merchants have likewise recourse to this City,
as Benjans, Mesulipatans; and great Caravans come to Barrandon, where are sold
all sorts of Arms, Hats made of Wool, and Elephants Teeth.

The Province of the Hendowns, or Hindous.
THE Country of the Hendowns, or Hindous, has on the one side the Kingdom of
Agra, or Indostan, where it is separated by the River Paddar, (which also
divides the Country Zurratte, and discharges it self into the Persian Gulf.)
On the North it conterminates with the Kingdom of Multan; or, as others affirm,
they Inhabit the Northern Parts of Asmeer, and those Parts that lie next to
Multan. They are also spread through all Surratte, and are employed as Soldiers
to Garrison Towns and Fortresses, they being stout and undaunted People, and
not inferior to the Raspoutes and Patannes.

The Metropolis, according to Daviti, is Hendowne, which bears the same
Denomination with the whole Country: The next Town is Rimala, and the great
City Mearta: then follows Towri, and about twenty two Leagues from thence, the
City Geissemer, seated in a very delightful Place.

The Country yields plenty of Corn, Cotton, Fodder for Beasts, and abounds with
Sheep and Fowls. The Inhabitants are generally great Robbers. They dress and
eat their Meat in a round spot of Ground, into which, while they are about
preparing and eating their Food, they suffer no other Person to come. The Women
from their Infancy wear little Silver, Copper, and Iron Chains about their
Legs, and Pendants in their Ears, (in which they make holes as big as they may
easily thrust their Fingers through) and Armlets from their Wrists up to their
Elbows.

In Mearta are weekly kept seven Markets, where they drive a great Trade in
Indico, Callico, and Woollen Cloth; as also at Gasmeer.

Moreover, the Hindous, though abstracted from Heathens, eat all sorts of
Meats, both Flesh and Fish, except that of an Ox or Cow. When they pray, they
strip themselves stark naked, and maintain a Doctrine different from the
Benjans.

The Province of Sanbat, or Sanbal, and Bakar.
THE Province of Sanbat, or Sanbal, or Sanbe, borders on the North at Bakar; on
the West, at that of Agra; and is separated on the South, by the River Jemni,
from the Province of Narvar. Some, as Herbert, call this Province Doab, that
is, Between the Waters or Streams; for Ab in the Persian Tongue signifies
Water, and Do, Between. It lies triangular, and is encompassed by the Streams
Ganges and Jemni, which make the Country very fruitful, and 'twas anciently
mighty Populous. The Metropolie is also called Sanbat.

In this Province, twenty five Leagues from the City Agra, near the Place where
the Jemni falls into the Ganges, lies a stately Palace, now called Helabassa,
but formerly Pray, and founded by the Rajas of that Place, in testimony of
their Subjection to Ecbar, when they submitted themselves to his Jurisdiction.
The most remarkable thing near this Palace is a large and dark Valley, wherein
are kept, as precious Relics, some Images, which the Inhabitants affirm to be
of Adam, Eve, Seth, Enoch, Methusalem, and others, which, as they relate, lived
in this Place. Great Companies of Benjans come daily hither from all Parts, to
bless themselves here, and purify or wash themselves from all their Sins in
the River Ganges, which they account Holy. They shave off all their Hair, and
ease themselves thereof, as an unclean and unnecessary Burden, and promise to
themselves great Benefits by the loss thereof. The Palace is surrounded with a
treble Wall, whereof the first is of square Red Stones, the second of White,
and comprehends an Obelisk of seventy two Foot high, erected by Alexander the
Great. The King spent above twelve hundred thousand Ropias to build this
Palace, of which the Kings of Patan have often endeavored to make themselves
Masters, because of the convenience of the Rivers which are so near it. There
is also a Sanctified Tree, which the Kings of Patan have endeavored to root
out, but could never attain to it.

Near Helabas is a magnificent Tomb, which King Sanghir built in honor to his
first Wife, the Raja Maminseng's Daughter, who poisoned her self when she heard
of her Son Sultan Gosrou's Insurrection.

The Territory of Bakar borders on the West at the Stream Ganges; on the South,
at Sanbal; on the West at Nagrakat: and has Bikaneer, or Bikameer, for its
Metropolis.

The Province of Nagrakat.
THE Province of Nagrakat, or Nakercut, borders Westward at that of Bakar, and
at the Stream Ganges. It is a Mountainous Country, and the utmost to the
Northward of the Mogol's Jurisdictions.

The Metropolis, called also Nagrakat, is adorned with a splendid Chapel; for
the Cieling and Floor is In-lay'd with Plates of Silver in diverse Forms, which
are continually kept scoured. It was built in honor of an Idol they call
Matta, which is erected in this Chapel, whither the Indians repair to their
Devotion, and out of Zeal often cut a piece of their Tongues off, as an
Offering to the Idol.

In this Province is another eminent Holy place, built on a Rock, and called
Jallamakee; where from the cold Springs which run out from between the Rocks,
are daily seen to arise Flashes of Fire, to which the Idolaters kneel down and
worship.

The Provinces of Siba, Kakares, and Gor.
THE Province of Siba lies to the Northward of Nagrakat, and is divided by the
River Ganges from North to South. The Metropolis, called Hardware, is seated
near the Ganges, which gliding thereabouts through great Rocks, soon after
makes a large River. The most eminent Rock through which the Ganges takes its
Course, has, according to the supposition of the superstitious Heathens, the
form or shape of a Cows Head: and they come hither daily in great numbers to
wash themselves; for they ascribe a certain Divine Power to the Water,
especially of the Ganges.

The Territory of Kakares lies Northward beyond that of Siba, and being
separated from Tartary by the Caucasian Mountains, is the utmost Northern part
of the Mogol's Jurisdiction. The Chiefest Towns thereof are called Decalce and
Purhola.

The County of Gor lies North-east from Kakares, and is very Mountainous. The
River Sersily takes its Original in this Country, and after long Course
Southerly, discharges it self into the Ganges. The Metropolis bears also the
name of Gor.

The Provinces of Pitan, Canduana, and Patna.
THE Province of Pitan conterminates Northwards at that of Kakares; Eastward,
at the River Sersily; Southward, at the Territory of Patna; and Westward, at
that of Siba. It is watered by the Stream Canda, which empties it self on the
Borders into the Ganges. The Chief City is named Pitan.

The County of Canduana verges Westward on the River Sersily; which divides it
from Pitan. This and the Territory Gor are the furthest Limits of the Mogol's
Jurisdiction to the North-east. The Metropolis is called Carhacatenca.

The Province of Patna borders Westward at the River Ganges; Eastwards, at
Sersily, and the County of Jesuat; and Northwards, at Pitan.

The Territories of Jesuat, Merat, and Vdessa.
THE Territory of Jesuat borders on the West at that of Patna; and on the East
at Merat. The Chief City thereof is called Raiapore.

Merat joins On the East to Udessa; and on the West, to Jesuat. It is a
Mountainous Country, and has Nariel for its Head City.

The Province of Udessa is the furthest part of this Jurisdiction Eastward, and
has Jekanat for its Metropolis.

The Kingdom of Decan.
THE Kingdom of Decan is, according to Juan de Baroes, generally taken for the
whole Extent which the Country of Cuncan comprehends, because the Inhabitants
call that Tract of Land Cuncan which extends it self along the Sea, from North
to South, to the River Aliga; and from East to West, from the Sea to the
Mountains of Gate: So that these People are called Cuncanyns. and not, as the
Portuguese improperly style them, Canariins. But the Coast of Decan, which
extends Eastward to the Mountains of Gate, is called The Kingdom of Decan; and
the Inhabitants, Decanyns: and, as Linschot has it, this Country is also
called Ballagate, that is, The Upper Gate; for Balla signifies Upper, and Gate,
A Mountain. Or rather the Country of Ballagate (by Ananie called Bilagate) is
that Land which extends over and among those Mountains; as appears by the
Description of Linschot, who makes three Kingdoms of this Country, dividing it
into Ballagate, Decan, and Cuncan.

All these three Countries, taken together, border on the North at the Kingdom
of Cambaye or Zurratte, with the Stream Bate between both, and also at the
Kingdom of Orixa; on the East, at the Kingdom of Narsinge; on the West, at the
Sea; on the South, at Canara, being parted by the River Aliga.

This Country extends it self along the Sea above 250 Italian Miles; or, as
Ananie says, full sixty two German: that is, from the Mouth of the Stream
Bate, to that of Aliga; or rather, as Juan de Baroes has it, from Chaul to the
River Aliga in Sintacora is sixty five Spanish Miles. But Texeira, and other
Modern Writers, rightly distinguish the Country of Decan from that of Cuncan or
Visiapour, by its extent to the North, calling that Country Cuncan which
extends to the South, and that which lies more to the North, and nearer to
Cambaye, Decan.

Decan borders on the North at Cambaye, on the East, at the Mountain of
Ballagate; on the South, at Cuncan; and on the West, at the Sea. It extends
from the South to the North along the Seacoast of Sifferdan to Negotana, a
Tract of twenty Leagues, and runs up into the Country near Cambaye.

The Metropolis of Decan, according to Texeira, is called Hamedanager; by
Ananie, and some others, singly Danager; by others, Amdadanager, who place it
up in the Country, and make it the King's Residence, affirming, That he made
this the Seat of his Realm, because of the pleasant Situation of the City, and
the delightful Gardens about the same: Yet there are some that make Beder, or
Bider, by Barbosa called Mavider, the Metropolis of all Decan, and Residence of
the Kings. Next to this, is reckoned the City of Decan.

In this Kingdom lies also a City built near the Seashore, which Texeira calls
Chaul; but Baroes, Chiaul; by Della Valle, Ciul, and Chaul; and by Barthema,
Ceuul: which by Castald is taken for the ancient City Camane of Ptolomy. It
lies ten Leagues to the Southward of Bazzain, in 19 Degrees and 50 Minutes of
Northern Latitude, two Leagues from the Sea, near a River, which by the help of
the Flood coming from the Sea, brings up Ships close to the Walls of the City:
It runs up a great way into the Country, from whence it takes its Course,
trending through Hills and Valleys, till it discharges it self into the Sea,
making a spacious Haven in the midst of the Bay below the City.

The Portuguese have two Forts here, whereof the one was built Anno 1520. by
Diego Sequeira, who obtained leave of the King for it: The other built by the
Moors, is on the other side of the Haven, viz. on the Right hand when you enter
into it. To the Southward of this Haven lies a famous Mountain, in the
Portuguese Tongue called Il Morro di Ciul, that is, A Member of Ciul, which
commands both the City and Harbor, having a Fortress built on the top, which is
in a manner inaccessible, and belonged formerly to the Moors of Decan, that is,
to Nizam Schiah King or Lord over all the adjacent County.

This Fortress was conquered by the Portuguese, who with discharging their
Muskets at an Elephant which was by the Moors placed to defend the Gate, with
a great Chain in his Mouth, so frighted him, that he removed to one side, and
permitted the Portuguese to creep under his Belly, and make themselves Masters
of the Place. But others relate, that the Place was taken after this manner,
viz. When the Portuguese had first with a handful of People defeated a
considerable Party of the Moors, and put them to flight, they retreated to the
Fort Il Morro di Ciul, where they thought to be secure from the fury of the
Portuguese; but an Elephant being wounded in the Battle, and retiring amongst
them toward the Fort, fell down dead at the entrance of the Gate, which then
could not be shut against the Portuguese, who by firing boldly upon their
Opposers, soon made themselves Masters of the Place, which since that time they
have made much stronger, and by that means defended the City Chaul from the
continual Assaults of the Moors.

Pyrard tells us, That there are two Cities called Chaul, in one of which
inhabit abundance of Handicrafts and Tradesmen. In this City is a famous Temple
dedicated to the Goddess Crangene.

Without the City is a Toll-house: Also the Chief Church of the Portuguese
stands near the Seashore, not far from which is a Cloister of the Jesuits,
with a Church dedicated to St. Peter.

Southward from Chaul, by the Sea, lies a Place by Barbosa called Banda, or
Dando; but by Della Valle, Danda Rajiapori: Near this lies the City Ziffardan,
or Zeferdani, the utmost Limits of the Kingdom of Decan. In the same Tract,
toward Banda, is a Bay called Kelsi, the Country on the South side whereof is
very Mountainous. In Decan is also a City called Petan, or Patan, which
produces abundance of fine Callico.

The Country of Decan is very fertile, producing all things in great plenty,
and agrees in most things with that of Cuncan; and the Inhabitants also agree
in their Constitutions, Habits, and manner of Living: Wherefore we will here
give an accout of them promiscuously, and at large.

The Air at Chaul is more hot than cold. The Soil thereabouts plentifully
produces all things except Raisins, Nuts, and Chess-nuts. Oxen, Cows, and
Horses are here in great numbers. The Inhabitants of Decan are called Decanyns,
as those of Cuncan, Cuncanyns.

After what manner the Countries of Decan, Ballagate, and Cuncan, or Visiagour,
which were formerly under the Jurisdiction of one Prince, are become subject to
several Lords, I shall here give this brief Account.

About three hundred years since the King of Dely brought all the neighboring
Kingdoms, but particularly those of Decan, Cuncan, and Ballagate, and the
Country of Goa, under his Subjection: At the same time when the Country of
Cambaye was conquered by the Mahumetans, who treated the Reisboutes,
Inhabitants or the Country, very tyrannically.

The Kingdoms of Ballagate and Decan were formerly governed by Heathen Kings,
and inhabited by a mighty People, of which the Venasars and Collers, the
present Inhabitants, are Successors. They join themselves with the Reisboutes,
and commit many Robberies, forcing Tribute from the Inhabitants of Decan and
Ballagate, without being punished for the same by their King.

After the King of Dely had made these Conquests, the Mogols took up Arms, and
made themselves Masters of the greatest part of Dely. About the same time there
was an eminent Lord of Bengale, who, to revenge himself of his King, for
putting his Bother to death unjustly, bereaved him both of his Crown and Life,
and afterward fell into Dely, forced the Mogols to fly, and at the same time
made himself Master of all the Country of Ballagate and Cuncan, extending to
the Borders of Cambaye. But he not being capable of Governing so many
Countries, and being also desirous of q^iet, resolv^d to return back to
Bengale, and committed the Care of Governing the Kingdoms of Decan, Ballagate,
and Cuncan, to one of his Nephews, who being a Lover of Strangers, divided
those Countries amongst several Lords of diverse Nations, as Arabians, Turks,
Rumeans, and Corasons, giving to one whom the Portuguese called Idalcan the
Country of Cuncan, otherwise called Visiapour, or Gingive, lying eight Leagues
from Goa. He also gave to one of his Captains, named Nizzamaluko, the Country
of Siffardan, which extends it self six Leagues to the North, along the Coast
of Negotana. He divided the Kingdom of Ballagate into Provinces, and gave one
part thereof to Imademaluko, another to Coralmaluko, and a third to Melik
Vervide. But all these immediately rebelled against their Lord and Benefactor,
and marching to the Metropolis Beder, took the King Prisoner, committing him to
the custody of Melik Vervide. They also procured several other Heathen Princes
to join with them in this Conspiracy, amongst whom were Mohade Koja, and
Veriche, who possessed rich Countries, replenished with Towns and Villages.
Amohade got the Cities Visiapour, Solapor, and Paranda, lying near Goa; but not
long after the City Paranda was taken by Nizzamaluko, and Salapor fell into the
Hands of Idalcan, who was also called Sabayo, that is, Lord. He possessed the
Island Goa, of which the Portuguese afterward made themselves Masters. His
House or Palace stands yet at Goa, but is now converted to a House of
Inquisition. The Place lying between the Great Church and the said House bears
the Name of Sabayo. Idalcan, who Reigned Anno 1535. was Grandson to one of
those forementioned Kings.

After this Division thus made, there was a Quarrel between Idalcan and the
King of Narsinga, his Neighbor; who by his Power subduing Idalcan, and the
other Kings of Decan, made them Tributaries to him: But in process of time
Idalcan, or his Successors, subdued all those Countries which were possessed by
peculiar Kings or Lords, except that of Melik, which the Mogol had conquered.

F. Bernier relates, That all this great Island of Hindoslan, reckoning from
the Bay of Cambay to that of Bengale, near Jagannate, and from thence to the
Cape of Comori, was all, some Mountainous Parts only excepted, about two
hundred years ago under one particular Lord or King, who was a very great and
Powerful Prince: But at present it is divided into many Dominions; and the
People are likewise of several Religions. The Reason of this Division was as
follows. A certain Raja or King, named Ramras, the last of those which
Reigned absolute in this Country, imprudently promoted three of his Slaves to
too great Dignities, by making them Governors: viz. The first he made Governor
of a great part of that Country which the Mogol at present possesses in Decan,
round about Daulet-Abad, from Bider, Paranda, and Surratte, to Narbadar: To the
second he gave the Government of all those Countries which are now comprehended
in the Kingdom of Visiapour; and to the third, that Part which is known by the
name of the Kingdom of Golconda. These three Slaves growing very Rich and
Powerful, and being supported by many Mogols which were in the Service of
Ramras, and of the same Religion with the Persians, agreed together to rebel
against and kill their Lord and Benefactor; which having effected, they
returned into their several Dominions, each of them taking upon him the Title
of Schah, or King. The Successors of Ramras finding themselves not able to
engage in a War against these Usurpers, were content to retire and seat
themselves in a Place called Carnateck or Bisnaguer, where to this day they
Reign as Rajas or Kings. The three Slaves and their Successors defended their
Kingdoms very valiantly, so long as they agreed among themselves, and assisting
one another, maintained great Wars against the Mogols; but when they went about
to defend their several Countries, they were immediately sensible of their
Division, to their great prejudice, being soon after reduced under the
Subjection of the Mogols.

Decan belonged formerly to a peculiar King; but is at present Governed by one
of the Great Mogol's Viceroys.

The Great Mogol Akebar, or Ecbar, was the first which conquered the Kingdom or
Country of Decan. He sent his Son, Sultan Morad, Anno 1595. against Melik
Amber, Viceroy of Decan, to whom belonged formerly the City of Chaul, who
setting forth from Cambaye, as being the nearest Place to this Province, was
killed, with many of his Officers. After this, in the Year 1598. he sent one of
his youngest Sons to maintain the Wars against Melik, and revenge the Death of
Sultan Morad: And soon after he followed in his own Person, resolving to be
present at the Conquest; but he staid about a Year in the City of Agra, from
whence he marched, Anno 1600. to the Kingdom of Decan: But the Queen of Decan,
who Reigned at that time, being a Woman of great Spirit and Valor, and being
also assisted by the Portuguese, and some great Lords, opposed him with so much
Courage and Resolution, that many of his People were slain at their entrance
into the Kingdom of Barara, at a Pass near the Mountains, by which they were to
come into the Country of Decan: Yet nevertheless the Decanyns, after the death
of this Princess, divided themselves into diverse Parties, from which proceeded
their overthrow and total subduction; for some being corrupted by Money, and
others by Promises, they all, upon hopes of greater Employments, contributed
their Assistance to the Great Mogol in his Conquest of the Kingdom of Decan.
Having by this means at last added this Kingdom to his Territories, he elected
one of his Sons to be his Viceroy, leaving with him a considerable Garrison.

Texeira says the King of Decan was formerly by the Inhabitants called Nezal al
Malucho, that is, The Lance or Spear of the Kingdom, and also Malek, or Melik,
which signifies King. Della Valle affirms that the right Name of the Kings of
Decan is Nizam Sciah, which some translate King of the Spear, induced thereunto
by the Portuguese Word Nize, which signifies A Spear; but falsely, because the
King calls himself Nizam Sciah, and not Nize Sciah, as this explanation
requires. Others call him, according to the signification of the Word Nizam,
King of Falcons; for Nizam in the Indian Tongue signifies A Falcon, or other
Bird of Prey; because this King, before he was made a Governor, was perhaps
Falconer to that Great King under whose Jurisdiction all this Country was; so
that he retains that Name to this day.

The King which Reigned Anno 1623. being a Child of about twelve Years of age,
gave the Government of his Realm to one of his Slaves, called Melik Amber, by
Extract an Ambassine, and of the Mahumetan Religion, who Governed with so much
Policy, that this Country was more known by the Name of The Dominion of Melik,
than that of the Kingdom of Nizam Sciah. He Governed with great Fidelity, and
Obedience to the King, and not as some pretended, like a Tyrant: Neither did he
keep the King as a Prisoner, though it is said by some that he designed to
marry his Daughter to the young King, that so he might the better hold his
Governor-ship, and make his Heir his Successor. He was a Man of great Prudence
and Understanding, yet not without the Name of being very wicked, and inclining
to Sorcery, of which some affirm he made use to continue himself in his Princes
Favor. It is also said, That for the accomplishing his Designs he would offer
to the Devil several hundreds of Children that were his Slaves, with abundance
of other People, hoping thereby the more easily to obtain his Desires. These
and other such barbarous Wickednesses and Impieties have been reported of him.

This Melik Amber maintained at that time great Wars against the Mogols, not
sparing his own Person, but himself engaging often very valiantly.

It is reported, That this King had a Gun of such a prodigious bigness, that it
required fifteen hundred Pounds of Gunpowder to Charge it; that a Man may stand
upright in the same; that it is above two Spans thick; and that it cannot be
removed without many thousands of Oxen, besides Elephants: And though it is not
used in the Wars, but is kept more for Curiosity, yet nevertheless the King
held the same in such esteem, that he would always have the same covered with
Cloth of Gold; nay he repaired thither one Year with so much Solemnity and
seeming Zeal, as if he would have worshipped the same.

The Kingdom of Ballagate.
THE Kingdom of Ballagate lies between and beyond the Mountains of Gate, as
some Writers affirm. These Mountains are about nine Leagues from the City
Banda; they are very high, and extend from the Country of Decan to the Coast of
Choromandel; they also reach to Dabul, with many Points and Inlets, which
render them altogether unfit to be Traveled over either by Men or Beasts. On
that side toward Decan is upon the top a Plain of an extraordinary compass,
planted on the Way-sides with Mangas, and other Fruit Trees.

Ballagate in the Persian Tongue signifies High Mountains; for Balla is High,
and Gate, A Mountain. Some also call this Country The Kingdom of Decan. The
Cities of Lispor, and Ultabad, or Dubtabad, are very famous for the great
numbers of Merchants that resort thither.

The Kingdom of Cuncan, or Visiapour.
THE Kingdom of Cuncan is by Linschot called The Kingdom of Dialcan; and by
others, from Visiapour its Metropolis, The Kingdom of Visiapour; and by Della
Valle, The Country of Telengone, or Telanga. It takes its beginning on the
Seashore of Ingediva, or Angedive, twelve Leagues Southward from Goa; or,
according to John de Barros, from the River Aliga in Sintacora, which is a
Boundary between Cuncan and the Country of Canara, and extends Northwardly to
the Land of Decan, or the Land of Siffardan, a Tract of sixty Leagues: Westward
it runs to the Sea, and Eastward to the Mountains of Gate, or to the Kingdom of
Bagenael, or Golconda; and is by a Stream separated from the Island Goa. Della
Valle makes Telengone, the Metropolis of this Kingdom, to border Southerly next
that which belongs to the Portuguese in Goa. Some reduce the City Visiapour and
Goa under the Province of Daman, and place the Province of Telanga much
further, to the Southern part. The most eminent Sea-Towns are, Geytapour,
Rasapoue, Carapatan, and Dabul; besides which, there are several other very
good Bays, Rivers, and Roads.

The Chief City of this Kingdom, the Court and Residence of the Kings, is
called Vasiapour, Bizapor, and Visipor, or peculiarly Vidhikpor;
notwithstanding Linschot places the King's Court at Solapor: but it is probable
he keeps his Court sometimes at the one, and sometimes at the other. Visiapour
lies up into the Country about 30 Gau, (each Gau being three Leagues) or 90
German Miles from Dabul, and 25 from Goa. It is surrounded with high Walls of
hard Stone, and deep Moats, which nevertheless are dry in several places. Round
about on the Walls, and some Platforms made for that purpose, are mounted above
1000 Brass and Iron Guns, some whereof are of an incredible bigness.

The City is built after the Asian manner, having five Leagues in
circumference: It has five great Gates, viz. Schanpour, Gurapour, Abrahimpour,
Alapour, and Bomnenaly. Before each Gate is a rich Trading Suburb (for in them
live most of view of Bijapur De Stadt VISIAPOER
the Merchants and Tradesmen) which bears the same Name with the Gate. In the
middle of the City lies the Royal Palace, or Castle, enclosed with double Walls
and strong Moats, planted about with 100 great and small Guns. It comprehends
in its Circumference above 3000 Paces, or 614 Rods: It has a very wide
Entrance, which is shut up by five several Gates, and guarded commonly by 2000
armed Soldiers. None but the King's Domestic Servants are permitted to come
within the forementioned Gates, unless commanded by the King, who has
appointed a Governor both over the Castle and the City, allowing him 5000 Men
under his Command.

About a League and a half from Visiapour lies another City called Nouraspour,
formerly the Residence of King Abrahim Chan, whose Palace, besides several
other fair Structures, are to be seen at this day, but quite ruined, the
Materials of them being employed for the building of the present King's Houses
and Palaces.

Traveling from Visiapour to Dabul, you pass through these Cities: From
Nouraspour you come to the City of Sirrapour and Tickota, six Kos from
Visiapour: Three Kos beyond Tickota is the City Honnowaere; and three more
beyond that, a City called Calesen: Six Kos further is a great and Trading Town
named Atteny, two days Journey from Visiapour: Four Kos from Calesen, and two
from Atteny, between both, lies the Village Burgie; and two Kos from Atteny,
the great Dorp Agelle: Six Kos and a half from Atteny is the City Areka, with
two Bary, or Villages, lying upon the side of the Road, about four Kos and a
half from Areka, and one and a half from Atteny. Three Kos from Areka lies the
City Berek, with a small Village in the way, one Kos and a half from Areka, and
is under the Jurisdiction of the City Mirisdie.

Mirisdie, otherwise Mirdsy, is a large and desolate City, fortified on the
South-west side with a strong Castle, which is so well furnished with Men and
Ammunition, that the Great Mogol, after the conquering of many Towns and
Fortresses, could not subdue this Castle with his whole Army. It is adorned
with a Metzid, built after the Moorish manner, in which lie buried two Kings of
Dely, which died about 500 Years ago; their Graves being adorned with Hangings,
and other rich Ornaments, are frequented by the Inhabitants, and traveling
People, who show great Reverence to the same.

Two Kos from Mirdsy lies the Village Epour; and three Kos further, on the
Banks of the River Koecenna, are two Towns, the one called Great, and the other
Little Graeen, about a Cannon-shot one from another. Five Leagues and a
half-from the River Koecenna is the great and rich Trading City Asta, with the
Villages Toncaa and Astacka, in the Road, about two Kos and a half one from the
other; between which two Villages is a Barry or Hamlet. Three Kos from Asta
stands the large and well built City Ballouwa; and three Kos further, two
Towns, about a Cannon-shot one from the other, called Oerem and Jesselampour;
the last of which has a strong Castle, with high Walls, wherein the Governor
for the King of Visiapour has his Residence. Two Kos from thence is a Village
named Taffet; and three Kos further, another called Cassegam; and two beyond
that, the decayed City Caljaer. Two Kos from Caljaer is the Village Galoure;
and six Kos beyond that, the City Tamba, and Village Winge, near the City
Quelampour; and another Town called Domo.

The City Tamba is large, and well Peopled, built along a Running Water which
has its Original out of the River Coyna. Two Kos from Tamba is the Village
Morel; two beyond that, Suppera; and four Kos further, Beloure: two more from
hence lies a great Village called Werad, nine Leagues from the Ballagatean
Mountains. Not far from this place is the Village Patan, formerly the Residence
of a famous Robber called Hiewogy, who forced Tribute from all Travelers,
which none could hinder him from, notwithstanding all possible means were used
to prevent it; for so soon as any Forces were sent against him, he immediately
fled into the Mountains, which were naturally inaccessible. Another Village,
called Helewaek, lies about three Kos beyond Werad, by which runs the River
Coyna.

Three great Kos, or a League and a half from the River Coyna, on the Mountains
of Ballagate, is the Village Gatamata, so called in respect of these Mountains;
for Gata in the Persian Tongue signifies A Mountain, and Mata, Above, or On the
top. Three Kos further lies another Village called Poly, at the foot of the
forementioned Mountains, which by reason of their steep, narrow, and Rocky
Ways, are very troublesome to travel. Two Kos from Poly, or the Foot of the
Ballagatean Mountains, is the Village Combaerly; and sixteen Kos from thence,
at the River Ghaybeer, a great Village named Chipolone, from whence is a
passage by Water to the City Dabul. All Goods that come out of the Country of
Decan, are carried in Boats from thence to Dabul, and so farther up into the
Country, which makes this Place to be very populous, and plentifully stored
with all manner of Provisions. The Merchandises and Commodities which are
brought thither by Water, pay for each Kandy, or 450 Pound weight, one Laryn
and a half Freight to Dabul.

Four Gau, or twelve Leagues from Chipolone, down the River Helewacko, lies the
City Dabul, or Dabrul, anciently very famous, but of late much ruined by the
Wars, and decreased in Trade. It lies in 18 Degrees Northern Latitude, or, as
others affirm, in 17 Degrees 45 Minutes, and is built along the Shore of the
River Helewacko, ten Leagues from Chaul. It lies open only on the South Side
which fronts the Water, where are two Batteries planted with four Iron Guns. On
the Mountains are several decayed Fortresses, and an ancient Castle, but
without any Guns or Garrison. On the Northern Point, where the Bay begins,
stands a little Wood, which at a distance appears like a Fort; and below this
Wood, near the Water, is a white Temple, or Pagode; as also another on the
South Point, on the declining of the Mountain, besides several other Temples
and stately Edifices. This City was taken from the King of Idalcan, by the
Portuguese, Anno 1508. but was afterward won from them again, and ruined by
the English.

Two Leagues Southward from Dabul lies a Promontory or Cape by the Portuguese
called Dabul Falso, that is, False Dabul, because in sailing by the same they
often find themselves deceived, taking it for the Point of Dabul, which it very
much resembles. Beyond this Cape is a Bay by them called Enceada de los
Brahmannes, that is, The Bay of the Brahmines, because many Brahmines dwell
thereabouts. Beyond this is the Ragiaputa, and the Cape Caraputa; the Enceada,
or Sea-Bay Calasi, or Calesci, lying not far from the Cape Carapeta; and next
to that, Tambona.

Four Leagues from Dabul lies the Bay of Zanguizara, in 17 Degrees and a half
of Northern Latitude. Twelve Leagues from Zanguizara, or rather from Dabul, and
twenty from Goa, lies the Haven and Road of Ceitapour, in 17 Degrees and 20
Minutes Northern Latitude, behind an Island which secures it from all Winds.
This Haven has at the lowest but three, and at the highest not above six or
seven Fathom Water. Beyond the River, three Leagues from this Island and the
Road Ceitagour, lies the City Rasapour, one of the eminentest Towns of the
Kingdom of Cuncan and Visiapour.

Traveling from the Seaside about Goa, up into the Country, to the Metropolis
Visiapour, you pass by and through the following Cities and Villages. First, A
great City called Ditcauly, lying three Kos from Goa. Not far from thence, near
the River Madre de Dios, lies a Castle called Ponda. Banda, a mighty City, is
about one Gau, or three Leagues from Ditcauly, two from Goa, two from Wingerla,
and three and a half, or nine Leagues from Ballagate. It is built near the
River Dery, which glides by this City into the Sea, having broad Streets, with
many fair Buildings, and several Pagodes or Temples.

Between Banda and the Ballagatean Mountains lie several Villages; as Amby, two
Kos from Banda; and Herpoli, four Kos: Eleven Kos from thence, on the other
side, at the Foot of the lowest of the Ballagatean Mountains, is the Village
Amboly, beyond which, near the River Herenecassy,, is another Village of the
same Name. A Cannon-shot from Herenecassy, in the Valley between the Mountains
of Ballagate, is a Dorp called Berouly; and two Kos further, another called
Weseree* three Kos further, Outor; six and a half more, Berapour; half a Kos
beyond, Matoura; and one more, the pleasant Village Calingra, close planted
about with Trees. A Cannon-shot from Calingra is the Village Cangier, a little
beyond a place by a general Name called Bary; for all those Places which have
no peculiar Name, but belong to other Villages, are in general called Bary. One
Kos from hence lies the Village Worry; and two and a half further, another
called Attrowaad, adorned with a Pagode built on a Mountain, which may be seen
at a considerable distance. Two Kos and a half further lies the Village
Badaraly; and as much beyond that, the Dorp Kerwes; two Kos more from which is
Secoery: Five Kos from hence is a Pagode, from whence you may plainly see the
City Mirsie, with its Castles and Towers. Seven Kos from the Village Secoery
lies Raiabaeg, a pretty large and Trading Inland City, fortified with a
Castle, and belonging properly to the King's Consort: About one Kos from the
City is a fair Well, and two Kos further runs the River Gagni. Three Kos and a
half from this City of Raiabaag, is another City called Gotterny, which has a
Fortification at one of its Gates. A Cannon-shot from thence are two Villages,
called Coetesy and Omgar; and half a Kos further, the eminent River Corstena;
one Kos and a half from which is the Village Eynatour; beyond that, the Dorp
Caterna; and one Kos and a half further, the River Agery, with the Villages
Tangely and Erary. Three Kos from Erary is the City Atteny; and one Kos beyond,
the City Bardgie; from whence to Agger is three Kos and a half more; three Kos
thence to the City Talsenge; and as much from thence to Hamowaere: Tickocata
lies three Kos further, and about six from Visiapour, having Nouraspour and
Sirrapour between both.

Tickocata is an Inland City, provided with a large Sarry or Public Inn for
Travelers.

The Kingdom of Cuncan is watered by several Rivers: viz. A little to the
Northward of Goa is the River Madre Dios; and beyond the City Banda the River
Dery falls into the Sea, and is Navigable in small Vessels. Two Kos from the
City Kaiabaag glides the River Corstena, which passes through the whole Country
of Cuncan, to the Jurisdiction of Masilipatan; about three Kos from whence, the
Stream Agry has its Course. Between the two Towns Great and Little Graeen runs
a large River called Coecenna, on whose Banks those Towns are situate. The
River Coyna, which signifies Great Water, passing through the Village Helewaek,
has its Original near the City Chaury, lying twelve Gau, or thirty six Leagues
up into the Country, and extends it self in several Branches beyond the
Metropolis Visiapour, and the whole Kingdom of Cuncan. The River Ghayhkeer
discharges its Water into the River Helewacko, whose Shore is bordered by many
Dorps, and planted with Cocos and other Trees, very delightful to the
Spectators. This River has its rise out of the Mountains of Ballagata, and
posses by the City Eabul into the Indian Sea, where it makes a convenient Bay.
From the North to the South Point, cross this Bay, is a Bank, which at low
Water is quite dry; so that those which sail up the River to the City, must
pass along close by the South Point. At the entrance is commonly five or six
Fathom Water at low Tide. Four Leagues to the Southward of Dabul, and thirty to
the Northward of Goa, glides the River Zanguizar, by Barbosa called Cinguicar:
Its entrance into the Sea is in 17 Degrees and 13 Minutes Northern Latitude,
and makes a large Bay or Inlet, with several commodious Roads for Shipping.
Next is the River Bardes, which runs by a Town called Banda. The Stream Aliga
of Sintacora, which rises in the Mountains of Gate, from thence taking its
Course to the Westward, falls into the Sea opposite to the Island Anchedive, in
14 Degrees and a half of Northern Latitude.

The many Rivers and Brooks which flow through this Country of Cuncan, make the
same very fruitful, especially in the production of Rice, which is sowed in
such Grounds as lie low, and are overflowed in the Winter: Yet it produces but
little Corn; but abundance of Areka and Betel, especially on the Banks of the
River Betel.

The Fruit Mangas growing in Ballagate are highly esteemed, weighing about two
Pound a spiece, and are of a much pleasanter taste than those which grow in
Charanna, Quindor, Mandanagor, and Dultabado, and especially those of Nisamoxa.

Ballagate and Decan produce also abundance of Grapes, but inferior to those of
Spain; and also great Quantities of Cotton and Silk.

There are likewise diverse sorts of Stones found in Ballagate; as Amethysts,
Chrysolites, and Hemathites, or Blood-stones; and by Decan, beyond Ballagate,
very rich Diamonds are found on the Mountain which the Portuguese call Rocca
Velha, that is, The Old Rock. Some of these Precious Stones, which are cut
naturally, are in the Country Language called Naiffez, and are by the Indians
esteemed above all others.

By Ustabado is a certain Stone found by the Arabians, called Hageramini, and
by the Portuguese Pedra Armenia, that is, The Armenian Stone; because the same
sort, being of a blueish green, are found in Armenia. The Moors make use of
them in their Sickness to provoke Urine.

About the Countries of Ballagate is a sort of excellent Varnish: Here are also
many Tigers, and Serpents of a prodigious length and bigness.

The Natives of Decan and Cuncan are either Decangeans or Cuncanyns, and
corruptly by the Portuguese called Canaryns and Corumbyns; but besides, there
are Moors, Persians, Benjans, and other Heathen People, which far exceed the
Natives in Number.

Linschot tells us, That the Inhabitants both in Complexion, Constitution, and
Clothes, do very much resemble those of Zurratte, and the Benjans: But Barbosa
makes them Black, and Barthema Sallow, or Swarthy. They are naturally Valiant,
being for the most part extracted from Strangers; excellent Horsemen, and well
skilled in managing of Elephants: but they are very proud, insolent, and
self-conceited. Their Women are much inclined to Venery.

Their Clothes are either of Silk or Cotton, except their Shoes, which are open
at the Toes, and laced over their bare Feet on the top: yet Pyrard says, That
they are Red, sharp-toe'd, gilt, and open on the top. The Women walk with their
Faces veiled, and the Children stark naked, till their seventh or eighth Year.
They eat all things without distinction, except Cows, Hogs, and Buffaloes;
which Beasts according to an ancient Custom of the Brahmines are accounted
Holy; nay, they are so superstitiously grounded in this belief, that they sleep
a nights under these Beasts, and catch their Dung in their Hands, imagining
that thereby they do their Gods great Service. They also abstain from all sorts
of Fish. Most of their Houses are built of Straw, with such little Doors, that
they are forced to creep in and out. Their Furniture is inconsiderable; for a
Mat spread on the Ground serves them in stead of a Bed; and a Hole dug in
the Earth, for a Mortar to stamp their Rice in.

There are many Gold and Silver-smiths among them, and also very good Artists
in the working of other Minerals, besides many other Handicrafts and Tradesmen,
Physicians, Surgeons, Carpenters, Masons, and the like. Every Child is
taught the Trade or Calling of his Parents.

The Rusticks maintain themselves with sowing of Rice and Fishing, on which
they live very poorly, inhabiting near the Seashore, and the Banks of Rivers,
for the convenience of the Coco-Trees which grow along the same.

The Decanders which dwell near the River Zanguizara maintain themselves with
Tillage and keeping of Cattle. People of more Ability Traffic in Pepper, in
which the chiefest Trade of this Country consists, which coming out of Canara,
is sent by Sea to Persia, Suratte, and Europe. They deal likewise in all sorts
of Provisions; for this Country is the Storehouse for all its Neighbors. The
Inhabitants also drive a great Trade in Calico, and another sort of Cloth
called Beirames, which being brought by Land from Indostan, Golconda, and the
Coast of Choromandel, is sold to great advantage; for in most Towns are kept
Weekly Markets, to which the Merchants carry all their Commodities, but
especially Corn and Provisions, which are generally bought up by a valiant sort
of People called Venesars, and transported through the whole Country of
Indostan, which they penetrate with Cafilas consisting of three, four, nay
sometimes eight or ten thousand Beasts of Burden, accompanied with Women and
Children, which follow them like an Army.

In Visiapour dwell many Jewellers, which Trade in Diamonds that come from
Golconda, and Pearls of a great value. There is also a great Market wherein
nothing but Diamonds are sold, which are bought by the Benjans of Surratte and
Cambaye, and by them disposed of again at Goa and other Places. Out of this
Country is also carried great store of Betel, to Ormus, Aden, and Cambaye.

The Portuguese of Goa drive a great Trade with the Inhabitants of Cuncan, but
chiefly with the Merchants of Ditcauly and Banda.

In the City of Raiebaag dwell many eminent Dealers, which Trade in Pepper and
other Commodities.

The Coins and Current Moneys of Cuncan are of different Valuations, there
being two sorts, viz. Laryns and Pagods. A Laryn of Dabul, coined of the
ordinary Metal, is valued at ten Pagods; whereas those of Persia make but
eight. Moreover the Pagods are likewise of a different Value; for some are
worth seven and a half or eight Persian Laryns, and ten Inland. Their small
Money is of Copper, and is called Basarucus and Paysas; two hundred and ten
Basarucus, and in some Places a hundred and eighty, make a Laryn; and twenty
eight Paysas are of the same value.

Every Town and Village has for the most part a peculiar Coin and Value on
their Money, in which is great deceit, especially in Laryns and Pagods, which
the subtle Benjans make so artificially of Copper and other Metals, that they
cannot be distinguished from the good: Wherefore few will receive Money without
the presence of a Xaraf or Exchanger, who for a small Reward looks over all the
Money, and makes good the Damage, if there happens to be any bad Money among
that which he receives: And if it be found that an Exchanger so entrusted as is
beforementioned, shall designedly put away bad Money, he is immediately
condemned to have his Hands cut off, and all his Estate forfeited to the King;
notwithstanding which, they practice it daily.

The Weight of this Country is like that of Surrat, having only some small
difference; for twenty seven Maons of Cuncan make but twenty Maons of Surrat.
The ordinary Maon of forty Ceeres (a Ceer is sixty Peysses) is about twenty
seven English Pounds, with which Weight they weigh all heavy Goods; and with
another Weight called Goemy (each Goemy being twelve Maons) they weigh their
Pepper. A Quintal, which is also a common Weight, makes four Maons; and five
Quintals, or twenty Maons, one Candy, which is five hundred and forty English
Pound weight.

There are many other Coins and Weights in use among them, which every Person
in buying or selling of Goods agree upon at their pleasure; but these
beforementioned are the most common, and generally used through all the
Country.

The Arms which the Inhabitants of Decan and Visiapour use, both for Horse and
Foot, are broad Swords, Pikes, Lances, with a square Iron at the end about a
Span long, Bows and Arrows, Shields, Darts, which they throw with great
dexterity at their Enemies: Their Defensive Arms are Coats of Mail, and Coats
lined with Cotton, which they call Landa^hes. When they march into the Field,
they carry with them Tents of Callico, under which they sleep. They make use of
Oxen to carry their Baggage. Their common way of Fighting is on Foot, though
when they march, some walk, others ride on Horses, and some on Elephants, of
which the King keeps a great number for that purpose. The King of Cuncan is
said to be very powerful, and able in a short time to bring eighty thousand, or
as some say, two hundred thousand armed Men into the Field, both Horse and
Foot: He keeps many Persians and Mogols constantly in his Service, which
commonly enjoy the most eminent Places under him: He likewise maintains many
valiant Rasepouts. There are four very eminent Castles or Fortresses in Cuncan,
known by the Names of Ponda, Perinda, Salpoure, and Bellegam Chapour.

The King has diverse great Guns in his Magazen, and about two hundred Cannons,
Demi-Cannons, and Culverins. Round about the City and Castle-walls of Visiapour
are planted many small Pieces, as Drakes, and the like.

In the City of Visiapour is a Copper Gun of an incredible bigness, its Chamber
being large enough to contain above five hundred Pound of Powder: It was found
in a conquered Castle called Perando, from whence it was conveyed to Visiapour
by ten Elephants, fourteen hundred Oxen, and an incredible number of Men. The
Founder of this Piece is reported to have been a Roman, who undertook the same
to make his Name Immortal, and that his Work might be admired by the whole
World; which is the more talked of, because after he had finished this
prodigious Piece, he killed his own Son, and sprinkled his Blood over it for an
Offering. It happened also, that whilst this Gun was Casting, Braman the King's
Treasurer coming to demand an Account of the Charge from the said Roman, he
caused a Fire to be made in the Pit wherein the said Gun was Cast, and throwing
the said Braman into it, bid him take an Account of the Fire which consumed the
Silver and Copper. The News carried to the King by the Relations of the
Deceased, he seemed not at all concerned thereat, but rather displeased with
the Complainants, telling them he never gave his Treasurer any Order to demand
an Account.

With this Cannon the King took an almost invincible Castle called Salapoure,
making a Breach in the Wall at the first Shot of fifteen Else long, and at the
next, battered down the whole side of the Wall; which so amazed the Besieged,
that without any further resistance they surrendered the Castle. The Inhabitants
relate many strange and ridiculous things of this Gun, as that it formerly
Prophesied like the Oracle at Delphos.

They speak three sorts of Languages, viz. the Arabian, Persian, and the
peculiar Language of the Country, which differs from that of the other
Provinces.

The Inhabitants of Decan, Cuncan, and Golconda speak the Persian Tongue, which
at the Princes Courts is as common as their own Language.

They Betroth their Children at seven or eight Years of Age, and Marry them at
twelve. They keep a continued Feast for fourteen days before the Wedding,
concluding each day with the sound of Drums and Trumpets. On the Wedding Day
all the Relations walk seven times about a Fire made for that purpose, after
which they hold the Marriage confirmed. The Bride brings nothing to her
Husband, save only her Person, and a few Jewels of an inconsiderable value.

They always burn the Bodies of the Deceased; and if a Married Man dies, the
Widow is obliged either to cast her self into the Fire with the Corpse of her
dead Husband, or to live the rest of her days in infamy and disgrace.

The King of Cuncan is in the Country Language entitled Adelcan, that is, The
true Governor; or Adel Scach, that is, Real Lord, or Lord of Justice: and by
the Portuguese, corruptly, Dialcam, or Hialcam; by the Netherlanders, Adelchia;
by others, Cadum Schach, or Schach Gean: He is also called Sabay, that is,
Lord. Dotexara called that King from whom the Portuguese took Goa, Sabyb
Adelcan, that is, Ruler and King of Justice; and not Sabay dalcan, as we read
in History. According to Della Valle, the King's Title, besides his own Name,
is Adil Sciah, or Idal Sciah, which, as some render it, signifies A Just King;
for Adil in the Arabian signifies Just: But others maintain, that Adil, or
Idal, which is an Indian Word, signifies A Key, and therefore must be called
King of Keys, perhaps from the Office which formerly belonged to this Prince,
viz. The keeping of the Keys which locked up the Books that containd the
Accounts of the Treasures of the Mighty Kings of Bisnagar and Sceherbeder, unto
whom this King and several other petty Princes were subject, as we have already
related.

The King keeps a splendid Court, and when he rides abroad is attended by all
his Nobility, and a great number of Horse and Foot, besides many Elephants and
Camels, and the sound of many Instruments.

The Kings eldest Son always succeeds his Father in the Government, and
maintains his Sisters till they are Married.

King Adel Schiah, who deceased Anno 2586. Great-grandfather to the King
Idelxa, took Goa twice from the Portuguese; but seeing at last that his Forces
were not any longer able to oppose them, he entered into a League with them, on
this Condition, That the Portuguese should keep in possession the City and
Island of Goa, and the adjacent Provinces, viz. Salsette on the South Side of
Goa, with sixty seven Villages; the Country of Bardes, with twelve Villages;
and the bordering Country of Tisvary, with thirty Villages: Provided that the
King of Visiapour's Subjects should peaceably and quietly Trade into all Parts
of India, and on condition that the Portuguese should not buy any Pepper in any
other Place but in Goa, upon Forfeiture of their Ships and Goods. But these
Articles were broke several times by the Kings of Visiapour; yet the Portuguese
Viceroy residing in Goa as often reconciled the Difference, by sending
Ambassadors with great Presents to them.

The Father of this present King maintained great Wars against the Portuguese.
Anno 1654. he sent a Letter to the Governor of Batavia, the Lord John
Maetzuiker, desiring him to send a Fleet of twenty six Sail of Ships to Goa, to
help him drive the Portuguese from thence, and afterward surrender the same to
his Army. The Letter, by reason of its unusual Style, will not be amiss to be
inserted here. The Contents thereof are as follow.

THE Good Firman which are sent to the Person of Honor and Strength; besides
Valiant, Famous, and sought after by the Grandees, as the most Eminent Person
of your Country, is John Maetzuiker, Chief Viceroy of the Hollanders in India,
who by Friendship and Goodness of the Kings is very much favored; Makes known
to your Excellency, That the Person of Honor, Greatness, and Happiness, Moelan
Abdulakiem, who sits in the King's Presence, has made known to me that you are
a Person of a good Nature, and candid Reality, and inclined to show service to
this House, which I gladly understood. Send therefore, according to Abdulakiem
's Request, a Fleet of twenty six Sail, well Manned with valiant Soldiers, and
provided with Guns and Ammunition, or at least as many Ships as you can
procure, to fight against the Portuguese at Goa, which Place you must endeavor
to clear of those People, and after the Conquest thereof, deliver Goa to our
Army. This done, you shall always remain in our Favor; and 'twill redown to
your Honor and Glory: And whatever Abdulakiem shall write to you concerning it,
freely credit the same, and do that which this Firman here requests. Given in
the Year after Mahomet 's Birth 1064. the second of the Month Sillekada.
According to our Style, On the thirteenth of August, Anno 1654.

The King likewise wrote another Letter to the same purpose, to a Dutch
Merchant called Leonard Johnson, to whom also Abdulakiem wrote the following
Letter.

THE Person whose Strength and Conduct is esteemed of amongst the Great Ones,
is Learned Johnson, a Dutch Merchant, whose Prudence must continue for ever.

How long has your Excellence maintained the War of Ceilon, with the Expense
of much Powder and Shot, and the loss of many valiant Soldiers; which yet
remains still unconquered, because the Portuguese have always fresh Aid come to
them? Now to take Goa, and to banish the Portuguese out of his sight, the King
has made me Commander of his Army, with which I am already come to the Borders
of Salseet. And since you were formerly inclined, when a good Firman or Letter
was sent to you from the King, to assist him against his Enemies, your good
Intentions to serve his Majesty were made known to the King, who thereupon
ordered two Firmans to be sent away, viz. One to the Person of Honor, Eminent,
of Great Command, and Respected amongst the Nobility of your Country, John
Maetzuiker, Viceroy for the Hollanders in the Indies: And the other to your
Excellency: Wherein is mentioned, That your Ships being well furnished with
Victuals and Ammunition, should come hither according to my Directions. And
therefore I desire you will send your Fleet with all the expedition you can,
well provided with all things, to the Bay of Goa: And when we have obtained the
Victory, and routed the Portuguese, we shall consequently in few days be also
Masters of Ceilon; after which your Valor shall be renowned in the King's
House, you ever continue in his Favor, and your Trade shall flourish in these
Countries.

If in case you cannot resolve to this Proposal, then consider what Charge you
may be at in this War, and what Loss you think you may sustain by it. You will
not want much Ammunition in these Countries; therefore do not refuse sending
Assistance to us.

In the same year, in the beginning of December, a Peace was concluded between
King Adel Schiah and the Portuguese, whereby both Parties were allowed free
access one to the other.

The King of Visiapour maintains also Wars against some of his Raise or Rajas,
which are Heathen Princes, or petty Kings, which with the Rabutes their
Subjects reside in the Mountains of Ballagate, in Places naturally
inaccessible, where they neither fear being surpised nor besieged.

They have no Written Laws in the whole Realm; but the King's Will is a Law to
all his Subjects. All Civil Debates that happen to arise in the City Visiapour,
are determined by the Coutewael or High Sheriff; but Criminal Causes are tried
by the King himself. The Criminals are often executed in the King's Presence,
with great cruelty, throwing them oftentimes before Elephants, and other Wild
Beasts, to be devoured, and sometimes cutting off their Arms, Legs, and other
Members; besides other ways not usual in Europe.

In other Towns or Provinces the Viceroy or Governor passes Sentence after the
same manner: For by virtue of their Patents, which they call Firman, they are
particularly empowered to give Judgment against Criminals. They commonly judge
of these Causes according to the first Complaint which they hear; so that he
which complains first, for the most part fares best. Differences of Debt are
soon decided among them; for if the Debtor do not pay his Creditor according to
the time limited by the Judge, he is severely whipped, and his Wife and
Children sold for Slaves by the Creditor. Such Persons as are forced to swear,
are placed in a round Circle made upon the Ground, laying one Hand upon some
Ashes brought thither for that purpose, and the other on their Breast, and
uttering several Expressions to their Gods; after which, they think themselves
obliged, on pain of Damnation, to make a true Answer to all such
Interrogatories as are put to them.

Linschot makes the Idalcans, or Kings of Cuncan, to be Subjects and
Tributaries to the King of Narsinga; but Jarrick affirms them to be mortal
Enemies.

The Kings of Cuncan were formerly absolute Lords of vast Territories, and
subject to none; but about sixty Years ago, in the time of King Mamedh Idelxa,
Son to King Ibrahimxa, who Anno 1635. possessed the Crown, in the twenty fourth
Year of his Age, they were reduced under the Mogol's Jurisdiction: viz. when in
King Mamedh Idelxa's Minority (who Governed his Realm under the Guardianship of
Chavas Chan) the Great Mogol assaulting those of Visiapour with two hundred
thousand Foot, and eighty thousand Horse, for their refusing to pay him
Tribute. After a long and bloody War, and the death of Chavas Chan, a Peace was
concluded, Duke Mustaff Chan and the Kings of Visiapour brought under
subjection to the Great Mogol, with Conditions to pay nine thousand Pagods
yearly for Tribute. But at present, as F. Bernier affirms, the King of
Visiapour pays no Tribute to the Great Mogol, but defends himself against all
Attempts which he makes upon him: for though he be not so powerful as those of
Golconda oppose the Mogol's Forces, yet he has this advantage, by reason of
the remoteness of his Country from Dely and Agra, that the Mogol makes not such
frequent Attempts on these Parts; besides which, that part of the Country of
Visiapour which lies next the Mogol's is very difficult for an Army to
approach, because of the scarcity of Water and Provisions, and the badness of
the Ways. The Metropolis Visiapour is also very strong, situate in a dry barren
Soil, and guarded by many Fortresses, built on the circumjacent Mountains,
which are most of them inaccessible. Many Rajas also join with him for their
own security. Moreover he oftentimes receives private assistance from the King
of Golconda, who always keeps an Army ready on the Borders, to assist the King
of Visiapour, whenever he perceives him to be too much oppressed by the Mogol.
Yet nevertheless this State, as also that of Golconda, is much declined; for
the Mogol has taken Paranda from them, which is the Key of their Country, with
the Magnificent City Bider, and some other eminent Places: But especially
because of a difference between these two Kings; for the last King of Visiapour
dying without Issue-Male, the present King, who is a young Man, being brought
up by the King of Golcondas Sister, who took him for her Son, does not
acknowledge her Favors.

Ibrahim Adil Sciah, who Reigned Anno 1620. notwithstanding the Countries of
Cutb Sciah or the King of Golconda, and Nizam Sciah King of Decan, lay as
Bulwarks between his Dominions and the Mogol's, and upon occasion was able to
raise an Army of a hundred thousand Men, stood nevertheless in great fear of
the Mogol, to whom though he paid considerable Tributes yearly, yet he was so
slighted by the Mogol, that he sent his Letters to him by a Common Soldier, or
Slave, whom he was forced to meet with his whole Army, and conduct him in great
Pomp to his Court, where he placed himself in a Chair of State prepared
purposely for him, whilst Adil Sciah was forced to stand in his Presence, like
a Slave: And when the Messenger had laid the Letter on a Carpet, he bowed down
to the Ground three times, according to the manner of the Country, before he
durst take it up.

This Ibrahim Adil Sciah is said to have caused his own Son to be put to death,
for persuading him from paying the usual Tribute to the Great Mogol, and
counselling him by force to free himself from that Slavery.

The King now Reigning sends oftentimes great Presents to the Mogol. Anno 1656.
in June, the King Sciah Sahep sent a Present of seven Lak Penas, or Two hundred
and eighty thousand Pounds, to the Mogol Prince Oranchzef, (at present King)
Residing at Dautabake; who then accompanied with Mirsimula, lay with his
Fathers Army on the Borders of Visiapour, in a Province called Pretapapour.

The Venassars, and Collers or Coulys, as also the Rasboutes of Cambaye, pay
Tribute to this King.

The thirteenth of November, Anno 1656. the King of Visiapour, call 'd Adil
Sciah, deceased; at which time Fettechan guarded the King's Palace; and Chan
Channa coming with his whole Army near the Walls, desired to know of Fettechan
whether it would not be convenient for him to bring the Army into the City, to
prevent Insurrections: Whereupon Fettechan replied, That he had taken upon him
in Chan Channa's absence to Guard the Fort; and therefore he judged it best,
for the safety of the Realm, to let Chan Channa come into the City: Whereupon
he repaired to Fettechan in the Palace, where consulting together, they
concluded to Crown the King's adopted Son, called Cha Chade, which was
performed the same day, he being then in the twenty fourth Year of his Age.
This new King received the Name of Aly Adel Sciah, and was permitted to use the
King's Grandfathers Seal. The right Coronation of their Kings is performed at
Chirer Ridder, a principal Place in the Realm of Visiapour.

When the old King lay a dying, Chan Channa was sent for to him by the Queen,
who being come, the Queen told the King, Here is Chan Channa; but she received
no Answer. Soon after, Fettechan being also called thither, the Queen spoke to
the King, saying, The Lord Fettechan is also here present; but the King not
answering, lift up his Eyes and departed this life: which when Fettechan
perceived, he threw himself after many mournful Expressions on the Ground, and
showed great signs of sorrow.

The young King was committed to the Care and Government of Chan Channa, being
the second Person in the Realm; whilst Fettechan sorrowfully repaired to his
House, where he mourned eight days for the King's death, no Man being able in
that time to persuade him to come to Court, notwithstanding the new King had
several times invited him: But at last Chan Channa sent him word, That it was
then no time to mourn the King's death any longer; That there was a necessity
for him to make his appearance before the new King; which if he again refused
to do, he should be necessitated himself to fetch him, and to bring him before
his Majesty. Upon which Message Fettechan made his appearance before the King,
and in all humility fell down at his Feet, but was immediately taken up and
embraced by the new-Crown'd Prince. The Queen sitting ^ll this while silent
behind a Curtain, at last spoke thus to Fettechan: Why would you obscure your
self in this juncture of time, when your Presence is so much required in all
Business? It Is true, here wants no Counsel; but we cannot in these dangerous
times repose any Confidence in them. Whereupon the young King added, You must
banish the death of his deceased Majesty out of your mind; I intend to promote
you higher, and bestow more Honor upon you than hitherto you have enjoyed.
Immediately after he gave him the Cane whereby he held his former Offices;
which Fettechan humbly receiving, was presented by the King, as a Testimony of
his Favor, with eight thousand Penas, which he modestly refused, saying, That
it was customary the Present should be made to Chan Channa.

Among several other Persons of Quality, the Lord Abdullachan came to
Complement the King with a Present of nine thousand Penas, and to wish him a
long and prosperous Reign: But the King would not accept his Present, telling
him, That in stead thereof, he should increase the number of his Horse. The
King likewise commanded all Officers that were unde his Subjection to appear at
Court, charging them on forfeiture of a hundred thousand Penas constantly to
maintain a thousand Horse.

The Inhabitants were at this time in a great Consternation, fearing to be
surpised by the Mogol Prince Oranchzef: But the King causing an Edict to be
published, commanded them to be at quiet, and encouraged them with the hopes he
had to lie down in a short time with his Army before Agra.

The King professes the Mahumetan Religion, as also the greatest part of his
Subjects; the rest are Pagans and Idolaters, of which Opinion are the Canaryns
of Goa, the Naires, and other Indians. They observe several Fasts, and other
Religious Ceremonies, like the Bramans. Linschot mentions a sort of Religious
Persons among them, called Jogues.

In most Parts of the Country reside Portuguese, who are permitted to Trade,
and enjoy all Privileges, except Religion; yet nevertheless they privately make
many Proselites.

The Kings of Decan, Visiapour, and those of Golconda, maintain the Religion
established by Mahomet, after the same manner with the Turks, and are therefore
called Soanies; yet the King of Golconda is said to incline to that of the
Persians. But notwithstanding they are all three Moors, and have instituted the
Mohammedan Doctrine in their Countries, yet they still retain many Idolatrous
Customs of the Heathens.

The Netherland East India Company have a Free Trade through the whole Kingdom
of Visiapour, and Storehouses in several Places, the chiefest whereof is at
Wingurla.

The Bay of Wingurla lies in 15 Degrees and 17 Minutes Northern Latitude,
Northward from Goa, and three Leagues Southward from Ilhas Quimadas, or The
Burning Island. It has a pretty large River, which runs some Leagues up into
the Country, and is Navigable by small Vessels. At the entrance of this River
several Streams of Fresh Water, which come down from the Mountains, fall into
the Bay.

The King allows the Netherlanders great Privileges, which are confirmed to
them by a Letter dated the tenth of May, 1655. viz. That they may lawfully
claim as their proper Goods all such Commodities or Things whatsoever as shall
happen to be Stranded, coming out of any of their Ships cast away upon his
Coast: And they are likewise freed from all manner of Taxes and Impositions, as
will appear more at large from the following Firman or Letter, written to the
Lord General John Maetzuiker.

GReat Firman to all Honweldares, Tannadares, and other Inferior Officers,
under the Jurisdiction of my Crown, on the Request of Leonard Johnson Merchant,
who desires, That if any Ships belonging to the Lord General John Maetzuiker,
which Trade along this Coast, should happen by Storm, Fire, or other
Misfortune, (which God forbid) to be Cast away or Stranded near any of my
Harbors, nothing might be lost or taken away from them, but all their Goods be
delivered to them again: Which Request I freely grant them. Therefore I charge
you, by virtue of this Letter, that no Honweldares, or other Inferior Officers,
which have any Command in any of my Seaport Towns, shall presume directly or
indirectly to keep or detain any Goods or Merchandises which by the casting
away of any of the Hollanders Ships shall happen to be found Stranded or
floating on the Sea; but on the contrary, assist them in the saving of any of
their Goods and Merchandise, and freely, without any Money, restore such Goods
as shall be taken up or found by any of you. He that transgresses herein,
shall be punished, as an Example to all others. I have also received lately
several Complaints from the Hollanders, concerning the paying of Customs, and
the detaining of their Servants, of which they were formerly freed, and Traded
without any Molestation; which is contrary to my former Edict: Therefore I
charge all those whom it may concern, a second time, not to demand any Custom
or Duties of them, nor trouble them in the least, that I may not have any more
Complaints concerning it. And that they may freely Trade without any
molestation through my whole Dominions, let several Copies be taken of this
Letter, and sent to the respective Places, that this Great Firman may be
exactly performed in every particular.

Given at our Court at Visiapour, the eighteenth day of the Month Jumandelaer,
in the 1055 Year after Mahomet's Death.

The End of the First Volume of Asia.
A TABLE OF THE KINGDOMS, PROVINCES, CITIES, TOWNS, and other Special Remarks,
Treated of in This First Volume of ASIA.
THE Description of Persia Fol. 1 Its Ancient Limits and Extent ibid. Its
Present Limits and Boundaries Fol. 2
The Province of Persia or Fars.
Fars, why so called Fol. 3 The Description of the Chief City Schiras ibid. The
Description of Maragascan Fol. 4 The Tower Tzehilminar ibid. The Ruins of the
Ancient Persepolis Fol. 5 The Cities and Towns contained in this Province Fol.
6 The Description of the Road from Schiras to Ispahan Fol. 7 The Dukedom of
Lar, with the Description of its Metropolis Fol. 8 The Temperature of the Air,
Nature of the Soil, etc. ibid.
Schirwan, or Scerwan, in Ancient Times called Media Atropatia, or Little Media.
The Modern Names of Media Atropatia, with its Boundaries Fol. 9 The City
Schamachie, with its Description ibid. Culistan Castle, why so called Fol. 10
Amaleck Cana's Tomb. The Village Mordow. Heid Ibrahius's Tomb. Tirihaba's Tomb
ibid. The Cities of Eres, Sequi, and Derbend, with their Description; and the
Story of King Tzumzume Fol. 11 The Tombs of Pyrhr Muchur and Imam Curchud Fol.
12 The City Bachu ibid. The Mountain Barmach ibid. The Trade, Military
Strength, and Change of Government of this Province, with the Description of
the Country of Muscur ibid.
The Province of Parthia, or Erack.
The Modern Names and Bounds of Parthia Fol. 13 The Situation and Bounds of the
City Ispahan, with its Description ibid. The Description of the King's Palace,
and of the Famous Marketplace Fol. 14 The Persians Belief concerning Mehedi
ibid. Places of Games and Exercises: Houses of Entertainment: The Famous
Coffee-house in Ispahan: The Garden Tzarbag Fol. 15 The Suburbs of Ispahan: The
Manners and Religion of the Kebbers Fol. 16 The City Jarustan ibid. The
Situation and Description of the Cities of Cashan, Saba, Rhey, and Com; with
the Description of the Village Casmabath Fol. 17 The City Casbin, its Situation
and Description: The King's Palace, with the Bath Haman Charabe, made famous by
the Story of Lockman Fol. 18 Schahesader's Tomb Fol. 19 The Village Achibaba,
whence denominated ibid. The Temperature of the Air, and Nature of the Soil
ibid. Scorpions of Cashan ibid. The Tarantula of Persia described, and compared
with that of Puglia in Italy Fol. 20 The Chief Trade of Cashan and Com; the
exceeding Rich Trade of Ispahan, Yasde, and Caxome ibid.
The Province of Aderbeitzan, or Aderbaijon, formerly called Great Media, or
Satrapene.
The several Modern Names of Great Media. The Bounds of Aderbeitzan. The
Description of the City Tabris Fol. 21 The Towns and Places of Note in
Aderbeitzan. The Situation of the City Sultania ibid. Sultania built by Sultan
Chodabende. The Description of Chodabende's Tomb, and Schach Ismael's Mosque
Fol. 22 The Chief Streets, and Marketplace; with their Temples; and a
Description of Schach Sefi's Tomb Fol. 23 By whom this Tomb was built; and the
great Revenues belonging to it Fol. 24 The Description of the Tomb of Seid
Tzeibrail ibid. The Villages of Basun and Sengoa Fol. 25 The City Caxem. The
Village Cencem. Places lying between Ardebile and Caswin. ibid. The Situation
and Description of the Province of Iran or Carabach Fol. 26 Drangiane, or
Sagistam, its Borders, and the several Names of its Metropolis, and Chief Towns
ibid. The Country of Nixabur, or Nisabur, with its Situation ibid.
The Province of Kilan, or Gilan.
The Denomination and Situation of Kilan, and its Division Fol. 26 The County
of Rescht. The County of Kesker. The City Curab, and Town of Astara; with the
Borders of the County Langercunan. Fol. 27 The Nature of the Soil, Productions
of the Country, Wild Beasts, Fish, Constitutions of the Inhabitants; their
Apparel and Language Fol. 28 Their Religion and Government Fol. 29 The Plains
of Mocan or Mogan, with a Relation of their Inhabitants ibid. The Province of
Betziruan, with its Description Fol. 30
The Caspian Sea.
The several Denominations of the Caspian Sea, with the Length and Breadth
thereof ibid. The diverse sorts of Fish found therein Fol. 31
The Province of Mazanderan.
Its Borders, and a Description of the Chief City Ferhabad ibid. The City
Eskerf. The Apparel of the Inhabitants of Mazanderan: Their Language and
Government: The Nature of the Soil, and Temperature of the Air Fol. 32
The Country of Chusistan.
The several Denominations and Bounds of Susiana, with its Chief Cities,
Inhabitants, Rivers, etc. Fol. 34
Carmania, or Kerman, otherwise Kirman.
The several Names, and by what People Inhabited, with its Division ibid. The
manner of their Buildings: With the Description of the Village Cambru, and the
Fort there Fol. 35 Meir Abbas Tomb ibid. The Nature of the Inhabitants of Wild
and Great Carmania, and the Commodities of the Country Fol. 36
Gedrosia, or Circan.
The several Names of Gedrosia, with its Chief Towns. The Country of Mecheran,
with its Commodities ibid.
The Province of Moghostan.
The Bounds of Moghostan. The Village Ciuciululion. The Metropolis Mina. Of
their Trees, Beasts, etc. Fol. 37 The Province of Lorestan ibid.
The Province of Chorazan.
The Cities Mesched and Herat: With the Production of the Country, Nature of
the Inhabitants, and their Government Fol. 38
The Province of Siston.
Its Situation and Description, with the Nature of the Inhabitants, and
Temperature of the Soil ibid.
Aria, or Ery.
The several Names and Bounds of Aria, with its Chief Towns, Temperature of the
Air, and Fertility of the Soil Fol. 39
Dagestan, or Tagestan.
Its Situation, Division, Metropolis: The Diet, Nature, and Customs of the
Inhabitants ibid.
The Kingdom of Amadan.
The Description of its Principal City called Amadan, etc. Fol. 41
Persia in General.
Of the Air ibid. The Nature of its Soil: Its Plants and Grain Fol. 42, 43 The
Beasts breeding therein Fol. 44, 45 Its several sorts of Inhabitants Fol. 46
Their Complexion, Nature, Shape, and some peculiar Customs Fol. 47, 48 Of their
Venery. Their Apparel Fol. 49, 50 Their Economy or Housekeeping Fol. 51, 52
Amfion or Opium, Thea, Coffee, and Tobacco Fol. 53 Of their Marriages Fol. 54
Of their Funerals Fol. 55 Astronomy Fol. 56, 57 Of their Poesy Fol. 58 Their
Lawyers and Physicians, and their Language Fol. 59, 60 Their Arms and Militia
Fol. 61, 62 Their Coins, Weights, and Measures Fol. 63 Their Trade, Artificers,
Manufactures, and several Employments; and the King's Revenue Fol. 64, 65 Of
their Buildings, Traveling, and their Religion Fol. 66, to 72 Of their
Festivals Fol. 72 The Policy in Government, Economy and Splendour of the Court
Fol. 74 Government of the Peculiar Provinces Fol. 80 The Dynastie of their
Kings Fol. 83
The Country of Georgia.
Extent of Georgia Fol. 85 The Division of the Country: Its Fertility, Wild
Beasts, Rivers, Lakes, and Language, etc. Fol. 86
The Province of Imereti, or Basciaciuk.
Its Extent, and the King's Titles, etc. Fol. 87
The Province of Cacheti.
The Situation of this Province, and the Reason of its Name ibid.
The Province of Cardel, or Carduel.
The Bounds of this Province. How the King came to be dispossessed. The Persians
Invade Georgia. Luarzab Imprisoned and Murdered Fol. 88 The Persian quits the
Country. The Georgian Women much desired by the Persian Nobility. Teimuraz
flies to the Turks, who assist him with a potent Army Fol. 80 The Province of
Guriell, with its Situation Fol. 90
The Province of Mengrelia, anciently Colchis.
The Borders of Mengrelia: The Air: The Inhabitants afflicted with many
Diseases. The Rivers in this Country ibid. Their Sturgeon of diverse kinds:
Their Venison, Birds, Beasts, etc. Fol. 91 Several sorts of Mengrelians: Their
first Money, Trade with the Turks, Houses, etc. Fol. 92 Their Habits: Their
homely Manner of Entertainment, Recreations, Nuptial and Funeral Ceremonies
Fol. 93 Of their Physicians. How they go to War. Their Charity to Strangers.
Their Government. The Royal Seat of the Dominion. The Occasion of the first
Revolt Fol. 94 The present King of Megrelia, called Dadian, Conquers the
Abcassians, and makes War upon Imereti. Dadian an excellent Prince. Their
Punishment of Malefactors Fol. 95 Their manner of determining Differences. The
Wealth of their Patriarchs. Their Bishoprics. Of their Priests. Of their
Baptism. St. Georges Feast Fol. 96 Their Fasts, Superstitions, and Ceremonies
at Funerals Fol. 97
Avogastes, or Avogasie.
Its Borders, and several Names, with the Chief Towns thereof ibid.
The several sorts of People about Mengrelia and Mount Caucasus.
The Inhabitants of Mount Caucasus, their manner of Living, Riches, Trade,
Habit, Wars Fol. 98 The People called Lazi, or Curten, and what they be ibid.
The Black Sea.
The several Names of this Sea. Subject to frequent Storms. Why frequented by
the Cossack, etc. Fol. 98
The Province of Circassia.
Who the Circassians are. The Rivers, Bounds, and Lords of the Country. How
they are Governed. The Situation and Description of the City Terki Fol. 99 How
Garrisoned. The Habits of the Circassians: Their Employments, Language, and how
they Govern their Children Fol. 100 Their manner of Living. What Arms they use.
Their Encouragement of Theft. Their different Opinions in Religion. Ceremonies
used at the death of the Nobility. Their Degrees, etc. Fol. 101
Albania.
The Cities and Chief Towns of Albania. The Air and Government of this Country
Fol. 102
The Province of Curdistan.
Its Bounds, and the Habit of the People ibid. Their Language, Living,
Government, and Religion Fol. 103
THE EMPIRE of the GREAT MOGOL, AND INDIA.
Of India in General.
INDIA, why so called. Its Division, Extent, and Bounds. The largeness of its
Circuit. Its Rivers Fol. 104 The Course of the River Indus. The River Ganges,
with its Riches. The Lake Chiamay Fol. 105 Their floating Bridges, Mountains,
Beasts, etc. Fol. 106 Their Fruits and Plants, as Betel, Areka, Cate; with
their several Uses Fol. 107 The general Name of the Inhabitants. Their Division
into several Tribes. The Brahmans highly esteemed Fol. 110 The Original of the
Brahmans Fol. 111 The several Sects of the Brahmans Fol. 112 Their way and
manner of Living; with their Habitations, Study, and Government Fol. 114 The
Ceremonies at the Birth of their Children, etc. Fol. 116 A strange Fable of
their Immortal Elixir. The manner how they Marry their Children Fol. 117 The
Punishment of Fornication. Their great Observation of Good and Bad Days, etc.
Fol. 118 Their Account of Time Fol. 119 The Fabulous Story of Gasjendre
Mootsjam; and their several Superstitions with the Sick, and at the Funerals of
their Deceased Fol. 120 The Liberty of their Women; and in what manner they are
obliged to accompany their Husbands into the other World Fol. 121 Burning not
allowed by the Mahumetans. The Funeral Ceremonies of the Brahmans Fol. 122, 123
A pleasant Quarrel betwixt a Christian and an Indian Fol. 123 Cages for Birds,
like Hospitals. Their great love for Cows ibid. Strange Marriages of Bulls and
Cows Fol. 124 Why the Indians have Cows in great esteem ibid. The Brahmans
forbid the eating of Flesh, and why ibid. The Soudras and Settreas condemned by
the Brahmans for eating of Flesh. The Brahmans Diet, etc. ibid. The Fast-days
of the Brahmans. The Fast Dauli. The Diet of the Indians Fol. 125 Their several
sorts of Liquor, etc. Fol. 126 Their Apparel, Places of Recreation, Furniture
of their Houses. The Indians go always Armed. The manner of Living of the
Nobility, and Persons of Quality Fol. 127 The Women good Dancers. Their Games
and Pastimes. The manner of the Great Mogol's Hunting. What Beasts they chiefly
Hunt Fol. 128 The manner of Hunting the Lion by the Great Mogol. Their
Language, and manner of Writing Fol. 129 A brief Vocabulary of the Malayan
Tongue ibid. The Court Language is wholly Persian Fol. 134
The Creation of the World, in Ten Bodily Appearances of Wistnow or Mahadeu.
Of the Creation of the World ibid. The Mountain Merowa. The four Ages of the
World. The ten Appearances of Wistnow. They acknowledge in some measure a
Trinity Fol. 135 They believe a general Conflagration of the World ibid.
Matsias or Matx Altar, the First.
The Charge of Bramha ibid.
Caurams or Courmas Altar, the Second.
The Riches of the Sea ibid.
Waras or Warrahas Altar, the Third.
Mahadue's strange Shape in his third Appearance Fol. 136 The Giant Hirnac's
Representation ibid.
Narsings Altar, the Fourth.
Hirenkessep's Request to Bramma. His Edict ibid.
Vannams Altar, the Fifth, begins with the Second Age, called Tretrsingke.
The Request of Vannam to Bell Ragia, etc. Fol. 137
Prasserams, or Paresje Ramas Altar, the Sixth.
Braman and Braminin, a Married Couple; she being barren, they both retire into
a Wilderness, and there pray to Mahadeu to give them Children, who grants their
Desire Fol. 138 Reneka Murdered; for what Reason; and how restored to Life
again Fol. 139
Rams, or Ram Katas, otherwise Dajaratha Ramas Altar, the Seventh.
Rawan's Request to Mahadeu Fol. 140
Kistnas, or Cristnas, or Crexnos Altar, the Eighth.
Narret's Prognostication of Denki, etc. Fol. 142 The Opinion of the Wonders of
Kistna ibid.
Bhodes or Boudhas Altar, the Ninth.
The Description of Boudhas, etc. Fol. 143
Callenkyns Altar, the Tenth.
Its Description and Continuance, etc. ibid.
Of their Religion in general.
A General Toleration in India. Their Vedam or Law-Book, what it contains ibid.
The Brahmans Opinion of God. The Extract of Garrouda and Annemonta.
Mahumetanism professed in some Places. Their high esteem of Ramma. Idols giving
Answers like Oracles. Their Belief and Opinion of the Immortality of the Soul
Fol. 144 The Commandments imposed by the Brahmans. The several Pagodes of
Wistnow and Eswara in Carnatica. Strange things related by the Brahmans of
their Pagodes Fol. 145 The manner of Worshipping Wistnow and Eswara Fol. 147
The Feasts Gawri Dewi, and Tsewartre, with diverse other Festivals, peculiar to
several Sects Fol. 148 Their Worship of several Deities Fol. 149 The Brahmans
Belief concerning the Transmigration of the Soul Fol. 150 Places accounted
Holy, and visited by the Brahmans Fol. 151
The Religion, Customs, and Constitutions of the Hassenists, or Moors.
The Women not permitted to go to their Temples Fol. 152 The Order of the
Derwises amongst the Hassenists. The Diet of the Hassenists, with several of
their peculiar Customs Fol. 153 The Nature and Complexion of the Hassenists
Fol. 154 The Habits of the Mogollans Fol. 155 Christians dispersed all over
India ibid.
The Realm of the Great Mogol, otherwise Hindostan, or Indostan.
The Bounds of the Kingdom. Its Circumference, Extent, and Division. Bengala, a
Fertile and Rich Kingdom Fol. 156 Indostan supplied with Elephants and Horses
from other Parts. Caravanseras, or Houses of Entertainment. Indostan very Rich.
The Indians manner of Sailing. The Inhabitants of Indostan. The Trade and
Manufacture of the Country. Fol. 157 The Omrahs Children Inherit not their
Fathers Estates. The Quality and Office of an Omrah. The Mansebdars. The
Rouzindars Fol. 158 The Mogol's Infantry. His whole Military Strength computed
Fol. 159
The Court, Splendour, Magnificence, and Riches of the Great Mogol.
The Description of the Mogol's Court at Lahor. King Chorram's Cavalcade from
Agra to Lahor Fol. 160 The King's Train, and Splendour of his Court Fol. 161 His
Entertainment of Ambassadors ibid. His Revenues Fol. 163 The Weights, Measures,
and Coins of the Country ibid. Their manner of Traveling Fol. 164 Their
Music. The Chief Officers of the Mogol's Court Fol. 165 The Execution of
Criminals. The King's Guard. Three Orders of Chans. The King sits in Person in
Court Fol. 166 Variety of other Punishments for Criminals ibid. The King's
Robes given to the Omrahs. He is weighed upon his Birthday with great Ceremony
ibid. Their way of Salutation, and the Reverence they show their Prince ibid.
The King's Chief Officers in Cities and Seaports Fol. 167
Of the Name and Title of Mogol.
The Reason of the Name Mogol, and its Signification. The Signification of Chan
ibid.
The Extract and Descent of the Mogol Kings.
The Great Mogol from whom descended Fol. 167 The Expedition of Tzingiz Chan. A
Tartarian Prince settles in India, and becomes Founder of the Royal Family
there Fol. 168 Ecbar's Character and Death. Scieco Gio succeeds his Father, by
the Name of Schach Selim Fol. 169 Several Opinions concerning Selim's Issue
Fol. 170 Chosrou Rebelling against his Father, is Defeated ibid. The mutual
Constancy of Chosrou and his Lover ibid. Chorrom takes up Arms against his
Father the Mogol, with the Occasion of his Rebellion Fol. 170, 171 Another
Relation of Ecbar's Death and Selim's Reign Fol. 171 Chorrom succeeds Selim
ibid. The Issue of Schach Jehan. The Character of his Children Fol. 172 He
sends his Sons to Govern several Provinces, keeping only the Eldest at home
Fol. 173 Emer Jemla's Plot against the King of Golconda Fol. 174 The King of
Golconda narrowly escapes from the Hand of Oranchzef. The great Friendship
betwixt Oranchzef and Emer Jemla ibid. Emer sent with an Army against Decan
Fol. 175 Schach Jehan falls desparately sick ibid. The four Brothers take up
Arms, each in his own defense ibid. Oranchzef's subtle Letter to Moradbeck
ibid. Emer suffers himself to be made Prisoner by Oranchzef Fol. 176 His Army
appeased by Oranchzef ibid. Oranchzef and Moradbeck join their Forces together
Fol. 177 The Mogol raises Forces against his Sons, though unwillingly ibid.
Soliman Chekouh, Darasja's Son, made General against Chasausa. He fights
Chasausa's Army, and gets the Victory ibid. The Courage and Passion of
Jesseingue's Wife Fol. 178 A violent Humor of Darasja ibid. The Policy of
Oranchzef ibid. Darasja resolved to fight Oranchzef, though contrary to his
Fathers Will, and the Advice of his Friends Fol. 179 The Ordering of the
Battalia Fol. 180 Moradbeck's Valor Fol. 181 A notable piece of Treachery, and
the Effects thereof ibid. Oranchzef's Behavior after the Battle, and Darasja's
miserable Condition ibid. Oranchzef marches straight with his Army to Agra.
Schach Jehan circumvented in his Design Fol. 182 The Counter-Policy of
Oranchzef; and his Letter to his Father Fol. 183 The Advice given to Moradbeck.
He Sups with Oranchzef, is surpised, and imprisoned Fol. 184 His Army goes
over to Oranchzef ibid. Darasja's Management of Affairs cavill'd at by the
Statesmen ibid. Darasja betakes himself to Amadabad, and is honorably
entertained by Schach Navazecan Fol. 185 Oranchzef engages with Sultan Sujas
ibid. Sultan Sujas guilty of the same fatal Error with Darasja Fol. 186
Oranchzef returns to Agra. He grows jealous of Sultan Mahmoud his Son, and Emer
Jemla ibid. Chasausa put to flight by Emer Jemla. Sultan Mahmoud seized on, and
sent to Govaleor Fol. 187 Oranchzef's Policy to take Darasja. The Battle
between Darasja and Oranchzef. Darasja's Flight and Misery Fol. 188 Darasja
betrayed by the Raja Catch. The Siege of Tatabacar Fol. 189 Darasja is made
Prisoner by Gioncan, and carried in Triumph through the City of Deli Fol. 190 A
Consultation held, Whether to put him to Death, or send him Prisoner to
Govaleor ibid. Darasja murdered. Tatabacar surrendered Fol. 191 Soliman Chekou
taken, and imprisoned. He is brought to the Court ibid. The Poust, what it is.
Moradbeck's Death ibid. Chasausa flies for Refuge to the King of Racan. He
requests a Ship to transport himself to Mecha, but is denied. His Plot against
the King of Racan discovered. He is pursued, overtaken, and defeated. What
became of him uncertain Fol. 192 His Family ill treated, but at last pardoned;
yet soon after extirpated by the Conqueror Fol. 193 Emer Jemla's Death.
Surratte surpised by a Robber. The Robber taken, and committed to Prison; but
escapes ibid. The Dea sh of Schach Jehan. Begum Saheb received into Favor. The
Mogol's Ambassadors abused by the Persians. The King of Persia dies Fol. 194
Paropamisa or Candahor, Sablestan, and Balassy.
The Bounds of Paropamisa, and its Inhabitants ibid. The Head of the River
Indus. The Extent of the Country, and its Chief Towns ibid. Candahor a Place of
great Trade. The Temperature of the Air. It often changes its Lords. When it
became subject to the great Mogol, and its several Vicissitudes Fol. 195
Candahor Besieged by the Mogol, Schach Jehan Fol. 196 The Fortress Calabust
taken by the Persians ibid. The Description of the City Balassan ibid. The
Government of Balassan Fol. 197 The Towns and People of Sablestan ibid.
The Kingdom of Cabul.
Its Borders, and the Derivation of its Name, etc. ibid.
The Territory of Multan.
Its Borders. This Country Famous for excellent Bows and Arrows ibid.
The Country of the Bullochs or Bobochs, or Kingdom of Ballochy, otherwise
Haican, or Hangi-chan.
The Borders, and the Nature of the People Fol. 197
The Province of Bucker or Buckor.
Its Borders; and the Trade of the Chief City Suckera Fol. 198
The Kingdom of Send or Sind, otherwise called Diu and Tatta.
The Etymology of its Name. Its Borders. Tatta a Place of good Trade. The
Chief Commodities ibid.
The Provinces of Sorit, Jesselmeer, and Attack.
Their Borders, Limits, and Boundaries ibid.
The Province of Penjab or Pengab.
The Signification of its Name. The Description of its Chief City Lahor. The
Nature of the Air, etc. Fol. 199
The Kingdom or Territory of Caximir.
Its Borders, Situation, and Extent ibid. Great Heats in March, and the Effects
thereof. The difference of Air in the Mountains. The Women very handsome.
European Plants and Herbs here in great abundance Fol. 200 The Description of
the City and Lake of Cachemire. A wonderful Spring on the Confines of this
Kingdom Fol. 201 A Description of the Mosque at Baramoulay. A strange Fable of
a Stone. The Character of the Cachemirans Fol. 202 Caximir Conquered by the
Mogol Fol. 203
The Territories of Banchish, Jangapore, and Jenba.
Their Situation and Boundaries, etc. ibid.
The Kingdom of Dely.
Its Situation and Limits. Jehan Ahad, a new City, how Seated ibid. Sixty
thousand Houses consumed by Fire, Anno 1663. Fol. 204 The Furniture of their
Houses. Dely stored with diverse sorts of Fruit from other Parts. The several
sorts of Provisions in Dely. The Description of the Castle Fol. 205 The Course
of the River Jemini Fol. 206 The Nature of the Tree Baxama Fol. 207
The Kingdom or Province of Mando or Bando.
The Description of the City Mando, etc. Fol. 207
The Territory of Sanga or Chitor, and Utrad.
The Description of the City Chitor, anciently very Famous ibid. By whom
destroyed Fol. 208 The Productions of the Province Utrad ibid.
The Kingdom of Zurratte or Cambaya.
By whom, and why called Cambaya. Its Extent and Limits. The Seaport Towns
ibid.
The City Amadabath or Ahmedabath.
The Reason of its Name, and its Description Fol. 209 The Description of a
stately Pagode, and two Magnificent Tombs Fol. 210 The Description of Surratte,
with several Remarks of note therein Fol. 211 The Legend of Oman Hidal Chan.
The Haven or Harbor of Sohali. The Fertility of the Soil. The Derivation of the
Name, and Situation of Cambaya. The Compass and Strength thereof. Its
Description, etc. Fol. 212 The Description of the City Brotha. The Jurisdiction
of this City. The Tomb of Polmedony, whereunto Pilgrimages are made. The
Description of Goga. The City Bysantagan Fol. 213 Pattan, a very large City.
Daman, a large City, Conquered by the Portuguese, Anno 1559. The City Bazaim
Fol. 214 The Productions of the Country, etc. Fol. 216 Serpents, and other
noxious Creatures Fol. 217 The Ancient and Modern Inhabitants of Surratte. The
Apparel of the Persians of Surratte, their Diet, etc. Fol. 218 The Description
of the People. Their several Feasts. The Original of Fire-Worship Fol. 219
Their Ceremonies of Fire-Worship. Their Initiation of their Children. Their
Marriages, and Nuptial Ceremonies Fol. 220 Their Burying-places, and Funeral
Solemnities Fol. 221 The Riches and Trade of Surratte Fol. 222 The Government
of Surratte Fol. 223 The State of the Chan or Supreme Governor. Their
Punishment of Criminals. The Religion of the Surratteans. The Opinion of the
Benjans concerning the Creation Fol. 224
The Kingdom or Territory of Chandish or Sanda.
Its Name, with the Description of its Metropolis called Brampore. Its
Strength, and manner of Government Fol. 237
The Provinces of Berar and Narvar.
Their Borders, and Principal Cities Fol. 238
The Province of Gwaliar or Gualier.
Its Chief City. The Mogol's Treasure kept here ibid.
The Kingdom of Agra or Indostan.
Its Name, and Metropolis. A great and famous Castle ibid. The Description of
the Royal Court Fol. 239 The Jurisdiction and Extent thereof Fol. 240 The
Product of the Country Fol. 241
The Country of Bulloits.
Its Situation, and the Fertility of the Soil ibid.
The Province of the Hendowns or Hindous.
Its Meteopolis, Fertility of the Soil, and Manners and Customs of the
Inhabitants Fol. 242
The Province of Sanbat or Sanbal, and Bakar.
It Borders. Some Special Remarks. A Magnificent Tomb ibid.
The Province of Nagrakat.
Its Metropolis, and the Splendour thereof, etc. ibid.
The Provinces of Siba, Kakares, and Gor.
Their several Metropolisses, and other Chief Towns, etc. Fol. 243
The Provinces of Pitan, Canduana, and Patna.
Their several Boundaries, and Principal Cities ibid.
The Kingdom of Decan.
Its Borders, Extent, and Metropolis ibid. Chaul, a great City, where the
Portuguese have two Forts. The famous, Mountain Il Morro di Ciul. The Fertility
of the Soil. The Air, etc. Fol. 244 The first Conqueror of Decan. The ancient
Name of the Kings of Decan. A Story of a prodigious Gun Fol. 245
The Kingdom of Ballagate.
Its Name, Extent, and the Cities therein contained Fol. 246
The Kingdom of Cuncan or Visiapour.
Its Extent and Chief Cities ibid. The Description of its Metropolis Visiapour
Fol. 246, 247 The City Tamba ibid. The Kingdom of Cuncan how Watered Fol. 248
The Armenian Stone found near Ustabado. The several Inhabitants of Decan and
Cuncan. Their Complexion and Constitution. Their Habits, and some Superstitious
Customs. The Arts by which they are maintained, and their several Manufactures
Fol. 249 Their several Coins and Weights. Their Arms both Offensive and
Defensive ibid. Their manner of Fighting. A Gun of an incredible bigness. The
Inhabitants speak several Languages. The manner of their Marriages and
Funerals. Fol. 250 The King's Name and Title. His Court and Attendance. Adel
Schiah takes Goa twice from the Portuguese ibid. The King of Cuncan desires
Assistance of the Netherlanders, and grants them great Immunities Fol. 250, 251
A Peace concluded between the King of Visiapour and the Portuguese Fol. 251 The
King professes the Mahumetan Religion Fol. 252 Many Portuguese reside in Cuncan
Fol. 253
DIRECTIONS For Placeing the SCULPS IN THIS First Volume of ASIA.
THe Title.
Persia, sive, Sophorum Regnum Fol. 1 Schamachie Fol. 9 Derbendt Fol. 11
Ispahan Fol. 13 Kom Fol. 17 Saba ibid. Cachan Fol. 18 Soltaine Fol. 21
Ardebeile Fol. 25 Caspise Zee Fol. 30 Tabula Colchidis Hodie Mengrelie Fol. 90
Magni Mogolis Imperium Fol. 104
The Ten Altars.
Matsias, or Matx, the first Fol. 135 Caurams, or Courmas, the second ibid.
Warras, or Warrahas, the third Fol. 136 Narsing, the fourth ibid. Vannams, the
fifth Fol. 137 Passerams, or Paresje Ramas, the sixth Fol. 138 Rams, or Ram
Katas, the seventh Fol. 140 Kistnas, or Cristnas, or Crexno, the eighth Fol.
142 Bhodes, or Boudhas, the ninth Fol. 143 Callenkyns, the tenth ibid. The
Court of the Great Mogol Fol. 160 Schach Selim Fol. 169 Schach Jehan Fol. 172
Schach Oranchzef Fol. 174 Nurmahal Fol. 188 Rauchenara Begum Fol. 193 Begum
Saheb Fol. 194 De Stadt Souratte Fol. 211 Dabul Fol. 214 Visiapour Fol. 246

