THE Last Judgment: OR A DISCOURSE Showing the reasonableness of the Belief of
such a thing.

Delivered in a SERMON, At the ASSIZES held for the County of DENBIGH, on the
18th of April, Anno 1682.

By JOHN OLIVER, Chaplain to the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Delves of
Dodington in Cheshire, Baronet, and sometime Student of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for John Minshull, and to be sold at his Shop in Bridge-street
in Chester, and Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1682.

To the Right Worshipful JOSHVA EDISBVRY, Esquire High Sheriff For the County of
DENBIGH.
SIR,
THis Sermon came abroad at last to testify the grateful sense I have of the
many favors received from your self, and some other Members of that Audience,
in which it was delivered. And since it is made thus public, it cannot in
justice be entitled to any other Person than your self, the first occasion of
its being: There were several Arguments that might have dissuaded any man in my
Circumstances from a Work of this kind (of which the unripeness of my years,
and a natural aversion to be knownin such a quarrelsome Age, where the
plainnest things are become matter of Controversy, were none of the least.)
And yet I reckoned, that the Request of those worthy Persons, who were pleased
to set such extraordinary marks of their Favor, upon one who was perfectly a
Stranger to them, could not be denied without a secret reproach of Ingratitude.
I have therefore been so hardy, as to expose it a second time, and do lay it
down with all submission at your Feet, beseeching you to receive it with as
much Candor, as it is offered with Modesty by

Your Most humble, and most obliged Servant, JOHN OLIVER.

A SERMON Preached at the AS SIZES held for the County of DENBIGH. April 18.
1682.
2 Cor. 5. and former part of the 10th Verse. For we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.


I Don't know any one Article of our Christian Faith, that can possibly have a
more universal influence on the Lives and Actions of all men, than that which
concerns a Judgment to come: And I know no time so proper to mind you of that
General Assize, in which all men shall be summoned to give Account of their
doings as the present occasion. For as nothing can be of greater Force for the
Government of our whole time, so nothing can more immediately conduce to
regulate the particular Actions of this, than a firm Belief, that whatever
passes from us here, will be entered into the most lasting and unalterable
Registers, be laid up among the Archieves of Heaven, and must as certainly be
reviewed another day, and at another Bar of the most exact and impartial
Justice.

In my Defense of this great Principle, I shall endeavor to make out these 3
things.

1. That the belief of a Judgment to come is suitable to those common Notions
which are imprinted on our minds: And that every sober Person by reflecting on
his own frame, must unavoidably fall under this persuasion. 2. That the Belief
of a Judgment to come, is agreeable to that Notion men have concerning the
Being and Providence of a God. 3. That this Doctrine is infinitely certain upon
the grounds of Scripture, and especially the Gospel, whose great Privilege it
is to have brought Life and Immortality to Light.
I begin with the first of these.

Viz. 1. That the Belief of a Judgment to come is suitable to those common
Notions which are imprinted on our minds, and that every sober Person by
reflecting on his own Frame, must unavoidably fall under this Persuasion.

We cannot imagine, that the great Author of our Being should leave any
Impressions upon man, the most excellent piece of his workmanship here below,
which should stand for a Cipher: Nothing could be a greater impeaching of his
Wisdom, than to have put such things into our Constitution, as could be of no
use or advantage to us: If there be therefore any such Principles stamped upon
us, as will naturally enforce the Belief of another Judgment: And if these
Principles can proceed from nothing else but the Finger of the Almighty, this
will be one fair Evidence, that such a thing must certainly be.

And that there are such Principles stamped upon our minds, as will naturally
enforce the Belief of another Judgment, is plain from the universal Consent of
men in all times and places about it.

For this Doctrine of a Judgment to come, has found a general entertainment in
the World: Not only amongst the Greeks and Romans, those People, by whom
Learning and Arts, Policy and Government were improved to a considerable
degree: But also amongst the rude and barbarous Nations, where nothing of this
kind can be assigned as the grounds of it: There being little of Policy or
Religion, or Learning or good Manners to be there met with. Whatever there was
to difference these last from the more civilized part of Mankind, yet in this
they all agreed; the Being of a God, a future State, the distribution of
Rewards and Punishments according to the Actions of men in this Life.

It must be granted, indeed, that the apprehensions the Heathens had of another
Life were dark and cloudy: The Rewards they imagined to be laid up for good
men, were mostly adapted to the gratifying of the sensual Part, and the
Punishments to be inflicted on evil men, were such as they thought most
suitable to the Crimes here committed.

They tell us, that when good men have passed their Trials, they are
immediately conveyed into some Paradysial place, some flowery Fields and
Gardens, always flourishing and delightful, where they meet with such innocent
enjoyments, as they took most pleasure in while here on Earth: Which (by the
way) is a secret reflection on the loose pretender to Christianity, who
resolves to spend all his days in riot and excess, in filthiness and
debauchery, and yet hopes in the end to be possessed of those spiritual
Pleasures above, which are nothing akin to the Pleasures he met with here, and
if enjoyed, could be no more satisfaction to him, than it would be to a Swine
to have his Stye built of Cedar, his Bed perfumed, and his Meat served him in
Plate.

As for the wicked, they tell us, the Portion of such is to be cast into black
and dismal Prisons, to be tormented by Haggs and Furies, and to meet with such
other Punishments, as the nature and weight of their Crimes deserved.

And however, this Account be infinitely short of what the Scripture affords,
concerning the different Conditions of men in another World, yet it argues a
strong persuasion even amongst Infidels of a future State, and that such a
thing was acknowledged by them, though the Nature and Circumstances of it could
not be made out, without the assistance of a supernatural Light.

If it be said, that there is no such universal consent as is here pretended,
because some few Persons Atheistically inclined, have now and then disowned the
Opinion; it is easily answered, that two or three such Instances can be no
prejudice to the General Judgment of most men, both learned and unlearned: That
it has been their Interest, there should be no such thing as a Judgment to
come, and therefore they have racked their Brains to find out Arguments against
it: That the impurity of their Lives has sullied their Reasons, and debauched
their understandings, and rendered them as incapable of judging what belongs to
the humane Nature, as a man born blind is to read a Lecture about Colors, or a
Person with a distempered Palate to distinguish meats.

But now to what Cause shall we assign this universal Agreement? How comes it
about, that the most distant People of the World, that live under different
Models of Government, and distinct Rites of Worship; that have peculiar Customs
and Manners, and Inclinations, should all join in this, that there is an
Account to be given in another World, of all our Actions done in this? Besides,
how comes this Principle to stand so fixed and unshaken, considering the
infinite changes which almost every thing else has undergone, and the many
attempts which have been made to alter this by a sort of men, that would
confound the Distinction betwixt Virtue and Vice here, that there might be no
such thing as either Heaven or Hell hereafter? We see daily, that other
Opinions rise and fall, according as the grounds they are built upon appear
stronger or weaker; and sometimes they have more, sometimes fewer Defendants to
own and countenance them: But this Doctrine of a Judgment to come, as it is of
equal Antiquity, and has the same extent with Mankind, so is it constantly the
same: Tract of Time, and revolution of Ages, and deeper insight into the nature
of things; the several changes that have happened in the Laws, the Religions,
the Customs of any People, have not been able to abate any thing of its
Authority, but still as the World grows older and more changeable, this grows
more strong, vigorous and constant.

It must then have some cause like it self, it must be resolved into some such
impressions as are common to Mankind, which every man carries about him, and
from which he may argue himself into a belief of it.

I am easily induced to think, that as the main Body of the Heathen Theology,
was but the old Traditional Religion corrupted by a long and tedious descent,
(as all things are apt to lose of their native Purity the farther they go) so
this Account of a future Judgment amongst the Heathens might be a branch of it,
mixed with the fancies and inventions of men, till the first Patriarchal Creed
became a mere Poetical Story. But yet I think it will be hard to persuade any
man that a Doctrine of this kind, so opposite to men's worldly Interests, so apt
to control their Lusts and Passions, should spread so far, and prevail so
generally, were there not some more early impression left upon us, to make room
in our understandings for it, some natural notions, that amidst all
vicissitudes of the World would be sure to uphold the truth of it: I instance
in these three.

1. That apprehension which all men have concerning good and evil. 2. That
secret joy which good men find upon the doing any virtuous act: And that
confidence they have when they suffer upon the score of Piety and Religion. 3.
Those horrible Fears and Confusions, which bad men find upon the doing an ill
act.
These are natural to us as men, and fair Evidences of what I have undertook to
make out.

1. That apprehension which all men have concerning good and evil, argues a
future Judgment.

That some actions are Virtuous and Honorable, and the contrary base and
vicious, and that Antecedently to any humane Law or positive Custom for the
making them so, is the common voice of mankind: To be innocent in our
Conversations, grateful to our Benefactors, upright in our Dealings, true to
our Vows and Promises, Oaths and Contracts, these are such things, as would be
excellent and approved of all, though there were no humane Laws to enjoin and
encourage the practice of them: And on the other hand the opposite Vices are so
deformed and ugly, that should all the Lawgivers on earth conspire to change
the Scene, to make Virtue Vice, and Evil Good, the undertaking would be as
strange as unsuccesful: Such attempts could never obtain their end, unless they
could mould the man over again, and infuse into him quite different Principles,
from what he has already.

And though men are so far willing to comply with their temporal Interests, as
to contradict in the Practick, what they are content to own in the Speculative;
yet there are not many arrived to that pitch of Profaneness, but would appear
in the World under another Character, than what they really deserve: Which
argues at least in the worst of men a secret allowance, that Virtue has
something in it more suitable to the honor of the humane Nature, and that Vice
has that intrinsic ugliness in it, that we blush at and are ashamed to own.

Now the goodness of every Action consisting in a conformity to its proper
Rule, and the badness of any Act in a deflection from it: It will follow, that
there is a Rule stamped upon the mind of every man, according to which he
judges one Act good, and another evil; and that Judgment about good and evil
being one and the same in all Parts of the World, the Rule must be so too, and
consequently, have the same Author which our very Being has, the all-wise God:
This is that Rule the Roman Orator styled, Non scripta lex sed nata, a Law not
written on Tables of Stone or Brass, but engraven on the Heart and Conscience
of man, agreeable to St. Paul's Character of the Gentiles, which having not the
Law, are a Law to themselves, Romans 2.14, 15.
and do show the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences
also bearing Witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing
one another.

'Twill also follow, that the great Author of this Law must have reserved some
Rewards and Punishments to secure men's obedience to it: It being below the
wisdom of any temporal Prince, to send his Statutes and Decrees abroad without
such Motives to enforce their observance: And if these Rewards and Punishments
are not immediately dispensed (as I shall after show) there must be another
time set apart for that work of Justice.

2. That secret joy, which good men find upon the doing a virtuous Act, is a
kind of earnest and anticipation of a future Reward; and that considence they
have when they suffer upon the Score of Piety and Religion, argues an
expectation of it. Let the good man reflect upon the frame of his mind, when he
has been doing his duty, and he will find every thing there calm and peaceable.

There is something within him, that whispers the soft Eulogies, of a well done
good and faithful Servant, and entitles him to the Approbation of his great
Master.

Besides, when he suffers upon the account of doing well, what is it, that
bears up his Spirit, but an assurance, that he suffers in a good Cause, and a
reasonable hope, that he shall be rewarded for it? This was the true Foundation
of that undaunted Courage, with which the first Christians outbrav'd the Malice
of their bloodiest Persecutors. This was it that made so many Champions for
Religion, both before and under the Law, of whose Sufferings the Author to the
Hebrews gives us this Catalogue: Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
They had Trials of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and
Imprisonments: They were Stoned, they were Sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented; (of whom the World was not worthy) the wandered
in Deserts and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth: And under all these
the great encouragement was the Recompense of the Reward. V. 26.


But perhaps these are Instances, that will not be allowed me here, and the
Courage of these men will be resolved, not into any natural expectance of a
future Reward, but into some special Promise and supernatural Revelation: If
so, there are memorable Examples of this kind to be found, even amongst
Heathens themselves.

To instance in one for all, the excellent Socrates, who suffered upon a
fundamental Point, Plato in Phaed.
the Unity of God; with how much bravery of Spirit did he demean himself, and
what admirable Discourses dropped from him during his Imprisonment? And lastly,
with how much boldness did he look the ghastly Messenger in the face? And what
was his support? (...): He encouraged himself in hopes of going into another
World, where he should meet with better Company than any was upon Earth: And
though his assurances of it were none of the best, (...), yet they were such as
bore up all that load, that was charged upon them.

But then,

3. What Account can be given of that great uneasiness of mind, which waits
upon the Commission of a gross sin especially, though never so private? How
comes the man to be so strangely altered on the sudden? His Color changes, his
Blood retires, his Spirits flagg, his Tongue falters, his Joints tremble, his
Pulse grows uncertain, fear, astonishment, and despair hang upon his Brow: And
all this is but the outward Scene and Representation of what is acted within:
There Is a Court of Judicature erected, the guilty Person's arrested by his own
thoughts, and summoned to the Bar: Arraigned, Convicted, Condemned, and only
Reprieved for a more solemn Trial at the great day: Though he walk abroad,
he is but a more enlarged sort of Prisoner, the Guards of Conscience attend him
in all places, and it is as impossible for him to make his escape from them as
to flee from himself: And now what is the meaning of all this? Only the man's
bound over to some other Tribunal to answer for those Actions which the
Temporal L^^ts here take no notice of

If it be said, that these fears are only the Fruits of bad education, and some
unsound Principles instilled into our tender Age; How comes it about, that
those Persons, who pretend t^^^ he greatest share of knowledge, who dare
undertake to argue down the Belief of a God and Providence, and a future State,
have not been able by all their endeavors to raze out these Notions, and to
conquer the fears arising from them? We see it is an ordinary thing for men upon
due Experience, and better Information, to throw off those Opinions, which were
forced upon them in their Infancy. But this of a Judgment to come, sticks
closer to a man than his skin; the Atheist himself cannot be rid on it, though
he tries all ways to baffle his Conscience, and extinguish his natural
Sentiments about it: And (if we may believe the credible Reports of former
times) no men in the World have been more assaulted with the fears of another
Life, than they who pretend to render that and every thing else in Religion,
the Subjects of their Mirth and Drollery. This was the case of Epicurus, who
when he had banished (as he thought) a Providence out of the World, yet he
could not by all his Arguments banish a Conscience out of himself; that was
resolved to keep home, and to punish the Offender for his other bold and
impious undertakings.

But perhaps the fear, that waits upon the Commission of some Acts, relates
only to temporal Punishments, and the Sword of the Secular Power: It may be,
that is it which puts the man out of order; if so, how comes it about, that such
Acts of Impiety as are not punishable in an^ Civil Court, and such as are done
with that secrecy, as not to fall under public Cognizance should have the same
effect? Or whence it is, that those Persons which are too big for the Law,
should be as much tormented with the fears of this kind, as any that are within
the verge of it? Kings and Emperors have been under this Discipline, if there
be any truth in Sacred or Profane Authors. This was the case of Belshazzar
even in the height of his jollity, Dan. 5.3, 6.
while the Hand was writing his doom upon the Wall, his Conscience was reading
over the Indictment within; and then no wonder if his Countenance was changed,
and his Thoughts troubled him; if his Joints were loosed, and his Knees smote
against each other. Thus it fared likewise with the Roman Governor, while St.
Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, Act. 24.25.
and Judgment to come: was it strange that Foelix should tremble at the latter
part of the Sermon, who knew himself so defective in all the rest? After the
Historian had taken notice of that odd Epistle, Tacit. Annal. lib. 6. Quid
scribam vobis Patres Conscripti, aut quomodo scribam, aut quid omnino non
scribam hoc tempore, dii me deaeque pejus perdant, quam quotidie perire sentio,
si scio ubi de hac re plura.
Tiberius the Emperor wrote to the Senate; He adds by way of remark, that if
the Breasts of Tyrants could be looked into, there would be found there,
Laniatus and Ictus, the wounds of a disordered Spirit.

And the Author of the Lives of the Caesar's, Satton. in vita Calig. Parag. 5.
in his account of Caligula could observe, that he who was so great a Contemner
of the Divine Power, was glad upon every thunderclap to take Sanctuary under
his Bed: His Courage then failed him, when the Arrows of the Almighty went
abroad: And the sense of his guilt made him apt to think, that himself was the
Person that was aimed at: 'Twere needless to reckon up more Examples of this
kind, since we have reason enough to believe, that there has not been one
Atheist in the World, but one tin e or other has been assaulted by that
clamorous thing within; and especially at the approaches of his dying hour,
when his Conscience has set all his sins in order before him, and put him in
mind of that Wise, Powerful, and Just God, before whom he is summoned to appear.

It has been well observed, that the hopes and fears, I am now speaking of, are
not to be found in any other Creature here below besides man. The Brutes have
no sad presages, no encouraging assurances of another Life, because wholly
unconcerned in the Retributions of it: Man is the only thing in this lower
World that is affected with them, and there is no man, that is free from them:
Which is a strong Evidence to me, that the Author of our Being has left these
impressions upon us, and that on purpose to guide us by them to the knowledge
of a future State.

For it cannot be, that a God of infinite Wisdom should put any thing into our
frame, which should stand for nothing: Or that a God of infinite Goodness
should fix any Principles there, that were perfect Cheats and Delusions, which
he must have done, if there be nothing in another World to verify those hopes
and fears, which all men whatsoever are liable to in this.

To conclude this Argument. Seeing this Doctrine has been universally received
by men in all Ages, and in all parts of the World; and whatever has so, may
well be thought to have some Foundation at least in the very nature of man:
Seeing there are such Notions there, as will dispose any man in the right use
of his Faculties, to the belief of an after-reckoning: Seeing these cannot in
reason be imagined to have any other Cause, than what our Being has, the Maker
of all things: since it could not consist with his Wisdom or Goodness, to leave
us under the Conduct of any vain, useless, or delusory Principles, it must
follow, that these are certain Intimations of a Judgment to come, engraven upon
the mind of every man, that the very Heathens might have some notice of it, and
be left inexcusable, if their Lives and Actions were not governed according to
the belief of it.

2. My second Argument for the proof of a future Judgment, is drawn from the
Notion of a God and Providence.

He that has but so much Religion left him, as to own the first Articles of his
Creed, may be able with very little Logic, to argue himself into a Belief of
this great Truth.

God being the Fountain of all possible Perfections, these things must be
included in the Notion of him: Infinite Knowledge: Exact Justice: Irresistible
Power: To which if we add the usual Methods of his Providence, relating to good
and evil men in this Life, we shall then have a full demonstration of this
Principle, that there is another time to be expected, when all men shall
receive according to their doings.

1. As to his Knowledge, we are sure it cannot be other than infinite: Any
thing less than that would be so far from being a Perfection, that it would be
a real blemish, and disparagement to the Divine Nature: And if infinite, then
(as to what concerns our present enquiry) it must extend to the Persons of all
men, from the beginning to the end of the World; and to all the Actions of all
men, not only such as are more open and public, but such also as are more
secret and reserved. Whatever Arts are made use of by us to conceal our faults
from the Knowledge of man, it is impossible, that they should have the same
effect upon God, whose all-seeing Eye pierces through the fairest Veils and
closest Disguises of Hypocrisy: From which it will follow, that all those Acts
of sin, which escape the Censure of the Magistrate, because either not within
his Sphere (as all internal acts of the mind) or done with that secrecy, that
there is no Evidence of them, must unavoidably fall under the notice and
observation of God.

2. As to his Justice: We cannot frame such a notion of an infinite Justice, as
to think, that it will either justify the Wicked, or condemn the Righteous.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? was a Question, that carried its
own Answer along with it, and would as soon have been resolved by a sober
Heathen, as a Patriarch.

We cannot think, that the great Lawgiver should be so much of Epicurus's
mind, as never to cast an eye upon his Creatures below, or if he did, be only
an idle spectator of what is done here. We cannot think, that he should have no
concern for those Laws he has given us, or look down with as much favor on
them that defy his Authority, and trample upon his Commands, as on them that
are careful to preserve a due regard to both. Rewards and Punishments are the
usual Sanctions of all Laws: And then sure those that proceed from the highest
Authority in the World, and are of greatest consequence to the Peace and
Welfare of mankind (as the Laws of God certainly are) must have the strongest
Motives to bind them upon us: The offer of the greatest Reward to the Obedient;
and the threatening of the severest Penalty to the flubborn; that Religion may
be our Interest as well as Duty, and Vice the contradiction of both. And we may
be further assured, that such Rewards and Punishments will one time or other be
apportion'd to the Actions of all men, seeing they are in the hands of the most
exact Justice to dispense them. 'Twere below an infinite Wisdom, to make Laws
without such enforcements, and repugnant to his Justice, not to execute them.

3. As to his Power: If that be equal with his Knowledge and Justice, as
certainly it is, can he want Methods to reward the Righteous, or punish the
Wicked? Whatever strength there is in the Creatures, it is but a Derivation from
him as the Fountain, and it is under his Government, as all other things, and
directed to such ends as he thinks fit. The Angels are but (...), Spirits that
minister to his Will as well as our wants, and all inferior Beings can have no
more honorable an employment, than to be sent on his Errand; and if these are
at his beck, he cannot want either Instruments of Wrath to avenge himself on
the Wicked, or ways of mercy for the recompense of the good.

But now if we consider the usual Course of his Providence, we cannot say, that
Rewards and Punishments are exactly suited to men's actions here: Temporal
Happiness is not always the Portion of those that reverence a Deity, nor are
Temporal Judgments the certain Fate of such as contemn it: It Is true, there
have been in all Ages some extraordinary instances of a Divine Vengeance
pursuing the Wicked, and as remarkable Examples of the worldly success and
prosperity of good men, God having been pleased by these ways, to give
sufficient Testimony of an over ruling Providence in all the Centuries of the
World And you perhaps these Instances are but rare, to wha^ ^ight be produced
to the contrary. How often do we see Meekness oppressed, and Innocence
slandered, and Virtue trampled in the dust, while Pride, Ambition and Tyranny
have been lifted up to the highest Pinacles of Honor? As if Satan had cleared
his pretended Claim to all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of all
sublunary things, and none were to be advanced there but his own Favorites.
How often do we see the unjust and the fraudulent to rise upon the Ruins of the
honest plain-dealing man, as if that famous Maxim, which has done more
mischief in the World, than any other Position besides, concerning Dominion
being founded in Grace, were perfectly turned the other way, and wickedness
were the only support of a good Title? Good men are no more exempt from the
common miseries of humane Life, than they are from death it self, the close of
all: Nay there are some Cases, wherein these are the only Sufferers, witness
the Primitive times, when to be Atheist or Idolater, a worshipper of false
Gods, or none at all, was Protection enough against the force of the Laws, but
to be a Christian was such a Crime, as all the murdering Engines Hell could
invent, or the malice of a persecuting Age could set on work, were not severe
enough to punish.

These are some of the Objections that puzzled the Heathens, and upon this score
the Belief of a Providence suffered so much in the World, some utterly denying
it, others allowing it under various Reflections, though the wisest of them
inclined to the safest side: And no wonder, since the Royal Prophet himself was
offended at it. After he had observed, that the Proud, the Violent, the Atheist
and the Blasphemer were the thriving men, he was just reeling into Infidelity:
Ps. 73.13, 14.
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, for
all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.

But whatever impressions the uncertainty of Gods Proceedings here might make
upon the Spirits of some men, it is an undeniable Evidence of a Judgment to
come: For if there be a Supreme Power presiding over all things, and that Power
be furnished with infinite Knowledge, and so in a condition to observe the
Actions of all men good and bad, with infinite Justice, and so resolved to
render to all according to their doings, with infinite strength, and so fitted
for the Execution of that Justice, it must follow, that Virtue will certainly
be rewarded, and Vice as certainly punished; and if that be not exactly done
here, 'twill also follow, that there is another time appointed to review the
Lives and Actions of all men, and to give them an answerable Recompense; to
vindicate the Honor of Gods Justice and Providence, and to make all men see,
that to be Religious, was to be wise; to be Atheistical and Profane, the
greatest madness in the World.

If it be said, that Virtue is its own Reward, and Vice its own Punishment, in
respect of that Peace of Conscience which follows the one, and that stinging
remorse which attends the other, and consequently that there is no need of a
future reckoning for the Vindication of Divine Providence: I answer, That
notwithstanding these moral advantages or disadvantages ensuing upon men's
actions, there is some Physical good and evil to be expected from all
Lawgivers, without which they could not be just: Would it be a sufficient
discharge of a Governors Duty, to let the blackest Crimes go unpunished,
because the Actors of them have been already tormented by some revengeful
guilt? Or to suffer his best Subjects to lie under the most unjust Oppressions,
because they feel within themselves the happy Testimonies of their own
innocence? Besides, what reward is there to him, who offers his Life a
Sacrifice for his Religion, supposing no future State? Is the pleasure of
Martyrdom so great, to outweigh the pain of it? Is there any thing so desirable
in Racks and Prisons, the Cross and the Flames, to make a sober man quit all
his Interests in the pursuit of? If we had only hopes in this Life, were not we
Christians of all men the most miserable? And what Punishment is there to him,
who has by a constant Custom of sinning, so baffled his Conscience, that like
(...) disobliged Friend it grows weary of rebuking him, and suffers him to
follow his own Inclinations without any check? Add to this, that the
satisfaction arising from doing good, and the regret which follows the
contrary, are not sufficient Motives to keep men within due bounds, and
therefore could never be intended by the great Lawgiver, as the whole of that
Recompense which good and bad men are to expect from him: Were there no other
inducements here below, to secure Obedience to humane Laws, and to preserve a
due Reverence to the Authors of them, Princes would be but the more glittering
pieces of State-Pageantry, and their Laws as empty as the Breath that uttered
them: No man would think himself any farther obliged to obey, than than
Obedience could be reconciled to his Interest; Nor would the Divine Laws speed
much better: These would be slighted as much as the other, notwithstanding the
greater Majesty of their Author, whenever men's worldly Advantages might tempt
them to it: There must be therefore some greater incitement to Virtue, than
Peace of mind, and some stronger discouragement to Vice than the disquiet of
it: There must be a far more exceeding weight of glory to draw down the
Balance against all the hardships good men meet with upon the score of
Religion: And some more intolerable load of misery to keep bad men in awe, and
innocent, though against their wills. And if these are not dispensed here,
there must be another day for that work, a day, wherein we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ; which brings me to the last thing, viz.

3. That this Doctrine is infinitely certain upon the grounds of Scripture, and
especially, the Gospel, whose great Privilege it is, to have brought Life and
Immortality to Light: This is the great Instrument of our Belief; moral
Arguments may make it reasonable, this makes it our duty to assent, and turns
humane Persuasion into Divine Faith: Here we shall find the solemn Assize of
the great Day painted to the Life, and all necessary Circumstances relating to
it punctually set down. Time and Place, indeed, God has reserved as secrets to
himself, because not so fit for us to be acquainted with, and so has barred us
out from all nice and curious speculations about them, but every thing else is
allowed us.

Would you know the Preparations leading to that great appearance of Men and
Angels? They are infinitely beyond all Pomp and Ceremony on Earth: For the Sun
shall be darkened, Mitth. 24.29.
and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven,
and the Powers of the Heavens shall be shaken: And the Angels shall be sent
abroad, V. 31.
with the great noise of a Trumpet, to summon all men to their last Reckoning.

Would you know the Person of the Judge? It Is that Son of man, to whom the
Father has committed all Judgment: A Person of that Wisdom, Act. 17.31.
that he sees into the Merits of every Cause; of that Justice, that he cannot
determine wrongfully; and of that Authority, that from his Sentence there lies
no appeal.

Would you know the Persons that are to appear before him? They are the Quick
and Dead, all that shall be found alive upon Earth at his coming, and all that
shall be cloistered up in the dark Regions of the Grave: At the great
Jail-delivery, Rev. 20.13.
the Sea shall render up the dead that are in it, and Death and Hell shall
bring their Prisoners to the Bar, that they may all receive according to their
doings.

Would you know the Proceedings of that Court? They Will be according to Law, the
natural Law written in our Hearts, and those Positive Laws, the Scripture has
superadded to them.

Would you know the Evidence to be produced upon every man? Rev. 20.12.
It Is the Testimony of Conscience, which keeps a perfect Diurnal of our several
Actions, from the beginning to the end of our days: An Evidence, we have no
reason to except against, because part of our selves, and so will never give in
a wrong or partial Information: An Evidence, the Judge will never question,
because it is his Minister in every one of us, one part of whose Office it is to
keep a true Record of all our doings.

Would you know the Conclusion of all? The Righteous shall go into Life
Eternal, Mat. 25 46.
where they cannot fail of the most ravishing Delights, being possessed of him,
in whose presence are Joys, and at whose right hand are Pleasures, and that
for evermore: The wicked shall go into a place of Torment provided for the
Devil and his Angels, where the Atheist will meet with late and sad assurances
of a Divine Power and Justice; the Blasphemer will find what it is to affront
the Author of his Being; the Profane and Dissolute will see, what an unhappy
choice they made, when they left the rugged ways of Virtue, and pitched upon
the broad Paths of Sin, pleasant indeed to the Eye, and easy to the Traveller,
but ending at last in a Precipice of unavoidable ruin.

Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord, let me persuade all that hear me
this day, so to live, that they may be thought worthy to escape them: Whether
Persons in Authority, that they remembering whose Ministers they are, and to
whom they are accountable for that Power entrusted to them, may be careful to
employ it to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the maintenance of
true Religion and Virtue: Or other subordinate Persons, that they having
always before their Eyes the great Account, may endeavor to live in a due
Reverence to the Majesty on High, and a quiet subjection to his Vicegerent on
Earth, and in common honesty among themselves.

In a word, that we may all of us, both in Church and State act suitable to the
Rules of our holy Profession, to the many weighty Obligations our Religion has
laid upon us, and especially to the Belief of this great Article of a Judgment
to come, that so we may finish our Course with joy, and then receive the Fruit
of our doings, even a Crown of Glory.

God of his infinite mercy grant, for his Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all Honor and Glory, World
without end.
FINIS.

