A BRIEF DEFENSE OF Infant Baptism.

WITH AN APPENDIX, Wherein is showed, that it is not necessary that Baptism
should be administered by Dipping.

By JOHN OLLYFFE, Rector of Almer in the County of Dorset.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard: and are to be sold by John Woolfryes, Bookseller in Blandford.
MDCXCIV.

TO THE READER.
THE following Treatise is the Substance of some Discourses which I delivered
in my Parish Church, for the Establishment of my Hearers in the present Truth:
which I now publish, partly for their sakes, to put them in remembrance
thereof, and that they may have something still by them to oppose to the
restless and importunate Insinuations of those that are of the other
Persuasion: And partly, in hopes that it may be of some Use to others, that
either need or desire Settlement or Information herein. If it shall fall into
the Hands of any of those of the other way, I only desire this of them, that
they will endeavor to read it with as little Prejudice as they can: For I can
assure them, that I have no mind either to deceive, or to be deceived. But as I
have learned, and am persuaded of the Truth, as it is in Jesus; so do I desire
to speak, and preach, and live. If any shall think that this had been a
Province fitter for others to have undertaken, I shall readily join with them
in the same Opinion. But yet I shall add this, that I have some Reasons to
incline me to do as I have done: And I doubt not but to find Excuse at least,
among all those that are truly candid, and sincere Lovers of Truth. If thou
receivest, Reader, any Benefit thereby, give God the Praise, and pray for me.

JOHN OLLYFFE.

A Brief Defense of Infant Baptism.
THAT I may proceed with all imaginable Plainness in this Matter, I shall first
set down what I have to say by way of Argument for it, which I shall endeavor
to clear up and confirm; and then I shall afterward endeavor to remove the
Objections that are most commonly made, and most usually raised against it.

To begin with the first: That which I have to say by way of Argument in the
Defense of Infant Baptism, is this, viz.

They that are to be owned and received by us, as the Children of God, and his
Peculiar and Vovenant People, and Members of the Church of Christ, to whom the
promised Blessings of the Covenant do belong, ought to be baptized:

But there are some young Children or Infants, who are to be received and owned
by us, as the Children of God, and his Peculiar and Vovenant People, and
Members of the Church of Christ, to whom the promised Blessings of the Covenant
do belong:

Therefore there are some young Children or Infants who ought to be baptized.

For the clearing and confirming of this Argument, two things are to be made
out and confirmed.

I. That there are some young Children or Infants, who are to be owned and
received by us, as the Children of God, and his Peculiar and Vovenant People,
and Members of the Church of Christ, to whom the promised Blessings of the
Covenant do belong. II. That being to be so owned and received by us, they are
therefore to be baptized.
I. That there are some young Children or Infants, who are to be owned and
received by us, as the Children of God, and his Peculiar and Vovenant People,
and Members of the Church of Christ, to whom the promised Blessings of the
Covenant do belong.

For there are some young Children or Infants that have been so received, and
reckoned, and declared by God himself, for his peculiar and Vovenant People,
and Children, and Members of his Church; and this their Church Membership and
Relation to him, as his peculiar Vovenant People and Children, has never been
abolished or taken away by him, but is still continued, and rather confirmed to
some young Children or Infants still: therefore there are some young Children
or Infants that are likewise still to be owned and received by us for such.

1. I say, that some young Children or Infants have been owned and received,
and declared by God, for his Children, and Members of his Church, and have been
reckoned and taken by him into the Number of his peculiar Vovenant People.

By the Church of God I mean that Body and Number of Persons which God has
chosen, and called, and set apart in a separate manner from the rest of the
World, to be brought nearer to himself in Relation, and learning the true
Religion, in order to the partaking of those spiritual and eternal Blessings by
Christ, which he has promised in the Covenant of Grace.

And they that are of the Number of, or do belong to this Body or Society of
Persons, I call the Members of the Church, as being Parts or Members of this
Body.

And these being such as God is pleased to take into a nearer and more
appropriate Relation to himself, than he does others, are therefore also called
his Children or Vovenant People; and he is their Father and Head. So that to be
a Child of God, and Member of his Church, and of the Number of his peculiar
Vovenant People, is all one; that is, does denote one and the same Person.

Now, I say, that some young Children or Infants have been of the Number of
those that have been thus chosen and taken by God into this near Relation to
himself, as his Vovenant People and Children, so that he has had a peculiar
and separate Respect to them, as well as to their Parents and other adult
Persons, in another and distinguishing manner from what he has had to the
other People of the World; and this his Respect to them he has openly declared
and testified, that others in like manner might accordingly own and receive
them. Such has been the Grace and Goodness of God, to choose and take the
Infants of such as he has called into a near Covenant Relation to himself,
that they might partake also of the Blessings of the same Covenant.

It is to be observed from the Beginning, that the Seed of those who have been
God's Vovenant People, have been likewise owned and taken by God into Covenant
with him; and so have continued in that State, till by their own Wickedness and
Apostasy they have fallen from it, and so have been discovenanted or rejected
by God. And the whole Current and Harmony of Scripture shows, that ever since
there was a visible Church on Earth, Propositions concerning the Subject of
Baptism, etc. by a Synod at Boston, p. 12.
the Children thereof have by the Lord's Appointment been a Part thereof. Eve,
the Mother of all Living, has a Promise made, Genesis 3.15. not only of Christ
the Head-seed, but through him also of a Church-seed, to proceed from her in a
continued lineal Succession, which should continually be at visible Enmity
with, and stand at a Distance, and be separated from the Seed of the Serpent.
Under that Promise made to Eve and her Seed, the Children of Adam are born, and
are a part of the Church in Adam's Family. Even Cain was so, Genesis 4.1, 3. till
cast out from the Presence of God therein, for the Murder of his Brother, ver.
14. being now manifestly one of the Seed of the Serpent, 1 John 3.12. and so
becoming the Father of a wicked unchurch'd Race. But then God appointed unto
Eve another, viz. Seth, in whom to continue the Line of her Church-seed, Genesis
4.25. And how it did continue in his Seed in their Generations, is showed in
Genesis 5. And hence the Children of the Church are called the Sons of God, (which
is as much as Members of the visible Church) in contradistinction to the
Daughters of Men, the Progeny of unchurched Cain, Genesis 6.2. Again; if righteous
Noah be taken into the Ark, (then the only preserving Place of the Church, to
which the Apostle applies Baptism, as having a mystical Relation to it) his
Children also are taken in with him, Genesis 7.1. though one of them, viz. Ham,
after proved degenerate and wicked; but till he so appears, he is continued in
the Church with his Brethren. And as the Race of Ham, or his Son Canaan (Parent
and Children) are cursed, Genesis 9.25, 26, 27. So likewise Shem (Parent and
Children) is blessed, and continued in the Place of Blessing, the Church. As
Japhet also, or Japhet's Posterity (still Parent and Children) shall in time be
brought in. And the holy Line, mentioned in Genesis 11, 10 -- 26. shows how the
Church continued in the Seed of Shem, from him unto Abraham.

And when that Race grew degenerate, (as it is plain they did, Josh. 24.2.)
then God called Abraham out of his Country, and from his Kindred, and
established his Covenant with him, which still took in Parents and Children,
Genesis 17.7. And here was a Token or Sign ordered for the Confirmation of this
Covenant, which was to be applied to Children in their Infant-state, even at
eight Days old, ver. 10, 11, 12. Here indeed we have the first mention of
Infants as owned by God, and taken into Covenant by him, together with their
Parents; as here we read of the first Token of the Covenant that was to be
applied to them. But the same is also to be held of those that are spoken of
before, though it be not particularly mentioned, because there was no Sign then
appointed for the confirming of this Covenant to them as there now was. Yet
forasmuch as they are reckoned still to be, and continue in their Church State,
till by their Wickedness or Apostasy they were cut off, and are reckoned to be
in this Church State, as coming and proceeding from such Parents as God had
chosen and called into so near a Relation to himself, they are therefore to be
reckoned even from their Infancy to have been in this State.

And as for the Covenant made with Abraham and his Infant Seed, I shall briefly
observe, for the preventing of Objections, that it was the same which in the
Gospel is called the new Covenant. And Circumcision, which was ordered to be
the Token or Seal of it, and to be applied to the same Infant Seed, was a Token
and Seal of it, as such; as appears by the Terms which in the main Article of
it are the same with those which are reckoned by the Apostle to belong to the
New Covenant: Genesis 17.7.
For I will establish, says God, my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee, in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy Seed after thee. This is the main Point. And thus that which
the Apostle calls the New Covenant, runs in the same Terms in that main Article
likewise, Heb. 8.10. I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.
And the Psalmist has taught us, that this imports and signifies much more
than any kind of outward Prosperity whatsoever, or all together. For howsoever
a People may be looked upon happy, that is in such a Case; yet this is the
chief Point, the all in all, the Sum of that Blessedness that can belong to a
People; Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that People whose God is the Lord. And our
Savior has deduced the Promise of the Resurrection it self, from God's being
the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, Matthew. 22. So that consequently
the Resurrection of all others, to whom God is a God, may be concluded from the
same Covenant Relation likewise. So that the Covenant made with Abraham and his
Seed, in their Generations, was the Gospel Covenant for the main Articles of
it, and contained in it the greatest Gospel-Blessings. The Promise and Giving
of Canaan was but an Appendix or Appurtenance to it, and not the principal
thing respected; but under that a better Country was intended: And so Abraham
understood it, for he looked for a City which had a Foundation, whose Builder
and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. But he sojourned in that earthly Land of Promise,
as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the
Heirs with him of the same Promise, ver. 9. So that neither he himself, nor
many others to whom the Promise was made, did enjoy the earthly Canaan for an
Inheritance. But they confessed themselves, that they were Strangers and
Pilgrims upon Earth; and they desired a better Country, that is, an heavenly,
ver. 13, 16. which they did no doubt, by virtue of the Promise, as they
understood it. And this the Apostle looks upon a verifying and making good that
Relation that God engaged himself in to them; for therefore, says he, he was
not ashamed to be called their God, because he had prepared for them a City,
ver. 16. So that Abraham had that which the Apostle calls the Promise of
eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no
more of Promise; but now, the Apostle says, God gave it to Abraham by Promise,
Gal. 3.18. So that the Promise of eternal Life and Happiness in Heaven, is
contained in the Covenant that God made with Abraham and his Seed; together
with those that were born in his House, Genesis 17.12, 13.
who yet had never any share with his Seed in the Land of Canaan, as an
Inheritance, at all; nor was the Messiah to descend from their Loins. And what
was this then less than the Gospel Covenant?

And it the Promise of eternal Life was contained in this Covenant, then we may
be sure it contained also the Promise of Justification or Remission of Sin. And
if so, then what was it less than the Gospel Covenant? And thus the Apostle
assures us likewise it was, and that the Gospel was preached unto Abraham, Gal.
3.8. For the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through
Faith, preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed. It is true, this Clause which the Apostle quotes, is not in
Genesis 17. wherein the Covenant is made with Abraham and his Seed, which we have
insisted upon; but in Genesis 12.3. and elsewhere. But yet this Promise which the
Apostle deduceth from these Words, must likewise be contained in this Covenant;
and so those Words must be also a Part of it, though spoken at another time:
Because Circumcision, that was the Token of this Covenant, was a Seal to
Abraham of this Promise; Romans 4.11. And he received the Sign of Circumcision, a
Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised:
Which must be founded on the Promise; so that that Promise likewise belongs to
this Covenant, and therefore is sealed by it. And this Covenant, as delivered
to Abraham, the Apostle tells us also, was confirmed in Christ, Gal. 3.17. and
therefore can be no other than the Gospel or New Covenant. Yea, and the Promise
of divine Assistance for fulfilling the Conditions of the Covenant, was
contained also in the same Covenant with Abraham: For so we find it was
understood by the Church formerly; Mic. 7.19, 20. He will subdue our
Iniquities; and thou will cast their Sins into the Depth of the Sea. Thou will
perform the Truth unto Jacob, and the Mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn
to our Fathers from the Days of old. Which must needs have Respect to God's
Oath and Covenant with Abraham. And so also the Apostle reckons, that God's
sending his Son Christ to bless them, and to turn them from their Iniquities,
was a great Instance of the Accomplishment of the Covenant that God made with
Abraham, Acts 3.25, 26. For the great Design of God in this Covenant at first,
(as appears by the first Call that was given him, Genesis 12.1.) was to separate
him and his Family and Seed, from the rest of the Nations, which were fallen
into the vilest Idolatry, and to preserve Religion and the Worship of the true
God in his Family. And the Promise of the Messiah, in whom the Covenant is
founded, had this Design in it; Luke 1.72, 73, 74, 75. The Oath that he swear
to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out
of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve him without Fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the Days of our Life. So that the Covenant with
Abraham was a Church Covenant, and contained in it all the Terms and Design
that belonged to such a Covenant, and was made with all the Family of Abraham,
in which his Infant Seed was also comprehended, and were to partake of the
Promises and Privileges that appertained to it: It belonged to all his Family
in the external Dispensation of it; and none were excluded from the Benefits of
it, that did not exclude themselves by their own actual Unbelief and
Disobedience to the Terms of it. And Circumcision was a Seal of it to all with
whom it was made, as the visible Church of God, and to the Infant Seed of
Abraham, as Parts or Members thereof. For Sacraments or Signs are not appointed
to the Church Invisible, (for who shall judge then to whom they are to be
administered?) but to the Church as Visible. Thus having cleared up the Nature
of the Abrahamical Covenant which God made with him and his Seed, even in their
Infant-state, I shall now go forward, and shall observe how God has shown the
same gracious Respects to Infants, in the Progress of his Dispensations toward
the Jewish People.

And thus we find afterward, that the whole Body of the Jewish People in
Jacob's Line, amongst whom Children also were contained, are collectively
styled by God himself his Son; Exodus 4.22, 23. Say unto Pharaoh, Thus says the
Lord, Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn: And I say unto thee, Let my Son go,
that he may serve me. Thus God speaks of them before they were formed into a
Political Commonwealth, only because he had chosen and called them out of the
Nations, to be a peculiar People to himself. And in this Appellation their
little ones were comprehended, as appears, because they were of the Number of
those that were to go also: For Pharaoh would have let the Men of Israel go,
but not their little ones, Exodus 10.10. But we will go, says Moses, with our
Young and with our Old, ver. 9. So that the whole Body of Israel, including
little ones also, was God's Son; for God had chosen and called all the Seed of
Israel to be his Vovenant People.

And therefore thus also Moses afterward enters and engages all into Covenant
with God, one as well as another, taking in the little ones likewise: Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12, 13. Ye stand this Day all of you before the Lord your God; your
Captains of your Tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the Men of
Israel; your little ones, your Wives, and the Stranger that is in thy Camp,
from the Hewer of thy Wood to the Drawer of thy Water; that thou should enter
into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which the Lord thy God
makes with thee this Day; that he may establish thee to Day for a People unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as
he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. So that
this was but the renewing of the Abrahamical Covenant with the People, as
appears by the latter Clause of it running in the same Terms, for the
Accomplishment of the Promise and Oath made to Abraham and his Seed. Deuteronomy. 3^.^.
And in the next Chapter the Grace signified by Circumcision, is there promised
to Parents and Children, to enable them to perform the Terms of it: And it
being promised to both, it imports that the Covenant, which Circumcision
sealed, belongs to both: For the Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and
the Heart of thy Seed.

And after this again, even when the People were fallen off also to the Worship
of other Gods, yet retaining still the Acknowledgment of the God of Israel,
(though they joined others with him) God challenges and owns their Children
for his; Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. Thou have taken thy Sons and thy Daughters, whom thou
have born unto me, and these have thou sacrificed: thou have slain my Children,
and delivered them, to cause them to pass through the Fire.

Now it was upon this Account, viz. by virtue of God's choosing and calling the
Seed of Abraham, and separating them from the rest of the World to the Knowledge
and Worship of the true God, that they were styled his peculiar People and
Children, and not upon a mere Political Account, or upon the Account of other
carnal and temporal Respects: For in this manner we find Moses speaking to
them; Deuteronomy 14.1, 2. Ye are the Children of the Lord your God, and therefore are
not to follow or comport with the Customs and Practices of the Heathen: For
thou art an holy People unto the Lord thy God; and the Lord has chosen thee to
be a peculiar People to himself, above all the Nations that are upon the Earth.
And so chap. 7.6. For thou art an holy People unto the Lord thy God; the Lord
thy God has chosen thee to be a special People unto himself, above all the
People that are upon the Face of the Earth. Which are the Appellations that are
likewise given to the Members of the Christian Church in the
New-Testament-Times by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth
the Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light; which in time past were not a People, but are now the People of God. So
that these Titles being given to the Jews, import their like Covenent-relation
to God in a Church-sense, as they here belong to Christians in the same Sense.

Now the whole Body of the People of the Jews being called by God into this
holy Covenant Relation to himself, are styled by the Prophet, Israel his
called, Isa. 48.12. And as thus he chose and called them, so he chose their
Seed after them, Deuteronomy. 4.37. The great Design of this Election and Call of God,
being to preserve pure Religion among them, which was extinguished in the rest
of the World; and therefore he took and adopted their Seed likewise to be as a
Nursery to the Vineyard of the Church. And therefore, as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 78.5.
He established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Fathers that they should make known unto their Children: that the
Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be born, who
should arise and declare them to their Children. According to Deuteronomy. 4.9. and
chap. 6.7. the great Care and Design of God being to raise up an holy People to
himself among the Nations, to preserve the true Religion in the World; and it
being of great Import to this, to have Children and little ones well educated
and brought up in the Belief, and Owning, and Worship of the true God, he
therefore ordered them a visible Admission, or Partnership, and Membership in
his Church, that they might be also owned and received as his People and
Children, that their Parents and Guardians might be obliged to take the more
Care of their Education for the promoting the great End of the Covenant. Thus
the Adoption, and the Promises, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 9.4.
pertained to all Israel, amongst whom the young Children also were included,
they being all God's Chosen and Called, and so continued till they were
rejected and cut off, through their own actual Apostasy and Rebellion against
God; and then they were discovenanted, both they and the Children of those that
were guilty of this Apostasy. But for others that continue still in a professed
Adhesion to God, and persist in the Profession of the true Religion, this their
Church State, and Covenant Relation to God, as his peculiar People, is
continued still, both to them and their Seed, and was never taken off from
either unto this Day: Which is the second thing I am now to come to show.

2. I say, that this Adoption of the Infants or young Children of his
Vovenant People, into this near Relation to himself, as the Children of God,
and so their Partnership or Membership in the visible Church of God, was never
abolished or taken away by God, but is still continued, and rather confirmed.

For how indeed can it be imagined or supposed, that now in the
Gospel-Administration, which is an Administration wherein there is a greater
Extensiveness and Enlargement of God's gracious Respect to the World, in
respect of spiritual Privileges and Mercies, than there was before, that his
Goodness and gracious Respect should be more restrained, in reference to
Infants and young Children, than it was formerly? For the Infants of Jews and
Proselytes formerly were taken into the Number of God's Vovenant People and
Children, and had the Seal of the Covenant applied to them for the Confirmation
thereof. And if this Privilege and Benefit should be now taken away, their
Condition after Christ would be worse than before, and they should be Losers by
the World's becoming Christian. This one would think none should ever imagine.
Neither, when we speak thus, do we complain against God, but against them, who
would exclude whom the Lord has not excluded.

For we do not find that ever God has repented of any Grace or Favor, that he
has showed to the little ones of his Vovenant People, in respect of their
being to be reckoned of his Church. But in those Prophecies which we find in
the Old Testament concerning the future Discoveries and Declarations of his
Favor, we find that there was the same Grace and Kindness foretold and
intended to be shown to the Children as to the Parents. So that in this manner
the Church should be propagated from Parents to Children, and so the true
Religion preserved in this way, as the most proper means for it. Thus in that
Prophecy which has relation to the Calling of the Jews in Gospel Times, as
appears by the Apostle's quoting some part of it to that purpose, Romans 11.26.
viz. Isa. 59.20. As for me, this is my Covenant, says the Lord; My Spirit that
is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out
of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy
Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. And so in like manner
it is a Prophecy of Gospel times; Isa. 44.3. I will pour Water upon him that is
thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed,
and my Blessing upon thy Offspring: And they shall spring up as among the
Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse. And Ezekiel. 47.22. The Tenor and
Intendment of God's Favor to little ones is always the same as it ever was, in
reference to their being of his Church and People; nor is there the least
Indication of any Design of the Dissolution or Alteration thereof.

For first, for clearing of this Matter, let us consider, that when God first
showed this Respect to Abraham and his Infant Seed, to take them near to
himself as his peculiar People, God's Election and Call of them to this
peculiar Covenant Relation to himself, as his Children and People, and so his
giving them a Partnership or Membership in the Abrahamical Church, was not with
Respect merely to their Proceeding by natural Generation from Abraham, but from
Abraham as a Believer and Worshipper of the true God; there being a fair
Prospect upon this Account, that Abraham would take care to train them up and
educate them in the true Religion. Whereas the Children of Heathens, where
there was no such Prospect, had no such regard shown them by God. This seems to
be much upon God's Heart, as we may express it, in his treating with Abraham,
and giving of him those great Promises, Genesis 18.19. For I know him, that he
will command his Children and his Household after him; and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he has spoken of him. It was with Abraham, as a Believer
and true Worshipper of God, that God treated and made this Covenant, and so
took his Children also into that near Relation to himself, when the Children of
the Heathen were neglected, as their Fathers were. And so this Blessing, in
like manner, was to be continued to his Children and Posterity, to successive
Generations, as Believers, or Children of Abraham's Faith, still continuing to
believe in, and worship the God of Abraham. In this Respect God promised to be
their God, and the God of their Seed, upon condition that they keep his
Covenant and his Statutes. But if they refused to do so, they were to be cut
off, and to have no Part or Inheritance in God or the Blessings of his
Covenant, neither they nor their Seed. But on the other side, they that were
not of the natural Seed of Abraham, but were bought with his Money, or were
born of Gentile Parents, in his House, they being brought into this near
Capacity to be instructed and brought up in the true Religion, were likewise to
share in this Covenant, and to partake of the same spiritual Privileges with
the natural Seed of Abraham, and were to be reckoned and numbered with them as
the People and Children of God; and God promised to be their God likewise, as
well as of Abraham's natural Seed. And so also afterward, all those Gentiles
that were at any time proselyted and brought over to the Faith and Religion of
Abraham, were with their Children admitted to the same Privileges. So that it
appears, that it was with Abraham only as the Father of the Faithful, and
consequently with all those that are the Children of the Faith of Abraham was
this Covenant made, that God would be their God, and the God of their Seed,
though they are not Abraham's Children or Seed according to the Flesh by
natural Generation. The Covenant was made with Abraham and all his spiritual
Seed, and not with his Seed merely according to the Flesh.

The Apostle has cleared this to us, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Not as though the Word or
Promise of God has taken none effect, because he will reject and cast off
those that were descended of Abraham for their Unbelief and rejecting the
Gospel, to whom you think that the Promises were made: For they are not all the
true Israel of God, to whom the Promise belongs, which are descended of Israel;
neither because they are the Seed of Abraham by natural Generation only, are
they all Children of God's Covenant: but in Israel shall thy Seed be called and
chosen, to whom the Covenant and Promises shall belong. That is; All they which
are the Children of the Flesh, as proceeding from Abraham only by natural
Generation, these, merely as such, are not the Children of God that he reckons
amongst his Vovenant People, but the Children of the Promise only, as Isaac
was, (that is, that are Abraham's spiritual Seed) are accounted for the Seed
that God took into that near Covenant Relation to himself; and these he will
own still in the same Capacity as ever, both they and their Seed. And therefore
the Covenant of God to Abraham and his Seed, stands firm against all the vain
Objections of the unbelieving Jews. From this Discourse of the Apostle then it
follows, that it was not with the Nation of the Jews only, as being that
natural Seed of Abraham, that the Covenant was made, and that the Adoption did
belong to them and to their Seed; but it was, and is a Benefit belonging to all
Believers, as the Children of Abraham's Faith, that did or ever should join
themselves to the People of the God of Abraham. All such are still an holy and
peculiar People to God, both they and their Seed, till they cut themselves off
by their own actual Rebellion and Apostasy, as the Jews did in our Savior's
and the Apostles times, by their not receiving him that was sent of God. The
same spiritual Privileges do belong to all believing Parents, and to their Seed
and Family, or those they become Guardians or Tutors to, to bring them up in
the true Religion, now in the Gospel-Ministration, as did belong to the
Children and Family of Jewish Believers formerly.

This appears yet further by the Apostle's Discourse, Acts 2.39. For the
Promise, or Covenant (for these are Terms that do mutually infer each other) is
unto you and to your Children, Compare Acts 3.25. Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, 29. Romans
4.16. Heb. 6.17.
upon your Faith; and also to all the Gentiles that are afar off: Yet even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, to the receiving and owning of the same
Faith, and so consequently to their Children and Seed also, as well as unto
your selves. Here the old Grant to them and to their Seed is declared to be
continued, and so by Consequence to the Offspring of all those that should
hereafter believe.

But this Matter may be rendered yet more clear from several Passages in the
Apostle's Discourse in Romans 11. for it appears there by the Apostle, that the
Jewish and Christian Church are radically and fundamentally the same Church,
the same Stock and Root; and the same Terms and Conditions of Church Membership
or Dischurching do belong to both. Nor is the Christian Church any new
Constitution distinct from the Jewish, nor is the way of Church Membership in
it any other now than what was before. The Laws are indeed altered in many
things, but in this Matter there is no Alteration, there is the same Covenant,
and the same Church, and the Church is still constituted of Abraham's spiritual
Seed, as it was before; so that the same Church Members also keep their Place
in it as there did then. And consequently as Infants, or little Children of
Believers, were Members of it before their Parents became Christian; so they
continue to be still after they became so: And so the Children of all Gentile
Believers for the future. For consider, ver. 17. the believing Gentiles are but
grafted in amongst them, and with them partake of the same spiritual
Privileges: and ver. 20. it is because of Unbelief, that any of the Branches
are broken off: and they that believe are always in it. So that the Church is
the same, and still remains without any Discontinuance or Dissolution of it,
only Unbelievers are broken off from it, and others that believe are grafted in
their room. It is the same Olive Tree, or the same Church still, but some of
the Branches are broken off, sc. the unbelieving Jews; and others, that is,
believing Gentiles, are grafted in: And none are shut out but only through
Unbelief. They that believe continue still of it; and so also their Children,
in the same manner as before, they having no Unbelief of their own, by which
they should be broken off, nor yet any imputed to them from their Parents, they
being Believers. And ver. 29. For the Gifts and Calling of God are without
Repentance. He will never repent of any Favor that he has ever by Promise
conferred upon any of Abraham's spiritual Seed, or their Children. So that when
those Jews that are now Unbelievers, and so cast out and broken off from the
Church, shall at length be brought to believe, they shall then partake of the
same Privileges and Benefits as they have ever done that continued in it, and
as they should have done if they had so continued, and so also their Children:
For ver. 16. If the first Fruits be holy, the Lump is also holy; and if the
Root be holy, so are the Branches. Where the Parents are in Covenant, or
Church Members, so are the Children, till they sall off through their own
Unbelief. So that here is no Alteration, diminishing or repealing of any
Church-privilege or Promise that ever did belong to the rightful Subjects of it.

And this is further clear from the Apostle, Romans 15.8, 9. Now I say, that
Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God, to
confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers, and not to lessen or abolish them:
And so also a Savior, through his Mercy to the Gentiles, that the Gentiles
might glorify God also for his Mercy, because partaking of the same Benefits
and Privileges that were confirmed unto the Jews. So that, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2.12, 13. they that were Aliens from the spiritual Commonwealth of
Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, and were sometime afar
off, are now in Christ Jesus made nigh. And Ephesians. 3.6. the Gentiles are now
Fellow-heirs, and of the same Body with the believing Jews, and Partakers with
them of God's Promise in Christ by the Gospel. So that belonging to the same
Church, and partaking of the same spiritual Promises and Privileges, those that
did belong to Jews, and the Jewish Church and their Seed formerly, do likewise
belong to Christian Believers now, and so in the same Extent and Latitude to
their Children also, there being no Alteration made in that respect more than
in any other. As the spiritual Seed of Abraham were ever holy, and God's
Vovenant People, so were their Children; and so it is now still with Gentile
Believers and their Seed.

To this purpose speaks the Apostle concerning the Seed of Gentile Believers,
even where but one of the Parents are such; 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving
Husband is sanctified by, or to the Wife; and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by, or to the Husband that believes, to the holy Use of such an one
in the Sight of God, (for to the Pure all things are pure) else were your
Children common or unclean, as the rest of the World are now in their
Heathenism, to whom therefore God has no Regard as to his Children; but now
are they holy relatively, and of a Religious Consideration before God, as
separated and dedicated to God, and so are part of his Vovenant People. It is
not a Matrimonial Holiness that the Apostle intends, or that the Children of
Believers are therefore holy, because they are no Bastards; for the Children of
Pagans are as well holy in that Respect, (that were born in Wedlock) though the
Parents neither of them were Believers. So that this Interpretation would make
the Apostle speak impertinently and untruly. It is a relative or federal
Holiness therefore that the Apostle must intend; and by this he shows, that
such Children are of an holy Consideration in the Sight of God, and are of the
Number of his Holy and Vovenant People.

So that we can no where find any Dissolution or Discontinuance of the
Church Membership of Infants under the Gospel, which they once had; but it
still remains the same as ever, and is rather more confirmed: It being the same
Church, Covenant, spiritual Privileges, and Members as ever; and these still
keeping by the same Grant, the same Place and standing in the Church as ever
they did. And as this therefore was once the Privilege of Infants of Abraham's
spiritual Seed, to stand in an holy Relation to God, as his peculiar
Vovenant People and Children; so it is still. But for a further Confirmation
and clearing of this Matter, we may observe also from our Savior some such
Indications of the same Respect had to them, in choosing, calling, and
esteeming of them as ever.

To this purpose we find, Mark 10.14. They brought young Children to him, that
he should touch them, (or as St. Matthew has it, Matthew. 19.13. that he should
put his Hands on them and pray) and his Disciples rebuked those that brought
them: but when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer
the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of God: And he took them up in his Arms, put his Hands upon them, and
blessed them. All which shows Christ's good Will and Respect, and dear
Affection to them, as Members of his Church, and part of his Kingdom. And which
way soever the Kingdom of God, or the Kingdom of Heaven (as St. Matthew
expresses it) be here taken, which they are said to be of, either for Heaven
it self, or the Church on Earth, their Church Membership in the visible Church
will hence be concludable. For if it be meant of the Church on Earth, (as that
Phrase is often taken for that) then it is the next and immediate Sense of the
Words of our Savior. Or if it be to be understood of Heaven properly, yet then
it will follow from it: For if the Kingdom of Heaven receive them, and they
have a Portion in that, the visible Church on Earth then may not exclude them:
For none are of the Kingdom of Heaven above, that are not first of the Church
on Earth: Acts 2.47. There were daily added to the Church such as should be
saved. And our Savior's Reason here, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven,
shows, that he meant this of such Infants, properly taken, and not only of
Men like them in Humility: For that could be no Reason why they should be
brought unto him, because others that are like them in Humility are of the
Kingdom of Heaven, unless they are also of the same. And his pronouncing this
as a Reason why they should be brought unto him, and his embracing them also in
his Arms, and his laying his Hands upon them and blessing them, shows a great
deal more Respect to them than what was required for the healing them of any
bodily Distemper; for neither was this Reason, nor all that Demonstration of
Affection to them needful for that: when if they had not been of the Kingdom of
Heaven, they should no doubt have been healed by him, if they had been brought
unto him; and when they had been brought, a Word or a Touch would have effected
that, without so much embracing, praying, and blessing them. So that what can
we conclude from all this, but a more than ordinary Respect of our Savior to
little Children, as to his Members and Proselytes of his Kingdom; and that for
this Cause he kindly treated them thus, as if on purpose, because he foresaw
how little Regard would be had to them in this latter Age of the Church?

And thus again, Luke 9.48. He took a Child and set him by him, and said unto
them, Whosoever shall receive this (this individual Child) in my Name,
receives me. But how can little Children be received in Christ's Name, if they
belong not visibly to him and to his Church? If they must be received in
Christ's Name, so that whosoever receives them may be said to receive Christ,
they must be spiritually related to Christ, as those are that are of his Body,
the Church. And this receiving them into the Church must needs be the most
proper way of receiving them in Christ's Name, as those that are spiritually
related to him.

By all this that has been said we may plainly see the like Continuance of
God's gracious Respect to little ones, as ever, without the least Abatement or
Alteration thereof; so that being once chosen and called, and esteemed by God
as his Children and peculiar People, as well as any of the Adult are, and so
being reckoned therefore as Members of his Church, and as having a share in the
Covenant, as others, we must conclude from these continued Indications of his
Favor and Kindness to them, that they stand in the same Relation to him still,
and accordingly we are so to own and receive them.

II. I now proceed to that which was in the second Place proposed for the
strengthening of our Argument, viz. that Infants or little Children being to be
owned and reckoned by us as the Children of God, and Members of the Church of
Christ, to whom the promised Blessings of the Covenant belong, they are
therefore to be baptized. The Rightfulness and Reasonableness of which
Consequence I shall now endeavor to make out.

1. From the Nature and Ends of Baptism, which is appointed by Christ to be the
Ordinance of Initiation into the visible Church, to be the Badg and Character
of the Children of God, and of the Members of the Church of Christ, and for a
solemn Dedication and Engagement of them to the Service of God, and for the
sealing of the promised Blessings to them. Now God having shown such Respect to
little Children, as to choose and call them out from the rest of the World, and
to take them into his own Family, and to reckon them amongst his People,
together with others that are adult, may we not reasonably infer, that when
there is a visible Badg or Ceremony appointed by God, by which others that are
called by him should be known and distinguished from the other People of the
World, and have the Promises of the Covenant confirmed to them, that little
Children partaking of the same Favor and Respect with them, should have the
same visible Badg or Character likewise put upon them, that is put upon the
rest of his People, that they may be visibly owned and received as his, in like
manner with them; and so there may be Care taken about their Education in the
true Religion, and in the Knowledge and Service of that God, to whom they are so
solemnly dedicated? Baptism being a Mark or Rite appointed by God to this
purpose, surely it is highly reasonable that Infants should be baptized as well
as others, seeing they are chosen and called to this Dignity and Privilege of
being the Sons of God, and Members of his Church, and Partakers of the
Blessings of the Covenant as well as others are.

Our Savior appointed, that all his Disciples should be baptized in his Name,
and thereby solemnly dedicated and engaged to his Service; Mat. 28. Go,
disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. Now to be
Disciples or Children of God, or of the Church of Christ, are all Terms that
are equivalent in Signification, or do mutually infer one another. And
therefore by the foregoing Discourse Children will come into the Number.

And when our Savior has appointed little Children to be brought unto him,
and to be received in his Name, Matthew. 19.13, 14. How can we otherwise conclude
but they ought to be baptized, when Baptism is a sacred Rite appointed by him
for such a solemn receiving of those that do belong to him?

And how can we better express our selves than in the Words of the Office of
Baptism, that seeing our Savior has shown such Affection to them, as to
embrace them in his Arms, and to lay his Hands upon them and bless them, doubt
ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he favorably allows this
charitable Work of ours in bringing Infants to his holy Baptism? And if when
they are brought to us to this End, we should refuse to receive them, we might
well look for his Displeasure and Censure, as those were rebuked and blamed by
him then that would have kept them from him.

The Apostle argues with the Jews, to bring them to be baptized, that the
Promise or Covenant did belong to them, and to their Children, and so also to
the Gentiles that were then afar off, when they should be called, and so
consequently to their Children: Acts 2.38, 39. Repent, says he, of your
crucifying the Lord of Life, which must needs include or suppose a precedent
Faith in him; repent for Remission of this and other Sins, which shall then be
forgiven to you, and be baptized for the sealing of this Remission; and ye
shall partake of the Gift of the Holy Ghost likewise for the farther
sanctifying of you, and the enabling you to perform what ye are called unto:
For you are God's Vovenant People, to whom the Promise is made, and to your
Children likewise; and believing Gentiles, when they shall be called into the
Church, and their Children also: And then they shall partake of your
Privileges; so that as you are baptized for the Sealing and Confirmation of
them, so shall your Children too. This Argument to them, both with respect to
themselves and little ones, must needs be of great Force. Repentance must go
before in them that had thus grievously sinned before they could partake of the
Benefits of the Covenant, or have them sealed to them in Baptism; but upon
their Repentance and Faith the Covenant is confirmed to them, and to their
Children likewise, and so by Baptism might be sealed to them and to their
Children also.

2. The Justice and Reasonableness of the Baptism of Infants upon the Grounds
aforesaid, may appear from the Analogy of the Administration of Circumcision to
little Infants among the Jews (which was the first Token of the Covenant that
God appointed) upon the very same Ground and Consideration, as may be seen,
Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after
thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy Seed after thee. And ver. 9. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore,
thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. And then follows the
Institution of Circumcision; ver. 10, 11. And ye shall circumcise the Flesh of
your Foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant between me and you: And
he that is eight Days old shall be circumcised among you. Because God had
chosen them, and taken them into Covenant, and into a near Relation to himself,
as his peculiar People, so that they were thereby separated and distinguished
from all the rest of the World, therefore he appointed that they should have
Circumcision, as a Badg and Mark of this Call and Distinction, and for a Seal
and Token of the Covenant between God and them. And when God has continued the
same Respect and Privilege to some Children now under the Gospel, and has
appointed the Ordinance of Baptism to the same Ends and Purpose which all those
that are his People and called Ones should partake of, is it not reasonable to
infer, that Children who are called to the same Privileges, and have the same
Respect from God, should partake of Baptism, as the common visible Badg of his
chosen and peculiar People, and as a Mark and Seal of God's Covenant now, as
they did formerly partake of Circumcision, which was the Token of the Covenant
for the time being? If Baptism be of the same Use, and to the same purpose now
as Circumcision was then, is it not a reasonable Conclusion, that Infants
should now partake of Baptism to the same end to which formerly they did
partake of Circumcision, there being the same Ground for this as there was for
that, viz. God's Election of them into the Number of his peculiar People, and
his Covenant with them?

For the Covenant, as we have heard, is the same for Substance, both then and
now; and there are the same Parties in the Covenant now as there were then, as
has been proved likewise; and Baptism is the Seal of that Covenant now which
Circumcision was a Seal of then; and the Church is radically and fundamentally
the same both then and now; and Circumcision then, and Baptism now, the
Sacraments of Initiation into it. And what though the Token be changed, as long
as the Covenant, Church, Church Members and Parties in it are the same, and
little Children are of the Number, it is reasonable sure that they should
partake of that Mark and Token now, which is for Initiation into the visible
Church, and for Confirmation of the Covennant, as they did of that which was
then so for the time being; and so, that now Children should be baptized, as
then they were circumcised, there being the same Ground and Reason for the
Administration of either of the Signs, viz. their being alike Church Members,
and Parties in the same Covenant.

The Apostle tells us, that Circumcision was a Seal on God's Part of spiritual
Benefits to Abraham, and so consequently to all Believers then; Romans 4.11. And
he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith,
which he had being yet uncircumcised; that he might be the Father of all them
that believe, though they be not circumcised, that Righteousness might be
imputed to them also. Just as Baptism is now of the Remission of Sin, and the
taking off the Guilt of Death which cleaved to it, and so of Justification,
which is the same in other Terms with that Righteousness of Faith then imputed
to Abraham.

And so Circumcision was a Sign, on the Part of Abraham and his Seed, of their
Covenanting and Obligation to be the Lord's, and to labor after the
Circumcision of the Heart, as Baptism is now a Mark or Seal of Obligation to
the Service of Christ. Hence Moses exhorts the People, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise
the Foreskin of your Hearts, and be no more stiffnecked; as being that which
was signified by the outward Circumcision. And so the Prophet Jeremy, in like
manner, chap. 4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the
Foreskins of your Hearts: This being that, it seems, which the Circumcision in
the Flesh obliged them to. And for this God's Assistance is promised them in
the same Form of Words; Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy Heart,
and the Heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God, etc. So that Circumcision
then was for circumcising them to the Lord, that is, for the Dedication of them
to his Service, as their God: Just as Baptism is now, for the like solemn
Dedication and Consecration of them to the Service of Christ, and to depart
from all the Filthiness of Sin, and a Sign of Obligation and Engagement of
Christians to the same. Yea the Apostle shows, that as the chief thing in
Baptism now is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the washing of
Regeneration, which is signified thereby; so the Circumcision of the Heart was
the principal thing intended in Circumcision, without which that in the outward
Ceremony was of no Value; Romans 2.28. For he is not a Jew, that God will accept
as the Seed of believing Abraham, which is one outwardly only in the Ceremony;
neither is that the acceptable Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh; but
he is a Jew, accepted by God as his Peculiar, which is one inwardly: and
Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
Praise is not of Men, but of God, who searches the Heart.

In a word, the Apostle intimates to us elsewhere, that Baptism is now in all
these Respects of the same Use and Significancy with Circumcision then; so that
what Circumcision was then, Baptism is now; and there is no need of
Circumcision now to these Ends, because Baptism does fully serve to the same
Ends, and therefore is enough without Circumcision. This is the Apostle's
Argument; Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Ye are complete in him, that is, Christ: In whom
also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting
off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ; and have
the outward Seal thereof too in Baptism, being buried with him in Baptism. So
that you have no need now of the literal Circumcision, having both the inward
Grace of it by Christ, and the outward Seal of it likewise in Baptism, as ye
had before in the literal Circumcision. And therefore hereupon the believing
Jews might well be satisfied with the Abolishment of Circumcision, when Baptism
served to the same Ends and Purposes. And it is no wonder therefore that the
Jewish Believers that had a right Understanding of things, acquiesced in having
the Ordinance of Baptism to the same Use as Circumcision was; and so that they
made no Debate nor Quarrel about the want of an outward Sign to their Seed,
because they took Baptism to be of that Use that Circumcision was before, which
their Children likewise might to the same purpose partake of. Whereas when
Circumcision was abolished, which they were so fond of, because it was the
Token of the Covenant between God and them, if Baptism had not come in its
stead to the same purpose, it would have been a wonder if we should not have
heard of many Heats about the Loss of it. And these things being thus stated,
sure Infants can be no more incapable of Baptism now than they were of
Circumcision formerly, but will have a just and reasonable Right to it.

I acknowledge yet that there were some Ends in the Appointment and
Administration of Circumcision then, which are not common to Baptism now, viz.
in respect of the Messiah, who was promised and foreshewn thereby to come into
the World by Generation: And so that was a Mark made upon that Part of the Body
which is inservient to Generation; and to that end was put upon that People, of
whom the Messiah was to be born, to keep them as a separate People from all
other Nations, that the Pedigree of the Messiah might be the more distinctly
and securely preserved. And this end of Circumcision ceasing when the Messiah
appeared, therefore in that Respect it expired of it self. But yet neither of
these, nor both together, were the chief or only Ends of Circumcision, as is
clear from what has been discoursed; but we see likewise, it had a spiritual
Significancy and Design to other Purposes; and in these Respects was of the
same Use then, as Baptism is now; and so they both have the same Subjects, viz.
Infants as well as grown Persons. And we are informed, that that was abolished
because of the Burdensomness of it, Acts 15.10. And Baptism now succeeds in the
room, as a new Institution to the same spiritual Ends, and as a more gentle
Administration, which would be less offensive and troublesome to the Gentile
World than that was or would have been.

And as for the Apostle's Disputes against Circumcision, it was in the Sense
that the Jews took it, as Circumcision in the Letter only, and as a Part of the
Political Law of Moses, into which it was afterward incorporated, and from the
keeping of which they expected to be justified before God, and that with
respect chiefly to its outward Performances. Against this Sense and Abuse of it
the Apostle discourses, not as it was a Sign or Token of the Abrahamical
Covenant, and as it was in its true End a Seal of the Gospel-Promises contained
in it. So that the Apostle's Dispute against it in the corrupt Jewish Sense,
does no way enervate or invalidate that which we have said concerning the true
End and principal Design of it. And therefore it no way destroys the Parallel
or Analogy between Baptism and that, in Respects of the Ends mentioned.

As for that Objection which some have made against the Usefulness of Baptism,
in comparison of Circumcision, to Children, because Baptism is but a transient
Sign, and leaves no significant Impression behind it, to instruct Persons what
was done to them in their Infancy; whereas Circumcision is an abiding Character
in their Flesh, which they themselves may take notice of. I answer, that in
Respect of the Significancy of either it is all one; for Children did no more
understand at that Age what was done to them, or why, than Infants do now: And
when they come of Age, they could not know how that Mark came, or what that was
intended for, but by the Instruction of others, whom they must be beholden to
to know the meaning of it. And so Children may know now as well by the
Information of others, and by the Practice thereof that they see in the Church,
both that they were baptized, though they perceive no Mark of it remaining; and
also the End that they were baptized for. And therefore where is the Difference?

As for the Objection, that Males only were ordered by God to bear the Token of
the Covenant then; it does not therefore follow by this Analogy, that they only
should bear it now, because now there was no such Restraint laid upon the
Administration, but it was to belong to both Males and Females; and yet the
Analogy in other Respects holds good.

3. That Infants being now, as well as formerly, owned and called by God into a
near Relation to himself, as his Children, and Members of his Church, should
therefore be baptized, may be argued from this, that we read of those that were
baptized upon this very Ground or Consideration, viz. of their being chosen and
called by God to be his People and Children, and of the Church of Christ, and
partaking of his spiritual Gifts and Blessings. So that if little Children do
appear to be as much respected and called by him to the same Privileges as
those grown Persons that were so, and thereupon were baptized: then little
Children, for the same Reason, ought to be baptized also, there being the very
same Reason and Ground for Baptism in them as there was in grown Persons.

Now, I say, we shall find, that the Reason and Ground upon which the Apostles
did administer Baptism to grown Persons, was the Evidence they had of their
being taken and brought by God into the Number of his own peculiar
Vovenant People and Children, and so partaking of his Blessings: For whenever
they perceived any the least Token or Evidence of this, they presently
administered Baptism to them, as it were for a visible Eurollment and Admittance
of them, being so owned by God, into the Number of his People, and to have a
Partnership in his visible Church.

Thus when the Holy Ghost was poured in an extraordinary manner upon Cornelius
and his Company, this being a Token of God's having alike Respect to them, as
to the believing Jews; Acts 10.46. Then answered Peter, Can any one forbid
Water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost,
as well as we? By this he perceived, that he was not to look upon them any
longer common or unclean, as others were that God had not shown such a
distinguishing Respect unto; and therefore he thought Baptism could not be
denied unto them, whom he saw that God had by this Mark separated and set apart
for himself. And in his Apology which he makes for himself about that Matter,
he expresses it in more general Terms, chap. 11.17. For as much as God has
given them the like Gift, as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, what was I that I could withstand God? Intimating to us, that they
partaking of the same distinguishing Gift of God as others did, whereby God's
singular Respect to them did appear, that they should partake of the same
Ordinance of Baptism likewise with them; without requiring of them any further
Confession of their Faith in Christ, that being it self a sufficient Evidence,
that God had chosen them into the Number of his People; and therefore it was
reasonably concluded, without any more ado, that they also should partake of
the same Badg and Seal with them. And yet the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which was
then poured on them, visibly consisted but in some extraordinary Endowments of
speaking with Tongues, and thereby magnifying God, which the Apostle acquiesced
in as an Evidence of God's distinguishing Respect to them. Now forasmuch as it
also appears, though by other Evidence, as has been shown, that little
Children in like manner owned and respected by God, as it appears that these
were by this that was extraordinary; How can any Man then forbid Water, that
they should not be baptized? For seeing God has given them the like Gift, as
he did unto them who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, what are we that we
should withstand God? If the Evidence of their Sonship and Relation to God be
as certain and firm, though not in the same way, why should they not then
likewise be baptized for the like Reason?

For the Gift of the Spirit it self was for their Admission or Entrance into
the Body or Church of Christ, as the Apostle shows; 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body. And this being a Means and Evidence
of their Admission into this Body, to this therefore the Baptism with Water was
annexed, as the visible Token or Ceremony thereof on the Churches Part. Now
forasmuch as it appears, that Children are likewise of the Body of Christ,
there is same Reason that they should be baptized as well as those that were
so, who were by the Spirit baptized into this Body.

For it appears likewise by the Apostle elsewhere, that Baptism does belong in
common to all those that are of Christ's Body, and upon that very Account of
their being so: so that as it does belong to others that are of this Body, so
likewise it does to Infants, as being of the same Body; Ephesians. 4.4. For there is
one Body, the one holy Catholic Church of Christ; one Spirit, that by his
Gifts and Graces moves, quickens and rules it; one heavenly Inheritance, to the
Hope of which they are called that are of this Body; one Lord that governs it;
one Doctrine of Faith for the Rule of it; one Baptism for a sacramental
Admission into it; one God and Father of all, who owns and receives the Members
thereof as his Children. So that all that are of the Body of Christ (as
Children are) are to be baptized, that they may be owned to be of the Number,
and may be distinguished from all others that are not. So that as in the Old
Testament, those within the Church are expressed by Circumcised, and those
without by the Uncircumcised: See Romans 3.30. chapter 15.8. Ephesians. 2.11. Judge. 14.3.
Jer. 9.25, 26.
so by Proportion those within the Church, as some Infants are, are to be
baptized, and so to be reckoned of the Church; and they who are not baptized,
to be accounted as out of the Church.

Even Faith it self is to bring us into the Relation of the Children of God, as
the Apostle intimates, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all the Children of God by Faith
in Christ Jesus. So that we may reasonably conclude, that it was upon their
Faith, as the Means and Evidence of their Adoption, that Believers themselves
were baptized: And forasmuch as it appears, that little Children do partake of
the Divine Adoption without Faith, as well as if they had Faith, there is the
same Reasons for their being baptized, as there was for the baptizing of those
that did partake of the Adoption through Faith: the Reason why they were
baptized being their partaking of the Adoption, of which Faith was the Means
and Evidence; and Baptism it self was but for the sealing of this Adoption to
them, and of the Covenant that God makes with them, and for the visible
intitling them to the Blessings thereof.

4. There may at least a probable Argument be taken for the Baptism of Infants,
from the Account that we have of the baptizing of whole Households, of all those
that are spoken of by Name, that are said to have had Households, when once the
Master or Mistress of the Family were baptized: When the Master or Mistress of
the Family were called and owned by God, and brought into the Church, it seems
that all theirs were received likewise, who did not reject the Counsel of God
against themselves, as Infants could not do.

It has been observed, Mr. W. A's Address to the N. C.
that there are but nine in Scripture mentioned by Name to have been baptized
besides our Savior, viz. Simon Magus, the Eunuch, St. Paul, Cornelius, Lydia,
the Jailor, Crispus, Gaius, and Stephanus. Among these, whether Simon Magus had
any Household is not mentioned: But the Eunuch was baptized on the Road, and so
had none there: St. Paul was not married, and it is certain had no Household
where he was baptized: And whether Gaius had any when he was baptized is
uncertain: But for all the other five, whose Households are mentioned, it is
likewise expressed, or may be clearly inferred, that their Households were
baptized with them: As Cornelius and his Household, Acts 10. Lydia and her
Household, Acts 16.15. The Jailor and his, ver. 33. Crispus and his, Acts 18.8.
And the Household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. For God is pleased to have Respect
to the Houses of those that are his, and do believe in him; as our Savior said
of Zaccheus, Luke 19.9. This Day is Salvation come to this House. For the Seed
of the Righteous is blessed, Psalm. 37.26.

Now the baptizing of whole Households mu^^ needs import the baptizing of all
within the House: And it is strange, if in a^l these Households there should be
no Person under Years of Consent to testify or profess their own Faith. And if
when Abraham and his Household were circumcised his Infants were likewise
comprehended; so when the Households of all those Persons are mentioned to be
baptized, that are said to have had Households, why should we not as well
conclude that their Infants likewise were baptized with them, as being
comprehended in the same Appellation?

And this need not seem strange, when we find how quickly and readily the
Apostles baptized many Persons upon the smallest Expression of Consent to the
Faith of Christ, being willing to give all kind of Encouragement to their
coming into the Church of Christ, when they had the least probable Hope of
their future persisting therein; as we see in their baptizing Simon Magus, and
the Jailor and his Household the same Night, and many thousands the same Day
that they first expressed their Consent. And therefore, I say, it need not seem
strange that they should baptize the Infants likewise, or those that were under
the Age of Consent in these Households, seeing they might conceive as fair a
Probability of their embracing and professing the Christian Religion
afterward, by Means of their Parents Care in their Education, because they use
to bring up their Children in the same Religion they profess themselves.

But for a further Confirmation of this, and of the Use and Practice of
Infant Baptism in the time of our Savior and the Apostles, there are two
considerable Points of History taken notice of by the Learned, which will give
a great Light to this Matter.

1st. The first is that which is taken out of the most authentic Records of
the Jewish Writings, Vid. Dr. Walker's Plea for Infant Baptism, chapter 30.
and those Authors that are of greatest Note among them: And it is this, that
even before our Savior's time it was the manner among the Jews to admit
Proselytes into the Jewish Church by three things, Circumcision, Dr. Hammond 's
Defense, Sect. 3.
Sacrifice, and Baptism, whatever were the Ground or Original of this Custom,
which is differently accounted for by learned Men: And Baptism was thought so
necessary, that though one was circumcised, yet if he were not baptized, he was
not a true Proselyte; which is delivered as a known Axiom by the Gemara
Babylonica. But if it were a Woman, she must only be baptized, and bring a
Sacrifice: And there being a Statute among the Jews, Numb. 15.15. That one
Ordinance should be both for themselves, and for the Stranger, or Proselyte,
that sojourned among them; therefore what they did to their Proselytes, they
did also to themselves. So that as the Jewish Talmud and Gemara say, the
Israelites themselves do not enter into Covenant but by these three things,
Circumcision, Baptism and Peace Offering. And as this was the Manner and Custom
of admitting grown Proselytes, so also their Infant-Children, if they had any,
were baptized likewise, as the Gemara says. And so also Maimonides, an Author
of great Account among the Jews, upon condition that there was Security given
for the Education of the Children in the Jewish Religion, that when they came
to Age they might not renounce it. And this their Reception of Proselytes in
this way, was esteemed among them to be a kind of Regeneration or new Birth,
they being brought and engaged thereby to a new Religion and a new Life.

Now if this be true, as the Jewish Records do inform us, and we have no Reason
to doubt of, it may seem less strange that the Baptism of John Baptist was so
readily complied with, and that there was no more Noise and Stir about it; it
being in it self, for the Matter of it, no new Institution, but what had been
usual and customary among them: and John's Design in it being only to
administer it to a different End than before, that is, as a Ceremony
demonstrative of, and engaging to Repentance, against the appearance of the
Kingdom of Messiah; whereas it was before observed only as an initiating Rite
into the Jewish Religion and Covenant.

And when our Savior came and baptized, or ordered his Disciples so to do, it
was only a Translation of an old Custom to a new End, viz. to admit and receive
Persons into the Religion of Messiah, who was now come: And it being no more
for the Matter of it than what was done before, it seems probable that our
Savior grounded his Reproof of Nicodemus upon his Ignorance of the Custom of
his own Nation, and the Sense that they put upon it; John 3.10. Art thou a
Master of Israel, and know not these things? For that might well seem very
strange, that a Person of his Condition should not understand the Phrase of his
own Nation, in which our Savior spoke to him, though including also more in it
when he said, Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

But to conclude this, it having been, as we see, the manner before among the
Jews, to receive the Infants of Proselytes, as well as grown Persons, into the
Jewish Church, by this Ceremony of Baptism, unless our Savior had prohibited
the same to them; how could the Apostles otherwise understand, but when our
Savior ordered them by this Ceremony to admit Christian Proselytes, they
should likewise receive their Infants, as the manner had been before in the
Reception of Jewish Proselytes among themselves? Which makes it therefore
highly credible, that it was accordingly done; For there is no manner of
Appearance of any Alteration made by our Savior, as to the Subjects, but only
as to the End and Intent of this Practice or Custom, which only gave it the
Form of a new Institution.

Nor need it seem at all strange that our Savior should adopt this Custom and
Practice into the Christian Religion and Church, that was before in use in the
Jewish, it being not in the least our Savior's Design to depart as far as he
could from the Jewish Church, but rather to build as much as might be with
their Materials in the Erection of the Christian, and to conform it after their
old Platform; as has been shown by learned Men in several Instances, and
particularly in the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper it self. Case of
Infant Baptism, London, 1683. Mede 's 1st Book, Disc. 51. 2d Book, c. 4.
And as for those Rites and Customs of the Jews which were abolished, the
Reason thereof was not merely because they were Jewish, but either because they
were such as were fulfilled in Christ and Christianity, as the Antitype and
Substance of them; or because they were such as were inconsistent with the
Nature of a manly, free and universal Church, such as Christ intended his
should be, in opposition to the Legal Pedagogy and servile Nature of the
Jewish, and for the breaking down the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile,
and the abolishing the Enmity of Ordinances, that the Religion of Christ might
become more passable among the Gentile World, to whom if it had been clogged
with so many Ordinances as in the Jewish Church, it would have become odious
and ridiculous. Dr. Hammond's Defense of Infant Baptism, p. 25, 26.
Nor yet can it be said e're the more, that the Baptism of John, or of our
Savior, was of Man, and not from Heaven, because it was a Jewish Custom;
forasmuch as the Design of it is now changed, and the Form of a new Institution
is stamped upon the old Matter.

2dly. Another considerable Point of History relating to this Matter, is with
respect to the times after our Savior and the Apostles, and that is this; It
appears by the ancient Writings of the Fathers of the Christian Church in the
next Ages, that Infant Baptism was then the general Practice of the Christian
Church, and was so observed, as being derived from the Apostles themselves: And
there is no one Writer in any of the first Ages of the Christian Church, that
does at all oppose it as unlawful, or speak of it as a novel Practice; but even
those that argue against it as less convenient, yet do allow by their
Discourse, that it was then the general Practice of the Church, and do not in
the least contradict that, or bring any Argument against it, as being a new
Invention, which if it had been, had above all other Arguments been most proper
for their Purpose.

Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, Adversus Haeres. l. 2. c. 39. p. 192.
who lived in the next Age after the Apostles, says, that Christ came to save
all by himself; Omnes inquam, says he, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum,
Infantes, and parvulos and pueros, and juvenes and seniores: All, I say, that
are born again to God, Infants, and little ones, and Boys, and young Men and
old. Which Phrase of being born again to God, in the Sacred and Ecclesiastical
Dialect, is but another Expression for Baptism, or does certainly imply or
infer it.

Tertullian, who lived but a very little after the said Irenaeus, from a
certain Notion that he had of the Use and Ends of Baptism, thought indeed that
it was more convenient to defer it: And so he was likewise for the deferring of
the Baptism of Virgins till they were married; and gives the same Reason for
both, For fear lest they should be tempted to renounce Christ after Baptism:
But then by other Passages it appears, Lib. de Bapt. c. 18.
that he thought the Baptism of Infants, as well as of others, absolutely
necessary in case of extreme Danger. And by his very Arguments against the
Practice of Infant Baptism in ordinary Cases, he shows, that it was then
commonly practiced; and does not produce any one Argument to prove either its
Unlawfulness or Novelty; which if he could have done, would have been a much
stronger Argument than any he has used to confirm his Opinion; and was so
obvious, that a Person of his Learning and Sagacity could not have overlooked
it; and which therefore being not urged by him, is a manifest Indication, that
he had no such Opinion of its being either novel or unlawful, though for other
Reasons in his singular Opinion he thought better to defer it. In Levit. Homil.
8. In Luc. Homil. 14. In Epist. ad Romans lib. 5. par. 2. p. 543. Edit. Basil.


Origin, who lived very little after him, speaks again and again of the Baptism
of little Children in that Age, and says expressly, that the Church has
received it as a Tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to little ones.

St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, a very small time after this, was a great
Admirer of Tertullian, whom he often used to call his Master. But the Evidence
for Infant Baptism was so clear to him, that he declares for the baptizing of
Infants, even recens nati, those that were just born: Epist. ad Fidum.
And there were sixty six Bishops joined in Council with him, who agreed in the
same Opinion, and sent it as their common Resolution to Fidus, who thought that
Baptism ought to be deferred at least to the eighth Day, according to the Law
of Circumcision.

In the next Age lived Athanasius, Q. 114. ad Antiochu^. Tom. 2. p. 337. Ed.
Paris.
who again and again makes mention of Infant Baptism, and lays a great Stress
upon it.

Much about the same time Gregory Nazianzen lived, who though his Opinion was,
that where it could be safely deferred, it was better to let it alone till
Children were three or four Years old, and were able to answer the
Interrogatories that then used to be put to those that were baptized; Orat. 40.
de Bapt.
yet does he vehemently urge, that in case of Danger they should be baptized in
their Infancy, and took his Reason from the Circumcision of Children at the
eighth Day, and from the saving of the firstborn in Goshen by the Sign of the
Blood on the Lintel of the Door and the two Side-posts: and says, that though
Infants be not sensible either of the Gain or Loss of it, yet that it is
better, in case of Danger, that they be sanctified without the Sense of it,
than that they be let alone uninitiated and unconsigned.

St. Chrysostom is plain for it in the Beginning of the next Age, and says,
Homil. ad Neophylos
For this Cause, that is, because there are so many Benefits of Baptism, we
baptize Children though they have not Sin. Vid. Dr. Hammond 's Defense of
Infant Baptism, p. 104.


And St. Austin speaks of it in many Places, and urges it as an Argument
against the Pelagians, for the Proof of Original Sin, which they denied. And it
is very observable, that they in their. Answer to him never denied the
Lawfulness of that which he pressed so upon them, nor yet the Universality of
the Practice, or the Antiquity of it in the Church of God: But rather on the
contrary owned it for an Apostolical Tradition, and practiced it themselves,
though for other Reasons than that for which it was urged by St. Austin. These
were very sagacious Adversaries, and would easily have discovered the
Innovation of the Practice, if such it had been, by which they might have best
put off any Argument that could from it have been produced against them.

To these might be added many other Testimonies out of St. Ambrose and St.
Jerome in that Age; Vid. Voss. de Bapt. cap. 14. and Cassand. Testim. veter. de
Bapt. parvulorum.
and also others in the following Ages. So vain is the Pretense of some
Anabaptists, that Pope Innocent was the first that introduced this Practice
into the Church. And as vain is what they produce from n="" Whistons Answer to
Mr. Danvers, c. 1.
Walafridus Strabo, and Ludovicus Vives, the eldest of which lived some Ages
later than the Fathers before mentioned: It is in vain, I say, what they
produce from them against the Practice of it in the Church in the former Ages,
when we have such clear Testimonies from those Ages for it, and when these
Authors give no Proof at all of their Opinion by which the Reader may make any
Judgment about it.

Now from what has been thus discoursed about the Judgment and Practice of
Antiquity in this Matter, so near the Age of the Apostles, and that agreeably
to the Practice of the Jewish Church in their admitting of Proselytes and their
Children also by Baptism, is it not a fair and reasonable Inference, to
conclude that this was the Practice also of the Apostles between, and was as
old as the Churches that they planted, and was derived to the succeeding Ages
from them? For if this had been a new upstart Invention, or had been brought in
by false Teachers, and especially if it had been of such a pestiferous Nature,
as the Anabaptists pretend, and had all been but profane Trifling and Mockery,
it is not easy to be imagined how it should so early and universally obtain in
the Christian Church, and that it should not be more vehemently opposed, and
the Mockery, Profaneness and Pestilency of it discovered, as that of other
Heresies was. Had the Churches erred, they would have varied, says Tertullian;
but what is one and the same among them all, (as this of Infant Baptism was)
Non est erratum sed traditum; does not come from Error but Apostolical
Tradition. And so St. Austin upon this very Subject, That which the universal
Church does hold, and was never instituted by Councils, but was always retained
in the Church, we most rightly believe to have descended from nothing else than
Apostolical Tradition. And such was the case of Infant Baptism.

And this Custom and Practice is still continued in the Churches of Christ,
Vid. Dr. Walker's Plea for Infant Baptism, c. 27.
though of several Denominations, unto this Day. All the Protestant Confessions
of Helvetia, Bohemia, Belgia, Auspurg, Saxony, Wittenberg, Sweveland, France,
and Piedmont, do universally give their Testimony to it. And Histories give us
the same Account of the Practice of it among the Russians, Muscovites; the
Christians of St. Thomas in India; those in Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia,
Babylon, Palestine; amongst the Cofti in Egypt; the Abassins in Africa; the
Armenians in Turkey; the Maronites inhabiting Aleppo, Damascus, Tripoly of
Syria, Cyprus, and Mount Libanus. And many of these Churches are at vast
Distance one from another, and therefore can have but very little Intercourse
or Communication one with another. And as for the Abassine and Indian Churches,
they seem in all Probability to be Original Plantations, and not to have
derived their Faith and Practice from any other Churches; and yet all retain
and continue the Practice of baptizing Infants.

These things one would think should be enough to sway with all modest Persons:
And they would learn not to prefer the new upstart Opinions of those, who
because of the Smalness of their Number are fain to call themselves the little
Flock, before the universal consentient Practice of all the Churches of Christ
besides in the World. An humble Person should far more highly esteem of Godly
Antiquity and the Universal Church, than of such late and novel Singularity.

Objections against Infant Baptism answered.
HAving thus, with all possible convenient Brevity, endeavored to clear up and
confirm the Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, I shall now consider the
Objections that use commonly to be raised against it, and shall endeavor to
give them a satisfactory Answer.

Object. 1. That Infants are not capable of the Ends of Baptism; that it does
them no Good, but they are as well without it as with it, because there is no
Benefit that they can receive thereby.

Answ. The contrary to this is most true. For,

1. They are capable of Baptism, as it is an outward Badg or Mark of their
Relation to God, as his Children and peculiar People, and of God's gracious
Respect to them, and owning them for such; and so as it is a visible Rite of
their Admission into the visible Church of Christ. This is one of the Ends of
Baptism, and Infants are capable of this, because for this End it may be
administered to those that are merely passive, and do not understand any thing
of the Matter: As Infants are capable of Civil Adoption, and of being entered
into any Family, Tribe, College, or other Society, by such a Rite as shall be
appointed for that end. And thus Infants in the Jewish Church were baptized to
this end, together with their proselyted Parents, as we have seen before: and
we do not find that ever any of the Prophets, or our Savior, or the Apostles,
did find fault upon the Account of Infants Incapacity, or otherwise; therefore
we may conclude, that they were capable of Baptism, and that their Baptism was
likewise well approved of. And so by God's own Appointment and Institution
Infants were circumcised to the aforesaid Ends and Purposes. And how are they
incapable then of Baptism to the same Ends to which they were capable of
Circumcision?

2. Infants are capable of Baptism, as it is a Sign, or Note, or Seal, on God's
or Christ's Part, to assure us of his gracious Favor to us, and to consign
over to us the Benefits of the Covenant of Grace. Thus Infants are capable of
Baptism, as it is a Mark or Seal of the Remission or doing away that original
Guilt and Obligation to Death, which they derived from the first Adam, and of
their being brought into a new State of Regeneration and Life by Christ Jesus.
And so as it is a Seal of the Promise and Gift of the Spirit for the
sanctifying and renewing them hereafter; though for the present they understand
nothing of it: For it is sufficient also for this, that they be merely passive
in the Administration. As Baptism is to the Adult a Sign or Seal of the
Remission or washing away of that original Guilt which they have from Adam, and
also of that which they have contracted by their own actual Sin; so may Baptism
be a Sign or Seal of the washing away of the original Guilt to Infants derived
from Adam, though they have no Guilt at all of any actual Sin of their own to
be remitted or washed away. And yet as Baptism is a Sign or Seal of the new
Covenant for the Remission of all Sin to Believers, not only of what is past,
but also of what is to come, when they come to repent of it, and to perform the
Terms of the Gospel required to such Remission; so may Baptism be to Infants a
Sign or Seal of the Remission of all the actual Sin that shall ever be
committed by them, upon their future performing of the same Terms. And so as
Baptism is to the Adult a Sign or Seal of their being brought into a new
Regenerate State, and of having a Right to Life by virtue of their Adoption,
their Sin being done away by the Blood of Christ; so may it likewise be to
Infants a Sign and Seal of God's gracious Favor in giving them a Right to the
Heavenly Inheritance. As Infants, by virtue of any Civil Adoption, may be Heirs
to a Temporal Estate, and are capable of any Acts of Favor from Man, and to be
instated in any Privileges, Case of Infant Baptism, p. 34.
before they come to understand what they are. As suppose the King should send
for a Traitor's Child out of the Cradle, and in the Presence of several Persons
assembled for that purpose, should say, You know the Blood of this Child is
attainted by his Father's Treason, and by Law he has forfeited all Right to
his Ancestors Estate and Titles, and is quite undone, though he be not sensible
of his wretched Condition: But I will pardon this Infant freely, and here I
restore him to all his forfeited Rights: I justify him freely, and declare my
self reconciled unto him, and moreover do adopt him into my Royal Family, and
do settle part of my Dominions upon him; and as a confirmatory Sign of this my
Respect unto him, I do order and command before you all, that he be washed with
pure Water, to signify that he is cleansed from his original Attainder and
Corruption of Blood, and that I am perfectly reconciled unto him. Who would say
that this were an insignificant or useless Sign, because the Child did not
understand the meaning of it? Or who could say that the Child, who was capable
of the thing signified, viz. the removing the Attainder, and being vested in a
Right and Title to a noble Inheritance, should be incapable of the washing with
Water for a Sign hereof? especially considering that a bit of Flesh was
appointed and ordered by God to be cut off by Circumcision, when the Child was
but eight Days old, to the same Intent and Purpose, though he understood as
little of the meaning of that, as Infants do of the meaning of Baptism now for
this end.

3. Infants are capable of Baptism, as it is a Mark or Sign on our part of
their Dedication to God, and to the Service of Jesus Christ, and of their
entrance into, and coming under a Covenant-Engagement to be the Lord's for the
future, even whilst they are under the Age of Consent, to concur hereto by any
Act of their own. As Infants are capable of being entered into a School or
College, and of wearing a Badg belonging to it, in order to future Instruction
and Learning, though at present they understand nothing of it. And as it is
usual by Wills and Contracts to bring Infants under an Obligation to perform
certain Conditions when they come to Age. This is plain from the
Covenant-Engagement, that the Seed of Abraham was brought under as well as
Abraham himself, and received the Sign of Circumcision to confirm this at eight
Days old: For that Rite laid an Obligation upon them to observe all the Laws of
Moses, though the Rite was administered to them in their Infancy by the Act of
their Parents, long enough before they themselves came to Age of Consent; Gal.
5.3. For I testify to every Man that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do
the whole Law. Circumcision, though primarily the Rite of the Abrahamical
Covenant, yet being incorporated into the Political Law of Moses also, and so
was withal an obligatory Rite to the Observance thereof.

Thus also in like manner, Deuteronomy. 29.11. The little ones are likewise said to
enter into the Covenant with the Lord, and into his Oath, as well as all the
Men of Israel. And it has been ever reckoned, that the Parents may lay an
Obligation on the Children: as Esth. 9.27. The Jews ordained and took upon them
and upon their Seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it
should not fail that they would keep the Feasts of Purim. And thus Hanna
dedicated Samuel to the Service of the Lord from the time of his weaning, 1 Samuel 1.28. And Samson was a Nazarite from the Womb, Judge. 13.15. And the
Covenant was made between David and Jonathan, both for themselves and their
Seed, 1 Samuel 20.42. And the Covenant that Joshua and the Men of Israel made
with the Gibeonites, obliged all their Posterity. And thus, as has been said,
all the Jewish Infants were consecrated and devoted to God by the Rite of
Circumcision: For Children are looked upon as Parts of their Parents; and what
their Parents do for themselves or them, especially when they are in their
Infant-state, and under the Age of Consent themselves, is reasonably esteemed
as laying an Obligation upon them, as if it were done by them, when the thing
it self is just and reasonable, and may be beneficial to them. For though we
cannot lay a Burden upon others without their own Consent, yet we may procure a
Favor for them, and oblige them to the Performance of certain Conditions for
their future Participation thereof, when it is for their Benefit to be so
obliged: Indeed if they will, they may afterward renounce the Obligation, but
then they must renounce and quit the Benefit too; which if it be considerable,
there is no wise Man that is in his Wits will ever do, but will stand to the
Obligation under which he is brought for his own Advantage, and will esteem it
a great Advantage that he was brought under it.

And now is all this no Benefit? They shall be saved without it, they will say.
But what then? Is there nothing to be ever esteemed a Benefit but Salvation it
self alone? Is all this that has been said of Infant Baptism no Benefit?

Is it no Benefit to be enrolled thereby into the Number of God's peculiar
People, to have the Mark and Badg of his Children, and to be reckoned amongst
those that he has called to a Covenant Relation to himself? Is it no Benefit
to partake of the Rite of visible Admission into the Church of Christ? Is this
no Privilege? no Benefit? If the contrary would be a great Evil, to be cast out
as common and unclean amongst the rest of the World, is it not then a Benefit
to have the Badg and Mark of an holy Separation to God, as the People of his
Adoption and Grace?

Is it no Benefit to partake of the Mark and Seal of the Blessings and Promises
of God, of the Removal of the Guilt and Death which they were liable to by
Adam, and of the Promise of the Spirit for their Regeneration and
Sanctification, whose Assistance therefore, to that end, they may comfortably
hope for, and expect from God, as they have need of it, whether there be any
present Operation or Work of the Spirit upon them or no? And is it no a Benefit
to them that they have a Seal and Assurance of the Forgiveness of all their
actual Sins also afterward, upon their Repentance and Return to God? As
Baptism is a Benefit to grown Persons, as it is a Sign and Pledge both of
present and future Blessings; so it is also in the same manner to Infants, as
being a Seal both of all those Blessings which they have need of, or do partake
of at present, and also of those which they have or may have need of
afterward. So that suppose they may be saved without it, yet this is a Mark or
Seal of their Salvation if they die in their Infant-state; and of all the
Blessings and Privileges that belong to them now, or are to belong to them
afterward, if they live according to the Terms of the Gospel, just in the same
manner as it is to grown Persons. So that if upon these Accounts it is a
Benefit to grown Persons, it is upon the same Account also a Benefit to
Infants; that is, it is a Benefit both to one and the other, as far as a Sign,
or Seal, or Pledge can be a Benefit.

And lastly; Is it not a Benefit to partake of that Ordinance that is a Mark or
Note of their early Consecration and Devotedness to God, and to the Service of
Christ, whereby they are brought betimes into a Covenant-Engagement to be his?
For that this is so, has been proved; and accordingly God so looks upon them;
and thereupon there is to be all Care taken about their Christian Education,
that they may be instructed and brought up in the Knowledge of those things
which belong to the People and Children of God. And this will be useful to them
as an Argument to prevail with them to live to God betimes, as they grow up,
because of the Oath and Covenant that they are so early entered into, and
engaged in. This Consideration indeed does not affect them immediately, whilst
they are in their Infant-state, but it may come to affect them as soon as any
thing else can that is of such a Nature, that is, as soon as their Reason comes
to be of use to them: Whereas if this had not been done for them betimes, there
would have wanted this Argument to deal with them. And it may be, it would have
been very long before they themselves might have been brought to consent to
enter into such an Obligation, as we read it often was among may that yet were
brought to the Profession of the Christian Faith in the Primitive Times: Dr.
Walker 's Preface to his Plea for Infant Baptism.
Some staying off for this, some for that carnal Reason or Fear, for a long
time, to the great Scandal of their Profession: Some keeping off for fear of
sinning after Baptism, and so forfeiting the Grace of it, as they thought,
thereby: Some from the Love of the World, and the Pleasures thereof, being loath
to part with their Sins and their vain Pleasures, which they were sensible this
obliged them to, notwithstanding they owned themselves Christians: Some again
deferring it out of want of Leisure: Some pleading the Inconvenience of the
Time; and others, because they could not have it done in the Place they
desired, or by the Person they most affected: Some taking Exception at the
mixed Company they were to be baptized with: And some delaying it for fear of
Perfecution from the Heathen: And some for fear lest they should be accounted
Tritheites: Some on pretense that their Relations were not present: And some
hanging back because of the little Charge they did use to be at at that time.
These things gave Occasion to such vehement and sharp Expostulations of the
Fathers of that Age to reprove their Slackness, as are to be found in their
Writings. And how many do you think, upon one or other of these Pretenses,
there would be that would put it off in like manner still, if they were not
baptized in Infancy; and it may be some would hardly ever bring themselves into
so near a Covenant-Engagement to God at all? Whereas this being done for them
so early in their Infant-state, it may be a powerful and prevailing Motive to
engage them betimes to a sincere and upright walking with God, which otherwise
they might not probably have been brought so soon to. If it be objected, that
this would be more apt to prevail with them, if it had been their own Act, when
they came to Age. It is plain by Experience, that those that are sincere, or
have any Sense of Honor or Gratitude, among those that have been baptized in
their Infancy, do hold themselves as much obliged by it, and do stand to the
Obligation that they were then brought under, and as faithfully discharge it as
any of those that are baptized at Age, and do look upon it a great Blessing,
that they were brought under so early a Pre-engagement: And those that are not
sincere, that are baptized at Age, do as little perform or discharge the
Obligation that they brought upon themselves by an Act of their own, as any of
those that were baptized in Infancy.

Object. 2. That Infants are not capable of performing those Acts, or having
those Conditions that are pre-required in Scripture, in Persons that are to be
baptized. For as much as they cannot learn, or be taught, or confess their Sins,
or believe, or repent, or make any visible Profession of their doing so. And
yet these things are required in Scripture of Persons that are to be baptized,
and were always performed by Persons before the Apostles did baptize any.
According to these and the like Texts; Mark 16.15, 16. Go into all the World,
and preach the Gospel to every Creature: he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. Matthew. 3.6. They were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing
their Sins. Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of
Jesus Christ. And ver. 41. They that gladly received his Word, were baptized.
Acts 8.12. When they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, they were baptized. Ver. 13. Then Simon himself believed, and
was baptized. And ver. 36. The Eunuch said, See here is Water, what does hinder
me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine Heart,
thou may. Acts 18.8. And many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were
baptized. From these and such like Texts it is argued, that here is a
Prohibition laid, and a Bar put against Infants Baptism, because they have no
Reason or Understanding about what they ought to be or do, and can neither
hear, learn, repent, or believe, or make Profession of either in their
Infant-state, and therefore are not capable of Baptism, before the
Administration of which these things are required and used to be done.

Answ. 1. That it is by virtue of that Covenant Relation to God as his People
and Children, which God is pleased to admit Infants to, though themselves do
not believe, they being the Seed or Pupils of professed Believers with whom
this Covenant is made, and with their Seed and Family, that Baptism is to be
administered to them. The Ground then which I build the Baptism of Infants upon,
is God's Election or choosing of them, together with their believing Parents,
or those that shall undertake for them to be his own peculiar Vovenant People;
as likewise their Parents or Susceptors are. For this was always God's Method,
and the way of his Grace, to own and receive the Children of his
Vovenant People into the same Covenant with their Fathers, and so to treat with
them, and to seal the Covenant and Promise to them, in the same manner, and by
the same Rite as he did to their Parents. So that it is not the Childrens own
Faith or Profession that qualifies them for Baptism, but it is God's Election
or Choice of them for his People, though they have not actual Faith or
Repentance of their own, upon their descending of such Parents, or being taken
into such Families, or undertaken for by such Persons as stand in a
Covenant Relation to God. And out of Respect to them, and in Prospect of that
Religious Education that they shall afterward receive from them, God is
pleased to own them for his, and to confirm his Promise and Covenant to them:
So that their Parents or Susceptors Faith is, as it were, vicariously imputed
to them for a while, till they come to Years, and is reckoned accordingly for
their Good, though they do not yet actually believe themselves, because
hereafter they are to do it through their Parents Instruction. As the Children
of the Levites of a Month old are said to keep the Charge of the Sanctuary,
Numb. 3.28. because they are so designed, and are to be brought up to it, and
are in a near Capacity for it. And Levi is said, after a Sense, to have paid
Tithes in Abraham, being in the Loins of Abraham when he paid it to
Melchizedek, Heb. 7.9.

And why should these things be thought unreasonable? If God is pleased to own
and adopt little ones for his, why should our Eye be evil, because his is good?
Or why rather should we not rejoice in his Mercy and Grace in behalf of our
little ones?

If Infants may contract Guilt, or lie under an Obligation to Death by the Sin
of their Parents, why may it not likewise be supposed through the Grace and
Goodness of God by Christ, that they may be invested with a Right and Title to
certain Privileges, and partake of the Mark and Seals of them through the Faith
of others? So that as God visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate him; so he may also show
Mercy to Thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandments. Mat. 8.13.
Mark 9.23. John 4.50.
And as some were brought to be healed by Christ (and were healed) through the
Faith of others, so why should we not think that Infants may partake of the
Favor of God through Christ, and of the Badg or Sign of this Favor, with
respect also to others Faith? So that the Faith of their Parents may be said to
be their Faith, whilst they are in their Infant-state, they being as Parts of
their Parents, and having no Use of Power, Understanding, or Will to provide
for themselves, till they come to Years of Discretion: As the Parents Act in
taking a House, or making a Bargain or Covenant, may be called the Child's Act,
as no less beneficial and obliging to the Child than to the Parent, and binding
the Child to the Performance of the same Conditions.

And what indeed is more common than for such things to be required of Parents
before they be admitted to certain Privileges, that when they are admitted to,
belong alike to their Children, though they could not do those things? Thus
those of a foreign Nation must take the Oaths of Allegiance required to a
Prince, before they become his naturalized Subjects, or partake of the
Privileges of such; but after they have taken the Oaths, and are admitted to
the Privileges of Naturalization, their Children also are admitted to the same
Privileges, though they cannot take the Oaths; so that their Parents Act is
imputatively theirs, or to their Benefit or Advantage. And so why may it not
likewise be here? And as those that are born of Parents, that are admitted into
a Corporation, shall partake of the Privileges likewise of that Corporation,
which those that are born of other Parents shall not; so, if such be the Grace
and Goodness of God, may the Infants of Covenant-Believers likewise partake of
their Privileges, which the Infants of Heathens and Aliens are to have no Right
unto. And yet all this while the Infants understand nothing of the Matter, but
are vested in these Benefits before they come to Understanding.

2. Therefore, I say, as to those things that are said to be pre-required to
Baptism, that either they have no need of them at all in their Infant-state,
and so may be baptized without them; or by virtue of God's Grace and Covenant
they have the same Benefit without them to qualify them for Baptism, which
others have by them, and therefore may be baptized without them, though others
cannot.

As for Regeneration in the most common Sense of the Word, it would be very
rash in any to say, that they cannot have it in the Seed or Root of it: For who
can tell what the Operations of the Holy Spirit are, or can be upon them? But
though they should not, or could not have it in that Sense that we commonly
take it, viz. for an internal Change and Sanctification of Heart and Mind; yet
they have that which may denominate them regenerate Persons, and so they may be
marked and signed as such, as being brought into a new and saving State by the
Death of Christ, which they shall not fail of the Benefit of, unless they fall
from it by their own actual Rebellion afterward. They may be said to be
delivered from the Death of Sin, or from the prevailing Power of that Death
which Sin brought in, there being the Forgiveness or Dissolution of that Death
to them: And so they may be said to be quickened together with Christ, and so to
partake of a new Birth by being put into a new State, wherein they have through
Christ as immediate a Right and Title to Salvation, as those have that have
been regenerate in the common Acceptance of the Word. And why may they not
then be qualified for the Sign or Seal hereof? For how can there be any more
required to qualify for the Sign than for the Thing signified, which they
possess, or have a present Right to?

And though they have not Faith properly speaking, yet being brought into the
same Condition of Sonship, and put into as immediate Capacity for Salvation, as
adult Believers are through Faith, why should they not partake of Baptism,
which is the Seal of these Blessings, as they do? For though they have no Faith
properly speaking, yet being by Christ redeemed from Death, and put into a
State of Sonship and Life, as actual Believers are, though without actual
Faith, till actual Sin takes place, they may be numbered in respect of the
Benefits of Faith with Believers. And if Believes are baptized, to seal the
great Grace of Adoption to them through Faith, why should not they likewise be
baptized for the Sealing and Confirmation of the same Grace, seeing in that
respect they may well be reckoned with Believers, as partaking of the same
Favor with them, through the Grace and Covenant of God in Christ toward them?
For what Faith is to adult Persons through the Covenant and Grace of God in
Christ, that the Covenant it self is to Infants without Faith. And so what
Baptism is to adult Persons upon their Faith, that it may be to them without
Faith, through God's Covenant with them alone by the Blood of Christ. So that
upon the Account hereof they may full as well be baptized as those that do
believe, because they have the same Privileges without Faith as Believers have
by their Faith: It being not Faith it self, or Profession of Faith that is to
be the immediate Ground of Baptism, but that Sonship or Relation to God, of
which Faith is the Means or Evidence; and when this can be evidenced without
Profession of Faith, there being no necessity of that Profession to qualify for
Baptism, as was shown before in Cornelius and his Company.

And then as for Repentance, while they are in their Infant-state they have no
need of it, and therefore may be baptized without (...); they have no need of
Repentance for Sin, because they have no actual Sin to repent of; and therefore
their want of Repentance can be no Bar to their Baptism. To those indeed that
have actually sinned, Baptism is a Baptism of Repentance, signifying it already
to be in some measure, and obliging to it farther. But where there is no actual
Sin, there being no need of Repentance, it may be administered to them without
Repentance, to oblige only to Holiness and Purity of Life, and keeping of the
Commands of God, which is a greater thing than Repentance, and which Repentance
it self is for, and to lead to, in those that have sinned. Thus the Baptism of
John, though it was a Baptism of Repentance to others that had sinned, and to
that end he mainly preached it, yet was administered to our Savior without
Repentance, because he had no need of Repentance, but he had perfect Holiness,
which was better than Repentance; and it was to him also a Sign of Obligation
to Holiness, though not to Repentance. So that it may be administered to those
that have no Repentance, because they have no need of it in their present
State; yet it may be administered to oblige to Holiness, and to Repentance too
hereafter, when they shall come to have actual Sin. And so it will be properly
also to them a Baptism of Repentance, which it could no way be to our Savior,
and yet was administered to him; it is a Baptism to them, (...), to future
Repentance.

But as for Profession of Faith and Holiness, which Infants cannot make: I
answer, that the Baptism of Infants is not for Profession of it, but for
Obligation to it, which we have seen before they are capable of.

3. As for those Texts then that are urged to show what is prerequired of
Persons that are to be baptized: I answer, That they are spoken of, or to grown
or adult Persons that are capable of performing those Acts, and were obliged to
it, as the Condition or Proof of their Adoption; and they do only concern them,
and no other but them. And therefore they are no Bar to the Baptism of Infants,
whose Adoption or Sonship may otherwise be judged of, without these Acts. As
for the Adult, we own and contend as much as they that make this Objection,
that grown Persons who are come to Years of Discretion, that had been Infidels
and Unbelievers before, ought to be taught, and profess Faith and Repentance,
before they be baptized; there being no Judgment by the Church to be made any
other way, of God's receiving and owning them for his Children and
Vovenant People. And this is as much as these Scriptures do prove or hold out
to us, concerning this Matter; but they are no Rule for all the Subjects of
Baptism: and as for Infants they are not at all concerned in them, and
therefore their Baptism is not prohibited by them; there being not the same
Qualifications required in them for Baptism, as there are in others. So that
though there is a virtual Prohibition of the Baptism of grown Persons, if they
do not perform these Acts first, here is no Prohibition of the Baptism of
Infants, though they do not perform them. For the meaning of all such
Expressions is to be judged of from the Nature and Capacity of those Persons to
whom they are spoken. And therefore as by the Apostle's Words, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
They that will not work, neither should they eat; the Relief of lazy Drones is
forbidden, that can work and yet will not; but here is no Prohibition of the
Relief or Sus^entation of Infants, or those that cannot work. So by these Texts
of Scripture that show what is required of Persons to be baptized, impenitent
Unbelievers that are come to Age, are prohibited from Baptism; but not Infants,
there being other Grounds for their being baptized. The Baptism of Infants
indeed cannot be concluded from these Texts, (and whoever said it could?) but
we have shown, there are other Scripture-Arguments for the Baptism of Infants:
And these Texts, as they say nothing for it, so they say nothing against it,
either directly or by Consequence: And therefore Infants may and ought to be
baptized, notwithstanding what is said in these Texts.

Baptism, as we have heard, is an Ordinance of the same Use, and to the same
Purpose, for the main, as Circumcision was, in the Respects mentioned. Now as
Circumcision was administered to different Persons of different Ages, so may
Baptism. Circumcision was administered to Abraham as a Seal of the Righteousness
of that Faith which he had before given Evidence, and made Profession of; so is
Baptism a Seal of the same to grown Believers now, upon their Profession of a
like Faith with Abraham's. But Circumcision was administered to Isaac, and was a
Seal of the same Righteousness which he should have, without any such
Profession made by him; and why may not Baptism then be administered to Infants
now, without any such Profession made by them? For Circumcision was administered
to Isaac, as being the Son of believing Abraham, by virtue of God's taking him
into the same Covenant Relation with Abraham, without any such Profession of
Faith required of him (which could not be) as was performed by Abraham. And why
may not Baptism now be administered to Infants, as being the Seed of believing
Parents, by virtue of the same Covenant made with them as with their Parents,
though they cannot themselves profess the Faith as their Parents do?
Circumcision and Baptism both were administered to Proselytes among the Jews
after their Profession of the God of Abraham, but then were likewise
administered to their Infants, and to the Infants of them, when they were grown
up and came to have Children: And why may not Baptism be administered now to the
Infants of professed Believers, though the Infants themselves can make no such
Profession?

To Mark 16.16. I answer particularly, because it is so much insisted upon; He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. From hence the Argument is,
That Faith must go before Baptism, because of the Order of the Words. To which
I might answer, that no Argument can reasonably be taken from thence in this
Matter; for then by the same Rule, according to the Order of the Words in other
Scriptures, Baptism should go first, before the Performance of some of those
Acts which they say, should go before it: And so this Argument would be as much
against them as for them. Thus Mark 1.5. Baptism is placed before Confession of
Sin, in the Relation of the Story there of those that were baptized; they were
baptized, confessing their Sins. And the Order of the Words in the Text that is
objected especially (as likewise that in Acts 2.38. concerning Repentance and
Baptism) is altogether insignificant to the Matter in hand, because here the
Design of our Savior is not to make Faith a necessary Prerequisite to Baptism,
(as neither the Apostles in that other Place to make Repentance prerequisite to
Baptism) but Faith and Baptism, that is, the Profession of Faith by Baptism,
prerequisite to Salvation. But I rather answer as before, that this Text is
nothing to the purpose, because it has no Respect to Children at all, and
therefore does not exclude or prohibit their Baptism: as appears by the second
Part added by way of Opposition, He that believes not, shall be damned. For if
the Text be to be so understood, that Infants are to be excluded from Baptism
because they do not believe, then must they likewise for the same Reason be
excluded from Salvation, which is more than they that urge it will own. So that
this Text indeed is nothing at all to the Matter.

But what then is the Design of it? It is a Direction or Commission given by
our Savior to his Apostles, to extend their Preaching to all the World, which
was hitherto confined within the Jewish Territories, and so to make Proselytes
among the Heathen Nations, that they also might be saved. For being in their
Darkness and Infidelity before, they must first be taught before they could be
brought to believe, and so before they could be fit for the Participation of
the initiating Ordinance into the Church of Christ, which was only to be upon
those Terms. But this does not in the least imply a Prohibition of the Baptism
of their Infants afterward, when the Parents themselves were baptized. No more
than if God should have sent forth his Prophets in the time of Law, and should
have given them the like Commission, to have proselyted all Nations by Baptism
and Circumcision then, would have been a Bar to the Circumcision of their
Infants, when once the Parents were by Conversion to the true God brought into
a Covenant Relation to him, and were circumcised. But as the Infants of such
Parents, by the Rule and Practice of Circumcision before, ought to have been
circumcised notwithstanding such Commission; nor could the Prophets have
understood the Commission otherwise, but as consistent with such a Practice and
Rule, unless an Exception of Infants had been expressly put in: so the Infants
of Christian Believers ought to be baptized according to the general Grounds of
Baptism, notwithstanding this Commission of our Savior; and this Commission
running in these Terms, can by no means be justly interpreted to contain a
Prohibition of the Baptism of Children, when there are such Grounds for it,
unless our Savior had put in an express Exception against it. Nor could the
Apostles themselves otherwise understand this Commission than as implying and
comprehending the Baptism of Infants, of those that were proselyted to the
Faith, according to the general Usage and Practice of the Jewish Church, unless
our Savior had put in an express Caveat against it: For they could not in
Reason otherwise understand him, than according to the ordinary Customs and
Usages of that Church in which they had been bred and brought up, unless our
Savior had otherwise made known his Mind unto them.

The same Answer would serve for Matthew. 28.19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. To which I shall only add, that the Fundamental Mistake of the
Anabaptists in this Case, seems to arise from their imagining, that our
Savior, in these Words, has delivered the whole Institution of Baptism, and
every thing that has Relation to all the Subjects of it: Whereas this Text
does not contain the Institution of Baptism at all, (for that was done long
before, though we have not in the Scripture a particular Account when) but only
contains a new Commission of our Savior to his Apostles, to go out to all
Nations to make Christian Proselytes; the Partition Wall being now taken down,
and no longer to confine this Favor to the Jews alone. It is a Direction of
our Savior only about this particular Matter; and as for all other things
relating to Baptism, they were to be continued according to former Grounds and
Precedents, for any thing that appears to the contrary. And this having been
the immemorial Practice of the Jewish Church before, in Admission of Proselytes
Children, as well as themselves, the Apostle could no otherwise reasonably
understand it, but that it ought to continue so still. Nor, considering the
Grounds laid down for it, can we now conceive any Bar put herein to it, unless
the Matter had been worded much otherwise than it is. And I shall further
observe after, that this Text contains rather a good Warrant for
Infant Baptism, if it be understood as it ought to be interpreted, than any
Prohibition of it. And so I come to the next Objection.

Object. 3. That however Infant Baptism is not commanded, nor is there any
express Example for it in Scripture. And therefore whatsoever the Use or
Benefits of Infant Baptism might be, if it had been commanded, there is no
sufficient Ground for it now, nor ought it to be practiced, and can be no
better than Will Worship if it be. And this they think makes a plain Difference
between the Reason of circumcising Infants formerly, and baptizing them now,
because that was commanded, and this is not. This is their great and triumphant
Argument, and the last Refuge of any Moment that they have to fly to.

Answ. 1. But will nothing indeed serve besides an express Command? Will no
Argument? no Reason? no Consequence serve for the Eviction or Proof of what we
are to believe and to do, without an express Declaration, Command or Example?
Do we not find, that our Savior himself proves the Doctrine of the
Resurrection against the Sadduces, by Argument and Consequence, only because it
was said, that God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, Matthew. 22.32.
and Jacob; and because he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living? And
the Apostle proves by Consequence the Resurrection of Christ himself, Acts
2.29. Psalm. 16.9, 10.
by a rational Deduction from Scripture-Testimony, which he proves could be
understood of no other but him. And in this manner it is usual with the Apostles
to deduce Conclusions from the Scriptures by reasoning from them, in diverse
Discourses both in the Acts and their Epistles. And thus our Savior himself
likewise argues the Lawfulness of the Disciples plucking the Ears of Corn on
the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 12.3, 4, 5.
from David's eating of the Shewbread, and from the Priests sacrificing on the
Sabbath, and from that Sentence in Hosea, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.
1 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10.
And so the Apostle deduceth the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers, from the
Reason and Parallel of some Passages mentioned in the Law. Yea, and do not the
Anabaptists themselves, as well as others, make use of the same consequential
kind of Deductions for the proving the Christian Sabbath, and Women's Right to
partake of the Lord's Supper, when there is no express Command in Scripture, in
so many Words, for either? And indeed the far greater part of such Actions,
which Men and Women perform out of Conscience toward God, J. G 's Catabaptism,
p. 7.
are neither injoined by any express Precept, or commended by an express
Example in Scripture, but either by some general Rule only, or the Analogy of
some proportional Example. So that by a diligent Use of our Reason, and a close
Engagement of our Minds to the Search of Scripture, it behooves us to inquire
diligently into it for the Conduct of our Actions, and for the Information of
our Minds in the Knowledge of those Truths which lie latent in Scripture, and
are often delivered to us only by secret Insinuations, and are to be deduced
thence by just and rational Conclusion. And how would a great part of the
Scripture else in many Respects be wholly useless to us? And I conclude
therefore, that there is no Necessity for the Proof of Infant Baptism, that
there should be a plain and express Command for it in Scripture; but it is
sufficient, if it may be justly and reasonably inferred by Force of Argument,
by the diligent Application of our Minds to the Consideration of those Grounds
upon which it may be warranted and built. And if there be sufficient Ground for
it, it ought to be received, though the Reasons for it should lie deeper than
they do, and could not be discovered without a more narrow and accurate sifting
into the Matter.

And it is in vain to pretend, that in doing thus we reject a Divine Command
for humane Consequences. For what Divine Command do we reject? that of
baptizing professed Believers? But do we reject that Command, because we hold
that Infants may be baptized as well as they? or is this only an uncertain and
humane Consequence? The Act of Reasoning indeed is ours, in deducing the
Conclusion from such Principles. But if the Premises, from which the Conclusion
is drawn, be certain and divine, then so is the Conclusion which is drawn from
them, if the Deduction be duly and regularly made. For the Conclusion always
follows the Premises, and is of the same Nature with them, as being virtually
contained in them, though the bringing of it to light is by Means of our
Reasoning.

2. Therefore I answer, and argue thus: That for which there is a sufficient
Warrant without an express Command, may and ought to be reeceived without an
express Command: but for the Baptism of Infants there is a sufficient Warrant
without an express Command; therefore it may and ought to be received without
it.

If the Anabaptists deny that there is or can be any such sufficient Warrant
for Infant Baptism without an express Command, (as no doubt they will do) we
must come to the Proof of it. If we cannot make this good, then I acknowledge we
must produce an express Command, or else we must give up the Cause. But if we
can, then there is an End of the Objection. So that our Business is to come to
the Trial, whether we can or cannot; and so the Objection however is at an end.
And this, I think, is a sufficient Answer to it: And so refer the Vindication
to what is before argued.

3. But yet that I may answer a little more directly, I shall add this further,
that in the Grounds which I have laid for Infant Baptism, there is that which
is equivalent to a Command: Because it is reasonable thence to conclude, that
it is the Mind and Will of God, that we should make use of it, (and that
howsoever it be made known to us, is our Rule which we are to walk by.) For how
can we conclude otherwise, when God has been pleased to appoint a
discriminating Badg and Character for his People and Children, whom he has
chosen and called into a near Covenant Relation to himself from the rest of the
World, and has appointed Baptism for that purpose now, and for such other
Ends, as little Children for the main are capable of, as well as grown Persons;
how can we otherwise conclude, I say, but that it is the Mind and Will of God,
that it should be administered to them as well as others, when it is in the
Nature and Ends of it accommodated to their Use and Benefit, as well as grown
Persons; and when a former Ordinance, which was for the same Ends, was expressly
commanded to be administered to them? And when we consider that this had been
the Practice before in the Jewish Church, to receive the Infants of Proselytes
also by Baptism, as we are informed by the most authentic Records of that
People, and the doing of this in the Christian Church is no where forbidden,
how can we conclude, but that it was the Mind and Will of God, that it should
be continued still, though he gave no express Command for it? there being no
need of an express Command for the doing of that which used commonly to be
done, but for the doing of that which had not been done before, viz. the
proselyting of all Natious to the Faith of Christ as already come, without
giving any Order about their Children, because there was no Alteration made
about them, as the Subjects of Baptism, from what had been commonly observed
before. And what is all this but a virtual Command, though it be not expressed
in so many Words? or how could the Apostles then, or we now, otherwise
understand it? And we now much less, considering that it was the universal
Practice of the Christian Church next and immediately after the Apostles, which
we cannot conceive how it should come to pass, unless it had had its Original
before.

And considering the Premises, if the Anabaptists will prove, that it is not
the Mind and Will of God that Infants now should be baptized, it is not enough
for them to alledg, that we have no express Command for it, but they
must-either produce an express Prohibition of it, (which they do not pretend to
do) or else that which is equivalent to a Prohibition, by showing the Absurdity
or Incongruity of it in the Nature of the thing, to the Use of Infants, as
unfit or incapable Subjects of it. And then indeed we should conclude as well
as they, that it is contrary to the Mind and Will of God, to have it
administered to them. As we hold the baptizing of Bells, or other inanimate
things amongst the Papists, or should hold the Baptism of Dogs or any other
brute Creatures to be so, because though the Baptism of such Creatures be not
expressy forbidden, yet it is altogether incongruous in respect of the Nature
and Ends of Baptism, to have it administered to such. And therefore the
baptizing of them is an Abuse of Baptism, and a gross Superstition. But when
Baptism is so ordered and constituted by God in the Nature and Ends of it, as
that Infants are capable Subjects of it; and when there are such other just
Grounds laid for the Application of it to them, and no Prohibition or Caveat
put in, to warn us about it, we cannot but hold rather that it is the Mind and
Will of God, that it should be applied and administered to them. And this I take
to be equivalent to an express Command.

I shall only add this further, that it may be said, That there is a general
Command, which may likewise extend to Infants, even in the general Commission;
Matthew. 28. (...) Go, disciple all Nations, baptizing them. For Infants are a
Part of the Nations: And if Infants may be made Disciples, (as that Word here
translated teach, should be rendered) then as Disciples too, they should be
baptized, for all that are Disciples should be so. Now that Infants may be
Disciples is plain, because they are so called, Acts 15.10. Why lay ye a Yoke
upon the Necks of the Disciples? which must be understood of Infants as well as
others; it being the Yoke of Circumcision that the Apostle there speaks of,
which used most commonly to be administered to Infants, or to them together with
others; and was called a Yoke, because of the Burdensomness, and Painfulness,
and Bloodiness of it. So that it is reasonable to conclude, that Infants here
are some of the Disciples meant. And it is no way unreasonable to call them by
that Name, though they are in no present immediate Capacity of learning, or
being taught; for it is sufficient that they be entered into Christ's School for
that purpose, and engaged to learn of him, as of their Master. And this they
may be, and so may be visible admitted Disciples by Baptism, in order to future
teaching, though they are not capable of present. As for Aliens and Infidels of
grown Age, to whom the Apostles were sent, they must be first taught before
they become Disciples, because they can be brought to be Disciples only by
their own Consent; whereas Children may be entered into Christ's School without
any present actual Consent of their own, by the Act of others that are their
Parents or Guardians, and so may become Disciples first, and so be baptized as
such, and then be taught afterward.

Now, as for the other part of the Objection, viz. the want of an express
Example of Infant Baptism, that is of less Moment: For an Example is of much
less Moment than a Command; and if a Command be not necessary, then much less
is an Example necessary. But if Infant Baptism may be concluded upon the
Grounds aforesaid, without an express Command, then much more without an
express Example; so that the Answer to the former Part of the Objection will
also be easily applicable here.

And indeed it is not at all strange, that such a Practice, though then in
being, should be silently passed over in Scripture: Because the Scripture is
not intended for a perfect Register of all Facts that were done, though it be a
perfect Rule of Faith and Practice in all things necessary to Salvation. So
that the thing might be done then, though the Scripture does not mention it.
And it might be passed over for this very Reason, because it was no new thing,
but was common before among the Jews, and so there need to be less notice taken
of it; or because the Apostles and Ministers Business then was principally to
preach to, and convert, and so baptize grown Persons and Fathers; and then the
Baptism of Children followed of Course by the general and common Rule and
Practice, and therefore there was less notice taken particularly of them.

But yet though there be no particular Example of it, it may reasonably be
inferred, that it was practiced, because there were such reasonable Grounds to
build the Practice upon, and considering the Practice that had been among the
Jews before, of the baptizing Proselytes Infants; and considering that there
was no Complaint amongst any for the Neglect of their Infants, notwithstanding
the Cessation of Circumcision, as it is probable there would have been, if
there had no other Ordinance succeeded in the room of it, which might be
applicable to Infants, because then they might well think, that their Infants
by their becoming Christians were in a worse and more neglected Condition than
before; for whereas before by Circumcision they were differenced from the
Common and Unclean that were the Uncircumcised, now they must be reckoned among
the Uncircumcised too, being not circumcised, and so also common and unclean,
if no other Ordinance should succeed in the room of Circumcision. So that these
Considerations give just Ground to infer, that it was then practiced, though it
be not particularly mentioned. Add to which, that they are likely to be
included in those Households mentioned to be baptized; for the Household contains
all that is in the Household, and it is strange if in all those Households there
should be no little ones. And though those that heard and believed were
baptized upon their own Faith, yet it is reasonable likewise to infer, that the
Infants were baptized, though without a Faith of their own, as the Infants of
Proselytes before, by virtue of God's Covenant, which, upon the Faith of their
Parents, they come presently to share in. And then mo^^over the Ancients
delivered this as a Tradition and Practice derived from the Apostles, as we
have seen; and there being no other probable Ground to be assigned for the
Original of it so soon in the Christian Church, and for the universal Practice
of it, that did every where obtain, it is fairly agreeable, that it was the
Apostolical Practice before.

And there is as little to be said from Scripture-Example for the baptizing of
Persons at Age, whose Parents were Christians when they were born, and who had
been educated from their Childhood in the Christian Religion. For there is not
the least him in Scripture of any such that were baptized by the Apostles, but
only of those that were converted from Judaism or Paganism unto Christianity,
and that presently after their Conversion. And yet the Anabaptists do not
doubt, but that such were baptized, though there be no express Example of it.
But if this Argument be good against Infant Baptism, because there is no
Example of it, it will be as good against the baptizing of such, because there
is as little Example of their being baptized. And so the Argument would prove
too much, and more than they intend; and so they must turn Quakers too, and
deny all Baptism now, for the same Reason that they deny Infant Baptism. But if
to salve this, they will argue, that the Warrantableness of baptizing such
grown Persons may sufficiently be deduced to Scripture-Consequence, from the
Reason and End of the Institution of Baptism, without any such Example, we will
allow the Argument. But then we must desire that Justice of them, that the
Practice of Infant Baptism be likewise allowed to be warrantable for the same
Reason, if we can likewise deduce it by just Consequence from sufficient
Grounds, though we produce no Example of it.

To conclude, there is no need of an express Example, when we have sufficient
Warrant besides without it. We must not teach God how he must notify his Mind
to us; but if he has made known his Mind and Will to us in any way, we are to
practice accordingly, whether there be Example or no Example left of such a
Practice: The Mind and Will of God however made known to us, being to be our
Rule, and not only when it is done this way or that way.

Object. 4. That this is the Reason why the Church is so full of Hypocrites and
carnal Professors, and profane Persons. For being all almost are baptized in
their Infancy, and thereby admitted Church Members, they are therefore so still
esteemed; and so the Churches of the Pedobaptists are overloaded with such
Persons which defile their Communions.

Answ. But what! are there no such Persons to be found among those of the other
Persuasion? I heartily wish indeed, for the Honor of our holy Master, and the
Credit of his Religion, that there were no such either among them or us, or
those of any other Denomination. But this is not to be expected in this
imperfect State of the Christian Church, Matthew. 13.47.
which is as a Net cast into the Sea, that receives of every kind, where good
and bad are mixed together; and so we must expect it will be till the End of
the World, when the Angels shall come forth, and sever the Wicked from among
the Just. But let us not blame that for this, which is not to be blamed. It is
not to be laid to the Charge of Baptism either in Infancy or in Age, nor to
that in Infancy more than to that at Age. For if once the Baptism of adult
Persons were the general Fashion, and as commonly received, and as much
encouraged, as Infant Baptism now is, I doubt not but the Church would be as
full of Hypocrites then, and carnal Gospellers, for any thing that Baptism at
Age would do more to prevent it than Infant Baptism now does: For it is no
great Matter to make such a Confession of Faith as may serve turn for Baptism;
and if once it were Men's Interest to do so, it would be easily enough gone
through.

As for so many profane Persons, which they say are in the Church by reason of
Infant Baptism because so many are looked upon of the Church that were once
baptized, and these are for the most part bad. I answer, However that be, yet
Infant Baptism is not to be blamed for it, but generally it is the want of Care
in Parents and Godfathers about the Instruction and Education of Children that
have been baptized; and want of Discipline in the Church, to expel those that
are profane out of it, when they once become scan dalous in it. It is not
Infant Baptism that is to be blamed, for that is a proper Means rather to make
Persons good, and that betimes: That will do its Part well if it be rightly
adverted to, when they grow up to Understanding, by Reflection upon it; and
full as well as if Baptism were administered at Age. This tends to continue and
help forward the Conveyance of Religion down to after-Generations, by laying a
strict Engagement upon Children to be good betimes, and upon Parents to educate
them and bring them up well in order to it; so that there might be still a
young Nursery of tender Plants growing up in the Vineyard of the Lord. And to
say otherwise, is a Refiection upon the Wisdom of the Jewish Church, in
admitting the Children of Proselytes, together with their Parents, yea and of
the Wisdom of the holy God himself, (who loves the Purity and Glory of the
Church certainly more than any of us can do, and knows best what most tends
to further it) who himself ordered the Token of his Covenant to be applied to
Children at eight Days old. For according to this Opinion, it had been much
better to have let it alone till all had come to Age. And the same Censure will
lie upon the Jewish Church for admitting of Members then in their Infant-state,
as much as it can now upon the Churches of the Pedobaptists. But let not us go
to teach God, or instruct him what Means are best to promote the Churches
Purity. I can make no doubt but Infant Baptism is as great an Advantage to the
Church now, as Infant-Circumcision was then in all the spiritual Respects of
it, or as the Baptism then of Proselytes Infants was.

But if there be other Ordinances and Duties neglected, which God has
appointed, which should be for the procuring of a pure Church, or for the
cleansing of it when it is impure, it is the Neglect of those Ordinances and
Duties, that is the true Reason of that Impurity in the Church, and not the
keeping up of that Ordinance, which rather helps toward its Purification, as
well as admits into the Communion of it. They of the other way, when profane
Persons are at any time found among them, don't blame their Baptism at Age for
it, as if that were the Reason of their Badness, which would rather tend to
make them good: and if these Persons continue still in their Church, no doubt
it is the Churches Neglect, and not the Fault of their Baptism. And so if
profane Persons be sound in the Church, wherein the Members are admitted by
Infant Baptism, let not Infant Baptism be blamed for that, but the Neglect of
those other Ordinances and Duties that should tend to promote the Churches
Purity.

Object. 5. Why may not the Lord's Supper be administered to Infants as well as
Baptism, that being as well a Seal of the Covenant as Baptism is, and was
likewise administered to them in some of the first Ages of the Church?

Answ. If the Lord's Supper should be administered to Infants, it could be of no
other Use to them than Baptism is, viz. to be a visible Badg or Mark of their
being owned and received by us as the Children of God, and Members of the
Church of Christ, and a Seal of the Blessings of the Covenant, and of their
Communion therein. These things are sufficiently confirmed to them by the
Ordinance of Baptism; and the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper could be of no
further use to them than what this comes to. And therefore the Administration
of the Lord's Supper to them would be supervacaneous and needless, because it
can do no more for them than Baptism does.

Nor is the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper so fit and proper to be administered
to them for the Ends aforesaid, as Baptism is: Because Baptism is a Sacrament
or Ordinance particularly designed or appointed for this purpose, to be for
their visible Initiation or Insition into the Church of Christ, and is
therefore to be administered to all the Members of it, as a Token or Sign of
their being the Children of God, and Members of Christ; and so to seal to them
the Blessings of the Covenant, and to engage them on their part to the
performance of the Conditions. And Infants being capable of all these Ends and
Uses of it, which are the chief Ends of Baptism, it is therefore proper and fit
to be administered to them. Whereas the Lord's Supper is a Sacrament of Growth
or Perfection, for the strengthening and refreshing of our Souls, and for our
Growth and Progress in Grace; which is promoted and furthered by an Act of
Reflection on our parts upon the Death of Christ, and the Benefits that he has
purchased thereby; and is to be a thankful Memorial, or for solemn Thanksgiving
to Christ for this great Grace and Love of his, that he has manifested to us
in his dying for us, and thereby purchasing and obtaining so great Benefits for
us: This being the chief End of that Institution, as appears by our Savior's
own words, Do this in Remembrance of me. Now all this requires great Knowledge
and Consideration, and pious Reflections upon what we are about, which Infants
are incapable of.

Nor is there the like Scripture-ground for the Administration of the
Lord's Supper to Infants, as we have seen there is for Baptism: Nor is there
the same Parallel of it, or Pattern for it from the Practice of the Jewish
Church, as there is for Infant Baptism, in their Administration of Circumcision
to Infants for a Token of the Covenant betwixt God and them; and likewise in
their baptizing the Infants of Proselytes. Whereas the Children of the Jews
were not admitted to the Passover, which is that other Jewish Ordinance, which
may seem to answer most to the Christian Eucharist, till they were old enough
to enquire about the meaning of the Service, and were capable of understanding
the Nature of it, as it was done in Remembrance of their Deliverance out of
Egypt; Exodus 12.26, 27. And so, agreeably to this therefore, neither should the
Children of Christians communicate at the Lord's Supper, till they are capable
likewise of understanding the Nature and Ends of it; as it is a Sacrificial
Feast in Remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion, and of our Deliverance from
Sin and Death, which we have thereby. And this indeed may well require more
Years over their Heads, before Children will be capable to come to the
Understanding thereof, than what might capacitate the Jewish Children for the
understanding the nature of the Passover, because that Mystery is greater; but
this is merely accidental. But as soon as our Children are capable of
understanding the Design of this holy Communion, and of performing those Acts
that are required with respect unto it, we hold it their Duty likewise to
participate in it.

Case of Infant Baptism, the Conclusion.
And then as for the Practice in Infat-Communion in the Christian Church, we
have not near the like Evidence of the Practice of it from Antiquity, either as
to the Antientness, or the Generality of the Practice of it, as we have for
that of Infant Baptism. There being none of the most ancient Writers, Ireneus,
Origin, Tertullian, that speak any thing of it, as they do of Infant Baptism,
and Origin particularly, as a Custom or Tradition derived from the Apostles;
nor near so many in the following Ages mentioning it, as there do
Infant Baptism. And many of those that owned the Necessity of Infant Baptism,
as the Pelagians, yet never owned the Necessity of Infant-Communion. And as for
the Practice of Infant-Communion therefore, the Western Churches have long ago
relinquished it, as apprehending it to be a Mistake, grounded neither upon any
Text of Scripture, nor Apostolical Tradition, and being in the Nature and
Design of it improper for Infants; but yet have still retained Infant Baptism,
as being in all respects well grounded, and most aptly to be accomodated to
them.

It was an easy and charitable Slip which the Ancient Church was suffered to
fall into amongst other things, to give the Lord's Supper to Infants, (as they
used to do to grown Persons presently after their Baptism) that they might
partake of all the visible Seals of Divine Grace and Favor. Rather than
deprive them of any, they would give them all. This, tho a Mistake, yet was a
Matter of no dangerous Consequence in Religion; as the Anabaptists pretend that
of Infant Baptism to be in the highest degree, as introducing a mere
Mock-Christianity, and a Mock-Church and Ministry into the World. Now it is not
imaginable, that God should suffer such a Church-destroying Corruption so early
to prevail in that Church that was so famous for Miracles, Martyrdom, and true
unaffected Holiness as the Ancient Church was. But for such a harmless and
innocent Mistake as that of Infant-Communion, it is no strange thing that their
Charity should a little be let alone to over-biass their Judgment. And I should
much rather choose to join with them in their Charity, than with these Duri
Patres Infantum, that are so unkind to deny that to Infants, which God has
been pleased in his great Grace and Kindness so freely to vouchsafe unto them,
and to instate them in.

The CONCLUSION.
THus have I endeavored, with all convenient Brevity, and I hope with
Perspicuity, to manage the Argument I have taken in hand: And I do not know,
that I have balk'd any considerable Argument or Objection, that seemed to me to
be of any force against it. And I have desired to follow the Apostle's
Direction, to speak the Truth in Love, without any bitter Reflection upon the
contrary-minded; whom, notwithstanding their Dissent, I shall respect as
Brethren. But as for the way that they have taken up, considering what I have
said in Defense of our own, I can no otherwise esteem of it than as a very
culpable Schism. If the Denial of Infant Baptism had been a simple Error, I
should have less concerned my self about it. But when there is such a Train of
dismal Consequences following at the heels of it, as the unchurching all
Churches that are not of the like Communion, and the denial of all other
Ministry and Ordinances besides their own, which must needs naturally be
accompanied with many fierce Animosities and unbrotherly Contentions, to the
destroying of Christian Love and Peace; it seems to me to look with a frightful
Aspect. Therefore they must excuse me, if out of a Love to Truth and Peace, I
have endeavored to rectify the Mistaken Judgment of those that have gone
astray, and to settle those that have need of Establishment in the way of
Catholic Verity, Love and Union.

But that the Doctrine which I have defended, may be more effectually
vindicated from that Contempt and Scorn that is poured upon it by those of the
contrary Persuasion, it is our part to make that good and holy Improvement of
the Baptism that we have received, as is suitable to the Nature of it. And you
that are Parents, and Godfathers, and Godmothers, pray consider your Charge and
Trust that is committed to you, and remember, as it is excellently expressed in
the Exhortation after Public Baptism, That it is your Parts and Duties to see
that the Children be taught, so soon as they shall be able to learn, what a
solemn Vow, Promise and Profession they have made by you: And that they may
know these things the better, to call upon them to hear Sermons, and provide
that they may learn the Creed, the Lord's-Pray^r, and the Ten Commandments, and
all other things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his Soul's
Health; and that they may be virtuously brought up to lead a Godly and a
Christian Life. It is the Carelessness of Parents and Godfathers about the
Education of Children, and their Neglect to enforce upon them their Baptismal
Obligations, that has been one great Cause of Offense, that those of the
contrary Persuasion have taken against Infant Baptism. For what wonder is it,
if that be counted a Nullity, that there is so little good use made of? And to
what purpose is the sprinkling or washing Children with Water, if there be no
care taken to instill into them, and to bring them up to that Christian Purity
in Heart and Life, that is signified thereby? They are bound indeed afterward
however, when they come to Understanding, to reflect upon the Obligations that
in their Infancy they were brought under: But there can be little Expectation
ordinarily, as we see by sad Experience, that ever they will do it, if their
Education and Instruction be neglected in their younger Years. Indeed it is to
be doubted, that the Baptism of Infants with many is turned into a mere
Formality: And the Charge that is so solemnly and particularly undertaken by
Godfathers and Godmothers, is never thought of afterward to any purpose. But
many Parents think that they do their Duty sufficiently, if they bring up their
Children to some Art or Trade, or provide Portions and Estates for them,
whereby they may be able to live in the World: And Godfathers and Godmothers,
if they do but give them something, as a Token of their Respect in some small
Gift. But that they may be brought to lead a truly Christian Life, that they
may deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and live Godly, Righteously and Soberly
in this present evil World, which is the great End of Baptism, Ordinances,
Gospel, and Life it self: How little is that reflected upon by many, as if it
were none at all of their Concern and Duty? A right practical Improvement of
our Infant Baptism by our selves, and a Religious Care taken in the Education
of our Children sutably to the Obligations thereof, will be a better
Vindication of the Usefulness of Infant Baptism, than all the Arguments that
can otherwise be brought for it, (tho never so good) which will seem all but
Noise and Sound to many, unless the Practical Influence and Power of it be made
more to appear in real Benefit and Fruit.

Now the God of Peace, which brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in us that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be Glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

AN APPENDIX; Wherein is showed, That it is not necessary to baptize by Dipping.
HAving dispatched the Controversy of Infant Baptism, I shall here add a few
Words of the Manner of Administration of Baptism; and show, That it is not
necessary, that Baptism should be administered by Dipping, or Plunging, or
Dowzing into the Water.

If it be necessary that Baptism should be always administered by Dipping, this
Necessity must arise from the Will and Intention of our Savior some way
declared to us in the Institution of Baptism, or in the Administration of it
left to us in Scripture. And there must be some Notices or Evidences, by which
this Intention or Will of our Savior may be made manifest to us; from which we
may necessarily infer, or conclude, that this particular Form of Administration
is determinately prescribed by him. And this, I think, can be collected no
otherwise, but by one or other, or all of these three ways, viz. Either from
the Use and Signification of the Words, by which this Ordinance is expressed;
or from the Examples of the Administration of it, that are left us in
Scripture; or from the Nature and Ends of the Ordinance it self. And if it
cannot be necessarily inferred from all, or either of these Considerations,
that it was our Savior's Will and Intention, that Baptism should always be
administered by Dipping; then, I suppose, it will be allowed, that Dipping is
not essential to Baptism. Now I shall endeavor to prove, that it cannot be
necessarily inferred any of these ways.

I. Not from the Use or Signification of the word Baptize, which is not used to
signify Dipping, but washing or cleansing by Water, which way soever it be. For,

1st. It is to be observed, That whenever the Holy Ghost in the New Testament
has occasion to mention the Act of Dipping, it is never expressed by this word
that signifies to Baptize, but by another, Not (...).
which we have but four times in the New Testament, viz. Luke 16.24. Joh.
13.26. Mat. 26.23. Rev. 19.13. But whenever the Act of Baptizing is expressed, it
is always expressed by another word, J. G 's Catabaptism, p. 47.
and not by that which is commonly used to express the Act of Dipping. From
whence we may probably infer a difference in the Signification, not a Sameness:
For if they were both of the same Importance or Signification, it is most
likely that they would be used promiscuously.

2dly. I say the word Baptize, or Baptism, is often used to signify any kind of
washing or cleansing by Water, by the Application of Water any way to the
Thing, and not only by dipping of it into Water; which in some cases was not
customary, nor likely. As when it is said, Mark 7.4. The Pharisees eat not,
(...).
except they wash: In the Greek it is, Except they be baptized. And Luke 11.38.
the Pharisees marvelled, that our Savior had not first washed before Dinner:
In the Greek likewise it is, that he was not first baptized. Now the manner of
washing in that case seems usually to have been by Aspersion of Water on the
Hands: And therefore this is to express the Office of a Servant to his Master;
2 Kings 3.11. Elisha poured Water on the Hands of Elijah. And the same word is
used to express their frequent Ceremonial Washing of Beds or Tables; as
likewise it is in that Text, Mark 7.4. In the Original it is, the Baptism of
these things. And it is no way likely, that this should be ordinarily done by
Immersion, or putting them all into, or under Water, but rather by pouring
Water upon them, and thereby to cleanse them. And Heb. 9.10. we read of diverse
Washings that they had: (...).
In the Greek diverse Baptisms, many of which were Sprinklings. Therefore there
can be no Argument for Dipping, etc. solidly grounded upon the bare
Signification of the word Baptize, because that is used to signify any kind of
Washing without Dipping as well as by it.

3dly. It is sometimes to be observed, that the Act of Baptizing is so expressed,
that it would be very uncouth and improper to understand it of Dipping: As when
it is express by baptizing with Water, not by baptizing into Water, or under
Water: as Luke 3.16. I indeed baptize you with Water. And so Acts 11.16. it
would be very uncouth and improper to say, that a Man is dipped with Water.

4thly. Again; this same word that is used to express Water Baptism, or
baptizing with Water, is in like manner used to express Christ's baptizing with
the Holy Ghost and with Fire; as in that same Text, Luke 3.16. Now that cannot
be so understood, that Christ should dip or dowze Men into the Holy Ghost; but
the usual way of Expression is, that the Holy Ghost with his Gifts and Graces
was poured upon them: thus Act. 2.17, 18. I will pour out in those days of my
Spirit upon them. And Acts 10.45. On the Gentiles also was poured out the Gift
of the Holy Ghost. And Tit. 3.6. The renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is shed,
or poured on us abundantly. And why should we not understand the baptizing with
Water, in Proportion and Similitude to this? So that I can see no reason to
conclude, that it was our Savior's Will and Intention, that Baptism should
always be by Dipping, from the Use or Signification of the Word.

II. It cannot be necessarily inferred or concluded from the Examples of
Persons being baptized, that are mentioned in Scripture. For in those Examples
that seem to be most express for Dipping, the most that can be concluded, is
only a bare Probability of it. And in some it is highly improbable, and the
Probability is rather on the other side. And if it could be demonstratively and
satisfactorily made out by Scripture-Examples, that the usual way of
Administration of Baptism then was by Dipping, yet that would lay no necessary
Obligation upon us to the like.

1. I say, that in those Examples, which seem to be most express for Dipping,
and therefore are most commonly urged for the Proof of it, there is at most but
a bare Probability of it, and hardly that in some; but there is no
demonstrative Proof can be made from any of them, either from the express Words
or Story of those Examples, or by just Consequence from them. There are three
Texts of Scripture that are usually urged to this purpose. I shall consider
them severally.

The first is Mat. 3.13, 16. which sets forth the Baptism of our Savior by
John Baptist at Jordan: For ver. 16. Jesus, when he was baptized, went up
straightway out of the Water. But what then? Can it be necessarily inferred
from hence, that he was dipped in it, or under it? If he went into it, (as the
manner usually was in that Country, to wash their Feet, that were dirty or soul
with traveling) and so there was baptized; yet was there no way to have this
done, but by Dipping? But indeed this Text, if rightly interpreted, does not so
much as prove, that our Savior went into the Water at all. For in the Greek it
is only, (...), he came up from the Water, not out of it. And so he might be
very well said to do, if he only went to the side or brink: There being some
little Ascent at least from the Water to the dry Ground. But however, there is
not determinate manner of our Savior's Baptism in it expressed, nor can be
necessarily or demonstratively inferred. And therefore at most that particular
Form, which the Anabaptists insist upon, is but a mere Probability.

Another Text that is urged, is Joh. 3.23. That John was baptizing in Enon near
to Salim, because there was much Water there. And because of the numbers of
those that went to John to be baptized, it was most convenient that it should
be in such Places where there was Plenty of Water. But can any one prove hence,
that they were baptized by dipping into it, or under it? Is this any thing more
than a Conjecture? tho he baptized there, where there was much Water, yet the
manner of baptizing there is not stated or determined. So that this which is so
much insisted upon, at most from hence, is but a Conjectural Probability; and
therefore can be no matter of Faith, nor can lay any Obligation upon Practice.
For besides, in that place it is not said, that there was much Water together;
but (...), many Waters, that is, many Streams or Rivolets, which were not very
common generally in that Country. And thus there might be, tho there were not
Water of a sufficient Depth to dip a Man in it. But let that be how it will,
there is no determinate Manner expressed, or to be certainly and evidently
concluded, as ought to have been to build a Consequence of such a Nature upon,
as to infer an Obligation to such a determinate Manner.

Lastly, that of Acts 8.36. uses to be insisted upon, concerning the Baptism
of the Eunuch by Philip. For ver. 38. it is said, They went down both into the
Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him: and when they were come
up out of the Water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip. Yet neither
here is the particular Manner of the Administration expressed, nor yet to be
certainly collected. It is no strange thing, that they did go down into the
Water in that warm Country; that they might do, and yet Philip not dip the
Eunuch in it, but take up Water with his Hand to pour it upon him. And yet the
words in the Original may be as conveniently interpreted, that they both went
down to the Water, (as the Eunuch was journying upon the Road by) and came up
from it only: For so the Particles here rendered into and out of, (...) and
(...). See Matthew. 15.24. Luke 1.71.
are often expounded. And if so, then this Text does not so much as prove, that
they went into the Water, but only to the Bank or Side of it. And besides, that
Water, if they did go into it, is reported by those that have traveled into,
and viewed those Parts, to have been only a Rise or Fountain, so small or
shallow, as that a Man could not be dipped in it. St. Jerome says, De Locis
Hebraicis, tom. 3. J. G 's Catabaptism, p. 51.
it was Fons ad Radicem montis ebulliens, a Fountain bubbling out at the bottom
of the Hill; Et ab eadem in qua gignitur, sorbetur humo, and forthwith drank up
by the Earth that produced it, as it is expressed by Sandys in his Travels,
speaking of the same Place; and therefore it is not likely to be of any
considerable Depth. And so the Expression in the Story of the Acts seems to
intimate, ver. 36. they came (...), unto a certain Water, or somewhat of Water,
enough to baptize the Eunuch, tho not by dipping. But from none of these
Relations of Baptism can the particular or determinate manner of the
Administration certainly he gathered; and therefore much less the Necessity of
any Form be concluded. So that at most, all that these Places amount to, is a
mere Probability of the thing, that it was done in that manner, and no more.
And yet these are all the Places from Example, that use to be produced to prove
the Necessity. But how short does all come of a demonstrative Proof?

2. In some of the Examples or Instances of Persons baptized in Scripture, it
is very improbable that the way of the Administration of Baptism was by
Dipping; and the Probability is rather on the other side, that it was not by
Dipping, but rather some other way.

As when we read of such vast Multitudes baptized by John, which the Evangelist
gives us an Account of; Matthew. 3.5, 6. Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all
Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him. This
great Conflux of People to him, seems to be chiefly at the Beginning of his
Ministry, though that continued but a little time neither at most. And we have
no Account that John had any Assistance in baptizing any; for we do not read
that his Disciples baptized, though the Disciples of our Lord did. So that the
whole Work must lie upon him, in baptizing so many thousand People, as it is
likely there were, that came to him day by day. And what a tedious and
dangerous Drudgery must this be for him, if he must stand so many Hours, or
whole Days together in deep Water, and must take all this Company one by one,
to bury them under Water, and take them up again after the Mode? How unlikely
or improbable therefore is this?

And so when we read of three-thousand Persons that were baptized, and added to
the Church the same Day, Acts 2.41. For it seems that they were baptized the
same Day that they heard the Word, and were converted to the Faith of Christ.
And this Work, it cannot well be supposed, that they could go about before Noon
at soonest: For St. Peter began his Sermon but about nine of the Clock in the
Morning, or the third Hour of the Day, ver. 15. And after that there must needs
some time pass in Discourse, etc. before they could be ready for the Work of
Baptism. And how unlikely is this, that all this could be done, and so many
Persons dipped after the Mode, by so few as there were to do it, in an
Afternoon? And that in the City Jerusalem, wherein there was no Water of Depth,
there being only the little Brook Cedron running by? And as for Cisterns, or
other Receptacles of Water, where should they find them to dip such a Multitude
in, and that upon a sudden? The most of that Nature, we may suppose, were about
the Temple, for the washing and bathing of the Priests; but it is not likely
there could be so many as to serve for such a Multitude; nor that they should
have leave to use those that were. And the Water-pots that were in private
Houses were commonly less, as serving chiefly for the washing of their Feet
when they came in from Travel. And there is not the least Intimation of their
going out of the City to perform this Work. And if they had, that would have
taken up more time than what could have been spared in an Afternoon. And yet as
Geographers report, there was not any Water near the City of that Quantity,
that could be sufficient for this Performance neither. And besides, was all
this done, and were they baptized naked, or in their Clothes? If naked, where
was the Modesty that became such an Ordinance, in the dipping of such a vast
mixed Multitude, as it is likely, of Men and Women together, at Noonday? If in
some Clothes, must they all go home first and fetch Clothes to change, or must
they walk to their several Habitations, it may be a considerable space, in
their wet Clothes? Which way soever Men's Imaginations may work to form a
Supposition, how strangely improbable is all?

So when we read of baptizing a whole Household, in the deep of the Night, in a
private House, in a City, without the least Intimation or Likelihood of their
going forth to a River, or any Water out of the House for it: As we read in the
Story of the Jailor, Acts 16.33. For he took them the same Hour of the Night,
and washed their Stripes, (that is, of Paul and Silas) and was baptized, he and
all his straightway, viz. in the very Prison; and then brought them into his
own House, which was probably joined to the Prison, and set Meat before them.
This is not very likely, in these Circumstances, to be done by Dipping neither.

And what an unlikely thing is it, that St. Paul, when he was in that weak
Condition through Fasting, and that great Consternation of Spirit that he was
in by reason of his Vision, should be baptized by Dipping in cold Water, in his
private Lodging, as the Series of the Story seems to intimate to us, that he
then was; Acts 9.9. He for three Days was without Sight, and neither did eat
nor drink. But ver. 18. when Ananias came and spoke to him, he received Sight
forthwith, and arose, (being, it is likely, before upon the Bed, through
Weakness and Trouble) and was baptized: And when he had received Meat, which it
seems was not till after his Baptism, he was strengthened.

Considering these things therefore, if we consider the bare Relations of the
Scripture, it seems highly improbable, that in these Instances Baptism was
administered by Dipping; but it seems more probable that it was done some other
way, by Aspersion or Application of Water, not by Dipping. So that if in the
former Instances there was a Probability that Baptism was by Immersion or
plunging in the Water, (though in some of them we have seen it hardly amounts
to that neither) yet in these now mentioned there is a Probability at least on
the other side. So that here is Probability against Probability. And I will
appeal to any Man that is not prejudiced, whether those Accounts of Baptism,
that we have in the former Relations, can ever be rationally supposed to
contain a demonstrative Evidence and Proof of the Necessity of Dipping, as
being essential to Baptism, when there are such Probabilities in others of a
quite different Administration?

3. But I shall add this further, that if it could be demonstratively proved by
Scripture-Examples, that the way of Administration of Baptism in those times,
was by Immersion or Dipping under Water, yet could it lay no necessary
Obligation upon us to the like, unless it could be proved, that this
determinate manner was appointed by Christ's Institution, which it is
impossible to prove by these Examples alone, if the thing be capable of being
performed otherwise. For our Savior might give out the Command of baptizing
with Water in general, without determining the manner of Administration, but
leaving the particular Form or Mode indifferent, and to be used ad libitum,
this way, or that way. And they might take up this Mode of Immersion (if they
did do so) as most suitable to their Apprehensions, or Inclinations, or Customs.
But it does not follow therefore, that we must needs observe the same Manner,
if the same Thing can be done another Way, and to the same Ends and Use.
Therefore unless they can prove this Particularity by the Institution, or such
Texts as are clearly declarative of it, these Examples will not bind us to the
like Observation. For an Example is no Rule or Obligation of it self; so that
the Rule it self must be first proved, before an Example can be made use of in
Argument. So that this Argument from Example alone is of no Force at all. And
we have seen before, that there is nothing to be certainly concluded from the
bare Words by which the Ordinance is expressed, to prove this Form of
Administration that is so contested about.

If it be said, That the Sense of our Savior's Institution may be competently
gathered from their Customs. I answer, That they had several sorts of Baptisms,
or Washings, and Purifications, and many of these were by Sprinkling: So that
which of those are we sure that our Savior referred to?

If it be said, that their manner of Baptism before was by Dipping or
Immersion, and so that our Savior in the Institution of Christian Baptism
supposed, at least, or ordered it to be administered in their Mode, and that the
word baptize must signify to do as they did. I answer, first, that that must be
proved by Scripture to be their Mode of Administration, before a Necessity can
be inferred by this Argument, that it must be ours. For if they produce an
unscriptural Proof, though the thing be true, though it may illustrate an
Argument, yet it will not be enough to enforce an Assent, so as to build the
Necessity of such a Practice upon. And yet again, if it could be proved never
so substanti^lly from Scripture it self, that this was always the Jewish Mode
of Administration of Baptism; yet it will not follow that this Mode or Manner
was prescribed by our Savior in his Institution: For his Institution respects
the End rather than the Manner, that is, he bid them do what they did to such
an End, (as Baptism is now designed for) but he did not bid them do it only in
that way. For our Savior's Institution does not seem to respect the Way at
all, but the End and the Matter; so that if there be any kind of Application of
Water to such an end, the Institution is satisfied. And these Examples do
nothing at all to oblige to this or that particular Form.

And yet it is to be observed again, that if the Institution had respected the
Manner as well as the End, that many things have been observed and done in the
first Administration of an Ordinance, in conformity to such Particularities in
the Institution, that in after-Administrations have been omitted or altered,
viz. in Matters that have not related to the Essence of the Ordinance. Thus it
was in the Matter or Business of the Passover, which according to the first
Institution was to be eaten standing, and in haste, with their Loins girded,
and Staffs in their Hands; to denote, perhaps, their hasty Passage and
Deliverance out of Egypt. But these Circumstances, when they came to possess
the Land of Canaan, in after-Generations, were wholly omitted. And we find
Christ and his Apostles in a Table-posture, in that Passover which he
celebrated with them, quite different from the first Institution; the
particular Posture being not relative to the main End of the Institution; and
the Circumstances being altered that the Institution at first had respect unto:
And so why may it not be in this Case? So that though it should be supposed,
that their way of Administration of Baptism was by Immersion, and that our
Savior had respect to that way in the first Institution, it having been their
Mode and Custom before in that warm Country; yet upon Variation of Places and
Customs, why may we not here also suppose an Allowance, if the Alteration of
the Manner, in Accommodation to such Places or Persons, parallel to that
Alteration that was before about the Passover? For surely a Change of Climates
makes a great Alteration of Circumstances; the Northern Climates being much
colder than the Southern, on this side the Equinoctial. And Immersion or
Bathing in cold Water, which was pleasurable enough in Judea, will be very
troublesome and dangerous in the Northern Regions, especially at some times of
the Year, and to some Persons that are sickly or weak. And yet no doubt but our
Savior intended that Baptism should be common to all Places, and Times, and
Persons: For we do not read in Scripture, that ever they deserred Baptism after
they were converted to the Christian Faith, at what time soever of the Year it
was. And yet withal it is plain, from the general Rule, that God requires Mercy
and not Sacrifice; and therefore our Savior, we may be sure, would not have an
external Ordinance to be ordinarily detrimental or dangerous to any of the
Subjects of it; as plunging in cold Water must needs be to some Persons,
especially in cold Climates, without a continual Miracle, which we are not
ordinarily to expect: For as he tells us in another Instance, the Sabbath was
made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath; and therefore was not to have any
Detriment from it, that could be conveniently prevented. For a natural Law must
be supposed always to overruled positive Institutions. And why may we not in
the same manner argue, that Baptism likewise was made for Man, and not Man for
Baptism? And therefore when such a Manner of Baptism would ordinarily become
hurtful to Man in some Places, we may by the same Rule conclude, that another
Manner may be substituted in the room of it, if it may answer to the same Ends
and Purposes. And though that of Dipping might be the manner in that warm
Country, where the Institution was first delivered, yet it is not reasonable to
suppose that that should be alike prescribed to other Persons and Places, to
whom and where it would become dangerous and hurtful to the Life and Health of
Man, when another will do as well.

III. I come therefore now to show, that it is not necessary to the Ends of
Baptism, that it should be administered by Dipping. For the cleansing Nature of
Water, without considering the Quantity, will be sufficient to signify all that
is intended by it. And it is the Significancy of Water alone, as a Sign, and
not the natural Virtue of it, can here be intended. And this Significancy may
be sufficiently expressed by the Use of it in any Quantity, it being the
purifying and cleansing Property of Water that is considerable in this
Ordinance. So that whether we take it as a Sign from God to us, of his
cleansing us from Sin and Guilt by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, and his
owning us for his own holy peculiar People; or whether we take it as a Sign
from us to God, of our Obligation and Dedication to Purity and Holiness, as the
Servants of God; the Use of it, by Aspersion or Application of it to us, will
be of like Significancy to Immersion or Plunging of us into it.

And that this may not be thought to be only our Imagination, it is to be
observed, that those very Benefits which are signified by Baptism, are often
set out by the Expression of sprinkling. And if the thing signified may be
sufficiently expressed in this way, Cyprian. Epist. ad Magnum.
then surely it is sufficient that the Sign should be so used, as to represent
or express the same. For the Sign is but for the sake of the thing signified.
Thus the Expiation of Sin by the Blood of Christ, and the Communication of the
Benefits of his Death, is set out by Sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Through Sprinkling
of the Blood of Jesus Christ. And Heb. 12.24. This is that Blood of Sprinkling
that speaks better things than the Blood of Abel. And so Heb. 10.22. we come
to have our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. And the Communication of
God's Grace, and Assistance of his holy Spirit, for the Sanctification of our
Hearts and Lives, is set out in the same manner. Thus we have that Prophecy,
with respect to Gospel Times, Isa. 52.15. He shall sprinkle many Nations, that
is, by bestowing his Word and Spirit upon them, to convert and bring them to an
holy Submission to himself. And so Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean
Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your Filthiness, and from all
your Idols will I cleanse you. And thus we find the manner was in the
Ceremonial Cleansings; as in cleansing of the Levites, Numb. 8.7. Thus shall
thou do unto them to cleanse them; sprinkle clean Water of purifying upon them.
And so when any one was unclean with any Ceremonial Uncleanness, he was to be
purified, by sprinkling the Water of Separation, Numb. 19.13. So that it seems
that all sorts of Purification or Cleansing may be sufficiently expressed by
sprinkling of Water or Blood. So that the Sprinkling of Water in Baptism is
likewise sufficient to express or signify what is to be signified thereby: It
being not the Quantity, but the cleansing Nature of Water, that is intended in
it, as a Sign to the Purposes to which it is designed. As in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, it is not the Quantity of Bread and Wine that is necessary
to the Significancy intended therein, of strengthening and refreshing our Souls
by the Body and Blood of Christ; but Bread and Wine used in any Quantity
whatsoever. So the Significancy and End of Baptism does not depend upon the
Quantity of Water used therein, but only upon that Use of it, whatever Quantity
it be in.

But say our Brethren of the other Persuasion, that the Significancy of Baptism
is not sufficiently expressed, unless, according to the Apostle, we are buried
in Baptism under Water, as they understand that Place, Romans 6.4. We are buried
with him by Baptism into Death: Which Place they produce, both to prove the
manner of Baptism by Dipping, and also the Necessity of it. Whereas I think
that neither one nor the other can be proved from it: The Apostle's Design in
that Place is to engage Christians to a Forsaking or Renunciation of Sin: And
the Argument he uses is taken from their Baptism, because they are baptized,
in their Baptism, into the Similitude of Christ's Death, and so are buried with
him by Baptism into Death, so as to die to Sin: That as Christ died for Sin, so
we by our Covenant-Engagement in our Baptism, undertake avowed Death to Sin,
evermore to renounce and forsake it, and to live a new regenerate Life
answerable to Christ's Resurrection. And this is to be planted together with
Christ in the likeness of his Death; Ver. 5.
and so we are to be in the likeness of his Resurrection. And our old Man is
crucified with him, Ver. 6.
that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
Sin: Ver. 11.
And therefore we must reckon our selves, by this our Covenant-Engagement, to
be dead indeed unto Sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord; to
live a Life of Holiness according to the Will of God. So that it is a departing
from Sin which the Apostle here intends, and argues from Baptism as an engaging
Covenant-sign thereunto, and makes use of the several Metaphors of Death and
Burial, and planting into Death, and Crucifixion, to express this departing
from Iniquity, to which by Baptism we are engaged.

But say they, The Apostle alludes to the Practice or Custom of baptizing by
dipping under Water. But how does that appear? they must prove the Custom
before they can prove that this is an Allusion to the Custom: For an Allusion
to a Custom supposes it, which must be made out some other way. For it must
first appear, that that was the Custom, before it can appear that this is an
Allusion to it; so that this Text alone does not prove the Custom. And we see
that the Apostle's Discourse may be very well understood without supposing such
an Allusion. And yet if the Custom be owned, and the Allusion be granted, the
Apostle's Allusion does not prove the Necessity of it. In other Scriptures we
see, there is an Allusion to Sprinkling, yet we don't argue the Necessity of
Sprinkling from such an Allusion: Nor can the Necessity of Dipping be argued
from this. For the Force of the Apostle's Argument does not lie in this, that
they were buried under Water, (though it be admitted they were so) but that
they were obliged by their Baptism, as an engaging Sign, to depart from Sin;
which they may be as well, if Baptism were administered by Sprinkling; so that
the thing designed is equally attained this way, though not under the Notion or
Metaphor of Burial, yet under another Notion that signifies the same thing,
though not in the same manner. And it is the thing it self that is to be
respected, and not as it is expressed under such or such a Metaphor. And
therefore I can never think, that there should be so much Stress laid upon a
Practice only for the sake of a certain Metaphor to be built upon it, when the
thing it self may be argued without it, or under any other as well as that.

Thus I hope I have made out, that there is no Necessity of baptizing by
Dipping to be proved by Scripture. And no body pretends, as I know, the
Necessity of any other particular determinate Form.

Inference 1. And hence then I infer, that the particular Mode or Form of
Baptism is a thing indifferent, as not coming under any Precept, or being any
way essential to the Ordinance. As the Anabaptists do allow, that it is
indifferent whether Persons be baptized naked or in their Clothes, (though I
think that that may fairly admit of a Dispute) there being as they think no
positive Rule for either. So for the same Reason shall I make the like
Conclusion concerning the Mode of the Administration, whether by Dipping or
Sprinkling.

2. And then if the particular Form or Mode be indifferent, then to lay such a
Stress upon it, as if the Worship or Ordinance could not be otherwise
acceptably performed or observed, can be nothing else but an unreasonable
Superstition.

3. And if it be indifferent, then to make a Breach and Schism in the Church
for the sake of it, to cry down all other Baptism for a Nullity, besides their
own, and to condemn all other Churches as no Churches, and their Ordinances as
no Ordinances, and their Ministry as no Ministry, for the sake thereof; and to
promote, continue, and carry on with so much Importunity, a causless and
uncharitable Separation and Division by means thereof, must needs be very
highly criminal.

I shall conclude all with the Apostle's Exhortation to the Romans, Let us
follow after the things that make for Peace, Chapter 14.19.
and things wherewith one may edify another. 2 Cor. 13.11.
And that to the Corinthians; Finally, Brethren, farewell: Be perfect; be of one
Mind, live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately published, A Survey of the Bible; or, an Analytical Account of
the Holy Scriptures: Containing the Division of every Book and Chapter; thereby
showing the Frame and Contexture of the whole. Much conducing to the clearer
Understanding thereof. By way of Supplement to the Annotations on the Bible. By
Samuel Clark, M. A. sometime Fellow of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge; and
afterward Rector of Grendon-Vnderwood, in the County of Bucks. Printed for
Jonathan Robinson.


