A DISCOURSE OF THE Unlawfulness of Praying TO Saints and Angels: BEING A full
Answer to a LETTER OF SABRAN the JESUIT: WHEREIN The Practice of the Church of
Rome, in Praying to Saints and Angels, is plainly proved to be contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, and the pretended Authority by him produced, to be either
Forged, or Impertinent.

By TITUS OATS, D. D. A Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

ERRATA.
PREFACE.

PAge 1. line 1. read Controversies. ibid. l. 7. r. new Matter. p. 3. l. 8: r.
that rascally.

DISCOURSE.

PAge 2. line 24. read erat Judaeis. p. 4. l. 12. r. perparum. ibid. l. 36. r.
Caroli. p. 5. l. 35. r. ut nonnulli. ibid. l. 38. r. adorari. ibid. l. 40. ^
for if. p. 11. l. 25. r. Apostolum Christi and non sicut Antichristum. p. 12.
l. (...). r. Mulieres. ibid. l. 38. r. Filii. ibid. l. 39. r. subactas. p. 13.
l. 21. r. (...). ibid. l. 28. r. posteros. p. 14. l. 35. r. affinity. ibid. l.
41. r. inde. p. 15. l. 3. r. Dixit, quid mihi tibi est. ibid. l. 4. r. quod non
putaret aliquis magis eximiam. ibid. l. 5. r. veluti. ibid. l. 7. r. admirati
delibantur. p. 16. l. 7. r. I pray. p. 17. l. 7. r. aliquem. p. 19. l. 13. r.
quisque. ib. l. 16. r. Nymphis. ib. l. 21. r. Nympha. p. 21. l. 8. r. has been
far. ib. l. 26. r. Now your Divines. ib. l. 42. r. aliter. p. 22. l. 33. r.
suppliciter. p. 24. l. 3. r. drive our sins away: p. 25. l. 12. r. call a
sequence. ib. l. 25. r. it is by her. ib. l. 36. r. per manus ipsius
administrantur. ib. penult. r. aureum. p. 26. l. 37. r. than he that is. p. 28.
l. 14. r. of his skill. ib. l. 33. r. King, moved him to wrath that he
threatened. p. 30. l. 3. r. recalling. ib. l. 26. r. of Tours in France. p. 31.
ult. r. Revelations meant. p. 33. l. 12. r. who are entreated in the Name of
the King. p. 34. l. 29. r. of Blood throughout. p. 36. l. 13. r. dependit. p.
41. l. 3. r. do not mention. p. 43. l. 7. r. was kept, that he went from thence
into. p. 44. l. 40. r. as I have already observed, dead. p. 51. l. 36. r. was
only. p. 52. l. 38. r. and were not. p. 53. l. 13. r. honorificentiam qui nobis
salutem profusione sui. p. 54. l. 9. r. great Miracles. p. 57. l. 4. r. in
Testimony that. p. 58. l. 4. r. Martyrs; I must tell you that of these. ib. l.
5. r. doubt were very. ib. l. 14. r. portenta. ib. l. 22. r. qui essent very
Christiani and qui. ib. l. 28. r. mirabiliarios. ib. l. 30. r. ut inducant. p.
63. l. 17. r. Rem, it being only for the. p. 64. l. 30. r. longa sint tempora.
ib. l. 38. r. Testimonies as Authentic. p. 65. l. 11. r. years, to justify
your groundless Notions. p. 66. l. 31. r. Grace, who by Nature were. ib. l. 35.
r. whom they asserted. p. 68. l. 12. r. an eundum mihi ad Angelos? ib. l. 13.
Neque per seipsos potentes. ib. l. 15. r. that may reconcile. p. 69. l. 13. r.
gestaverunt. ib. l. 15. r. Sanctum Sanctorum. ib. l. 17. r. Vail; there he
alone of all them. p. 70. l. 27. r. quia si pie vixerunt.

These are the gross Faults of this Piece, besides which are many other smaller
Errors, not only literal, but in the Pointing, which I have omitted here, and
desire the Reader to Correct with his Pen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas a Late Paper was Published, Entitled, A Petition, and Proposals to
his Highness the Prince of Orange; this is to satisfy my Friends, it is a very
unjust Imposition on me, both by Printer and Publisher.

TO ALL True Protestants. GRACE and PEACE, etc.
BRETHREN,
THE Controversy between us of the Reformed Religion, and the Synagogue of
Rome, have been so often debated, and the Authorities on both sides so often
produced, that to some who are yet Strangers to the present Constitution of
Affairs, it may seem unnecessary to say them over again, and I must confess
that it will be scarce possible to bring forth any Matter, or if we could, it
is scarce probable that what can be newly laid down as Proof, can prevail more
than all those Arguments that have been used and urged in those great
Controversies, by Men Eminent in their Generations for Learning and Piety, and
who have blessed the World with their Labors in a most signal manner; but
these Considerations have not discouraged me from doing my Duty, because that
Experience has taught me, that the same Medicaments are with Success applied
to a returning or abiding Ulcer; and the Truth of it is, the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, must be for ever ready to put the
Church of God in mind of such things as they have already heard, and by the
same Scriptures, and the same Arguments endeavor to prevent and destroy Sin;
and by the same Authority from the Word of God to extirpate Heresies, which
daily are sowed by those cursed Impostors of the Sea of Rome.

These eight or ten years of warm Weather, and many Indulgent Showers of soft
Rain, have made many of their Damnable Heresies like Weeds, to take Root
greatly, and to spread themselves widely; and the Conspirators by their
repeated Importune Impudence, have had great Encouragements to seduce our
Countries from their Obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and they bave had
some Success upon those who have made Gain to be Godliness, and their Interest
their God, and have to the utmost of their Power and Skill, endeavored to
brand and blacken all Men that have stood in their way; some they have almost
Ruined, for endeavoring to prevent the Mischiefs they have ever since the
Restoration been Plotting and Contriving against our Lives, Liberties, and
Religion, amongst which I am one, and should have been silent under my present
Oppression, and unjust Usage, and given way to others of better Abilities, to
have defended the Cause, had I not been provoked to appear in Print.

Some time since Mr. Lewis Sabran, who calls himself a Priest of the Society of
Jesus, wrote a scurrilous Letter to Mr. William Needham, in answer to a third
Letter by him Licensed, written to him the said Sabran, in the fourth Page of
which Letter he is pleased to use these words: Hence have taken their Rise,
those black unconcionable Calumnies, by which, when they could reach it, they
have taken away our Lives; to this end of late years was singled out against
us, the Minister Oats: Their Fury being now disarmed, they turned the Stream
of those Calumnies, on the Catholic Church, by misrepresenting her Doctrine;
and again, when all the false Colors of those Misrepresentations are wiped of
those Slanders, that scurrulous Language fall on them who appear in the Defense
of those Catholic Truths, for which double Service, the Minister G -- seems to
have been singled out; they are both equally well qualified for the purpose,
because neither can blush. Thus far Mr. Sabran, who falling so foully upon me, I
thought it fit to put Pen to Paper, in order to justify my self, and expose
the Doctrine by him so zealously defended.

I have no reason at this time of day to suspect that Spirit of Malignity
amongst Protestants, which carries some on to run down Men by vulgar
Acclamations; and as for those dismal Vizors, those Rascally Party of Mankind
(the Popish Party I mean) has endeavored to put upon me, viz. of Malice,
Perjury, Treason, with the like, which serve to affright Children in
Understanding, and their Illegal, and Unjust, and Reproachful Whippings, and
Pillorying, as a Malefactor; whereas God knows, and you now must own that they
have had no matter of just Accusation against me, all which was to bring you
out of the Love of those most Worthy and Important Truths I did before three
Parliaments deliver upon my Oath, as also in several Courts of Judicature,
where my Testimony was received, believed, and approved of. In order to my
fall, these unwearied Vermin employed a Profligate Fellow, the common Buffoon
of the Nation, and great Presents were made to him, to blast and abuse me, and
the Pains he took, met with an unexpected Success; for many of my Brethren of
the Church of England were deluded by him, and were carried away by his
Profligate Hellish Lies. Being thus run down by his Pen, nothing would serve
the turn of my Popish Adversaries, but that I must dye, to this end great
Endeavors were used (if possible) to take away my Life, by a false Accusation
of Felony, and Treason; but their Witnesses not having the luck to be
believed, then they were resolved not to rest themselves satisfied in the
Defeat of that Effort and Enterprise, they proceeded to Indict me for Perjury,
in which, by the help of their Banditti from St. Omers, and Staffordshire, and
by the Countenance of the Common Hangman of England, they prevailed upon a
Credulous Jury, to Convict me, and having obtained a Verdict, these
Conspirators laid their Heads together, to invent what Punishment they should
Inflict, and ordered me to be Pilloried five times a Year during my Life, and
to be Whipped from Aldgate to Newgate, and then within a day after, to be Whipped
from Newgate to Tyburn, in which sort of Punishment, I received two thousand
three hundred fifty six Stripes, according to the most modest Computation that
could be made, and they ordered that I should be divested of my Canonical
Habit, which they had no Power to do as I conceive; besides all this, they set
a great Fine upon me, and Condemned me to be a close Prisoner during my Life,
which Punishment they thought would render me very Obnoxious to all Mankind at
least; but the great Design was my Murder, that I might not Communicate to the
World, those Particulars relating to the Popish Conspiracy, carried on by that
Wicked Party, for the Murder of the Late King, and the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and Government, both in Church and State, as by Law
Established, which are not yet told, which I shall do, when it shall please
God, and the King that now is, that a Parliament shall meet, and sit, and
Redress our Crying Grievances, and Heal all those Wounds which the Devilish
Hellish Popish Crew have made amongst us, by Murdering our Protestant
Brethren, attempting to Assassinate the Late King, Firing the City, Corrupting
Christianity, Enslaving the Nation, Debauching our Youth, and Disturbing of
Mankind.

Their base Usage of me, was, I say, to lessen me, and those plain Truths which
I have delivered, in order to discover these Serpents to the World, who at that
time acted as behind a Curtain; but since they have been more bare and brazen
faced in their Proceedings, and the Series of their Actions from the second of
February, 1684. to this very day, have sufficiently justified me, so that by
the good Providence of our Great God, and the Imprudence of my Implacable
Enemies, I do find that they have taken away all Cause and Occasion of
Jealousy in me, concerning you, that you should take any such Impressions from
them, as may tend to beget in you an evil Opinion of me: Further, because you
well remember that it has been the common practice of the Members of that
Whorish Synagogue (they being instigated by the Devil their Father) to put the
Servants of God, and Professors of the Protestant Religion into Bears Skins,
and Wolves Skins, that they might be the better prepared to be torn in pieces,
and devoured by Dogs; but they being now disabled from the acting of such
Cruelties here, they took another Course with some of us, and slily have
insinuated with the Sons of Men, that they were a peaceable and quiet People,
and that those who have charged them with those Crimes, viz. Treasons,
Murders, Fires, and Massacres, were Men not to be believed against them, and
by those Courses they did prevail with some Eminent and Holy Men, who were
carried away for a time with their Dissimulation; but they have given you such
a taste of their Truth, Peace, and Love, that I conceive you will not any more
fly to any such polluted Sanctuaries, nor rely upon their Suggestions, as if at
this time of day they could dissuade you from giving Credit to those great
Truths I have already made known to you; but if there be any Man, or number of
Men, that may or shall remain subject to the Delusions of these Devils, it is,
That they may be Damned for not receiving the Truth in the Love thereof. As for
me, I have that Witness within me, whose Prerogative it is to Laugh at all
Jealousies, and Suggestions of Men to Scorn, whether they be deceived, or such
as deceive, though I confess, they have not run about altogether in vain, who
have sought my Ruin. But I bless my Good God, though my Popish Adversaries
have to the utmost of their Power endeavored to bring me under a Cloud of
Disparagement, insomuch, that some of my old Friends were afraid, or ashamed to
own me; yet he raised up new ones who have not without Difficulties preserved
me from Perishing in my Affliction, Feeding, and Clothing me; many of whom
were Persons who were better acquainted with my Cause, than my Person, who
escaped the being deluded by that Infamous Race of the Babylonish Strumpet.

Almighty God who never forsakes those who stand faithful to the Truth, has
been pleased to Comfort me with his Presence, and to give me the Blessing of
his Holy Jesus, to grow in the Favor of himself, and of good Men, and though
he has Chastned me sore, yet he has not delivered me over unto Death, but
under the Affliction he has taught me some weak Rudiments of his Heavenly Art,
drawing Light out of Darkness for mine own use; and my being abused by these
uncircumcised Philistines, and neglected by the Prelates, and Presbyters of our
Church, and others that should have stood by me in that Cause, for which I do
Suffer, has made me sensible, that Man is no^ to be relied upon, but that
Trust is to be put in him that will confound these Hell born Devils in his own
due time, and that he will preserve those who abide faithful in the Truth: Nor
do I envy the Happiness of those my Brethren of the Church of England, who are
easy in their Places and Preferments; for my part, (blessed be God) I can from
my Poor Prison, where I have been almost five years, behold all my Brethren of
the Church of England, with much Contentment, and sufficient Enjoyment of my
self, on Thrones round about me.

It will not be amiss to tell you, that one great Artifice of these Firebrands,
and Incendiaries, was to persuade many of my Brethren of the Church of England,
that I was a Dissenter, and an Enemy of the Church of England, which though it
was notoriously false, for all that know me, can testify that I received my
Ordination from the Church of England, and Communicated with the Church of
England, in the blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: But this is the truth,
and nothing but the truth, that I have been always of the opinion, and do still
esteem my Dissenting Brethren, as a Generation of Men anointed by Almighty God,
with a Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, Zeal, and Faithfulness, and might well be
so esteemed by all my Brethren of the Church of England, and accepted of as
Persons fit to help on the great Work of ruining the Temple of Dagon,
destroying of Baal, and all its Worshippers, and to bring on the New Heavens,
and the New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell; and that by the mutual
joining of Protestants, in the Repair of the House of GOD, and making up the
Breaches, and decayed Places in the Body of the Doctrine of the Christian
Religion, which since the first raising, and completing of it, by Christ and
his Apostles, and the delivering it from the Hands of these Edomites, partly
through the ignorance and insufficiency of some, and partly through the
remisness of others, to whom the Guardianship and Custody thereof has been
committed by GOD in their successive Generations, has by these Locusts been
lamentably dismantled, and defaced in most parts of it, that if a Man should
look upon it, as they have represented it, he could scarce call it the Doctrine
of Christ. And therefore, since my Brethren that are Dissenters, were always
ready to do their part, to support and maintain the Doctrine of the Church of
GOD here in England; I could not but in point of Justice, Truth, and
Righteousness, own them for my Brethren, with whom I am contented to suffer, as
well as with my Brethren that are in close Communion with the Church of
England, since both profess the same Faith.

And were this Spirit of Love in me an Error, it might be more easily
pardoned, then the Errors and Wickedness of some few of those, who pretending
to be Bishops, and Presbyters of the Church of England, yet have been very
zealous and forward to promote Popery and Slavery in the Nation, these for a
time, have been caressed by those, whose eyes now (blessed be God) are opened,
and have seen their own Mistake, and the Villainy of those that have deceived
them, they now see who were the Criminals; and I question not, but may help
them to that state, into which they have put the Innocent, and relieve me who
have been kept close these five Years. My humble Request therefore to my
Brethren of the Church of England is, that I might not be thought unworthy of
their Cognizance, because of my tender Affections to my poor Brethren, that
cannot comply with the Church of England in some few things, since they are so
willing to go as far in the Service of the Protestant Cause and Interest, as
any of those who profess themselves Members of the Church of England.

Brethren, It is time for me to cease entertaining you with the sad Account of
the Villainy, Inhumanity, and Cruelty of these Monsters of Mankind against me,
and to tell you that the Prize that I run for in this Humble Application of my
self to you, is by the opportunity and advantage hereof, to excite, provoke,
and engage you to bless the World in general, and this Nation in particular,
laboring under Popish Burdens, and Tokes, which neither we, nor our
Forefathers, were able to bear, by asserting those blessed Truths, worthy of
your defending and maintaining, and by bringing the Doctrines of God our
Savior out of the Pavillions of Romish Darkness, into clear and perfect Light,
to be beheld, understood, reverenced, and obeyed. I have endeavored to the
best of my power at present, to make it plain, that Prayers to Saints departed
this Life, and to Angels, are unlawful, and abominable in the sight of God; I
have examined into some Authorities this angry Gentleman has produced, and
find them either forged, misrepresented, or impertinent; and without all Reason
and Conscience, he falls foully upon a Reverend Presbyter of our Church, for
Licensing a Letter to him, in which he is fairly and fully Refuted; but the
Mungril Curr will not leave barking; in his Letter, he is light, profane, and
abusive, and impudent, as if he never had been in a Conspiracy against the
Lives of two of the greatest Princes of Europe, nay three, and two of them
Crowned Heads, and against the Religion, Liberties, and Lives of the
Protestants of these three Kingdoms. But I shall say no more of this little
Schoolmaster, that talks as sawcily in the Pulpit, and is as peremptory in his
Notions, as he was over his Boys at St. Omers, where he used to bellow, and
roar like a Town Bull.

This little Piece I offer to your Consideration, and pray your acceptance of
it; there are Mistakes in it, through the carelessness of the Printer, which I
cannot help, because of my Imprisonment, and not being permitted to see after
it myself; so that by this means I may appear obvious to your Censures, because
that some passages ought to have been better secured: But I trust the Ancient
Law of Indulgence, in such Cases and Circumstances as mine are (which may
probably in due time, be some of my Adversaries also) is of Authority
sufficient with all sober Protestants, to relieve me.

Brethren, and Beloved, my Pen has transgressed the Law, and time of my
Intentions, these confined me to a much narrower Compass in my Epistle, and
prohibited me the troubling of you to any such degree, as now I have done. The
truth is, I have for a long time suffered wrongfully from my Popish
Adversaries, and I hope you will give an injured Presbyter of the Church of
England leave to speak, and complain a little of his hard and cruel usage, for
no other cause, but doing Justice to my Protestant Brethren, in discovering
what those Hellish Popish Conspirators were doing against our Religion, Lives
and Liberties, and of their Villainous Firing the City of London, and Borough of
Southwark. Your eyes have seen enough, and would have seen more, had not
Almighty God put a stop to their Career, by confounding their Councels, and
defeating theirwicked purposes against us. I will therefore say no more, but
shall ever stand by that Truth which I have delivered, and will not hide one
Iota of what remains behind undiscovered, And I have taken care of that, though
it should please God that my Enemies should by any indirect course take away my
Life; and I shall always approve my self an honest man. and at present remain,

November 1. 1688. Your Brother and Servant, in the King's Bench Prison, for
the Testimony of a Good Conscience, TITUS OATS.

AN ANSWER TO SABRAN the Jesuit: SHOWING The Unlawfulness of Praying TO Saints
and Angels,
SIR,
I Perceive you are very earnest in the defense of a great Point much
controverted between the Divines of the Reformed Churches, and the Church of
Rome, viz. The Doctrine of Praying to Saints and Angels; a Doctrine exploded by
the Protestants, and as zealously defended by those of your Communion: And
because the unknown Minister has not (as you would make the World believe)
dealt ingenuously with you, you take occasion to fall upon Mr. Needham for
Licensing those Replies made to your Sermon, in which you were pleased to
defend that Doctrine, so much opposed by us of the Reformed Religion. I will
not go about to use any unhandsome Reflection upon you, or any of your
Communion, for any point of Religion, which I am satisfied in my Conscience to
be contrary to the Doctrine of God our Savior. Amongst the many Errors the
Church of Rome does hold, and maintain, I humbly conceive this to be one, and
an Error tending highly to the overthrowing of the Mediation of Christ, the
High Priest, and Apostle of our Profession.

Therefore the Point that I shall lay down, is this: That your Practice of
Praying to Angels, and Saints departed this Life, is contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ, and abominable in the sight of God.

I shall not, Sir, trouble you at present with those many Reasons those of our
Church and Communion, have offered to justify this Assertion of mine;
therefore I shall only tie my self up to these few.

First, Our Divines have rejected the Doctrine of Praying to Saints and Angels,
and look upon it as a Doctrine, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and
abominable in the sight of God, because it has no Warrant from the Word of
God. This, Sir, is acknowledged by the most Learned of your Communion.
Bannesius says, Orationes ad Sanctos faciendos, neque express, neque
involute, Sanctae Literae docent, 2 Qu. 1 Artic. 10. Lib. 1. Which in plain
English is this: That it is not taught in the Holy Scripture, neither expressly,
nor covertly, that Prayers are to be made to Saints. Bellarmine de Beat. Sanct.
cap. 19. says plainly, It was not the manner under the Old Testament, to say,
Holy Abraham, pray for us: for which he gives several Reasons, as that the
Fathers were then shut up in Prison, and did not see God. So that by the
confession of that Learned Doctor, it was no Practice of those that lived under
the Ministry of Moses his Law. Salmeron in 1 Timothy 2. says the same, and withal
adds, That there is nothing expressed in all the Gospels, or Epistles of the
Apostles, touching the matter. And withal he says, It would have been hard to
enjoin such a thing upon the Jews; and the Gentiles would have thought that
many Gods were put upon them, instead of the many Gods they had forsaken. His
own words, Sir, are these, Durum eratie Judaeis percipere, and Gentibus daretur
occasio putandi, multos sibi Deos, etc. Therefore be pleased to observe, that
it was the Practice of the Church of God to require Christians, when they did
labor under any Distemper, whether of Body, or Mind, to have recourse to the
Prayers of living Saints, and were taught that the Prayers of such were
prevalent; and if the Prayers to Saints, supposed to be in Heaven, were a
Doctrine according to truth, why were they not then ordered to apply themselves
to the Patriarchs and Prophets, to the Blessed Virgin, to St. Stephen and St.
James, and other more early Martyrs of the Church, whose Prayers, by your
common received Opinion in your Church, are highly meritorious, and far more
prevailing? But, Sir, you see these great Doctors of your Church, and men of
great Reading, confess that there are not the least footsteps in the Scripture
for this Practice; as also Suarez, Tom. 2. in disput. These. 42. Sect. 1. Eccius
in Enchyrid. suo. But suppose, Sir, that these Great Men had not been so
ingenuous as to confess; yet give me leave to tell you, that it is not possible
for you to find the least intimation of any Warrant for this Practice: which is
apparent, if you will but consider that in the Book of God there is neither one
Precept from our Lord, nor one Precedent to justify such a Worship. Now if you
can produce no Command from God, nor Example from any of the Saints of God, in
the time of the Apostles, you cannot expect to gain one Soul, that has the
least consideration, to the belief of that Proposition of the Lawfulness of
Praying to Saints and Angels, which you so fiercely maintain. If you have a
Warrant from God's Word, then it will lie upon you, first to produce the
Command, then you must produce the Promise, that the complying with that
Commandment shall be acceptable; for there is not one Command enjoined us in
the New Testament, but has its peculiar Promise: and you must also produce a
Threat, if this Command be not obeyed. Then secondly, show but where and when
the holy Apostles, in their day, or any Christian under their immediate
Ministry, did ever practice Praying to Saints and Angels, and you shall be my
great Oracle in Controversies of Religion: otherwise you must give me leave not
to believe Father Sabran's Ipse Dixit in this case.

Sir, give me leave to put you in mind, that the Holy Scripture everywhere
makes God to be the only Object of Prayer and Invocation. How many hundred
Petitions or Prayers are upon Record there? and not one of them put up to any
other. When our Lord taught his Disciples, and us in them, to pray, he directs
them to say, Our Father, which art in Heaven. The Scripture often expresses
this Duty, by the term of Praying, without any mention of the Object. When you
pray, use not vain Repetitions. When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet. And
hereby it is intimated, that Prayer in matter of Worship, can signify nothing
else but Praying to God. It is not Prayer, if it be directed to any other.

From all which, I must necessarily conclude, that your Practice of Praying to
Saints and Angels, must be an Abomination; for God will allow of nothing in his
Service and Worship, but what he himself has instituted: Therefore all
Protestant Divines have with one consent agreed, that all necessary parts of
Religious Worship do so depend upon the Will of God, revealed in his Word, that
whatsoever is not founded on his Word, is contrary to his Will. Therefore, Sir,
hear what the great Doctor of the Church, St. Augustine says, De Consens.
Evangel. Deum sic colere Op rtet, quo modo seipsum Colendum esse praecepit. We
ought so to worship God, as he has appointed himself to be worshipped. Be
pleased to remember what the Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 12. last verse, The
Israelites are dehorted from using the Religious Rites and Customs of the
Heathens, in the worshipping of God. How then? in what manner must they worship
him? Whatsoever thing he commands, they must observe to do; they may not add
thereto, nor diminish from it. To which, Sir, let me add that of our Savior,
Mat. 15. 9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of men: that is, pressing men's Traditions in the room of God's Institution.

Sir, give me leave to press one thing more, as worthy of your consideration;
that is, that the worshipping of Saints and Angels, of which Prayer and
Invocation is a principal part, and is not only without any Warrant from the
Word of God, but also is forbidden in the Scripture: there it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. I must here tell
you, I am not ignorant of your distinction of (...) and (...), the former your
Divines say belong to God only, and the latter may be applied to the Creature:
But, Sir, you very well know these are reciprocally used both in Sacred and
Profane Writ. And some Learned men of your own Communion have been so
ingenuous, as to acknowledge the same. Quid si and una Religionis vertus sit
quae Latriam duliamque continet certe plurimis atque Sapientissimis ea est
Opinio. You know well enough who it was that coined this distinction; and that
though he was a great Light in the Church of God, yet he was no Critic in the
Greek Tongue, as he himself says, Ego quid Linguae Graecae perpurum --
assecutus sum and prope nihil. It was St. Augustine himself, whom you very well
know did never intend it for that end and purpose, for which it is now used:
for he confesses, That the one is due to him as he is our Lord, and the other
as he is our God. These are St. Austin's own words, which takes away, to all
intents and purposes, that imaginary difference between your Latria and Dulia:
therefore when I meet with any of yours, urging the one to signify the honor
that belongs only to God, recognizing his Supreme Dominion, and the other to
signify service that is due to the Creature. I find that they say just
nothing, but thus much: We must honor God, and serve the Saints. It is like
the Saying of your Lyra; One Knee we may bow to a Noble Personage, but upon
both we may kneel only to God. This Lyra thought he had done the business, when
he had so learnedly salved the matter.

But I pray, Sir, what if the common people understand no Greek, and cannot so
learnedly discern Latria from Dulia, but take the one Adoration for the other,
truly as it now fares in your Church, they use them universally without
difference? therefore this distinction, thus applied, seems much like to the
Physician's Wife, that once said, that Pepper is cold in working, and hot in
operation: for I humbly conceive this distinction, so much made use of by the
Divines of your Church, stands not in difference of matter, but only in words.

Certainly, Sir, Constantius the Bishop of Constantia, in the second Nicene
Council, was so zealous for the Worship of Images, that he laid aside this
distinction of Latria and Dulia, and very roundly in Libro Carole Magni, tells
you his thoughts of the Worship of Images. Ego Imaginibus cultum honoris
exhibeo eundem, qui debetur Individuae Trinitati; and si quis nolit idem facere
eum anathematizo ut Martionem and Manichaeum: I for my part yield unto Images
the same Adoration of honor, that is due to the Holy Trinity; and if any man
refuse to do the same, I accurse him, as I do the Heretics Martion and
Maenicheus. Now, Sir, this distinction of your Churchmen falls to the ground,
if the Authority of this Doctor and Bishop of your Church may pass for current;
but lest you should wave the Authority of this Bishop, I pray consider the
determination of the second Council of Nice, where it was determined thus: Non
sunt duae Adorationes, sed una adoratio, Imaginis and primi exemplaris Cujus
est Imago. There are not two sorts of Worship or Adoration (the one called
Latria, the other Dulia) as your Divines divide them, but one only Adoration,
both of the Image, and also of the Pattern whereof the Image is.

Likewise your Great Doctor Thomas of Aquine, after a long Debate upon the
Point of the Worshipping of Images, and showing with what Worship they ought to
be Worshipped, The Image, says he, and the Thing thereby represented, must be
Worshipped with one and the same Adoration, Tho. 3 Senten. Did. 2. And for
example, says, The Cross or Image of Christ, must be Worshipped with Latria
(that is with Godly Honor) because Christ himself is so honored; and the
Image of our Lady with Dulia; because that Honor, as he says, is due unto our
Lady. But this Determination is reproved by Holcot in his Readings upon the
Book of Wisdom, Reading 158; and his Reason is this, Latria, or Godly Honor,
is due only unto God; but the Image of God is not God, therefore Latria, or
Godly Honor, is not due to an Image; otherwise, says he, the Creator, and the
Creature would be Worshipped, or Adored with one and the same Honor: and
notwithstanding Henricus de Gandavo, Petrus de Aquila, Johannes de Gui Verra,
Durandus, and other School-Doctors of your Communion, agree with Holcot, and
their Judgment seems more agreeable to reason: yet your Author that wrote
Fortalitium Fidei, says, The common Opinion and Practice of your Church
holds to the contrary. And one Jacobus Payva, a great Stickler on that side,
with great assurance, writes thus, Non Tamen Inficiamur hac -- Nos Latriae
Adoratione Christi praeclarissimam, Crucem colere, and Venerari: We deny not
but we do Worship and Adore the Most Noble Cross of Christ, even with this
Godly Honor that we call Latria.

Sir, Be pleased to take Notice that some of your Divines, the better to color
the absurdity of this way of Adoration, they will in all their Writings refer
the Adoration of the Thing represented by the Image; yet I find that Jacobus
Nauclantius, the Bishop of Clugium in Italy, is so zealous, that he tells you,
That the Image, and the Thing represented by the Image, must be Worshipped with
one and the same Adoration. Be pleased, Sir, to observe his Words, which are
these, in Epist. ad Roman. Cap. 1. Ergo non solum fatendum est, fideles in
Ecclesia Adorare coram Imagine, and nonnulla ad cautelam, forte loquuntur, sed
and Adorare Imaginem, sine quo volueris scrupulo, quin and eo illam, venerari
cultu, quo and proto typon ejus; propter quod si illud habet Adorari Latria,
and illa habet adorare Latria. Therefore we must confess that the faithful
People in the Church, do not only Worship before the Image, as some men use to
speak for more assurance, but that they Worship the Image itself, and that
without any manner of scruple of Conscience whatsoever: yea, and further, they
Worship the Image with the same Honor, wherewith they Worship the Thing
represented, as if the Thing represented by the Image be Worshipped with Godly
Honor; then must the Image itself be Worshipped with Godly Honor. These, Sir,
are the Doctors of your Church, Men of no small figure in their day. The
Bishop's Works were Printed at Venice, 1557; and Pava was Printed at Cologne,
1564, both allowed, as not being against the Catholic Faith: From all which,
what avails your Distinction of Latria and Dulia? For the one by your Doctors
is given to the Creature, as well as the other. Why may not the Virgin Mary
have Latria, as well as a Stock, or Stone, which have Eyes and see not, and
Hands and handle not, a Nose and smell not, Ears and hear not, Feet and walk
not? So that if you trust to the Distinction, you will fail of your
expectation, Service and Worship being only due to God; Thou shall Worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: hereby both Dulia and Latria
applied to God, and to none else; for if you compare the Text, with the Text in
the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. you will find the word Only not used; but our
Blessed Redeemer puts it in, to show, that God, and none but him, is the Object
of our Latria and Dulia, the one signifying Religious Worship, and the other
signifying Religious Service. In the Text, if you please to consider the
occasion that was then given to the Blessed Jesus to speak those Words, in
Matthew. 4. our Lord was tempted by the Devil to Worship him, the Reply Christ
makes is this, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. You cannot imagine, Sir, that
the Devil did desire of Christ to pay that Service to him, which you call the
superior, and highest Service; nor did he pretend to be God himself, but only
his Minister, and enjoy what he offered, by the Bounty of God, and a little
Religious Prostration would have served his turn; I say, the most he could
appear to be, was an Angel of Light; yet Christ refused to pay to him, either
your Latria or Dulia, for he says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve: where you must observe, that as the Devil had no
Right to any Religious Worship, so no Creature can pretend to it, it being due
to God only.

Sir, Be pleased further to consider that passage in the Revelations, 19. 10.
where St. John seeing an Angel, I fell, says he, at his feet to worship him,
and he said unto me, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants, and of thy
brethren that have the testimony of Jesus; worship God. This St. John was so
transported with the Great and Glorious Tidings he had received from Heaven by
the Angel, he falls on his Face to acknowledge to the Angel his Joy for his
News, and his Thankfulness to the Messenger; but he is forbidden, and commanded
to Worship God; See thou do it not, but worship God. And see Revel. 22. 8, 9.
And I John saw these things, and heard them, and when I had heard and seen, I
fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which showed me these things;
then said he unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy follow-servant, and of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book;
worship God. Hence you may see that the Angel forbids St. John Worshipping him;
nay, he chides him for offering to pay him a Religious Worship, (...), I am thy
Companion in Dulia, therefore Worship not me, but God, as the only Object of
Religious Worship, do not Worship me that am thy Fellow Servants, and
Fellow-Worshipper.

Secondly, I pray Sir, be pleased to consider, that the Almighty has enjoined
us a Rational Worship and Service, fit for Mankind to perform, and as most
suitable with the Glory of his Holy Name: but I conceive the Practice of the
Church of Rome in this Point of Praying to Saints and Angols, to be irrational;
and by your leave, let me tell you, that nothing can be more irrational, and
absurd; this I shall make appear in these two Particulars.

I. Consider that the Saints and Angels are under an incapacity of hearing the
Prayers that are directed to them; and if so, then, Sir, you will own it to be
ridiculous and irrational to pray to them that cannot hear our Prayers; I
remember the Scripture says, How shall we call on them in whom we do not
believe? I may with as much reason say, How shall we call on them who cannot
hear us? that this is the Case of the Glorified Spirits, is evident, 1. Because
they are not Omnipresent, they are circumscribed and finite Creatures, and can
be but in one place, at one and the same time. This may be affirmed with very
good ground of the Virgin Mary herself, who then must be incapable of hearing
the Prayers of One Hundred Thousand Persons, who it may be are Praying to her
at one and the same time, some in one part of the World, and others in the
other part of the World; and if she cannot hear their Prayers, I cannot suppose
that she can help those who are so much devoted to her Service. I pray, Sir,
Why do we call upon the Name of the Great God? Is it not because he is present
to observe, and present to accept our Petitions, and answer our Suits; all Men
have his essential Presence, good Men have the Presence of his Grace, which
does not only flow from his Nature, but from his Promise also. Now, how can a
Saint or Angel be either present to observe, or present to accept of the
Petitions of those that make suit to them? That saying of the Psalmist is
plain, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9. Whither shall I go from thy presence? If I ascend up
to heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there; if
I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall uphold me. Now,
Sir, if God be in Heaven, Earth, Sea, Hell, and fills all Places with his
Presence, this shows him an Omnipresent Being. Now produce as much of the
Mother of Jesus, or of any of the Saints and Angels, and we will join with you
in making our Addresses to them; but this cannot be said of any Saint or Angel
whatsoever, therefore, How can they hear? How can they help? And if they can
neither hear, nor help, what reason have we to pray unto them? 2. As they are
not Omnipresent, so they are not Omniscient; for suppose they could hear what
Men do or speak, yet they cannot understand what they think; if we could
imagine that they could hear us, what our Mouths do utter, yet we cannot
imagine that they know the Secrets of the Heart. Now, Sir, the greatest part of
our private Devotions are mental, they are conceptus Animi, such as are
conceived in our Hearts and Minds; nay, Sir, let me tell you, that our most
acceptable Prayers, many times consist of those Sighs and Groans which cannot
be uttered; and if you will make the Saints and Angels privy to these, it is to
give that to them, which is only due to God; see what Solomon says, the 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. Thou only know the hearts of the children of men: there was no
Man, nor no number of Men but will say that such Knowledge was too painful, and
too wonderful for them: in a word, Sir, you well know, that to search and try
the Heart is an incommunicable property and perfection of Almighty God.

It has been, Sir, a Question among the Divines of your Church, Whether the
Saints in Heaven have any knowledge at all of our Human Actions, and Affairs on
Earth? but I think the Scriptures are as full as may be to the contrary, (viz.)
That they have no knowledge of our Affairs or Actions here upon Earth, see
Isai. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us,
and Israel acknowledge us not: and see the 22 Kings 20. Thine eyes shall not
see all the evil that I will bring upon this place: for I will gather thee to
thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered in peace: this was a Promise made unto
Josiah: so take notice of Job, who tells you, that ye know not what is done
after their death; Their sons may come to honor, and they know it not; and
they are brought low, and they perceive it not of them. From all which you may
easily conclude, that there can be no Man, whether good or bad, that can tell
any thing of earthly Transactions, after they are departed this Life.

This I may assert with the greatest assurance, that the Saints have no such
knowledge as is necessary in this case, they can neither know, nor understand
the Prayers that Men offer up to them, nor (which is also highly necessary)
with what Mind they offer their Prayers, whether in sincerity, or in
hypocrisy. I pray call to mind what St. Augustine says, Mortui nesciunt,
etiam Sancti quid Agant Vivi, etiam eorum filii. This was the Opinion of that
Great and Learned Doctor and Bishop of the Church of God, and it is so plain a
Truth, that whatsoever shall be brought in to say in contradiction to it, it
will be scarce received for a Catholic Verity, in the Church of God.

But, Sir, how can we expect any satisfaction from you, when your Divines are
to this day divided about that matter, and can neither satisfy themselves, nor
one another, how the Glorified Saints come to have knowledge of our
Supplications, and Prayers: you know that many nice and curious Questions have
been argued in our Schools, amongst many Learned Men, for at least Six Hundred
Years, Pro and Con, without any satisfactory Determination, as Gratian Gloss,
in 13. Qu. de Mortuis, and St. Augustine in his Tract, De cura pro Mortuis,
they have all left the matter in doubt, As whether the Souls of those to whom
they Pray be present, or absent? If they be present, whether they be present
actually or virtually? If they be absent and have Information from others, then
whether it be from the Angels, or from God himself, and if it be from God, then
whether it be by particular Revelation from him, or by the Beatifical Vision of
him. Thus, Sir, you know it has been inquired into, and debated amongst your
own Doctors; one has determined one way, and another has determined another
way, and there is not yet to this day, any Catholic Determination made of any
of those Questions: it is true, they all agree that they are made acquainted
with the Prayers, or else in vain they would be Invocated; but how they come by
this knowledge, Non convenit inter Omnes, says your Pinello, all are not
agreed about it.

Some of your Divines that have been very fanciful, have been taken with the
Notion of a Looking-glass in the Face of God, wherein those blessed Spirits
have an exact and full view of all things past, present, and to come: the
Notion is pleasant, and it is pity you have not had the good fortune, to beget a
firm belief amongst those of your own Church, of this Point; for since this
Looking-glass was broken in pieces, even in your own Church, there has been
some of your own Doctors, who could see nothing in it, but the Folly and
Rashness of those who first invented it, without any Warrant from the Word of
God, Cajetan, Gabriel Durandus, Scotus, Occam, and many other great Names,
think themselves no whit obliged to this imaginary Glass; for they were then
satisfied of the vanity of that Imagination; nor will the Text, In thy light,
we shall see light; nor will that Saying, Qui videt videntem omnia, is Videt
omnia: He sees all things, that sees him who sees all things: establish the
belief of it: For, Sir, if it were so, he that sees God, sees whatsoever is in
God, and whatsoever God sees. Then the Angels that always behold his Face, and
look up to this Glass, would have never stooped down to pry, as they did, into
the Mysteries of the Gospel, and needed not be informed by the Church, about
the manifold Wisdom of God; then would they not be to seek, concerning any
future Events, no, nor be ignorant of the Day and Hour of the last Judgment. I
shall conclude this with the Saying of St. Augustine, in his Discourse, De cura
pro Mortuis; If (says that Father) so great and famous Patriarchs as Abraham
and Jacob, did not understand how the World went with their Posterity, how then
can it be, that the Dead should at all take Notice of the Living, or
intermeddle with assisting them. That is, they neither know their Wants, nor
can they give them any assistance; Why then we should make our Prayers to them?
I hope, Sir, you will give a Reason: for at the present I am to seek.

Thirdly, It is, Sir, in the third place, highly destructive to the Mediation
of Christ. It destroys both his Glory and Power, as a Mediator between God and
Man. Our Divines have from the Scriptures satisfied those, over whom they by
the Holy Ghost were made Overseers; and by our knowledge we have of the
Scripture, we are convinced that we have no other Mediator, or Intercessor, by
whom we may have access to God, but Jesus Christ, in whose Name alone all
things are obtained at the hands of his Eternal Father: therefore we are much
concerned at the Vanity and Superstition we see in your Churches, not only that
your Mediators are without number; though you know well, Sir, that St. Paul, in
the 1 Timothy 2. 6. says, There is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus.

Your Divines give it for granted, that there is but one Mediator of Salvation;
but there are many Mediators of Intercession: And thus with this fond
Distinction they convey themselves away, as if they had sufficiently acted
their part. But, Sir, be pleased to tell us, that since you own that Christ
alone is the Mediator of Salvation, why do you pretend to call upon the Virgin
Mary? Salva omnes qui te glorificant: Save thou all those that glorify thee.
Here you intrude upon the Office of our dear Redeemer, and make the Holy Virgin
not only Mediator of Intercession, but also of Salvation; for by your Prayers,
and by the Practice of the Church of Rome, even contrary to your own
Distinction, you desire Salvation of our Lady, and so make her a Mediator, not
only of Prayer, but of Salvation. You shift off this, and say, That when you
say, Save us, you mean no more, but, Pray for us, that we may be saved; but
this is but shifting: for you shift from Saving to Praying, and from Praying to
Saving, at your pleasure: but if you crave nothing from the Mother of Jesus,
but only her Prayer, or Intercession, I pray, Sir, what is the true meaning of
these Words, Meritis and praecibus suae piae Matris here, are not only Prayers,
but also Merits. You still say, that the only thing you crave from the Virgin,
is her Prayers; What then will you do with those Words so often mentioned in
your Offices? Monstra te esse Matrem: Show thy self to be the Mother, and let
him know it: that is to say, Command him, he is thy Son. I pray observe, a
Command cannot be Prayer, Merits cannot be Prayer, nor Salvation cannot be
Prayer. But, Sir, why should your Divines stand upon this Distinction? since a
fictitious Author that carries the name of St. Ambrose, in Sermon. 6. de S.
Margareta, writ thus, Reddere debemus sanctis honorificentiam qui nobis salutem
profusione sui sanguinis pepererunt, qui tam sacra Hostia pro nostra
propitiatione domino sunt oblati. We must yield honor unto the Saints, who
have procured Salvation for us by the shedding of their blood, who also were
offered up unto the Lord so holy a Sacrifice for our Salvation. If we have
Salvation in and by the blood of the Saints; then is not our blessed Lord the
only Mediator of Salvation. Therefore Sir, how shall this be reconciled to your
Doctrine? or how will you reconcile your Doctrine to this of your young St.
Ambrose? for you say, that Christ himself is the only Mediator of Salvation,
and your Author says, that Salvation is procured by the blood of the Saints,
also by which you may perceive your distinction will not serve your turn upon
any terms whatsoever.

Therefore Sir, give me leave to offer this to your consideration; that the
end, and office of Christ's Mediation of Intercession, as also of Salvation, is
to reconcile us to God, and to procure us Mercy, which Christ performs; for
he reconcileth us to God, he presents us unto the Throne of Grace; and
therefore as St. Paul says, Romans 8. 34. That he is at the right hand of God,
and makes Intercession for us, and that there is one Mediator between God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus, Tim. 2. 5. I confess that God has commanded his
Saints and Servants to Pray one for another; but St. Paul never commanded the
People to Pray to Saints. I pray take notice of the words of St. Augustine,
Paulus non facit se Mediatorem, inter Populum and Deum, sed Rogat ut pro se
orent Invicem, ontnia Membra Corporis Christi: Paul makes not himself a
Mediator between God and the People, but requires that they Pray one for
another, they being all the Members of Christ's Mystical Body, Aug. Epist.
Parmen. Lib. 2. Cap. 8. And of St. John he says, Si Johannes ita diceret, hoc
scripsi vobis ut non peccetis, and siquis peccaverit Mediatorem me habetis,
apud Deum, and ego, exoro pro peccatis vestris. Sicut Permenianus quodam loco
Mediatorem posuit Episcopum, inter Deum, and Populum, quis eum ferret bonorum,
atque fidelium, Christianorum? Quis sicut Apostolorum, Christi and non sicut
Antichristium intueretur? If St. John would say this, I have written unto you,
that you sin not; and if you sin, you have me your Mediator before God, and I
will entreat for your Sins. As Parmenian the Heretic, in a certain place, made
the Bishop a Mediator between God and the People: What good and faithful
Christian could abide him? Who would look upon him as the Apostle of Christ,
and not rather think him to be Antichrist? Thus you may see that it is
repugnant to the Sense of St. Augustine, and other of the Doctors of the
Church. That Christ is the only Mediator of Salvation, and that he is not the
only Mediator of Intercession; for whosoever takes that upon him is Antichrist,
St. Paul himself not assuming to himself the Office of a Mediator, Why should
we without any just ground judge and deem him so? since no Man can take this
honor to himself, unless called of God, as was Aaron to this High Priesthood
of Intercession, which the Blessed Lord himself did not take upon him till he
was thus called: so that you may plainly see that St. Augustine is as positive
as may be, that no Man can be a Mediator of Intercession, but Christ himself
alone, who ever lives to make Intercession for us; and your young St. Ambrose
he says, That Christ is not alone the Mediator of Salvation: Therefore, what
is become of your Distinction of his being the only Mediator of Salvation, but
not the only Mediator of Intercession? And, by the by, be pleased to observe,
that Parmenianus the Heretic, against whom St. Augustine wrote, never thought
that the Bishop was a Mediator of Salvation; and yet St. Augustine says, That
if St. John would have said so much of himself, (viz.) That he had been a
Mediator of Intercession; he had not been the Apostle of Christ; but rather
should have been judged, and taken for Antichrist. This, Sir, I humbly
conceive, is worthy of your Consideration: And I hope that you will not for the
future, rely much upon that Distinction.

I must mind you of that Saying of the Prophet, Where are thy Gods that thou
have made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy
trouble: for according to the number of thy Cities, are thy Gods, O Judah, Jer.
2. 28. chap. 11. 13. And according to the number of the Streets of Jerusalem,
have you set up Altars to the shameful Thing, even Altars to burn Incense unto
Baal. So you have your innumerable Company of Saints, to whom ye erect Altars;
insomuch, that those of your Communion cannot tell to which Saint it were best
to turn them first: yet you have assighed every one of them their Office, and
direct your Disciples what things they ought to ask, and what to give, and what
to bring to pass, under their respective Protections, without any manner of
Warrant from the Word of God. But, Sir, be pleased to understand me, I do not
apply these false Gods to the Saints, for that would be Blasphemy, and it were
to call them Idols, which is absurd, seeing that they see the Face of God
evermore, and are with God in Glory; but in respect of those horrible Abuses,
and vain Fancies of those of your Communion, the words of the Prophet may be
justly applied: for you in your Imagination of the Saints of God, you have made
Idols, and have so multiplied and increased the same, that the number of them
have exceeded the number of your Cities and Towns: But, Sir, if you will give
me your patience, I will show you that an eminent Light in the Church of God,
did apply these very words of the Prophet, unto the Blessed Mother of Jesus,
being then abused most Idolatrously by the Heretics Collyridians, in the same
manner as you abuse her, and other Saints now, even to the highest Idolatry; it
was the old Father Epiphanius, Lib. 3. Haeris 79. Nequis comedat de Errore qui
est propter Sanctam Mariam, tam and si enim pulchrum sit lignum, tamen non'est
ad Cibum, and si Pulcherrima est Maria, and Sancta, and Honorata, at non ad
Adorationem. Hae vero Mulieris colentes Mariam, rursus Renovant fortunae
mixturam, and praeparant Mensam Diabolo, non Deo, quemadmodium Scriptum est
pascuntur cibo impietatis, and rursus and Faeminae terunt Pollinem, and Filiis
colligunt Ligna ut faciant Placentas Oleo subactus Reginae Caeli: Compescantur
Jeremia; tales Mulieres ne turbant Orbem Terrarum; ne dicant Honoramus Reginam
Coeli: Let no Man feed upon this Error, touching St. Mary; for though the Tree
be fair, yet is not the Fruit to be eaten; and though Mary be Beautiful, Holy,
and Honorable, yet is she not to be Adored: But these Women Worshipping St.
Mary, run again to the Sacrifice of Wine mingled in the Honor of the Goddess
Fortune, and prepare a Table for the Devil, and not for God, as it is written
in the Scriptures, they are fed with the meat of wickedness: and again, their
Women boult flower, and their Children gather sticks, to make Cakes in honor
of the Queen of Heaven: therefore let such Women be rebuked by the Prophet
Jeremiah, and let them no more trouble the World, and let them not say, We
worship the Queen of Heaven.

Here you may see, Sir, that these words were spoken of the filthy Idols of the
Heathen, and by this holy Father applied to the Mother of our Lord; not to
deface that blessed Woman, but to declare the fond Errors of those Heretics,
what is done less to that great Saint in those Countries that pay Obedience to
the Church and See of Rome, than these Heretics did, of whom this holy man
thus complains? Do you not offer to her Candles, Incence, Garments, Jewels of
Silver, and Jewels of Gold? Are not, by pretense of Worship, your Churches
enriched? And all this you do, because you say, She is the great Mediator of
Intercession. But you pay the same Homage to her (if not more) as you do to her
Son the Redeemer of the World. You pray to her to save and defend you in Body
and Soul, now and in the hour of death: for you call her, The Queen of Heaven,
the Lady of Angels; you say to her, Command thy Son, show thy self to be a
Mother. Your Cardinal Bembus tells the Virgin, Dominam and Deam Nostram,
Bemb. in Epist. ad Carolum 5. Ambrosius Catharinus, one of the Council of
Trent, Sess. 2. calls the Virgin, God's Fellow; Fidelissima ejus Socia.
Nicholaus Cusanus, a Cardinal of Rome, says, Excitat. Lib. 8. Hoc cedit ad
Laudem dei and Virginis Mariae Matris, quod ipso suo principatu Authoris mortis
nullo unquam tempore fuit non indiguit virgo Liberatore, qui ipsam absolveret a
sententia in Adam and in posteres, Lata, Maria non est deleta de Libro Mortis,
quia nunquam in eo scripta fuit. This thing turns to the praise of God, and
of the Virgin Mary the Mother, that she never was at any time under the power
of the Author of Death; that Virgin needed no Deliverer, that should ransom her
from the Sentence pronounced against Adam and his Posterity. Mary was never
razed out of the Book of Death, for she was never written in it. When our
Nation did profess the Romish Religion, I meet with a Council held at Oxford,
where the Name of Christ is quite left out, and Mary's Name put in; for thus it
begins: Authoritate Dei Patris, and Baeatae Virginis, and omnium Sanctorum;
By the Authority of God the Father, and the Blessed Virgin, and of all Saints.

Do you not in your Offices call her Mediatrix and Redemptrix? Why then do you
shuffle off your Hearers with this distinction, that Christ alone is the
Mediator of Salvation, and that the Virgin and Saints are only Mediators of
Intercession, and not of Salvation? I would once more pray you to observe how
you contradict your own Doctrine left by men, whose Authority was not to be
questioned by any that did succeed them. If your St. Ambrose says true, The
Saints by shedding their Blood did purchase Salvation for us, how comes it to
pass that they are not Mediators of Salvation? But if they did not purchase
Salvation for us, I pray how comes it to pass that they are Mediators of
Intercession? When did this Priesthood of theirs commence? When did God say to
any one of them, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? The Saints did
not glorify themselves to be made Priests, nor did God call them to that
Priesthood that should entitle them to such a Mediatorship that you would put
upon them; and Christ himself had not glorified himself to be made an
High Priest, but God glorified him, and said, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee, Heb. 5. 8. From all which, Sir, we may conclude, that if your
Doctors are in the right, your Ambrose, and your Bembus, and your Ambrosius
Catharinus, your Cusanus, if they be in the right, and your Offices, the which
I have by me, are in the right, then the Virgin Mary and the rest of the
Saints, are Mediators of Salvation, as well as Jesus Christ; and upon that
consideration you must part with your fond distinction between being a Mediator
of Salvation, and of Intercession. Now if it be true, that none ever arrived to
that Priesthood but Christ himself, who was called of God, as was Aaron, Heb.
5. 7. and he took not the Office upon him, till God did so call him; then how
dare you thrust this Office upon them, which is only due to Jesus Christ? And
because he is the Great High Priest and Apostle of our Profession, the Angels
of God are commanded to worship him: And till you prove the Saints to be such,
you must pardon us, we will pay them no Worship; we do praise God for them, but
we will not pray to them.

Sir, I know you make a great account of the Virgin Mary, upon the
consideration that she was the Mother of our Lord: It was a great Honor and
Grace that God Almighty conferred upon her, and therefore you run into those
extravagant ways of worshipping her. Truly I, with very good assurance, do
affirm, that it is a greater Honor to be a Child of God, than to be the Mother
of Jesus Christ. Observe what St. Augustine says, Beatior ergo Maria fuit
percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi: Materna
propinquitas nihil Mariae profuisset, nisi felicius Christum Cord quam Carne
Gestassit. Mary was more blessed in that she received the Faith of Christ, than
that she conceived the Flesh of Christ: Motherly kindness could have done Mary
no good, unless she had born Christ more blessedly in her heart, than she bear
him in her flesh, Aug. de Sancta Virginitate, cap. 3. Again, he says, Matter
mea quam appellastis foelicem, unde foelix est, quia verbum Dei custodivit, non
quia in illa verbum caro factum est. My Mother whom ye have called blessed,
therefore is blessed, because she has kept the Word of God, not because the
Word in her was made Flesh, Aug. in Joh. Tract. 10. To the words of this holy
Doctor give me leave to join the words of Christ himself, in Luke 11. 27, 28.
And it came to pass, as he spoke these things that is, while he preached to the
people, a certain woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him,
Blessed is the womb that bear thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. But he
said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. I
pray you to observe the words of Epiphanius, Lib. 3. Haeres. 79. con.
Collyridianos, Christus dixit quid mihi, and tibi est mulier? nondum venit hora
mea, quo non putarent aliquis magnis eximium esse Sanctam Virginem, mulierem
eam appellavit voluti prophetans quae essent futura interra sectarum and
Haereseon genera ut ne aliqui nimium admirari Sanctam in hanc Haeresim ejusque
deliramenta delebantur est enim Ludibrium tota Res, and Anicularum fabula, and
ut ita dicam tota Haeresis tractatio. Christ says unto his Mother, Woman, what
have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come. Lest any man should think the
Virgin Mary was of greater Excellency, he called her Woman; as it were
prophesying of the kinds of Sects and Heresies that were to come into the
World, lest any man, having too great an Opinion of that holy Saint, should
fall into the Heresy and the Dotage of the same: for indeed the whole matter
is but a Mockery, and Old Wives Tale, and truly to say nothing else but the
handling of an Heresy. You see St. Epiphanius his Judgment of the Worship that
is due to the Virgin Mary. We do not find him to call her Redemptrix or
Mediatrix; he takes no notice at all of that, but in plain words tells you,
that she is not to be worshipped: Now if she had been in any sense a Mediator,
she would have had some title to be worshipped and adored.

In short, Sir, you can never prove her, in any case whatever, to be a
Mediator. Then do you not do the greatest affront and contempt to Jesus Christ,
by applying your selves to her as a Mediator, or to any other Saint whatsoever?
Do you not in your Offices pray to them all, that they through their merits
would obtain for you life everlasting? But, Sir, to be plain with you, it is
necessary that you consider that there are, as the effects of Christ's death
for us, three great Products, which are the Rule and Measure of our Prayers,
and of our Confidence. 1. Christ's Merits. 2. His Satisfaction. And 3. His
Intercession. By these three we come boldly to the Throne of Grace, and pray to
God through Jesus Christ: But if we pray to God through the Saints too, and
rely upon their Merits, Satisfaction, and Intercession, do we not make them
equal to Christ in the great Office of his Priesthood? You know very well that
this is the public avowed Practice of the Church of Rome, to rely upon the
Saints Intercession, to be made valid by the Merits of the Saints, together
with their Satisfaction: for if by the shedding of their Blood for the Church,
hey purchased Salvation for the Church; then by shedding their Blood for the
Church, they made satisfaction for the sins of the Church: So that you make the
Virgin Mary and the Saints equal, if not superior to Christ, in the great Work
of obtaining Salvation for us. Give me leave, Sir, to put you in mind of some
of your Prayers that have been used, and whose use still continues in your
Church. In the first place, take notice of a Prayer to one Etheldred an English
Saint, in these words: Look, O most gracious Virgin, upon our Troubles which we
most deservedly sustain, and by the Merits and Intercession of thy Holiness,
both appease the Anger of the Judge, whom we have offended, and obtain that
Pardon which we have not deserved. Sacrum Breviary, fol. 100. In the Office of
the Hours, as it is used at Rome: Omnes Sancti, and Sanctae Dei, subvenite
mihi, and ut per merita vestra per venire valeam ad eternae beatitudinis
Patriam. There is another Prayer in the Roman Breviary, directed to St. Jude;
in English it is thus: We pray thee, O St. Jude the Apostle, that by thy Merits
thou would drive me from the custom of my sins, and snatch me from the power
of the Devil, and advance me to thy invisible power. I pray consider another
Prayer in your Offices, for the Sunday before the Ascension of our Lord, made
to St. Mary Magdalen, in these words: O Mary Magdalen, hear our Prayers, which
are full of Praises, and most clemently reconcile this Company unto Christ,
that the Fountain of Supreme Piety, who cleansed thee from thy sins, giving
pardon, may cleanse us who are his Servants and thine. But above all, see that
excellent Prayer to St. Becket, whose Blood ye have supposed to be as sovereign
as the Blood of the Son of God. It Is not enough to pray as you do, that by his
Merits and Prayers you may be delivered from Vice to Virtue, and from the
Prison to the Kingdom; this you hope for from the more ordinary Saints: but as
for St. Thomas of Canterbury, you pray, That by his Blood you may climb to
Heaven, as he has done before you. Now do you judge in your own Conscience,
Whether this and all your Saints be not made equal to Christ? and whether you
do not make them Mediators of Salvation, as well as Intercession? And more than
all this, one of your own Doctors tells us, That the Intercession of the Saints
is more available, than the Intercession of Christ; and that as Christ wrought
greater Miracles by his Saints, than by himself, so oftentimes he shows the
force of their Intercession, more than his own. This Doctor of yours put a
Question, Whether it is better to pray to God through Christ alone, or through
the Saints? which Question he determines, That it was better to pray to God
through the Saints. So that by the Doctrine of your Learned men, you may, nay
you ought to go to God through the Merits, Satisfaction, and Intercession of
the Saints; so that there is nothing remaining of the Honor due to Christ our
Savior, and our Confidence in Him, but the same in every kind is by your
Church imputed to the Saints: therefore the Being and Economy of Christianity
is destroyed by these Prayers, and the People are not, and cannot be good
Christians in these Devotions; and what hopes are laid up for them who Repent
to no purpose, and pray with derogation to Christ's Honor, is matter of
deepest consideration: Therefore our Church will take care that her Members may
not be seduced with little Tricks and Artifices, of useless and laborious
Distinctions and Protestations against Evidence of Fact. Therefore, Sir, you
ought, with Fear and Trembling, to consider what God said by the Prophet; My
people have done two great evils, they have forsaken me, the living fountain,
(that is, the strong and living God) and have dug to themselves cisterus
(that is, little fantastic helps) that hold no water, that give no
refreshment, Jer. 2. 13. Or as St. Paul expresses it, They worship and
invocate the Creature, (...), beside the Creator: so the word properly
signifies, and so it is used by the Apostle in other places, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and
Gal. 1. 8. But to conclude this Head, I beseech you, Sir, to remember the words
of St. Augustine: Tutius, and jucundius loquar ad meum Jesum, quam ad aliquam
Sanctorum Spirituum Dei: I can speak more safely, and more cheerfully to my
Jesus, than to any of the Saints and Spirits of God, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. De
Visitatione Infirmorum. For that Holy Father knew that Jesus was the only
Mediator, and it was highly tending to the prejudice of Christ's Priesthood,
who only ever lives to make Intercession for us, to pray to any of the Saints.

Fourthly, You know, Sir, that Christians are everywhere exhorted to flee from
Idolatry, and to keep themselves from Idols: for this I shall not need to use
many Arguments, to satisfy you or any man; therefore we cannot consent to your
Practice of Praying to Saints and Angels* because it is Idolatry. I confess
this is, and has been a Charge which none of your Communion could bear, but
have been, and are still highly offended at it. Any man (says a Doctor of your
Church) of common Reason, would think it as easy to prove the Snow to be
black, as so innocent a Practice to be Idolatry. But, Sir, I humbly conceive
that Learned Person may be mistaken: for it is agreed by both the Romish
Doctors, and those of the Reformed Religion, That Idolatry, in the proper
notion of it, is a giving that Worship and Service to the Creature, which is
due only to God; yea, though men worship God, yet if they worship the Creature
also, they are Idolaters.

The holy Apostle reproves those (Romans 1. 25.) that worshipped the Creature
besides the Creator. And this was the Idolatry of those whom the King of
Assyria sent to inhabit Samaria. The Text says, They feared the Lord, and
served other or their own Gods, 2 King. 17. 33. Now that you worship Saints and
Angels, as well as Almighty God, is notorious enough; for you profess and
practice it: and is not that a worshipping the Creature besides the Creator?
And if to worship the Creature besides the Creator, be Idolatry, how shall you
be excused from the just Charge of Idolatry? The distinction that you think to
help your selves out withal, is that of Latria and Dulia; which I think is as
ill applied, as ever any distinction was. I confess, I am no Proficient in the
Hebrew, but those that are Masters of that Tongue, tell us, there is but one
word in the Hebrew for Dulia and Latria; but that skill I have in the Greek
assures me, that (...) and (...) are indifferently taken in the Old and New
Testament, both for one and the same thing; and both applied to God, the former
to him as he is Lord, and the latter as he is God, as St. Augustine says, that
first made the distinction: and therefore, as I said before, I repeat it to you
again, it was neither made by him, nor used by him, to justify any such
Practice, as you maintain in your Church. But there is another distinction of
yours, much to the same purpose, that is of Superior and Absolute Worship,
which you say is only due to God; and Inferior and Relative Worship, which is
applicable to the Creature. Now, Sir, if by Inferior and Relative Worship, you
mean a Religious Worship, as you must do, if you will justify your own
Doctrine; then give me leave to tell you, that you have no ground for this
distinction in all the Word of God: and had the Arians found out such a
distinction, by its help they might have destroyed the force of the Apostle's
Argument, whereby he proves the Deity of Christ, because the Angels of God are
enjoined to worship him, Heb. 1. 6. Psalm. 97. 7. To this they might readily
have replied, that the Text intends a Religious Worship of an Inferior degree,
such as may be given to the most excellent Creature. But, Sir, you know that
shift was not found out then; and therefore they were not able to give any
answer, but were necessitated to silence. You must either prove that this
distinction is grounded on the Word of God, or you must quit your distinction:
And if you quit that, then it roundly follows, that your paying that Worship to
the Creature, which is only due to the Creator, you bring the just Charge of
Idolatry upon your selves, which we are commanded to avoid.

I beseech you, Sir, to tell us wherein you differ from the Gentiles in their
Idolatry: Do you not do by your Saints and Angels, as they did by their Gods?
Do you not manifestly revive their Doctrine of Demons, which is foretold in
Scripture, as that which should fall out in the latter days, amongst the
degenerate and apostatizing Christians? So the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 4. 1,
2. That in the latter times, some should revolt from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils or Demons. Now what these Demons
were, I will not pretend to inform you, but only remind you, that the Idolatry
of the Gentiles, and their notions of Demons, is revived and re-enforced in
your Church. The Gentiles feighned that their Demons were an inferior sort of
deified Powers, that stood in the midst between the Sovereign Gods and them.
The Sovereign Gods were by them supposed so sublime and pure, that Mortals
could not, and might not approach; therefore they introduced this middle sort
of Divine Powers, to be as Mediators and Agents betwixt them. These Demons, or
Mediators, were supposed to be of two sorts; some were the Souls of men deified
after their death: for you must understand that the Canonization of Heroes and
deceased Worthies, is somewhat older than your Canonizations in your Church,
for Rome, whilst it was under the Clouds of Heathenism, had a custom to
canonize their deceased Emperors, and they called them Divine or Saints, as
well as the Church of Rome has now. We read of a Divus Augustus, as well as of
a Divus Augustinus.

The Gentiles, I say, had another sort of Demons, which were more sublime, and
had never dwelt in mortal bodies, but were from the beginning always the same:
These second sort of Demons do fitly answer those Spiritual Powers which we
call Angels as the former abovementioned sort do to those we call Saints. To
these Demons they built their Temples and their Images, Shrines and Relics,
they worshipped with all Religious Devotion. So that in many respects, the
Idolatry of the Pagans, is a perfect Pattern of the Idolatry of your Church;
the one has great affinity with the other, and is exactly parallel with it:
and your Practice of Praying to Saints and Angels, has its Rise and Being from
the Adoration that the Gentiles paid to their Demons.

The Gentiles distributed Offices, and several Duties limited, and appointed to
each Demon, in his station and degree; which I prove out of Augustine de
Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 12. who there says thus: Varro dicebat, ita esse
utilem cognitionem Deorum, si sciatur quam quis quae Deus vim aut potestatem
habeat, cujusque rei ex eo enim inquit poteremus scire, quem cujusque rei
causam Deum advocare, atque invocare debeamus, ne faciamus ut Mimi solent, and
Optomus a Libero aquam, and a Lymphis Vinum. Varro said, the knowledge of the
Gods is profitable, if a man understand what Power and Authority each God has
in every thing: for so, says he, we may know whom to call upon, and whom to
pray unto, lest by chance we do as certain Mimi are wont to do; that is to say,
lest of Bacchus, the God of Wine, we beg Water; and of Cymphae, the Goddess of
Water, we beg Wine. These things having their beginning amongst the Pagan
Idolaters, have since been brought into the Church of God, to the high
displeasure of Almighty God, and great scandal of the glorious Gospel of his
dear Son.

So all the Saints in Heaven have been appointed, each one in his Order, to his
several Office, lest any one should intrude into another Room. Observe what
Antonius, a Bishop of your Church, (nay, if I mistake not, he was Archbishop of
Florence) says in his time, He saw Sr. Paul and Friar Dominick painted
together: Under the Image of St. Paul there was written, Per hunc Itur ad
Christum; We may come to Christ by this Saint: but under the Picture of Friar
Dominick they wrote thus, Sed Magis per Istum. What did they mean by this, Sir,
but that Friar Dominick's Office and Authority before God, was somewhat better
and of more credit than St. Paul's? You teach your People to pray to St. Gal,
for the fecundity and health of their Geese; and to St. Windiline, for their
Sheep; to St. Antony, for their Hogs; St. Pelagius, for their Oxon. Nay, your
several Tradesmen have their particular Saints; the Physicians are patronized
by Cosmas and Damian, as Aesculapius was to the Physicians in the time of
Paganism. The Heathens were wont to invok Lucina, in the Pains of Childbirth;
but you do judge St. Margaret the better Midwife, and therefore you pray to her.

The Pagan Seamen, they called upon Neptune; but your Church judges St.
Nicholas to have as much or more power than he: therefore your Seamen call
upon him. Your Painters have St. Luke for their Patron; and the Pagan Painters
had Appelles for theirs. Your Porters have Goalus: And the Hunts-men,
Eustachius. Your Curtezans have St. Affra, and St. Mary Magdalen. You, I
suppose, know who was the Patroness of the Pagan Ladies of Pleasure. The
Heathens did rely upon their particular Demons, for the cure of several
Diseases; and you rely upon your particular Saints. St. Sebastian and St. Roch,
have a special privilege to cure the Plague; St. Petronilla, the Fever, with
the help of St. Sigismund; St. John and St. Bennet the Abbot, to cure Poison;
St. Apolonia, the Toothache; St. Oliva fore Eyes; St. Apollinarius, the
French Pox, for he had got that Employment since the discovery of the West
Indies: St. Vincentius has a special faculty of restoring stolen Goods; and St.
Liberius does infallibly cure the Stone; and St. Faelicitas will give the
Teeming Mother a fine Boy. It is strange, that if nothing but the Intercession
of these Saints were intended, that they cannot as well pray for other things
as these; or that they have no Commission to ask of those any thing else. I
pray, Sir, compare your Readings together, and see whether or no the Heathens
had not their particular Gods for these things, to whom they did pay all
Worship, and therefore were charged by God himself with Idolatry, and their
Gods were termed Idols; and the reason why they were Idolaters, was, because
they gave Worship to their Gods, which were but Creatures, which was only due
to the Creator.

You may say, Sir, that these Demons, or Inferior Deities of the Heathens,
were the Souls of wicked men and Devils; whereas those that are invocated and
adored by us, are the Spirits of just men and Angels. And as to the
distributing to every Saint his peculiar Office, we are not tied to defend the
Superstitions of the Vulgar, or the Abused. To this, Sir, I must reply, and
tell you, We do not think you lie under any such Obligation; but you are bound
to inform the Abused, and to reprove this notorious Idolatry, as all the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, do in the Reformed
Churches, and declare against such Abominations. I confess, the Tridentine
Chapter very zealonsly forbids all Superstitions, but wisely forbears to tells
the World what is Superstition, and what is not: So that the Members of your
Church still go on in those Superstitions and Idolatrous Practices.

Nay, every Nation has its Saint, as England has St. George, Scotland St.
Andrew, Ireland St. Patrick, Wales St. David, Spain St. James, France St.
Dennis; nay, every City, every Family, almost every House, and every devout
Person chooses his particular Saint, whose Altars they more devoutly frequent,
whose Images they more Religiously Worship, to whose Relics they more readily
go in Pilgrimage, to whose Honor they say more Pater Nosters, and Ave Maria's,
whose Festivals they more solemnly observe, spoiling their Prayers by their
Confidence in unknown Persons, living in an unknown Condition, diminishing that
Worship they owe to God, and that Honor they owe to our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that Affiance they ought to have in God through Christ, and pay it to them who
cannot save.

Give me leave to tell you, that the number of your Saints are so many, that
your People can scarce tell, which Saint to turn himself to first; and if you
will take the Authority of a Writer of your own Church, you will find that your
Church have been so far from correcting of the Superstition, and Idolatry of
the Common People, and the abused Zealots of your Communion: for Isuardus a
French Monk, diligently searching out the number of Saints, found that in every
day in the year, there are more than three hundred Saints to be served: such a
number of Saints have the Bishops of Rome brought into the Church of their own
Authority, whom they have Sainted partly for Favor, and partly for Money, and
partly of blind Zeal, and partly for satisfying other Men's corrupt Affections;
these I say, must be Worshipped, and Prayed unto; so far are you from reproving
Idolatry, that you encourage and promote it. Another says, That from the time
the Bishops of Rome began first to Canonize, and make Saints, unto the time of
John the two and twentieth Bishop of Rome, there were Canonized five thousand
five hundred fifty five Saints; this I have from the Author Fasciculus
Temporum. Therefore, Sir, you must confess the Extravagancy of those who have
had the Guardianship of the Church. It is not the fault of the People only
running wilfully into such Idolatrous Practices; but it is the Practice of your
Church, warranted and taught by some of her Guides. Now, whereas, your Divines
have pleaded, That the Worship that the Pagans give to their Gods was Idolatry,
because they were the Souls of wicked Men, and Devils; and that your Worship
that you pay to Saints and Angels, cannot be Idolatry, because they are such.

This, I humbly conceive to be a great Mistake, for though there be a
disparity, because the Idolatry of the Pagan World, did not lie in the ill
choice they made of their Demons, they Worshipped; but in giving that
Religious Worship to a Creature, which was due only to the Creator. Let him be
a good or a bad Angel, a just or a wicked Person since he is but a Creature,
it is Idolatry to offer Religious Worship, or to Invocate him; so that if it be
Idolatry to Worship ill Men, or Devils, because they are Creatures, then it is
Idolatry to Worship good Men, or Angels, because they are Creatures likewise.
Before I conclude this Head, let me tell you the Opinion of one of your Church
upon this matter, his Words are these: Multi Christiani in re bona plerumque
peccant quod Divos, Divas que non alitur Venerantur, quam Deum, nec video in
multis quid sit discrimen, inter eorum Opinionem de Sanctis, and id quod
Gentiles putabant de Diis suis: Ludvi. Not. in Aug. De Civit. Dei, Lib. 3. Cap.
27. Edit. Anno 1596. Many Christians, do for the most part transgress in a good
thing, that they Worship Hee-Saints, and Shee-Saints, no otherwise than they
Worship God: nor do I see in many things, wherein their Opinion of the Saints
do differ from that which the Heathens had of their Gods. I think no Protestant
could have said more.

Sir, Let me ask you, Was it not Idolatry in the Jews to burn Incense to the
Queen of Heaven? And was not God highly provoked at it? What difference is
there betwixt burning Incense to her whom you call the Queen of Heaven, and the
Jews burning Incense to the Queen of Heaven, which is termed Idolatry? Is not
this your Practice to this day? And if the Jews were guilty of Idolatry for
that Worship, how can you expect to clear your selves from the same Charge? If
they Worshipped that which was not, and therefore were guilty of Idolatry. I
pray what is your Queen of Heaven? when was she made so? and by whom? What Text
can you bring to prove any such thing? Did God ever say to the Virgin Mary,
(whom you call Queen of Heaven) Sit thou at my right hand? Or did he say, Let
all the Angels of God Worship Her? If he did, produce your Text, and you will
do much; and till then you will not easily persuade those of our Church, either
to join with you in any Worship to the Virgin, or quit you from the Charge of
Idolatry. I will leave these to your Consideration, and so conclude this Head.

Fifthly, As your Practice of Praying to Saints and Angels, is the vilest
Idolatry, so it is the greatest Blasphemy; and from hence we conclude it to be
an unreasonable Service, and an Abomination in the sight of God. To prove this,
Sir, I will take notice of some of those Prayers to the Saints, used in your
Offices, and show how you attribute that to them, which only belongs to the
great God, that made the Heavens, and the Earth. You must know, Sir, that God
has several Attributes that are incommunicable; and to give these to any
Creature whatever, must be the highest Blasphemy against God.

The Council of Trent, I confess, is more modest than some of your private
Doctors, but blasphemous enough in its Determination: C. Trid. Sess. 9. Sanctis
una cum Christo Regnantibus, and Orationes pro Haminibus offerentibus, bonum,
atque utile est supplicare, eos Invocare, and ob Beneficia a Deo Impetranda,
per filium ejus Jesum Christum, qui solus noster Redemptor, and Salvator est,
ad eorum Orationes opem, Auxiliumque, Confugere: That is the Saints Reigning
with Christ, and offering their Prayers for Men, it is good and profitable,
humbly to Invocate them; and that we may obtain benefits of God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer and Savior, to have recourse to
their Prayers, Aid, and Assistance. In which, Sir, you may see that Council
does attribute the power of helping, and aiding Men; which only belongs to an
infinite God, to the finite Creature, that is not able to help. Your Catechism
set forth by the Decree of that Council, has it thus, Invocandi sunt Sancti,
eo quod Salute hominum preces assidue faciunt, multaque eorum Merita, and
gratiam, nos Deus confert beneficia, Rogati peccatorum veniam, nobis impetrant
and Concilliant nobis Deus gratiam. Where the obtaining of Grace is attributed
to them, which only belongs to the Intercession of Christ, as he is our great
High Priest that is gone into the Holy of Holies, not made with Hands, to
appear in the Presence of God on our behalf: for you see he is by your own
Council called, Solus Redemptor and Salvator: and what greater blasphemy and
contempt against Christ our Lord can be committed, than to attribute that which
is due to him, to any Creature; since that God has given him all Power both in
Heaven and in Earth, Who is he that can justify the communicating and
attributing this Power to another, without the just Charge of Infamous
Blasphemy? Give me leave to take a view of those Prayers inserted in your
Public Offices, performed in your Public Assemblies, in the Breviary, or
Hours of Sarum, which was in great Request before the Reformation; wherein I
find many blasphemous Strains of Devotion, sometimes to the whole Quire of
Angels in general; sometimes to this, or the other Angel in particular; as to
Michael, Gabriel, Rapheal, whom you dignifie with the Title of Archangels; but
in that, and in other Breviaries, you are more liberal of your Prayers to the
Saints, though they are lower, yet your Devotion is carried much higher than to
the Angels. To the Saints, Sir, you are more particularly directed, and to use
the same show of Affection which you use to God himself. In the Office of the
Hours, as in use at Rome, on the Sixth Day of June: Sancte Claudi! Desolatorum,
Consolator, Captivorum Liberator, Resurrectio Mortuorum, Lumen, Caecorum,
Auditus, Surdorum, Sanator Languidorum, T^tor Naufragantium, Via Errantium,
Salus in te omnium Sperantium. What could have been said more to the Eternal
God, or Christ himself? And can you say this to any Creature whatsoever, and
escape the guilt of Blasphemy? Sir, Consider that Prayer in the same Office: O
Beati Apostoli Dei! Solvite me a Peccatis Defendite me a Poenis Inferni, and de
potestate Tenebrarum confortate me, and ad Regnum, aeternum me perducite, Omnes
Sanctae Virgins Dei! adjuvate me, ut habeam bonam Voluntatem Cordis, Corporis
Sanitatem Castitatem, and post Cursum Vitae meae, Societatem perpetuae
Beatitudinis. Who can loose us from our sins, but God, through Jesus Christ?
Who can deliver us from the pains of Hell, but God, through Faith in the Blood
of his Son? Who can deliver us from the power of Darkness, but God, by the
Ministry of the glorious Gospel? It was great Blasphemy in the Jews, to
attribute the great Power by which Christ did work Miracles, to the Prince of
Devils; and then it follows, that it is also Blasphemy in our Devotions, to
attribute that Power to the Creature, that belongs alone to Almighty God
himself. But let us see a little more of your Devotions: In the Hours of the
Blessed Virgin you pray thus: O generous Mary, beauteous above all, obtain
pardon for us, apply Grace unto us, prepare Glory for us. Hail thou Rose, thou
Virgin Mary, Grant us to use true Wisdom, and with the Elect to enjoy Grace,
that we may with Melody praise thee; do thou drive away our Sins away: O Virgin
Mary give us Joys. These, and diverse others like these, may be found in those
Hours of the Virgin Mary. I will give you another touch of this sort of
Devotion in the same Offices:

Reparatrix, and Salvatrix, desperantis Animae,
Irroratrix, and Largitrix, Spiritualis Gratiae,
Quod Requiro, quod Suspiro Mea Sana Vulnera,
Et da menti, te Poscenti, Gratiarum Munera.
Vt sim Castus and Modestus, etc.
Cord prudens, Ore studens, Veritatem Dicere,
Malum Nolens, Deum Volens pio semper Opere.
That is, Thou Repairer, and Savior of the dispairing Soul, dew Giver, and
Bestower of Spiritual Grace; heal my Wounds; give to the Mind that prays to
thee, the Gifts of Grace, that I may be chaste, modest, wise in Heart, true in
my Sayings, hating Evil, loving God in every good Work: and much more to the
same purpose.

I do not now marvel that Bishop Leo the tenth, calls her a Goddess; and Father
Turcelin, one of your Order, calls her, Divinae Majestatis, Potestatisque
Sociam, huic olim Coelestium Mortaliumque Principalium, detulit ad hujus
arbitrium (quo ad hominum Tutela Postulat) Terras Maria Coelum, naturamque
moderatur, hac annuente and per hanc Divinos Thesauros, and Coelestia dona
largitur: The Companion, and Partner of Divine Majesty, and Power, to her long
since gave the Principality of all heavenly and mortal things at her Will (so
far as the Guardianship of Men requires) she Rules the Earth, Sea, Heaven, and
Nature, and she consenting he gives Divine Treasure, and Celestial Gifts. Nay,
in the Mass-Books, Printed 1538, and used in the Polonian Churches, you call
the Blessed Virgin, Mary viam ad vitam, Mundi Gubernatricem, Peccatorum cum Deo
Reconciliatricem, fontem, Remissionis Peccatorum, lumen humanum: The way to
Life, the Governess of the World, the Reconciler of Sinners with God, the
Fountain of Remission of Sins, and at last you Salute her with an Ava Maria,
Vniversae Trinitatis Matter: Hail Mary! thou Mother of the whole Trinity. Sir,
you are a Man of Reading, and certainly you can never be such a Biggot, as to
forget your Reason: Is not Christ himself the Door and Way to Life? Is not he
our Reconciler? Is not God alone the Governor of the World? Does not our Creed
tell us, That he is God of Gods, and Light of Lights? Is not he the Fountain of
Pardon? Yea, Sir, he is an unexhaustable Fountain of Remission, And what
greater Blasphemy can be spoken, than to call her the Mother of the whole
Trinity? Can you think with your self, that any thinking number of the Church
of England, or of any other Reformed Church, can be brought to join with you in
such irrational Practices as these? Be pleased, Sir, not to mistake me, I do
not pick out these only as the most singular, and the worst Forms; for such as
these are very numerous, as may be seen in your Breviaries, Missals, and Hours
of our Lady, and in the Rosary of our Lady, and Litanies of our Lady, the
Speculum Rosariorum, the Hymns of Saints, and Portuices, and Manuals, these are
only the Instances, amongst which many others do occur. A few things I shall
only add, instead of many more that might be represented.

I. The first is, that Hymn which you in your Church (for what Reason or
Etymology I know not, and should be at little cost or trouble to be informed)
calls a Sequence. The Council of Constance, did to Invocate the Blessed
Virgiu, in the same manner as the Council did use to Invocate the Holy Ghost:
they call her the Mother of Grace, the Remedy to the Miserable, the Fountain of
Mercy, and the Light of the Church, Attributes proper to God; and
incommunicable they Sing her Praises, and Pray to her for Grace; they Sing to
her with the Heart; they call themselves her Sons; they declare her to be their
Health; and Comfort in all Doubts; they call on her for Light from Heaven; they
trust in her for the destruction of Heresies, and the repression of Schisms,
and for the lasting Confederations of Peace. This Piece of Service and Worship,
did the Prelates of that remarkable Council perform. And, Sir, you may know
that many approved Doctors of your Church, have followed the Footsteps of those
Counselors: One says, That she being the Mother of God, who does give the
Holy Ghost, are by her Hands administered to whom she pleases, when she
pleases, and how she pleases, and as much as she pleases. Bernardin. Senen.
Sermon 6. Art. 1. Cap. 8. Your Doctors have taught, and I do not believe them
Changlings: That she is Constituted above every Creature; and whosoever does
bow his Knee to Jesus, does fall down also and supplicate his Mother. So that
the Glory of the Son may be judged not to be so much common with the Mother, as
to be the same. I will do your Writers no wrong, for I will set down the very
words of Barnerdinus Senensis, which are these: Matter est filii Dei, qui
producit Spiritum Sanctum, Ideo omnia Dona Veritatis, and gratiae ipsius
Spiritus Sancti, quibus vult, quando vult, quomodo vult, and quantum vult, per
Manu ipsius administratum. The other Saying has for its Author, Arnoldus, De
Laudibus Beatae Virginis, Constituta est super omnem Creaturam, and quicunque
Jesu Curvat Genu, Matri quoque pronus supplicat, and filii gloriam cum Matre,
non tam communem Judico, quam eandem. But, Sir, to proceed, there is another
Saying of Bernardus Senensis: Ipsa Dei Matter de omnipotentia filii sui ^ui est
innixa, quando vult sibi assumit, de Bust. Ma. P. 12. Ser. 2. That she assumeth
to herself as much of the Omnipotency of her Son, as she pleases. Damian.
Sermon. 1. de not. B. V. accedit ante aurum humanae Reconciliationis Altar, non
solum Rogans, sed Imperans, Domina, non ancilla: That she comes before the
Altar of Human Reconciliation, not Interceeding only, but Commanding, as
Mistress, not a Servant. A Divine of your Church that was willing to show the
strength of his fancy, tells us: That the History of Ahasuerus in Esther, was a
figure of God's bestowing half his Kingdom upon the Blessed Virgin, that having
Justice and Mercy as the chiefest Goods of his Kingdom, he retained Justice to
himself, and granted Mercy unto her. Hence, if a Man find himself agrieved in
the Court of God's Justice, he may appeal to the Court of the Mercy of his
Mother; she being that Throne of Grace, whereof the Apostle speaks in the
Hebrews, chap. 10. my Author is Gabriel Breit, upon the Canon of the Mass,
Reading 80.

Well, Sir, there is a Prayer to the Virgin Mary, in the Psalter, approved by
the Doctors of the Sorbonne, that is well worth considering* and it is this, My
only Succor, my Lips are bound to publish no other Praises but thine: by thee
the Head of the Serpent has been bruised, the World repaired; thy Power is
boundless; unto thee I confess my Sins, into thy Hands I commit my Soul; come
unto Mary all ye that have thirst, pray unto her, that with her Water she will
wash away the filthiness of your Sins. This, Sir, is your Devotion, and how
blasphemous it is, I leave to the World to judge. The latter part, I suppose,
is intended for some pious Meditation, rather than a Prayer; but here you make
her infinite in Power, for you say her Power is boundless; here you make her to
have bruised the Head of the Serpent, which is only to be attributed to Christ
Jesus; here you commend your Souls into her Hands, who are all at the disposal
of Almighty God. Christ says, Come unto me; but your Doctors call upon Men to
come to our Lady. God through Christ has Power to forgive Sins; but you say
the Virgin Mary has that Power, What can be greater Blasphemy then this? In a
word, in this Prayer you give the Virgin the same Power that God himself has;
nay, some will give her more, and impudently justify themselves therein. But
at this also, I do not wonder, for your Barnardinus tells us, That in respect
of her, God after a sort is more bound to us, then we are to him: Propter
Beatam Virginem Deus quodamodo, plus obligetur nobis, quam nos sibi. Then again
the said Writer says, speaking to the Virgin: Tu fecisti Majora ei qui Potens
est: she says, He that is mighty has done great things for me: but of her we
may say, she has done greater things that is mighty. The same Author further
says: Though she be subject to God, inasmuch as she is a Creature; yet she is
said to be superior and preferred before him, inasmuch as she is his Mother.
And is not that the reason, why ye direct more Prayers to her, than to God
himself? Do you not teach your People to say ten Ave's, for one Pater? And she
has more days set apart for her, then Christ himself.

I have but one thing more to trouble you with upon this Head, and that is the
Psalter of our Lady, which is made in imitation of David's Psalms, the Name of
the great God is everywhere put out, and the who Name of the Virgin Mary is
put in its place. You know very well who the Author is, that it was compiled by
your Seraphical Doctor, Bonaventure Bishop of Alba, and Presbyter-Cardinal of
your Church. You may know also the great esteem it is in the Church of Rome: it
has been several times Printed at Venice, and Paris, and elsewhere. Instead
of, In thee, O Lord; you read it, In thee, O Lady, have I put my trust, let me
never be confounded. Instead of, Let the Lord arise; it is, Let our Lady arise,
and let her Enemies be scattered. And instead of, O come let us sing unto our
Lord; it is, O come let us sing unto our Lady; let us make a joyful Noise unto
the Queen of our Salvation. Now, whether these things can be said without
horrible Blasphemy, I suppose, needs not much disputation. From all which, I
must conclude, that it is irrational to practice Praying to Saints and Angels;
because of the horrid Blasphemy, those that perform this Worship and Service,
are guilty of.

Sixthly, The Practice of your Church, in Praying to the Saints, is irrational
and abominable; because upon a due consideration of what manner of Saints you
Invocate, they are such, whose Saintship, nay, whose Existence is by us justly
to be questioned. I pray call to mind what Cassander, one of your own Church,
speaks by way of complaint, in his Chapter De Meritis and Intercessione
Sanctorum. These are his words, The People do now almost despise the Old
Saints; and serve with more Affection the New, whose Holiness is less certain.
Yea, there are some of them, of whom we may justly doubt, whether ever they
lived in the World.

I. You pray to some of doubtful Saintship, or Holiness, who instead of
reigning in Heaven, it may be are frying in Hell. You, I suppose, very well
know that I do not now speak without Authority; for it is a famous Saying of
Gregory the Great, That the Bodies of many Persons are Worshipped on Earth,
whose Souls are tormented in Hell. This is not only the opinion of one Doctor,
but Thomas of Aquine, and Cardinal Cajetan, and others, do acknowledge that in
a matter of Fact his Infallible Holiness may be mistaken; and that his Holiness
may be in an Error in this very business of Canonization. And many of your
Church have taken great offense at that prostitution of Devotion, usual in your
Public Assemblies, to every upstart new Saint: Do you not in this, Worship,
many times, ye know not what? Christ put the Question to the Samaritan Woman;
give me leave to put the same to you, I pray, Who is it that you Worship? How
came they to be the Objects of your Worship, and great Devotion paid to them in
your Churches, after they were dead, whose Conversations were much questioned,
whilst alive, against whom many Scandals were proved? How many of your Saints,
Sir, have been made f^r Money? Many of them Traitors to the Government, under
which they then lived. It would be an endless Task for me to make Observations
upon the Lives of some of your Saints, Murderers, and common Disturbers of the
Peace of Christendom. Sir, I will instance in the Lives of those Saints that
have been of Note in the English Nation: The first Instance that I shall give
you, is that of Austin the Monk, and Archbishop of Canterbury, who was sent
into this our Nation by Gregory the Great, and therefore called by your Church,
The Great Apostle of England: this Monk, with others, were by this Gregory sent
into this Island, to turn the People to the Romish Religion; which Augustine,
when through his pretended Holiness, or rather Hypocrisy, had got a Party to
own him, and had obtained of King Ethelbert, to be Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Primate of all England; went into Wales, where he found many Godly, and
Learned Bishops, and Preachers of God's most Holy Word, which sincerely and
truly taught the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and rightly administered the
Sacraments, according to Christ's Institution; whom this Austin the Monk
labored to the best of skill and power, to allure from the Sincerity and
Simplicity of Christ's Religion, unto the Superstition and Idolatry of your
Church: setting out that he was a Legate of the Most Holy Father the Pope, sent
from Rome; and that he was made and ordained the chief Bishop and Primate of
all England, and therefore he commanded them to obey him, and his Doctrine, and
to receive that Most Holy Father of Rome, and his Religion: but the Godly and
Learned Fathers boldly answered, That they were already true Christians, and
according to the Word of God they governed their Churches, therefore would
neither obey him, nor submit themselves to the Authority of that strange Romish
Bishop, nor yet receive his strange Superstitious Ceremonies; but continue as
heretofore they had done, in their old way of serving of God. For which cause
Austin the Monk, with his Companions departed, and being not satisfied with the
entertainment these holy men gave him, he found a way to give these Christians
great trouble, because they would not obey him, nor comply with the Bishop of
Rome's pretended Title over them. This develish Priest he complained to King
Ethelbert, that the Britains would neither obey him, nor any man but only the
Archbishop of Carleon; which thing thus represented to the King, it moved him
to wrath, and threatened to destroy them all. Writing to Elfrid King of
Northumberland, that he would come to him with all the Force he could raise,
and that he would meet him at Leicester, and from thence they would go into
Wales and destroy the Archbishop of Carleon, and all those who had refused to
obey Austin and his Doctrine.

When these holy men heard of this, and that the two Kings, with their Armies,
did approach, to the end they might destroy them, they sent unto the Kings
certain holy and good men, who went barefoot, and with all Humility and
Meckness besought them to cease from so ungodly an Action: But these wicked
Kings would not speak to these holy men, but presently ordered them to be
slain, which was presently done, being in number five hundred and forty, (some
say eleven hundred.) And from thence these Kings went to Bangor, in order to
destroy all the Britains; but they having received notice of the intentions of
these instigated Princes, they assembled themselves, and raised all the Force
they could, resolving to fight in the defense of their Religion and Country: so
that in the Battle King Ethelbert was slain by the just Judgment of God, and
Kind Elfrid was sore wounded in the Battle, and forced most shamefully to fly;
the whole Army also were defeated, and almost all destroyed. Thus God gave his
Servants Victory over their Enemies. Ex Chron. Angl.

This, Sir, is a Saint to whom great Devotions are paid by your Church, for
that, as your Divines say, he was the first that brought the Faith into this
Land; which is false, the Faith having been Received by the Inhabitants thereof
many hundred years before he was born. But behold his Pride and Cruelty! two
Vices that did rather entitle him a Devil than a Saint. His Pride is
sufficiently set forth by Venerable Bede, who tells us, That he did disdain to
rise up in token of Reverence to seven Bishops, and other Learned and Grave men
of Britain, when they made their appearance at his Council: And because of this
his Pride, they would not hearken to his Demands, nor take him for their
Archbishop; thinking that if he carried himself so insolently to them whilst a
Stranger, what Respect might they hope for when they came under his
Jurisdiction. His Cruelty appears in stirring up two Kings to commit such
barbarous Murders.

Now, Sir, what reason have we to pray to such a Saint as this, that had
stained his Life with such foul Crimes as these? Besides, I could never yet
read of his Repentance for that Blood which he had occasioned to be shed. Nay,
see but the old Chronicle, written in French above three hundred years ago by
Thomas Gray, a Member of your own Church, you shall find him thus to speak:
Austin being thus Refused of the Bishops and other learned men of the Britains,
made such complaint thereof unto Ethelbert King of Kent, that he forthwith
levied his Power, and marched against them, and slew many of them most
barbarously, etc. Hereby it appears that he was not only proud, but envious,
and an inflamer of Wars, and a causer of Slaughters; yet a Saint, and much
Devotion paid to him. He did not only stir up War, but went in person himself
in company with the Kings that made War against the innocent Britains. I shall
be so far from praying to such a Saint, that instead thereof, I and all
Protestants must pray, From such a Saint, good Lord deliver us.

Another of your Saints is St. Anselmn; he is a person that is canonized, and
by your Church he is worshipped and prayed to: therefore I shall observe to you
a little of his Saintship, which appeared in his behavior to Henry the First,
his Sovereign Lord, with what Impudence, Insolence, and Disloyalty, did he
carry himself to that King, till he was forced to banish this Anselmn the
Realm? and so he continued for some time, till the King, partly through fear of
the displeasure of the Bishop of Rome, who was then very potent, and partly
through his Zeal to the Church of Rome, did permit the return of this Bishop,
who when he was returned, made such havoc in the Church of England, as never
the like was heard of before, and what Wars he occasioned, testifies, that he
was no Saint on Earth; I doubt therefore, the Pope could upon no terms justify
his being canonized; and you can by no means be justified in paying any
Devotion to such a Wretch. Ex Chron. Angl. p. 253.

Another of your Saints is Thomas Becket, whom you call St. Thomas of
Canterbury. The Prayers you make to him are so extravagant, that flesh and
blood is not able to bear them; they are so full of Blasphemy, that it is a
shame they should be named amongst Christians; him you call a Saint and Martyr.
But, Sir, to be plain with you, he was neither Saint nor Martyr; it is true, he
was slain at Canterbury, but the true cause of his death, was his Ambition, and
Vanity, and Wilful maintaining of manifest Wickedness of the Clergy, to the
dishonor of God's holy Name, as by the Writers of that time it does fully
appear; and for proof of this, I pray be pleased to read the Story of
Guilielmus Nubrigensis, that lived in the same Age with this high and mighty
Saint of yours, who thus writes of Becket: That Henry the Second took him into
his especial Favor, and being only the Archdeacon of Canterbury, made him
Lord Chancellor of his Realm, and so treated him with all kind of Honor, that
he seemed to Reign as well as the King; that afterward he promoted him to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, and sent him to the Council of Towers, then
holden in France; being there, as upon some remorse of Conscience he misliked,
and secretly refused the King's Gift, and resigned the Archbishopric unto the
Pope, and received it again at his hands; and so he secretly betrayed his
Princes Right unto a Stranger. At his return, there grew a great Question
within this Realm, touching the Prerogative of the Clergy: The Judges
complaining that there were many Rapes, and Robberies, and Murders committed
within the Realm, to the number of one hundred, by Ecclesiastical Persons; and
therefore made Request to the Parliament, That some consideration might be had
of it; for that they themselves being Temporal Ministers, had neither Law nor
Jurisdiction against them. As for the Bishops (says Nubrigensis) whose part it
was to see such Disorders corrected, of so many thousand wicked Priests, they
never degraded, nor punished so much as one; for they (says he) seeking more
carefully how to maintain the Dignity, and Liberties of their Clergy, than the
Correction of their Manners, think they do good Service to God, and his Church,
if they maintain wicked Priests against the Government: whereby, says he, it
comes to pass, That the Priests that should shine as the Stars in Heaven,
having free liberty to do what they list, care neither for God nor Man; for
redress whereof the King was resolved to take Order by his Parliament: all the
rest of the Bishops, not one excepted, agreed thereunto, and confirmed the same
under their Seals, only Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, stood stiff,
and stout, and would not yield; afterward when he saw the King's displeasure
grew against him, in the Morning before he should come to make his Answer, he
caused the Mass of St. Stephen's Office to be sung, with this Preface, Sederunt
Principes, etc. The Kings sat down to speak against me, and the wicked sought
to persecute me. This done, he took his Silver Cross in his hand, and went
boldly to the Court, but perceiving the King was much moved, and misliked his
stoutness, the next Night following he fled over into France, and afterward
sought Aid of the Pope; at the last being reconciled unto his Prince, and
returning again into England, he brought with him the Pope's Suspension, and
thereby suspended all the Bishops of the Realm, and would never agree to
release them; by reason of which the whole Church, and Kingdom was much
disordered, and shortly after ensued his Death. This is the true Story of
Thomas Becket, Lib. 2. Cap. 16.

Sir, not only Neubrigensis, but also Baronius, by the account he gives of
Beckett, shows us, That they were both strongly of the opinion that the Pope
was out when he Canonized this Becket, and commanded the People of England
annually to Celebrate the Day of his Passion, and that by Prayer to him they
should endeavor to merit the remission of their Sins. Now Sir, this Becket for
ought that can appear by these your own Historians was a proud Praelate, a
Rebel to his Prince, one that had set the Nation in a Flame, to defend the
Pope's Quarrel against the King, and when he dyed, was rather the Pope's
Martyr, then Gods. Seeing he dyed not for the Faith of Christ, but for the
Defense of the Popish Tyranny, and Usurpation. This Sir is owned, That the
People were so devoutly Affected to this new Saint, that in respect of him they
had little or no Consideration of the Blessed Virgin, or of Christ himself; and
to encourage the Peoples Devotion, many Stories were told, and Reports made of
the many Miracles that were by him wrought on them that did pray unto him.

I fear Sir, I shall move your Patience, I will but instance in one Saint more,
whose Saintship I must call in Question, so do all the Reformed Divines, it is
St. Francis, the great Founder of the Order of Friars called Franciscans, he is
no ordinary Person in your Church, you make him equal with Christ in his Birth,
Life, Temptations, Doctrine, Miracles, and what not; This and a great deal more
may be Read of him in his Book of Conformities, which was Published with
Allowance in the Year 1590. of him, Turcelline Sings, Qui Franciscus erat, nunc
tibi Christus erit. Your Bonaventure Swear at Paris, That it was revealed to
him by Almighty God, that Saint John by the Angel that had the Seal of the
Living God in the Revelations, was meant no other then this Saint Francis; yea,
such is your Esteem of this Intercession, that some of you have preferred it to
Christ's, and say, Christus Oravit, and Franciscus exoravit, Christ has Prayed,
and Francis Obtained.

I pray you seriously to Read his Book of Conformities, and Bonaventure of his
Life, and if you please, those other Chronicles and Records under the Hands of
Writers that were of your own Communion; then you will soon find that he was a
strange sort of a Saint, and that he did a multitude of things that argued him
destitute of common Sense. What can you say of a Man that shall Preach to Birds
and Beasts, and salute them kindly, saying, Brother Bird, and Brother Beast?
How can you approve of his taking up the Lyce that were fallen from his
Garments, and putting them on again, for fear of wronging those Innocent
Creatures? What can be said for his cutting his Garments in pieces, and giving
them away? What account can be given of his tumbling in the Mire? unless it
were some significant Ceremony; you must certainly have more Sense than to
justify his making his Crucifixes of Mortar, as Children do Babies of Dirt.
What can you say for his making a Wife of Snow, and embracing her to Allay his
Amarous and Lustful Heat? These with many more such rediculous Actions show him
to be no Saint, but rather a Bedlam, Sick-brained Creature, What reason then
for his being Sainted? Why should he be Adored?

Sir, In short, concerning the Doctrine and Practice itself, I may say to you,
as our Lord said to the Woman of Samaria, Ye worship ye know not what; such are
St Fingare, St. Anthony of Padua, Charles Borromaeus, Ignatius Loyola,
Xaverius, and many more, of whom Cardinal Bessarion complains, that many of
them were such persons, whose Lives he could not approve of, and such
concerning whom they know nothing but from their own parties, and by pretended
revelations made to particular and Hypocondraical persons, In Libro de Sanctis
Hibernicis. Another of your own Writers Augustinus Triumphus affirms, that all
who are Canonized by the Pope, cannot be said to be in Heaven; and this is
apparent beyond all dispute; for Prateolus tells us, that Herman the Author of
the Heresy of the Fratricelli, was for Twenty years together honored for a
Saint, and at last his body was taken up and burnt, but then since (as
Ambrosius Catharinus and Vivaldus observes) if one Saint be called in question,
then the rest may; what will become of the Devotions that have been paid to
such Saints as have been Canonized for these last eight hundred years?
concerning whom we can have but slender Evidence that they are in Heaven at
all, and therefore the Cardinal of Cambray, Petrus de Aliaco wishes that so
many new Saints were not Canonized.

Secondly, You Worship some Saints who are of dubious Existence, as well as
Holiness, as many of your Saints have been suspected; so you have many feigned,
or fabulous Saints in your Church. In the Breviary of Sarum, I find you there
pray to Saint Christopher, so in the Roman Breviary, this Saint, Sir, your
Divines, and other Writers have supposed him to be a Giant of prodigious
stature; Mantuan, Lib. 7. Fast. says he was many Else high; Ludovicus Vives
says, he saw a Tooth of his bigger then his Fist: your Writers report, That he
carried Christ over Marinum Flumen, an Arm of the Sea, and at last became a
Martyr of Christ. This Saint is in much request, though but an imaginary one.
Who could ever have thought that any number of Men should be so besotted as to
worship such a Saint, that rather is a Monster than a Saint, or only a nominal
Saint, of whom we have no account but what is romantic, or fabulous.

Another Office we find to the three Kings of Cullen, King Jasper, King
Melchior, and King Balthazer, and are entreated by the King of Kings, whom they
merited to see crying in his Cradle, to show compassion to their Petitioners in
their distress.

And in another Office we find for the most Holy Vrsula, and eleven thousand
Virgins, who you say were her Companions in Martyrdom, and were killed at
Cullen, as your Writers tell us, by the barbarous Hunns; where they were all
Interred, and many of their precious Relics reserved to this day; and it did
not a little encourage them in their Martyrdom, that Christ had sent his Vicar
amongst them, Pope Ceriacus, to absolve them from their Sins, and to die a
Martyr with them: but there is so great a difference and disagreement amongst
your Writers, that we of the Reformed Religion must be excused if we doubt
whether there were any such number of Virgin-Martyrs, or no; and must suppose
your Church to be in a great Error, to Pray to Saints, of which she herself
has great reason to doubt. I could give you several other instances of these
sort of Saints; as the Seven Sleepers, who slept in the time of grievous
Persecution, three hundred sixty two years, till the time of Theodosius, at
which time they awaked: and are Worshipped as Saints in your Church. And St.
Longuinus the Soldier, that with his Lance pierced our Lord Jesus upon the
Cross, and being almost blind, with the sparkling of that Blood, immediately
received his sight; of which the Evangelist makes no mention, though a most
considerable passage; this Saint you say upon receiving his Sight, believed,
and being instructed by the Apostles, forsook his Military Profession, and
lived thirty eight years a Monastic Life; and was at last Martyred for the
Christian Faith. If this had been true, I am sure his Name would not have been
omitted, and therefore I must conclude it to be a mere fiction, and that there
was no such Saint. To conclude therefore this Argument, upon a serious view of
the Roman Breviary, I have met with many more of this sort, yea, which some of
your own Church calls Symbolical Saints, which are yet Worshipped, and
Invooared with the greatest formality, but this is sufficient to prove that
your Praying to Saints and Angels is absurd, and irrational, and abominable in
the sight of God.

Give me leave, Sir, now, to make some observation upon those Testimonies you
did produce, in your Letter to Mr. Needham, to prove the lawfulness of
Invocation, and Adoration of Saints. The first Advocate you bring upon the
Stage, is St. Athanasius, who you say in his Book, De Incarnatione Verbi, has
these words: Hearken, O Daughter of David, and Abraham, and stoop thy Ears to
our Prayers, and forget not thy People, we lift up our Voice to thee: Remember
us, Holy Virgin, and return us for these inconsiderable Speeches, great Gifts,
and Riches of your Grace. Hail, most Gracious, the Lord is with thee,
Interceed, O Mistress. O Lady, O Queen, and Mother of God. Sir, I must tell you
a Story that this Athanasius is said to be the Author of, and that considered,
you will find these words, thus cited, to smell more of Rome, than of
Alexandria: Your Divines represent him to tell a mighty formal Story of an
Image that was abused by the Priests of the Jews; the Story is this: A
Christian having occasion to remove his Family, from an House he had long
inhabited; amongst his other Goods he had an Image of Christ, equal to him in
length and breadth, and in all proportion, through forgetfulness leaves it in
a secret place in his House, out of which he removed; after him a Jew does
inhabit the same House, for some time, and sees not the Image; a strange Jew
sitting there at Dinner, immediately espyeth it, standing open against a Wall.
This is your Athanasius, not Bishop of Alexandria, but an Athanasius of your
own making: one while it is open, and another while it is in a secret place.
The Priests and the Jews came together, and abuse it with all Villainy, they
Crown it with Thorns, and make it drink Vinegar, Gall, and stick it to the
Heart with a Spear; out issues Blood in a great quantity, the Powers of Heaven
are shaken, the Sun is darkened, and the Moon loses her light; and from hence,
says your young Athanasius, we have had Hailstones of Blood, and all other
like Blood, throughout the World. Nay, you make him to tell another doughty
Story: How that Nicodemus, that came to Jesus by Night, made an Image of Christ
with his own Hands, and that when he lay upon his Deathbed, he delivered it to
Gamaliel, that was Schoolmaster to St. Paul; and when that Gamaliel saw that he
should die, he delivered it to James; and James left it to Simon, and Zacheus,
which Image came from hand to hand by Succession, and continued a long time at
Jerusalem; and from thence it was carried into Syria; and from thence into a
City called Berytus, not far from Tire and Sydon, where it was abused by the
Jews, and a great many Wonders were showed by that Image. This, Sir, is
Athanasius of your Church; but not St. Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria. And
he that was the Author of these Fables, was the Author of that blasphemous
Prayer to the Virgin Mary. For I suppose you well know, that St. Athanasius
wrote concerning that matter; and the Heresy of the Arrians gave him occasion
for it. They maintained, That Christ was a mere Creature; and yet they prayed
to him. He on the contrary asserted, That if he were Created, he must not be
Invocated, and Adored. Observe his third Oration against the Arrians: To God
alone (says he) it belongs to be Worshipped; and the Angels themselves are
not ignorant hereof: for although they excel in Glory, yet they are Creatures,
and are none of those that are Worshipped; but of those that Worship the Lord.
Again, Because that Jesus Christ is not a Creature, but is begotten of the
Substance of his Father, and is by Nature the Son of God, therefore is he to be
Worshipped. It Is true, the Arrians did Worship Christ; but it was not upon a
good consideration; for they Worshipped Christ, upon the account, that the Word
of God abided in him. This great Doctor shows them the absurdity of the Reason
of their Worshipping of Christ: For (says he) by the same Reason you may
Worship the Saints, who have the Word of God abiding in them. He does not at
all countenance the Worshipping of Saints: but shows that the Worshipping of
Saints is the sad consequence of Worshipping of Christ, because the Word of God
did dwell in him. You are pleased to represent St. Athanasius to say thus: If
you Worship the Man Christ, because the Word of God dwells there; at the same
time Worship also the Saints, on God's account, who has his Word dwelling in
them: which you make use of to prove the lawfulness of Praying to Saints; when
as he uses it as an Absurdity the Arrians run into, they Worshipping the Man
Jesus, only as the Word of God dwelling in him.

Another Author for Praying to Saints, is St. Cyril of Alexandria, at the
Council of Ephesus, who presided in that Council as Pope Caelestine's Legate;
and at the Second Action, or Session of that Council, in the Presence of the
Bishops that sat in Council, and in their Names, and in the Names of the whole
Council, he (you say) spoke these words: Hail in all our Names, Holy Mother of
God, most excellent Ornament of the whole World, unextinguishable Lamp, Crown
of Virginity, Scepter of right Doctrine, Temple never to be destroyed, the
Dewlling Place of him that cannot be contained within any place, Mother and
Virgin by whom he is named Blessed in the Gospel, who comes in the Name of our
Lord. Hail you that did bare in your Holy Virgin's Womb, him that is Immense,
and Incomprehensible, by whom the Holy Trinity is glorified, and adored, the
universal World over, by whom the Earth exults, by whom Angels, and Archangels
rejoice, by whom the Devils are put to flight: then you say, he concludes, That
none can sufficiently praise that glorious Virgin: and ends his whole Discourse
with these words: Let us fear and worship the undivided Trinity, Celebrating
with Praises Mary, the ever Blessed Virgin, to wit, the Holy Temple of God, and
her Son, and immaculate Spouse.

This you say was plain and full; and so say I: But how do you prove, 1. That
Cyril was there President of the Council of Ephesus, as Legate to Pope
Coelestine? 2. How do you prove that he said the Words in the Name of the whole
Council? 3. How do you prove that ever he spoke them at all? These are three
Particulars worthy of consideration. I perceive your great Voucher; and if so,
the whole thing is to be suspected as a mere Forgery of your Church. You are
pleased to give the Words in Greek to Mr. Needham, who understands Greek; and
so do others: yet your putting it into Greek, will give you no Reputation in
this point, only that you may understand Greek. Therefore, Sir,

Consider in the first place, that Cyril of Alexandria, did not preside in that
Council, by Virtue of any Legantine Authority he received from the Bishop of
Rome; for the Bishop of Rome did not Summon that Council; nor indeed had he
that Power in him for the first five hundred years after Christ. For Cusanus, a
Cardinal of your Church says; Authoritas Consilii non ita sependit a
Congregante, ut nisi a Papa congregetur non sit Concillium, quia tunc omnia
Octo Vniversalia Concilia non fuissent firma, quoniam per Imperatores Conv^cata
Leguntur and Romanus Pontifex instar aliorum Patriarcharum, divales Sacras
Jussiones de veniendo, aut mittendo ad Concilium recepit: The Authority of the
Council does not so depend upon him by whom it was Summoned; so that unless it
be Summoned by the Pope, it can be no Council: for so we shall avoid the first
eight General Councils; for we read they were Summoned by the Emperor, and not
by Popes: and the Pope received the Emperor's Majesty's Commandment, to come,
or send to Councils, as other Patriarchs did.

And your own Writers have owned, that the Council of Ephesus, which was the
third General Council, was held under Theodosius the younger, and by his Order
that Holy Father did preside; and not from any Legantine Authority he received
from Pope Coelestine. Here you fail in this particular, and therefore we have
just cause to question the whole. But this shall suffice, as to the first
Enquiry.

2. I pray how do you prove that Cyril spoke this in the Name of the whole
Council? For if that the whole Council was not for Praying to the Saints and
Angels, he could not be said to speak in their Names: Then how could he in
their Names make such an Address to the Virgin, without being deputed by them?
If it had been said by you, that he did in the Name of Theodosius the Emperor,
make this Prayer, you had said something; for Praying to Saints was then scarce
heard of in the Church of God. I confess, toward the latter part of the fourth
Century, it began to creep into the Church, but was questioned again by the
Council of Carthage, and the Council of Laodicea, both which Councils
determined against the Invocation of Saints and Angels. In the 35 Canon of the
Council of Laodicea, it was thus determined, That Christians ought not to leave
the Church of God, and go and call upon Angels, and make Meetings, which are
things forbidden; Let him be accursed, because he has forsaken the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, and applied himself to Idolatry. Theodoret, in his
Exposition upon the Colossians, does twice mention this Canon, and declare the
Sense of it upon Col. 3. 17. The Apostle (says he) commands us to adorn our
Words and Deeds with the Commemoration of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to send up
our Thanksgiving unto God the Father by him, and not by Angels. The Synod of
Laodicea following also this Rule, and desiring to heal this old Disease, viz.
Angel-Worship, made a Law, That they should not Pray unto Angels, nor forsake
our Lord Jesus Christ. And on Col. 2. he adds, That this Vice continued long in
Phrygia, and Pisidia; for which cause the Synod assembled at Laodicea, the
chief City of Phrygia, and forbad them by a Law, to Pray unto Angels. Can it
then be supposed that the whole Council of Ephesus, should be agreed in the
Point of Praying to Saints and Angels? Since both these Councils had determined
against it, how then could St. Cyril do this in the Name of the whole Council?
For it is well known, that there was yet never any General Council that had
determined for it.

3. Let us know, Sir, how you prove that ever St. Cyril did speak those Words,
or make such a formal Prayer, as you pretend he made. I have given myself the
trouble of Reading the Council of Ephesus; but I find nothing at all of the
business; and therefore you would do well to examine that Council once more;
and let us have the Prayer in Greek, without an etc. But I will tell you I have
great reason to suspect the truth of it, because, I perceive, you take it upon
the credit of Baronius, who was one of your own Writers, and therefore worthily
suspect it: for certainly it was his design in all his History to promote the
Doctrine, and Interest of the Church, and See of Rome. If you would show us St.
Cyril's Speech, it would go a great way further as to its reputation. Yet, Sir,
consider your Divines have falsified that Council of Ephesus, and have
represented that Council to have determined against administering the Communion
in both Kinds, which is a mere falsehood because the Cup was not denied to the
Laity, for several hundred years after; But if it were taken away, why was
there no Decree made thereupon, that is extant in that Council, nor any mention
of, by any Learned Man, within a great time after; and those that laid first
that Doctrine upon the whole Council, might as easily make a Speech for St.
Cyril, and a Prayer for him too, to the Virgin Mary, the better to give
countenance to that way of Worship.

The next proof you bring sorth is a Prayer of St. Gregory Nyssen, unto St.
Theodore, in these words: Martyr, use the liberty you enjoy, speak for your
Fellow Servants; you have conquered the World, but you have not forgotten the
Passions and Necessities our human Condition is liable unto: Ask for Peace,
that those Public Meetings may continue, that the enraged and wicked
Barbarians may not plunder and destroy our Churches and Altars, that no impious
Man tread the Holy Thing under-foot; for we that have been untouched, and
alive, do own ourselves obliged to you for that Blessing, and will ask your
Protection and Security for the future.

No doubt, but St. Theodere might be a Worthy Saint, and Martyr of Christ, to
whom this St. Gregory might use a Rhetorical Apostrophe, tho he were not
present in Person, yet, he might be present by his Picture, or some Monument,
that was set up in the Honor of so great a Saint. But, Sir, Remember the
Psalmist, He calls upon Angels to Praise God, and all the Hosts of Heaven, the
Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars of Light, he calls upon Dragons, and all
Deeps, he calls upon the Fire, Hail, Snow, and Vapor, to Praise God; not that
the Fire did hear him, or the Sun, Moon, and Stars, or Mountains, Hills
fruitful, Trees, or Cedars did hear him, yet here was Invocation; but answer me
plainly, Were these Words spoken by way of Adoration? Was this a Formal Prayer
to St. Theodore? or only an acknowledgment only, that God for the Sake of that
Saint had preserved the Church? You know that God did for the Sake of Abraham,
show many favors to the People Israel, and for the Sake of St. Paul, a whole
Ships Company were preserved, as you may see in Acts 27. 24. Fear not Paul,
thou must be brought before Caesar, and so God has given thee all them that
Sail with thee, as in the same Sense that the People that Sailed with Paul,
were obliged to Paul for their Preservation: In the same Sense does this Holy
Gregory tell St. Theodore, that those who had escaped the Cruelties of the
Barbarians, and were alive, they were obliged to him for that Mercy; but you
will say, that St. Gregory says, That we own our selves obliged to you, for
this Preservation, and we will ask your Protection for the future. That is the
same Protection, he does not pray to St. Theodore, to Protect and Secure, but
says, they will ask the Continuance of that Protection, and Security, which
God was pleased to bestow upon the Church, as a Reward of St. Theodore's
Sufferings, by whose Death the Church might perchance otherwise have sustained
some loss. But you will say further, that St. Gregory prays to St. Theodore, to
ask for Peace. It is true, the Blood of Christ's Martyrs do cry to Heaven, see
Revel. 6. 9, 10. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar,
the Souls of them that were Slain, for the Word of God, and for the Testimony
which they held; and they cried aloud. How long O Lord, Holy and True, do
thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them who dwell on the Earth? And if he
calls for Vengeance upon the Persecutors of the Peace of the Church; such a
sort of asking St. Theodore might use, and for such an Intercession as this,
St. Gregory might perchance Invocate St. Theodore. We find such Invocations as
these frequently, amongst fanciful Men, to Persons, to whom they would pay no
Worship. The Noble Army of God's Martyrs, as they do Praise God in Heaven, so
their Blood calls for Vengeance upon their Persecutors on Earth. Therefore,
Sir, upon the Consideration of the whole Words, there is nothing more to be
said, but that they were a Rhetorical Strein in Honor of the Memory of St.
Theodore, and not a Prayer to him, as an Act of Adoration that he paid to that
Saint. The Reason that I give is this, because that in his Works against
Eunomius, Lib. 5. he most excellently speaks thus: We are taught to understand,
that whatsoever is Created, is a different thing, from the Divine Nature, and
that we are to Adore that Nature only which is Uncreated. Whose Character is
this, that neither at any time began to be, or ever shall cease to be? Now
compare St. Gregory with St. Gregory, and you must conclude that there is no
Invocation as an Act of Adoration, nor Formal Prayer as any Act of Devotion,
paid to this Saint: but as the Psalmist did Invocate the Dragons, and Deeps,
Sun, Moon, and Stars; and as the three Children did call upon the Frost, and
Snow, to magnify God without any mention of Adoration or Formal Supplication;
and such an Invocation many fanciful Men at this day use.

But you are pleased to say, that St. Gregory did pray to St. Theodore to get
the rest of the Martyrs, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. John, to pray for the
several Churches planted by them: This plainly shows, that it was but a
Rhetorical Redundancy of Speech of St. Gregory, in Memory of that Saint. The
Cries of the Martyr's Blood reaches to Heaven, and is heard by God, and his
avenging their Blood upon the Persecutors on Earth, secures the Peace of the
Church: but that St. Gregory did so supplicate St. Theodore, for that he
believed that the Saints hear our Prayer, I cannot gather from his Words,
beccause, that he is so full against giving any Worship unto any, but the
Uncreated Being, so that you may see he intends no Adoration to St. Theodore,
nor any Prayer to him, as if he did believe that St. Theodore did hear him, or
did make Intercession to God otherwise then his Blood crying to Heaven for
Vengeance. Thy Brothers Blood cries to me from the Earth, says God to Cain,
Genesis 4 10. The Saints Blood did Cry, and St. Theodoret's Blood did Cry, What
then, were they therefore Mediators of Intercession? were they to be Prayed
unto, and Worshipped? as if they could hear our Prayers? No, St. Gregory does
not Invocate him for those Reasons, nor for that End.

But those warm Expressions of Holy Men, have given great occasion to your
Idolatrous Practices, their Heats of Zeal were many times beyond the Bounds of
their Judgment, by which, Sir, you may observe that we do not depend much upon
the Authority of the Fathers; we having a more sure Word of Instruction, which
gives us no Warrant for this way of Worship, nor have we any Precedent in the
New Testament, that ever any Worship to them was ever performed.

You say, that St. Gregory does explain himself in his Oration on Theodore the
Martyr. The Christians (says he, call on) this Martyr, as on God's Minister,
who being Invocated by them, he is able to Impetrate for them, what Favors he
pleases; and this you tell us is St. Gregory's Explanation of himself, and you
tell us, that his Prayer was as full, and as plain as could be. The Church at
that time did begin to have great Devotion to the Monuments of their Martyrs,
not that they did permit any Worship to be paid to them; and their great
Orators did in their Orations on the Saint, whose Memory they kept, use a great
many Rhetorical Apostrophies, which looked like Prayer: But I tell you again,
that they designed no praying to their Saints, but did Invocate them as the
Ministers of God: The Psalmist did so by the Angels, the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and it was only in Honorem Sancti, not in Adorationem. They did use to repeat
all their good Words, and all their good Works, and did speak to their
Monuments, and their Relics; and is there no difference betwixt Invocation by
way of Honor? and Invocation in order to Worship? The former might perchance
be used to St. Theodore, but latter not.

But you press still, and say, that St. Gregory says, That St. Theodore being
Invocated by them, is able to obtain what Favors be pleases; It Is true, that
God does look upon himself Honored, when we retain a grateful Memory of those
who have highly served him, and in a most Eminent Manner have suffered for him,
and many times the word Invocate signifies only a calling to, and not always a
calling upon; they spoke of their Saints with great Reverence, and reported
their Works, and Services, and Sufferings, to induce their Hearers to follow
their good Examples; then according to the custom of the Time, they did use to
convert their Speeches to the Monuments, or Images of these Saints, which you
call Praying to them, which was no more a Prayer than a Poets calling upon his
Muse: and as for the Intercession, (you would have us take notice of) is no
more then the Cry his Blood makes to Heaven from under the Altar, for upon the
Account of their Sufferings, great Blessings have been bestowed on the Church
of God, Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae, by the Example of their
Constancy, many have been brought to the Faith, and by their Eminent Holiness,
many have entered into so strickt a Course of Life, that they have been of
great Use in the Church of God; and therefore these Fathers did mention the
Names of these Martyrs, and did as it were speak to them, that they might
engage their People to follow their good Examples, so that with them they might
be made partakers of Bliss and Happiness. This is all that I can apprehend from
St. Gregory Nyssen.

Another Proof you produce is St. Gregory Nazianzen, who you bring in praying
to St. Basil, in these Words: O Sacred and Divine Man, look down upon us from
Heaven, and either by your Prayers mortify that Sting of the Flesh, which God
has given us for our Instruction, or move us to bare it with a courageous
Mind, and direct our whole Life to that which is most fitting, and when we part
out of this Life receive us there in your Tabernacles.

Sir, I have read over the Life of Nazianzen, written by Gregorius Presbyter,
and he tells us, that Nazianzen came to Caesaria a great while after St. Basu's
Death, and it is like he might Visit St. Basil's Grave: but I do not remember
any Prayer he made to St. Basil, and since Gregorius Presbyter makes no
mention of it, who wrote his Life, and no mention being made of it by Socrates,
and Sozomen, nor of St. Gregory Nyssen, nor Gregory Nazianzen himself, and
other old Writers of approved Credit, that also wrote St. Basil's Life, mention
that Prayer made to St. Basil, by St. Gregory Nazianzen: Till you give me some
Instructions where to find this Prayer, you must excuse me from believing any
thing of the Matter; I partly guess at your Author, who, if well considered,
will give you no manner of Reputation.

The next Proof is a Prayer of St. Maximus to St. Agnes, which I shall not give
my self the trouble of answering, till you tell me where you find that Prayer,
and then I shall be in a better condition to make a Reply to it. I yet never
met with any such Prayer in my Reading; I would have you tell where in your
Books you meet with it, I will then tell my Thoughts of it, till then I shall
forbear any Reply.

The next Proof you produce is Father Hillary of Arles, his Prayer to St.
Honoratus: To this Hillary, I must confess I am wholly a Stranger, but I have
considered St. Hillary, Bishop of Poicters, and he knows nothing of the
business, and therefore I pray tell us who this St. Hillary of Arles was; but
the Saint Hillary that I know, was Bishop of Poicters, and was a married
Bishop, and did Learnedly write of the Holy Trinity. I have both Fathers and
Councils by me, and I have read some things of this St. Hillary, but he
mentions nothing of praying to St. Honoratus. I pray, Sir, tell me whether
there were two St. Hillaries or no, if not, then let me tell you, that I cannot
find it, till I have some directions from you; and you must excuse me from
giving any Credit to it, for I doubt you depend upon an Author that will have
little or no Credit, for the Prayer, as you call it, smells so much of your
Romish Forgery, that I cannot well mention without great Indignation, for St.
Hillary the said Bishop of Poicters lived, and flourished presently after St.
Athanasius, and then praying to Saints was not in fashion. In the latter part
of the fourth Century, some of the Fathers were very full of their Rhetorical
Apostrophies, and did call upon their Saints, but not pray; their Speeches many
times were directed to them, that Men might follow their good Example, having
had an Account of their Lives: but no Prayer at all intended to them.

Sir, in your Epistle to the English Peer, you make mention of one
Amphilochius, as a great Defender of the Lawfulness of Praying to Saints; but
in your Letter to Mr. Needham, are pleased to take no notice of him, therefore
give me leave to tell you, that it is true, there was an Amphilochius, that did
maintain and defend that Doctrine, but he is a new Amphilochius of your
Churches setting up, and not the true Amphilochius, and your Prayers of St.
Gregory Nazianzen to St. Basil, and your Prayers of St. Gregory Nyssen to St.
Theodore, and your Prayers of Nectarius, Patriarch of Constantinople to St.
Theodore, are all taken out of your Amphilochius; the falseness of that Author
shall be made appear by, and by him you make a Writer of St. Basu's Life, and
what not.

We confess there was Amphilochius, that was of Iconium, but not Bishop of
Iconium, but Archbishop of Layconia; he was a stout, godly and worthy Bishop,
that did write against the Messalian Heretics, whom he courageously
suppressed, and joined with Flavianus Bishop of Antioch, and drove them out of
their Diocesses; and in the Assistance of these Holy Prelates, one Laetoius,
who was a Zealous Man, came and burned up their Monasteries, or as Theodoret
terms it, their Den of Thieves, Lib. 4. c. 11.

But your Amphilochius, who, as your Divines pretend, was Bishop of Iconium,
and if we may believe your Churchmen, was Consecrated by Angels from Heaven:
He pretends to write St. Basil's Life, and was as yours say, an Ancient Father;
and the Credit this Amphilochius has; did encourage you to make use of his
Name and Authority in your Epistle to the English Peer, for a Proof of the
warrantableness of the Doctrine of praying to Saints, as it is now practiced in
your Church. I confess, the Names of the Ancient Fathers of the Church are
worthy of great Honor: The Life of St. Basil was written and published by
several worthy Fathers, as by St. Gregorius Nyssenus, and by his dear Friend
St. Gregory Nazianzen, by Gregorius Presbyter, by Socrates, and by Theodoret,
by Sozomen, and Nicephorus, and St. Chrysostom has some Remarks of his Life in
his Works, notwithstanding of late years, he that wrote Vitas Patrum, and
Jacobus de Voragine, and Vincentius in speculo, who seem to entitle this
Amphilochius to be a great Writer of St. Bazil's life, and therefore from him
you have the prayer St. Gregory Nazianzen is supposed to have made to St.
Bazil. The reason of my suspicion is, because I cannot find this Prayer, as I
observed to you in any of the Works of those ancient Writers beforementioned.
If you have, I pray deal so ingeniously with us, as to tell us. But in the mean
time to let you understand of what Credit your Amphilochus is, I pray see how
he has dealt with St. Bazil in his pretended writing his Life, and by that you
may see what stress may be laid upon his Authority, as to the controversy now
in hand. We will therefore compare your Amphilochius, with Socrates, Sozomen,
Gregory Nazianzen, and Gregory Nyssen, and other Ancient Fathers of undoubted
Reputation in the world, that did on purpose write the life of St. Bazil, but
not one syllable as ever I could see of that Prayer. Socrates and Zozomen do
say, that Bazil in his Youth was under the Education of Libanius, and was his
Scholar; but your Amphilochius says, that he was Companion, and School-fellow
to Libanius, Socr. l. 4. c. 21. Sozomen, l. 6. c. 17. Nazianzen, and Gregorius
Presbyter say, that Basil living some time at Caesaria, was well acquainted
with Eusebius the Bishop of that place, before he went into Pontus: Your
Amphilochius says, that at his return, which was soon after, Eusebius knew him
not, neither had he ever seen or spoken with him before. Nazianzen, in vita
Basilii, and Greg. Presb. in vita Nazianz. Your Amphilochius says, that Basil
was Bishop of Caesaria, in the time of Julian the Emperor, whereupon he tells
a great many fond Fables of that Holy Basil: Nazianzen, his nearest Friend,
says, that he was chosen a Bishop there a long time after, in the time of
Valens the Emperor, and was not there Bishop all the time of Julian: Your
Amphilochius tells a Canterbury Story, how that St. Mercury being then dead,
and a Saint in Heaven, at the Command of the Virgin Mary, took his own Spear
out of his Chapel, where it was kept, and went out of the same into the Field,
and slew the Emperor Julian, and that the same Spear was found bloody
afterward. Nazianzen, Socrates, and Sozomen, and Theodoret say, It could never
be known by whom that cursed Apostate was slain. Nazianz. in Oratione contra
Julianum, Socrat. Lib. 3. c. 18. Soz. lib. 6. c. 2. Theod. lib. 3. c. 25. Your
Amphilochius tells us, that Basil foretold the Death of Julian, but Theodoret
says, it was one Julianus Saba, and not Basil, Theodoret. Lib. 3. c. 2. Your
Amphilochius says, that Valens the Emperor did yield unto Basil, and gave him
place; but Sozomen says, that the Emperor persisted in his Resolution, and
would not yield, but persisted in his Obstinacy against St. Basil: Your
Amphilochius says, that Nazianzen was present at St. Basil's Burial; but
Nazianzen in his Monodia, says, he came after his Burial, and was not present;
of these two, which must we believe? Gregorius Presbyter that wrote Nazianzen's
Life, says, that he came a great while after that Basil was buried; but your
Amphilochius says, that Nazianzen came in and saw the blessed Body, and fell
upon it, when it was buried; upon which you may see that your Author did not
lay his Lies together so close, but that they may be detected; for if St.
Gregory Nazianzen saw St. Basil's Body, how was it buried? if it were buried,
how could he see the Body? but you may see where the Prayer to St. Basil was
invented, for he saw the Body, says Amphilochius, and from thence we conclude,
that he is your Author for this Prayer.

Now, Sir, What Credit can we give to this Author? that has set himself up to
contradict Authors, that are even to this day of great Credit with the Divines
of your Church. I wonder that you should Rank him amongst the Fathers, that is
so young as to write the Life of Thomas Becket, which was seven hundred years
after your Divines suppose him to have lived; and in quoting this Author, you
very much betray your self, for do but observe the Impudence of the Man, to
pretend that he wrote St. Basil's Life, and that St. Basil dedicated his Book,
called (...) unto him the said Amphilochius. Since Nazianzen reckoning up all
St. Basil's Books in his Monodia, and passes that Book by as none of his; and
Sozomen writes, Lib. 3. c. 13. that it was judged not to be St. Basil's, but
the Work of one Eustathius a notable Heretic, a Book full of Superstition,
and wicked Doctrine, and condemned by the Council of Gangra, praefat. in
Council. Gangren. but you did consider better of it, and therefore omitted that
Author in your Letter to Mr. Needham.

Another Instance for praying to Saints, is Nectarius Patriarch of
Constantinople, who, as you say, preceded St. Chrysostom. This Prelate having
given an account why St. Theodore's Feast was kept on the Saturday of the first
week in Lent, to wit, in Thanksgiving to the Saint, for having in a Vision
forewarned the Patriarch of Constantinople, that Saint during the Persecution
of Julian, that the Apostate designed to pervert or destroy all the Christians,
by permitting no Meat to be sold in the Market, but such as had been offered to
the Idols, and besprinkled with the Blood of those abominable Victims; and
advised him to prepare such a provision of Bisquets, as would suffice his Flock
to feed upon: Whilst the Markets were thus shut up to them; and for having thus
secured their Religion, and Lives, he makes this following Prayer to the Saint,
The words of the Prayer you say, are these: O Splendour of the Martyrs, Glory of
the Saints, O worthy Gift of God, O Unconquered Keeper and Defender of the
Faithful, be not unmindful of our Poverty, and Dejectedness, but vouchsafe thou
always to pray for us, O most Admirable Man; nor do thou despise us who are
daily assailed by Julian the Spiritual one, who both then and now is the Author
of Evil, the Enemy of our Souls, for we believe that you live after Death; Thou
then who art yet alive in Christ, and stands near unto him, endeavor by thy
Prayers to make him Gracious unto us thy Servants, that freed by thee from the
present Miseries, we may attain unto the happiness that is there reserved for
us.

I pray, good Sir, in what part of Nectarius his Works is this Prayer found?
What Historian that writes his Life has this Prayer. There is one Euthymius
that your Divines suppose to be an Ancient Greek Father, I thought you would
have quoted him, but I commend you for your Modesty, you have recourse to
Bellermine, who directs you to Lippomanes, who, I suppose you do not esteem an
Ancient Father, for he was Bishop of Verona; he filled two mighty Volumes of
this Stuff, which were printed at Venice, and Lovaine, about a 120 years ago.
This Father Aloysius Lippomanes, you will find to have no Credit, he being so
young an Author; besides it is well known that Julian was dead twenty years
before Nectarius was installed in that Patriarchate of Constantinople, and
therefore sat not in the time of Julian's Persecution, and stood in no need of
St. Theodore's Advice in that business of providing of Bisquet for his Flock,
which your Lippomanes takes no notice of, and if no such Restraint were put
upon the Christians by the said Julian, then what Obligation lay upon Nectarius
to return St. Theodore thanks, and that there could be no such design of
Julian, in the time of the said Nectarius, for that he was, as I observed,
before dead twenty years before Nectarius was Patriarch of Constantinople.

The last Prayer you offer was that of St. Gregory Nazianzen: O Venerable
Virgin, chaste, and most happy, hear my Voice benignly, and grant me that which
is chief of all, viz. That departing this Life, I may find thee to be my
Patron: This is another of your Prayers, you say; but this smells so like the
Church of Rome, that I must suspect it, till you are pleased to tell me where
you find this Prayer in the Works of St. Nazianzen; Does not your Amphilochius
help you here at a dead lift? Gregorius Presbyter that wrote the Life of
Nazianzen, says nothing of it, nor do I find it in any of his Works. If
Amphilochus does not, I pray how far does your Aloysius Lippomanes give you his
assistance? For they are a couple of Fathers your Church has of late, coined
to help them in the time of need: but if you did find it in Nazianzen, I pray
tell us where, that we may give you a more satisfactory Reply; but if you have
none but your young Authors, we judge it a Forgery of your Church.

Then you proceed to produce your Authority from those Fathers which did defend
the Practice of Invocation of Saints, and the first you produce is that of St.
Gregory Nyssen, which I have replied to already, and will say something more:
You tell us, that in his Oration upon St. Theodore, that he says, The
Christians call on the Martyr, as on God's Minister, who being Invocated by
them, is able to impetrate for them what Favors he pleases.

To this, Sir, give me leave to say, That where the Fathers are contrary to the
Word of God, there we must leave them; where they are agreeable, there we do
agree with them: but you have so ordered the matter, that you make the Fathers
speak your own sense, by your frequent Forgeries, putting that upon them which
they never speak, or else leaving out what they did really say. And this
Father's Expression does look like a Forgery of your Church; for I find in the
Life of St. Theodore, written by St. Gregory Nyssen, who wrote it with much
Eloquence in the Praise of the Church, where the Monument of that Holy Martyr
was kept; and speaks of the Excellency of the Image that was made for the said
Saint, which did so lively represent him, as if the whole Story of him were
written in a Book: And in his Oration upon that Martyr, he does by a passionate
Apostraphe direct himself to the Image; but that he prayed to that Saint, as if
he could hear him, that I deny: Because, that in his Writings against
Eunominus, he says, We are to Worship and Adore that Nature alone, which is
uncreated, whose Character is this, That it neither at any time began to be,
nor ever shall cease to be, Contr. Eunom. Lib. 5. But from these Words of St.
Gregory, you cannot prove such an Invocation, as points the least at any
Adoration intended by him, to this, or any other Saint; but certain it is, that
this extravagant way of speaking to St. Theodore, is by no means to be
justified, it being repugnant to the Word of God, and tending to the
countenancing of an heathenish Custom, (viz.) Of bringing Images into the
Churches, Eusebius. Lib. 7. Cap. 16. Who says, That the Use of Images was brought
into the Churches first, by the Heathens, and St. Hierom tells you, the decking
of them was to deceive the simple: Argento and Auro decoravit illud ut fulgore,
utriusque Materiae dicipiat simplices, qui quidem Error ad nos usque transivit,
ut Religionem in divitiis arbitremur. Hieron. in Jer. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. He
adorneth his Image with Silver and Gold, that by the luster and glory of both
these Metals, he may deceive the simple: which Error crept in amongst us, so
that now we think our Religion stands in Riches. I say, this was the
consequence of those high flown Apostrophes, and Invocating them, though they
intended no Worship to them; for they were convinced that the Saints could not
hear them, therefore the end of their calling upon them, was the more to induce
their Hearers to follow the good Example of these Saints, whose Works they
magnified, and in their transports of Zeal they did call upon them, as some of
the Fathers did upon other things, which I am sure they did never believe that
they were capable of hearing them. Thus it was with this holy Nyssen in this
Oration upon St. Theodore, and means and intends no Prayer at all to be made to
him, but only a naming his Name, and Works, that his good Example might be
followed.

Your Doctrine of the Saints Intercession is no ways proved, for St. Gregory
intends no more, than to show you, that those who name his Name, and profess
the Faith he professed, and that the consideration of his holy Life, and
glorious Martyrdom, working in them a willingness of obedience to the Will of
God, they might obtain those Favors God usually bestows on his Church,
Blessings suitable to the great Sufferings and Services of his Saints; and this
all Protestants do own, that God for the sake of his Saints, that have been
eminent in their day, has been pleased to show great Mercy to his People, by
their Example of Holiness, and Obedience, and courageous Sufferings, many have
been brought to God, and many have been confirmed in the Faith of Jesus Christ,
and an holy emulation has been by this means occasioned amongst Christians,
who should outvie each other in Practices suitable to the glorious Gospel,
which they profess in the World, by following the Examples of those Saints,
whose Names they had in continual remembrance.

You say, That St. Basil is evidently plain, the Martyr called by his Name
shows himself present to as many as call by his Works: Behold, say you, he
uses the same terms, which express the Invocation of God, in Zachary. Sir, I
must own that the Saints of God have left sweet Memorials of their Holiness and
Piety, and in this Sense they may be said to be present; but by calling upon
the Saints, the holy Doctor does not at all imply any Prayer to them, but only
professing the Holiness and Faith, for which they laid down their Lives. I
pray, Sir, observe the words of the Prophet Zachary, 13 chap. 9. They shall
call upon my Name, and I will hear them: I will say it is my People; and they
shall say the Lord is my God. Where the words of the Prophet are not so much to
be understood an actual Prayer to God, as an acknowledgment of him; and these
words, I will hear them, we may understand thus much, I will own them. Those
shall be owned by Almighty God, that acknowledge him, both in respect of his
Justice in correcting them, and in his Mercy in preserving them: which
explication of the words is justified by the following words: I will say it is
my People; and they shall say the Lord is my God. And, Sir, give me leave to
tell you, that St. Basil says thus much, and no more: That the Christians have
great reason to own the Martyrs, and are justified in so doing: for that they
art yet present by their own Works, and by those good Examples they have left
us. St. Paul says, Let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from
Iniquity. So let every one that names the Name of this, or that Saint, or
Martyr, depart from Iniquity.: let Men not only call them by their Names, or
pretend to own them by an outward Profession only, since they are present by
their Works; that is, their Examples are left for us to follow. But what reason
you had to bring this Saying of St. Basil, to prove your Doctrine of the
lawfulness of the Practice of your Church in Praying to Saints? And why you
should think to corroberate your Authority with the Saying of the Prophet
Zachary, that I must leave to you to consider of, for at the present I do not
see any tendancy that way, by the words of St. Basil.

Another Testimony you produce was an Observation of St. Augustine, on the
Blessing of Job, Genesis 48. to wit, that not only Exaudition, but Invocation is
used in reference to Men, as well as to God; where your Printer, I conceive,
was mistaken; for there was no mention made of the Blessing of Job; but there
is mention made of the Blessing of Jacob, in the fifteenth and sixteenth Verses
of that Chapter, where the Text says, That Jacob blessed Joseph, and said, God
before whom my Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac walked, and the God which fed me all
my life long, until this day. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless
the Lads, and let my Name be named on them, and the Name of my Fathers Abraham,
and Isaac, and let them grow into a Multitude in the midst of the Earth. Now,
I pray Sir, what do you infer from these words? I suppose that you lay some
stress upon these words: The Angel which delivered me from all evil, bless the
Lads: and from the Names used of Abraham, and Isaac, you would prove the
Lawfulness of the Invocation of Angels, and that the Saints do interceed for
us, that could not be Jacob's meaning: For, Sir, it was not Angelus Domini that
Jacob points at, but at Angelus Dominus, who is called the Angel of the
Covenant; and him only Jacob does Invoke for a Blessing; for when he saw this
Angel, he says, I have seen God face to face, and my Life is preserved, Genesis
32. 30. And that the naming of Abraham, and Isaac, does imply the Intercession
of Abraham, and Isaac, in the behalf of his two Grandchildren, is an Error;
for according to the Sense of Bellarmine, one of your own Church, and Order, it
was not the manner under the Old Testament, for Men to apply themselves to the
Saints; and he gives this reason, The Fathers were then shut up in Prison, and
did not see the Face of God; therefore, if this be true, you must not conclude
the Doctrine of the Intercession of the Saints from these words, or that they
were to be prayed unto.

You further cite St. Augustine, and you bring him in saying, The Christian
People celebrate together the Memory of the Martyrs, a Religious Solemnity,
both to excite an imitation of them, and that they be partakers of their
Merits, and be assisted by their Prayers. That the Christians did meet to
praise God together, for the holy Lives, and happy Deaths of God's most blessed
Saints and Martyrs, Sir, is no question, and that they did it in a most
Religious, Solemn Manner, is beyond all doubt, and that they did in order to
follow these good Examples that were recorded of these Saints, is as clear: And
what of all this? They did Meet together to celebrate the Memory of the holy
Martyrs: Ergo, They prayed to them. They met to Celebrate the Memory of the
holy Martyrs, to excite an Imitation of them: Ergo, They prayed to them. This
is not Logic fit for a Man of your Station and Character: certainly no such
Logic was taught in any of your Philosophy Schools at Liege. You may know,
that in such Religious Assemblies congregated for the commemoration of the
Saints and Martyrs, the Priests did recite the Names of the Martyrs, together
with some short account of their holy Lives, and heavenly Exits they made, and
of the Miracles that were wrought by them; but I do not observe any Prayer or
Prayers were made to them; they did praise God for them, and did pray to God to
give them Grace to follow their good Examples, and performed many Works of
Charity, in token of the sincerity of their Prayers. But I do not find that any
Direction is given by that holy Father, for any Adoration or Worship to be paid
to them.

You will say the great end for which they did Celebrate together the Memory of
the Martyrs, was, that they might be partakers of their Merits, and be assisted
by their Prayers. Here are two things worthy of observation: 1. What is to be
understood by being made partakers of the Merits of the Martyrs. 2. What is to
be understood by being assisted by their Prayers: and both these seriously
considered, may, I humbly conceive, satisfy any reasonable Man. To the first
then, by the Merits of the Saints, I apprehend the holy Doctor intends no more
than those Gifts and Graces, with which the Martyrs were endued both in their
Lives, and at their Deaths, and that those that did meet together, to
commemorate these Martyrs, did pray for those Gifts and Graces with which these
Martyrs were endued, and by which they arrived to that degree of perfection,
that their Lives and Deaths were Sacrifices, with which God was well pleased:
therefore to infer, that because the Christians meet together to commemorate
the Martyrs, to the end they might be made partakers of those Gifts and Graces
with which the Martyrs were endued from on high. That therefore they prayed to
the Saints is a consequence which you would not allow in any other case
whatsoever. And Secondly, consider the words of that great Saint and light of
Gods Church, and let us see what is to be understood by being assisted by the
Prayers of the Martyrs, I have observed that the blood of the Martyrs do cry;
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood?
Revel. 6. 10. Abels blood it did call to Heaven, Genesis 4. 10. If you will call
this praying, the point will soon be at an end. If by these prayers the
faithful may be said to be in a sort assisted, then you and I shall not need to
debate the Controversy any further, for we shall soon put a period to this
difference. Nay, Sir, your own Divines from those words in the Revelations, do
teach, That the Saints of God are present at their Tombs and Monuments and
Relics, and have cited St. Jerome to prove the same. And therefore I perceive
it is, that the Christians did meet together to commemorate the Martyrs, at
their respective Tombs or Monuments, because from thence their cry did go to
Heaven, and by virtue of such Prayers, and cries of these Martyrs, the Church
received benefit; for calling for vengeance upon the wicked, implies a calling
for Mercy upon the Church. In this sense they may be said to pray, as blood may
be said to have a Voice and Cry; and does it follow that because their blood
does pray, and their blood has a voice and does Cry, that we must pray to
them? I pray Sir in your next lay your Arguments a little closer, and conclude
aright from your Premises. The Martyrs Prayers do assist the faithful, Ergo,
the faithful must pray to the Martyrs, no young Logician would be guilty of
such Reasoning.

You call St. Austin again to your Aid, to prove that there was an Invocation
and Adoration used at the Meetings of Christians to commemorate the Martyrs. We
offer to thee O Peter, O Paul, O Cyprian; What was it that was offered? pray in
your next let us have the whole sense of the Father; these are imperfect
sayings, and we will reply to them in the next; but this by the way. The words
are no more than a Rhetorical Apostrophe, to the Images or Tombs of these
Saints. The reason, you say, the holy Doctor gives for their Invocation is,
because of the Oblation they make to God, who has Crowned the Martyrs: their
Martyrdom was a Sacrifice with which God was well pleased, and their Holiness
comes up as a Memorial before God; for he is not unmindful of their Blood,
which still does cry from under the Altar: which after a certain manner we may
term an Oblation; And in this Sense that great Doctor says, They make an
Oblation: But what then? Because St. Austin does Invocate the Saints, that
therefore he prays to them. You know, Sir, Invocation does not imply a belief
that the Person Invocated does hear, or that the Person Invoked is prayed unto.
And this, Sir, will be made appear from those Divines and Doctors, for which
you have no small esteem.

I suppose, Sir, you have not forgotten, that in your Church you use thus to
Salute the holy Oil, Ave Sanctum Oleum: All Hail thou holy Oil. Nor do I
believe but that within a few days you did thus Salute a Cross of Wood, or
Silver, or Brass, Ave Rex noster. I am confident you have prayed to the Cross
thus, O Crux ave spes unica hoc Passionis Tempore, Auge Piis Justitiam Reis que
dona veniam: All Hail, O Cross, our only Hope in this time of the Passion: Give
thou increase of Righteousness unto the Godly, and give thou Pardon unto
Sinners. You have seen the Prayer that Pope Bomface the Eighth made to be said
before a Picture and Image of the Cross: which is this: O Crux altissima, O
Innocens Sanguis, O Poena magna, O Christi penuria, O profunda Vulnera, O
Lanciae perforatio, O Sanguinis fluctio, O Cordis Fractio, O Dei amara Mors, O
Dei veneranda Dignitas, adjuva me in Vitam oeternam. Amen. O most high Cross, O
innocent Blood, O great Pain, O the Penury of Christ, O the deep Wounds, O the
piercing through of the Spear, O the flowing of the Blood, O the breaking of
the Heart, O the bitter Death of God, O the Worshipful Dignity of God, help me
unto everlasting Life.

I cannot believe, Sir, that you give Divine Worship unto a corruptable
Creature; or that you believe that Christ is there present under the Form of
Wood. You know that the Sacrament has been Invocated, and yet the Sacrament is
a thing unsensible, as Epiphanius says. Dyonisius, who as your Divines say,
did Invocate it; but see what Pathymeres, the Greek Paraphrast says,
Expounding the Words in this Sense: O Divinum, and Sacrum Mysterium affatur
illud tanquam rem animatam. He speaks to the Sacrament as if it were endued
with Sense and Life, and yet the Sacrament is not a Thing that has Life and
Sense. So Gregory the Great says: O Great and Holy Passover. Therefore, Sir,
every thing that is called upon, is not Adored with Divine Honor.

Consider, Sir, what your own Abdias says of St. Andrew, when he came to
suffer upon the Cross for the Testimony of God, and his Christ, he represents
the Holy Apostle thus speaking to the Cross. Salve Crux, etc. All Hail thou
Cross that here stand thus looking for me, I come of my own accord unto
thee, for I know thy Secrecy, I know thy Mystery, I see in thee the things that
are promised to me of my Lord: Receive thou me, O thou chosen Cross, that an
thus humbled for my God, and help the poor Servant unto his Master. Sir, here
are plain Words of Invocation, here is manifest Adoration; yet I hope you will
not believe that St. Andrew did indeed give Divine Honor unto a Wooden Cross,
on which he was to suffer. I pray consider the words of St. Ambrose, Lib. 10.
Cap. 22. in Lucam. Observe how he does speak to the Water of Baptism: O Aqua
quae humano aspersum Sanguine, etc. O thou Water that have washed the World,
stained with Man's Blood, O thou Water that deservest to be a Sacrament of
Christ, thou beginnest, thou fulfillest the perfect Mysteries. Do you think
that St. Andrew's Cross had Eyes and Ears? Do you think that the Baptismal
Water had Eyes and Ears? You cannot imagine therefore that St. Andrew expected
to be heard by the Cross, or St. Ambrose by the Water. And as St. Ambrose did
not expect to be heard, so he designed no Divine Honor to the Water. I pray
consider what Devotion your Church does use to the Girdle of the Blessed
Virgin: O Veneranda Zona fac nos Haeredes aeternae, and beatae Vitae and hanc
nostram, vitam ab interitu conserva, tuam Hereditatem, tuum Populum, O
Intemeratae Zona, intemerata conserva habeamus te vires, and Auxilium murum and
pro pugnaculum portum and Salutare Refugium. O Blessed Girdle, make us the
Inheritors of Eternal and Blessed Life, and keep our present Life from
Destruction; O unspotted Girdle, of the unspotted Virgin, save thy Inheritance;
O save thy People, be thou our Strength, our Wall, our Fort, our Haven, our
Refuge.

This Prayer of your Divines is not taken out of Euthymius, but it is taken out
of Aloysius Lippomanus, the Bishop of Verona, where you had your Prayer to St.
Theodore, made by Nectarius, for in the Margin he has made this Observation
upon the Prayer: O quam magna and mira petit a Veneranda Zona: O how great and
mavelous things he desires of this Blessed Girdle. From this Prayer you
cannot say that either Euthymius or Lippomanus, would have you Worship the
Virgin Mary's Girdle with Divine Honor.

From all which, I easily gather, that though the Fathers did in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries, Invocate, and ask the Saints for Favors, yet in that they
paid them no Divine Honor; Prayer being of its own nature due only to the
Creator, and not to the Creature: nor, indeed, can any thinking Man justify
the Fathers in those Raptures, and Rhetorical Apostrophe's, in which their Zeal
did exceed the bounds of their Knowledge; for their Judgments were otherwise
when they came to be more sedate, and had taken these Raptures into
consideration, which I shall show you by and by.

By your writing I perceive that you are so fond of the notion of the
lawfulness of praying to Saints, that you endeavor to deliver your notion from
that great objection of the incapacity of the Saints hearing us, in many places
far distant from each other at one and the same time; for you must know, that
at the first creeping in of this fend notion, the memory of those Martyrs were
only kept up where their Bodies were Intombed, and their Relics kept; but now
you generally pray to them in many places at one and the same time, where you
have no Monuments of those Saints, nor any of their Relics, which you do
endeavor to prove, offering several Authorities in vindication of the same.

The first Authority you produce is St. Augustine, who, as you say says, The
Solution of this Question is beyond the reach of my Understanding, how the
Martyrs help those which most certainly are helped by them; whether or no they
be themselves present at one time, in so different places, etc. From whence you
conclude, that the holy Doctor, Is certain that the Martyrs help their Clients,
at one and the same time, in different places; yet uncertain whether they were
themselves present. It was not, say you, his Persuasion, that then the Saints
help was to be required only, where they were believed to be present. This you
say is a clear demonstration.

Your using the word Clyents, is fitter for a Lawyer than a Divine of your
station; there might another word have been sound out, but I let that pass, and
tell you, that I do really believe the examples of the Martyrs have been of
great use to the faithful; and in this sense they may be said to help those
that follow their good example; you see it was past St. Austins understanding
to solve the question, How the Martyrs did help those that were their Clients,
as you call them, in his Cura pro Mort. c. 16. but Sir, suppose I should ask
this question, whether or no the Saints in Heaven have any knowledge at all of
Humane Affairs on Earth. I am sure there St. Austine can resolve me, and he
will tell us, That the Dead can have no knowledge of our Affairs here upon
Earth, Mortui nesciunt etiam Sancti, quid agant vivi etiam eorum filii. Again,
Si rebus viventium interessent animae mortuorum, etc. If (says he) so great
and famous Patriarchs, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, did not understand how the
world went with their posterity, how can it be that the dead should at all take
notice of the living? or intermeddle with assisting them? De cura pro Mort. c.
13. and 16. I pray Sir observe that St. Austin here is so far from praying to
Saints, that he tells you, they are so far from helping or assisting, that they
know not your affairs on Errth, for they have not the least knowledge of our
condition. Therefore when he says, the Christians are helped by the Martyrs,
you must not understand help as a consequent of your Prayers to them, but of
your following those holy Rules and Examples they have left you, for by their
Examples they may be said to help men.

Another Authority you produce is St. Gregory Nazianzen in his twelfth Oration,
who you say having largely showed how the Martyrs cure Diseases, put the Devil
to flight, etc. He adds where their Bodies only are, the same effect is had as
from their Souls, whether they are touched or worshipped. The Relics of
Saints are much in Esteem in your Church, and no Christian, I think, should
offer any Indignity to them, were they not false and fictitious, and put upon
Men in order to deceive them, and those things termed to be Relics, which
indeed are not so, and many of the supposed Miracles done by them so foolish,
that a Man has no reason to expect any miraculous Effects from them, but
rather ought to set them at naught, they being the Inventions of Men to deceive
the Simple: but with your pardon, I think St. Gregory here only speaks of the
Miracles that have been done by the Bodies of the Saints that have suffered for
the Testimony of Jesus. I will not dispute the Truth that the Holy Father
delivers, but I think from these words you cannot yet justify your Doctrine of
praying to Saints. The Bodies of Martyrs cure Diseases, and put the Devils to
flight say you, therefore must we pray to the Saints and Martyrs. I think it by
no means will follow.

Another Authority you produce is St. Ambrose in his Sermon upon the Holy
Martyrs Nazarius and Celsus, Have you invocated the Martyrs, (says he?) He
hears you every where, who is honored in the Martyrs according to his
Dispensation, who weighs your Vows, and dispenceth his Gifts, in so much is a
nearer presence of the Intercessor granted as the Faith of the Clyent is more
devout. These words, you say, are St. Ambrose's words, and so do several of
your Divines: But, Sir, I will offer you another saying of St. Ambrose, as you
call him, in his Sixth Sermon upon St. Margaret. Redere debemus Sanctis
honorisicentium que nobis salutem, profusione suis sanguinis perpererunt, qui
tam sacra hostia pro nostra propitiatione Domino suo oblati. We must yield
Honor unto the Saints which have procured Salvation for us, by their shedding
of their Blood, which also were offered up unto the Lord so Holy a Sacrifice
for our Salvation. You must not think, Sir, that any Protestant Divines will
take either of these for the sayings of St. Ambrose, for your Divines have
miserably corrupted this Father, and made him speak such Blasphemies against
God and his Christ, which that Holy Father would never have uttered, and
especially in his Sermons upon the Feasts of the Saints. And the reason why I
offer this, is because that I find St. Ambrose is corrupted by Eutropius one of
your own Authors, and instead of Dominici sanguinis consecrationem: He says,
Dominici sanguinis dispensationem; and again we find him in his Funeral Oration
upon Theodosius to say these words: Tu solus Domine Invocandus es, Tu Rogandus
ut eum in filiis Representes, Thou alone O Lord art to be Invocated, Thou art
to be Entreated to make up the want of him in his Sons. If a Saint and Martyr
might lawfully be prayed unto, then St. Ambrose was not Orthodox in this
Request he put up to God. If he were Orthodox in this, then God only is to be
Invocated, and not the Saints; wherefore I conclude, that when you Represent
him, to Admonish his Hearers to call upon the Saints, that then you make him
speak what your Divines have Forged, and not his own Sense. And this does
further appear, if you will but consider that the Prayer you call his makes the
Creature Omnipresent, which is an Incommunicable Attribute of Almighty God, of
which great Blasphemy that Holy Father would not be Guilty. But I suppose your
Lippomanus, or your Amphilochius has helped you to this Prayer, for in the old
Edition of St. Ambrose, I cannot find the Title of this Sermon; but if they
should be the words of St. Ambrose, you know the word Invoke, does not always
imply Prayer, but an Acknowledgement, and the word here is sometimes taken for
to own, as that in Zach. 13. 9. So that the Holy Father, if he did use those
words, he neither intended any Adoration, to be paid to these Saints, but only
an Acknowledgment of their Graces, and great Holiness, and Faith in their
Services, and Sufferings for Christ, and these were owned as Honourers of those
Saints. As for the Intercession there mentioned, I never Read of any, but that
of their Blood, which from under the Altar cries to Heaven, but that any Man
was justified, or accepted, or had a promise of being accepted; but he that
came to God in the Name of Christ alone, I never read or heard of from the
Scriptures. In a word, the Prayer as you call, it is a muddy sort of business,
and scarce Sense as you have represented it.

You bring in Gregory the Great, affirming, that greater Miracles are often
wrought where the Saints Bodies are not, that our Mind being fixed upon God,
our Faith may have a greater Merit, for as much as we know they repose not
there; and yet believe that they fail not to hear, and grant our Requests. I
confess, it is true, that where the Primitive Christians did more trust in God,
that greater Miracles were wrought then by the Bodies of the Saints; and those
that have fixed their Minds upon God, have received Eminent Favors from God as
a Reward of their Faith: But what of all this, what have you to say to St.
Gregory? He is here brought in by you, but I pray for what? He does indeed tell
you, that greater Miracles were wrought where the Bodies of the Saints were
not; therefore does it follow that you must pray to them? Nay, the Bodies of
the Saints not being there, occasioned some of the Christians to have their
Minds fixed upon God? Ergo, the Prayer to Saints is lawful, and they that have
their Minds thus fixed, their Faith has a greater Merit; therefore Prayers to
Saints are lawful. The Christians did know that their Bodies were not reposed
in the Church where they were praying, and this was an Argument of a strong
Faith, and therefore the Practice of the Church of Rome in praying to Saints is
lawful. You say, St. Gregory says, That they hear and grant our Request, That
is, we are owned, and obtain favor from Heaven, upon the consideration of our
following their good Example; for as God did much for the People of Israel for
Abraham's Sake, and saved a Ships Company for St. Paul's Sake, if you will have
it so worded. And when God did show any particular Favor to any Man for his
Esteem that he had of God's Servants that were Martyrs; it was often attributed
to the Saint, not believing that they did do it, but only to engage them to
Honor the Memory of the Saints, and to follow their good Examples. But I
think, Sir, St. Gregory the Great is somewhat too young an Author to be brought
upon the Stage to prove this Doctrine.

You advanced next as Witnesses to your Doctrine by you defended, those Fathers
who owned that the same Saints Relics lay in several places, were Honored
in, and carried about to distant places; the Evident import whereof is, that
the Saints may be worshipped in many, nay in a thousand different places. In a
word, wherever the God of Saints is, as St. Ambrose you say observes, who every
where manifests these Prayers to his Saints, and grants the Blessings asked by
their Intercession. These, Sir, are your own words, what proof have you for
this?

What does St. Ambrose observe, he observes you say, That the God of these
Saints is every where, and so do I and all Protestants, and we believe that he
does hear us at all times, and in all places? Does St. Ambrose say that
therefore we must Worship the Saints? Because God hears us every where,
therefore must we pray to the Saints? They make Intercession for those that
pray to God, and have Blessings granted by their Intercession, How comes this
to pass? God says St. Ambrose reveals it to them. Suppose all this be true,
Does it therefore follow we must pray to them? because by Virtue of a Divine
Revelation, or Manifestation, they come to understand that we have made our
Prayers to God. This is not a way of Arguing that becomes a Grave Father of the
Society. The God of these Saints is every where, therefore we ought to pray to
him only, as that Father says. But I pray in your next tell us where St.
Ambrose makes this Observation, and upon what Occasion: Till then, I cannot see
any just Reason you have to bring in St. Ambrose for a Voucher, I believe he
will stand you in little stead. But having taken your leave of St. Ambrose, you
then begin to produce your main Witnesses in Defense of your Doctrine.

The first you produce is St. Gregory Nazianzen, What would you have him to
prove? Would you have him to prove that the Saints Relics lying in several
places, and being Honored in, and carried about to distant places, they may be
Worshipped in many, yea, in a thousand different places. I pray what says St.
Gregory? He attests, that a little Dust, the least Splinter of their decayed
Bones, a Lock of their Hair, their Clothes, some drops (though almost worn off)
of their Blood have as much Worship paid, as their whole Body, that the very
calling of the place by the Martyrs Name was known to him to have as much
Efficacy, as if the whole Body had lain there. I am much surprised at this
Authority, or Witness, for here is not one word to justify the Doctrine of
praying to Saints, unless you will Argue thus: That some of Relics of the
Saints have as much Worship paid to them, as the whole Body, Ergo the praying
to Saints is lawful, and they may be prayed to at one and the same time, in a
thousand different places. This Logic, Sir, will not do, but let us go on, the
very calling of a place by a Martyrs Name was known to St. Gregory, to have as
much Efficacy, as if the whole Body had lain there. I believe as much to the
full, and so you and I shall agree there, but what then? I hope you will let us
see what will follow upon this, Praying to Saints is Lawful, and praying to
them at one and the same time in different places. By no means, I do think
Logicians of very little Proficiency would detect this way of Arguing.

Your second Testimony is from Theodoret, who is brought in saying thus: Their
Bodies are not each in their own Monument, but being divied amongst Cities and
Villages, are by them esteemed the Preservers of their Souls and Bodies; and
called their Physicians and Honored, as their Protectors and Guards, and
making use of their Intercession, they by them obtain Divine Benefits, and
their divided Bodies retain their Power entire. This was a Learned Writer, but
I cannot perceive what Service he does you, here is no Prayer to Saints
justified from hence. It is confessed that the Christians very early did pay
great Honor to the Bodies, and Relics of the Saints, and Martyrs; and they
were induced to believe that great Cures, and mighty Effects were wrought by
them, and by the visiting of the Churches, and Places where they were reposed,
they had such Reports of them, and whole days were spent in giving Thanks to
God for those Holy Examples they left. But I do not find any thing of any
Divine Worship they paid to these Relics, or that Theodoret here in these
words does in the least justify the point in hand: That because their Relics
were divided amongst Cities and Villages, therefore the Saints and Martyrs
might be Worshipped and Prayed unto in a thousand places at one and the same
time. If you can make Theodoret speak thus, it will be worthy of Consideration.

Your third Witness is St. Augustine, who speaks, you say, of several Miracles,
that to his certain Knowledge were wrought at the Relics of St. Stephen, in
the different places at which they were Honored. I pray what were those
Miracles, when, and where were they wrought; you found that it was not much to
the purpose, and therefore you say no more. Admit the thing to be true, that
there were such Relics of St. Stephen, and that several Miracles were wrought
by them, at those several places where those Relics were reposed. What does it
prove that St. Stephen might be Worshipped at one and the same time in
different places? You will do well to peruse St. Austin again, and see how that
Doctrine is proved.

Your last Witness is St. German, who, you say, carried about him in a
Reliquary for his Protection and Safeguard, the Relics of all the Apostles and
Martyrs. The very Dust that lay about St. Alban's Monument, by a touch of those
Relics, and the Intercession of those Saints, restored Sight to a Blind Woman;
this may for ought I know be as true as the rest. But, Sir, you will do well to
remember your Point, which was this: That, because the Fathers owned the Saints
Relics to have been reposed in several places, and were Honored in, and
carried about to distant places, it did follow that the Saints may be
Worshipped in many, yea, in a thousand different places. The Fathers, I
confess, seem to take notice of the Division and Distinction of the Relics of
the Saints, and of the great Respect and Honor they had in those Churches,
where they were reposed, and that many Miracles were wrought by them there, by
the Power of God; but that they prove the Consequence, or import that the
Saints may be Worshipped in several places, may, in a thousand places at one
and the same time. That, Sir, does not yet appear.

Give me leave, Sir, to deal freely with you. I do own that the great God of
Heaven and Earth, for the Testimony of the Truth of the Gospel of his dear Son,
has oftentimes wrought great Miracles, even by the dead Carcases of his
Saints, in Witness that they have been his Witnesses and Instruments of his
Holy Will, in opening the Eyes of the Heathen, and turning them from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, to the end that they might
receive Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance amongst them, which are
Sanctified by Faith in Jesus Christ. But as these were great Instruments at
first, to lead the People into the Truth, and bring them to the Obedience of
the Gospel; so they became afterward Snares to lead the People into Errors
and great Inconveniences, and that even in the times of the Ancient Fathers
above twelve hundred years ago.

St. Austin says, I know many Worshippers of Graves and Images, that drink and
quaff disorderly over the Dead, and offer Meat unto their Carcases, and bury
themselves over the buried, and do esteem that even their very Drunkenness and
Gluttony is a Religion that peaseth God, De moribus Ecclesiae, c. 34.
Confession, lib. 6. c. 2. Galasius says, It is reported, That with Procession
they furnish up their Churches, built in the Name of the Dead, and the same for
ought I can hear, while they were alive, were not altogether good Faithful Men,
Galasius Can. 2. de con. did. 1. placuit. St. Martin on a time came to a
Chapel, built in the Name of a Holy Martyr, but afterward it was revealed to
him, that the same Martyr had been sometimes a common Thief, and for a Robbery
had been put to Death, and by the Error of those times, was Honored by the
People for a Saint: Likewise St. Austin says, Some there be that carry about
Martyrs Bones, exposing them to Sale, and yet may very well be doubted whether
ever they were Martyrs or no. Consider what feigned Miracles your Church has
invented to encourage the Laity in these Errors. You have made dead Images to
Sweat, to Weep, and to Laugh, and to shift themselves from place to place. The
Image of the Virgin was made to attend her own Candle, and other Images and
Relics were feigned to heal Diseases. Nicolas Lyra says, In Ecclesia dei
populus saepe dicipitur a Sacerdotibus fictis miraculis lucri causa. In the
Church of God the Priest oftentimes deceive the People with feigned Miracles,
for Lucres sake. Thus the World was born in hand, that Images and Relics of
Saints were not barely such, but had a secret Divine Power hidden within them;
and therefore they ought to be Worshipped. From hence I conclude, that though
God was pleased to work sundry Miracles by the bodily Relics of his Saints;
yet the People were abused by them, and notorious Errors insued upon the great
Esteem the Sacred Relics were in. But had they continued in the same Station,
for which they were first preserved, and no abuse at all occasioned by them; I
cannot see how you can justify your Doctrine, that, because of the many places
where the Relics of Martyrs were reposed; that therefore the Saints and
Martyrs might be Worshipped in many places at one and the same time.

And, because you have insisted so much upon the Miracles of the Relics, and
of the Bodies of your Saints and Martyrs; but of these Miracles, the Holy
Fathers without doubt was very cautious, for see St. Chrysostom says, In fine
temporis concedenda est potestas Diabolo, ut faciat signa utilia, ut jam
Ministros Christi, non per hoc cognoscamus quia utilia faciunt signa, sed quia
omnino haec signa non faciunt, In the end of the time Power shall be given to
the Devil, to work profitable Signs and Miracles, so that we cannot know the
Ministers of Christ, by that they work profitable Miracles, but by that they
work no Miracles at all, Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 49. St. Austin says, Non dicat
ideo est quia illa vel illa Mirabilia fecit, vel iste vel ille aut quia illa
vel illa ibi contingunt, etc. Removeantur ista vel figment a Mendacium hominum,
vel protent a fallacium Spirituum, Let no man say it is true, for that or this
Man has wrought this or that Miracle, for that Men make their Prayers at the
Tombs of our Dead, and obtain their Desires, or for that these or these
Miracles be wrought there, etc. Away with these things, they may be either the
Juglings and Mockeries of deceitful Men, or else Illusions of Iying Spirits,
Aug. de Vnitate Ecclesiae. Cap. 16. Again, St. Chrysostom says, Per Signa
cognoscabatur qui essent, essent very Christiani qui falsi nunc autem signorum
operatio omnino levata est mag is autem Invinitur apud eos qui falsi sunt
Christiani. In old time it was known by Miracles who were the true Christians,
and who the false, but now the working of Miracles is taken quite away, and is
rather found amongst them that are false Christians, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom.
49. Therefore St. Augustine says, Contra illos mirabiliar is cautum me fecit
Deus meus dicendo in novessimis diebus exsurgent pseudo Prophetae facientes
signa and portenta ut inducunt in errorem si fieri possit etiam Electos:
Against these Miracle-Mongers my God has armed me, saying, In the latter days
shall arise false Prophets, working Signs and Wonders, to deceive, if it be
possible, the Elect of God. Aug. in Johan. Tract. 13.

Sir, you have told us of a great many Miracles that have been wrought by the
Bodies and Relics, of Saints and Martyrs: But I wonder, you being of the
Society of Jesus, would not give us one touch of the Relics of St. Xaverius,
in East India, and of his Relics at Rome; nay, there is scarce a College of
Jesuits in Christendom, but have of them more or less, and by those Relics
many Miracles have been wrought; Why did you not prove that he might be
Worshipped all over Christendom, as well as any other Saint? Why did you not
give an account of the Miracles of the Saints of your Order in India? Who by
their Holy Water have driven Mice out of the Country, and made barren Women to
bare Children; and such other wonderful Miracles. But you are a modest
Gentleman, and would not therefore take notice of them, at this time, lest the
World should not at this time of day, be under any obligation to believe them,
or any part of them; and as the World is now cautious, so have Learned Men in
all Ages: Alexander of Hales says, In Sacramento apparet Caro interdum humana
procuratione interdum operatione Diabolica: In the Sacrament itself there
appears Flesh, sometimes procured by Men, and sometimes by the working of the
Devil, Alex. de Hales, Par. 4. Quest. 53. Mem. 4. Therefore from hence observe,
that Miracles are not the Signs always of true Doctrine, especially of the
Doctrine you defend, (viz.) Praying to, and Worshipping of Saints.

Love you know is bountiful, and as it has produced a very fair Account of the
Miracles, wrought by the Relics of Saints, and the Bodies of your Martyrs; so
give me leave on my part to tell you what Miracles I have seen wrought by the
Preaching of the glorious Gospel of our dear Redeemer, the Blind see, and the
Dumb speak, the faint-hearted are made courageous, our Bishops are stout in the
Cause of our blessed Lord, our Presbyters speak now with the Tongues of Angels,
the Voice of our God is heard amongst us, and the People are turned from
Darkness to Light, and from the power of Antichrist, to the obedience of the
Gospel. The Doctrine that is Preached amongst us is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul
and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, confounding Principalities and
Powers, Spiritual Wickednesses, and High Places, good Men are perfected, the
Body of Christ is edisied; these, Sir, if you have Eyes to see, are great
Miracles. Saint Chrysostom says, The Conversion of the World is a Miracle,
Chrysostom. in cor. Hom. 6. St. Austin says, Modo Caro caeca non aperit Oculos
Miraculo Domini, and Cor caecum aperit Oculos Sermon Domini: Now adays the
blind Flesh opens not her Eyes by the Miracles of our Lord, but the blind
Heart opens his Eyes at the Word of our Lord, Aug. de verbis domin. Secund.
Mat. Ser. 18. Again, Modo Aures corporis surdae non aperiuntur, sed quam multi
habent clausas Aures Cordis quae tamen verbo dei penetrante Patescant? Now
adays the deaf Ears of the Body be not opened, but how many are there who have
the Ears of their Heart shut up, which notwithstanding are opened, when the
word of God that pierces enters? I think that these Miracles are greater
Arguments why we should Worship God through Jesus Christ, then the Miracles of
the Relics and Monuments of the Martyrs are why you should Worship and Pray
unto the Saints.

It may be you may not take it well if I should not take notice of your
Miracles once more, therefore I will I behold the Countenance of your Glorious
Miracles: Your Crosses they can speak, and your Idols can go; your Images can
light their own Lamps; your Holy Water is able to drive away Mice, and to make
barren women Fruitful, and to calm the Sea. This I have learned from some of
your own Writers, but your Miracles and your Doctrine of Praying to Saints is
much alike; but I will conclude this Head with the Saying of St. Hierom,
Mendacium Antichristi Christi Veritas devorabit. The Truth of Christ shall
devour the Falsehood of Antichrist.

Having examined your Doctrine, that because the Relics of the Martyrs are
dispersed about into diverse places, and being honored in their respective
places where their Relics are reposed, that therefore they might be Worshipped
in a thousand different places, at one and the same time; for which you
produced several Witnesses, and they being all considered, you now proceed to
show that this Doctrine of Praying to Saints was authorized by four Councils,
held within the space of the first five hundred years after Christ. By the
Authority of those Councils you think you do your work.

First, You cite the Council of Chalcedon, and say, That in the First General
Council held there, the Bishops belonging to the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, publicly in the Council, and unopposed, used this Invocation
to Flavianus: Flavianus lives after Death; let the Martyr Pray for us. And
more, you say, you do not express in your Litanies to the Saints. This was a
Practice, But I pray, Sir, where is the Injunction? There is a Decree in your
Chapter, held at Tront, That the Saints shall be Prayed unto. If you can find
such a Decree in the Council of Chalcedon, I pray let us see it; or else never
pretend to cite the Authority of the Council. I was big with expectation, and
truly did give myself the trouble to peruse, and consider it; but finding no
Decree in the case, I therefore judge that your citing the Council, was to
little or no purpose; the Practice of a number of Bishops being no Warrant for
any Doctrine whatsoever, unless approved, allowed, and decreed by a General
Council. You have met with sundry Debates amongst Learned Men, that have not
been opposed by the rest of the Council; yet when the Question has been put,
it has been carried against the Debates, though they have appeared with a
considerable Party.

But I will consider your Invocation here, in the Council of Chalcedon. The
Words of your Invocation are these: Flavianus lives after Death; let him Pray
for us. I pray, Sir, do but consider the occasion of the Words: There were two
Persons that stood Candidates for the Bishopric of Ephesus, Bassianius and
Stephen, who both contended for that Bishopric, Bassianius appears before that
Council, and he having had this Flavianus to communicate with him in his
Lifetime, and having been a great Favorite with him, he because of that
intimacy, engaged the Bishops of the Obedience of Constantinople, who cried out
in the Council, in the behalf of Bassianius, Flavianus the Martyr lives after
Death, he shall Pray for us. Which is no more than this, he shall entreat you
to do us this favor, as to give the Cause for Bassianus, and confirm him
Bishop of Ephesus, let him Pray for us, since he was a Martyr for the Faith,
let his Martyrdom oblige you to appear for his Friend. These Bishops did not
say, Flavianus lives after Death, he shall pray to God for us, (for you must
understand these Bishops had made the Cause of Bassianus their own) but he
shall pray or entreat this Council for us. This is a worthy proof for the
Lawfulness of Praying to Saints; for do but consider, if it be given for
granted, that the intention of those Bishops was, Let Flavianus pray to God for
us: What then, does it say, Let us pray to Flavianus? Here is not one Word of
that, nor indeed of the other.

Secondly, You in the second place cite the Council of Gangrae, Can. 20. If any
one through Pride, believing himself perfect, accuse those Meetings, which are
had at the places where holy Martyrs Repose, or in their Churches, or believes
that such Oblations as are made there, ought to be slighted; Let them be
accursed. But, I pray, Sir, why do you put these words in, that is, need not
the Intercession of the Saints, that is the greatest Folly that ever Men could
be guilty of; What Man of Learning could ever give this Explication of a Canon,
which the thing will in no wise bear. But, Sir, I will forfeit all the skill I
have, if you can bring any of the Doctors of Sorbonne, or any of the
Congregation, De propaganda fide, that would produce this Canon of the Council
of Gangra, to prove that Praying to Saints was enjoined by the Catholic
Church: Nay, I will appeal to any of the Learned of your own Society, whether
they in their Consciences do believe that it looks like a proof to justify
that Doctrine. The Canon being taken as you have laid it down, says no more,
that they are accursed, who shall take down the Monuments of the Martyrs, or
should believe that the Oblations made in those Holy Places were to be
slighted, or should in any measure reflect on those that did frequent the
Meetings, had, and held where the Bodies of the Martyrs did repose. Here is not
one word of Praying to the Saints, or of the Saints making Intercession for us.

Thirdly, You produce the Council of Laodicea, held in the Year 320, as
allowing the Worshipping of the true Martyrs of Christ, mentioning Churches
built in their Honor, over their Monuments, whether the Christians resorted. I
perceive you are faint-hearted, and durst not say the Sense of the Council of
Laodicea; see the 35 Canon, where it was determined by that Council, That
Christians ought not to leave the Church, and go and call upon Angels, and make
Meetings, which are things forbidden. If any Man therefore be found giving
himself to this secret Idolatry, let him be accursed, because he has forsaken
the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and has applied himself to Idolatry.
Theodoret in his Exposition upon the Epistle to the Colossians, does twice
mention this Canon, and declare the Sense of it, upon Col. 3. 17. the Apostle
says, He commands us to adorn our Words and Deeds with the Commemoration of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to send up thanks, giving to God, and the Father by
him, and not by Angels. The Synod of Laodicea follow also this Rule, and
desiring to heal this old Disease, (viz.) Angel-Worship, made a Law, That they
should not Pray unto Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. And on Col. 2.
he adds, That this Vice continued long in Phrygia, and Pisidia, for which cause
the Synod (assembled in Laodicea, a chief City in Phrygia) forbad them by a Law
to Pray unto Angels. Oecumenius has much the same words, upon the same place;
and here I am sure you find nothing of Praying to Saints, but rather forbidden,
for if it be unlawful to Pray to the Angels, and that be Idolatry, then it is
unlawful to Pray to the Saints, for without doubt the latter is as lawful as
the former.

In the Sixth, and thirty sixth Canons of that Council, you say, That the
Worshipping of Martyrs was as it were allowed; or that I may not be charged for
a Misrepresenter, you say, That you produced that Council, as allowing the
Worshipping the true Martyrs. With what face can you assert that, when those
Canons speak nothing of the Worship of the true Martyrs. The Council makes
mention indeed of the resort of the Christians to the Churches of the Martyrs,
where they did use to pray, but there is nothing in that Council, that
intimates any thing of the lawfulness, or the necessity of Praying to Saints,
but rather forbids it.

Fourthly, The last Council you cited, is the fourth Council of Carthage, held,
you say, in the Year 368, not only Authorizing Christiansto meet in Churches
Dedicated to Martyrs, and even wherever any Monument of a Martyr should be;
but commanding that all Altars should be demolished, if there be not an evident
certainty of the Relics over which they were erected. What is all this to the
purpose? The Council of Carthage, say you, Authorized Christians to meet in
Churches Dedicated to the Martyrs, Ergo Prayers to Saints are lawful. That the
Council ordered the demolishing of all Alters, if there were not an evident
certainty of the Relics over which they were erected, Ergo the Council did
command Praying to Saints. But if you will look into the third Council of
Carthage, you will find it against the Praying to Saints.

You are pleased to say that this was the most expressive method of authorizing
Devotion to the blessed Saints. The Council authorized Christians to meet in
Churches Dedicated to the Martyrs; this was indeed an expressive method of
authorizing Devotion to the blessed Saints, but where are your Injunctions for
the Praying to Saints, what was the Decree of that Council, and what was that
Council that did decree for the putting in practice this Romish Doctrine of
Praying to Saints. In a word, your Four Councels make no mention of any
Injunction for the people to pray to Saints, no they do not so much as intimate
to us, that it was the practice of the Church at that time. You know that your
Chapter at Trent makes a formal Decree, enjoining all upon pain of a Curse, to
apply themselves in their Prayers to the Saints, and if you had produced such a
Decree, you would have done some small matter of Reputation to the practice of
the Church.

Since your Authorities taken from these Four Councils, will do you no service,
away you hasten to St. Augustine, who in his 137 Epistle, commends the
Christians for flocking to the Monuments of Martyrs, there to ask miraculous
Favors, and to some particular Saints, for such, and such peculiar Graces, to
others again for different ones. The Christians did go to the Monuments of the
Martyrs, and did ask for Favors; but I hope you will tell us from whom they
asked these favors. St. Austin in all that Epistle does not say one word of
their asking the Saints, but their Prayers were directed to God, that he might
obtain this or that favor or Grace which the Saint was supposed to be endued
withal in the time of his or her life. Here you are failed in your Authority,
for this saying of the holy Doctor proves nothing for the lawfulness of Praying
to Saints.

You come to the close of the matter, and here you offer the commemorations of
the Blessed Virgin and holy Saints, as more full and expressive in the ancient
Liturgies, then any in the present Roman Missal. This I am sure is not ad Rem,
for the commemoration of the Saints to bless God for them and their good
examples they left us, and heavenly Doctrine they taught. In that we are all
agreed; but I am inclined to join with you, and examine your Authorities you
produce, and perhaps you may find something to drop in that may help your
Doctrine of Praying to Saints, which no doubt but will give your Church some
color for that Practice.

The first Authority you produce is St. Cyril, Patriarch of Jerusalem, who
bears witness to this Prayer in the Liturgies of his time: We pray to thee all
of us, and offer thee this Sacrifice, so as to make a Commemoration of those
who have slept before us; first, of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, that God through their Prayers would accept of our Prayers: We never
say more than this, in any Commemoration in our Masses: Well, here is plainly
set forth, that the Saints make Intercession for us, but nothing of any Prayer
made to them. But your Author is not very well received, because this Prayer of
his, smells so rank of your Romish Superstition, that none but such an old
Doctor newly set forth, could be guilty of; I am loathe to call his Credit in
question, but I tell you that in his style, in his way of arguing, he is not at
all like the Greek Fathers, in wording his Notions; he appears to have lived
but of late Years, and therefore his Authority, Sir, will be of little Credit
at this time. Yet he does you no manner of Service; he shows that in his time,
the Intercession of Saints was a received Notion, but has not one word of
Praying to them, and St. Augustine in his Tract in Johan. seems to
countenance it, but does not at all point at any Invocation, or Prayer to be
made to the Saints and Martyrs. But say you, does not the saying of St. Cyril
and St. Augustine prove, that their Intercession must be asked that it may be
obtained. In answer to this, I say, I do not find that either your St. Cyril or
St. Augustine does in either of these places direct us to apply our selves to
the Saints for the benefit of their Intercession, the one says, That in the
Prayer of the Liturgies in his time, the faithful did commemorate the Saints
that God through their Prayers would accept of your Prayers. And St. Austine
says, That the Christians commemorate the Saints at the holy Table, that they
may pray for us. He does not say, that Christians pray to the Saints that they
may pray for us. It may be worth your while to consider how little these two
Authors do appear to help you out in this point, which you so zealously defend.

You say that you offered devout Prayers to the blessed Virgin out of the
Liturgies of St. Basil and St. Chrysostom. Those Liturgies have both been so
miserably abused, that they are not of any great value with the Doctors of you
own Church, for the Interpolations are so frequent, that we can scarce tell
either the order or the sense of those Liturgies. I have seen the old Copies of
those Liturgies, where I find commemorations of the Blessed Virgin and the
Saints, but I cannot find any Prayer made to them in latter times. They may
have crowded a Prayer to the Virgin, which you perchance have used, but it is
no proof. For Dr. Stephen Gardner, the notorious Bishop of Winton, he says,
(and that not without due consideration had of those Offices) that both of them
were miserably disordered, that set behind which should have been before, and
that the Ignorant Scribes of the latter Ages had basely corrupted both those
Liturgies. This is the Credit that the Liturgies of those Fathers had, with
that Bishop of your own Church, and therefore we have reason, Sir, to refuse
them as Authors that have been corrupted by the Scribes of your own Church,
Steph. Guard. ad object. 185.

And that St. Chrysostom's Liturgy has been abused does thus further appear,
for in that Liturgy set forth by Claudus Sanctes, you have St. Chrysostom
praying for Pope Nicholas in these words, Nicholai sanctissimi and Vniversalis
Papae longa sunt tempora: We pray God send Nicholas that most Holy and
Universal Pope a long time to live, whereas it is well known to you, that Pope
Nicholas lived in the year of our Lord 857. which was almost 500. years after
St. Chrysostom's decease; likewise in the same Liturgy there is a Prayer for
the Empire and Victory of the Emperor Alexius, who lived in the year 1080.
after the death of St. Chrysostom 700. years. Now it is very hard if we should
receive the Testimonies that are Authentic, since they are made to serve all
the vile Turns imaginable, so that you may see what Stuff here is that you
father upon two burning and shining Lights of God's Church, and upon them we
must ground our Faith and Salvation. We must pray we know not what, and I know
not to whom. If we receive either or both your new St. Basils, and new St.
Chrysostoms Liturgies, for in their old Liturgies there is no mention made of
praying to Saints, nor of the Saints Intercession for us.

It has been commonly observed when the learned Writers of your Church have
wanted Scripture for any Point or Notion of Religion, which they have
endeavored to defend, then they pretend the Authority of the Fathers and
Counsels to justify them in the maintenance of their Notions, and in
particular this practice of your Church, in prayto Saints and Angels. Your
Bellarmine says, That all the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Churches
teach us to pray to Saints. Salmeron and Stapleton, and others do speak the
same Language; but all of you to this day have so inured your Tongues to talk
of the Fathers, that you can hardly use any other form of Speech, nay, you have
attempted to bring several of the Fathers of the first four or five hundred
years.

But you have not yet produced one Testimony out of any Father, whereby it may
appear that any account at all was made of it; nay, those whom you have named
were all against it. I could produce Testimonies in abundance for this my
Assertion, but it would be too tedious for me to Write, and you to Read,
therefore take a taste of these few.

Ignatius who flourished about the year of our Lord 140. in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians, writes thus: You Virgins have none but Jesus Christ before
your Eyes, in your Prayers, and the Father of Jesus Christ, Ignat. ep. 6. By
which Testimony it appears to me, that the Christians of his time did not so
much as pray to the Virgin Mary herself. To the same effect is that of Origin:
We must pray to him alone who is God above all things, to him also we must pray
who is the Word, the only Son of God, and the first Born of all Creatures, Tom.
8. cont. celsum page 395. in eod. lib. p. 381. 384. 402. 416. 420. Tom. 5.
conta. celsum lib. 8. in ep. ad Romans c. 10. Athan. in orat 3. contr. Arrian. To
God alone (says he) it belongs to be Worshipped, and the Angels themselves
are not ignorant hereof, for although they excel in Glory, yet are they but
Creatures, and are none of those that are Worshipped, but of those that Worship
the Lord: And again, because Jesus Christ is not a Creature, but begotten of
the very Substance of the Father, and is by Nature the Son of God; therefore he
is to be Worshipped. Therefore, Sir, what becomes of your urging of Athanasius,
for countenancing of Invocation and Prayer to the Saints, and of his Prayer, as
you call it, to the Virgin Mary?

Consider Origin once more, and he has this expression, if I understand his
Greek aright, That we ought not to Worship our Fellow-worshippers, nor to pray
to those that pray themselves; which saying of this great Doctor agrees with
that passage in the Revelations, c. 22. 9. c. 19 10. When St. John offered to
Worship the Angel, he says to him, See thou do it not, for I am thy
Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them that keep the
sayings of this Book Worship God. That great Doctor says in another place, If
Celsus will have us to procure the good Will of any others after him, that is
God over all, let him consider that when the Body is moved, the shadow thereof
does follow it. So in like manner having God propitious to us who is over all,
it follows that we shall have all his Friends, both Angels and Saints, loving
to us, for they have a fellow-feeling with them that are thought fit to find
favor with God; neither are they only favorable unto such, but they work with
them also that are willing to do Service unto him who is God over all, and are
friendly to them, and pray and entreat with them, so as we boldly say, that
when Men with Resolution propose unto themselves the best things do pray unto
God, many thousands of the Sacred Powers pray together with them unspoken to,
Origin lib. 8. contr. celsum, p. 432, 433. The Writings of Origin are full of
Evident Testimonies against this Doctrine, for which you so earnestly contend:
And Athanasius wrote as much as he about this Point, and the Arrian Heresy,
which had spread itself in his time in many considerable parts of Christendom,
against which he contended with great Zeal, and as great Judgment gave him
occasion for it. They maintained Christ was a mere Creature, and yet they
prayed unto him. The Holy Doctor on the other side, did with the Orthodox
Fathers maintain, That if he were Created, he must not be Invocated, What
reason had they to pray to Christ who was a mere Creature. You very well
remember that their Plea was, because the Word of God dwelt in him, then he
argues upon them thus: If you Worship the Man Christ, because the Word of God
dwelt in him, at the same time Worship also the Saints who have the Word of God
dwelling in them. The Word of God dwelling in Christ was no manner of Plea, or
Argument for his being Worshipped; but because he is not a Creature, but is
begotten of the very Substance of his Father, and is by Nature the Son of God,
therefore he is to be Worshipped. If you find St. Athanasius to say, That the
Saints are by Nature the Sons of God, and begotten of the Substance of the
Father, then we must Worship the Saints; but since they are the Children of God
by Adoption and Grace, and by Nature they were the Children of Wrath, as well
as those who are yet dead in Trespasses and Sins, though since their
Conversion, the Word of God, and Seed of God remains in them, and they are
not to be Worshipped. If the Plea of the Arrians for the Worship of Christ, who
they asserted to be a mere Creature had been justifiable, then by Virtue of the
said Plea it had been lawful to Worship the Saints; but as the Plea cannot
maintain the Arrians in the Worshipping of Christ, so that Plea will not
justify you, nor your Church in the Practice of Praying to Saints: Hence it is
that the great Doctor St. Athanasius: That if you Worship the Man Christ,
because the Word of God abides in him, Worship also the Saints who have the
Word of God abiding in them.

I humbly conceive it may not be unnecessary to put you in mind, that as the
Greek Fathers now cited do by no means Countenance your Doctrine and Practice
of Praying to Saints and Angels, there are also several Latin Fathers, who are
of the same Opinion. Tertullian who lived about the beginning of the third
Century he says, Haec ab alio orare non possum quam aquo me scio consecuturum
quoniam ut ipse est qui solum praestat, etc. The substance of which words is
this, He tells us that such and such things he might not pray for from any
other but from him, from whom he knew he should obtain them, because it is he
who alone is able to give, and I am he for whom they must be obtained, being
his Servant who observe him alone, Apologetic. c. 30. There is a Discourse of
the Trinity, by Novatian, which is added to the Works of Tertullian, in which
you may meet this passage: If Christ be only a Man, Why is a Man called upon in
our Prayers as a Mediator, seeing that the Invocation of a Man is judged of no
Efficacy to Salvation? Why also is Hope reposed in him, seeing Hope in Man is
Accursed? From hence observe, that if Christ may not be Prayed unto, if he were
but a Man, then the Saints who are but Men, may not be prayed unto. If Christ
be but a Man, he cannot be prayed unto as a Mediator, therefore how can you
justify Praying to Saints as Mediators, seeing they are but Men? If a Prayer
to a Man be of no Efficacy to Salvation, then Prayer to Saints can be of no
Efficacy to Salvation, since they are but Men. If Christ were but a mere Man,
then why is Hope reposed in him, the Saints being but Men, Why should Hope be
reposed in them; for if you pray to Saints, you must not only believe that they
hear you, but hope that they will answer you, which hope is in vain, because
they are but Men.

Observe what he says further, Si Homo tantum modo Christus, quomodo adest
ubique invocatus haec-Hominis Natura, non sit sed Dei ut adesse omni loco
possit? If Christ be only Man, how is he present, being called upon every
where, seeing this is not the Man, but God that can be present in every place?
De Trinit. c. 14. The Saints being only Men, how are they present, being called
upon every where, they cannot be in all places, it being the Nature of God only
to be present in every place. If the Omnipresence of God be the great Argument
why we should call upon him every where, then you can give no reason why the
Saints should be called upon every where, because they are not Omnipresent. We
could not justify Praying to Christ every where as Mediator, if he were but a
mere Man, because as such as he could not be in every place, How then can you
justify Praying to Saints every where as Mediators, sure they cannot as Men be
in every place.

Observe what St. Ambrose says in his Funeral Oration upon Theodosius the
Emperor: Tu solus Domine Invocandus es, Tu Rogandus ut eum in filiis
Representes. Thou only, O Lord, art to be Invocated, Thou art to be Entreated
to make up the want of him in his Sons. If this Holy Doctor says true, which
is beyond all Contradiction, then how can you justify the Invocation and
Prayer to Saints, as it is practiced in your Church? Why might not St. Ambrose
have applied himself to the Saints, to make up the want of Theodosius in his
Sons, if that the Praying to Saints had been lawful, And if the Praying to
Saints be lawful, how can this passage of that great Doctor be by you
justified? If you can but reconcile this, you shall be my great Oracle; for if
God alone be to be called upon and Entreated, then none else ought to be called
upon and Entreated, Why then are your Saints called upon and Entreated?
Consider that passage of St. Augustine in his Confessions, he thus Prays unto
God: Quem invenirem qui me Reconciliaret tibi an eundem mihi fuit ad Angelelos,
qua prece quibus Sacramentis multi conantes ad te redire, neque per seipsos
volentes, ficut audio tentaverunt haec and inciderunt in disiderium curiosarum
Visionem, and digni habiti sunt Illusionibus. Whom shall I find that might
Reconcile me to thee? Should I go to Angels, with what Prayer? With what
Sacraments? Many endeavoring to return unto thee, and not being able to do it
by themselves, as I hear have tried these things, and have often fallen into
the Desire of curious Visions, and were accounted worthy of Delusion. If Angels
and Saints had been Mediators, as your Church says they are, then St. Austin
could have lain under no great difficulty of finding some body to Reconcile him
to God: If praying to Angels had been a Doctrine according to Truth, he would
not have wanted a Prayer. He says, Should I have gone to the Angels, With what
Prayer? If praying to Angels had been a received Doctrine, there would have
been Directions given with what Prayer he should have gone to them; and the
very same may be said of the Saints. Should we go then, with what Prayer? See
what he farther says: I confess and know my Soul is Defiled, But who shall
cleanse it, or to whom else should I cry besides thee? Confess. lib. 10. c. 41.

Sir, The Question had been altogether needless, or else soon answered, had
your Doctrine been true: the Distemper that he labored under, had soon been
cured, had your Practice been lawful. If it were lawful for St. Austine to cry
to none but to God, and seek redress from him, then why does your Church engage
us to call upon Saints and Angels? There is another Saying of the same Father,
that does appear against your Practice and Doctrine in Controversy in these,
words: Divine and singulariter in Ecclesia Catholica, traditur nullam Creaturam
collendam esse, etc. In the Catholic Church it is divinely and singularly
delivered, that no Creature is to be Worshipped by the Soul, but only he that
is Creator of all things: De quantit. Animae, C. 34. It is apparent that the
Word of God is against you, for you have no warrant from thence, for this
assertion; nay, you have the express Words of Christ against it, Mat. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Which
Injunction was delivered by Moses to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. chap. 10. 20. And
by the Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. 3. with a Promise of their being delivered out
of the hands of the Philistines: and not only so, but you have a Tradition of
the Church Catholic: Traditur (says the holy Doctor) in Ecclesia Catholica
nullam Creaturam collendam esse. From whence I argue, if no Creature is to be
worshipped but God only, who is the Creator of all things, then the Saints who
are but Creatures, are by no means to be worshipped, because Worship is only
due to God, for that he is the Creator of all things. Again, the same Doctor
says: Christus Sacerdos est qui nunc Ingressus in interiora veli Solus ibi ex
his qui Carnem Gustaverant interpellat pro nobis in cujus rei figura in illo
primo populo and in illo primo templo unus sacerdos intrabat in Sancta
Sanctorum: populus omnis for as stabat: Jesus Christ is the Priest, who being
now entered within the Vail alone, there of them that have been partakers of
Flesh, does make Intercession for us; in figure of which thing, amongst that
first People, and in that first Temple, the Priest only did enter into the Holy
of Holies, and all the People stood without, Aug. in Ps. 64. How came Christ to
be a Priest? And of what Order is he a Priest? The Author to the Hebrews tells
you, That he was a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck: and that he was
called of God: see Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6. And no Man takes this Honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron; so also Christ glorified not
himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee: as he says in another place, Thou art a Priest
forever after the Order of Melchizedeck. Whoever termed the Saints to be
Priests, after the Order of Melchizedeck? Who called them to be Priests? When
did did they enter within the Vail? The Father says, That he alone of them,
which did partake of the Flesh, does make Intercession for us. How comes the
Saints now to do it? When did this Intercession of theirs commence? Christ did
not enter into the Holy of Holies till after his Resurrection, then God
constituted him the great High Priest, and Apostle of our Profession; saying,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Are the Saints yet risen from
the Dead? if they are not, How then can they appear in the Presence of God for
us. If they do, when did their Mediatorship begin? Christ alone entered, and
alone does interceed with God for Mankind. If the Saints are joined with him,
why then does the Father here say, He being now entered within the Veil alone
of them, who have been partakers of the Flesh. The High Priest in the time of
the Law was a Type of Christ, because he went into the Holy of Holies alone,
and all the People stood without: How can that be true? for you say, That
Christ did not alone go into the Holy of Holies, but the Saints are entered
also: Holy Men of the Jews could not go in, because they were not called to be
Priests; but you crowd in the Saints, though you can prove no Call. St. Austine
says, He alone does Interceed* But you say, That Christ does not Interceed
alone. You must by no means contradict your own Bellarmine; he says thus, The
Saints in the Old Testament were not prayed unto, because they were shut up in
Prison, they did not enjoy the Presence of God. Do the Saints now enjoy the
Presence of God in Body and Soul? If not, how can they be Priests? And how can
they interceed for us? How can they be said to have entered within the Veil?
Christ, our High Priest, he is risen from the Dead; and both in Body and Soul
he appears in the Presence of God for us. Give me leave to deal freely with
you, and tell you, that your Stapleton tells us, That Tertullianus, Ireneus,
Origin, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, St. Ambrose,
Clemen, Romanus, and St. Bernard, did not believe that the Saints were admitted
into Heaven, or had a clear sight of God, till the Resurrection from the Dead;
therefore they did not assent to this Sentence, which is defined as a Doctrine
of Faith, that the Souls of the Righteous, enjoy the sight of God before the
Day of Judgment; but did deliver their Opinions contrary to this Diffinition of
your Church; and if so, they could not be of the Opinion, by Bellarmine's own
confession, That Men on Earth should pray to them, as those of your Church do
to this day. Do but observe this Holy Doctor once more saying thus: Non sit
nobis Religio cultus hominum Mortuorum quia se pie vixerunt tales non quaerunt
Honores, etc. Honorandi ergo sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter
Religionem: The worshipping of Men that are Dead, should be no part of our
Religion, because that if they lived piously, they will not seek that kind of
Honor; they are to be honored therefore for Imitation, but not to be adored
for Religion, Aug. de Ver. Relig. cap. 35. If it were no part of Religion in
St. Augustine's time, to Worship Saints; then by what Authority do you make the
Worshipping of Saints, to be a part of your Religion.

It lies upon you therefore to justify your self from this great absurdity, of
making that to be a part of the Christian Religion, which is not really so. I
hope your Saints to whom you pray, lived and dyed in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ; or as this great Doctor has it, they lived piously; If so, when
did they claim or challenge this Worship as due to them; for he says, They
well not seek that kind of Honor. It lies, Sir, upon you to satisfy the World
in this particular. Again, observe, That if the Memories of the Saints and
Martyrs, be to be honored only for Imitation, as I have observed before, Then
by what Authority do you adore them for Religion, since the aforesaid Doctor
tells you, They are not to be worshipped for Religion? That the Memories of the
Saints and Martyrs of our dear Redeemer ought to be honored, that no Christian
will deny; but that they ought to be worshipped, is by this Doctor plainly
forbidden. Again, the said Father says: Oration quae non fit per Christum non
potest delere peccatum sed etiam ipsa fit peccatum: The Prayer which is not
made by Jesus Christ, not only cannot blot out Sin, but itself also is sin,
Aug. in Psalm: 108. From which saying, if to go to God in the Name of the Saints
be sin, how much more to go to the Saints themselves; for you may remember that
our sins are pardoned for the sake of Christ alone, and that we have no Promise
to receive at the hands of God those things we ask, unless we go to him in the
Name of his Son only. And the said St. Austin, in plain terms, calls them
Heretics, that were inclined to worship Angels, De Haeres. Cap. 29. Now if
they were Heretics that were inclined to worship Angels; much more are they
which worship Saints; for if the more honorable may not be worshipped, then
the less honorable must not; if the first be Heresy, the latter cannot be
Orthodox, If this Father here condemns the one, how can you, with reason,
pretend to justify the other.

St. Chrysostom, who was a great Doctor in the Eastern Church, In his third
Homily on the first Chapter to the Hebrews, has this saying, Why do you gape
after Angels, they are Servants to the Son of God, and are sent to diverse
places for our sakes. Sir, Why do we worship Jesus Christ, but because he is
God over all, blessed forever, and God has commanded the Angels to worship
him, Heb. 1. 6. Ps. 97. 7. But he never commanded us to Worship the Angels; for
if Worship be due to the Angels, how will it appear that he was made better
than the Angels, and that he has by Inheritance, obtained a more excellent
Name than they: Nay, the Apostle makes this observation in ver. 5. Unto which
of the Angels, said he, at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, Ps. 2. 7. And observe verse 13. of this first Chapter to the Hebrews; to
which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thy Enemies thy footstool. And if upon these Considerations, this great
Doctor uses this expression, Why gape ye after Angels? upon the same
consideration I may say, Why gape ye after the Saints? To which of the Saints
said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: or, Sit
thou at my right hand, until I make thine Enemies thy footstool. If God by not
speaking this to the Angels, does show that they ought not to be worshipped;
then it necessarily follows, that the Saints ought not to be worshipped, unless
you can tell where, and when God used such expressions to them, as he used to
his Son. Again, we find that God made his Angels ministering Spirits, sent forth
to minister to them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation, and they being no more,
St. Chrysostom says, Why do you gape after Angels? Then what can we expect
from the Saints, who are not so much as ministering Spirits, who never were sent
forth by God to minister for the People of God, here upon Earth.

St. Chrysostom, in his eighteenth Homily on the Epistle to the Romans, says,
Unto whom shall thou flee, whom will thou call upon to fight for, and help
thee, shall it be to Abraham; he will not hear thee; shall it be to these
Virgins, but they also shall impart none of their Oil unto thee; shall thou
call upon thy Father, or Grandfather, but none of them shall be able to
release, or relieve thee. These Sayings considered, worship and pray to him
alone, who has power to blot out thine obligation, and quench that flame: You
may observe the holy Father shows the vanity of those Men that have a recourse
to the Saints departed, and how they are disappointed that expect any Relief or
Comfort from any other but God. Therefore the holy Doctor admonishes
Christians to have recourse to God alone, who is able to help, and to relieve
them. Now, I pray, if God alone is able to help, and relieve us, to what end is
it for us to have recourse to Angels and Saints, if they are not able to
relieve us, and release us? And what warrant can you pretend from God, to
worship or pray to any other, since this Holy Father says, You must worship
and pray to God alone?

Again, the same Father in his ninth Homily upon the Colossians, he shows us,
that the Devil envying the Honor that we have, to address our selves to God
immediately, has brought in the Worshipping of Angels. It is strange that you
should practice that as an Institution of God, which was but a mere Intention
of the Devil, and that the Council of Trent should define that as an Article of
Faith, which has been Condemned by the Fathers of the Church Catholic, as
Sin, and a manifest breach of our Duty and Obedience we owe to God; and if that
the Worshipping of Angels were an Invention of the Devil. Then, Sir, I pray
what reason have you, or any sober Man, to think that Worshipping of Saints can
be an Institution of God, and that you may see the latter, as well as the
former, was a mere contrivance of Hell. I pray, consider the Doctrine which
holy Epiphanius did teach the Church in his time; and largely refuting the
Heresies of those who were called Collyridians, from the Collyrides, or Cakes,
which they used to offer to the Virgin Mary, and says, That neither Elias, nor
John, nor Thecla, nor any of the Saints are to be worshipped: and again, God
will not have Angels to be worshipped, much less her that was born of Anna: And
again, which of the Prophets have permitted a Man to be worshipped, much less a
Woman. The Virgin is a choice Vessel indeed, but a Woman. Let Mary be in
honor, but let the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost be worshipped: Let
no Man worship Mary, Epiph. Haeres 79. This Doctor is as plain as may be, in
the Point in debate. They offered her Cakes, and you Incense, and Vestments,
and Candles. If they were Heretics in Epiphanius's time, for worshipping the
Virgin Mary, what are you who do it now?

I have one Father more to offer to your Consideration, and that is Lactantius,
who is a Doctor of great esteem with you; observe what he says; Qui supplicant
mortuis rationem hominum, non tenent Lactant. Insti. Divin. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. It
is a short Testimony, but as plain as can be, in opposition to your Doctrine of
Praying to the Saints, who are departed, and can neither hear your Prayers, nor
are they in any capacity of granting your Desires. This sort of Service must
unman you, for that you do not pray upon any good ground, nor can you pray for
any good end. If you can, let us know the Principle upon which you pray, and
the end for which you pray to the Saints; for all Services that have not their
Foundation upon good Principles, and are not performed for a good end, are so
far from being Christian Services, that those who perform them, are scarce
worthy of the Name of Men.

I have taken some pains to make it appear, that the Doctrine of Praying to
Saints and Angels is unlawful. I have delivered you my thoughts freely, in
answer to those Authoiries which you have produced, which at the first view had
the aspect of Prayers, but upon a strict observation they prove to be no more
then Rhetorical Apostroplies those holy Fathers used, not adoring the Saints
for Religion, but only honoring them, to beget in their Hearers an holy
imitation of their Virtue, and to oblige them to follow those good Examples the
Saints left behind them; and then I have given you the Authorities of the most
eminent Fathers, both, of the Greek and Latin Churches, that with one consent
condemn your Doctrine and Practice by you defended. But in truth, Sir Humane
Writings are no Foundation of our Faith, we have a more sure Rule of our Faith
in this particular, the Holy Scriptures, which are the Word of God, whereunto
you will do well to take heed, and no more endeavor to bring in the
Authorities of humane Writers, to stand in competition with the Holy Word of
God, that has commanded us to worship, and serve him alone, and has sworn by
himself, that he will not part with this Honor to another; but if this does
not satisfy you, I am ready to reply to any thing you shall further bring in
to give countenance to the Point in hand, as it is defined and determined in
your Church.

Sir, you were pleased in your Epistle to the English Peer, to reflect upon the
Ordination of the Church of England, and in words at length, you did deny the
Validity of the Orders of our Church. If you have a Will to enter into the
debate of that point, I am ready to justify the Validity of our Ordination;
and again, you were pleased to assert, that all Councils, Fathers, and Churches
condemned and deposed all those who having received Holy Orders pretended to
Marriage which you call Sacrilegious. I am inclined to give you manifest proof
of the lawfulness of the Marriage of the Clergy, and to this end be pleased to
observe,

That Pope Silvester the first ordained Degrees in Ecclesiastical Orders, and
Decreed, That every Priest should be the Husband of one Wife only, according to
the Doctrine of the Holy Apostles, Tim. 3. 2, 3. Tit. 1. as Platina. St.
Huldrich in his Epistle to Pope Nicholas the first, tells him, that Pope
Gregory the first restored Marriage again to the Priests, which he for some
time before had denied them, when he saw how many great Inconveniences attended
the single Life of Priests, which would take up too much time to repeat. The
whole Epistle I recommend to you as worthy of your serious Consideration, in
which you may see that the Marriage of the Clergy is at large justified, and
their Restrained Chastity, or single Life Condemned by that Reverend Prelate.
In a word, I do assert that all the Councils, all the Fathers, and all Churches
did not condemn the Marriage of the Clergy, nor did they esteem their Marriage
Sacrilegious, but did esteem it Honorable in all Men, they well knowing it was
Ordained to prevent Sin, that they who have not the Gift of Continency might
Marry and preserve themselves undefiled Members of Jesus Christ.

Sir, there are many other Doctrines and Practices in your Church, which are
Antichristian and Develish, tending to the total overthrow of the whole Body of
the Christian Religion, as your Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy, the single
Life of the Clergy, your private Masses, your Doctrine of the Real Presence,
your Doctrine of the Adoration of Images, your holding up the Sacrament over
your Heads, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, votion, your Doctrine of
Purgatory, and praying for the Dead, your Doctrine of Justification by Works,
Indulgences, that the Sacrament was called by the Fathers Lord, and God; these
are the strange Notions of, and Positions of your Church. Sir, I will if you
please, begin and engage with you in any one, or all of these Points, therefore
you need not give Mr. Needham any trouble in this Matter, for though he
wonderfully exceeds you, or any of yours in Parts and Learning, and is much
more able to cope with you, then perhaps I my self, yet I am at leisure, and he
on the contrary is an Attendant on a great Person, and may be diverted from
going through in such an undertaking, therefore I am ready with all the modesty
that may be to answer you, therefore be pleased to turn your Pen against me,
and spare your Reflections upon our Church, which is yet able to show it self,
and will gain ground, when Babylon shall be brought down to the Dust. Dagon
will never stand before the Ark of God, we have the Apostles and Prophets for
our Foundation, and Jesus Christ for the chief corner Stone, so that we cannot
fail of giving you, or any of yours a Reason of our Faith, when you, or any of
your Church shall demand it of us.

In your Letter to Mr. Needham you conclude with a Prayer: Fas est ab host
doceri. In mine to you I will conclude with one also, which is, That God would
preserve the Church of England, that he would increase her Peace, and enlarge
her Borders, and make her Fruitful and Glorious, even as the Garden of God is
Fruitful and Glorious; as for her Enemies, let God Cloth them with Shame and
Confusion of Face, and that in her the Gospel may Flourish; to this end may all
Blessings, Gifts, and Graces from the God of Heaven descend upon all her
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; let God arise and pull down Babylon, and
destroy all Superstition and Idolatry, all false Doctrine and Heresy, to the
Glory of his Holy Name, and Comfort of all Protestants. This is the hearty
Prayer of,

SIR, Yours so far as you are Christ's, TITUS OATS.


