The Blessedness of Good Men-after Death.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Revd. Mr. Henry Cornish, B. D.

Who died on Sunday, December. 18th, in the Eighty Ninth Year of his Age, and was
Interred on Thursday, December. 22d, School. in the Church of Bisiter, in the
County of Oxford.

With a Preface to Rectify some Misrepresentations, etc. in a late Pamphlet,
Entitled, Some Remarks on the Life, Death and Burial of the said Mr. Cornish.

By John Ollyffe, Rector of Dunton, in the County of Bucks.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
I Had not the least Intent, when I first Composed, and afterward Preached
this Sermon, to make it Public. But there being a very busy and angry
Reflector, who it seems was then an Auditor, who has concerned himself to
Print Remarks upon it in a very little time after it was Preached, which I
cannot but take for very dis-ingenious and hard Usage; and not knowing what may
be the Consequence thereof, among those who may frame their Judgments only by
his Report, and may be apt to kindle at his Fire: I think my self obliged for
my own Vindication, as also to satisfy the Desires of some, whom, I have a
Respect for, at length to send it abroad, and to take some little Notice of his
Reflections upon it. And I am not without hope, but that by the Blessing of God
it may be of use to some devout Minds at least, howsoever He, or some Others
took it.

This Reflector says, He is really as much against a Persecuting Spirit, as
any of those Men, whose Interest or Coldness it is to be, for what they call
Moderation. He knows himself best. Far be it therefore from me to charge him
with that, which he denies of himself. But it seems, tho he be against
Persecution, yet he is not for Moderation: For this he reckons to be from
Coldness or Interest; which are too low Principles for him to be influenced by.
And so one would think by him. Now I must own to this Reflector, and to all the
World, that I am not only against a Persecuting Spirit, and so have always
been, but am for Moderation too; yet not from Interest or Coldness, but because
I think it is a very great Christian Virtue. And I believe, if the Reflector
had something less of a Persecuting Spirit, and a little of Moderation, it
would be never the worse; and then I am apt to think, he had spared these
Reflections.

He says, He is as much by Temper and by Conscience against Railing and
Rudeness, as against Fawning and Flattery. It Is great pity, that a good Temper
should ever be spoiled by bad Customs; or that Passion or Heat should ever
overruled such a Principle, as Conscience. But yet, so we see it comes to pass
sometimes. He would have all Justice and Charity, he says, showed to the Dead
of all Persuasions. And I perceive, he is willing enough, that Dissenters
should have as much Respect shown them that way, as other Men of the most
desperate Sects and Factions, as Pharisees, or as the most deplorable Heretics
in the Christian Church. Because there may be some laudable Qualities even in
such Men; and they are not so lost to God and Goodness, but they say and do
some things that are Praise worthy, and of good Report, which is a very notable
Concession, and which the Dissenters no doubt will Con him much Thanks for,
that they may be treated at least as well as Turks, Infidels, Pharisees and
Heretics.

He is not angry, he says, That this Grave Ancient Man was publicly treated
with so much Respect and Honor; and how comes it to pass then, that he is so
angry with me for treating him with this Respect and Honor which I have done?
Especially when he grants, that Funeral Sermons should be interpreted with
Candor and Concession.

But it raised his Indignation, he says, to hear such an Harangue upon a
professed maintainer of Division and Schism. What that Harangue was, is to be
seen in the Sermon, toward the latter End, which is there without the least
omission or alteration of any one Word, that I know of; which, if he had
considered better, and had not done in haste what he did, he might have
thought, that there had been no such occasion given for this loud Outcry,
which he has made in this Business.

As to much of what I have mentioned in the Character of this Worthy Person,
this Reflector has said as much as I, and somewhat more, as I shall give an
account afterward, being better acquainted with some Passages of his Life of
late, than I was; and if it be more to the purpose too, I am very glad of it,
and thank him for it. But for those Strokes of his Life and Conversation,
which, he says, some People had objected, as Blots and Blemishes to him, and
which I should have made an Ingenious Apology for, I knew none there, that had
made such Objections, or that expected such Apologies. And I did not in the
least design then, that my Sermon should have gone farther. The Reflector now
being well acquainted with Panegyric, has showed me, what he thinks I might
have said both ways; but has inserted or added withal very slighting and
undervaluing Reflections, which I, who have less Skill that way, cannot but
think he ought to have let alone; and no doubt he had done so, if he had
designed his Remarks in real kindness to his Memory. But I for my part did not
think, I had need to concern my self with any thing of that Nature; but must be
of Opinion still after all, that he has said, That it would have been plainly
absurd in the present Audience; and that much also of what he has said, has
neither relish of Decency nor good Nature in it; and therefore I chose rather
to express in few Words what I knew in the time of my Acquaintance with him,
and to omit all other Things which did not concern me: For it was not my
Business to give an History of his Life, nor indeed could I do it, being but
little acquainted with it, but only in short to express his Character, as far
as I knew. And if I did deliver this with as much noise and assurance, as Lungs
and Liberty could take, which He being an Auditor, says, I did; I hope it may
well be ascribed to my Affection and Sense of Obligations, which this Reflector
grants in Funeral Orations there should be an Allowance for. But that I spoke
it in Triumph over the Head of the Parochial Minister, as this Reflector also
by a most uncharitable Censure lays to my Charge, I abhor and detest it with
as much Indignation, as he says, he heard it. Far be it from me ever to have
had such an Intent or Thought, which I am sure never was in my Heart; nor could
there be the least color for such a Censure, but my Affectionate Delivery;
which the Occasion drew from me.

But the great Quarrel against me, I perceive is, That I commended him so much
for his Piety and Holiness, which this Reflector calls Sainting of him as it
were; and that I pronounced him Blessed, that is, I expressed my Belief of the
Blessedness of the Man, Who, this Reflector says, had been the Voice and the
Soul of the Schism in that Town; that is, had been a Preacher to a separate
Congregation there. In which Station of his yet, it appears by what this
Reflector himself afterward says of him, He managed himself with very great
Modesty and Inoffensiveness. And this Reflector himself also pronounces him an
Honest Man; that being the Appellation which he gives him. And if he was such
an One, then whatever his Failures or Mistakes had been in some Points, either
of Opinion or Practice; and suppose this for One, which this Reflector
mentions, yet he must needs believe, that these Failures and Mistakes were
Unwilling and Involuntary in him. And sure He cannot but hold, but that a very
eminent degree of Piety may be very well consistent with more than one
involuntary Failures and Mistakes. And a Man may be a very Good Man, though in
some Things He be in the wrong. And if I believed him Pious, as I verily did, I
can see no Reason, but that I might at that time openly express my Belief
thereof. And then sure I ought to believe him Blessed too, if I ought to
believe Pious Men to be Blessed. And then why might not I express my Belief
thereof likewise?

But, he says, I should have considered the Place, wherein I stood upon
Courtesy and Sufferance, and should in good Manners have said nothing
offensive to the Person, by whose Leave I came there; I verily thought, I had
done so, as he says, I should have done. I commended him for his Goodness,
Humility and Piety; and I think, he deserved it. And I could never imagine,
That the Commendation of the Piety of any Man, who did deserve that
Commendation, could be offensive to him, or any other worthy Person.

But it seems I spoke, as if I had his Person in Admiration, and taught those
present to have it so. And what then? It was for that, which was Good and
Excellent in him; and what harm could there be in that? That sure could never,
as this Reflector adds, seal up the Obstinate, or confirm them in the Error of
their Ways, when I did not commend him for any Error, but for that which was
Good in him. Nor can it be a delivering up of the Church, which I hope is as
much for Holiness in all Men, as I, or any other Person can be. Nor can the
Commendation of a Person's Piety and Goodness, though in some Things differing
from me, and from the Church of which I am a Member, be to countenance
Disorders and Divisions, to daub with untempered Mortar, or to prophecy
Deceits; all which are the judicious and kind Remarks, which this Reflector
makes upon my Performance. What! Cannot a Man commend a Dissenter, but that
must be to commend his Dissent? And if I did not commend his Dissent, how was
that to countenance Divisions? And if I commended him for that Good, which was
really in Him, I spoke the Truth, however this Reflector would insinuate the
contrary, and if a Man speaks Truth, is that to Prophecy Deceits? I am no
Dissenter, but I love and honor Dissenters that are good Men, for their
Goodness sake, though not for their Dissent; and so I ought to do. To speak
plainly, I believe the Constitution of our Church to be Justifiable, and in the
main Primitive; and the Terms of our Church Communion to be Lawful; or else I
should Lie to God and Men in what I have done in Conformity; which God forbid;
or now must renounce it, which I see no Reason for. And therefore I know, I
ought not to do any thing, that I think might tend to alienate or withdraw any
Person from it; nor did I ever intend any such thing in the whole Course of my
Life, but to sweeten Men's Spirits, and to reconcile them to it, as much I
could. But I see many Persons have invincible Prejudices against some Things,
which the Church of which I am, as well as my self, think Indifferent. And if
this Reflector thinks, they cannot be Good Men because of such Prejudices, and
certain Practices of theirs following thereupon, I am of another Opinion. For I
believe, there have been, and are a great many such notwithstanding; and as
such I am bound to Love and Honor them, and not only to exchange with them the
common Offices of Humanity, which is all, that this Reflector seems to allow.
Though it is their Goodness, and not their Prejudices or Dissent, that I Love and
Honor in them. And on the other side, to speak as plainly, If any be Bad Men,
let them be of the Church never so much; if they can pray and swear almost in a
Breath; if they are drunk with Wine or strong Drink, though not with Opinions; if
they hate Faction, and nothing else besides; if they have a Zeal for Forms and
outward Observances, and there it rests, I shall never have much respect for
such Puppits and Apes in Religion, that have nothing at all of the Life and
Spirit of it.

I have indeed these Expressions in the Character of this Good Man, That his
Labor in that way, wherein he thought he might Glorify God, even to extreme
Old Age (for now he was in the Eighty Ninth Year of it) was an Instance of his
great delight therein, of his Pious Zeal for the promoting of Religion, and of
his Earnest Desire of the Eternal Welfare of Men. I did not speak this to
justify his Way in the Circumstances of it, but to commend his Holy Intention
and Zeal for the promoting of Piety in it, which I thought his long-continued
Labor was a great Indication of. For so I persuade my self, it was intended by
him, and that the matter and end of his Service and Performances, allowing for
Human Frailties, were for the glorifying of God, and promoting of true
Religion, and not of Disorders and Divisions. For this Reflector himself
observes enough to clear him in that Matter, if his Preaching was like the rest
of his Conversation. For he himself observes, That notwithstanding many
Disadvantages of Education and Interest; which he lay under, that he was no
Bigot, no violent angry Man; That he had really a Meekness of Disposition,
which kept him from Wranglings and Disputes; That he had a goodness of Nature,
which inclined him to a fair Correspondence with some Church-Divines; and that
it seemed his peculiar frame of Spirit, to be reserved and inoffensive; That
like a Wise and Good Man he took only the defensive part in those short
Discourses, that had been held with him; That he never in his hearing railed
at, or run down the Constitution of the Church; but pleaded calmly for
Moderation and Liberty of Conscience, and bearing with one another. And that he
often chose to make as it were some Apology for keeping up a separate Meeting
in opposition to the Church; and would say, he was brought thither by the
invitation and importunity of such; as were good People. And that it was not
his Intention to keep them altogether from the Church, but should sometimes set
them an Example of going thither himself. And that he did at first resolve to
begin and end his Public Exercises at such Hours, as should not interfere wirh
the Solemn Service of the Church, but dismiss them from one place to attend at
the other. And that he seemed to desire no better Character, than what had been
freely given to his Predecessor Mr. Troughton ( by one, who, as this Reflector
says, had not the Custom to flatter that Party) who was very moderate, etc.
And that he seemed to value himself on this Happiness, that he had received
Holy Orders from a Bishop of the Church of England. That he Married one of his
Daughters to a Conforming Divine, and used his Interest to possess him of a
better Benefice, under the Condition of Subscription and Declaration, which the
Law required. Concerning which Relations, and others which he adds, I know
nothing, except that barely of the Marriage of his Daughter, and therefore
could say nothing of them. But I think even from this Reflector's account of
him, I have Reason also to conclude, That this Good Man's Pains and Zeal were
intended by him, not for the promoting of Divisions and Disorders, but of the
Service of God, and of true Piety and Holiness; which was what I aimed at, in
that which I said of him in that part of his Character. Therefore to conclude
this, I cannot yet be persuaded, but that what I said of this Worthy Man, was
downright Justice to his Memory, and not Fawning or Flattery, as this Reflector
would insinuate.

But there is another Thing it seems, that raised the Indignation of this
Reflector, viz. That in all my Discourse there was not a word of Exhortation to
Unity and Peace, nor so much as wishing those People to come more frequently to
that Holy Place, where they were now Assembled, and where their Beloved Teacher
chose to lie at Rest: That there was nothing, he says, but an Applause of the
Person, and then a silent Consent to the Merits of the Cause. And thereupon he
insinuates, as if I made Conformity and Separation indifferent Things; as if I
was an Advocate for Indifference in Communion; and had cowardly betrayed that
Altar, to the Service whereof I had been legally Ordained. For my part, I
cannot but wonder at this Reflector's Discourse, and by what Logic he could
ever infer, That the Applause and Commendation of a Person for his Goodness,
and Zeal for the promoting of Piety, which was all that I designed; and my
omitting of that, which did not concern me at that time, could be a silent
Consent to the Merits of a Cause; or that it was to be an Advocate for
indifference in Communion, to say nothing at all about it. But a little Wit,
and a great deal of ill Nature, by the help of spightful Innuendo's will be
able to infer any thing from any thing. But I must tell this Reflector, That
that was no part of my Business at that time, which he expected of me. My
Business was to Preach a Funeral Sermon at the Interment of an Old and Good
Friend, from whom I had received formerly many Obligations; to which I was
called by the Friends of the Deceased, and for the doing of which they had
obtained leave of the Minister of the Town. In this Sermon I did endeavor
plainly and familiarly (which it seems was a Fault with some) to represent some
Things, which might be for the Consolation of Good People against the fears of
Death, and to exhort and encourage others to espouse Religion, which had so
great Advantages attending upon it. And this I think, by this Reflector's
leave, was a proper Subject for such an Occasion. And this Subject I having
chosen, this I was to pursue. But yet could not omit saying something, though it
was but a little (and I think, if I committed any Fault, it was in saying too
little) out of Gratitude and hearty Respect to the Memory of my Reverend and
good Friend Departed. But I could not think it any part of my Business upon
that Occasion, to insist upon the Points of Unity and Schism: Let my Thoughts
or Opinion about them have been what they would, or though they were never so
much such as this Reflector would have them; therefore I think the Reflector
blames me without Cause, as guilty of a grand Omission of that, which was
nothing to the purpose of what I was then about; but it seems to me, would have
been a downright Solecism at a Funeral Solemnity. And I have never observed,
That Excursions of this Nature have ever had any good Effect, but directly the
contrary.

Yet I can assure this Reflector, and do profess to him, That I have as much
desired and longed for the Peace of the Church, its Security and Establishment,
and the Union of Dissenters to it; that all our Animosities might be composed,
our Breaches healed, and our Differences happily brought to an end, as ever any
hungry Man did long for his Meat and Drink, and would be glad to promote it by
all proper Means. I am sure it is for the interest of Religion, for the
advancement of the Name and Honor of our great Lord and Master, to have the
Church of God at Unity within it self. It is that, which would make the Church
it self Glorious and Venerable, and formidable to all its Enemies; or rather,
it will be the way to have no Enemies at all, when they shall see the happy
Effects of the Christian Doctrine upon the Lives and Spirits of Men, and Love,
Charity and good Will planted and fructifying in the Christian World. I am very
sure from the Apostle, That the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted
by that, which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
Measure of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it
self in Love, Ephesians. 4.16. And therefore all that could be done, should be done,
toward the procuring of this mutual Love, and the settling of Concord among
all the Members of this Body. All proper Means should be made use of, all
Methods taken; any way, any expedient tried that can be; unnecessary occasions
of Contention should be removed, Concessions made, and yielding on all sides;
and if one Thing will not do then another, and another should be tried, like
Physic in a difficult Case: And it would be all worth the while, for the
promoting of Christian Love and Charity, which is so great a part of Religion,
and which is so helpful to all the rest. And it is Religion, that we must aim
at, and which all Things whatsoever should subserve to. Order, Government,
Discipline, Ordinances, Ministers, and Ministry, are all but to promote
Religion, Faith, Purity, and Charity among Men. And it is Pride, Interest,
Passion, Stiffness, and Revenge, that spoil and hinder all. But whosoever they
are, that do not prefer Religion and Peace above every Thing else, all violent
Incendiaries, all Self-seekers, all Carnal Politicians, that to gratify an
Humor, to serve an Interest, or to keep up a Balance, make it their Business
to foment Discord, and to keep Divisions a-foot, I will be bold to say, they
know not what manner of Spirit they are of, they seek not Christ but
themselves, their God is their Belly, and their Glory is in their Shame. And
let them be Dissenters, or Churchmen, or of what Denomination they will, they
are not true Christians. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly,
Sensual, Devilish. For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion and
every Evil Work. But the Wisdom, that is from above, is first pure, then
peacable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits,
without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy. And the fruit of Righteousness is
sown in Peace of them that make Peace, Jam. 3.15. This Peace I am for. I love
neither Faction nor Fury, Obstinacy nor Revenge; but could be glad to do any
thing in the World, to convince, heal, or reconcile. And so I hope would many
others. But I can see but little success of Attempts that have been made this
way; and can have but little hopes, till God is pleased to take the Matter into
his own Hands, to bring the Spirits of Men to a certain Temper on all sides,
which yet the most do not seem to be inclined to; which has been no small
Trouble to me to observe, so that I have been almost tired out with vain
Expectation in this Matter. But if I can do no good toward a Composure or
Accommodation of these our Uncharitable and Unchristian Differences, I am
resolved however I will not irritate or inflame, what I would be glad to heal;
as I dare say, I should have done, if I had taken this Reflector's Measures.

But now we are upon it, let us consider, what Methods He would have had me
used to bring those People to Church more frequently at other times. First, he
says, I should have taken the opportunity to Commemorate the great Charity of
the Church of England, which like a Natural and Indulgent Mother, has always
open Arms to receive even her Froward and Rebellious Sons; and allows her
Offices of Christian Burial to those, who despise her other Ordinances, that
she patiently waits their Submission, while they live, and affords them the
last Offices of Piety, when they come to Die; which sure might win upon all
Ingenious Spirits to oblige her with Conformity and Obedience in all reasonable
Service. But I am apt to be of Opinion after all, that they would hardly have
thought this Argument to have any great Weight in it. Charity is a very good
and obliging Thing. But unless they can have Satisfaction given them about the
Reasonableness and Unexceptionableness of the Service it self, which they
Dissent from, which this Reflector does not proceed to, nor does advise me to
it, though that was the chief Thing, and would have been most to the purpose; I
doubt the Churches Charity alone, in the respect which he mentions, would
hardly bring them to Conformity and Obedience to it.

But to give Him his due: He does not insist upon this, as the chief Thing,
being apprehensive, it is likely, of the weakness of it taken by it self. It was
something else he had principally in his Thoughts, as appears by his long
Harangue about it, which I cannot but wonder at, viz. That it was an Holy Place
where they were now Assembled, and where their Beloved Teacher chose to lie at
Rest, which He had hinted before. And that I might have inferred, That they do
not Die so much out of Charity with the Church, as is commonly imputed to them.
For they like well enough to be Buried there, in the Church Ground. And when
they come to depart out of this World, they leave their Bodies as a Legacy to
it. And to leave a Legacy to one, is justly thought a Sign and Seal of
Reconciliation and perfect Love. I never heard indeed that they were much out
of conceit with the Earth of the Church-Floor. And if that be a sign of their
Reconciliation to the Church, I find they are contented to give a Testimony of
it at any time, when there is the like Occasion. And though these Brethren choose
to serve God in a Common and Unhallowed Barn, rather than in a Place Solemnly
Devoted to be God's House of Prayer; yet on Deathbed Thoughts they cannot Will
their Bodies to be committed to the Threshing-Floor; but make it their last
Option to be Buried with their Forefathers, as it is Natural, or Customary for
all to desire; and let their Sepulchers at least be on the good old Consecrated
Ground; though I dare say, they never think of the Consecration, when they do so.
And who knows, but the Better Sort of Dissenters may have such Scruples on
them as these? That if they should be too soon admitted into the Bosom of the
Church, they could by no means live up to the Rules and Orders of it; whereas
delaying their Admission to the last, when their Bodies are brought to Church,
They may possibly suppose, that such a final Action may determine their
Salvation; and to be Buried in the Church be a sufficient Atonement for their
long Absence from it. And then upon this he says, I might have took occasion
to persuade the Brethren there present, that they would be as well affected in
their Life and Health, as they generally come to be in their last Sickness and
point of Death; that is, to bring their Bodies to the Chuich, whilst their
Souls are yet in them; which would be a more acceptable Sacrifice, than the
bare Carcass and Refuse of Mortality. And, why should they desire to be
Interred within the Precincts of the Church; unless they think it their own
last Home and proper Place? Would any of us request, that our Dead Bodies
should be carried into an Enemies Country, rather than be laid up in our Native
Land? It must argue some good Affection sure to the Spot of Earth, where we
resolve to lay down our Mortal Man, and to mix our common Dust. And moreover
therefore, I should have encouraged these Brethren, not to forsake the
Assembling of themselves together in that Holy Place, where the Mournful
Occasion had now brought them. The Ground was not Polluted with Idolatrous
Worship; if it had, their Reverend Teacher would not have desired to have found
there an Ark of Rest for his Earthly Tabernacle. By these extraordinary
Arguments and Motives, I should very powerfully have Exhorted the Brethren
there present, to come to Church every Sunday in the Year. And if any of them
should have an Humor more Obstinate than ordinary, such rare and singular
Reason and Rhetoric together, must needs have knocked it down in an instant.

Now I must own to this Reflector, That these wise Thoughts never came into my
Head, and if they had, I should certainly have sent them packing, as soon as I
had observed them. For I should certainly have disdained to have trifled in
this manner. These Topics might serve the turn for a young Declaimer, of whom,
if he can but show a little Wit, it is not expected, that he should talk much
Reason. But does this Reflector think, that to talk of Holy Places, and Holy
Consecrated Ground, and of the contrary, Profaneness of a Common and
Unhallowed Barn, and the Threshing-Floor, would be of such mighty force to
bring Dissenters to Church? Would not this rather have offended, than persuaded
them? Does not he know, they have but little Opinion of such Holiness and
Consecration? And yet that they choose to Worship on the Threshing-Floor, not
because they think it best, but for want of a more convenient Place? And
because they are willing to have their Dead Carcases, that are without Sense or
Feeling, brought to be Buried in the Church Ground among their Forefathers,
which they think is a convenient Repository for them, does he think that this
would do the mighty Feat to persuade them to bring their Living Souls to Church
to Worship there, when they think, they can do better elsewhere? Does not be
know, that it is the Service that they take Exception against, and not the
Walls, or Seats, or Ground, or Earth? And it is impossible, that He should
trifle so, as to imagine, that the Better Sort of Dissenters should think, that
if they should be too soon admitted into the Bosom of the Church, they could by
no means live up to the Rules of it? Does he think, that they take the Rules of
our Church to be stricter than those of their own? Or that they should think,
that their choosing to be Buried at last in the Church Ground would Atone for
their long Absence from the Church Service, and that this being their final
Action would determine their Salvation? Would not they take this to be a
downright Affront to them, that we should take them to be such silly Creatures?
Of all Men living, if I were to Discourse of this Matter, I would not come to
this Reflector to suggest Heads or Arguments to me for it. Certainly it is a
thousand times better, quite to hold one's Peace, than to talk thus quite cross
to the Business. These are rare and singular Thoughts, and I dare say are
nonesuch of their kind; and this last especially He took for a notable piece
of Wit and Ingenuity, it being no doubt his own most genuine Offspring; and
was so taken with the misshapen Fancy, that he could not choose but make much
of it, and then by all means must produce it to open View, that all may admire
it. But a little Charity, and Judgment withal, which this Reflector has taken
great care not to betray too much of, had most certainly finally determined it
out of the way.

Now at last, He adds, That the Ceremonies are few, and inoffensive; the
Prayers are Devout, and pathetically Good; the Sermons are Practical and Plain.
I know nothing, that this Reflector has said to the purpose, but only this.
But if he had also a little farther set out the inoffensiveness of the
Ceremonies, the goodness of the Prayers, and the usefulness of the Sermons, it
would have been no doubt so much the more effectual. But it looks, as if he
least descended upon this, He slights it over so quick. For this Reflector is
only for Rare, Antique, and Unusual Things; a little plain honest Truth is not
so agreeable to his roving, and high-soaring Fancy. Does he think, that such
general Affirmations only would have been so powerful to persuade? Or that his,
or my telling them so, which perhaps they have heard an hundred times over,
would upon a sudden convince and alter their Minds, and change their relish of
Things? If I had been to Discourse of this Matter, I think I ought to have gone
a little deeper into the Controversy, taken it to pieces, and unravelled its
Parts, to break the force of Objections. But was that a Time or Season for all
this? Would not that have been a pretty undertaking at a Funeral? Besides,
there are many Books writ about these Things; and many and long Disputes
Printed about them. And if these do not prevail, I don't believe, that the
slight Flurts of this Reflector's Rhetoric, or the most that I could say, will
ever do it. For I have no such mighty conceit of my Abilities that way,
whatever this Reflector has of his: We have Disputed long enough. And we know
the time, when some Severities have been used too. And yet we see, that all
has had but little Effect. I think therefore, we were all better yield, what
we can, and shake Hands, and Love one another.

I have now said, what I intend to say in this Matter. If the Reflector be not
satisfied herewith, it will be in vain for me any farther to attempt his
Satisfaction. I shall not presume to give him any Advice, but let him alone to
take his own Measures. Yet I shall not refuse any from him, provided he be
happier in advising another time, than in what he has done already. But if He
intends to Dispute or Criminate on, I shall leave him to enjoy himself in his
own Humor, but I intend to give my self no farther trouble about it.

To conclude, it is a great comfort to think of that State and Place, where all
Imperfection shall be done away, and where all Differences and Contentions
shall be at an end; where I hope yet to meet this now angry Brother; and do
most heartily pray, that both He, and I, and whosoever has any Ill will to me
in this World, may by the free Grace of God pardoning our Sins, and accepting
us in Christ Jesus, be at last received into the Embraces of our Blessed Lord,
and may Live and Joy together in the most satisfying Fruition of his
everlasting Love. And in the mean time, if to Preach up the Doctrines of our
Holy Religion, with Zeal, Fervor and Earnestness, in order to the preparing of
Men for this, be Cant, Noise, and Assurance, I beseech the God of Heaven to
give me more of it. Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author has also Published a Thanksgiving Sermon for the Delivery of this
Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power.

A Brief Defense of Infant Baptism with an Appendix, wherein is showed, That it
is not necessary that Baptism should be Administered by Dipping.

The Minister's Last-Advice to his People, being a Farewell Sermon Preached at
Almer in Dorsetshire, at the Author's leaving the said Parish.

Rev. 14 13. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are
the Dead, which Die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
IN these Words we have Three Things considerable, which we have an account of,
from the Voice and Spirit of God.

First, That they, who Die in the Lord, are Blessed.

Secondly, The Reason or Parts of this Blessedness: They rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them.

Thirdly, The time of the Beginning, or Commencement of this Blessedness. From
henceforth.

First, They that Die in the Lord, are Blessed. But here the Question is, who
they are, that may be said to Die in the Lord? Or what it is, that is intended
in that Expression or Description of those, to whom the Blessing here does
belong.

I make no doubt, as it is also generally understood, that these Words were
especially and principally intended for the comfort of such Christians, who
were then like to suffer in those Days of Persecution of the Church of God;
whereby the Patience of the Saints, of which he speaks, ver. 12. was so much
Exercised. The outward State of the Church was then very dismal and sad, in
those dark and afflictive Times. And therefore it was but need to give a Word
of Comfort and Support to such, as were like to bear the Burden of those
direful Calamities, that were about to fall upon them. This seems to be mainly
intended here in this Blessing, that they might be encouraged thereby to hold
out in their Faith and Profession, notwithstanding all that should fall upon
them.

In this Sense then, by those that Die in the Lord, the Holy Martyrs must first
be intended, who laid down their Lives for the Lord, that is, for his sake, or
for their Adherence to his Faith and Gospel. This being a very grievous Case,
God was pleased often in the Scriptures to provide for their Encouragement. 2 Timothy 2.11.
It is a faithful saying, says the Apostle, if we be Dead with him, we shall
also Live with him: If we Suffer, we shall also Reign with him. Romans 8.16, 17.
And that we shall be also glorified together; and that the Sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.
that shall be revealed in us. For, says he, our light Affliction, which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory. 2 These. 1.6.
Seeing it is a Righteous Thing with God, to recompense Tribulation to them
that trouble you; and to you, who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and admired in all them, that believe. And a great many more such
Promises and Encouragements there are to Suffering Christians, who Die in the
Lord.

But then it must be likewise supposed, That those, who Die thus in, or for the
Lord, and for their Adherence to the Faith of Christ, do Die in, or under the
sanctifying Power of that Faith also; the great Design of which was to Purify
the Heart, and Work by Love. Without which Effect obtained, Martyrdom it self,
if it could be supposed, would not at all profit them; as we have the Apostle's
own Resolution in the Case, 1 Cor. 13.3. For, says He, Though I give my Body to
be burnt, and have not Charity, which is the great Christian Virtue, and
comprehensive of all the rest, it profits me nothing. For the great End of
the Faith of Christ, and of the belief of the Gospel, is to make Men Holy, to
recover the Image of God in Men, that they may Live to his Glory. So that there
is no Salvation without this, let Men's Sufferings for the Faith seem to have
been never so great.

But then on the other side, they who Live and Die in the Power of that Faith,
having felt the transforming and sanctifying Virtue thereof, and so have
attained to the great End of it, though they have not undergone the Sufferings of
Martyrdom, surely may be said to Die in the Lord also. They Die United to him,
adhering to his Interest and Cause. Yea, they Die for him, fighting under his
Banner, and in his Quarrel, against all his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil. And these are also Martyrs Animo, in the Disposition of their
Minds, and they would by his Grace maintain the Field, for his Sake, to the
very Death. And the sufferings of Mortification, which they have endured
already, are a kind of Martyrdom, in cutting off their Right Hands, and
plucking out their Right Eyes, in bringing down the Old Man, and crucifying the
whole Body of Sin: Therefore there is no doubt, but that to these also the
Blessing here mentioned does belong. For these, the Apostle tells us, being
made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, have their Fruit unto Holiness,
and the end everlasting Life, Romans 6.22. And all these shall partake of the
Inheritance, which are sanctified by Faith, that is in Christ, Acts 26.18. In
which Sense it is a very comfortable Consideration to all truly Penitent and
Sound Believers, and Good Christians.

For the evidencing of which, these few Things may be farther considered, to
persuade us, that it shall be so.

First, Because the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ is in them, so that they
are led by the Spirit, and live in the Spirit, by the Dictates, and according
to the Rules of the Holy Spirit of God. Now there is no Condemnation, says the
Apostle, to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made
them free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.1. Romans 8.11.
And if the Spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies by
his Spirit that dwells in you. Ver. 14.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God; and if
Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ. These Men are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and God will no more destroy those Temples, than
he will allow others to do so. But the Spirit of God, with the Blessed Fruits
of it, which is in them when they Die, is a sure Pledge and Earnest of more
Blessings to be received afterward.

Secondly, From hence it will follow, That the Image of God is upon them, and
that in a more eminent manner, than it is upon any others. They being renewed
after the Image of him that Created them, in Righteousness and true Holiness.
So that they have not only the Natural Image of God, as it may be called for
distinction sake, in the Spirituality, Powers, and Immortality of their
Spirits; but they have the Moral Image of God also, which is the Glory of the
Divine Nature; which is wrought in them by the transforming Power of the Holy
Ghost, to whose Holy Dictates and Motions they have been brought to submit
themselves. And by this Means they are according to their Measure made like
unto God. And thereby it must needs be, That God's Love of Complacency must be
toward them, and his Delight must be in them. For however there may be some
Blots in this Image in them, yet these being not such, as to spoil the Beauty
thereof, God will have a favorable Respect unto them; and they may depend upon
it, that He will not cast them off.

These Men are not of a Temper, or Spirit, for Devils, or Infernal Spirits, to
dwell with them. For they do oppose their Dark Kingdom, and are grieved at the
Conversation of the Wicked, by whom it is promoted. And therefore they may be
sure, they shall never be put to Herd with them in the Infernal Lake hereafter.
But the time will come, when all shall be carried to their Like; though it cannot
be done here, where the Tares and the Wheat must be suffered to grow together.
But at last the Sheep shall be put by themselves, and the Goats by themselves;
all Wicked Men by themselves, and with their Patrons and Masters, the Devils
and Infernal Spirits, whose Work they have done, and whose Image they bare; and
all Holy and Good Men by themselves, together with Christ their Lord, whom they
have served, and whose Image is upon them. So both Parties would have it; and
so it shall be. For they differing so vastly in their Tempers, so far as they
differ, are even weary of one another here; so that God will certainly order a
Separation of them hereafter, that they shall be far enough asunder.

Thirdly, By what has been said, it appears, That the great End of Christ's
Death, and Resurrection, and Government, is obtained upon Good Men. For God
sent his Son to Bless us, in turning us every one from our Iniquities. Acts
3.26. Cap. 5.31.
And He has Exalted him with his Right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to
give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of Sins. His great Business was to
reduce Men to their Allegiance, and to bring them back to God, Tit. 2.
from whom they were departed. The Grace of God which brings Salvation, has
appeared to that End, etc.

Now this being done, it becomes Christ, as their Redeemer and Head, to take
care of them, and to look after them, that they may attain the End of their
Faith, the Salvation of their Souls. And so he assured us, He will do, Jo.
10.27. My Sheep hear my Voice, I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto
them Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish. For, says he, He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, He it is that Loves me; and He that Loves me,
shall be Loved of my Father, and I will Love him, and will manifest my self
unto him, Jo. 14.21. And where I am, there shall my Servant be; and if any Man
serve me, him will my Father Honor, Jo. 12.26. And, Father, I will that those,
whom thou have given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory,
which thou have given me, Jo. 17.24. They having heard, and learned of the
Father, and being come unto him, He has undertaken for them. Now they are his
Members, and therefore He will not lose them. Romans 14.8.
They now Live unto the Lord, and shall Die unto the Lord, so that whether they
Live or Die, they are the Lords; and He will certainly see, that they shall not
miscarry. For He has Power to save them; all Power in Heaven and Earth being
committed to him. Mat. 28. Jo. 6.21.
So that as the Father raises up the Dead, and quickneth them, so the Son
quickneth whom he will. For as the Father has Life in himself, so He has
given to the Son, to have Life in himself; and this Life he will Communicate to
his Members, as it certainly concerns him to do. He would at last lose his own
Honor in the work of Redemption else. For it would seem, either that his Merit
and Satisfaction are Incompetent, or that He wanted Power and good Will to do
more for them. But He has faithfully assured us, That He that believes in
him, though he were Dead, yet shall he Live; and whosoever lives and believes
in him shall never Die, Jo. 11.25. But because I Live, says he, ye shall Live
also.

Fourthly, They being now brought to partake of those Qualifications, which
make them meet for this Blessedness, they have by Virtue of God's Promise and
Covenant also a Right to it. Col. 1.12.
For it is to be an Inheritance of Saints, and they being Sanctified, are
therefore become meet for it. And this is God's Covenant, Heb. 8.10.
that when He has put his Laws into their Minds, and wrote them in their
Hearts, that He will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a People; and
that He will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and their
Iniquities will He remember no more. And therefore they shall be freed from all
that Death and Misery, that would be the Effects and Consequence of them. And
this is the Record, says the Apostle, 1 Jo. 5.11.
That God has given unto us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. So that
He that has the Son, as all have, that believe in him, and submit to him as
their Lord and Savior, has Life by Virtue of God's Promise, and He that has
not the Son, has not Life. For this is the Will of him that sent me, says our
Savior, That every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
Everlasting Life, and I will raise him up at the last Day, Jo. 6.40.

Secondly, I now come to the Second Thing observed in the Words, viz. the
Nature and Parts of this Blessedness of those that Die in the Lord; which if I
could thoroughly Explain, would be an abundant Evidence of their being Blessed.
Now this is Expressed in two Particulars, They rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them.

First, They rest from their Labors. Now Labor is a very toilsome and
tiresome Thing, whether it be of the Body or Mind; which yet we are all here
Exercised with, more or less. But the Comfort of it is, it is this World only,
that is the Place for Labor and Work, for Pain and Sufferings; the next is the
Place of Retribution and Reward, where there shall be no more Toil or Trouble,
no more Sorrow or Pain, no more Combat or Contention with any Evil whatsoever
at all.

The Labors here meant in the Text, may most properly signify the Sufferings
and Persecutions for the Faith of Christ; as they that Die in the Lord may most
properly signify the Holy Martyrs and Confessors, who shall for ever hereafter
be freed from these Labors and Sufferings, for then they are all past the
Pikes. The Devil, the Accuser of the Brethren, the Apollyon, the Abaddon, that
gives them here so much Disturbance, shall then be far enough off from them;
and neither He, nor his wicked Instruments, shall ever come near to hurt them
more. For the Devil and Wicked Men, as you have heard, are all to be by
themselves; and there shall be a great Gulf fixed between them, and the Servants
of God; so that they shall never be able to bring their Fire and Faggots, their
Wheels and Gibbets near them there. There shall be nothing to hurt or destroy
in all that Holy Mountain.

But if the Servants of God should be freed then from all these kind of
Labors, yet if there should be any of some other kind for them to undergo, it
could not be perfectly well with them, not could they be said to be perfectly
Blessed, which yet it is designed, they shall be. So that we may well conclude,
that it is not only the Labor of Persecutions and Martyrdoms that then they
shall be freed from, but from all Labor and Pains whatsoever, that should
bring any Sufferings along with it.

First, Most certainly Then there shall be no more Labor for or about the
Body, to nourish or feed, to maintain or preserve it: Because then there shall
be no more weakness of the Body; no more Sickness or pained Limbs, or decay of
Spirits, to seek a Remedy for. The Body indeed will not presently after Death
be raised to this State of Life and Blessedness; but must lodge a while in the
Grave, which is appointed for its Dormitory, till the Judge shall come, and the
Trumpet shall sound, to raise up all, that are asleep in Jesus. But when once
it has been strained through the Grave, then it shall leave all its Corruption
behind it. And it shall be a weak and natural Body no longer. It is sown indeed
in Weakness, but it is raised in Power; it is sown in Corruption, but it is
raised in Incorruption; it is sown in Dishonor, but it is raised in Glory; it
is sown a Natural Body, but it is raised a Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.42. And
therefore it shall not need those Supports and Refreshments then, as now it
does. Then there will be no need of Meats and Drinks to maintain it. Meats are
now for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats; but God shall destroy both it, and
them, 1 Cor. 6.13. For the Body then shall be Hale, and Well, and Strong,
without them all. Phil. 3. Ult.
For He shall change our Vile Bodies, says the Apostle, and shall make them
like unto his Glorious Body. When our Savior himself says, Mat. 13.41.
That the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their
Father. So that though they shall have the same Body for Substance, yet not of
the same Constitution, or all its parts for the same Offices and Purposes. Our
Bodies then will be no more such Dead and Lumpish Things, as they are now; but
Active and Vigorous, even as Spirits themselves, and therefore without Fainting
and Weariness. Therefore all those Trades and Callings, which are here so
necessary to provide for their Support, or to secure and defend them from Cold
and Ill Weather, shall then be at an end. There we shall have a Building of
God, an House not made with Hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.
Eternal in the Heavens. It shall never decay, or grow leaky more. There will
be no Winds or Storms to annoy; no ill Airs or bad Weather; no dirty Roads, or
painful Traveling; no Darkness or Night. For there is the Throne of God, all
Lightsome, Pure, and Blissful, there shall be no Night, because no need of
Rest, and yet no Weariness in the perpetual Day; where the Servants of God,
though they are always at Work, yet are never tired, they shall be so Holy and
Strong, and their Work so Good, Rev. 48. Cap. 5.13.
that they rest not Day, nor Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come; but are singing Halleluja's to
God, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Secondly, Moreover, not only Bodily Labor, but the Labor of Study and
Mortification, for the improvement and refining of our Souls, shall then be
over likewise; it is a great deal of Pains and Labor we must be at here, for a
very small Improvement. We must read many Books; and much Reading is a
weariness to the Flesh, Eccl. 12.12. as it is in the Margin: It tireth the
Spirits, and impares the Health. And yet this we must endure in the getting of
Knowledge; we must go through many Studies, and spend many wearisome Nights and
Days; and be a long time, either in making Observations of our own, or
gathering from others, before we can come almost to any thing. And in this we
must sustain many times a great expense of Spirits: For the Intense Exercise of
our Minds will draw our Bodies into consent. And the Spirits being so much
taken up one way, there are hardly enough left many times, to discharge the
Vital Offices of Nature. So that the Blood becomes Impoverished, the Face Pale,
the Limbs Languid and Weak, and the Vessels obstructed within, that are the
very Channels of Life. And yet after all this, it is but a little Knowledge for
the most part, that we are able to attain unto, of any kind whatsoever. That,
which we get indeed, is very Pleasant, as little as it is. For Wisdom exceeds
Folly, as far as Light excels Darkness, Eccl. 2.13. Yet in much Wisdom is
much Grief too, and He that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow, Eccl.
1.18. And after all, a great deal of that Knowledge, which we spend so much of
our Time about, I doubt, is hardly one degree above Folly it self.

But in that State hereafter, there will be none of all this Toil for the
improvement of our Minds. For there is the Land of Vision, where we shall see
God, the chief Good, as He is, and shall with open Face behold his Glory. 1
Cor. 13.12.
Now we see but through a Glass darkly, says the Apostle, but then Face to
Face; now we know but in part, but then shall we know even as also we are
known. And if we shall have such a Vision or Sight of God himself, then we may
be sure, the Knowledge of no other Thing shall be hid from us, as far as it may
be of any use to us, for our Comfort and Happiness. For he that gives us the
greater, will not withhold from us the less. Then we may expect to see and
behold many Things, by an immediate Intuition, and to have a clear and plain
Introspection into their Natures and Properties. Or at least, the longest train
of Reasoning will be easy and quick, Principles will be open and plain, the
Impressions deep, the Connection between Things clear and apparent; so that the
Mind will be no more in Pain, or lose it self in long or tedious Deductions.
For the Powers of the Minds will be advanced and perfected, the several Objects
distinct and manifest; Idea's of Things will be present to us, or ready at a
Call; so that the turn of the Mind to its several Objects will be as easy, as
that of the Eye is now.

And thus it shall be for Grace and Virtue, and all the Moral Perfections of
the Soul. We shall be troubled with none of those Difficulties, that here we
meet with, in the acquirement thereof. Here we must Work, and Work hard, to
Work out our own Salvation, and must do it still with Fear and Trembling: We
must give all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, and to add to
what we have received. We must strive to enter in at the strait Gate, because
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads to Live Everlasting.
And there can be no striving without Pain: We must deny our Selves, and
mortify our Members, which are upon the Earth. And because we have not yet
attained, we must forget those Things that are behind, and reach forward to
those Things that are before. We must gird up the Loins of our Minds, and sweat
and bestir our selves with all our Might.

It must be so here, and it cannot be otherwise. Because our Knowledge is
little and imperfect; our Affections and Appetites strong to many Things, which
commonly obstruct the Divine Life. The Solicitations of the Flesh are
sometimes tumultuous and vehement. And we have contracted many Ill Habits,
which are like a second Nature, and are not easily deposed or laid aside again.
And the Ill Examples and Customs of the World, with the Insinuations and
Flatteries of some, and the Menaces and Discouragements which we meet with from
others, the Kindness of Carnal Friends, and the Threatenings and Fury of
Enemies, are all apt to have a great Power upon us. And here, be sure the Devil
will never leave his Trade of Tempting and Seducing to Sin, as long as he can
come at us. So that what from one Cause, and what from another, we are engaged
here in a continual Fight. So that if we look no farther than Men, it is a
wonder, that ever we should hold out. Nor indeed could we, 1 Pet. 1.5.
if we were not kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

But in that State there will be none of all this, and therefore no occasion
for all this Trouble and Pains. Because then we shall be freed from our Errors
and Mistakes, and Misprisions about Things. We shall be freed from Evil Habits,
and Evil Customs, from Inordinate Appetites and Corrupt Affections. For then we
shall be like God. For beholding God Face to Face, we shall be changed into the
same Image in a very Glorious manner. Beloved, says the Apostle, now we are
the Sons of God, but it does not appear, what we shall be; but this we know,
when He shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as He is, 1
Jo. 3.2. And, says St. Paul, Our Life is now hid with Christ in God; and when
Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall we appear also with him in
Glory, Col. 3.3. Then we shall have no Flesh to solicit us to Evil any more;
because it shall be changed, and be no more as it is. And Evil Men and Seducers
shall be gone; so that there shall be no more Discouragements or Evil Examples
from them. And the Devil shall be cast out, so that He shall Tempt no more. And
we shall continually live in the presence of God and Christ, and under their
immediate Influences; for the Tabernacle of God shall be with Men, and they are
to be where He is; and in the Blessed Company of Angels and Saints, who are all
Pure and Holy; so that then the Servants of God shall have no more trouble,
either to Purify their Souls, or to keep them Pure.

Thirdly, And it will be a very great Addition to all, That then there shall be
no more Labor, or Care, or Solicitude for others neither; as here there often
times must be. Because all shall be then in the same most perfect and happy
State. Parents shall be at Care for their Children no more. The Poor shall
undergo no more hard Labor, as here they do, to provide for their Families;
they shall no more go Cold, or fare Hard, for want of better Provisions. For
there shall be no Poor in Heaven; but all, Kings and Princes, sitting upon
their Thrones of Glory. For it is their Fathers good Pleasure to give them a
Kingdom. There will be no more need of those Things, which now we are forced to
take such Care about, in this Imperfect and Animal State. And there will be no
Enemies to Invade, or Extort from us what we have. Nor shall we need to be at
any Concern to Guard our selves against the Violence or Malice of those, that
would despoil or ravish away our Comforts from us. For none of them all shall
come there.

Then Private and Public Labors shall be all over. There shall be no more
Labor to preserve, or purge the Church from any of those Things, that now do
so much annoy it. For then there will be no Errors or Heresies to Corrupt it;
no Schisms or Factions to divide it; no Animosities or Quarrels,
Heart-Burnings, or Contentions to disturb its Peace. For then Christ shall
present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such Thing, Ephesians. 5.27.

And then there shall be as little Labor, to preserve the Peace or Quiet of
Government, from Tyranny or Invasion, from Men of Fraud and Violence, of
furious Passions and unbridled Lusts. Because there shall be no such there. And
all shall be under the most perfect and immediate Rule and Government of God
himself, who shall be with them, and dwell among them. And all shall perfectly
Love their Governor, and his Government; and shall Love one another, with a
Pure Heart fervently. Oh Blessed State, and Blessed Condition, when all this
Trouble of every Kind shall be at an end! Yet so it shall be then.

Secondly, Their Works do follow them. That is, the Reward of their Works; for
so it must needs be understood. Some indeed understand it of the good Effects
of all the Sufferings of Confessors and Martyrs in this Life, in the Fall of
the Man of Sin, and bringing down the present Kingdom of Darkness. But this
being here Assigned as part of their Blessedness, it seems to me that it must
signify a Reward to themselves; and can mean no less, than God's Approbation
of what they have done in his Service, and for his Name, and the Reward that He
gives them thereupon.

It is indeed a Reward of Grace, and it is so Transcendant, and surpassing all
that they have done and suffered; that, as the Apostle says, Romans 8.18.
The Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory, that shall be revealed in them. And these light Afflictions, which are
but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.
work for them a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, as was also
observed before. However, a Reward it is, and that which belongs, not only to
those that in the strictest Sense Die in, or for the Lord; but also to all the
Faithful Servants of Christ, who may be truly said likewise to Depart hence in
the Lord, in his Faith and Service, in Relation to him, and Union with him, as
their Lord and Head. So that Verily Men shall say, Ps. 58.11.
there is a Reward of the Righteous. And therefore, say to the Righteous, Is.
3.11.
it shall be well with him; for they shall Eat the Fruit of their Doings. For
God shall reward every Man according to his Works. Mat. 16.27.
But here is the Place of Work, and then hereafter of Reward. When whatever any
Man has done heartily, as to the Lord; He shall receive for it the Reward of
the Inheritance, Col. 3.24. So that in this World there is Striving, and
Fighting, and Working, and then is the time of Recompense for all their Work
and Labor of Love, which they shall find shall not be in vain in the Lord. 1
Cor. 15. Ult.
And this shall be so great, that it is a time of Coronation and Glory to them,
when it shall appear, what shall be done to the Men whom God will Honor. 1
Pet. 5.4.
For they shall receive a Crown of Glory, which fades not away. For, be thou
faithful unto Death, says our Savior, and I will give thee a Crown of Life,
Rev. 2.10. Then they come to receive their Robes, and to have Palms of Triumph
in their Hands, and to be set upon Thrones of Glory. For, to him that
overcomes, says He, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne, Rev. 3.21. And this
shall be the Portion of all the Faithlul Servants of God. For, God will render
to every Man, says the Apostle, according to his Deeds; to them, who by
patient continuance in well Doing, seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, He
will give Eternal Life, Romans 2.6.

This indeed is all of Grace; but therefore, because it is of Grace, it shall
be so much the greater. For if it were to be given in proportion to our Merit,
then it could be but little; because our Merit is but little, or rather,
properly speaking, none at all. But now being to be of Grace, it will therefore
be exceeding great; to set forth the Glory and Love of God, who as a great
King, will give like himself; and to set forth the Price of our Redemer's
Merits, and to show how high and valuable they are.

This is most certain for One Thing, that there will be a most intimate and
transporting Manifestation of the Ever-blessed God himself to his Beloved
People. Then they shall not only see his Back Parts, as Moses did, that is,
some little and low degree of Splendour and Beauty, but then they shall see him
with open Face, in his highest Luster, and most inconceivable Glory. Then they
shall see Christ in all his Glory, and they shall be with him. Then is the time
of the great Supper of the Lamb, when He will manifest and display himself in
all his Loveliness and Beauty to all about him. Here is the place of Faith and
Hope; but there is the place of Vision and Fruition. Here we sip a little by
the way; as in a Land of Drought; but we are not yet come to the Rivers of
Pleasure; Ps. 16.11.
they are at God's Right Hand, in whose Presence is fullness of Joy; so that
there the Saints and Servants of God shall never Hunger or Thirst more. Here we
have the Tastes and first Fruits of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.14.
as a Pledge and Earnest in the way; but there is the full Enjoyment of the
Purchased Possession. We cannot expect here so much in the way, as when we come
to our Father's House. Here we are but at the Footstool; it cannot be with us
now, as when we come to the Throne of God.

Yea, such is our State here, That we must be tried, and Disciplined, and
Corrected sometimes; there is a Necessity sometimes for it. And therefore if
need be, for a Season, 1 Pet. 1.6.
we are in Heaviness, through manifold Temptations. We are Sinners, and live
among Sinners, and therefore sometimes we must expect Sinners fare. Our
Corruptions must be melted down in the Furnace of Affliction, when there is no
other way to purge us from them. And our Father must sometimes Frown upon us,
and Chastise us, because the Best of us all are sometimes apt to be wandering
and neglectful of our Duty. Before I was Afflicted, the Psalmist observes, I
went astray; but now have I learned thy Ways. Afflictions tend to File and
Polish us, to clear us of the Rust and Rubbish that is apt to cleave unto us.
Heb. 12.10.
God Chastens us therefore for our Profit, that we might be Partakers of this
Holiness. For though no Chastning for the present seems to be Joyous, but
Grievous; nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness to them, that are Exercised thereby.

But then hereafter there will be no occasion for any of this Discipline any
more; because of that perfect Transformation into the Image and Likeness of
God, which then his People shall have. For his Servants shall serve him, and
they shall see his Face, Rev. 22.3. So that there will be the fullness of Light
and Love; and God shall never withdraw from them the Light of his Countenance
any more.

I have not time to tell you, as much as I might, what all the Reward will be.
And besides, I have prevented my self in part already, in what I have said
before. Only in short, it will be A State of all Perfection. And that is
enough. For there is the General Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, and
the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, Heb. 12.23. So then, That which is
Perfect shall come, and that which is in part, shall be done away, 1 Cor.
13.10. Where the Apostle does certainly mean a Perfection of Knowledge and
Grace, of that Divine Grace of Charity, which He elsewhere tells us, is the
Fulfilling of the Law. And that must needs imply an Enlargement and Perfection
of our Faculties, and a Cure of all their Weakness and Infirmities. For full
and perfect Habits of Light and Good in the Mind and Heart, can never subsist
without a full Extention and Purification thereof. And then from thence we may
certainly infer, that there shall be a perfect Communication of Good, to answer
to the fullness of their Enlargement. Or else the Enlargement of our Faculties
would rather be a Torment and Vexation, than a Satisfaction, if they have not
Objects proper to suit them. And from all this there must needs flow an entire
and unspeakable Satisfaction, a fullness of Delight and Pleasure running over in
the Soul. To which this will be a wonderful Addition, the consideration of the
everlasting Duration and Continuance of all this Blessedness. That it shall for
ever continue without Interruption, Intermission or Decay. For so it shall be,
1 These. 4.
for as much as we shall for ever be with the Lord, who will for ever Delight
in his People, ever take Care of them, and be a Guard to them, that no Evil
shall come near them. Oh Blessed Day, and Blessed State, when all this Good
shall be imparted to them! But when will all this be?

Thirdly, I now proceed therefore to the Third Thing, observable in the Words,
which is the time of the beginning, or the Commencement of this Happiness;
which shall be Henceforth, i. e. from the very Day or time of their Death, or
Departure out of this World. Not that they shall be presently instated in all
that full Possession of Good which I have mentioned; which cannot be, whilst
their Bodies remain still in the Grave, or before the Resurrection. Therefore
the full Possession or Perfection of Happiness, is not to be expected till the
Coming of Our Lord; as the Scripture generally sets it forth to us. Col. 3.4.
But when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall we appear with him
in Glory. But yet this Happiness is to begin on the Day of the Saints
Dissolution; Henceforth, from the very time of their Death. They shall Rest
from all their Labors presently, and their Reward does then begin: I know
there are other Senses given of this Expression; but I can see nothing but
this, that answers the Design of comforting the Afflicted Servants of God in
their present Sufferings, which this Text is intended for. There is nothing but
this Possession of the Reward at Death, can denominate them Blessed from
Henceforth.

If they might Glorify God in this World, though it were in Suffering, yet they
would rather desire to do so, than be gone hence, unless they may come to the
present Enjoyment of their Happiness. How are they Blessed from Henceforth, in
having the Reward of their Works, if there be no such Reward yet to be enjoyed?
If the Soul were to sleep in the Grave in a lumpish and unactive State, where
then would be their Blessedness? It were better to continue longer here, in
performance of their Master's Work, and in the Service of their Lord, as long
as God shall be pleased to uphold them, and enable them to hold out in it, though
it were in the midst of Labor and Suffering. And they would choose to do so,
because hereby they would further their Reward hereafter; when God shall Reward
Men, not only according to the Nature, but also according to the Measure and
Degree of their Labor and Sufferings: All the Troubles and Labors of this
Life therefore would rather be endured a great deal, than One would choose to be
put into an insensible and unactive State, where there is neither Work, nor
Enjoyment; no One, that has any thing of Christian Zeal and Magnanimity would
be glad to be removed hence, so long as God is pleased to give him Strength and
Patience to hold out, unless He might immediately pass to the Enjoyment of that
Happiness, which is the End of all his present Seeking, and Striving, and
Laboring.

It was this that put St. Paul into such a Strait, that he knew not which to
choose, Phil. 1.21. For to me to Live is Christ, says he, He being heartily
devoted to him, and being glad to be employed in his Service; but then to Die
was present Gain. For that He must mean, or else it had been better, and more
Gain to live still. For if I Live in the Flesh, this is the Fruit of my Labor,
to be serviceable to Christ in the Conversion of more to him; Yet what I shall
choose, I know not. Why? Would not the Apostle choose to serve Christ in the Work
of the Gospel, rather than cease to be? But I am in a Strait betwixt two,
having a Desire to deport, and to launch out from this Body and this World; and
to be with Christ, which is far better. That was the Reason why He was willing
to be gone from the Body, because then he was to be with Christ; and that would
be far better for him. For in this the Apostle is very Positive and Peremptory,
2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, says he, if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle, the
Body, were dissolved, we have a better Dwelling for our Spirit prepared, a
Building of God, an Habitation in the Heavenly Glory, an House not made with
Hands, of Men's or Mortal Facture or Procreation, Eternal and undecaying there.
And in this therefore we Groan earnestly, and desire to be clothed upon with
that our House, which is from Heaven. Knowing, says he, Ver. 6. that whilst we
are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; therefore are willing
rather, to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. So that it
seems the Souls of Good Men at Death are to leave the Body, and then be absent
from it; and then they are forthwith to be present with Christ. So 2 Timothy 4.7.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day. And what Day was that? But the Day
of his Departure, of which he speaks, Ver. 6. and says was then ready at Hand.
And that we may not think, that this was only a Privilege belonging to him, or
to such Excellent Persons, as he was, He adds, and not to me only, but also to
all them, that Love his appearing. So that we see, that this is a Blessing,
that all the Faithful Servants and Followers of Christ shall partake of, as
well as the Blessed Apostle himself.

Now the Enjoyment of this Happiness in the Regions above, I do not only in
Charity hope, as I would of every ordinary Good Christian; but do most firmly
believe, is the State and Condition of this Reverend and Good Man, whose
Relics we have now before us, and upon the occasion of the Interment of which
we are here met. Of whom therefore I cannot but say something, though not near so
much, as his Character, I believe, does deserve; my Acquaintance with him
having been so long Interrupted, as for some Years.

He seemed to me to be an Aged Person, when I first knew him; but by Temperance
and Wise Conduct, and the Blessing of God thereupon, and by the Divine
Protection warding off Evil Harms and Accidents from him, which might either
have cut him off, or broken his Health much sooner, how has his Life been
prolonged to almost half the common Age of Man since that time? It being now
toward Thirty Years ago since I was first acquainted with him.

That which I had always observed in him, was a great Kindness and Benignity of
Disposition, joined with an Undissembled Integrity and Uprightness; whereby I
dare say, he wished Well to all Men, and bore a Loving Respect in his Carriage
to all, and rejoiced in all Men's Welfare and Happiness; and was glad, when He
could himself any ways promote it* This, I doubt not, he had learned from his
Great Lord and Master, who was kind unto all, and who by his Pattern and
Precepts had made Universal Love the great Character of his Religion. And by
this means, one would think, He could not have many Enemies. For who could find
in their Hearts to be Enemies to one, in whom there was resplendent so much
Goodness? And this Goodness was set off by a profound Humility, and low
Condescension and Respect to the Meanest the Lowest, the Least. By this He was
apt to prefer others before himself, and to set a Value upon the Parts and
Performances of some Young Persons above his own Gray headed Knowledge and
Experience. By this Kindness and Humility, his Self-distrust and
Self-abasement, He was preserved from the Fiery and Furious Zeal, which is the
Blemish of some of all Parties, that differ in some Circumstantials of Religion
and Worship. He could not imagine, why a Difference in some Circumstantials,
should make Men Hate and Curse one another, among whom there was a good Accord
in the Main and Substantial Points of Christian Doctrine. Therefore He could
bear a Kind and Friendly Respect to other Good Men of other Persuasions besides
his own, as He would hope for the like from them.

He had a great Calmness in his own Temper, but He was Forward and Fervent in
Spirit, in the Service of his God; as appeared in his Devotions in a Private,
but much Honored Family, where I have heard him. And his long and continued
Labor in the Service of God, in that Way wherein He thought He might Glorify
God, even to extreme Old Age, is a great Instance of his Delight therein, of
his Pious Zeal for the promoting of Religion, and of his Earnest Desire of the
Eternal Welfare of Men. He always appeared to me to be one of Eminent Piety, of
Exact Walking, of an Healing Spirit, and to be full of Love to God, and Good
Men of different Denominations. He was not for a Wrangling or Disputative
Divinity, which tends to Gender Strife; but for Plain, Practical Godliness in
its Life and Power, which has always indeed most Sweetness in it, and so will
especially appear to have at the last.

His Afflictions, I hear, in many Respects, have been many, but that his Faith
and Patience also have been as Eminent. Wherein He deserves, as in many other
Things, your Pious Imitation. In a Word, He Lived long in the Exercise of Piety
toward God, and of Good Will to Men; and how He Died, you know.

I could gladly have enlarged much more upon his Character; but these few
Things, I could not but mention, being always bound to have his Memory in
Honor. For I must ever acknowledge, I have had him of Old in many Respects my
Friend, in some Respects as my Father and Patron, and in some others a Guide
and Director, when I first entered my self upon this Sacred Function. This
Acknowledgment I cannot but take this Opportunity to express; nor do I know any
just Reflections, that any can make upon it.

I shall now only make an Inference or two from what I have said on the
foregoing Subject, and then Conclude.

First, To Comfort, and Prepare Good Men for the Expectation of their Death,
that they may not be Frighted at the Approach of it, as such a Dreadful Thing;
it being most certain, that when they remove out of this Tabernacle, they enter
into an Estate of present Bliss in the presence of their Lord.

If the Soul indeed were to lie in a stupid Lethargy in the Grave, and have no
more Sense or Reflection, or Enjoyment after the time of Dissolution, they
should desire to continue here as long as they can, that they may bring more
Honor to God in the World, and so might further their Reward hereafter
thereby. And they might have just Cause to take Death for their Enemy,
whenever it comes, that should deprive them of so great Advantages here, and
bring them none in the room. But there is no fear of all this. The Soul is an
Active Spark, the Breath of the Almighty; which, whilst it is in the Body, by
the Laws of Union that were fixed in the Original Creation by the great
Creator, must sympathize with it. But when the Body is no longer a tolerable
Habitation for it, it will then Dislodge, and take its Flight, and the Holy
Angels wait to carry it aloft, through all the Airy Armies of invisible Fiends,
to place it above, out of the reach of all their Malice. For the Soul is a
Thinking Substance, which has no Relation to Matter; but is of another Nature
from it, and has quite other Properties in its Idea. And being Immaterial, it
is not subject to Putrefaction or Dissolution of Parts, because it has no
Parts, and therefore none to be dissolved, but must in its own Nature Subsist
and Live still. But whatever the Philosophy of the Soul may be, we have full
assurance from Divine Revelation of its continued Life, and greater Perfection
and Enjoyment after Death than before. Mat. 10.28.
Our Savior told his Disciples, That Men, though they might kill the Body, yet
were not able to kill the Soul, and therefore bid them not be afraid of them.

Romans 8.
The Body indeed must Die, because of Sin; but the Spirit, the better part, is
Life, because of Righteousness. So that Good Men have no Cause to be mightily
Affrighted at the Approach of Death. For though it be the King of Terrors to
outward appearance, yet they may look upon it, as a Routed or Conquered Enemy,
as a Serpent, that has lost its Sting and Strength, which howsoever it may
Hiss, and show its Rage and Fury, yet cannot hurt. So that Good Men may Triumph
over it, and over all Things else besides; because neither Death, Romans 8.38.
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor
Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to
separate them from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But in
and over all these Things, they are more than Conquerors, through him that
Loved them. Death is now rather a Friend to them, the Messenger of the great
King, to invite them to his Supper, which he has prepared for them.

The same Comfort there is at the Departure of Others, Friends and Relations,
that Die in the Lord. For now they are past from all their Labors and
Troubles, from all their Fears and Dangers, their Pains and Sufferings
whatsoever, and are gone but to take Possession of the Promised Crown. It is a
Loss to us indeed, that they are gone; and Self-Love makes us to Mourn and
Complain at it. But what do They lose, in leaving us, or the World; and the
little Accommodations of this Life, that are now entered upon the Possession of
the Inheritance. Though we lose by them, because they are gone, yet we ought not
sure to Grudge at their Happiness.

Secondly, To Exhort all to the Faith and Service of Christ our Lord, that they
may also Die in him, and so be Blessed. For we must certainly Live to him now,
if we will Die in him, or be United to him at the last. We must have Union with
him in Life, as our Lord and Head, if we think to have Union with him, and
Relation to him at Death, as our Everlasting Savior. We can by no means expect
to Live with God hereafter, if we will not Live to his Honor here. We can
never expect, that He will receive us into his Embraces at last, if we continue
now in an Hatred of him, and Enmity against him. Neither the Work, nor
Enjoyments of Heaven, can be suitable to an Unholy Soul, that is not
Transformed into the Divine Likeness. For what should such an One do with God,
or among the Saints above, that has nothing at all of a Divine or Saint-like
Nature? But if we are now made like God, and Live to him, He will be sure then
to take Care of his Own. For the Foundation, or Covenant of God, stands sure,
2 Timothy 2.19.
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. And, let every One that
names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity.

Let all Wicked Men see therefore the absolute Necessity, and the great
Advantages of Religion. They are apt now to have hard Thoughts of it, and to
Censure it sore for a very Sour and Melancholy Thing; though that is a very
great Mistake and Misprision; but how will it be at last? Or what will their
Thoughts be of it hereafter? Then they will find, that this had been the only
way to Happiness and Bliss, whatever they think of it now. And should not Wise
Men have Futurity in Account, as well as the present Time? Should they look
only at their present Pleasures and Advantages, and neglect the future, which
are infinitely greater? Or do they think to Die the Death of the Righteous, and
yet will not Live his Life? This cannot be.

But you must begin now, and should not put off the Study of Piety and
Holiness, till hereafter neither. You Young Ones must not think to Live to the
Age that this Holy Man of God has done. This is a rare and peculiar Favor,
which very few can expect. You may be called and summoned away before you are
aware. However, can you ever begin to be Wise too soon, or Blessed too soon?
For this is certain, that you are never Wise, or Blessed, but in the way of
Religion. And yet how apt are the most to put this off still, and to cry, it is
too soon yet, it is too soon yet. Yet a little more Sleep, and a little more
Slumber, and a little more folding of the Hands to Sleep. A little more of the
Pleasures and Vanities of Sin; a little more unjust Gain, and then we will take
up, and Repent; and Return. And yet when the Time is come, that they have set,
they are as backward to it as before, or worse. Their Hearts are more Hardened,
and they are farther off from Repentance and Religion, than they were some
Years ago. And will you always be thus deceived?

You that continue in Sin, and the Impenitency of your Hearts, what do you
think to do at last? Where will you appear? Do you expect that Christ should
take you to himself, Dying in your Rebellion against him, or that He should
save you in your Sins? How unreasonable is this?

Repent, Oh Sinners! And Return in Time. And let those who have, begun Well,
hold on still, left they lose their Reward. The Day of our Redemption draws
near. Therefore let us cast off the Works of Darkness; let us keep down Sin,
which Christ came to destroy. Let us Renounce our own Lusts and Wills, and Live
as his Covenant Servants; and then Blessed shall we be.

FINIS.

