A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held for the County-Palatine of CHESTER The
11th. day of April, 1699.

By JOHN OLIVER, M. A. and Vicar of Audlem, the County of Chester.

LONDON: Printed for, and to be sold by Amy Stone, Bookseller Namptwich. 1609.

To the Right Worshipful THOMAS DELVES of Eardshaw, Esquire; HIGH SHERIFF Of
the County of CHESTER.
SIR,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I have made Public a plain Discourse, upon a
common Subject, which had the good Fortune to meet with some favor able
Entertainment from the Pulpit. I wish I could have made you a better Present,
to testify the particular Obligations I have to your self, and your worthy
Family: However, such as it is, I humbly offer it in acknowledgment of all past
Favors.

That God Almighty would bless you with a numerous Offspring, such as may
derive your Name, and especially the Noble Qualities of your House, to many
succeeding Generations; is the Constant Prayer of

Sir, Your most humble, and most obliged Servant, JOHN OLIVER.

PROVE. X. 9 He that walks uprightly, walks surely.
IN this short Sentence, Solomon commends to our Practice a Noble and an
Excellent Rule for the Government of our Lives; that of Integrity, or Upright
Walking; a Rule of absolute necessity, and general use through all the parts of
our Conversation; as that which will direct us in every Action we undertake,
conduct us through all the Relations we are engaged in, and enable us to steer
our Course aright, through that great variety of Events and Contingencies that
fall out in the world. And the Observation hereof, that wise Prince enforces,
from an Argument that seldom fails of gaining upon our Consent, viz. the mighty
Advantages that will attend this Method: he assures us, that by a steady
Perseverance in our Duty, in spite of all Temptations to the contrary, we
shall render our lives easy and comfortable, secure all our most valuable
Concerns, and pass our whole time in a happy Calm and Tranquillity; whilst the
Politicians of the World, those who think to establish their Repose and their
Fortune by Maxims of a different Nature, by evil Arts and unlawful Practices,
by the crooked ways of Subtilty and Intrigue, by mean Flatteries and unworthy
Compliances, will find themselves at last fatally disappointed of their aims,
and be forced to sit down under all the Melancholic Resentments of their own
ill Conduct: for so it follows in the Close of this Verse; But he that
perverteth his ways shall be known.

In my Discourse upon these Words, I shall endeavor these Two Things.

First, To give some account of the Duty in my Text; and that by Representing
to you the Character of the Just and Upright Man: He that walks uprightly.
Secondly, To show you the Advantage of this Principle.
of Mind, as is not to be shaken on the one hand by the Charms and Allurements
of the most glorious Fortune, nor on the other with the threatening Prospect of
the worst Calamities: the consideration of what he shall gain by departing from
his Rule, or what he shall lose by adhering to it, makes no Impression upon
him, but he is unalterably fixed and obstinate to his Principle, and takes it
for the Companion of his whole Life, let the Consequence of it be what it will:
And this Rule is a guide to him in every Action, in all his Relations, and
amidst the manifold Changes and Accidents of his Life.

and Conscience require of him, that he readily engages in, and never troubles
his thoughts about the Event; since that is not in his Power as his Actions
are: and therefore as he thinks himself obliged to look after the one, he knows
he ought to leave the other where it belongs, to the Discretion of an All-wise
Providence. And as he is thus concerned for the Matter of his Actions, he is no
less solicitous about the Intention; and takes care that his Heart be Upright
in that Point also. He will not lose the Glory, nor the Reward of Well-doing,
by suffering any ill Designs or unworthy Ends to mix in the performance, and
therefore whatever he does, proceeds upon good Grounds, and just Motives: His
Prayers are never offered up without a hearty Zeal and a pure Devotion, his
Alms are always the result of a real Tenderness and Compassion, and every Fast
he undertakes is a Religious Audit, a season of strict Reckoning and Account,
in order to perfect his Repentance, and even Matters betwixt God and his own
Soul: much less can he satisfy himself with Forms and Appearances of Virtue
without the Thing; he is not willing to seem a better Man than he is, and is so
far removed from all degrees of Vanity and Affectation, that he is scarce
content to be thought so good. Hypocrisy and Intrigue, the leading Principles
of too great a part of Mankind, have no share in his Management, and therefore
his Face is ever the true Index of his Mind; his Thoughts and Expressions are
not at War with each other, and all his Vows and Promises, his Oaths and
Protestations are so many sacred and inviolable Ties upon his Honor and his
Conscience. In a word, his whole Conversation has an Openness and Freedom in
it, like that of the Air he breaths in, and is as clear as the Light at
Noonday, without the least Artifice of Disguise or Reserve.

Whatsoever Relations he is engaged in, this same Principle bears him constant
Company; if Providence have raised him above the common level of Men, and
entrusted him with the Administration of Public Justice, the Law is his Rule,
and Justice is his End; and the great Example he copies from in all his
Proceedings, is that Sovereign Justice above, from which he derives his Power,
and to which the last Account must be given of its Execution: like that he
renders to all under his Charge according to their Doings, without the least
Partiality or Respect of Persons; he weighs the Merits of the Cause without
throwing in the Circumstances of the Party to unsettle the Balance, so that
neither the Weight of Greatness presses down the Scale, nor the Lightness of
Poverty kicks it up; but every Action receives such a Sentence as the Law has
provided, and meets with a Reward or a Punishment suitable to its own Merit. If
the Cure of Souls become his Province, the Importance of his Charge, and the
Consideration of a vast Eternity in Happiness or Torments unspeakable, the
infallible Recompense of Virtue and Vice, inspire all his Ministerial
Applications with an extraordinary Vigor, and set him to the Discharge of every
Branch of the sacred Office with all imaginable Diligence; and because the
World is not easily reconciled to Principles that contradict the natural Lusts
and Passions of Men, and because most Men are willing to excuse themselves by
every Pretense, from what they are loath to practice, he endeavors to convince
his People both of the Truth of his Doctrine, and Practicableness of Religion,
by his own Example, and teaches others the Value they ought to set upon their
precious and immortal Souls, by the particular Care he has of his own. If
Subjection be his Lot, he is very well satisfied with his Station, as knowing
how much easier it is to obey than to govern, to receive than to give Laws; he
is very sensible of the great Burden that Authority lies under, how vast a Load
of Care and Business devolves upon him who has the Charge of a Multitude, and
stands obliged to provide for the Rights and Interests of every particular
Member of it, and therefore he thinks it a Shame to add more Weight; by a
perverse and refractory Carriage, but resolves to contribute all he can to the
ease of his Superiors, by a cheerful Obedience to their Commands, and to the
Maintenance and Support of them also by as cheerful a Liberality.

brought so low as to stoop to any base unlawful Means for the Recovery of his
Fortune, nor can he ever think it reasonable to redeem his Interest at the
Price of his Conscience; much less does he harbor any murmuring Thoughts of
that Supreme Power to whom belongs the Disposal of humane Affairs by
unquestionable Right: and who can at pleasure shift the Scene, and make the
greatest Prince change Circumstances with the meanest Slave: in his lowest
Declension he discovers a Brightness equal to that of his greatest Height, and
lets all Men see, that his Virtue is not like Quicksilver in a Glass, subject
to all the Alterations of the Weather, but is the fixed Persuasion of his Mind,
and the settled Choice and Resolution of his Soul.

This is the Upright Man, view him all over and you will find him exactly of a
piece; Justice and Righteousness are the ruling Qualities of his Conversation,
Interest, and Design, and Subtilty have no place in him, and whatsoever
Judgment the World makes of him, he is abundantly satisfied with a sense of
Well-doing, and finds it at last the best Policy too.

Which brings me to the

Second thing: The Advantage of this great Principle: And that will appear upon
many Accounts.

I. With Respect to God. II. To the World. III. To a Man's own Conscience. IV.
To the Judgment of the great Day.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm, 11, 37, 18.
his countenance does behold the upright. The Lord knows the days of the
upright, and their inheritance shall be for ever. The upright shall dwell in
the land, Prove. 2.21.22.
and the perfect shall remain in it; but the wicked shall be cut off from the
earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it. Now what are all these,
but so many express Declarations of Heaven to assure Good Men of Protection and
Assistance in their ways; whilst the Wicked are for saken of God, and left to
reap the fruit of their own Evil Counsels. And indeed it must needs be so, for
sure they that commit themselves, and all their Affairs to an Almighty Power
and Wisdom, and rest wholly upon that in the Discharge of their Duty; that are
not to be frightened from it by any Terrors or Sufferings on the one hand, nor
seduced out of it by the offers of any Worldly Interest and Advantage on the
other; they that dare be Honest, and trust God with the Event, these sure have
a better Title to his Promises, and a greater Interest in his Care than other
Men, and whatsoever Calamities shall happen in the World, they may reasonably
hope for his Support and Assistance: Truth, and Righteousness, and Sincerity
are Qualities that cannot fail of endearing us to God as well as Man, these are
some of the brightest Resemblances of his own Divinity, and cannot choose but
engage his Affection in what part soever of his Workmanship they are found; an
humble Resignation of our selves and all our Concerns to him, without the least
Dependence on our own Strength or Policy, this will enter us into his immediate
and particular Care, and prove the nearest and most infallible Way to our
Happiness and Security: for what should make him afraid, that has Omnipotence
for his Guard, or what can he want that lives under the Provision of infinite
Goodness? Such as these in the Royal Prophets Expression, need not fear the
terrors by night, Ps. 91.5, 6,
nor the arrow that flies by day, nor the pestilence that walks in darkness,
nor the destruction that wastes at noonday: a thousand shall fall on one
hand, and ten thousand on the other, but it shall not come nigh them; nay tho
the World should fly asunder, and fall into its final Confusion, they need not
start at its Dissolution; their own Integrity and Heavens Care is their Shield
and Buckler, and let what will happen, it shall certainly turn to their
Account. But can the Wicked and the Fraudulent, the Subtle and the Projecting
Person promise the like Security? I doubt not such as resolve to establish
their Fortunes by any Means, that contrive to make themselves great and
considerable at any Price; that lay the Scene of their own Advancement by the
Rules of Worldly Policy, and never trouble their Heads with Notions of Right or
Wrong, of Heaven or Hell; these sure can form no Title to the Divine Promise,
nor challenge any Interest in the Divine Care; they have nothing to trust to
but themselves, and are commonly the most fatally mistaken in their own
Projects: such men do in Effect renounce the Protection of the Almighty, and
defy his Providence; and consequently it is but Just with God to lay aside all
care of 'em, to turn their Councils into Folly, and to bring all their Glorious
Contrivances to nothing.

Paul tells us, ^om. 13.3, 4.
that Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil; that is the great
End and Design of their Institution, and where they Act contrary, they go
beyond their Commission, and violate the Trust reposed in 'em; and then adds,
Will thou not be afraid of the powers, do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same; for he is the minister of God to thee for good: But if
thou do that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain: ^.
Tim. 1.9.
and elsewhere he assures us, that the law is not made for the righteous, but
for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly* and for sinners, for unholy
and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for
men-slayers, and the like: where Men are so hardy as to break through all the
Bounds the Laws of God and Man have prescribed; where they have the Impudence
to attempt the Rights of Majesty, and will venture to stamp their Sovereign's
Image upon their own base Metal, where they are not satisfied with their Legal
Properties, but will be invading those of their Neighbors: when they are not
content to refer their private Injuries to the Decision of the Civil
Magistrate, but will be Judges in their own Cause, and hang and draw by their
own Sentence: It cannot be expected, but that the Justice of a Nation will be
roused by such bold and desperate Impieties, and be obliged in Honor to itself,
and for the Preservation of public Peace, to leave the Offenders to the utmost
Severities of the Laws: Without some Examples in these Cases, Government would
naturally dissolve, and all its Bonds fly asunder, and Mankind must return to
that Condition which some have fancied to be its Primitive State, a Company of
Bears and Wolves worrying and devouring one another: But good Men run no
Hazards under a Government sensible of its Honor, and exact in its
Administrations; their Lives, you Fortunes, their Liberties are all at repose,
and whosoever attempts any of these, does it at his Peril: such Men are as
secure in their several Interests as the Strength of a Nation can render them,
and the same Force that maintains the whole Body in Peace and Order, descends
to the Preservation of every particular Member of it; and so long as they keep
close to their Rule, and persist in exact Obedience to the Laws, they have no
reason to suspect either the Anger of their Superiors, or the Violence of their
Fellow Subjects. In general, to the Just and Upright, Laws are a constant Guard
and Protection, and they turn the edge only upon Evildoers, whose Subtilty may
perchance evade their Force a while, but it seldom secures them long, and when
once discovered, does certainly give them up a Sacrifice to revengeful Justice.

will speak Peace to them, bear up their drooping Spirits, and give them
Courage and Assurance under their greatest Pressures: Let the Weather be as bad
as it can be abroad, let the Storm rage never so horribly, Good Men have a safe
Harbor in their own breasts, all is quiet and calm within, their Minds are
perfectly at ease, undisturbed by the Disorders of Guilty Thoughts, or the
gusts of Tempestuous Passions: A good Conscience is a Blessing of more value
than all the other Enjoyments of Life it is this that gives Life and Being to
all other Satisfactions, and without this they lose their very Essence, and
convert into a Load and an Oppression; like Health to the Body, it keeps a Man
easy under the meanest Circumstances, and without it he never can be so in the
greatest Affluence. And it is this Blessing of Life only that is not liable to
any outward Accidents, no Change or Revolution of Affairs, no Caprichio 's of
Fortune, no Malice of Enemies can make the least Impression upon it; it is no
more to be forced than our Wills and our Choice, as inseparable from Virtue, as
Light and Heat from the Body of the Sun; and so long as the Spring that feeds
it be well maintained, so long as Men persist in a steady Resolution of living
well, these Streams of Pleasures can never be cut off, or dried up. But the
Wicked cannot pretend to this Advantage; in the height of their Prosperity
Guilt, and Fear, and Anxiety of Mind will make the best Ornaments of Life sit
uneasily about them, and Happiness is vainly sought in things without, whilst
the Soul and Conscience are disordered within; and in their lowest ebb these
Men of all others are the most Miserable. When the Arrows of the Almighty are
abroad in the Earth, and he visits for the Iniquity of a People; when he lays
his hand on Evildoers, and presses them sore, what a Condition are they in who
have no Retreat to fly to, nothing in all the World to take refuge under? When
there is a raging Storm without, and a violent Tempest within; when the
Almighty becomes their Enemy, and their own Conscience refuses to be their
Friend, but adds to their Miseries by secret Rebukes, and an invisible Sting;
when the Guilt of all their past Impieties displays itself before their
Thoughts in blackest Colors, and summoneth up their Fears of approaching
Vengeance, this is enough to set them at their Wits ends, and make them
Wretched to the last Degree. ^^ov. 18.14.
The spirit of a man will sustain his Infirmity, says the Wise Man, but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? When that which should relieve a Man in Extremity
proves itself the greatest Burden, that Burden must be intolerable.

Lastly, To pass on to the last and greatest Advantage, That which waits for
Righteous and Good Men in the Recompense of the great Day. And here give me
leave in a few Words to entertain your Thoughts with part of the Proceedings of
that solemn Assize; The Time is long since fixed in the unalterable Decrees of
Heaven, and every Day sets us nearer to it, and when it does come, we shall all
have a very great and concerning share in it. That Day will no sooner appear,
but it will open to our View the most astonishing Prospect, the Glory and
Majesty of the great Judge, the vast and numerous Assembly that will stand
before him, the Troops of Good and Evil Angels in their different Posts
attending the Execution of his Sentence, the raised Hopes and Expectations of
Good Men, and the presaging Horrors of the Wicked, will strike us with strange
and unusual Apprehensions: then all things will appear in a different Form to
what they now undergo, then Virtue and Piety (once the Scorn of Fools, and Envy
of Devils, despised, run down, and persecuted by an ungrateful World, to the
utmost stretch of its Wit and Malice,) will be brought forth in Triumph, and
crowned with Rewards infinitely great, and such as our present Conceptions
cannot form any tolerable Notion of. Then Innocence and Sincerity, howsoever
they were overcast in this Life, will look Bright and Clear to all the World,
and Godliness will be found Gain, and Honesty the best Policy. Then Religion
will be all one with Wisdom, the very Character the Wise Man now gives it, and
Duty and Interest will be but different Names for the same thing; and no
Persons will appear to have considered their Advantage so much, as they that
exposed every thing that was dear to them on this side Heaven, their Honor,
their Estates, and even Life itself, for the sake of a Good Conscience, and a
Glorious Eternity. Then will all the Works of Darkness be brought to Light, and
exposed in their proper Colors to the view of Men and Angels; Hypocrisy will
no longer walk in Disguise, but be stripped of its artificial Dress, and
presented to that vast Assembly in its native Ugliness and Deformity: then
Atheism will be found stark Madness, and Profaneness the most desperate Folly,
and the Wise Men of the World, as they are now counted, will appear the most
stupid Wretches, and they that could part with their Honor, and their
Conscience in exchange for a little parcel of Earth, for an Aerie Title, for a
few Moments of Sensual Satisfaction, will be found to have made the saddest
Bargain, and to have pawned away their Souls for a Trifle; and all Sinners will
stand amazed how they came to be thus over-reached by the Delusions of Satan,
and so far lost to all Sense and Reason, as to give up what was infinitely
Valuable, their Innocence, their God, and Heaven and Eternity, for just
nothing. Most certainly, all things will in a little time, put on another Face
than what they now carry, and our Apprehensions of them will be quickly altered
from what they are at present. The Scene will undoubtedly change before it be
long, and rectify abundance of Mistakes we now lie under; the things which are
now Articles of our Faith, will in time become the Objects of Sense, and the
Hopes and Fears of good and bad Men, will one day terminate in a joyful or a
miserable Experience, and those things which are now reckoned for Cheats of
Government by our new Refiners of the Age, the Notions of Good and Evil, Heaven
and Hell, will be found by them Sad and Important Truths, the Genuine
Impressions of Nature, and the Results of sober and wise Reasoning. Then will
all the dark Proceedings of Providence be unfolded, then the Sufferings and
Persecutions that good Men lay under, for the Trial of their Constancy, and
Increase of their Virtue will prove the happy Engines that have raised them up
to an Eternal Weight of Glory: and the Ingratitude and Impenitence of Sinners
under the various Methods of Divine Clemency, will sink their Souls and Bodies
into Torments intolerable, and yet such as must be endured for ever.

Thus far I have pursued the Advantages of this Virtue in my Text, and shown
you how great Gainers we shall be by conforming our Practice to it: The Favor
of God, the Approbation of our own Consciences, the Protection of Humane Laws;
not to mention the good Opinion of all Wise Men, and the various Offices of
Kindness and Humanity which this Principle binds all Men to return to us, are
the present Rewards of it, besides what we may justly promise our selves in
Reversion, the unconceivable Delights of a glorious Eternity. In a word, the
Interests of both Worlds are concerned in it, and it is not possible for us to
miscarry either here or hereafter, so long as we hold close to this Rule.

May these Considerations then sink deep into our Hearts, and engage us to act
accordingly. Whatsoever Station the Divine Providence shall cast us into, let
us take Care that our Consciences be rightly informed in their Duty, and when
they are so, resolve that no Inducement whatsoever shall make us go counter to
their Orders, or violate their Commands. Let us endeavor to stand so firm,
that neither the greatest Dangers may fright us from our Duty, nor the highest
Flatteries of Fortune seduce us from it, nor any Temptation whatsoever triumph
over our Honor and our Integrity; and if we thus steer our Course, we shall
make Sure of a safe Passage, at least through this World, howsoever our Vessel
may be beaten with the Storms and Tempests of it; and shall in the end arrive
at a happy Shore, where Pious Souls are in full Possession of all they can
desire, there to reap the Everlasting Fruits of Righteousness and Well-doing.

Which God grant, etc.
FINIS.

